==PAGE:1==
 
 
Analyzing and improving hash function and 
algorithm of an FPGA based look up table 
Krzysztof Jan Pac, s213033 
Master of Science (MSc) in Communication Technologies and System Design 
DTU 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Analyzing and improving hash function  
and algorithm of an FPGA based look up table 
Author:  
Krzysztof Jan Pac, s213033 
Advisor(s):  
Michael Stübert Berger, Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engi-
neering of DTU 
René Josiassen, System Architect at Comcores ApS 
DTU Electro 
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
Ørsteds Plads Building 343 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Tel: (+45) 45 25 63 52 
www.electro.dtu.dk 
 
Project period:  4th September 2023 – 4th March 2024 
ECTS:  35 
Education:  M.Sc.Eng 
Field:  Electrical and Photonics Engineering 
Class:  Public 
Edition:  1. Edition 
Remark:  This report is submitted as partial fulfilment of the requirements for graduation in the 
above education at the Technical University of Denmark. 
Copyright:  Krzysztof Jan Pac ©,Denmark 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Table of contents 
1. 
Introduction. .............................................................................................................. 5 
2. 
Sense of using hash functions. ................................................................................. 7 
2.1 
Hashing – short introduction. ................................................................................................. 7 
2.2 
Selected hashing functions and balancing algorithms.......................................................... 11 
3. 
Project implementation ........................................................................................... 15 
3.1 
CRC32 – implementation. .................................................................................................... 16 
3.2 
Murmur3 hash – implementation. ......................................................................................... 19 
3.3 
Jenkins lookup3 hash – implementation. ............................................................................. 22 
3.4 
Cuckoo algorithm – implementation. .................................................................................... 23 
4. 
Testing procedures. ................................................................................................ 30 
4.1 
Testing a hash function. ....................................................................................................... 30 
4.2 
Testing a balancing algorithm. ............................................................................................. 33 
5. 
Results. ................................................................................................................... 35 
5.1 
Hash function – results. ........................................................................................................ 35 
5.2 
Balancing algorithm – results. .............................................................................................. 42 
6. 
Conclusion. ............................................................................................................. 49 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
4 
 
Abstract 
The goal of this project is to analyse and improve hash function, and algorithm of an FPGA based 
lookup table. The project was conducted in C programming language, however the needs of the 
FPGA environment were kept in mind while decision making. In order to, achieve project objec-
tives, it was important to pick and implement commonly used hash functions for data manage-
ment. It has been decided that CRC-32, Murmur3 and Jenkins Lookup3 hash functions will be 
compared with the concept used at Comcores ApS. The testing part is based on checking so-
called Avalanche Effect to verify that proposed function has a high distribution of information. To 
broaden the test, different input patterns were proposed. Due to the collision phenomenon affect-
ing hash functions, the collision resolving algorithm were implemented. The algorithm tested 
within the project is well-known Cuckoo hashing. In order to take the full advantage of the synergy 
between hashing and balancing algorithms, Cuckoo hashing were extended to support different 
combination of independent tables, or concept of caching data to achieve the best possible utili-
zation. Basing on obtained result the final conclusion has been given at the end of the project. 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
5 
1. Introduction. 
Nowadays, hashing has been introduced in many applications. The idea of using hash functions 
varies, depending on the use case. Starting from the most default application like cryptography 
which these days is one of the fastest developing areas. In order to secure data transmission and 
data itself, many hash based solutions has been launched. For example, digitals signatures used 
to confirm the authentication and integrity of the message. Other hash based implementation can 
be password management. Instead of storing password, the hash of this password is stored in 
database systems. Moreover, hash functions are used for a blockchain technology to generate 
fingerprints for transactions security or data integrity. Cryptocurrency topics drives todays world 
and plays significant role in establishing alternative monetary system. For this project, hash func-
tion application will not have anything in common with cryptography or data processing like data 
compression or file comparison but with the subject of data management and search. 
In the telecommunication area, the speed of data transmission plays significant role next to the 
availability and robustness. ICT (Information and Communications Technology) networks must 
be able to process and forward/route packets from sender to recipient with a sufficient throughput. 
For example, network devices like ethernet switch must cope with large amount of data within 
each second. In short, this devise has a lookup table where it stores information about port on 
which it forwards data basing on MAC address. The linear based search results in long search 
time, because the algorithm must check whether MAC address matches the one stored inside 
lookup table. This search procedure is done one-by-one until it success or fails. In telecommuni-
cation where every milliseconds matters, such a approach does not seem to be the most opti-
mized. Therefore, other methods can be introduced instead. One of them is aforementioned hash-
ing. The key processed by hash function results in hash output. That output is a bit stream of finite 
length that interpreted as memory address, points to the exact place in the memory allocated for 
lookup table. As can be seen, this approach improves search time, because it almost immediately 
identifies where information for given key is stored. Unfortunately, because of the nature of hash-
ing function which is a finite set of output and infinite set of input values, the phenomenon of 
collision effect may occur. It basically means that two different values have the same hash output. 
In order to overcome that problem so-called collision resolving algorithms had been introduced. 
Such an algorithm is used to cope with collision effect and balance hash tables. Therefore any 
reasonably hash based implementation for search procedure should use the pair of hash function 
and collision resolving algorithm. 
The main objective of this project is to find an improved hash algorithm for hashing Ethernet MAC 
addresses, Ethernet IP addresses and for Ethernet TSN stream identification function. In order to 
achieve that, the number of hash functions have been chosen to compared with the proposal from 
==PAGE:6==
 
6 
 
Comcores ApS company. Each hash has been picked basing on its easiness or existing imple-
mentation in an FPGA environment. Selected hash functions has been introduced in the chapter 
2 and used implementation in chapter 3. To fully benefit from hashing concept, the collision re-
solving algorithm has been incorporated. Both chapters 2 and 3 contain information about the 
theoretical and practical part for that algorithm. Moreover, basics of hashing functions has been 
introduced in the second chapter. In order to find the best candidate, hash functions went through 
a few test cases, alone and with balancing algorithm to fulfil project needs mentioned in the ab-
stract above. The test schemes are described in chapter number 4, whereas the following chap-
ters contains results and conclusion with additional comment regarding potential future develop-
ment of the project. 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
7 
2. Sense of using hash functions. 
Before it is possible to move on to the implementation of the hash functions and algorithms, it is 
first necessary to introduce the meaning of the aforementioned concepts. The essence of this 
chapter will be topics like what are hashing functions and algorithms, what is the purpose of using 
hashes, basic requirements and explanation of undertaken decisions. 
2.1 Hashing – short introduction. 
Hashing, in an number of resources, is defined as the process of transforming the input value, 
commonly called key, into the fixed output. The simple example can be seen in the figure 2.1. 
The output can be expressed in many ways e.g. binary stream, hexadecimal or decimal value. 
Moreover, the result of the hash function is set to be finite. There are functions like SHA3 which 
hash length can vary, however, this is set before the hash is being calculated. Therefore, it seems 
that there is a simple conclusion, that output has a finite set of possible combinations. For example 
SHA3-256 has a range of values up to 2256, whereas CRC-8 results in the range between 0 to 
255 different values only. On the other hand, there is the input value - the key, that can be variable 
length. Hashing functions enables to hash from simple values to long text. Thus there is an unfa-
vourable relationship between infinite set of input values and finite set of output values. This situ-
ation will obviously lead to the point where more than one key has the same result. Such a case 
is called collision. 
 
Figure 2.1 Hashing – simple example [4] 
 
Before collision will be explained, the real-life application should be presented. Hashing functions 
are mainly known for being used for cryptographic purposes and data retrieval. In the cryptog-
raphy, hash can be used as fingerprint (digital signature) for sensitive data. For example, the 
==PAGE:8==
 
8 
 
official document can be processed by hashing function to get the hash over the whole message. 
Then the document and the fingerprint are sent to the recipient, who can calculate the hash over 
the received document and compare with the delivered fingerprint. If the hash calculated locally 
and the delivered one are the same, then it is confirmed that the message has been received in 
the unmodified form and is authentic. Picture below represents the example with a few more 
details about encryption for safety purposes. 
 
 
Figure 2.2 Signature example [5] 
 
This form of the hash application is used to secure both sides of the communication, especially 
when so-called man-in-the-middle attack is being executed. In this scenario, hacker is in between 
the sender and recipient and tries to spoof the message that has been sent. However, any minor 
change in the document or signature results in the major change in the hash. Therefore, the 
recipient will now if the message was altered. One may say that the hacker can find the change 
that will give the same hash. Although, the good hash should prevent from such a situation with 
high probability. This will be explained later in this chapter. 
Another cryptographic example from real-life applications is hashing passwords. For example, 
there is a website of the shop that’s enable to order goods online and every customer has the 
possibility to create the account. Therefore, the owner of the website must have implemented the 
database to store information about clients’ accounts. In the simple way, the database stores user 
login and associated password, so when customer tries to log in, the website verifies credentials. 
However, if hacker manage to break the security and steal the database records, then such a 
person has an access to the sensitive data. In the modern world, the concept of digitalization 
carries a lot of security problems like this. Thus, hashing can be one of the solutions. Instead of 
storing the password itself, while registering, users password is processed by hash function and 
hash digest, namely the result is stored in the database. When user is trying to log in, provided 
==PAGE:9==
 
9 
password is processed by the same hash and results are compared. As can be seen, this ap-
proach secures user data even if unauthorized person has access to it.  
Second application of hashing is aforementioned data retrieval. For instance, let’s consider once 
again the database. The more data is stored in the database the longer it takes to search it for 
data under given key. Especially, when linear searching is used. In such a case, searching pro-
gramme must compare the key with the ones stored, one by one. The process is finished when 
the key matches the one in the database. This approach is time consuming and the performance 
is quite low. Particularly when considering telecommunication applications like network switch 
that forwards data packets. In this example, packets must be processed and forwarded very fast. 
To put it simply, each packet carries the information about the destination. Network switch must 
check on witch port that packet must be sent. To do that, it checks the lookup table where it stores 
information about next port for given destination point. Therefore, to process many data packets 
in one second, the lookup process must be also quite fast. One of the improvements for searching 
process is hashing. In this example the input key is MAC address. The hash function takes the 
key and calculate the hash. That hash is pointing to the place in the memory (lookup table) where 
the data for that key is stored. This solution improves significantly the search time, because thanks 
to the hash function the search result is found almost immediately. In this project the hash func-
tions are used for manging the data in lookup tables. The picture below shows hashing as the 
solution for data retrieval. 
 
Figure 2.3 Hash lookup example [6] 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
10 
 
After the short introduction about hashing applications, it is time to introduce hash properties. 
Let’s denote that 𝑥 is the key, 𝐻 is the hash function and 𝑦= 𝐻(𝑥) is the hash digest. Basing on 
information from [1, 2, 3] a hash function must fulfil following fundamental properties: 
• 
Compression – which means that for any key the output should be small. In other word 
the hash function must have fixed length output, irrespective to the input key length [1]. 
The good example are long data streams like plain text. 
• 
Preimage resistance – alternatively called one-wayness. The hash function 𝐻 is fulfilling 
this requirement when for any hash digest 𝑦 it is computationally infeasible to find a mes-
sage 𝑚 that satisfies 𝐻(𝑚) = 𝑦. In other words, inverting hash function 𝐻 from the result 
𝑦 to find 𝑚 that corresponds to 𝑦, must be very hard or almost impossible [2]. [2] also 
mention that for an ideal hash to find the preimage it should take 2𝑛 evaluations, where 
n is the length of the hash output.  
• 
Second preimage resistance – alternatively called weak collision resistance. The hash 
function 𝐻 is considered second preimage resistant when for any message 𝑚 it is com-
putationally infeasible to find another message 𝑚′, which is different from 𝑚 but fulfils 
following formula 𝐻(𝑚′) = 𝐻(𝑚). Again, for the ideal hash function it should take 2𝑛 eval-
uations to find the second preimage resistance [2]. 
• 
Collision resistance – alternatively called strong collision resistance. The hash function 𝐻 
is collision resistant when it is computationally infeasible to find any two messages 𝑚 and 
𝑚′ that are 𝑚 ≠𝑚′ and fulfils aforementioned equation 𝐻(𝑚) = 𝐻(𝑚′) [2]. The difference 
between collision resistance and second preimage resistance is that for second preimage 
resistance it should be computationally infeasible to find alternative message 𝑚′ when 
having and basing on message 𝑚. While for collision resistance it should be computa-
tionally infeasible to find a pair of messages 𝑚 and 𝑚′ without basing on any known 
message. To find the collision, for the ideal hash it should take 2𝑛/2 evaluations. The 
number of evaluations is lower than for previous requirements, because of the birthday 
paradox, which will be described briefly later. 
• 
Efficiency – the hash digest 𝑦 should be considerably easy to compute. The processing 
time depends on the input length, however it should not grow too fast [1]. 
The [1] mention that there may be the noticeable hierarchy between aforementioned hash func-
tion properties. For example, if hash function fulfils strong collision resistance (collision re-
sistance), therefore it should fulfil the weak collision resistance (second preimage resistance). 
Moreover, as can be seen, the second preimage resistance fulfilled implies that preimage re-
sistance is also fulfilled. However, the reality can be different and various attack methods may 
proof that above theory about hierarchy is only a theory. It is said that it should be computationally 
infeasible but e.g. finding a scheme of generating the colliding messages basing on existing one, 
fails to meet second preimage resistance, while still being unable to break collision resistance. 
==PAGE:11==
 
11 
Then the hierarchy relationship is broken. However, this is the topic for cryptography area, which 
is not the part of this project. 
The birthday paradox touches the problem of estimating the probability that two people at the 
same party will have birthday at the same day. The goal is to calculate how many participants is 
required to hit specific probability. Let’s consider the probability of 50%. Basing on information 
from [3]: 
𝑃(𝑛𝑜 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑛 2 𝑝𝑒𝑜𝑝𝑙𝑒) = (1 − 
1
𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟) 
It should be assumed that there are only 365 days in the single year (exclude a leap year). 
When considering 3 people, then the probability is: 
𝑃(𝑛𝑜 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑛 3 𝑝𝑒𝑜𝑝𝑙𝑒) = (1 − 1
365) × (1 − 2
365)  
For 𝑛 people the equation looks as follows: 
𝑃(𝑛𝑜 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑛 𝑝𝑒𝑜𝑝𝑙𝑒) = (1 − 1
365) × (1 − 2
365) × … × (1 − 𝑛−1
365 ) 
After repeating the above equation until the 𝑛= 23, probability of not having collision will drop 
below 50% (49,27% rounded). From probability theory it is known that the probability of some-
thing opposite is equal: 
𝑃(𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛) = 1 −𝑃(𝑛𝑜 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛) 
Basing on aforementioned theory, the number of people when there is at least one collision is just 
23. The translation the of birthday paradox to hashes is as follows [3]: the number of possible 
values at the output is 2𝑛, where n is the length of hash output. Because everything is calculated 
in the binary system, it is easy to understand that the longer the hash is the harder it should be 
for the collision to occur since the range of potential output is increasing. In the chapter 11 from 
[3], authors translated the birthday paradox to the hashing problem and estimated that the number 
of input keys that must be hashed before the collision occurs is equal to the square root of all 
possible output values: √2𝑛= 2
𝑛2
⁄ . For example for 32 bit hash, achieving the rate of 50% is after 
232/2 = 216 hashes. 
2.2 Selected hashing functions and balancing algorithms. 
In this subchapter there will be focus on chosen hash functions and algorithms for balancing 
lookup tables. As it was mentioned in the introduction the goal of the project is to analyse the 
efficiency of an existing hash based lookup table from Comcores ApS and compare to the alter-
native implementations of hash functions and lookup tables in software. Therefore, the theory 
behind the selected alternatives will be touched here, whereas the implementation itself is a part 
==PAGE:12==
 
12 
 
of the next chapter. However, the theory and implementation of an existing Comcores hash func-
tion will not be addressed because it is a private property of the company. The Comcores hash 
function exists in two versions and from now they will be called Comcores hash1 and Comcores 
hash2. 
The first hash function that has been decided to check is CRC-32. This function is used for error 
detection to verify if received bit stream data has an error that might have happened during the 
transmission. CRC is calculated by dividing data bits with given polynomial [9]. The remainder 
(called also a checksum) obtained after division is added to the data and send within the packet. 
At the recipient site, data is divided again by the same division polynomial. If both checksum 
matches, error has not been detected. Since CRC checksum can be also considered as a hash 
for given data, therefore it has been decided to check that function. Because of the fact that CRC 
is known for a long time and it has been implemented in FPGA in many ways [10], the idea of 
picking that solution does not seem to be a bad decision when it comes to FPGA compatibility 
[11]. 
The next hash function is a Murmur3 hash developed by Austin Appleby that is supposed to be a 
well suited choice for general hash-based lookup application [12]. Following hash function is 
based on two operations: addition and multiplication. From an FPGA perspective addition is quite 
simple to implement whereas multiplication needs the use of DSP blocks. However, official Xilinx 
mention about existing murmur implementation for FPGA and it also has utilization table results 
for data input length from 32 to 1024 bits [25]. Therefore, it has been decided that this function 
could be a potential candidate for this project. 
The last hash used is a Lookup3 hash developed by Bob Jenkins [14]. Author claims that this 
hash function is not suitable for cryptographic application, however for hash table lookup purposes 
or anything else were one in 232 collisions are acceptable [14]. The algorithm is based on simple 
operations like addition, logical exclusive or operation and bit rotation based on bit shifting. Simi-
larly as Murmur3 hash, Lookup3 hash has implementation proposed on Xilinx website [25] with 
utilization table for different input length. With having aforementioned aspects in mind , following 
function also seems to be a good candidate to check.  
In order to manage data and phenomena of collisions the proper balancing algorithm must be 
introduced. Based on company needs and interest it has been decided to check the cuckoo hash-
ing. Algorithm itself had been also modified to check different implementations like extended num-
ber of hash buckets or support of extra hashing function. This is described later in chapter 4. As 
it was mentioned in the above paragraphs, hashing for data management is used to find optimal 
and fast way for manipulating data (e.g. insertion, lookup or deletion process). The structure that 
stores data is known in data structure theory as dictionary. Dictionary is a set of data combined 
into key-value pair. Each key has associated a single value. That value can be retrieved from 
datastore via key. In this case the key is a hash that points to the data block where stored is a 
==PAGE:13==
 
13 
value (which is also used to calculate the hash). Such a example of dictionary is hash table – 
presented in the figure 2.3. To manage the data within hash table it is highly recommended to 
use a balancing algorithm that will try to resolve collision conflicts and balance the fill level of the 
tables (known also as load factor) [24].  
Classical cuckoo algorithm has two hash tables 𝑇1 and 𝑇2, each with independent hash function 
ℎ1(𝑥) and ℎ2(𝑥). Cuckoo hashing supports three operations: 
• 
Insertion 
• 
Deletion 
• 
Lookup 
The deletion and lookup procedures are very simple. Cuckoo algorithm takes designated value 
and examines both hash tables. To do that it calculates hash values for each table based on input 
and check whether key under that hash exist. For lookup operation algorithm should return infor-
mation if the desired value exist inside that data store. As for deletion it deletes that value, if exist. 
On the other hand, insertion procedure is more complex and explains the name cuckoo used for 
that concept. To insert data inside the table, cuckoo algorithm performs similar operation as for 
lookup procedure. However it differs a little bit, depends on adopted approach. To insert the value, 
the hash must be computed, but only for one table. Table decision can be done either randomly 
on every insertion or it can be decided that algorithm tries always to save the value inside chosen 
table (e.g. first table). If slot inside hash table is free, value is saved under that place and insertion 
operation is finished. However, when given slot pointed by hash value is already occupied, algo-
rithm starts to re-organise data. Firstly, already stored value is taken out and awaiting new value 
is placed in that memory slot. Then for swapped value, hash value is calculated for the opposite 
table. If that place is free, that value is placed there and procedure is finished. If not, then the 
same thing happens until there is no value left. As can be easily observed that process resembles 
a cuckoo bird that pushes out other eggs out of the nest when it hatches. The insertion chain 
example can be observed in the figure below. 
 
Figure 2.4 Cuckoo hashing insertion procedure [24] 
As can be seen, x value points to alternative position in each table. Table 1 has been chosen to 
store the new value. However, that place is already occupied by y value. Therefore, algorithm 
==PAGE:14==
 
14 
 
place x in that place and takes y. Hash digest for table 2 based on y value points to alternative 
position for y. Again, this place is occupied by z value and swap procedure is done. Fortunately, 
alternative position for z value is empty and z can be stored there without extending the chain 
reaction for re-organization procedure in insertion operation.  
As can be predicted, described procedure has a drawback. It can be a situation during value re-
organisation that all values within that chain reaction points to only occupied places and whole 
procedure ends in the infinite loop. Sooner or later such a situation occurs and algorithm becomes 
useless. To prevent from such a situation, it is reasonable to incorporate a breakpoint for the 
insertion loop which terminates that loop after selected number of attempts. Nonetheless, the 
data storage becomes unusable, because it cannot store more values . To overcome that problem 
many resources like [24] suggest to rehash tables with new hashes. Moreover, during rehash 
process it is proposed to double the size of hash tables. Sometimes in some applications it is not 
possible to allocate more memory for data storage and therefore it is recommended to test desired 
solution before implementation. 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
15 
3. Project implementation 
This chapter will focus on introducing the implementation of chosen hash functions and balancing 
algorithms. Moreover, there will be a short preface about programming environment in which the 
projects was implemented. As it was mentioned in the previous chapter the CRC32, Murmur and 
Jenkins Lookup3 hash will be described.  
The project was implemented in C language, version C17 (ISO/IEC 9899:2018). The decision 
was made based on the fact that is quite portable, low cost and quick in compilation. Moreover, it 
is quite efficient and fast when it comes to execution. It gives user more power when it comes to 
managing the memory allocation. In addition, it can be easily move to the Linux based system 
and executed without much changes. For FPGA engineers developing in Verilog language, C is 
quite understandable. Therefore it is also an advantage for this project, because some parts might 
be later implemented or examined by Comcores FPGA developers. Lastly, the author of this pro-
ject is somehow familiar with C language, which plays a significant role in decision making. 
The compiler used in the project is delivered by GNU GCC compiler for C and C++. Whereas the 
IDE where project was implemented is CodeLite platform installed on Windows 11 system.  
A few words about input data must be mentioned. In the project the input data was decided to be 
the Ethernet IP address, mentioned in the thesis description. To be more specific, the IPv4. In 
this version of the IP protocol the address is saved on 32 bits. The address is divided into four 
octets, each 8 bits. This gives four bytes per address. Data is generated in so called user-friendly, 
readable form e.g. 192.168.0.1 and saved inside vector. The vector (in this case 1-Dimensional 
array in C) is type of unsigned integer (uint8_t) with the maximal size of 255 per value. Therefore, 
as can be seen, one vector field stores only one byte. Example can be seen below. 
Table 3-1 Input representation 
 
Octet 1 
Octet 2 
Octet 3 
Octet 4 
User readable representation 
192 
168 
0 
1 
Bit representation 
11000000 
10101000 
00000000 
00000001 
 
Data vector example in C language form: 
uint8_t input_data[ ] = {192, 168, 0, 1}; 
This approach ensures that data is structured in the proper way, before it can be processed by 
hashing functions. Moreover, it is the closest to the way the IP address is stored inside packets. 
When it comes to storing data inside lookup tables. The decision was made based on the most 
optimized approach, that ensures the easiness of managing data across memory. When the hash 
is pointing to the place in the memory where the key (IP address) should be saved, it was decided 
that the key will be stored as single 32-bit unsigned integer, rather than vector of four bytes. It 
==PAGE:16==
 
16 
 
means that the formatting process of the single integer value is based on concatenating four 
octets of IP address into one value. Example based on data from table 3.1 can be seen below. 
 
Figure 3.1 Data concatenation into a single value 
 
3.1 CRC32 – implementation. 
There are many versions of CRC32 implementation. One of the most commonly used options 
are: the byte-wise implementation, based on the lookup table and bit-wise implementation, where 
each byte is processed bit-by-bit. Both implementations will be explained below. 
As it was mentioned in the previous chapter the CRC has some initial values. For this project 
following values has been taken: 
Table 3-2 CRC-32 parameters list [10] 
Name 
Polynomial 
Initial value 
Reflected  
input 
Reflected 
output 
Out XoR 
CRC-
32/BZIP 
0x04C11DB7 
0xFFFFFFFF 
NO 
NO 
0xFFFFFFFF 
  
First of all, the lookup table based implementation will be described below. Following block dia-
gram (figure 3.2) represents the process of creating the lookup table for CRC-32. The diagram 
itself is a simplified version of the implementation done in C. The concept of lookup table version 
for generating CRC-32 is based on storing pre-calculated hash values for each extended ASCII 
character list. The size of char (character data type) in C is 1 byte = 8 bits. This gives 256 different 
values that can be assigned to the char variable. Because, the CRC calculation can be based on 
processing the bit by bit, the need to calculate the end syndrome and intermediate division values 
is done once and stored in the lookup table. Such a approach can limit repetitive instructions and 
improve efficiency of the code. Moreover, this implementation can be realised in FPGA [10, 11]. 
In [10] authors tries to increase the CRC-32 throughput by introducing lookup based implemen-
tation combined with FPGA. The table is pre-calculated and stored in RAM, whereas the VHDL 
part calls the RAM for data while calculating the checksum of CRC-32. In addition, authors intent 
to calculate CRC-32 for 16 bytes in one operation, so they created 15 lookup tables, where the 
==PAGE:17==
 
17 
next one is based on the previous. However, proposed algorithm for generating lookup table is 
similar to the presented in this project. 
First of all, the process start with entering the outer loop, that loops from 0 to 255 (range of values 
that can be stored inside one byte). The iterator value is saved to the auxiliary variable cur-
rent_byte, that stores the byte value. Then the inner loop starts to process all 8 bits of the byte 
value. The conditional statement check whereas the first left-most bit is equal to the 1. If yes, then 
the current_byte is shifted to the left by one place and XOR (alternatively ⨁ symbol will be used 
for denoting the XOR operation) with generative polynomial. If the statement is false, then the 
byte variable is just shifted to the left. As can be seen the same approach with shift register idea 
that was described in the second chapter. When whole byte is finally processed, the result (syn-
drome) is saved in the lookup table under the filed with the same number as decimal value of that 
byte. Then, the whole process is being repeated until the outer loop iterator reaches 256. In the 
end, the lookup table is ready to be used in the next step. 
 
Figure 3.2 Algorithm to generate lookup table for CRC-32 
 
The next figure 3.3 represents the algorithm to calculate the CRC-32 hash based on the input 
form above lookup table. The idea of the algorithm is quite simple – read from table the result of 
division when processing the input value, instead of calculating it. First of all, the crc_value vari-
able that will store the end value is initialized with initial value from table 3.2. Then the loop starts 
to process the input data byte by byte. As it was mentioned earlier data is passed as vector storing 
==PAGE:18==
 
18 
 
one byte in each field. Firstly, inside the loop, the position of the intermediate syndrome is being 
calculated. The value of the byte is processed by XOR’ing it with the current crc_value. The result 
gives the place in the lookup table where, the syndrome is stored for that value. Then, crc_value 
is updated by ⨁ that variable with the feed from the lookup table. The whole procedure is being 
repeated until the whole input is processed. In the end the crc_value is ⨁ with end XOR value 
from table 3.2. As can be seen it is a very smart and software optimized approach to calculate 
the CRC. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3 CRC-32 calculation based on lookup table 
 
The second version of CRC calculation is bit-wise approach. This implementation is more similar 
to the calculation algorithm of the CRC explained in the chapter 2. In this case every each byte 
of the input is processed bit-by-bit. So as can be seen it incorporates the two parts of lookup 
based approach. The block diagram for the algorithm is presented in the figure 3.4. 
The algorithm starts with reading the data and initializing crc_value and end_xor variables with 
values form table 3.2. The outer loop is used to feed the algorithm with next byte values form the 
input. If the statement for outer loop is true, the current byte from the data vector is XOR into the 
crc_value. Then the inner loop starts processing that value bit-by-bit. The same conditional state-
ment is implemented as it was in lookup table generation algorithm. The value is checked for the 
leftmost bit. If the bit is equal to 1 then the crc_value is shifted and ⨁ with generative polynomial. 
If statement is false, then just shift it. When whole input is processed the end value of crc_val is 
XOR with end_xor and returned. This is how CRC-32 hash can be calculated in two different but 
similar ways. Alternatively, the CRC can be also implemented as the XOR combination of the 
input bits for each hash bucket. This seems to be the optimize way of the CRC implementation 
==PAGE:19==
 
19 
for FPGA architecture, however this is not a scope of that project to find the most optimal hash 
implementation for FPGA. The implementation was based on data from [7-10]. 
 
 
Figure 3.4 CRC-32 bit-wise calculation algorithm 
 
3.2 Murmur3 hash – implementation.  
The next algorithm (figure 3.5) for hashing function to explain is a Murmur3 hash that gives 32 bit 
output. Input data that has to be passed is: the key – denoted as data, key length – denoted as 
data length and seed. Seed is a value that can be used to modify the output value. There is not 
the best way to pick the most suitable key. Especially when key itself is 32 bit long. This gives to 
many permutations to check, whether this specific seed can influence hash output and contribute 
to the best possible result that might be desired by the user. For example, avoiding hash collisions 
for specific set of data. Therefore, the most accessible way is to generate once, randomly the 
seed value and save it for hash computation. Other advantages of using seed is: data randomi-
zation or enhancing the security aspects, by making more difficult for the attacker to manipulate 
the hash output. 
As can be seen in the figure below, Murmur hash has a lot of constants denoted as c1, c2, c3, 
c4, rot1, rot2, n and m. There is not much theory behind the idea of the algorithm itself as it was 
mentioned in the chapter 2. The hash variable that will store the end value is initialized with seed, 
whereas the input data is being divided into 4 byte blocks. This is the most important thing to 
==PAGE:20==
 
20 
 
understand in this concept. Data is passed as an array of bytes – aforementioned uint8_t type. 
The algorithm counts on how many 4 bytes blocks it can divide input data.  
 
Figure 3.5 Murmur3 hash algorithm 
 
Then the data is casted to 32 bit type uint32_t and passed to the pointer, that points to that array. 
Because of the fact that the type has been changed to 32 bits, when they are accessed from the 
pointer, it must return 32 bit value. One may think that values are changed from 8 bit representa-
tion to 32 bit by concatenate additional 24 zeros. That situation will occur when there is a typecast 
of a single variable from 8 to 32 bit that is saved in the new 32 bit variable. However in current 
case data remains untouched but the access mechanism is changed. As can be seen in the 
algorithm block diagram, the initialization of the chunk has been put into bold. This is the moment 
of typecasting and passing to the pointer. To illustrate the example, the input data will be an IP 
address from table 3.1. When accessing the data through chunk pointer in the so-called array 
style e.g chunk[0], instead of accessing the first byte that is value 192, the whole 4 bytes of data 
will be returned: 192, 168, 0, 1. Because the type of the value that is pointed by the pointer is now 
==PAGE:21==
 
21 
32 bits = 4 bytes. This is how data partitioning works in the murmur hash. Example can bee seen 
on the next page (figure 3.6). 
 
Figure 3.6 Memory access in Murmur3 hash 
 
If the input data is longer than 4 bytes, it will be assigned to the next container and so on. Unless, 
the next part of the input is shorter than 4 bytes, then it is processed differently by the algorithm, 
but this will be described later. Starting from the beginning of the algorithm, when the data is 
passed to the hashing function, and the number of block are estimated, then the blocks (called 
chunks in the block diagram) are processed by multiplying the key value by c1 and c2 constants 
and the modifying by the combination of bit shifting operation (called rotation) to the right and left, 
specified by rot1 (rotate1) value. Then processed 32 bit key is ⨁ into hash variable, that is later 
also modified by bit shifting and m, and n constants.  
When the loop for processing the blocks is finished, if exist, the remain data is processed by the 
algorithm. The remaining part of the input key that is smaller than the block size is assigned to 
the uint8_t pointer called tail. As can be seen, in this moment the input data is treated byte-by-
byte. The switch operation, checks the if the data length is divisible by 4 and estimate the remain-
der by simple logical AND operation between the bits of length value and number 3. This method 
will tell algorithm how long the tails is: 0, 1, 2 or 3. Then remaining part will be processed in the 
so called “cascade” manner. For example, if the length of tail is 3, then the process block for the 
first statement will be executed and instead of breaking the switch operation, the next process 
block is executed. As a result, the whole tail will be processed and the result XOR with current 
value of the hash variable. The last part is where hash value result in the end state where, data 
from previous stages is processed by remaining constants c3 and c4, and data length and rotating 
operation done by bit shifting. 
As can be observed, the murmur hash algorithm is very simple in execution and processing. It 
only requires two operation, aforementioned multiplication (Mu) and rotation (R) that formed the 
hash name Murmur [12]. In the FPGA implementation it will requires additionally a DSP module 
for multiplication operation. Implementation is based on the resources from [12, 13]. 
==PAGE:22==
 
22 
 
3.3  Jenkins lookup3 hash – implementation. 
The last hash function implementation described here is Bob’s Jenkins hash [14] known as 
lookup3 (implemented on the author’s website as “hashlittle” function). The hash was developed 
for lookup purposes. Function itself is more enlarged than the proposal code in the appendix. It is 
because of the fact that, author proposed three if statements where key is processed based on 
information such as: little or big endian machine and data alignment. First two conditions checks 
if executing machine is little endian and the input key is aligned to 32 or 16 bits. Then hash cal-
culation is more optimized in the execution part. For data that doesn’t fulfill the double condition 
which is little endian machine and data alignment, the else statement contains the most versatile 
code to process data. It is less optimized that previous two examples, but it doesn’t care about 
the input. Because, the main scope of the project is to check how well data is hashed, the pro-
cessing time wasn’t the most important factor. Therefore, algorithm proposal  from else statement 
was taken into consideration. Simplified block diagram of that algorithm can be seen in the figure 
below. 
 
Figure 3.7 Jenkins Lookup3 hash algorithm. 
 
As can be seen in the figure 3.7 the input data is the same as it was for Murmur3 hash. The are 
three operating variables a, b and c that are used to mix the input key and combine processing 
output into final hash. Those variables have the same initialization value based on constant, data 
length and seed. As it is presented in the block diagram, input key is read as 1 byte block, whereas 
==PAGE:23==
 
23 
the murmur focused on 4 byte blocks. The first block focus on processing data in 12 byte blocks, 
where each byte is treated differently. Everywhere, where input byte is bit shifted on the diagram 
the type cast to 32 bit representation is performed. Otherwise the data would be lost. Then in the 
loop, the data length is decremented by the size of the block and pointer is moved to the next 
bytes from input. When there is no more 12 byte blocks available, the remaining part of input data, 
if exist, is processed as so-called tail. The tail part is executed inside switch statement. As can be 
seen, the algorithm checks the length of remaining data and picks the right starting point. When 
statement for the condition is executed, algorithm “falls through” next statements to process all 
data blocks inside tail. This is similar approach to the tail part from Murmur hash. The difference 
is in the end. When last block is processed, algorithm breaks switch statement and goes to the 
last processing block to mix operating variables and return c, which is taken as final hash value. 
If tail does not contain data, then mixing is based on values from 12 byte block processing part. 
Code for mix_macro and final_macro is included in the appendixa the end of this document. 
The implementation is taken from author’s website under the link in [14]. 
3.4 Cuckoo algorithm – implementation. 
In the following subchapter there will be focus on introducing the cuckoo algorithm implementa-
tion. For the project scope it was decided that only insertion and collision resolving parts will be 
implemented. However, the code for classical cuckoo includes all features. Whereas the next two 
variations of cuckoo: three table cuckoo and double-two-table cuckoo with spill over CAM (Con-
tent Addressable Memory) are reduced to the most important parts. The following block diagrams 
will therefore focus on the insertion and collision resolving mechanisms.  
As can be seen in the figure 3.8, three different table concepts are taken into account. The clas-
sical cuckoo hashing, that has two simple tables and different hash function assigned to each 
table. Three-table cuckoo algorithm, which is basically previous example but extended by one 
hash table and hash function. In this case first table points to second, second to third and third 
back to the first. In contrast to the first concept, this idea is expected to increase the fill level of 
each table and as can be presumed, the number of stored entries. The last scenario is a double 
based table variation with CAM. In this concept, each table can store two keys, which should 
extend the number of entries saved before collision will result in inability to store a new entry. 
Additionally, Content Addressable Memory is implemented here as simple cash memory that 
stores keys for which insertion loop achieved user-defined breakpoint. It is expected that it might 
push the presence of the endless-insertion loop a little bit further. However, the profit might not 
be that spectacular as it could probably be when random key deletion is introduced. Nevertheless, 
the key factor is to check when the table starts to have a clash without removing the content. 
Simply, how loaded can tables be for proposed hash functions. The idea behind aforementioned 
tables schemes for utilization testing was shaped during the meetings with Comcores.   
==PAGE:24==
 
24 
 
 
Figure 3.8 Proposed tables configuration for balancing algorithm. 
 
First algorithm diagram to introduce is for classical Cuckoo hashing. The process is presented in 
the figure 3.9. Starting from the beginning, to the function are passed following parameters: data, 
data length, parameters to calculate all possible hashes like generative polynomial or hash seed, 
lookup table, list of hash functions to be used within the algorithm and breakpoint. 
 
Figure 3.9 Classic Cuckoo - insertion procedure. 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
25 
Breakpoint is a user-defined variable that set the maximum boundary for key swap insertion loop. 
As it was mentioned in the theory chapter cuckoo algorithm works as follows. In short, it calculates 
hash for given table and check if that place is occupied. If yes, replace key located in table with 
the new key and then calculate hash for key taken out from table and check if the place in the 
second table is available. If yes, insert. If not, redo the process of swapping keys. As can be seen, 
sooner or later it may occur the situation when the insertion loop for swapping keys starts to 
“makes circles” and the key that has been swapped n steps before is once again the candidate 
to be inserted. Therefore, to prevent infinite loop problem, the breakpoint has been introduced. It 
breaks the loop when loop iterator achieves breakpoint value. In that case, the insertion of data 
can not be continued since the table have a clash. The value of the breakpoint can be decided 
on different factors like: empirically or processing time constraints. It is important to have in mind 
that too small breakpoint value for quite big table size may result in breaking the loop too early. 
On the other hand, too big value will only postpone inevitable clashing problem. 
The next stages on the block diagram is calculating hash values for both tables, based in given 
input key. Since all hash functions result in 32 bit hash, it has been decided that hash digest must 
be trimmed. This will reduce the number of entries during testing stage, where the number of input 
keys should be enough to cover the table length. Theoretically, to fully cover the single table for 
hash of 32 bits length, it is required to generate 232 entries. As can be seen, this is quite big value 
and the memory needed for a single table that stores only a 32 bit (4 byte) keys is: 
232𝑥 4 𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑘𝑒𝑦 ≅16 𝐺𝐵 
The calculated size of the storage to allocate for a single table, that can only stores the key without 
other associated data is unnecessarily enormous. Furthermore, the standard network device 
available to buy can store form a couple of thousands to a couple of hundred thousands of entries. 
For example, from data accessed from [15], proposed device in the basic configuration can store 
up to 112000 IPv4 address with extra data. However, presented example seems to be a quite 
powerful option, other devices may have smaller memory assigned for data storage. Therefore, 
it has been decided that the number of entries and hence table size is limited. Moreover, the 
machine used for project implementation has only 16 GB of RAM memory and too big pool as-
signed for project may slower the execution significantly or result in program crash. Thus, it has 
been decided that a single table can store up to 8192 entries. This means that the length of the 
hash must be 13 bit (213 = 8192). 
Each cuckoo algorithm have a procedure of folding the hash digest to reduce its length to desired 
13 bits. Firstly 32 bit hash is folded to 16 bits and then to 13 bits. For example, folding will be 
explained on the stage from 32 to 16 bit key. As can be observed in the figure 3.10 to achieve 16 
bit hash digest, the upper 16 bits are XOR with lower 16 bits. This result in trimmed hash output 
and no data loss, because one part of data influence the other part. Other possibility is to do the 
modulo on hash and trim it by removing part of the data. It wasn’t considered as the best solution 
==PAGE:26==
 
26 
 
because e.g. two keys that differs in upper 16 bits of data are trimmed by removing aforemen-
tioned upper bits, will result in induced collision between those keys. Therefore proposed XOR 
folding based solution seems to be more balanced approach that eliminates above problem. 
 
Figure 3.10 XOR folding. 
 
Finally, when hashes for both function are calculated, key is transformed into one 32bit value 
stored in converted_key and status for each table is being checked. Then, first statement checks 
whether for new key, either first and second table have already that keys inserted. If yes, the 
function returns information that key already exist. If not, the algorithm starts insertion procedure. 
Firstly, the targeted table is being drawn. Random function result in either 0 or 1. Inisde code, the 
table is implemented as a single 2 dimensional array. Collum with index 0 is first table and index 
1 points to the second table. This approach should result in uniformly distributed table decision. 
Other option proposed for cuckoo algorithm implementation was to pick first table as fixed table 
to insert key. When table_flag that points to the table is calculated, table_hash and table_status 
stores data for drawn table. Moreover, following variables are initialized: replace_iterator to follow 
insertion loop execution, move_key to store the key to move across tables and deconverted_key[] 
vector to store key in traditional four octets representation. In the next stage algorithm enters 
insertion loop. Firstly it checks if for chosen table, the field is empty. If the condition is true, the 
key is inserted, loop is broken and algorithm returns information that key has been inserted. If the 
condition is false, and the field is occupied, algorithm saves the key from that field to move_key 
and inserts awaiting key in that place. Then table is switched to the opposite one and move_key 
value is assigned to converted_key. Later, this awaiting key is reconverted to octet representation 
and based on that value hash is being calculated, and the status is checked for this table. At this 
moment algorithm is ready to redo the insertion process with the key that has to be moved. More-
over, the replace_iterator is incremented. The process is continued until loop reaches given 
breakpoint or swapping procedure does not have any keys to be moved. 
The next step after insertion loop checks whether breakpoint has been reached or not. If the 
conditions is true, algorithm returns that the breakpoint has been reached and prints statistic data 
like fill level for each table. If condition is false, the return value is preserved from previous stage 
– in this case it will be the information that key has been successfully inserted. The state of the 
algorithm is checked in the main part of the program, where cuckoo algorithm exist in loop that 
==PAGE:27==
 
27 
one-by-one tries to insert key from pre-generated input array. If functions returns that the break-
point has been achieved, program stops to feed the algorithm with new entries. As can be seen, 
cuckoo algorithm seems to be simple in idea but might be a little bit complex or challenging in 
implementation. The next part of this chapter will focus on cuckoo implementation for remaining 
tables schemes. However, only differences between classical cuckoo and proposed variations 
will be described. 
 
Figure 3.11 Three-Tables Cuckoo - insertion procedure. 
 
In the above figure there is a block diagram presenting insertion algorithm for cuckoo hashing 
tailored to work with three independent tables. As can be seen, compared to the previous example 
the beginning stages are similar, but extended by third hash calculation and third table status 
estimation. Random table selection is also modified to draw between three tables and set the 
==PAGE:28==
 
28 
 
starting values. The insertion loop works similarly, whereas the table switch part works as it was 
mentioned in the beginning of this subchapter: key from first table is allocated to the second table, 
key from second table to the third table and key from third table is moved to the first one. As can 
be seen, the difference between classic cuckoo and three-table is rather small in the implemen-
tation itself and differ on small details. However, results for utilization test may show the ad-
vantage of that concept. 
 
Figure 3.12 Double-Table Cuckoo - insertion procedure. 
 
The last implementation to describe is a Double-Table Cuckoo for two tables, that can store two 
keys per hash. It is related to linked list solution (Separate Chaining Collision Handling Technique 
[16]) but more simplified. Instead of creating a linked list in the field inside hash table, it was 
decided to allocate only 2 slots per hash. Moreover, by implementing cuckoo algorithm the utili-
zation of lookup tables is expected to increase in contrast to the classical approach. In addition, 
the double-table based solution incorporates spill over the CAM to increase the overall perfor-
mance of balancing algorithm. As can be seen in the figure above, algorithm itself is modified a 
bit more than the previous one. First of all, the hash values and table states are saved inside 
==PAGE:29==
 
29 
arrays because it is easier to manage the larger number od variables. The previous example 
focused on three tables where having three sets of separate variables was still manageable. In 
current one must follow two double tables that result in checking four fields. The lookup tables 
are also implemented as one two dimensional array with four columns. The pairs of columns 0-1 
and 2-3 are treated as two separate double tables. Therefore the random table selection focus 
on picking the table in following manner: random function generate a random number 0 or 1. If 
the value is 0 the table pointer points to table number one. If value is 1, table number two. As can 
be observed, insertion loop tries to check the status of both slots within the table. If both fields are 
occupied then the swapping process begin. Firstly, algorithm estimate on which table the table 
pointer points and within that table the slot is drawn. Then the keys are swapped and table is 
switched. Algorithm pre-calculate hash and table status for awaiting key and process is returned 
to the starting point inside the loop. To conclude, the algorithm must check extra slot per hash 
and it has more complex table switching procedure. The last difference is inside the statement 
that checks if insertion loop reached fixed breakpoint. Instead of returning the BREAK-
POINT_REACHED message, it checks, if CAM has available space and saves the awaiting key 
there. Only when CAM is entirely filled, the algorithm must return the information that it not able 
to store more keys inside tables.  
To sum up, current chapter was intended to familiarize the reader with the most important imple-
mentations of the project such as hashing functions and balancing algorithm. The project itself 
contains more features that enables the program to be executed. However, they only have an 
auxiliary dimension. Next chapter is focused on introducing the testing part of the project. 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
30 
 
4. Testing procedures. 
The following chapter contains information about testing procedures for hash functions and colli-
sion resolving (balancing) algorithm. Each part will focus on introducing different ideas and their 
implementation. For hash functions it will be so-called avalanche effect, whereas balancing algo-
rithm will focus on table utilization for different data sets and table combinations.  
4.1 Testing a hash function. 
Basing on the thesis description, the requirement that hashing function must fulfill is a high distri-
bution of information in the hash result such that, for two very similar keys the output should be 
vastly different. Therefore the avalanche effect test seems to be the most suitable candidate to 
verify that. Basing on information from [21], the avalanche effect means that the minor change 
done in the input key should result in a significant change in the hash output. It means that for 
two input keys that differs by only 1 bit (aforementioned minor change), processed by the same 
hash function, should give vastly different output. It is said that at least 50% of bits should change 
between both hashes [21]. However, authors in [19] specifies that on average a half of bits should 
change. As can be seen, there are different interpretations of the threshold, whether it should be 
50% on average or at least. However, the concept of half bits changed remains unchanged. In 
the [21] the strict avalanche criterion has been described as: hash function fulfill strict avalanche 
criterion if the Hamming distance between hash values for a pair of messages is at least half of 
the output length of hash digest. The Hamming distance [22] is the number of pair of bits that are 
in the same position between two bit strings, where the values in that pair are different. To calcu-
late the average strict avalanche criterion it has been decided to use a simple algorithm [18] that 
is basing on the aforementioned definition.  
As can be seen in the figure 4.1 the algorithm is quite straightforward. The process starts with 
reading the hash function H to test and the number of iterations to perform, denoted as 𝑀. Each 
iteration is a new test. Therefore, it is suggested that the number of repetitions should be quite 
large to achieve meaningful average [17, 18]. Inside the test loop, random message 𝑚 is gener-
ated. In this case it will be an IP number. Then the hash output 𝑦= 𝐻(𝑚) is calculated. Next step 
is to flip random bit of the input message in order to obtain 𝑚′ and calculate 𝑦′ = 𝐻(𝑚′). To check 
which bits has changed between both outputs the XOR is calculated between 𝑦 and 𝑦′. It is a 
simple method to verify the change, because XOR operation between the same values: 0 ⨁ 0 
and 1 ⨁ 1 will result in 0, whereas between 1 and 0 gives 1. Basing on that information, algorithm 
counts the number of 1’s stored in 𝑥 (it is a result of aforementioned XOR between two hashes). 
Moreover the number of 1’s is the Hamming distance. In the end sum_mean variable accumulates 
the average of changed pair of bits across the size of hash output 𝑛. When algorithm reaches the 
end, the avalanche metric is obtained by dividing the accumulated average by the number of 
==PAGE:31==
 
31 
tests. The project contains also a modified version of this algorithm where input is precalculated 
and passed in the array, but this will be presented in the next chapter.  
 
Figure 4.1 Strict Avalanche Criterion - block diagram. 
 
The next metric to describe is a proposal from [17, 18] to calculate strict avalanche metric vector 
that stores the mean of the probability for each bit independently. Instead of accumulating the 
Hamming distance between the hash outputs, algorithm collects the number of bit change occur-
rences for each bit position. It as a more in-depth proposal to check how different output bits 
change. Authors in [17] use the vector to obtain more statistical data, however it will not be the 
scope of the following analysis in that project. The block diagram based on [17,18] is presented 
in the figure 4.2. As can be observed, the algorithm is different in the last stage. Instead of accu-
mulating the average number of changed bits for whole output, state for each bit is saved inside 
the vector and then accumulated across the number of test iterations. Vector is filled starting from 
the last filed where LSB is supposed to be saved. The least significant bit from 𝑥 is extracted by 
logical OR operation between that bit and number 1. Then the binary stream 𝑥 is shifted by 1 
towards right side. Thanks to that, whole stream is processed and relevant data is saved inside 
count_bits vector. In the end, when testing iteration loop is finished, all values inside count_bits 
are divided by 𝑀 to obtain the average probability of bit change for a single bit. 
==PAGE:32==
 
32 
 
 
Figure 4.2 Strict Avalanche Criterion vector - block diagram. 
 
Both metrics will be compared with the results obtained from set of data prepared in a different 
manner. For example, in statistical company, inside private network the IP numbers are from the 
same subnetwork. This network has determined range of addresses that can be used within that 
network. It is done by using the subnet mask that specifies aforementioned range. For IPv4 subnet 
mask is a binary stream of length equal to 32 bits, divided into four octets (same as IPv4 address). 
For example the subnet 255.255.255.0 determines that the number of addresses achievable in-
side that subnetwork is from 0 to 255 (extensive explanation behind the subnet mask can be 
found under [20]). Thus, the IP addresses inside private network may differ only on the lower bits. 
Therefore it has been decided to compare results for avalanche metrics based on fully random 
input to something a little bit more realistic. In this case the avalanche metrics will be also com-
puted for following input: 
• 
First three octets will be generated randomly once for a single test. 
• 
The last fourth octet will take values from 0 to 255 in the ascending order. 
==PAGE:33==
 
33 
• 
The table of 256 IP address organized in ascending order, where pair of addresses differ 
by 1 bit, will be used to compute aforementioned avalanche metrics between pairs e.g. 
x.x.x.0 and x.x.x.1, x.x.x.2 and x.x.x.3 to x.x.x.254 and x.x.x.255. 
• 
The test will be repeated number of times to achieve sensible average that is later com-
pared with results obtained from a random test. 
This case should show how hashing function cope with larger set of data where every keys differs 
only on last 8 bits. Moreover, the case has at some point more realistic nature, since in the illus-
trative intranet the address range is limited and addresses may be assigned one by one to specific 
devices from that address pool. It has been decided that first three octets are generated randomly 
and the test is repeated many times so the average result is based on larger scope of input values. 
This ensures that input values may be simultaneously favorable and unfavorable for given hash 
function in terms of output values. 
4.2 Testing a balancing algorithm. 
This part will test the performance of cuckoo algorithm in three different versions. The sense of 
testing the balancing algorithm is to check how big load factor can be obtained during insertion 
process for given input. The better algorithm can cope with collisions, the more input values can 
be saved within hash table. For this project only insertion operation will be checked to calculate 
maximum utilization of hash buckets. As a reminder, comparison is done between a classical 
cuckoo, three table cuckoo and double table cuckoo algorithm. The size of a simple hash table 
has been set to 8192. This number is the exact result of the operation 213. Therefore, the output 
hash size is 13 bits (all hashes has been folded with an XOR operation). 
First of all the breakpoint test will be checked. As it was mentioned in the chapter 2, cuckoo 
hashing can enter the endless loop for key replacement process. Therefore it is important to pick 
optimized breakpoint value, that will set the maximum boundary for that process. The test checks 
a few prosed numbers – the next 5 powers for the value 10. This should give the good overview 
on the result distribution. The obtained outcome is presented as the percentage of load factor for 
each hash table and the average for whole package. Similarly, as for hash function testing, the 
input is generated randomly. To obtained reasonable outcome the test has been executed num-
ber of times to achieve a sensible average. 
The next test scheme checks how hypothetical input pattern affects obtainable load factor. In this 
case, the input array has been created in a way that starting value is generated randomly an the 
next values differs by 1. This result in receiving an input pattern for more realistic scenario where 
IP addresses are from the same subnetwork.  
The penultimate test case is to verify a spill over a CAM influence on load factor. This feature has 
been implemented in double table cuckoo. The idea is to verify how far the obtainable load factor 
==PAGE:34==
 
34 
 
can be pushed with CAM concept. In this case, problematic keys that could not be placed during 
replacement process are stored inside vector. Because this case scenario checks only an inser-
tion procedure, keys that has been saved inside CAM vector stay there until the end of the test.  
Therefore, it is important to remember that some keys are cached when analyzing the results. 
The last test case is to show the importance of balancing algorithm. Therefore, the classic cuckoo 
hashing is compared with a simple insertion algorithm without balancing procedure at all. Com-
pared scheme has also two hashing tables with two different hash functions. However, it does not 
resolve collision in the same way as cuckoo. This algorithm tries to offload awaiting key to the 
other table if the collision is detected. It also checks if awaiting key already exists inside each 
hash table, to eliminate the potential problem of storing the same key twice and occupying two 
slots. Presented test case should show how important are collision resolving algorithms for hash 
based data management solutions. The comparison is based on obtained load factors for both 
schemes. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
35 
5. Results. 
This chapter is focused on presenting results for hashing function and balancing algorithm, ob-
tained from testing procedures introduced in the previous chapter. Firstly, the avalanche effect 
will be discussed. Then the next part will touch the performance of cuckoo hashing for selected 
hash function, where the key factor will be the achievable fill level before clash. This will be tested 
across different table combination.  
5.1 Hash function – results. 
The first thing to present and comment are results obtained from avalanche test to check how 
well hash functions fulfil the avalanche effect. To remind the testing procedure, avalanche effect 
will be tested in a standard method and based on input table (described in the chapter 4). The 
number of iterations was 𝑀= 200000 and input key are randomly generated IPv4 addresses. 
Results for CRC-32 hash are as follows: 
Strict Avalanche Criterion test : average probability of a bit change is ≅ 𝟒𝟒. 𝟏𝟑𝟖 % 
Table 5-1 Avalanche vector results for CRC-32. 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
1 
40.669 
17 
46.840 
2 
40.585 
18 
46.826 
3 
43.787 
19 
49.985 
4 
43.811 
20 
53.191 
5 
43.769 
21 
53.105 
6 
46.878 
22 
40.594 
7 
40.644 
23 
37.514 
8 
40.680 
24 
40.555 
9 
43.700 
25 
50.014 
10 
43.809 
26 
46.834 
11 
37.464 
27 
46.769 
12 
37.548 
28 
53.106 
13 
37.431 
29 
46.887 
14 
40.726 
30 
50.041 
15 
43.787 
31 
40.639 
16 
43.691 
32 
40.627 
Avg. 
41.810 
Avg. 
46.470 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
36 
 
Results for Murmur hash are as follows: 
Strict Avalanche Criterion test: average probability of a bit change is ≅ 𝟒𝟗. 𝟗𝟖𝟔 % 
Table 5-2 Avalanche vector results for Murmur hash. 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
1 
50.021 
17 
50.181 
2 
49.999 
18 
50.120 
3 
49.792 
19 
50.142 
4 
49.938 
20 
50.137 
5 
49.967 
21 
50.018 
6 
50.069 
22 
49.961 
7 
49.863 
23 
50.136 
8 
49.877 
24 
49.976 
9 
49.906 
25 
50.137 
10 
49.839 
26 
49.912 
11 
49.929 
27 
49.989 
12 
50.107 
28 
49.837 
13 
50.017 
29 
49.964 
14 
49.875 
30 
49.854 
15 
49.973 
31 
50.024 
16 
49.874 
32 
50.031 
Avg. 
49.94 
Avg. 
50.026 
 
Results for Jenkins Lookup hash are as follows: 
Strict Avalanche Criterion test: average probability of a bit change is ≅ 𝟓𝟎. 𝟎𝟑𝟖 % 
Table 5-3 Avalanche vector results for Jenkins Lookup hash. 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
1 
49.752 
17 
50.165 
2 
50.165 
18 
50.175 
3 
50.094 
19 
50.078 
4 
49.803 
20 
50.138 
5 
50.030 
21 
49.963 
6 
49.923 
22 
49.818 
7 
49.950 
23 
49.959 
8 
49.878 
24 
50.048 
9 
50.071 
25 
50.006 
==PAGE:37==
 
37 
10 
49.974 
26 
50,112 
11 
50.248 
27 
49,944 
12 
49.808 
28 
50.144 
13 
50.019 
29 
49.824 
14 
50.060 
30 
50.075 
15 
49.954 
31 
50.104 
16 
49.865 
32 
49.938 
Avg. 
49.97 
Avg. 
50.031 
 
Results for Comcores hash 1 are as follows: 
Strict Avalanche Criterion test: average probability of a bit change is ≅ 𝟓𝟏. 𝟒𝟓𝟖 % 
Table 5-4 Avalanche vector results for Comcores hash 1. 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
1 
59.366 
17 
59.341 
2 
59.370 
18 
56.292 
3 
59.550 
19 
56.226 
4 
59.360 
20 
53.071 
5 
59.381 
21 
50.102 
6 
59.321 
22 
37.638 
7 
59.365 
23 
40.705 
8 
59.356 
24 
40.626 
9 
59.365 
25 
40.492 
10 
59.422 
26 
40.609 
11 
56.314 
27 
40.557 
12 
56.229 
28 
37.459 
13 
56.247 
29 
40.793 
14 
53.239 
30 
40.595 
15 
56.294 
31 
40.630 
16 
59.320 
32 
40.532 
Avg. 
58.22 
Avg. 
44.729 
 
Results for Comcores hash 2 are as follows: 
Strict Avalanche Criterion test: average probability of a bit change is ≅ 𝟒𝟖. 𝟒𝟒𝟑 %. 
==PAGE:38==
 
38 
 
Table 5-5 Avalanche vector results for Comcores hash 2. 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
Bit number 
Probability [%] 
1 
40.648 
17 
65.531 
2 
37.448 
18 
62.582 
3 
37.503 
19 
59.308 
4 
43.621 
20 
56.216 
5 
37.445 
21 
56.339 
6 
40.525 
22 
53.900 
7 
40.628 
23 
49.855 
8 
49.959 
24 
43.708 
9 
43.780 
25 
40.511 
10 
53.108 
26 
40.526 
11 
53.114 
27 
37.437 
12 
56.229 
28 
40.649 
13 
56.263 
29 
40.670 
14 
59.365 
30 
40.642 
15 
59.382 
31 
49.960 
16 
59.430 
32 
43.749 
Avg. 
48.03 
Avg. 
48.85 
 
As can be seen in the above tables, it seems that for an avalanche coefficient test Murmur hash 
and Jenkins Lookup hash fulfills the assumption about the probability of 50%. Comcores hash 1 
proofs to be a little bit better, since the probability exceed the 50% criterion. As for Comcores 
hash 2 it is still a good hashing function, even if the result is 1,5% lower. The worst score from 
tested functions was obtained by CRC-32. It achieves around 44,2%. The table 3 from [21] con-
tains result for strict avalanche metric for cryptographic hash functions, that must meet much 
stricter requirements. Most of them satisfies the strict avalanche requirement and compared to 
non-cryptographical hashes tested here, it seems that Murmur, Jenkins and Comcores hash 1 do 
not stand out in the results. For the hash functions that did not meet the avalanche criterion there 
it is implied that those functions are vulnerable to collision attacks, length extension attack and 
preimage resistance attack [21]. From, the non-cryptographic perspective for this project the 
chances of having a collision for given input range should increase and result in higher demand 
on balancing algorithm performance.  
Basing on vector results it can be seen that Murmur and Jenkins hash have the most balanced 
bit change probability. The difference between the highest and lowest probability does not exceed 
0,5 percentage points. Both halves of bits have the average probability on the similar level. The 
CRC-32 achieved worse results in that regard. Probability between bits varies quite significantly. 
==PAGE:39==
 
39 
The lower half tends to change with higher probability than the upper one and the difference is 
more than 4 percentage points. Moreover, the difference between the highest and the lowest 
value between bits is around 15,7 percentage points. Comcores hash 1 is another example of 
disbalance between bit probability. Around 13,4 percentage points between halves and around 
22,2 percentage points between maximal and minimal value. On the other hand, Comcores hash 
2, when comparing both halves the average values are almost similar. However, after more 
deeper inspection it can be easily seen that values differs quite significantly – around 28 percent-
age points.  
The above results may lead to conclusion that hashing function, less balanced in bit change prob-
ability (avalanche vector) would result in less diversified output or that there is a bit dependency 
between some bits that may lead to higher chances of collision with specific pattern of input val-
ues. However, this should be tested more carefully with other metrics like bit dependency criterion 
[21]. 
In order to confront obtained results, it has been decided that aforementioned metrics will be re-
calculated for specific input. In this case, the number of iterations remains, however the input data 
will be a set of 256 IP addresses, where last octet takes values from 0 to 255 in ascending order. 
To fulfill the avalanche criterion only pairs that differ in one bit will be checked against. Fortunately, 
the bit values in the ascending order creates pairs naturally: 
• 
0000 and 0001 -> 0 and 1 
• 
0010 and 0011 -> 2 and 3 
• 
1110 and 1111 -> 254 and 255 
To conclude, first three octets are generated randomly per test, whereas last octet consider all 
values and hence the input array is being created (see chapter 4). 
Results for CRC-32 hash are as follows: 
Strict Avalanche Criterion test: average probability of a bit change is ≅ 𝟐𝟏. 𝟗𝟏𝟏 %. 
Table 5-6 CRC-32 avalanche vector results for input array test. 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
1 
0 
17 
50.210 
2 
0 
18 
0 
3 
0 
19 
50.210 
4 
0 
20 
0 
5 
0 
21 
50.210 
6 
0 
22 
50.210 
7 
0 
23 
0 
8 
50.210 
24 
0 
==PAGE:40==
 
40 
 
9 
50.210 
25 
50.210 
10 
50.210 
26 
0 
11 
0 
27 
0 
12 
50.210 
28 
0 
13 
52.210 
29 
0  
14 
0 
30 
50.210 
15 
0 
31 
50.210 
16 
0 
32 
50.210 
Avg. 
15.82 
Avg. 
25.105 
 
Results for Murmur and Jenkins hash are as follows: 
Strict Avalanche Criterion test: average probability of a bit change is: 
• 
Murmur hash ≅ 𝟐𝟓. 𝟎𝟗𝟗 % 
• 
Jenkins hash ≅𝟐𝟓. 𝟎𝟗𝟖 % 
Table 5-7 Murmur and Jenkins hash avalanche vector results for input array test. 
Murmur hash 
Jenkins hash 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
1 
25.067 
17 
25.061 
1 
25.061 
17 
25.064 
2 
25.061 
18 
25.067 
2 
25.066 
18 
25.058 
3 
25.062 
19 
25.069 
3 
25.074 
19 
25.069 
4 
25.063 
20 
25.066 
4 
25.070 
20 
25.067 
5 
25.069 
21 
25.068 
5 
25.074 
21 
25.072 
6 
25.065 
22 
25.070 
6 
25.069  
22 
25.065 
7 
25.069 
23 
25.059 
7 
25.065  
23 
25.069 
8 
25.061 
24 
25.069 
8 
25.066 
24 
25.059 
9 
25.075 
25 
25.058 
9 
25.067 
25 
25.066 
10 
25.074 
26 
25.061  
10 
25.061 
26 
25.062 
11 
25.075 
27 
25.062  
11 
25.064 
27 
25.066 
12 
25.059    
28 
25.068  
12 
25.069 
28 
25.078 
13 
25.068 
29 
25.069  
13 
25.073 
29 
25.067 
14 
25.065 
30 
25.062  
14 
25.065 
30 
25.059 
15 
25.061 
31 
25.067 
15 
25.067 
31 
25.067 
16 
25.062   
32 
25.063 
16 
25.055 
32 
25.073 
Avg. 
25.07 
Avg. 
25.065 
Avg 
25.07 
Avg 
25,066 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
41 
Results for Comcores hash 1 and 2 are as follows: 
Strict Avalanche Criterion test: average probability of a bit change is: 
• 
Comcores hash 1 ≅𝟐𝟓. 𝟎𝟗𝟓 % 
• 
Comcores hash 2 ≅𝟑𝟏. 𝟑𝟑𝟏 % 
Table 5-8 Comcores hash 1 and 2 avalanche vector results for input array test. 
Comcores hash 1 
Comcores hash 2 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
Bit no. 
Prob [%] 
1 
50.191 
17 
0 
1 
50.191 
17 
50.191 
2 
50.191 
18 
0 
2 
50.191 
18 
50.191 
3 
50.191 
19 
50.191 
3 
0 
19 
50.191 
4 
50.191 
20 
0 
4 
50.191 
20 
50.191 
5 
50.191 
21 
0 
5 
50.191 
21 
50.191 
6 
50.191 
22 
50.191 
6 
0 
22 
50.191 
7 
0 
23 
0 
7 
0 
23 
50.191 
8 
50.191 
24 
0 
8 
50.191 
24 
50.191 
9 
50.191 
25 
0  
9 
50.191 
25 
50.191 
10 
0 
26 
50.191 
10 
0 
26 
50.191 
11 
0 
27 
50.191 
11 
0 
27 
50.191 
12 
50.191 
28 
50.191 
12 
0 
28 
50.191 
13 
50.191 
29 
0 
13 
0 
29 
0 
14 
0 
30 
0 
14 
0 
30 
0 
15 
0 
31 
50.191 
15 
0 
31 
50.191 
16 
50.191 
32 
0 
16 
0 
32 
0 
Avg. 
34.51 
Avg. 
18.822 
Avg 
18.82 
Avg 
40.78 
 
As can be observed in the above tables, the avalanche effect results decreased significantly for 
proposed input pattern. The CRC-32 algorithm reached only around 22% probability of bit change 
and only around 40% of all bits can change with probability > 50%. The rest bits will not change 
at all. Similar situation is for Comcores hash in both versions. However in contrast to CRC both 
functions obtained higher avalanche score, but some bits did not changed at all. Moreover, some 
of the halves tends to change with higher probability than others. It may point to the problem of 
finding the change pattern for hash function. From security perspective this may lead to the situ-
ation when hash function can be easily broken. But tested hash functions are not for cryptographic 
use, therefore that problem can be omitted. On the other hand, since only a number of bits tends 
to alter, the number of potential output is limited and the chance of collision arise. However, this 
==PAGE:42==
 
42 
 
aspect should be studied more carefully to confirm that theory. Murmur and Jenkins hashes ob-
tained the same result for an avalanche effect. In contrast to CRC-32 and Comcores hash all bits 
tends to change but with a small probability of 25%. After further analysis of obtained results it 
can be easily observed that for proposed input none of testes hash function passed the avalanche 
test. However, it does not mean that those functions are weak and the overall performance will 
be low. Therefore it is important to check how well those functions works with a collision resolving 
algorithms and how good utilization of hash tables can be achieved. This aspect has been tested 
and obtained results are presented in the next subchapter. What may be important to realize after 
above test is that it is highly recommended to check hash functions performance based on the 
input that is supposed to be processed within given application. The random input test may end 
with better results than are supposed to be for specific data set. 
5.2 Balancing algorithm – results. 
The first thing to check is the semi-optimal size of breakpoint, that is used to stop the key reloca-
tion loop from endless execution. Size of the breakpoint should be selected in such a manner that 
cuckoo algorithm will perform the relocation enough number of times to save the maximum pos-
sible number of entries before infinite insertion problem comes. Too small value of the breakpoint 
can prevent from achieving the best hash table utilization whereas too big will only increase exe-
cution time without any improvement. The test will be performed on randomly generated input 
values (IPv4 addresses) for all cuckoo table scenarios. To ensure more optimized results each 
test will be executed 10000 times and the average load factor will be taken as the result. 
Table 5-9 Classic Cuckoo algorithm - breakpoint test. 
Break-
point 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
10000 
Load  
factor [%] 
0.98 
0.98 
31.99 
31.99 
51,15 
51,15 
51,69 
51,67 
51,67 
51,67 
Average 
[%] 
0.98 
31.99 
51,15 
51,68 
51,67 
 
As can be seen in the above table, increasing 10 times the breakpoint value improves significantly 
the load factor until breakpoint is equal to one hundred. The sub-optimal maximum performance 
can be reached when that value is set to one thousand. Both tables, in average are filled at the 
same level. Last value proved that increasing breakpoint value over one thousand did not result 
in load factor improvement. Therefore the penultimate proposal seems to be the best solution. 
For the real-time implementation time factor may play a significant role and arguably better result 
for breakpoint equal to 1000 rather than 100 might not be worth considering. On the other hand 
==PAGE:43==
 
43 
implementation in a different technology (FPGA) may be so fast that aforementioned  considera-
tions should not be taken into account. However, for that project for a classic cuckoo the break-
point will take the value of 1000. Moreover, results are slightly better as it was stated in [24], 
where it was said classical cuckoo algorithm achieves maximal load factor no better than 50%. 
The difference is marginal but the result can be considered as true. 
Table 5-10 Three table Cuckoo algorithm - breakpoint test. 
Breakpoint 
Load factor [%] 
Average [%] 
1 
0.79 
0.80 
0.79 
0.79 
10 
45.12 
45.12 
45.11 
45.12 
100 
85.58 
85.58 
85.58 
85.58 
1000 
91.19 
91.20 
91.19 
91,19 
10000 
91,76 
91,76 
91,76 
91,76 
 
Results achieved after the addition of extra table with different hash function for cuckoo hashing 
concept improved significantly. As can be observed, load factor has increased up to almost 92% 
in average. At the cost of extra space for third hash table and new hash function achievable 
outcome is incomparably better. Similarly as for the classical cuckoo all tables are balanced when 
it comes to fill level between them. To achieve the best result, breakpoint value for this scenario 
should be equal to 10 000. However, it is implementation-dependent what values should be taken 
into account based on parameters like execution time etc. 
Table 5-11 Double table Cuckoo algorithm - breakpoint test. 
Breakpoint 
Load factor [%] 
Average [%] 
1 
6.25 
0.22 
6.25 
0.22 
3.24 
10 
71.01 
35.28 
71.00 
35.29 
53.15 
100 
92,72 
73.64 
92,72 
73.65 
83.18 
1000 
95.55 
81.69 
95.54 
81.66 
88.61 
10000 
95.99 
83.12 
96.01 
83.10 
89.56 
 
In the last scenario, it can be observed that the additional slot per hash value improved results 
compared to the first case. Up to 90% of input values can be stored in that test for this implemen-
tation. However, as can be seen first slot in each table tends to be filled better than the second. 
==PAGE:44==
 
44 
 
Presumably after the addition of the third slot, the fill level maintains the gradual reduction trend. 
However, it should be checked to verify that hypothesis. Nevertheless, this case also proves that 
small change in the cuckoo algorithm can improves the overall performance. As for breakpoint 
values both 1000 and 10 000 gives a great outcome.  
The test results were not presented for all hashing functions combinations because for random 
input all result were almost the same with some small differences ( < 0,1 percentage points). 
To remind the above results were obtained for randomly generated input. Therefore it should be 
reasonable to see how well balancing algorithm can work with specific input pattern. It this case 
input keys will be generated in the increasing order starting from randomly generated initial value 
of the IP address (per one test). This should result the input table that stores IP addresses within 
same subnet, which seems to be more real life application scenario. As it was in the test above, 
each test will be executed 10000 times to get sensible average.  
Abbreviations list: 
• 
C -> CRC 32 
• 
M -> Murmur 
• 
L -> Lookup3 
• 
P1 -> Comcores hash 1 
• 
P2 -> Comcores hash 2 
Table 5-12 Three table Cuckoo algorithm – load factor test. 
 
As can be seen in the table 5-12, results for each hash are quite repetitive for each hash across 
different combinations. The change of the order of hash functions and hash buckets did not influ-
ence the outcome. However, the combinations itself might have a noticeable influence on how 
well each table was filled with data. For example, Murmur and Lookup hashes reached 89.45% 
and 88.68% respectively for the test with CRC-32 as the third hash. Both hash functions resulted 
Hash  
combination 
Load factor for each bucket [%] 
Average [%] 
C + M + L 
63.93 
89.45 
88.68 
80.69 
C + M + P1 
61.96 
88.73 
87.56 
79.42 
C + M + P2 
66.43 
91.27 
99.66 
85.79 
C + L + P1 
62.00 
88.72 
87.62 
79.45 
C + L + P2 
66.42 
91.26 
99.66 
85.78 
M + L + P1 
92.34 
92.26 
98.49 
94.36 
M + L + P2 
92.89 
92.65 
99.73 
95.09 
==PAGE:45==
 
45 
in a better performance when paired with Comcores hash 1 or 2. Therefore, the poor performance 
of CRC-32 can affect negatively the entire hash table structure. It can be also observed that 
Comcores hash 2 obtained the best results among other hashes without a noticeable impact of 
weaker functions. The murmur, lookup and Comcores hash 1 also performed well. When com-
pared to results from table 5-10 it can be observed that for specific input pattern the outcome 
varies for specific hash function. The full random input for all combinations gives the same results 
presented in the table 5-10. As can be seen, for breakpoint 1000 or 10 000 the result exceed 
91%, whereas for the best hash mix it is over 95%. Therefore, the exact performance is somehow 
based on the input as well. The conclusion is that each hash application should be check not only 
for random input but also for tailored one if possible. The next tables will provide results for all 
combinations for classical cuckoo and double slot version.  
Table 5-13 Classical Cuckoo algorithm – load factor test. 
Hash  
combination 
Load factor for each bucket [%] 
Average [%] 
C + M 
17.97 
35.19 
26.58 
C + L 
17.94 
35.17 
26.56 
C + P1 
17.48 
33.64 
25.56 
C + P2 
33.18 
68.09 
50.64 
M + L 
51.76 
51.76 
51.76 
M + P1 
58.85 
59.51 
59.18 
M + P2 
63.79 
78.79 
71.29 
L + P1 
58.65 
59.00 
58.83 
L + P2 
63.98 
79.17 
71.58 
 
The above table shows that for classical cuckoo, obtained load factor is different across hash 
functions. Similarly as for three table based cuckoo, results varies from random input (table 5-9) 
and there is the same trend that CRC-32 performs poorly compared to other hashing functions. 
Once again Comcores hash 2 proved to be the best hashing function for that input pattern. More-
over, last 4 combinations result way better for that input rather than the expected 50% for load 
factor [24]. 
Table 5-14 Double Table Cuckoo algorithm – load factor test. 
Hash  
combination 
Load factor for each bucket [%] 
Average [%] 
C + M 
78.63 
76.72 
95.20 
80.93 
82.87 
==PAGE:46==
 
46 
 
C + L 
78.61 
76.69 
95.18 
80.89 
82.84 
C + P1 
73.95 
66.70 
94.05 
75.01 
77.43 
C + P2 
79.14 
75.24 
98.32 
91.82 
86.13 
M + L 
95.54 
81.66 
95.52 
81.63 
88.59 
M + P1 
96.64 
85.50 
99.76 
95.84 
94.44 
M + P2 
97.20 
87.19 
99.98 
99.29 
95.92 
L + P1 
96.59 
84.14 
99.74 
95.61 
94.02 
L + P2 
97.20 
87.19 
99.98 
99.30 
95.92 
 
Once again the results for proposed input pattern proves that for given hash functions and cuckoo 
algorithm varies from results obtained for fully random input values. The same trend can be ob-
served for CRC-32 hash function. The worst combination was CRC and Comcores hash 1. On 
the other hand, murmur and lookup hash paired with Comcores hash 2 resulted in the best pos-
sible table utilization.  
To conclude, random input tests may give an overall overview of performance for hash and bal-
ancing function combination. It is a good way to see an average outcome. However, if possible, 
it is a good option to test it with specifically prepared input pattern that will be close to data that 
will be stored for given application. Moreover, it would be beneficial to verify the worst and best 
case scenario, and conduct tests for that scenarios.  
The next test is to check if the addition of a cache concept to store unsaved input keys will im-
proves table utilization. This idea is imitating the spill over the CAM. Following test checks only if 
insertion procedure lasts longer than without cache. Of course, some keys will be stored inside 
cache memory, instead in the hash tables. However, it is worth checking how many more keys 
could be stored in buckets. Since the test only checks the insertion procedure, it may be needed 
to add tests cases where data stored inside hash table is deleted from time to time, randomly and 
compare the implementation with and without spill over a CAM. The second implementation 
should try to unload cache memory by trying to save the content every time something is deleted 
from hash tables. Then it should be worth checking how many more entries statistically were 
stored with spill over than without it. From proposed cuckoo implementation, the last one with 
double slot per hash assigned has the option of using the cache to offload problematic keys. The 
test will be conducted on fully random input. The breakpoint was set to 1000. 
CAM size 
Load factor for each bucket [%] 
Average [%] 
0 
95.55 
81.69 
95.53 
81.67 
88.61 
==PAGE:47==
 
47 
500 
96.52 
84.38 
96.52 
84.81 
90.56 
1000 
96.92 
86.20 
96.93 
86.20 
91.56 
1500 
97.26 
87.39 
97.26 
87.38 
92.32 
2000 
97.53 
88.37 
97.53 
88.38 
92.95 
 
Proposed cache size are 0, 1.5, 3, 4.58 and 6.10 % consecutively of whole memory assigned for 
hash tables. As can be seen any of tested cases did not resulted in full data coverage. Moreover, 
all cache chunks are filled with data so it has to be in mind when calculating possible profit. 
2 𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑠 × 2 𝑠𝑙𝑜𝑡𝑠 × 8129 = 32 768 𝑠𝑙𝑜𝑡𝑠 
For the simulation without CAM, the number of stored entries is: 
32 768 × 88.61% ≅ 29 035 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 𝑠𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑑 
Number of entries saved for all CAM size scenarios: 
32 768 × 90.56% ≅ 29 674 
32 768 × 91.56% ≅ 30 002 
32 768 × 92.32% ≅ 30 251 
32 768 × 90.56% ≅ 30 457 
Number of entries gained compared to no CAM scenario: 
𝐹𝑜𝑟 𝐶𝐴𝑀 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 500           29 674 −29 035 = 639 
𝐹𝑜𝑟 𝐶𝐴𝑀 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 1000           30 002 −29 035 = 967 
𝐹𝑜𝑟 𝐶𝐴𝑀 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 1500           30 251 −29 035 = 1216 
𝐹𝑜𝑟 𝐶𝐴𝑀 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 2000           30 002 −29 035 = 1422 
When considering above numbers, without data stored in CAM the percental storage increase 
inside tables is 1.95, 2.95, 3.71 and 4.34 consecutively. The improvement does not seems to be 
significant but test with random entry deletion might prove the sensibility of incorporating afore-
mentioned concept. 
The last thing to check is how important balancing algorithm is. The test will compare classical 
Cuckoo table utilisation versus the simple implementation where code checks whether it can save 
the key in the first or second table. Technically, it is a cuckoo without replacement procedure and 
key is tried to be saved in the first and then second table. When this basic algorithm is unable to 
save incoming input value in any of available tables then the test is finished. To receive sensible 
==PAGE:48==
 
48 
 
average outcome, test has been executed 10 000 times (as it was for previous cases). Tests were 
conducted on fully random input. 
Table 5-15 Importance of balancing algorithm for hash based data store. 
Algorithm 
Load factor for each bucket [%] 
Average [%] 
Cuckoo hashing 
51.69 
51.67 
51.68 
No balancing alg. 
15.25 
1.42 
8.34 
 
As can be observed in the table 5-15, the influence on storage capacity for hash based data 
management is significant. Cuckoo algorithm obtained around 52% of occupancy, whereas no 
balancing method managed to save only 8.34 % keys. For hash based methods it is important to 
use collision resolving algorithms because the overall utilization of memory assigned to store the 
data might be extremely poor. Therefore, the advantage of hashing functions for fast data man-
agement would not make any sense in such an application.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
49 
6. Conclusion. 
The goal of the project was to analyse and improve hash function and algorithm of an FPGA hash 
based lookup table. Based on the fact that a hardware (FPGA) is the default application environ-
ment, and the simplicity of implementation or function applicability for lookup purposes following 
hash functions has been chosen for the project: CRC-32, Murumur3 and Jenkin’s Lookup3 hash. 
As it was stated at the beginning of the project, each function has already existing implementation 
in the FPGA technology and the complexity of each function is not too great. Moreover, two of the 
functions are developed for hash table lookup. In order to focus on project needs, all cryptography 
functions were not considered. This approach limited the potential number of test schemes for 
hash functions, because most of the literature contains hash testing procedures tailored for cryp-
tography requirements. Nevertheless, the main factor for hashing function to check was infor-
mation distribution. Therefore, the best approach was to test the avalanche effect for each hash-
ing function. It has been decided that the project will focus on the IP addresses as an input. The 
results showed that Murmur, Lookup and Comcores hash in variant one passed that test for ran-
domly generated input. CRC-32 did not achieved the optimal result of 50 % probability and 
Comcores hash in the second variant was very close. On the other hand the same test for pro-
posed input pattern showed that aforementioned hash functions did not performed as before. All 
functions did not achieved expected threshold. This led to the conclusion that test should be done 
also for a data set that is expected to be work on. As it was stated in the 5th chapter, other hy-
potheses needs more tests to confirm. 
The next part of the thesis focused on the algorithm for collision resolving and balancing. It has 
been agreed that currently used Cuckoo hashing should be examined and modified to achieve 
better utilization. In order to achieve that, two additional variations had been proposed. The results 
showed that additional table with a new hash function and classical cuckoo algorithm with an 
additional slot per hash improved significantly hash table utilization compared to basic cuckoo 
version. Load factor test for proposed input confirmed that any hash combination with CRC-32 
resulted in the worst performance among them. Moreover, hash testing on randomly generated 
data again confirmed, that obtained results may show that given hash function performs better 
than it currently is for specific input data.  
After the outcome comparison it is suggested that all hash functions besides CRC-32 could be a 
good candidate to consider. Moreover, as for algorithm, a cuckoo in three table version seems to 
be the best option to use with aforementioned hashing functions. It requires more space to allo-
cate for hashing tables and an additional hashing function to be implemented. However, obtained 
results proved that it is worth considering when overall utilization can exceed 90%.  
The potential project development can be more testing proposals for hash functions itself. There 
may be a specific test scheme that gives more other useful information than avalanche effect test. 
==PAGE:50==
 
50 
 
Moreover, more different input data could be verified. As for collision resolving algorithm, it is 
beneficial to find an alternative to compare with cuckoo hashing. Additionally, for project’s author 
it could be interesting to learn and try to implement proposed solutions in the FPGA environment.  
To conclude, all points from project description have been achieved. The project ended with the 
proposal of functions that can be considered as a good candidates for lookup tables. Moreover, 
one of the proposed variants of the collision resolving algorithm proved that basic implementation 
can be improved significantly to achieve nearly double performance. Therefore it can be consid-
ered that project has been finished successfully. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
51 
Reference 
[1] Mark Stamp; Richard M. Low, "Hash Functions," in Applied Cryptanalysis: Breaking Ciphers 
in the Real World , IEEE, 2007, pp.193-264, doi: 10.1002/9780470148778.ch5. 
[2] Stavroulakis, Peter & Stamp, Mark. (2010). Handbook of Information and Communication Se-
curity. 10.1007/978-3-642-04117-4.ch4. 
[3] C. Paar and J. Pelzl, Understanding Cryptography: A Textbook for Students and Practitioners. 
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2009. 
[4] https://www.okta.com/identity-101/hashing-algorithms/ 
[5] https://www.techtarget.com/searchdatamanagement/definition/hashing 
[6] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_table 
[7] Jubin Mitra, Tapan Nayak, Reconfigurable very high throughput low latency VLSI (FPGA) de-
sign architecture of CRC 32, Integration, Volume 56, 2017, Pages 1-14 
[8] http://www.sunshine2k.de/articles/coding/crc/understanding_crc.html 
[9] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclic_redundancy_check 
[10] M. S. Abdulnabi and H. Ahmed, "Design of Efficient Cyclic Redundancy Check-32 using 
FPGA," 2018 International Conference on Computer, Control, Electrical, and Electronics Engi-
neering (ICCCEEE), Khartoum, Sudan, 2018, pp. 1-5 
[11] https://xilinx.github.io/Vitis_Libraries/security/2021.2/guide_L1/internals/crc32.html 
[12] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MurmurHash 
[13] https://github.com/aappleby/smhasher/blob/master/src/MurmurHash3.cpp 
[14] https://burtleburtle.net/bob/c/lookup3.c 
[15] https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/collateral/switches/catalyst-9400-series-
switches/nb-06-cat9400-ser-sup-eng-data-sheet-cte-en.html 
[16] https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/separate-chaining-collision-handling-technique-in-hashing/ 
[17] Daemen, J., Hoffert, S., Van Assche, G., & Van Keer, R. (2018). The design of Xoodoo and 
Xoofff. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology, 2018(4), 1–38. 
[18] https://arishs.medium.com/analyze-your-hash-functions-the-avalanche-metrics-calculation-
767b7445ee6f 
[19] Webster, A. & Tavares, Stafford. (1970). On the design of S-Boxes. 10.1007/3-540-39799-
X_41. 
[20] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subnet 
[21] Upadhyay, Dhaval & Gaikwad, Nupur & Zaman, Marzia & Sampalli, Srinivas. (2022). Inves-
tigating the Avalanche Effect of Various Cryptographically Secure Hash Functions and Hash-
Based Applications. IEEE Access. 10. 112472-112486. 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3215778. 
[22] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamming_distance 
[23] Fleming, Noah. “Cuckoo Hashing and Cuckoo Filters.” (2018). 
[24] Chen, Charles. “An Overview of Cuckoo Hashing.” (2014). 
[25] https://docs.xilinx.com/r/en-US/Vitis_Libraries/database/guide/hash/hash.html 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
52 
 
List of figures 
Figure 2.1 Hashing – simple example [4] ...................................................................................... 7 
Figure 2.2 Signature example [5] .................................................................................................. 8 
Figure 2.3 Hash lookup example [6] .............................................................................................. 9 
Figure 2.4 Cuckoo hashing insertion procedure [24] .................................................................. 13 
Figure 3.1 Data concatenation into a single value ...................................................................... 16 
Figure 3.2 Algorithm to generate lookup table for CRC-32 ......................................................... 17 
Figure 3.3 CRC-32 calculation based on lookup table ................................................................ 18 
Figure 3.4 CRC-32 bit-wise calculation algorithm ....................................................................... 19 
Figure 3.5 Murmur3 hash algorithm ............................................................................................ 20 
Figure 3.6 Memory access in Murmur3 hash .............................................................................. 21 
Figure 3.7 Jenkins Lookup3 hash algorithm................................................................................ 22 
Figure 3.8 Proposed tables configuration for balancing algorithm. ............................................. 24 
Figure 3.9 Classic Cuckoo - insertion procedure. ....................................................................... 24 
Figure 3.10 XOR folding. ............................................................................................................. 26 
Figure 3.11 Three-Tables Cuckoo - insertion procedure. ........................................................... 27 
Figure 3.12 Double-Table Cuckoo - insertion procedure. ........................................................... 28 
Figure 4.1 Strict Avalanche Criterion - block diagram. ................................................................ 31 
Figure 4.2 Strict Avalanche Criterion vector - block diagram. ..................................................... 32 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
53 
Appendix 
Code for CRC-32, Murmur3 and Lookup3 hash functions: 
void CRC32_Table(uint32_t lookup_table[], uint32_t gen_polynomial) 
{ 
    for(size_t byte_val = 0; byte_val < 256; byte_val ++) 
    { 
        uint32_t current_byte = (uint32_t)(byte_val << 24); 
        for(size_t bit_val = 0; bit_val < 8; bit_val ++) 
        { 
            if(current_byte & (1 << (32 - 1))) 
            { 
                current_byte = (current_byte << 1) ^ gen_polynomial; 
            } 
            else 
            { 
                current_byte = current_byte << 1; 
            } 
        } 
        lookup_table[byte_val] = current_byte; 
    } 
} 
 
uint32_t CRC32_Table_Based(uint32_t lookup_table[], uint8_t* buffer, size_t lenght) 
{ 
    uint32_t crc_val = 0xFFFFFFFF; 
    for(size_t byte_val = 0; byte_val < lenght; byte_val ++) 
    { 
        uint8_t position = (uint8_t)((crc_val ^ (buffer[byte_val] << 24)) >> 24); 
        crc_val = (uint32_t)((crc_val << 8) ^ (uint32_t)(lookup_table[position])); 
    } 
    crc_val = crc_val ^ 0xFFFFFFFF; 
    return crc_val; 
} 
 
uint32_t CRC32_Bitwise(uint8_t* data, size_t data_lenght, uint32_t gen_polynomial) 
{ 
     
    // Initialize CRC start value 
    uint32_t crc_val = 0xFFFFFFFF; 
     
    // Initialize CRC last xor value 
    uint32_t end_xor_value = 0xFFFFFFFF; 
     
    // Calculate CRC32 in bitwise manner 
    for(size_t byte_val = 0; byte_val < data_lenght; byte_val++) 
==PAGE:54==
 
54 
 
    { 
        // XOR-in byte from byte array, cast to 32 bit value and shift content to MSB 
        crc_val = crc_val ^ (uint32_t)(data[byte_val] << 24); 
         
        // Process bit-by-bit for each byte value 
        for(size_t bit_val = 0; bit_val < 8; bit_val ++) 
        { 
            // Use 32 bit bitmask 1...0 to check if first bit whether 1 or 0 
            // If true shift by 1 bit and XOR with polynomial 
            // Otherwise shift by 1 bit -> see rules of CRC calculation 
            if(crc_val & (1 << (32 - 1))) 
            { 
                crc_val = (crc_val << 1) ^ gen_polynomial;       
            } 
            else 
            { 
                crc_val = crc_val << 1; 
            } 
        } 
    } 
     
    // XOR at the end the result with specified constant and return the result 
    crc_val = crc_val ^ end_xor_value; 
    return crc_val; 
} 
uint32_t Murmur3_Cal(uint32_t seed, uint8_t* data, size_t data_length) 
{ 
    // Murmur3 Hash Constants  
    const uint32_t c1 = 0xcc9e2d51; 
    const uint32_t c2 = 0x1b873593; 
    const uint32_t c3 = 0x85ebca6b; 
    const uint32_t c4 = 0xc2b2ae35; 
    const size_t rot1 = 15; 
    const size_t rot2 = 13; 
    const uint32_t n = 0xe6546b64; 
    const size_t m = 5; 
    const size_t byte_block_size = 4; 
     
    // Variable initialization 
    uint32_t hash = seed; 
    uint32_t k = 0; 
     
    // Calculating number of the blocks 
    size_t num_blocks = data_length / byte_block_size; 
     
    // Cast data from 8bit to 32bit representation 
    uint32_t* chunk = (uint32_t*) data; 
==PAGE:55==
 
55 
     
    // Calculate for 4 byte blocks 
    for (size_t i = 0; i < num_blocks; i++)  
    { 
        k = chunk[i]; 
        k *= c1; 
        k = (k << rot1) | (k >> (32 - rot1)); // rotate by r1 
        k *= c2; 
 
        hash = hash ^ k; 
        hash = (hash << rot2) | (hash >> (32 - rot2)); // roatet by r2 
        hash = (hash * m) + n; 
    } 
     
    // Calculate the tail (unprocessed remainding byte of the input) 
    uint8_t* tail = (uint8_t*)(data + num_blocks * byte_block_size); 
    k = 0; 
     
    // Processing remaining bytes for any lenght from 3 to 1 
    switch(data_length & 3) 
    { 
        case 3: 
            k = k ^ tail[2] << 16; 
        case 2: 
            k = k ^ tail[1] << 8; 
        case 1: 
            k = k ^ tail[0]; 
            k = k * c1; 
            k = (k << rot1) | (k >> (32 - rot1)); 
            k = k * c2; 
            hash = hash ^ k; 
    } 
     
    // Final block 
    hash = hash ^ data_length; 
    hash = hash ^ (hash >> 16); 
    hash = hash * c3; 
    hash = hash ^ (hash >> 13); 
    hash = hash * c4; 
    hash = hash ^ (hash >> 16); 
     
    return hash; 
} 
 
#define rotate(x,k) ((x << k) | (x >> (32-k))) 
 
#define mix_macro(a, b, c) \ 
==PAGE:56==
 
56 
 
{ \ 
  a -= c;  a ^= rotate(c, 4);  c += b; \ 
  b -= a;  b ^= rotate(a, 6);  a += c; \ 
  c -= b;  c ^= rotate(b, 8);  b += a; \ 
  a -= c;  a ^= rotate(c,16);  c += b; \ 
  b -= a;  b ^= rotate(a,19);  a += c; \ 
  c -= b;  c ^= rotate(b, 4);  b += a; \ 
} 
 
#define final_macro(a, b, c) \ 
{ \ 
  c ^= b; c -= rotate(b,14); \ 
  a ^= c; a -= rotate(c,11); \ 
  b ^= a; b -= rotate(a,25); \ 
  c ^= b; c -= rotate(b,16); \ 
  a ^= c; a -= rotate(c,4); \ 
  b ^= a; b -= rotate(a,14); \ 
  c ^= b; c -= rotate(b,24); \ 
} 
 
uint32_t Lookup3(uint32_t seed, uint8_t* data, size_t data_length) 
{ 
    // Preparing so-called internal stage 
    uint32_t a = 0xdeadbeef + (uint32_t)(data_length) + seed; 
    uint32_t b = a; 
    uint32_t c = a; 
     
    // Read data as 8 bit representation 
    uint8_t* chunk = (uint8_t*)data; 
     
    // Process blocks 
    while(data_length > 12) 
    { 
      a += chunk[0]; 
      a += ((uint32_t)chunk[1])<<8; 
      a += ((uint32_t)chunk[2])<<16; 
      a += ((uint32_t)chunk[3])<<24; 
      b += chunk[4]; 
      b += ((uint32_t)chunk[5])<<8; 
      b += ((uint32_t)chunk[6])<<16; 
      b += ((uint32_t)chunk[7])<<24; 
      c += chunk[8]; 
      c += ((uint32_t)chunk[9])<<8; 
      c += ((uint32_t)chunk[10])<<16; 
      c += ((uint32_t)chunk[11])<<24; 
      mix_macro(a,b,c); 
      data_length -= 12; 
==PAGE:57==
 
57 
      chunk += 12; 
    } 
     
    // Process the tail 
    switch(data_length) 
    { 
        case 12:  
            c+=((uint32_t)chunk[11])<<24; 
        case 11:  
            c+=((uint32_t)chunk[10])<<16; 
        case 10:  
            c+=((uint32_t)chunk[9])<<8; 
        case 9:  
            c+=chunk[8]; 
        case 8:  
            b+=((uint32_t)chunk[7])<<24; 
        case 7:  
            b+=((uint32_t)chunk[6])<<16; 
        case 6:  
            b+=((uint32_t)chunk[5])<<8; 
        case 5:  
            b+=chunk[4]; 
        case 4:  
            a+=((uint32_t)chunk[3])<<24; 
        case 3:  
            a+=((uint32_t)chunk[2])<<16; 
        case 2:  
            a+=((uint32_t)chunk[1])<<8; 
        case 1:  
            a+=chunk[0]; 
            break; 
        case 0:  
            return c; 
    } 
     
    final_macro(a,b,c); 
    return c; 
} 
 
Code for cuckoo hashing in all variants: 
enum Lookup_Status Cuckoo_Lookup(uint16_t hash, uint32_t key, uint32_t **lookup_tables, size_t table_num) 
{ 
    // Check if key exist in given place  
    if(lookup_tables[hash][table_num] == key) 
    { 
        return EXIST; 
    } 
==PAGE:58==
 
58 
 
    else 
    { 
        if(lookup_tables[hash][table_num] != 0) 
        { 
            return OCCUPIED; 
        } 
        else 
        { 
            return EMPTY; 
        } 
    } 
} 
 
void Cuckoo_Insert(uint16_t hash, uint32_t key, uint32_t **lookup_tables, size_t table_num) 
{ 
    lookup_tables[hash][table_num] = key; 
} 
 
void Cuckoo_Delete(uint16_t hash, uint32_t **lookup_tables, size_t table_num) 
{ 
    lookup_tables[hash][table_num] = 0; 
} 
 
enum Cuckoo_Status Cuckoo_Algorithm(uint8_t* key, size_t key_length, uint32_t **lookup_tables, uint32_t seed, uint32_t gen_polyno-
mial, uint8_t *custom_bit, uint8_t custom_bit_length, uint8_t *cfg, char *hashes, char operation, size_t breakpoint, uint32_t* fill_lvl) 
{ 
    //Precalculate both hashes used for lookup tables 
    uint32_t hash1_32bit = Calculate_Hash(hashes[0], key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, custom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
    uint32_t hash2_32bit = Calculate_Hash(hashes[1], key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, custom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
     
    //Fold hashes from 32bit to 16bit representation 
    uint16_t hash1_16bit = Fold_32to16bit(hash1_32bit); 
    uint16_t hash2_16bit = Fold_32to16bit(hash2_32bit); 
     
    //Fold again to 13 bit representation 
    uint16_t hash1_folded = Fold_16_to_X(hash1_16bit, 13); 
    uint16_t hash2_folded = Fold_16_to_X(hash2_16bit, 13); 
     
    //Convert data to int representation 
    uint32_t data_converted = Four_Octets_to_32_Int(key, key_length); 
     
    //Check key status for both tables 
    enum Lookup_Status table1_status = Cuckoo_Lookup(hash1_folded, data_converted, lookup_tables, 0); 
    enum Lookup_Status table2_status = Cuckoo_Lookup(hash2_folded, data_converted, lookup_tables, 1); 
     
    enum Cuckoo_Status algorithm_status; 
    //Main algorithm engine 
==PAGE:59==
 
59 
    switch(operation) 
    { 
        case 'i': 
            if(table1_status == EXIST || table2_status == EXIST) 
            { 
                algorithm_status = KEY_EXIST; 
            } 
            else 
            { 
                //pick table to save randomly 
                uint8_t table_flag = rand() % 2; 
                 
                int replace_iterator = 0;       // iterator to count how many times insertion loop was executed 
                uint32_t table_hash_32bit = 0; 
                uint16_t table_hash_16bit = 0; 
                uint16_t table_hash = 0; 
                uint32_t move_key = 0; 
                uint8_t deconvereted_key[4] = {0}; 
                enum Lookup_Status table_status; 
                 
                if(table_flag == 0) 
                { 
                    table_hash = hash1_folded; 
                    table_status = table1_status; 
                } 
                else 
                { 
                    table_hash = hash2_folded; 
                    table_status = table2_status; 
                } 
                       
                //Insertion loop 
                while(replace_iterator < breakpoint) 
                { 
                    if(table_status == EMPTY) 
                    { 
                        Cuckoo_Insert(table_hash, data_converted, lookup_tables, table_flag); 
                        algorithm_status = KEY_INSERTED; 
                        fill_lvl[table_flag] += 1; 
                        break; 
                    } 
                    else 
                    { 
                        //Save the data to move and insert new key in that place 
                        move_key = lookup_tables[table_hash][table_flag]; 
                        Cuckoo_Insert(table_hash, data_converted, lookup_tables, table_flag); 
                         
==PAGE:60==
 
60 
 
                        //Logic to switch beetwen tables 
                        if(table_flag == 1) 
                        { 
                            table_flag = 0; 
                        } 
                        else 
                        { 
                            table_flag += 1; 
                        } 
                         
                        //Overwrite data for next check 
                        data_converted = move_key; 
                        //Re-convert key to user readable formula e.g 162.168.0.1 
                        Int_32_to_Four_Octets(deconvereted_key, data_converted); 
                        //Calculate hash 
                        table_hash_32bit = Calculate_Hash(hashes[table_flag], deconvereted_key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, cus-
tom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
                        table_hash_16bit = Fold_32to16bit(table_hash_32bit); 
                        table_hash = Fold_16_to_X(table_hash_16bit, 13); 
                        //Chech the status for next loop iteration 
                        table_status = Cuckoo_Lookup(table_hash, data_converted, lookup_tables, table_flag); 
                        replace_iterator += 1; 
                    } 
                } 
                 
                if(replace_iterator >= breakpoint) 
                { 
                    algorithm_status = BREAKPOINT_REACHED; 
                } 
            } 
            break; 
        case 'l': 
            if(table1_status == EXIST) 
            { 
                printf("Key found in table 1"); 
                algorithm_status =  KEY_EXIST; 
            } 
            else if(table2_status == EXIST) 
            { 
                printf("Key found in table 2"); 
                algorithm_status =  KEY_EXIST; 
            } 
            else 
            { 
                printf("Key not found in both tables"); 
                algorithm_status =  KEY_NOT_FOUND; 
            } 
==PAGE:61==
 
61 
            break; 
        case 'd': 
            if(table1_status == EXIST) 
            { 
                Cuckoo_Delete(hash1_16bit, lookup_tables, 0); 
                algorithm_status =  KEY_DELETED; 
            } 
            else if(table2_status == EXIST) 
            { 
                Cuckoo_Delete(hash2_16bit, lookup_tables, 1); 
                algorithm_status =  KEY_DELETED; 
            } 
            else 
            { 
                algorithm_status =  KEY_NOT_FOUND; 
            } 
            break; 
    } 
    return algorithm_status; 
} 
 
//for three tables 
enum Cuckoo_Status Cuckoo_Algorithm_3Tables(uint8_t* key, size_t key_length, uint32_t **lookup_tables, uint32_t seed, uint32_t 
gen_polynomial, uint8_t *custom_bit, uint8_t custom_bit_length, uint8_t *cfg, char *hashes, size_t breakpoint, uint32_t* fill_lvl) 
{ 
    //Precalculate both hashes used for lookup tables 
    uint32_t hash1_32bit = Calculate_Hash(hashes[0], key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, custom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
    uint32_t hash2_32bit = Calculate_Hash(hashes[1], key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, custom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
    uint32_t hash3_32bit = Calculate_Hash(hashes[2], key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, custom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
     
    //Fold hashes from 32bit to 16bit representation 
    uint16_t hash1_16bit = Fold_32to16bit(hash1_32bit); 
    uint16_t hash2_16bit = Fold_32to16bit(hash2_32bit); 
    uint16_t hash3_16bit = Fold_32to16bit(hash3_32bit); 
     
    //Fold again to 13 bit representation 
    uint16_t hash1_folded = Fold_16_to_X(hash1_16bit, 13); 
    uint16_t hash2_folded = Fold_16_to_X(hash2_16bit, 13); 
    uint16_t hash3_folded = Fold_16_to_X(hash3_16bit, 13); 
     
    //Convert data to int representation 
    uint32_t data_converted = Four_Octets_to_32_Int(key, key_length); 
     
    //Check key status for each table 
    enum Lookup_Status table1_status = Cuckoo_Lookup(hash1_folded, data_converted, lookup_tables, 0); 
    enum Lookup_Status table2_status = Cuckoo_Lookup(hash2_folded, data_converted, lookup_tables, 1); 
    enum Lookup_Status table3_status = Cuckoo_Lookup(hash3_folded, data_converted, lookup_tables, 2);     
==PAGE:62==
 
62 
 
     
    enum Cuckoo_Status algorithm_status; 
    //Main algorithm engine 
    if(table1_status == EXIST || table2_status == EXIST || table3_status == EXIST) 
    { 
        algorithm_status =  KEY_EXIST; 
    } 
    else 
    { 
        //pick table to save randomly 
        uint8_t Table_pointer = rand() % 3; 
         
        //Set starting point 
        enum Lookup_Status Table_status; 
        uint16_t Table_hash = 0; 
        uint32_t Table_hash_32 = 0; 
        uint32_t Table_hash_16 = 0; 
        if(Table_pointer == 0) 
        { 
            Table_status = table1_status; 
            Table_hash = hash1_folded; 
        } 
        else if(Table_pointer == 1) 
        { 
            Table_status = table2_status; 
            Table_hash = hash2_folded; 
        } 
        else 
        { 
            Table_status = table3_status; 
            Table_hash = hash3_folded; 
        } 
         
        //insertion loop iterator 
        size_t replace_iterator = 0; 
        uint32_t key_2_move = 0; 
        uint8_t deconvereted_key[4] = {0}; 
        while(replace_iterator < breakpoint) 
        { 
            if(Table_status == EMPTY) 
            { 
                Cuckoo_Insert(Table_hash, data_converted, lookup_tables, Table_pointer); 
                algorithm_status = KEY_INSERTED; 
                fill_lvl[Table_pointer] += 1; 
                break; 
            } 
            else 
==PAGE:63==
 
63 
            { 
                //Save the data to move and insert new key in that place 
                key_2_move = lookup_tables[Table_hash][Table_pointer]; 
                Cuckoo_Insert(Table_hash, data_converted, lookup_tables, Table_pointer); 
                 
                //Logic to switch beetwen tables 
                if(Table_pointer == 2) 
                { 
                    Table_pointer = 0; 
                } 
                else 
                { 
                    Table_pointer += 1; 
                } 
                 
                //Overwrite data for next check 
                data_converted = key_2_move; 
                //Re-convert key to user readable formula e.g 162.168.0.1 
                Int_32_to_Four_Octets(deconvereted_key, data_converted); 
                //Calculate hash 
                Table_hash_32 = Calculate_Hash(hashes[Table_pointer], deconvereted_key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, custom_bit, 
custom_bit_length, cfg); 
                Table_hash_16 = Fold_32to16bit(Table_hash_32); 
                Table_hash = Fold_16_to_X(Table_hash_16, 13); 
                //Chech the status for next loop iteration 
                Table_status = Cuckoo_Lookup(Table_hash, data_converted, lookup_tables, Table_pointer); 
                replace_iterator += 1; 
            } 
        } 
         
        //Check the insert loop iterator 
        if(replace_iterator >= breakpoint) 
        { 
            algorithm_status = BREAKPOINT_REACHED; 
        } 
    } 
 
    return algorithm_status; 
} 
 
enum Cuckoo_Status Cuckoo_Algorithm_Double_Tables(uint8_t* key, size_t key_length, uint32_t **lookup_tables, uint32_t seed, 
uint32_t gen_polynomial, uint8_t *custom_bit, uint8_t custom_bit_length, uint8_t *cfg, char *hashes, size_t breakpoint, uint32_t *cam, 
size_t cam_length, uint32_t* fill_lvl, size_t* cam_iterator) 
{ 
    //Precalculate both hashes used for lookup tables 
    uint32_t hash_32bit[4] = {0}; 
    for(size_t i = 0; i < 4; i++) 
==PAGE:64==
 
64 
 
    { 
        hash_32bit[i] = Calculate_Hash(hashes[i/2], key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, custom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
    } 
     
    //Fold hashes from 32bit to 16bit representation 
    uint16_t hash_16bit[4] = {0}; 
    for(size_t i = 0; i < 4; i++) 
    { 
        hash_16bit[i] = Fold_32to16bit(hash_32bit[i]); 
    } 
     
    //Fold again to 13 bit representation 
    uint16_t hash_13bit[4] = {0}; 
    for(size_t i = 0; i < 4; i++) 
    { 
        hash_13bit[i] = Fold_16_to_X(hash_16bit[i], 13); 
    } 
     
    //Convert data to int representation 
    uint32_t data_converted = Four_Octets_to_32_Int(key, key_length); 
     
    //Check key status for each table 
    enum Lookup_Status table_status[4]; 
    for(size_t i = 0; i < 4; i++) 
    { 
        table_status[i] = Cuckoo_Lookup(hash_13bit[i], data_converted, lookup_tables, i); 
    } 
 
    enum Cuckoo_Status algorithm_status; 
    //static size_t cam_iterator = 0; 
    //Main algorithm engine 
    if(table_status[0] == EXIST || table_status[1] == EXIST || table_status[2]  == EXIST || table_status[3]  == EXIST) 
    { 
        algorithm_status =  KEY_EXIST; 
    } 
    else 
    { 
        //pick table to save randomly 
        uint8_t Table_pointer = rand() % 2; 
         
        if(Table_pointer == 0) 
        { 
            Table_pointer = 0; 
        } 
        else 
        { 
            Table_pointer = 2; 
==PAGE:65==
 
65 
        } 
 
        //insertion loop iterator 
        size_t replace_iterator = 0; 
        uint32_t key_2_move = 0; 
        uint8_t deconvereted_key[4] = {0}; 
         
        while(replace_iterator < breakpoint) 
        { 
            if(table_status[Table_pointer] == EMPTY) 
            { 
                Cuckoo_Insert(hash_13bit[Table_pointer], data_converted, lookup_tables, Table_pointer); 
                algorithm_status = KEY_INSERTED; 
                fill_lvl[Table_pointer] += 1; 
                break; 
            } 
            else if(table_status[Table_pointer + 1] == EMPTY) 
            { 
                Cuckoo_Insert(hash_13bit[Table_pointer + 1], data_converted, lookup_tables, (Table_pointer + 1)); 
                algorithm_status = KEY_INSERTED; 
                fill_lvl[Table_pointer + 1] += 1; 
                break; 
            } 
            else 
            { 
                //Pick randomly slot to be replaced inside the table 
                if(Table_pointer == 0) 
                { 
                    Table_pointer = rand() % 2; 
                } 
                else 
                { 
                    Table_pointer = rand() % 2 + 2; 
                } 
                 
                //Save the data to move and insert new key in that place 
                key_2_move = lookup_tables[hash_13bit[Table_pointer]][Table_pointer]; 
                Cuckoo_Insert(hash_13bit[Table_pointer], data_converted, lookup_tables, Table_pointer); 
                 
                //Logic to switch beetwen tables 
                if(Table_pointer == 0 || Table_pointer == 1) 
                { 
                    Table_pointer = 2; 
                } 
                else 
                { 
                    Table_pointer = 0; 
==PAGE:66==
 
66 
 
                } 
                 
                //Overwrite data for next check 
                data_converted = key_2_move; 
                //Re-convert key to user readable formula e.g 162.168.0.1 
                Int_32_to_Four_Octets(deconvereted_key, data_converted); 
                //Calculate hash 
                hash_32bit[Table_pointer] = Calculate_Hash(hashes[Table_pointer / 2], deconvereted_key, key_length, seed, gen_polynomial, 
custom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
                hash_32bit[Table_pointer + 1] = Calculate_Hash(hashes[(Table_pointer + 1) / 2], deconvereted_key, key_length, seed, 
gen_polynomial, custom_bit, custom_bit_length, cfg); 
                hash_16bit[Table_pointer] = Fold_32to16bit(hash_32bit[Table_pointer]); 
                hash_16bit[Table_pointer + 1] = Fold_32to16bit(hash_32bit[Table_pointer + 1]); 
                hash_13bit[Table_pointer] = Fold_16_to_X(hash_16bit[Table_pointer], 13); 
                hash_13bit[Table_pointer + 1] = Fold_16_to_X(hash_16bit[Table_pointer + 1], 13); 
                //Chech the status for next loop iteration 
                table_status[Table_pointer] = Cuckoo_Lookup(hash_13bit[Table_pointer], data_converted, lookup_tables, Table_pointer); 
                table_status[Table_pointer + 1] = Cuckoo_Lookup(hash_13bit[Table_pointer + 1], data_converted, lookup_tables, (Ta-
ble_pointer + 1)); 
                replace_iterator += 1; 
            } 
        } 
         
        //When reach break point, save the key in Content Address Memory 
        if(replace_iterator >= breakpoint) 
        { 
            if(*cam_iterator >= cam_length)     
            { 
                algorithm_status = BREAKPOINT_REACHED; 
            } 
            else 
            { 
                //Save the key in CAM 
                cam[*cam_iterator] = data_converted; 
                *cam_iterator += 1; 
                algorithm_status = KEY_INSERTED; 
            } 
        } 
         
    } 
 
    return algorithm_status; 
} 
