==PAGE:1==
Data extraction from existing photos of power
grid installations to verify database integrity
Master’s Thesis
Anders Skott Lind
2024
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database
integrity
By
(s170128) Anders Skott Lind
Advisor(s)
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering and Photonics
Department of DTU
Education
Master’s Thesis
Programme
Autonomous systems
Period
4 September 2023 to 4 March 2024
ECTS
35
Copyright:
Anders Skott Lind 2024
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Anders Lind, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Elektrovej 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for grad-
uation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the feasibility of using images captured to document maintenance-
related activities to enhance the database integrity.
Concretely, this project is mainly
concerned with the extraction of text-based information from label formats. Results in-
dicate that this is indeed possible, and this project presents an extensible software pro-
gram which facilitates this data extraction. To accomplish this, this project makes use of a
state-of-the-art object detection algorithm as well as computer vision techniques and OCR
functionality. The images used in this project vary greatly in terms of resolution, lighting,
distance to labels, etc., resulting in a challenging text extraction process. This project
takes a ”machine learning” approach to address this, where computer vision techniques
and parameters are chosen primarily based on the OCR performance on a ”training” set
rather than optimizing output from individual images. Finally, a set of recommendations
for future improvements, where especially the implementation of a state-of-the-art vision
API, is likely to increase the program output quality.
ii
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Analysis
3
2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Database discrepancy example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Text matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Extraction
11
3.1
Label extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Text extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Quality measures and extensible software design
29
4.1
Image acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Data Structures and extensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Text matching and parsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5
Results, database verification, and discrepancies
37
5.1
Data extraction output format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.2
Test scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.3
Results and project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.4
Text extraction API test scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.5
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
45
A Regular expression examples by ChatGPT
47
A.1 Connection point label . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
B Full program code
50
B.1 Github Repo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
iii
==PAGE:6==
B.2 Python files mentioned in the report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
C Data extraction model output
61
iv
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In a world characterized by technological advancements, companies seek ways to lever-
age new technology to improve their businesses. An example of this is Radius, hereafter
referred to as the company, an electricity distribution company aiming to enhance the
integrity of their database by extracting information related to electrical cabinets1 and con-
nections from an existing image archive. These images can contain various pieces of
information, such as available capacity, model identifiers of electrical cabinets types, or
textual descriptions from label formats. To initiate the project, the company opted to nar-
row the scope to extracting information from two predominant text label formats, depicted
in figure 2.3 and 2.4. However, the company expressed a desire to expand this model
to extract additional image information in the future. Therefore, this project is practical
in nature with the purpose of creating an extensible end-to-end model pipeline from the
facility archive to database enhancement proposals.
1.1
Background
The motivation for removing false database entries is evident. In the case of the company,
it is particularly so due to a project 15 years ago that introduced significant uncertainty into
the database, resulting in a total error estimation of roughly 5-6%. At that time the com-
pany’s electrical connections points was not mapped in GIS2 but only registered in SAP3.
To migrate the database to GIS approx. 530,000 connection points4 and customer ad-
dresses was extracted from SAP of these 80,000 was, as a best estimate, relocated to
the nearest cabinet in GIS. Consequently, some customers were, in the database, con-
nected to the wrong electrical cabinet. This impacts the business negatively in multiple
ways e.g. when maintenance work has to be scheduled or during electric grid analysis
calculations if customer usage is located on a wrong transformer station.
1.2
Objectives
The scope of this project is somewhat exploratory, therefore, there are no fixed success-
critea of model performance. Thus, this project is also an investigation of to which extent it
1Housing unit designed to protect and organize electrical components used in power distribution
2Geographic Information System
3Systems, Applications, and Products in Data Processing
4Physical location where an electricity or consuming facility connects to the power grid
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
1
==PAGE:8==
is a feasible to decrease database discrepancies using the facility archive5. To provide the
reader with a concrete understanding of the objectives and technical challenges involved
in this project, the tasks can be defined as follows:
1. Determine the feasibility of using the facility archive to increase database integrity
from text labels.
2. Implement an end-to-end pipeline which facilitates this challenge.
3. Enforce good coding practises to ensure real-wold project usability and future appli-
cation extensions.
1.3
Limitations
Some of the labels in this report holds information which falls under GDPR6 restrictions. In
particular, those of the format discussed in section 2.1.2. Therefore, addresses cannot be
shown in the examples and will be censored throughout this report as shown in figure 2.6b.
Ideally, the appendix should hold a large portion of images for the reader to investigate.
However, for the same reasons, the images accessible to the reader are limited to the
examples used in this report.
Additionally, the company only provided a timely dataset of label ID’s without additional
data such as addresses, Ampere values, or cable dimensions mentioned in 2.1.2. There-
fore, even though additional data can be extracted, the precision and reliability of data of
these types will be omitted from this report.
5A repository of images captured in when performing to maintenance activities
6GDPR restricts personal data processing, ensuring privacy and consent in European Union jurisdictions.
2
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:9==
2
Analysis
When detecting text in images for subsequent machine reading one well studied, and
similar task comes to mind i.e. a license plate recognition system (LPRS). Therefore, the
work plan to detect and read label data will be similar to that proposed in [1] and shown in
figure 2.1. In addition to sharing similar objectives, this project shares a key challenge with
a LPRS – obscured text. In a LPRS, text may be obscured by dirt or snow, while in this
project, factors such as label glare, print quality, or image resolution are more prevalent
causes of obscuration.
Figure 2.1: Work plan proposed for LPRS in [1]
2.1
Data
Since the data structures encountered in this project are crucial for understanding and
solving the problem, this section provides the reader with a concrete overview the data
that is used throughout the model pipeline.
2.1.1
Images
The images used in this project have not been collected with the intention of data extrac-
tion but rather as documentation of maintenance related work. Therefore, unlike LPRS,
which can involve selecting hardware tailored to specific specifications, such as choosing
a camera resolution capable of confidently reading text from a certain distance, this project
lacks such options. The absence of a fixed image-capturing format also means that unlike
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
3
==PAGE:10==
a LPRS, which typically assumes horizontally aligned license plates, this project cannot
make any such assumptions, as images are captured with varying orientations and dis-
tance to region of interests using workers’ phones.
(a) Labels oriented upside down
(b) Image without usable information
(c) Inside a cable box
(d) Labels within electrical cabinet
Figure 2.2: Image examples from the facility archive
2.1.2
Label data
The data that we want to extract in this project is found in one of the two label formats
described in this section and shown in 2.3 and 2.4. These represent the bulk of the labels
that we can expect to find within the cabinets. However, as with any manually created
data, there are frequent occurrences where the described formats are deviated from.
Connection point label
Figure 2.3: Connection point label
4
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:11==
The label type shown in 2.3 is called a connection point label (in Danish: ’stikskilt’) and is
the most common label data structure to encounter. It represents a connection end-point
that has the unique ID described by the ’TSO nummer’ (from Danish: ’tilslutningsobjekt’).
Connection point labels holds multiple pieces of information such as address, Ampere,
and the dimensions and material of the cables to the connection point. In this project we
are mostly concerned with the ID’s of the TSO which in this example is ”60256712” given
the limitations described in 1.3. These ID’s have the following characteristics:
1. Starts with the digit ”6”.
2. Holds a total of eight digits.
In this project, the term ”connection point” will be used frequently. To define a set of shared
terminology:
• Connection point: is the actual point of energy delivery.
• Connection point label: is the paper print that describes the properties of the con-
nection point typically found within electrical cabinets.
• Connection point ID: Is the unique identifier with the properties described in items
(1) and (2).
Subsection label
Figure 2.4: Subsection label
The label type shown in 2.4 is called a subsection label (in Danish: ”strækningsskilt”) and
holds the ID of a connected electrical cabinet. This ID has the following characteristics:
1. The first part of the ID refers to the transformer station it is connected to.
2. The second part is the number of the cabinet.
3. The ID is only unique in conjunction, i.e., following the example in 2.4, cabinet num-
ber 63 might exist on other transformer stations, but there is only one 63 located on
transformer station 2363.
Following the example from section 2.1.2 the terminology related to the subsections are
defined as:
• Subsection (electrical cabinet): A point where energy is distributed to other subsec-
tions or for consumption to connection points.
• Subsection label: is the paper print that describes the ID of the subsection.
• Subsection ID: Is the unique identifier with the properties described in items (1),(2),
and (3).
2.1.3
Image directory structure
The image directory that we wish to extract data from is comprised of approx. 100.000
images of 20.000 cabinets. Thus, the directory consists of 20,000 folders, each labeled
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
5
==PAGE:12==
with a subsection ID corresponding to the cabinet from which the images originate. Figure
2.5 provides a subset of the directory’s structure.
/
06-04
IMG_3161.JPG
IMG_3162.JPG
IMG_3163.JPG
1-1
20200228_185622000_iOS.jpg
20200228_185635000_iOS.jpg
20200228_185710000_iOS.jpg
20200228_185721000_iOS.jpg
Thumbs.db
254-05
IMG_20210617_001225.jpg
IMG_20210617_001231.jpg
IMG_20210617_001237.jpg
11-24
IMG_20190911_093202.jpg
IMG_20190911_093210.jpg
IMG_20190911_093235.jpg
13-12
20180205_093613000_iOS.jpg
2515-53
20190606_092441000_iOS.jpg
20190606_092505000_iOS.jpg
Figure 2.5: Folder structure
Since the image folders are added to the directory manually by maintenance workers this
data structure is not followed perfectly. Concretely, the following encounters are common:
1. Naming errors / miss spellings.
2. Image folders as subfolders such as cabinet ”2515-53” in 2.5.
3. Corrupted image files.
2.2
Database discrepancy example
To provide the reader with an example of how the facility archive might be used to correct
database errors we use the electrical cabinet with ID ’254-05’ as an example. Images
related to electrical cabinet are shown in Figure 2.6 and are located under the folder of
the same name in Figure 2.5.
6
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:13==
IMG_20210617_001225.jpg
(a) Image of subsection ID
IMG_20210617_001231.jpg
(b) Image of labels
IMG_20210617_001237.jpg
(c) Image of components
Figure 2.6: Images from folder 254-05 in the facility archive of subsection 254-05
The GIS representation of electrical cabinet ’254-05’ and ’254-06’ is shown in figure 2.7.
From GIS it appears that connection point with ID ’60032481’ is located on subsection
’254-06’, however, when referring to the labels in figure 2.6b, specifically the connection
point label in figure 2.8, it is clear that the connection point with ID ’60032481’ is in fact
located on cabinet ’254-05’. Additionally, we can verify that the images in the folder ’254-
05’ are indeed of the subsection 254-05 from the image in figure 2.6a.
Figure 2.7: GIS representation of electrical cabinets 254-05 and 254-06
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.8: Connection point label within electrical cabinet 254-05 from image in figure
2.6b
2.3
Text matching
Its difficult to imagine a license plate having an actual typo or format deviation, however,
in this project it is not unusual to see considerable deviations from the expected formats.
For example, the address in 2.9 is not an address but a description of placement meant
for other maintenence workers. Also, this specific connection point ID is not a real ID but
a merely placeholder value.
Figure 2.9: Connection point label with non-unique placeholder TSO
Additionally, there might be times where the physical placements of text objects appear
in the wrong places or completely missing. For example, the upper right corner of a
connection point label should hold the cable dimensions information. However, the label
in figure 2.10 holds cable dimensions information in the middle section and its actual ID
is missing. Additionally, this label has an unusually large space between between the
ampere value (35) and the ”A” denoting it is indeed an ampere value.
Figure 2.10: Connection point label with no ID, cable dimensions wrongly placed, and
gap between ”35 and ”A”
The deviations from standard formats are too many and too creative to all address here.
8
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:15==
This suggests that, unlike a LPRS, our application cannot rely solely on character seg-
mentation to distinguish data parts. Thus, to minimize the number of false outputs, our
application should perform some form of text matching to ensure the data extracted from
specific label placements are indeed the expected data types.
2.4
State of the art
2.4.1
End-to-end models
There exist priced solutions such as Azure AI Vision [2] and Google Vision AI [3] that
can out-of-the-box detect many object, among others, text, and perform OCR. A demo of
Google Vision AI is shown, and shows impressive out-of-the-box capabilities to extract text
on a few difficult labels. However, despite showing impressive capabilities these models
also make errors such as when reading the text ”TSO nummer” is in both cases wrong as
”TSO numer” in 3.7a. and ”159 summer” in 3.3b.
(a) Label with bad print quality
(b) Label with poor lighting conditions
Figure 2.11: Google Vision AI OCR predictions
Figure 2.11: This figure shows two images analyzed using the Google Vision API where both of
the TSO are extracted correctly.
2.4.2
Object Detection
For the sub-task of object detection one example of a state of the art model is the YOLOv8,
which is a CNN1 based on EfficientDet architecture [4].
2.4.3
OCR
Despite the fact that OCR is a mature technology, it falls short of achieving human-level
accuracy when confronted with non-ideal circumstances, and for most practical applica-
tions, its accuracy remains considerably below human levels [5]. This emphasizes the
need for effective image processing techniques. In fact, according to [6] ”The most essen-
tial step during the development of a recognition system is the selection of an appropriate
preprocessing method”. Some OCR engines also include the use of LSTM-networks2
1Convolutional neural networks is a neural network type that are widely used in computer vision tasks,
including image classification, object detection, and image segmentation.
2Long Short-Term Memory is a neural network architecture used for processing sequential data such as
language processing
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
9
==PAGE:16==
to match characters based on the sequence of characters rather than relying on appear-
ance matching of the individual characters. Tesseract is an example of a OCR engine
with LSTM functionality [7].
2.5
Summary
The work-plan for this project will draw inspiration from that shown in figure 2.1. However,
variations in label formatting introduce the need for domain specific text matching in the
pipeline. Concretely, project work-plan and processes are described in chapters is shown
in figure 2.12.
Image 
acquisition
Label 
extraction
Preprocessing
OCR
Text cleaning
Compare 
with 
database
Is in 
database?
yes
Verify 
datapoint
No
Give 
enhancement 
proposal
Manual 
check by 
company
Chapter 4
Chapter 3
Chapter 5
OUT OF SCOPE
Data extraction model
Database enhancement
Text 
matching
Data 
serialization
Figure 2.12: Process diagram of end-to-end model
10
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:17==
3
Extraction
This chapter is concerned with the processes involved in data extraction from images in
the facility archive i.e. the pipeline form input image, to text output. This involves training
an object defection model to locate labels in images in order to facilitate preprocessing
and subsequent text extraction. This chapter is mainly not concerned with the theory
but rather it focuses on practical aspect’s behind the application of these concepts. To
solve these challenges this project makes use of open source frameworks which has the
following important characteristics:
1. Free to use (open-source).
2. Can be installed locally and ran offline (version stability).
3. Widely used (solid documentation).
Concretely, the following frameworks are employed:
1. YOLOv8 which is a object detection algorithms build on the convolutional neural
network architecture used for label detection.
2. Tesseract OCR engine which is a widely recognized OCR package maintained by
Google [7].
3. OpenCV which is a computer vision library that is used in the preprocessing phase
related to text extraction[8]
3.1
Label extraction
To extract label objects from images this project will make use of the YOLO1 model men-
tioned in section 2.4.2. Specifically this project uses the YOLOv8, which is the latest itera-
tion that has the best precision-to-network-size ratio, as seen in figure 3.1. The YOLOv8
framework is maintained by Ultralytics and offers alot of build in functionalities that will be
applied throughout this project [4].
1YOLO (You Only Look Once) is a state-of-the-art object detection model framework
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Benchmarks of YOLOv5, v6 ,v7 and v8 [4]
Since this project is not meant as a real time-application, but rather a database cleanup
which should run occasionally, it has no strict speed requirements. Thus, the biggest and
most precise network, shown as size ”x” on figure 3.1, should be the most desirable for
this kind of application. However, for the sake of preserving computational resources, this
project uses the network with parameter size ”m”, since it was more than capable of solv-
ing the label detection task. To extract label objects, one could think of two approaches:
1. Make a two-class object detection model to separate different labels beforehand
into two classes i.e. into connection point labels and subsection labels.
2. Make an object detection model to locate all labels and distinguish them further
down the pipeline based on the text matching.
The approach in item (1) involves annotating additional images to distinguish two objects
types of high similarity accurately. Ideally, this method holds the advantage of knowing
which textual data is expected and where it should be located. However, the extracted text
is subject to a subsequent text matching due to the unreliability of text locations. Hence,
for this project, the second approach (2) will be adopted.
3.1.1
Requirements
Its important to note, that label detection performance is not crucial for this project. In
fact, the consequences of misinterpreting objects as labels is limited to additional compu-
tation time since the extracted label images are subject to a text matching process which
disregards the label data if it does not fit an expected format. This is in stark contrast to
other use cases of object detecting such as autonomous driving or medicinal diagnostics
where misinterpreting objects can have dire consequences. Thus, many choices related
to the development of the label detection model are made for convenience such as using
a small dataset and default hyper parameters without domain specific tuning. For similar
reasons, recall2 is a more important for this application than precision3, as it is of course
beneficial to find all labels in the images, whereas miss-classifying a label-like object does
not have a negative impact.
2Recall in measures the ability of a model to find all relevant instances in the dataset. It is the ratio of true
positive predictions to the total number of actual positive instances.
3Precision is the accuracy of positive predictions. It is the ratio of true positive predictions to the total
number of positive predictions made.
12
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:19==
3.1.2
Dataset
The object detection algorithm is a supervised learning algorithm, i.e. it learns from labeled
data. Thus, to train the model we need to provide both a set of images and a set of
corresponding .txt files which holds label position coordinates. For this purpose, we use
the data annotation tool LabelImg [9] which allows to easily draw boxes on images and
export the corresponding image coordinates. The dataset images typically hold one-five
labels as shown by the histogram of label counts in figure 3.2. Notably, images without
labels have been excluded from our dataset, as they offer no training value.
Figure 3.2: Label count histogram
The dataset consists of 153 images and originates from a subset of 62 images containing
labels from the facility archive. To expand the dataset from 62 to 153 image augmenta-
tion4 techniques which mimic the actual images in the facility archive such as rotations,
blur, and brightness adjustments are applied such as those in figure 3.3. Image augmen-
tation enables the artificial expansion of the dataset without manually having to annotate
additional data. Additionally, it can increase performance under circumstances which are
underrepresented in the dataset such as poor lighting or blur.
(a) Rotated with increased brightness
(b) Original
Figure 3.3: Example of image augmentation of rotation and brightness
4a technique commonly used in computer vision and deep learning tasks. It involves applying a variety of
transformations to the original images to artificially increase the size of the training dataset
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
13
==PAGE:20==
Image sizes
The images in our dataset tend to vary in size as shown in figure 3.4. Concretely older
images tend to have a lower resolution than newer ones. However, neural networks rely
on a fixed set of input features, and in the image domain every pixel correspond a ”feature”.
Thus, the input size of our object detection model need to match the input dimensions of
our images. Therefore, a rescaling such that images have the same resolution needs
to be applied. The choice of image size should be empirically determined as it affects
both model accuracy and computational complexity, i.e. models with smaller images will
train and perform inference faster, however, if they are too small labels might be pixelated
beyond recognition. As suggested by [10] downscaling large images will tend to provide
better results than upscaling small ones. Thus, progressive resizing starting with low
image dimensions has been applied before reaching image dimensions of 640x640 which
proved sufficient to detect labels.
Figure 3.4: Plot of image sizes
Figure 3.4: Plot of image sizes with the purple box indicating the median width by median height
image (4000x3024)
3.1.3
Training
The model is trained using the default hyper parameters and build in transfer learning5
functionality, where the model has already been ”pretrained” on the COCO dataset [11].
This has several advantages, which are especially beneficial since this is an investigatory
project. For example reduced training time, and the need for less annotated training data.
Additionally, Ultralytics provide functionality such that the best model weights saved, i.e.
has the lowest loss on the validation dataset, even if the model keep overfitting for many
epochs6 [4]. As a start, the model was trained for 100 epochs and by referring to the class
loss in figure 3.5 i.e. the models ability to accurately detect labels, it is clear that validation
loss has stopped improving. This indicates that the model has likely reached a the point
5Transfer learning reuses pre-trained models for new tasks, leveraging knowledge learned from previous
tasks, reducing computational resources and data requirements.
6An epoch in refers to one complete pass through the entire training dataset during model training itera-
tions.
14
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:21==
(a) Training loss as a function of epochs
(b) Validation loss as a function of epochs
Figure 3.5: Training and validation class loss
of overfitting, thus, there is no need to train the model further and the model weights from
epoch 70 are used since they have the lowest validation loss. Initially, the model was
trained for 100 epochs, and by examining the class losses in Figure 3.5, which reflects
the model’s capability to accurately identify labels, validation loss has ceased to decrease.
This suggests that the model has likely reached a state of overfitting. Consequently, there
is no need to continue training the model further and the weights from epoch 70 are chosen
as they correspond to the epoch with the lowest validation loss.
3.1.4
Bounding box in original image
The rescaling of images is necessary such that the image dimensions will fit the input layer
of the object detection model. However, for the purpose of text extraction it is preferable
to keep resolution as high as possible. Thus, the cropped label images which are used
further down the model pipeline should be cropped from the original full sized image rather
than the downscaled version used for label detection. The method .xyxy(), described
in the documentation [12], provides the bounding in the original image coordinates which
can be used to crop the original image.
3.1.5
Performance
The performance of the object detection model on the test set shown by the confusion
matrix in figure 3.6.
Precision is calculated as the ratio of true positive (TP) predictions to all positive predic-
tions (TP + false positives (FP)):
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.1)
Precision =
26
26 + 1 = 0.963
(3.2)
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.6: Confusion matrix of model predictions
Recall, is calculated as the ratio of true positive predictions to all actual positives (TP +
false negatives (FN)):
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.3)
Recall =
26
26 + 1 = 0.963
(3.4)
Thus, by equations 3.2 and 3.4 the object detection model has a precision of 96.3% and
recall of 96.3% respectively. The labels which the model fails to detect seem to have
to poorest quality for subsequent OCR and are least likely to have text successfully ex-
tracted from (see figure 3.7). Additonally, the heatmap in figure 3.8 shows that the label
placements on training images are mostly placed around the center of the images. Thus,
the ability to detect labels on image borders such as the ones in figure 3.7b can likely be
improved by adding training images with labels in such locations.
(a) Example of found labels
(b) Example of non-found labels
Figure 3.7: Label findings
16
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.8: Heatmap of label placements on images in training dataset
3.1.6
Summary
In conclusion, the precision and recall of the model is satisfactory for the purpose of this
project, especially given the small size of the training dataset. Recall can be increased
such that the model finds more labels by addressing underrepresented label locations in
3.8. To what extent, these off-center and skewed labels can result in extra data extractions
at the end of the model pipeline is, however, uncertain.
3.2
Text extraction
The label images which are found and cropped using the methods from the section 3.1
are subject to a high degree of variation in lighting, print quality, and image dimensions
as shown in figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Scatter plot of cropped label-image dimensions
Thus, designing a preprocessing step which performs well across all variations proved
challenging. Furthermore, improving quality of one image, could mean reducing it in an-
other. For example, an image with high resolution but image noise caused by as rain
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
17
==PAGE:24==
(a) Label image of high resolution with raindrops
(b) After some some preprocessing meth-
ods
(c) After some some preprocessing methods
with morphological transformations
Figure 3.10: High resolution rain drop noise removal
drops or poor label print quality could be improved with morphological transformations7
as shown in figure 3.10. However, that same process might make an otherwise readable
image, of lower resolution, but decent print quality unreadable as seen in figure 3.11.
This implied the need for a different approach where the preprocessing was not done to
solve challenges on the individual image level, but rather based on empirical testing of
what provides the best overall results of the whole dataset. Thus, the optimization of the
preprocessing step, is inspired by the learning of supervised machine learning algorithms
i.e. testing different configurations of parameters and preprocessing steps on a ”training”
set and optimizing these iteratively based on the results. This approach had some non-
intuitive results for example, adaptive thresholding which performed worse than tuning a
fixed thresholding with parameter for all images. The sequence of the resulting prepro-
cessing steps is shown in figure 3.14 and will be expanded in the following section.
Furthermore, to optimize OCR output of a text image, the text should be horizontally
aligned [13]. However, as shown in figure 2.2 the labels can have any arbitrary rotation.
There is no obvious way to distinguish label images which are horizontally aligned, and
which are horizontally aligned but upside down as shown in figure 3.12c and 3.12b. This
suggests the need for a trial-and-error based approach where a combination of rotations
and text extractions are combined to horizontally align the label image. That is, if a label
image has an image dimension where height is greater than width such as the one shown
in figure 3.12a, we can rotate it 90 degrees as a initial attempt to horizontalize the image.
In this particular case, no OCR output should match text formats since the label image is
upside down and we might perform a second rotation of a 180 degrees. A flowchart of
this process is shown in figure 3.13.
3.2.1
Preprocessing
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/clean.py
Function name: process()
7Morphological transformations involve operations like dilation and erosion (expanding or shrinking object
boundaries for example to remove image noise
18
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:25==
(a) Label image of lower resolution and great print
quality
(b) After some some preprocessing meth-
ods
(c) After some some preprocessing methods
with morphological transformations
Figure 3.11: Label image with failed and unnecessary noise removal
(a) Label image rotated 90 degrees
(b) Horizontally aligned label image
(c) Upside down label
Figure 3.12: Examples of label image rotations
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
19
==PAGE:26==
Input label 
image
width > height     
No
rotate 90 
degrees
Yes
Further 
preprocessing 
and text 
alignment
OCR and 
Text 
matching
Known 
format?
No
Has been 
rotated 180 
degrees?
Yes
Data 
extraction 
was 
succesfull
End label 
extraction
No
Yes
Rotate 180 
degrees
Data 
extraction 
failed
Figure 3.13: Flowchart of text extraction
Input label 
image
Inversion
Remove label 
background
Tresholding
Skew 
correction
Noise 
removal
Further processing and text alignment
OCR and text 
matching
Figure 3.14: Flowchart of preprocessing steps
Referring to the flowchart in 3.13, this section is concerned with the process ”Further
preprocessing and text alignment”. In this section, alot of functions will be mentioned
both from openCV and custom made. To avoid redundancy in citations, functions which
are not mentioned with a specific path such as done in the beginning of this section, are
from openCV [8]. Functions which are mentioned with a specific path can be found by in
the Github repository B.1 or in the appendix B. The preprocessing steps in this section
are shown in figure 3.14 and has been chosen on a basis of Tesseract preprocessing
recommendations in 3.2.1 and empirical testing.
Thus, the ’process’ function is custom function which is collection of grouped functionali-
ties where each of the steps will be explained in this section. Some details such as specific
function parameters or error catchings will be left out of the report to focus on the general
concepts which are applied. However, the interested reader can find the functions from
the paths provided for full details.
According to the Tesseract documentation the ’process’ function should ideally change
label images such that they hold the following characteristics [13]:
1. Not be inverted i.e. have a dark background and light text.
2. Be binarized.
3. Text should be horizontally aligned.
20
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:27==
4. Minimized image noise i.e. random variation of brightness or colour.
5. Should not have ”scanning borders” i.e. dark borders of varying shape and gradation
which are often encountered on scanned pages.
Inversion
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/clean.py
Function name: invert()
The function invert() is responsible for addressing item (1) in section 3.2.1. Firstly it
uses the function cvtColor() which transforms the label image from color to gray-scale
[8]. Secondly, since the labels hold white text on black background and item (1) suggests
black text on white background is preferable, the function bitwise_not() is used to invert
the gray scale image [8]. This process is illustrated in figure 3.15.
(a) Input image
(b) Gray scale image
(c) Inverted gray scale image
Figure 3.15: Image transformation in the invert() function
Removing label image background and scan-borders
In many cases the label is not tightly fitted by the label image hence some of the back-
ground material is visible which can, in some cases, disturb the OCR output. For example
the white vertical lines on the left side in images 3.11a and 3.15a will after inversion re-
semble a dark scanning border. Additionally, white print edges that are present around
the label such as those on all the labels in figure 3.12 present the same problem. That
is, to remove background image noise and to address item (5) in 3.2.1 we seek to extract
only the part of the label image which holds the actual label.
Finding label contour
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/clean.py
Function name: get_label_contour()
To extract the label from the background, the inverted gray scale image from figure 3.15c
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
21
==PAGE:28==
is used to extract the label object boundary (contour)8. Most images have several con-
tours, for example, every character in our image also has a contour. Thus, the function
findContours() returns not only the label contour in which we are interested [8] but rather
a collection of all contours within the image. To extract only the label contour we use the
naive approach of sorting contours by image area and selecting only the one which has
the largest. findContours() performs best on binary images9 therefore a threshold value
of 150 is applied to the image (see figure 3.16a) before extracting the contours.
(a) Thresholded binary image with
threshold value of 150.
(b) Inverted gray scale image with con-
tour from thresholded image
Figure 3.16: Contour extraction processes
Extracting label from image using its contour
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/clean.py
Function name: mask_img()
After finding the contour we can extract the pixels within the label contour by creating
an image mask10 by:
1. Starting an image mask of same dimensions as the input image with all pixel values
set to 0.
2. Draw a filled contour with pixel values set to 255 using drawContour().
3. Generate an output image by replacing high mask pixel values with the inverted gray
scale pixel values.
The masked inverted gray scale image from figure 3.15c is shown in figure 3.17.
Thresholding
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/clean.py
Function name: A part of process()
8Contours can be explained as a curve joining all the continuous points (along the boundary), having same
color or intensity.[8]
9A binary image is where each pixel can only take two values typically black or white (0 or 1)
10An image mask is a binary image used for image processing to selectively modify parts of an image
based on certain criteria.
22
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:29==
(a) Mask to preserve specific pixels in
the inverted grayscale image.
(b) Masked inverted grayscale image.
Figure 3.17: Masking label contour
Item (2) in section 3.2.1 suggests that images should be binarized to optimize perfor-
mance. However, during testing of the preprocessing two things were evident:
1. Thresholding dark pixels values to 0 decreased performance.
2. Gray background provided better OCR results than white.
These findings may be application specific and binarized images may increase Tesseract
performance in other applications. However, for our purpose the empirical testing implied
that preserving the gray ”shadows” around the letters on a light gray background would
provide the best results. As a results, the thresholded image in our application is not
binary, but rather all pixel values higher than 125 are set to 200. Figure 3.18 shows a
comparison of the thresholded images from figure 3.17 as is suggested in the Tesseract
documentation against the thresholding used in our application.
(a) Thresholded binary image in according to Tesseract
documentation [13].
(b) Empirically tested thresholding
Figure 3.18: Thresholded images
Skew correction
Getting label rotation angle
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/rotation.py
Function name: get_text_angle()
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
23
==PAGE:30==
To address the issue of skewed text, we first need to estimate the angle by which the
text is skewed. For this purpose, we utilize the Sobel() function, which calculates the
image gradients i.e. changes in pixel values [8]. Specifically, for this task we require the
gradient in the ”y” direction (representing horizontal edges), allowing us to estimate its
angle relative to the horizontal axis. To accomplish this, the Sobel() function convolves
the kernel in matrix 3.5 with the input image to achieve the gradient image in figure 3.19.


−1
−2
−1
0
0
0
1
2
1


(3.5)
Figure 3.19: Thresholded label image after applying the Sobel operator in the y direction
After applying the Sobel operator the function HoughLines() is employed which is a trans-
form used to detect straight lines in images. The number of votes in the Hough lines
transform corresponds to the number of points which is estimated to be on a certain line,
i.e. images can have multiple lines with different number of ”votes”. For this application,
we need only one good line to find the angle from horizontal, therefore, we use only the
line with the highest number of votes. The resulting line is shown in figure 3.20.
Figure 3.20: Line estimated with highest number of ”votes” in the Hough lines transform
The line returned from HoughLines() is given in polar coordinates, where the origin is
located in the top left corner of the image. Thus, as shown in figure 3.21 a rotation angle
Θ of 0 radians corresponds to a vertical line image line, and a rotation angle Θ of π/2
corresponds to a horizontal line image line [8].
Therefore, the angle in radians by which the text needs to be rotated to be horizontally
aligned can be found as done in equation 3.6.
24
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.21: Line with its rotation representation
θ = Θ −π
2
(3.6)
Rotating label image
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/rotation.py
Function name: rotate()
When the angle by which the text need to be rotated has been determined, this project
uses the function getRotationMatrix() to get the transformation matrix as the 2x3 ma-
trix in figure 3.2.1 where and the first two columns are the 2D rotation matrix, and the last
column is the translation needed to maintain the rotation center [8].
[cos(θ)
−sin(θ)
tx
sin(θ)
cos(θ)
ty
]
The function warpAffine() handles the actual rotation given by the transformation matrix
in 3.2.1 with the resulting text images as seen in figure 3.22.
(a) Rotated label image with line for reference
(b) Rotated text
Figure 3.22: Rotated label image for further processing
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
25
==PAGE:32==
3.2.2
Noise removal
To remove remaining image noise, it was empirically determined that what had the best
results across the dataset was the use of dilate() for a single iteration with a kernel of
3x3. Dilation works by setting the output pixel value to the maximum of all pixels within
the kernel. I.e. it will effectively decrease the size of dark areas. In the specific example
from the images in this section noise is not so prevalent, but can be seen in figure 3.23.
(a) Before dilation()
(b) After dilation()
Figure 3.23: Image noise removal
3.2.3
OCR
After the images have been processed, Tesseract will handle actual OCR. As mentioned
in 2.4.3 Tesseract have LSTM functionality, however, since we are mainly concerned with
extracting specific character sequences from the label formats this project will not make
us of it.
Output format
The OCR output is transformed to a text string format where text blocks are read from left
to right and top down as shown in figure 3.24. The OCR output will thus be on the forms:
Connection point label: ”ID, cable dimension and material, address, ampere”.
Subsection label: ”ID”.
Figure 3.24: Order of text blocks in OCR output string
Connection point label with OCR-ouput:
”TSO nummer 60008774 4x16mm2 Cu Street-name-placeholder 2 63A””
OCR results and preprossessing comparisons
The preprocessing methods was optimized based on the OCR performance of a subset of
the facility archive with images of 83 electrical cabinets. The results were obtained after
the additional quality control provided by text matching which is explained in section 4.3.
26
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:33==
An overview of the inidividual preprocessing methods and their influence on the model out-
put is shown in 3.1. It is important to note, that the results table does not take into account
all interaction effects. For example, it appears that inversion has a slightly negative effect,
however, it has a significantly positive effect when combined with background-removal
and thresholding.
Table 3.1: Output results per additional preprocessing method
Correct
Wrong
Precision
Preprocessing method
Nothing
46
1
97.9 %
+Horizontalizing
51
2
96.2 %
+Inversion
50
3
94.3 %
+Remove background
76
5
93.8 %
+Thresholding
96
5
95.0 %
+Skew correction
126
10
92.6 %
+Noise removal
133
7
95.0 %
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
27
==PAGE:34==
28
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:35==
4
Quality measures and extensible
software design
This chapter outlines a series of measures implemented to enhance output quality by
minimizing end-to-end model output errors and ensuring adherence to standardized out-
put formats essential for comparing model output with entries in the company database.
Additionally, this chapter will describe some custom data structures used to store and
serialize model data. Thus, even though this project’s primary objective is not software
design, it is a substantial byproduct of the practical implementation of data extraction. Fur-
thermore, for this project to have a real world applicability software design choices have
to be considered since the company seek to extent, and implement this project to clean
their databases in the near future. In particular, the following items has to be addressed:
1. Ensuring relationships between extracted data and existing knowledge subsection
ID’s.
2. The model output should be serialized to a usable format.
3. The program should be extensible to include other label formats.
4. The program should be extensible to other image findings such as available cabinet
capacity and cabinet model type.
4.1
Image acquisition
To acquire images for this project all folders in the facility archive are iterated as described
in section 2.1.3. For every folder we assume that all images are of the subsection with
the ID provided in the folder name. Its not clear beforehand how many labels will be
present on every picture, additionally, the same labels might appear multiple times on
different images. Thus, the data structures used to hold label information should have
comparative functionality in order to reduce redundancy in model output. To address item
(1) in section 2.1.3 folders which do not follow the described naming convention are are
not processed.
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
29
==PAGE:36==
Object <<Abstract>>
+ type
+ serialize()
+ is_valid()
Label <<Abstract>>
+ ID
+ Resolution
+ Format
+ __init__()
+ serialize()
+ is_valid()
+ __gt__()
+ __eq__()
+ __repr__()
AvailableCapacity <<Not  implemented>>
ConnectionPoint
+ Address
+ Ampere
+ Dmension
+ Format
SubSection
+ Format
Box
+ ID
+ Labels
+ Model
+ Capacity
+ __init__()
+ serialize()
+ add_object()
BoxModel <<Not  implemented>>
Serializer <Abstract>>
+ current_object
+ __init__()
+ start_object()
+ add_property()
+ to_str()
JsonSerializer
+ start_object()
+ add_property()
+ to_str()
XmlSerializer <<Not  implemented>>
+ start_object()
+ add_property()
+ to_str()
ObjectSerializer
+ serialize
LabeParser <<Abstract>>
+ parsed
+ remainder
+ patterns
+ id_pattern
+ parse()
+ _clean_id()
+ _extract()
+ extract_id()
+ _get_remainder()
+ _clean_extracted()
ConnectionPointParser
+ patterns
+ id_pattern
SubSectionParser
+ patterns
+ id_pattern
+ _correct_format()
Figure 4.1: UML diagram of data structures
4.2
Data Structures and extensibility
To make this application extensible this project adheres to the SOLID principles [14].
Therefore, the use of abstract classes and factory methods are heavily applied. A UML1
diagram of class relationships is depicted in figure 4.1. This figure also holds examples of
future exstension (represented in red) that the company seek to implement in the future.
For example, the object detection model described in 3.1 can be expanded to detect avail-
able capacity on the images and by subsequently creating an ”AvailableCapacity” class
which inherits from the ”Object” class. Data can easily be manipulated without exsten-
sively modifying to the existing code functionalities. Likewise, if the company desires
another output format than the already implemented JSON format, a class derived from
the abstract ”Serializer” class can be implemented.
4.2.1
Box
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/box.py
The ”Box” class holds cabinet ID’s extracted from the folder names. Additionally, it imple-
ments an add_object() which relates labels (and other future objects) to the cabinet in
which it was found.
4.2.2
Object class
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/item/model.py
Abstract class which all objects found on images should inherit from in order for the appli-
cation to run without errors.
1A Unified Modeling Language (UML) diagram is a visual representation used to visualize, and document
software systems
30
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:37==
4.2.3
Label class
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/labels/model.py
Abstract label class which implements label functionality shared across formats such as
an ID. Concretely, some of its implemented functionalities are:
Serializing
Method name: serialize()
Serializes the label data to the desired output format. For example the if passed the JSON
serializer will output the the label format and for a subsection label as:
1
{"id": "2927-38", "format": "SUBSECTION"}
Comparison
Method names: __eq__() and __gt__()
If the same label ID is found multiple times on different images of the same cabinet, the
data output should not register that ID multiple times. Therefore, the __eq__() is used to
check if a label of that ID has already been added to a specific box object. Additionally,
__gt__() is implemented as a naive approach of determining which label data is more
reliable if they hold the same ID since only one can be added. Specifically, the label data
from the label image with the highest resolution is kept.
Validity check
Method name: is_valid()
If a label has been found by the object detection model, but it was not possible to extract
an ID that passed the text matching quality checks described in 4.3 it will not be added to
the to the model output.
4.2.4
ConnectionPointLabel class
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/labels/labels.py
Inherits from the ”Label” class, and implements additional attributes and serialization to
contain label specific information such as ampere, address and cable dimension. Such
that a ”ConnectionPointLabel” is serialized as follows:
1
{"id": "60014395", "format": "CONNECTIONPOINT", "ampere": "35A",
"dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Street-name-placeholder
11"}
4.2.5
SubSectionLabel class
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/labels/labels.py
Since subsection labels only contain the ID of the connected cabinet, the only method
which is implemented is the abstract property method format().
4.2.6
Serializer class
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/serializers.py
Defines the interface which derived serializing classes should implement as:
start_object(), add_property(), and to_str()).
JsonSerializer class
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/serializers.py
Implements the interface from section 4.2.6 to return the data as a JSON object.
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
31
==PAGE:38==
4.3
Text matching and parsing
In section 3.1 it was concluded that the label format should be determined from the text
data they hold. That is, To identify the label formats this project use the regular expres-
sion (regex) language2 to match the OCR output. Thus, the sequence of characters we
use as an identifier should be unique for that label type. Therefore, we use the ID’s de-
scribed in 2.1.2. Furthermore, the regex patterns should, to the extent it is possible, take
into account the format deviations. Additionally, the text that is matched and extracted
should be cleaned to have a standardized format such that it can be compared with the
company database. This functionality is handled by the classes ”ConnectionPointParser”
and ”SubSectionParser” in figure 4.1 which can be located in appendix B.
4.3.1
Connection point label text
The connection point ID’s are characterized by having being 8 digit, and starting with ”6”.
Hence, if a label has text which matches the format ”6xxxxxx” where the x’s are digits, it
is a connection point label. Furthermore, connection point labels contain additional data
as described in section 2.1.2 which can be extracted with the following regex patterns:
1. ID:
1
6\d{7}
2. Cable dimension and material:
1
\dx\d{2,3}(mm|mm2)?\s?(cu|al)
3. Ampere:
1
\d{2}\s?A$
4. Address:
1
([A-ZÅÆØ][a-zæøå]{1,}(.|\s))?[A-ZÅÆØ]?[a-zæøå]{2,}\s\d
{1,3}(-\d{0,3})?
Without expanding on specific possible combinations that these data expressions can take
due to format deviations, it is sufficient to say that these regex patterns seek to encapsu-
late the data variations that are encountered on the labels while still reliably determining
the information type. The interested reader can investigate the ChatGPT generated de-
scriptions of different regex patterns in appendix A.
Matching order
Since we know the placements the data items in the OCR text string as described in
section 3.2.3 we can consider the order of which we match text patterns from a text string.
Especially the address can be difficult to distinguish from the Ampere if not using the text
placements since the address might take on the forms:
2Regular expressions are sequences of characters that define a search pattern commonly used in text
processing and string matching
32
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:39==
1. Vejlandsvej 1
2. Vejlandsvej 1-4
3. Vejlandsvej 50A (House number could without the use of matching order be inter-
preted as an Ampere value)
4. Gl. Vejlandsvej 1
5. on the corner between Vejlandsvej and the big tree.
To give an example of how the OCR output is processed we use the text string from figure
3.24 with the string: ”TSO nummer 60008774 4x16mm2 Cu Street-name-placeholder 2
63A”.
1. The ID ”60008774” is matched, and the ”TSO nummer” text that precedes it in the
string is useless. The string is therefore trimmed to only keep text after the ID. Thus
the remaining string is ”4x16mm2 Cu Street-name-placeholder 2 63A”.
2. The cable dimensions and material text ”4x16mm2 Cu” is matched and extracted so
the remaining string is Street-name-placeholder 2 63A”.
3. The regex pattern describing Ampere will only match the last part of the string. Thus,
the value ”63A” will be matched and trimmed from the string such that: ”Street-name-
placeholder 2”.
4. Finally, the address is extracted.
4.3.2
Subsection label text
The subsection ID’s described in 2.1.2 can be represented in a regex pattern as a series
of digits followed by a hyphen and another series of digits. However, this means it could
falsely match the addresses on a connection point label if the address is of the format
”Vejlandsvej 1-4”. Therefore, the regex pattern for subsection labels are not static for all
cabinets, but rather it relies on the specific transformer ID of the cabinet which is being
searched. Additionally, a subsection ID often holds random spaces be such as those in
3.12a before or/and after the ”-”. As a consequence the the regex should match all the
following combinations:
1. "TransformerID"-x
2. "TransformerID" -xxxxx
3. "TransformerID" - xxx
4. "TransformerID"- xxxx
Therefore, the regex for extracting subsection ID’s is TransformerID + \s?-\s?(?!0$)\d{0,5}.
After determining the label type, the label text is scanned for additional information.
4.3.3
Text cleaning
The matched text is transformed into standarized data formats such the model ouput can
be compared with the company database. This involves capitalizing letters, removing
redundant spacing etc. Concretely, the following output formats are enforced:
• Subsection ID: Removing possible redundant spacing between numbers and hy-
phens. For example, ”1- 23” -> ”1-23”.
• Ampere: Capitalizing and removing redundant spacing such that ”50 a” -> ”50A”.
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
33
==PAGE:40==
• Cable dimension and material: Capitalizing, removing redundant spacing and let-
ters such that ”4x 16 mm2 Cu” -> ”4X16CU”.
• Connection point ID: Same as the matched text i.e. 8 digits.
• Address: Same as the matched text.
4.4
Example
To provide a real example of how the label text is processed, we use the found label in
figure 4.2. The labels were found on an image located in the ”facility archive” in folder ”23-
7” i.e. the cabinet ID in which the labels are located. Hence, all subsections connected
to this box have an ID starting with ”23-”. The OCR output from the processed label
images in 4.2c and 4.2d are ’TSO 60008774 4x16mm2 Cu street-name-placeholder 62
35A’ and ’Skab 23-06’ respectively. After the labels have been text-matched, cleaned and
serialized the cabinet box data is represented as:
1
{"id": "23-7",
2
"labels": [
3
{"id": "23-6", "format": "SUBSECTION"},
4
{"id": "60008774", "format": "CONNECTIONPOINT", "ampere": "35A",
"dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Street-name-placeholder
62"},
5
{"id": "60046567", "format": "CONNECTIONPOINT", "ampere": "50A",
"dimension": "4X16CU", "address": ""Street-name-placeholder
64"},
6
{"id": "60956683", "format": "CONNECTIONPOINT", "ampere": "50A",
"dimension": "4X16CU", "address": ""Street-name-placeholder
62A"}
7
]
8
}
Listing 4.1: Single image folder serialized output example
34
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:41==
(a) Connection point label detection
(b) Subsection label detection
(c) OCR output: ’TSO 60008774 4x16mm2 Cu
street-name-placeholder 62 35A’
(d) OCR output: ’Skab 23-06’
Figure 4.2: Preprocessed labels with text output
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
35
==PAGE:42==
36
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:43==
5
Results, database verification, and
discrepancies
To what extent the model output can be used to improve the company’s database integrity
will have to be determined by testing the model on new, unseen data which neither the
prepossessing methods nor the label detection model have been designed to perform
well on. It is assumed by the company that the data quality of the labels has a higher
quality and probability of being the ”correct data” than the data in the company database.
However, one can imagine a scenario where the model has extracted label text correctly,
but the label holds false information and the database holds the correct information. For
the purpose of this section we seek to evaluate the models performance, thus, we assume
that if data has been correctly extracted from the labels it is a correct output regardless of
the data validity. Furthermore, as described in the limitations in 1.3, the company was not
able to provide a dataset which relates connection points to addresses, cable dimensions,
and Ampere values. Hence, the model output performance is only measured on the ability
of the model to accurately extract label ID’s.
To evaluate the model performance it can be compared against the company database
as follows:
1. If model output is non-compliant with the database, it should be manually evaluated
if the output is correct since it can mean either:
(a) The label ID has been wrongly extracted (false positive).
(b) The label ID was successfully extracted from the image (true positive). which
means either:
i. Company database holds an error.
ii. Label was read correctly, but data label data was false.
2. If model output is compliant with the database it is assumed that the model output is
correct since the chance of a wrong label reading which corresponds exactly to the
database entry seems unlikely. We call this data an intersection, thus, intersections
are assumed to be a subset of true positives.
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
37
==PAGE:44==
5.1
Data extraction output format
The output of the data extraction model is a .txt file where each image folder such as
those shown figure in 2.5, will be serialized as in the listing 4.1. I.e. this data has not
been compared to that in the company database, but is collection of all the data that was
extracted from the images. A full example of the model output from the test-set can be
found in appendix C.
5.2
Test scenario
To test the end-to-end model performance a subset of data from the facility archive is used
which consists of 206 folders i.e. images of 206 different subsections. The model output
is then compared to the company database in order to estimate performance.
5.2.1
Test script
Location: test/test.py
The test script is responsible for loading the data extraction model outputs and performing
row wise database look ups to output intersections, and database discrepancies.
5.2.2
Example
Following the example from 4.4 we use the row entry from the database of subsection
”23-7” which holds the following information in .csv format:
1
id,connectionpointID ,subsectionID
2
23-7,"['60008774', '60046578', '60956683']","['23-5', '23-6']"
The data extraction model output in listing 4.4 shows that the following connections have
been extracted:
• Connection points:
– ”60008774”
– ”60956683”
– ”60046567”
• Subsections:
– ”23-6”
The test-script then locates intersections and discrepancies and outputs the following:
1
{"ID": "23-7", "INTERSECTION": ["60008774", "23-6", "60956683"],
"DISCREPANCIES": ["60046567"]}
Thus, the ID’s: ”60008774”, ”23-6”, ”60956683” are intersections and can be verified in
the database as being correct. The connetion point ID ”60046567” has to be confirmed
as either a false positive or a true positive. By referring to the image in figure 5.1 it seems
that the the connection point ”60046567” is indeed connected to subsection ”23-7” and
therefore a true positive.
38
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.1: Connection point label from box ”23-7”.
5.2.3
Results
From the 206 subsections that are searched the label detection finds 696 labels. These
are not guaranteed to be unique nor readable, nor actual labels as they can also be objects
which are misclassified. From the 696 cropped label images 341 unique ID’s are extracted
where 279 are in database (intersections), and 41 are database discrepancies. A review
of the images from which the discrepancies are extracted reveals that 22 of these are true
positives and 19 false positives. This gives the model an end-to-end precision of 94% as
shown in equation 5.1.
Precision =
279 + 22
279 + 22 + 19 = 0.94
(5.1)
Even though the model has a precision of 94% the subset of extracted ID’s which are
not in the subset intersection will only be correct in around 54% of the time as given by
5.2. Thus, the actual data-enhancement proposals should be subject to further review
and should not be automatically input into the database.
22
22 + 19 = 0.54
(5.2)
Since the facility archive is not guaranteed to hold images of all the labels, hence, deter-
mining the end-to-end model recall would involve manually reviewing all the images for
labels and determining which ones are actually readable. Instead this project introduces
a database improvability metric which estimates the extent to which the database can be
improved.
Database improvability metric
According to the company database the 206 subsections which are being searched for
data extraction contains a total of 1254 connections. Even though some connections
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
39
==PAGE:46==
might be missing or wrongly located, this is a good estimate of the upper bound of ver-
ifications + true positives enhancement proposals output by the model. We define this
relationship as the extent to which the database can be verified or corrected by using the
model as:
DBIM =
True positives
Upper bound of verifications and enhancement proposals
(5.3)
DBIM = 279 + 22
1254
= 0.24
(5.4)
Additionally, we can extend this to include the estimated error percentage removal. In
section 1.1 it was stated that the estimated error percentage of the database entries is
5-6% i.e. an estimate of the reduction in database errors as percentage points can be
found as in 5.6.
DBIP =
True positives
Upper bound of verifications and enhancement proposalError estimate (5.5)
DBIM = 279 + 22
1254
0.06 = 0.014
(5.6)
Thus, the end-to-end model should following the example reduce database errors from
6% to 4.6%.
5.3
Results and project objectives
The primary objective of this was to determine if the facility archive could be used to in-
crease database integrity which was indeed true. This is especially the case for confirm-
ing the validity of intersections in the database as they can be confirmed automatically.
However, the need for manual processing to validate or discard database enhancement
proposals is still required.
Secondary objectives involved the adding functionality of scalability to the project code
structure. This cannot be tested empirically, however, the company have expressed their
content with the solution and has already started using the code base for further exsten-
sions.
5.4
Text extraction API test scenario
As doing paid API calls falls out of the scope of this project, the extent to which the model
output can be improved by incorporating state-of-the-art API calls remains undetermined.
However, testing a few difficult label images which the current model fails to accurately
extract data from, suggested that the number of successfully data extractions can be
significantly improved as shown in figure 2.11.
5.5
Future works
State-of-the-art API’s such as Google Vision had an impressive out of the box text ex-
traction performance even under non-ideal circumstances where the precprocessing and
OCR methods used in this project were unsuccessful. Coupling this API, with the text
matching capabilities and label extraction holds the promise for both a higher number
of data extractions as well as more precise model outputs. Additionally, stricter image
capturing formats such as ensuring the text from labels is clearly visible, label glare and
captured at a non-skewed angle, should further increase the quality of the model outputs
in the future.
40
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:47==
5.5.1
API implementation
Since this project has adhered to the concept of ”single-responsibility-principle”, improving
the model output by implementing API calls is as simple as changing a few lines of code
in the ”label” builder [14].
Label builder changes
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/builder.py
1
def builder(crop, box, **ignored):
2
# clean = process(crop) # remove
3
# text = extract(clean) # remove
4
5
# ADD API call and parse text as list format described in the OCR section.
6
text = TEXT_FROM_API_CALL # add
7
...
8
Additional parsing and builder functionality
9
...
5.5.2
Future data extraction implementations
After extending the detection model to classify additional objects from images such as
electrical cabinet models. The application can be extended simply by creating a data
structure representing the detected object which inherits from the abstract Object class in
figure 4.1 and implementing the builder function to return a instance of that detection.
Box model builder changes
Location: cabinet_image_data_extraction/cabinet_model/builder.py
1
def builder():
2
# remove error raising
3
# raise NotImplementedError() # remove
4
return BoxModelDataStrucuture() # add
5.5.3
Implementing additional label formats
As stated in the introduction, the two label formats which have been focused on in this
report represent those which are most prevalent in the images. However, there exists
others formats which can easily by adding a new custom implementations of:
1. The abstract ”Label” class to represent the label data.
2. The abstract ”LabelParser” class to store the methods and regular expressions etc.
used to parse OCR output related to that label format.
5.6
Summary
The end-to-end model can in its current state be used, to some degree, improve the com-
pany’s database integrity. However, testing of state-of-the-art API text extraction function-
alities suggested that this could be improved significantly by implementing paid API calls.
Additionally, the model is ready to be extended for further functionalities such as other
label formats, or other data types which can be extracted from the images.
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
41
==PAGE:48==
42
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
This project found that images captured in relation to maintenance activities such as those
in the facility archive can be used by the company for data extraction. Specifically, this
project was mainly concerned with the extraction of text data from labels located inside
electrical cabinets. To implement a text extraction pipeline, this project draws inspiration
from a similar and widely studied text extraction case, namely that of a license plate recog-
nition system. It was concluded that the quality of the OCR was widely dependent on an
appropriate image prepossessing which was in this project determined on the basis of
empirical testing and concrete suggestions from [13]. Furthermore, the use of regular
expressions was implemented as way to distinguish between label types and program
output quality.
Testing indicates that the program at its current state has potential to reduce database
errors by approximately 1.4% points as per equation 5.6. However, by implementing
API calls to a state-of-the-art vision engine, this could likely be significantly improved.
Furthermore, this projects presents a program which can facilitate this data extraction with
concrete proposals of how it can be extended to include additional data format extractions
such as model identifiers of electrical cabinets types in the future.
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
43
==PAGE:50==
44
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Farheen Ali, Himanshu Rathor, and Wasim Akram. “License Plate Recognition Sys-
tem”. In: 2021 International Conference on Advance Computing and Innovative
Technologies in Engineering, ICACITE 2021. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc., 2021, pp. 1053–1055.
[2]
Microsoft. Azure Computer Vision. No date. URL: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-
us/services/cognitive-services/computer-vision/.
[3]
Google Cloud. Google Cloud Vision API. No date. URL: https://cloud.google.com/
vision.
[4]
Glenn Jocher, Ayush Chaurasia, and Jing Qiu. Ultralytics YOLO. Version 8.0.0. Jan.
2023. URL: https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics.
[5]
AIMultiple Research. OCR Technology: The Complete Guide in 2023. No date. URL:
https://research.aimultiple.com/ocr-technology/.
[6]
Raghunath Dey et al. “Approach for Preprocessing in Offline Optical Character
Recognition (OCR)”. English. In: 2022 International Conference on Interdisciplinary
Research in Technology and Management, IRTM 2022 - Proceedings. Ed. by Satya-
jit Chakrabarti et al. IIIT Bhubaneswar, DRIEMS, SOA University, Christ (Deemed
To Be University), SRM Institute of Science and Technology. Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2022, p. 6. ISBN: 1665478861 and 9781665478861.
DOI: 10.1109/IRTM54583.2022.9791698.
[7]
Ray Smith and Tesseract Contributors. Tesseract OCR. No date. URL: https://
github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract.
[8]
OpenCV Contributors. OpenCV. No date. URL: https://opencv.org/.
[9]
LabelImg: image annotation tool. URL: https://github.com/HumanSignal/labelImg?
ref=blog.roboflow.com.
[10]
Joseph Nelson. You Might Be Resizing Your Images Incorrectly. Roboflow Blog:
2020. URL: https : / / blog . roboflow . com / you - might - be - resizing - your - images -
incorrectly/.
[11]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. 2015. arXiv: 1405.
0312 [cs.CV].
[12]
Glenn Jocher, Ayush Chaurasia, and Jing Qiu. Ultralytics YOLOv8 Docs. 2023. URL:
https://docs.ultralytics.com/modes/predict/#boxes.
[13]
Tesseract Docs. No date. URL: https://tesseract-ocr.github.io/tessdoc/ImproveQuality.
html.
[14]
SOLID Principles: Improve Object-Oriented Design in Python. URL: https://realpython.
com/solid-principles-python/.
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
45
==PAGE:52==
46
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:53==
A
Regular expression examples by
ChatGPT
A.1
Connection point label
A.1.1
ID
The regex 6{̣7} can be broken down as follows:
• 6: This part of the regex simply matches the character ’6’ literally.
• ̣: This is a shorthand character class in regular expressions, which matches any
digit from 0 to 9.
• {7}: This quantifier specifies that the preceding ̣ should be matched exactly 7 times,
so it’s looking for exactly 7 digits.
Putting it all together, the regex 6{̣7} will match a string that starts with the digit ’6’ followed
by exactly 7 digits.
Example of strings that would match this regex:
• 60000000
• 61234567
• 65432109
These strings all start with ’6’ and are followed by exactly 7 digits.
A.1.2
Cable dimension and material
The regular expression pattern \dx\d{2,3}(mmmm2)??(cu|al)| is used to match certain
patterns in text. Here’s what each part of the regex means:
– \d: Matches any digit.
– x: Matches the character ”x” literally.
– \d{2,3}: Matches between 2 and 3 digits.
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
47
==PAGE:54==
– (mmmm2)?|: Matches either ”mm” or ”mm2” optionally (the ”?” means zero or one
occurrence).
– \s?: Matches zero or one whitespace characters.
– (cual)|: Matches either ”cu” or ”al”.
Here are some examples of strings that would match this pattern:
– 5x123mm cu
– 8x99mm2 al
– 3x555 cu
– 10x22mm al
And here are some examples of strings that would not match:
– ax123mm cu (doesn’t start with a digit)
– 5x12m cu (has only one digit after the ”x”)
– 15x1233mm2 al (has 4 digits after the ”x”)
– 8x99mm3 al (mm3 is not a valid option)
A.1.3
Ampere
The regular expression pattern \d{2}\s?A$ is used to match certain patterns in text.
Here’s what each part of the regex means:
– \d{2}: Matches exactly 2 digits.
– \s?: Matches zero or one whitespace character.
– A: Matches the character ”A” literally.
– $: Matches the end of the string.
Here are some examples of strings that would match this pattern:
– 12A
– 45 A
– 67A
And here are some examples of strings that would not match:
– 123A (has more than 2 digits)
– 9A (has only 1 digit)
– 78A B (has extra characters after ”A”)
A.1.4
Addresses
The regular expression pattern ([A-ZÅÆØ][a-zæøå]{1,}(.))?[A-ZÅÆØ]?[a-zæøå]2,1,3̣(-
0,3̣)?| is used to match certain patterns in text. Here’s what each part of the regex means:
– ([A-ZÅÆØ][a-zæøå]{1,}(.))?|: Matches an optional sequence starting with an up-
percase letter (from the specified set) followed by one or more lowercase letters
(from the specified set), optionally followed by any character or whitespace.
– [A-ZÅÆØ]?: Matches an optional uppercase letter from the specified set.
48
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:55==
– [a-zæøå]{2,}: Matches two or more lowercase letters from the specified set.
– \s: Matches a whitespace character.
– \d{1,3}: Matches between 1 and 3 digits.
– (-\d{0,3})?: Matches an optional hyphen followed by between 0 and 3 digits.
Here are some examples of strings that would match this pattern:
– Oslo 123
– New York City 456-789
– Århus 78
– Copenhagen 1-23
And here are some examples of strings that would not match:
– 123 Oslo (the pattern does not start with a sequence of lowercase letters)
– Aa 45 (the pattern does not end with a digit)
– London (the pattern lacks the required digit)
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
49
==PAGE:56==
B
Full program code
B.1
Github Repo
Investigate full program on Github: https://github.com/mr-lovalova/cabinet_image_data_
extraction
B.2
Python files mentioned in the report
B.2.1
Main
1
import os
2
import sys
3
import re
4
5
from pathlib import Path
6
from PIL import Image
7
import torch
8
import click
9
from ultralytics import YOLO
10
11
sys.path.append(".")
12
from box import Box
13
import extract
14
import item
15
import serializers
16
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
17
from config import MODEL_PATH , RESULTS_FILE_PATH , DESTINATION_PATH
18
19
20
def get_img(root, file):
21
if file.lower().endswith("jpg"):
22
img = Image.open(Path(f"{root}/{file}"))
23
else:
24
img = None
25
return img
26
27
28
def get_detection_model(conf):
29
model = torch.hub.load("ultralytics/yolov5", "custom", MODEL_PATH)
#
yolov5
30
# model = YOLO(MODEL_PATH , task="detect")
50
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:57==
31
model.conf = conf
32
return model
33
34
35
def get_tree(path):
36
tree = os.walk(path, topdown=True)
37
next(tree)
# skipping top directory
38
return tree
39
40
41
def ensure_destination_folder(destination):
42
destination.mkdir(exist_ok=True)
43
44
45
def start_empty_results_file(file_path):
46
with open(file_path , "w"):
47
pass
48
49
50
def parse_id(folder):
51
try:
52
station_id , cabinet_number = re.findall(r"\d+", folder)
53
except ValueError:
# folder has the wrong format
54
return None
55
cabinet_number = int(cabinet_number.lstrip("0"))
56
station_id = int(station_id.lstrip("0"))
57
return f"{station_id}-{cabinet_number}"
58
59
60
@click.command()
61
@click.option("--source", default="data/raw", help="Path to facility archive")
62
@click.option("--output_format", default="JSON")
63
@click.option("--conf", default=0.7, help="confidence of detection model")
64
@click.option("--development_mode", is_flag=True, default=True)
65
def main(source , output_format , conf, development_mode):
66
source = Path(source)
67
destination = Path(DESTINATION_PATH)
68
results_file = Path(RESULTS_FILE_PATH)
69
70
ensure_destination_folder(destination)
71
start_empty_results_file(results_file)
72
73
model = get_detection_model(conf)
74
tree = get_tree(source)
75
logger = item.Logger(destination , development_mode)
76
77
for root, _, files in tree:
78
id_ = parse_id(root.split("/")[-1])
79
if not id_:
80
continue
81
box = Box(id_)
82
logger.start(id_)
83
for file in files:
84
img = get_img(root, file)
85
if not img:
86
continue
87
extractions = extract.from_img(model, img, logger=logger , box=box)
88
print(f"FOUND {len(extractions)} LABELS ON IMAGE {file}")
89
for extraction in extractions:
90
if extraction.is_valid:
91
box.add_object(extraction)
92
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
51
==PAGE:58==
93
logger.log(extraction)
94
95
with open(results_file , "a") as f:
96
f.write(serializers.serializer.serialize(box, output_format) + "\n
")
97
98
logger.recap()
99
100
101
if __name__ == "__main__":
102
main()
cabinet_image_data_extraction/main.py
B.2.2
Box data structure
1
from serializers import ObjectSerializer
2
3
4
class Box:
5
"""Data structure to represent electrical cabinet"""
6
7
def __init__(self, id_) -> None:
8
self.id = id_
9
self.labels = []
10
self.station_id , self.cabinet_number = id_.split("-")
11
self.model = None
12
self.capacity = []
13
14
def add_object(self, item):
15
# TODO change to factory style before adding more capacity , model etc.
16
if item.type == "LABEL":
17
if item not in self.labels:
18
self.labels.append(item)
19
else:
20
# check which item to keep
21
idx = self.labels.index(item)
22
old_item = self.labels[idx]
23
if item > old_item:
24
self.labels.pop(idx)
25
self.labels.append(item)
26
elif item.type == "CAPACTITY":
27
self.capacity.append(item)
28
else:
29
raise NotImplementedError(item.type, " type has not been
implemented yet")
30
31
def serialize(self, serializer):
32
serialized = []
33
for label in self.labels:
34
s = ObjectSerializer()
35
serialized.append(s.serialize(label, "DICT"))
36
37
serializer.start_object("id", self.id)
38
serializer.add_property("labels", serialized)
39
40
def __eq__(self, other):
41
return self.id == other.id
42
43
def __str__(self):
44
return f"BOX:{self.id}"
cabinet_image_data_extraction/box.py
52
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:59==
B.2.3
Abstract object class
1
from abc import ABC, abstractmethod
2
3
4
class Object(ABC):
5
@property
6
@abstractmethod
7
def type(self):
8
pass
9
10
@property
11
@abstractmethod
12
def is_valid(self):
13
"""should extracted information be kept or is bad quality e.g. labels
with no id"""
14
pass
15
16
@abstractmethod
17
def serialize(self):
18
pass
cabinet_image_data_extraction/item/model.py
B.2.4
Abstract label data structure
1
from abc import abstractmethod
2
from item.model import Object
3
4
5
class Label(Object):
6
def __init__(self, id_, dimensions , remainder , **images):
7
self.id = id_
8
self.dimensions = dimensions
9
self.resolution = dimensions[0] * dimensions[1]
10
self.imgs = images
11
self.remainder = remainder
12
13
@property
14
def type(self):
15
return "LABEL"
16
17
@property
18
@abstractmethod
19
def format(self):
20
pass
21
22
@property
23
def is_valid(self):
24
return bool(self.id)
25
26
def serialize(self, serializer):
27
serializer.start_object("id", self.id)
28
serializer.add_property("format", self.format)
29
30
def __eq__(self, other):
31
return self.id == other.id
32
33
def __gt__(self, other):
34
"""used as naive guess of most reliable output"""
35
return self.resolution > other.resolution
36
37
def __repr__(self):
38
out = dict(vars(self))
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
53
==PAGE:60==
39
out["format"] = self.format
40
out.pop("imgs")
41
out.pop("remainder")
42
out.pop("dimensions")
43
return str(out)
44
45
def __hash__(self):
46
return hash(self.id)
cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/model.py
B.2.5
Concrete label data structures
1
from abc import abstractmethod
2
from helpers import ObjectFactory
3
from .model import Label
4
5
6
class ConnectionPointLabel(Label):
7
def __init__(self, id_, resolution , remainder , parsed , **images):
8
super().__init__(id_, resolution , remainder , **images)
9
self.address = parsed.get("address", None)
10
self.ampere = parsed.get("ampere", None)
11
self.dimension = parsed.get("dimension", None)
12
13
@property
14
def format(self):
15
return "CONNECTION_POINT"
16
17
def serialize(self, serializer):
18
super().serialize(serializer)
19
serializer.add_property("ampere", self.ampere)
20
serializer.add_property("dimension", self.dimension)
21
serializer.add_property("address", self.address)
22
23
24
class ConnectionPointLabelBuilder:
25
def __call__(self, id_, resolution , remainder , parsed , images , **_ignored)
:
26
return ConnectionPointLabel(id_, resolution , remainder , parsed , **
images)
27
28
29
class SubSectionLabel(Label):
30
@property
31
def format(self):
32
return "SUBSECTION"
33
34
35
class SubSectionLabelBuilder:
36
def __call__(self, id_, resolution , remainder , images , **_ignored):
37
return SubSectionLabel(id_, resolution , remainder , **images)
38
39
40
class UnknownLabel(Label):
41
@property
42
def format(self):
43
return "UNKNOWN"
44
45
def __hash__(self):
46
return hash(self.id_, self.resolution , self.remainder)
47
48
54
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:61==
49
class UnknownLabelBuilder:
50
def __call__(self, id_, resolution , remainder , images , **_ignored):
51
return UnknownLabel(id_, resolution , remainder , **images)
52
53
54
factory = ObjectFactory()
55
factory.register_builder("CONNECTION_POINT", ConnectionPointLabelBuilder)
56
factory.register_builder("SUBSECTION", SubSectionLabelBuilder)
57
58
factory.register_builder(None, UnknownLabelBuilder)
cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/labels.py
B.2.6
Serializers
1
import json
2
from helpers import ObjectFactory
3
from abc import ABC, abstractmethod
4
5
6
class ObjectSerializer:
7
def serialize(self, serializable , format_):
8
serializer = factory.create(format_)
9
serializable.serialize(serializer)
10
return serializer.to_str()
11
12
13
class Serializer(ABC):
14
def __init__(self):
15
self._current_object = None
16
17
@abstractmethod
18
def start_object(self, object_name , object_id):
19
self._current_object = {"id": object_id}
20
21
@abstractmethod
22
def add_property(self, name, value):
23
self._current_object[name] = value
24
25
@abstractmethod
26
def to_str(self):
27
return self._current_object
28
29
30
class DictSerializer(Serializer):
31
def start_object(self, object_name , object_id):
32
self._current_object = {"id": object_id}
33
34
def add_property(self, name, value):
35
self._current_object[name] = value
36
37
def to_str(self):
38
return self._current_object
39
40
41
class JsonSerializer(DictSerializer):
42
def to_str(self):
43
return json.dumps(super().to_str())
44
45
46
factory = ObjectFactory()
47
factory.register_builder("DICT", DictSerializer)
48
factory.register_builder("JSON", JsonSerializer)
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
55
==PAGE:62==
49
serializer = ObjectSerializer()
cabinet_image_data_extraction/serializers.py
B.2.7
Preprocessing
1
import cv2
2
import numpy as np
3
from .rotation import horizontalize , rotate , get_text_angle
4
5
6
def is_blurry(img, threshold):
7
variance = cv2.Laplacian(img, cv2.CV_64F).var()
8
print(variance)
9
return threshold > variance
10
11
12
def mask_img(img, cnt):
13
mask = np.zeros_like(
14
img
15
)
# Create mask where white is what we want, black otherwise
16
cv2.drawContours(mask, [cnt], 0, 255, -1)
# Draw filled contour in mask
17
out = np.ones_like(img) * 255
18
# Extract out the object and place into output image
19
out[mask == 255] = img[mask == 255]
20
return out
21
22
23
def calculate_brightness(gray):
24
# Calculate the average pixel intensity
25
brightness = int(gray.mean())
26
return brightness
27
28
29
def get_label_contour(img, threshhold):
30
# we assume the largest contour on the countour_img is the label.
31
_, countour_img = cv2.threshold(img, threshhold , 255, cv2.THRESH_BINARY)
32
cnts, _ = cv2.findContours(countour_img , cv2.RETR_EXTERNAL , cv2.
CHAIN_APPROX_SIMPLE)
33
cnts = sorted(cnts, key=cv2.contourArea , reverse=True)
34
try:
35
return cnts[0]
36
except IndexError:
37
threshhold -= 5
38
contour = get_label_contour(img, threshhold)
39
if threshhold < 50:
40
return None
41
42
43
def get_invert(img):
44
gray = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
45
invert = cv2.bitwise_not(gray)
46
return invert
47
48
49
def normalize(img):
50
normalized = cv2.normalize(img, None, 0, 1, cv2.NORM_MINMAX)
51
return normalized
52
53
54
def sharpen(gray):
55
blurred = cv2.GaussianBlur(gray, (3, 3), 0)
56
kernel = np.array([[-1, -1, -1], [-1, 9, -1], [-1, -1, -1]])
56
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:63==
57
sharpened = cv2.filter2D(blurred , -1, kernel)
58
return sharpened
59
60
61
def process(crop):
62
horizontal = horizontalize(crop)
63
invert = get_invert(horizontal)
64
65
contour = get_label_contour(invert, 150)
66
brighness = calculate_brightness(invert)
67
68
if contour is not None:
69
out = mask_img(invert , contour)
70
else:
71
out = invert
72
out[out > 125] = 200
73
out = rotate(out, get_text_angle(out))
74
out = cv2.dilate(out, (3, 3), iterations=1)
75
# out = add_border(out)
76
return out
77
78
79
def add_border(img, size=10):
80
height , width = img.shape
81
image_with_border = np.ones((height, width + size), dtype=np.uint8) * 255
82
image_with_border[:, size : size + width] = img
# leftside border
83
return image_with_border
cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/clean.py
1
import numpy as np
2
import cv2
3
import pytesseract
4
from pytesseract import Output
5
6
7
def show(img, title="none"):
8
cv2.imshow(title, img)
9
cv2.waitKey(0)
10
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
11
12
13
def is_possibly_upside_down(img):
14
"""possebly is important here ^^"""
15
try:
16
orientation = pytesseract.image_to_osd(img, output_type=Output.DICT)[
17
"orientation"
18
]
19
if orientation == 180:
20
upside_down = True
21
else:
22
upside_down = False
23
except:
24
upside_down = False
25
26
return upside_down
27
28
29
def horizontalize(img):
30
"""returns a horizontally oriented label. (possibly upside down)"""
31
try:
32
h, w = img.shape
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
57
==PAGE:64==
33
except ValueError:
34
h, w, dim = img.shape
35
if w < h:
36
rotated = cv2.rotate(img, cv2.ROTATE_90_COUNTERCLOCKWISE)
37
return rotated
38
return img
39
40
41
def rotate(image, angle):
42
"""rotates image by an angle"""
43
image_center = tuple(np.array(image.shape[1::-1]) / 2)
44
R = cv2.getRotationMatrix2D(image_center , angle, 1.0)
45
angle = np.deg2rad(angle)
46
result = cv2.warpAffine(
47
image,
48
R,
49
image.shape[1::-1],
50
borderValue=200,
51
)
52
return result
53
54
55
def get_text_angle(img):
56
edges = cv2.Sobel(img, cv2.CV_8U, 0, 1, ksize=3)
57
lines = cv2.HoughLines(edges, 1, np.pi / 180, 20)
# 75 #20
58
59
try:
60
horizontal_lines = [
61
line
62
for line in lines
63
if np.abs(np.cos(line[0][1])) < np.abs(np.sin(line[0][1]))
64
]
65
except TypeError:
66
return 0
67
68
if not horizontal_lines:
69
return 0
70
71
best_line = horizontal_lines[0]
72
rho, theta = best_line[0]
73
angle = np.degrees(theta) - 90
74
"""
print(angle)
75
# for logging images
76
a = np.cos(theta)
77
b = np.sin(theta)
78
x0 = a * rho
79
y0 = b * rho
80
x1 = int(x0 + 1000 * (-b))
81
y1 = int(y0 + 1000 * (a))
82
x2 = int(x0 - 1000 * (-b))
83
y2 = int(y0 - 1000 * (a))
84
85
cv2.line(img, (x1, y1), (x2, y2), (0, 0, 255), 2)
86
# Display the result
87
cv2.imshow("Detected Lines", img)
88
cv2.waitKey(0)
89
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
90
cv2.imshow("Detected Lines", rotate(img, angle))
91
cv2.waitKey(0)
92
cv2.destroyAllWindows()"""
93
94
return angle
58
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:65==
cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/process/rotation.py
B.2.8
Label parsers
1
from abc import ABC, abstractmethod
2
import re
3
4
from .filters import filters
5
from .mappings import mappings
6
7
8
class LabelParser(ABC):
9
def __init__(self):
10
self.parsed = {}
11
self.remainder = None
12
13
@property
14
@abstractmethod
15
def _patterns(self):
16
pass
17
18
@property
19
@abstractmethod
20
def _id_pattern(self):
21
pass
22
23
def _correct_format(self, id_):
24
"""used in strækningskilt to remomve leading zeros for example"""
25
return id_
26
27
def _clean_id(self, id_):
28
id_ = "".join(filter(lambda x: x.isnumeric() or x == "-", id_))
29
id_ = self._correct_format(id_)
30
return id_
31
32
def parse(self, text):
33
self.remainder = text
34
for key, regex in self._patterns.items():
35
extracted = self._extract(regex, self.remainder)
36
if extracted:
37
extracted = self._clean_extracted(key, extracted.group(0))
38
self.parsed[key] = extracted
39
return self.parsed
40
41
def _extract(self, regex, text):
42
"""takes a pattern and adds it to parsed if it is present"""
43
match_ = re.search(regex, text)
44
if match_:
45
self.remainder = self._get_remainder(text, match_.group(0))
46
return match_
47
48
def extract_id(self, text):
49
"""get label ID which should be extracted before anything else to make
sure we get it right"""
50
id_ = self._extract(self._id_pattern , text)
51
id_ = self._clean_id(id_.group(0))
52
return id_
53
54
def _get_remainder(self, text, remove):
55
"""get remainding text"""
56
return text.replace(remove, "", 1)
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
59
==PAGE:66==
57
58
def _clean_extracted(self, key, replacement):
59
"""Filters unwanted signs and maps to shared format"""
60
cleaned = filter(filters[key], enumerate(replacement))
61
cleaned = map(mappings[key], cleaned)
62
cleaned = "".join(cleaned)
63
return cleaned
cabinet_image_data_extraction/label/text/parser/parser.py
cabinetimagedataextraction/label/text/parser/parsing.py
60
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:67==
C
Data extraction model output
1
{"id": "250-4", "labels": [{"id": "250-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
2
{"id": "218-8", "labels": [{"id": "218-9", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60152545", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60152553",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
3
{"id": "182-23", "labels": [{"id": "61679109", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": null}, {"id": "60235022", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address":
"Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "182-22", "format": "
SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60260638", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}]}
4
{"id": "306-13", "labels": [{"id": "306-14", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"306-10", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60037128", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "80A", "dimension": "4X25CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
5
{"id": "254-5", "labels": [{"id": "254-6", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60033276", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "254-46",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "254-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60032481", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
6
{"id": "275-4", "labels": []}
7
{"id": "316-14", "labels": [{"id": "316-13", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"316-15", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
8
{"id": "275-3", "labels": [{"id": "275-1", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
9
{"id": "309-39", "labels": []}
10
{"id": "251-32", "labels": [{"id": "251-1", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"251-33", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "251-38", "format": "SUBSECTION
"}]}
11
{"id": "186-11290", "labels": [{"id": "186-10991", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"
id": "60054882", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension
": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60054856", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60054876",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "186-34", "format
": "SUBSECTION"}]}
12
{"id": "159-17", "labels": []}
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
61
==PAGE:68==
13
{"id": "279-7", "labels": [{"id": "279-8", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"279-6", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60139815", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -
extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
14
{"id": "251-58", "labels": []}
15
{"id": "218-9", "labels": [{"id": "60152539", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": null}, {"id": "218-10", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "218-8", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60152535", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
16
{"id": "251-34", "labels": [{"id": "60242377", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "251-33", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60291112", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60289004", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60292300",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60289213", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "address
": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
17
{"id": "203-13", "labels": [{"id": "60032768", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": null}, {"id": "203-12", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "203-14", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60034875", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension":
null, "address": null}]}
18
{"id": "251-33", "labels": [{"id": "251-34", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60289019", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "251-36",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "251-32", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60289046", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension":
"4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
19
{"id": "213-40", "labels": [{"id": "60031627", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60046935", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
null, "dimension": null, "address": null}, {"id": "60000814", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address
-extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "213-47", "format": "SUBSECTION"},
{"id": "60042594", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
20
{"id": "275-2", "labels": []}
21
{"id": "161-22", "labels": []}
22
{"id": "254-4", "labels": [{"id": "61666666", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "50A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "61700210", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}, {"id": "61699837", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "50A", "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"254-5", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "254-7", "format": "SUBSECTION
"}, {"id": "60339264", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"61696831", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "254-2", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
23
{"id": "275-5", "labels": []}
24
{"id": "211-2", "labels": [{"id": "211-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
25
{"id": "184-6", "labels": []}
26
{"id": "188-53", "labels": []}
27
{"id": "254-4", "labels": [{"id": "61666666", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "50A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "61700210", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
62
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:69==
"}, {"id": "61699837", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "50A", "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"254-5", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "254-7", "format": "SUBSECTION
"}, {"id": "60339264", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"61696831", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "254-2", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
28
{"id": "288-10", "labels": [{"id": "288-11", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"288-7", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
29
{"id": "263-24", "labels": [{"id": "60289030", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
30
{"id": "227-9", "labels": [{"id": "61733843", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": null}]}
31
{"id": "228-3", "labels": [{"id": "228-15", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60055726", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "228-16",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "228-3", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
32
{"id": "300-3", "labels": [{"id": "60279538", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "50A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60258995", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": null}]}
33
{"id": "260-32", "labels": [{"id": "60203041", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "260-33", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60218776", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60218784", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60980973", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension":
null, "address": null}]}
34
{"id": "180-12078", "labels": []}
35
{"id": "202-6", "labels": [{"id": "60045846", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "202-7", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "202-5", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
36
{"id": "284-1", "labels": []}
37
{"id": "188-5", "labels": [{"id": "60146792", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": "4X16AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "188-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60146756",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16AL", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60146750", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4X16CU", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60146787", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4X16AL", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
38
{"id": "202-24", "labels": []}
39
{"id": "300-2", "labels": []}
40
{"id": "246-1", "labels": [{"id": "246-18", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
41
{"id": "254-5", "labels": [{"id": "254-6", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60033276", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "254-46",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "254-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60032481", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
42
{"id": "311-8", "labels": [{"id": "311-7", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60234521", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "38A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
43
{"id": "178-4", "labels": [{"id": "178-3", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
44
{"id": "313-2", "labels": []}
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
63
==PAGE:70==
45
{"id": "217-4", "labels": [{"id": "217-3", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60131114", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60131068",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
46
{"id": "311-6", "labels": [{"id": "60226832", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "311-1", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
47
{"id": "258-15", "labels": []}
48
{"id": "260-42", "labels": [{"id": "61000464", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60239255", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "260-41", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "260-43",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60203152", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT",
"ampere": "50A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR
-placeholder"}, {"id": "60222748", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
49
{"id": "217-2", "labels": [{"id": "60131052", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60131063", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
null, "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60131047", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"63A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
50
{"id": "176-4", "labels": []}
51
{"id": "311-7", "labels": [{"id": "60234524", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "311-5", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "311-8", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
52
{"id": "217-5", "labels": []}
53
{"id": "297-16", "labels": []}
54
{"id": "260-21", "labels": [{"id": "260-21", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60483780", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension":
null, "address": null}]}
55
{"id": "157-11", "labels": []}
56
{"id": "263-39", "labels": []}
57
{"id": "251-1", "labels": []}
58
{"id": "300-27", "labels": [{"id": "300-28", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
59
{"id": "260-43", "labels": [{"id": "60209391", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60224106", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}, {"id": "260-42", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
60
{"id": "270-17", "labels": [{"id": "60135051", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "270-58", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
61
{"id": "156-18", "labels": []}
62
{"id": "200-27", "labels": [{"id": "60216817", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60192720", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60192813", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "200-26", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
63
{"id": "301-7", "labels": []}
64
{"id": "296-20", "labels": [{"id": "296-21", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60037621", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "61836672",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address
": null}]}
64
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:71==
65
{"id": "291-1", "labels": []}
66
{"id": "281-2", "labels": []}
67
{"id": "241-6", "labels": []}
68
{"id": "260-7", "labels": [{"id": "60180998", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "260-8", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "260-7", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
69
{"id": "180-12521", "labels": []}
70
{"id": "246-1", "labels": []}
71
{"id": "181-16", "labels": [{"id": "60094652", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": null}, {"id":
"60110783", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "50A", "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": null}, {"id": "181-15", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60089855", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension":
"4X10CU", "address": null}, {"id": "181-17", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
72
{"id": "241-1", "labels": []}
73
{"id": "241-11", "labels": []}
74
{"id": "220-1", "labels": [{"id": "220-11", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"220-2", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "61879254", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X25AL", "address": null
}]}
75
{"id": "210-20", "labels": []}
76
{"id": "203-30", "labels": [{"id": "203-3", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"203-29", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60046629", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -
extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60044880", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "2X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60046623", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "2X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60021539", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "2X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60020854", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "2X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
77
{"id": "281-3", "labels": []}
78
{"id": "161-8", "labels": []}
79
{"id": "281-4", "labels": []}
80
{"id": "204-20", "labels": [{"id": "204-21", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"61904954", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
81
{"id": "166-29", "labels": []}
82
{"id": "251-21", "labels": [{"id": "61611443", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "61611441", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}, {"id": "61611447", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"61611445", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "251-16", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "61611455", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "251-22", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"61611449", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "61611453",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "61611451", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "address
": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
83
{"id": "203-39", "labels": []}
84
{"id": "214-11", "labels": [{"id": "60235907", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
65
==PAGE:72==
85
{"id": "299-5", "labels": []}
86
{"id": "241-19", "labels": []}
87
{"id": "262-5", "labels": [{"id": "262-9", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"262-1", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60184134", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -
extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
88
{"id": "220-11", "labels": []}
89
{"id": "218-11541", "labels": [{"id": "60133613", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT
", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -
GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60128507", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
90
{"id": "249-3", "labels": [{"id": "60232484", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60289319", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60666668", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
null, "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": null}]}
91
{"id": "210-28", "labels": []}
92
{"id": "181-17", "labels": [{"id": "60085879", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60084773", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"33A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}]}
93
{"id": "210-17", "labels": []}
94
{"id": "287-1", "labels": [{"id": "60376718", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60046462", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"50A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}, {"id": "287-19", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60376712", "format":
"CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
95
{"id": "238-50", "labels": [{"id": "60235192", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": null}, {"id":
"60236097", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "238-49",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "61922446", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT",
"ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -
GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60194615", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": null}]}
96
{"id": "235-1", "labels": [{"id": "235-3", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
97
{"id": "258-4", "labels": [{"id": "60009968", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "50A", "dimension": "4X185CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR
-placeholder"}, {"id": "258-3", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "258-5", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
98
{"id": "210-36", "labels": [{"id": "210-35", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"210-37", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60009807", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60012558", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address
-extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60002684", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60039709", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60007991", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
99
{"id": "213-11", "labels": [{"id": "60048714", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60025899", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
66
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:73==
100
{"id": "239-4", "labels": []}
101
{"id": "306-17", "labels": []}
102
{"id": "159-23", "labels": [{"id": "60046345", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60048381", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"63A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "159-24", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60051082", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
103
{"id": "217-10", "labels": [{"id": "60170459", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60172214", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"},
{"id": "60172051", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"217-9", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
104
{"id": "309-67", "labels": []}
105
{"id": "210-38", "labels": [{"id": "210-37", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60039699", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
106
{"id": "200-8", "labels": [{"id": "200-29", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
107
{"id": "249-3", "labels": [{"id": "60232484", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60289319", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60666668", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
null, "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": null}]}
108
{"id": "254-7", "labels": [{"id": "60059442", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "254-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
109
{"id": "275-6", "labels": [{"id": "275-3", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
110
{"id": "151-11", "labels": []}
111
{"id": "275-1", "labels": []}
112
{"id": "218-3", "labels": []}
113
{"id": "213-21", "labels": []}
114
{"id": "182-21", "labels": []}
115
{"id": "171-21", "labels": [{"id": "171-25", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
116
{"id": "171-1", "labels": []}
117
{"id": "210-8", "labels": [{"id": "210-9", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
118
{"id": "258-5", "labels": [{"id": "60048343", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "258-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
119
{"id": "258-50", "labels": [{"id": "258-34", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
120
{"id": "254-7", "labels": [{"id": "60059442", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "254-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
121
{"id": "260-36", "labels": [{"id": "260-37", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60348530", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "00A", "dimension": "4
X50AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "260-33",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
122
{"id": "314-31", "labels": [{"id": "314-29", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"314-32", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
123
{"id": "178-12", "labels": []}
124
{"id": "270-65", "labels": [{"id": "270-64", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"270-21", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "64701940", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -
extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
125
{"id": "178-15", "labels": []}
126
{"id": "5413-25", "labels": [{"id": "5413-40", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"5413-24", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
127
{"id": "5413-40", "labels": [{"id": "5413-25", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
128
{"id": "316-12194", "labels": []}
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
67
==PAGE:74==
129
{"id": "197-11", "labels": []}
130
{"id": "263-42", "labels": [{"id": "263-41", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
131
{"id": "202-72", "labels": [{"id": "202-72", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
132
{"id": "180-2", "labels": []}
133
{"id": "178-14", "labels": []}
134
{"id": "150-10", "labels": []}
135
{"id": "231-8", "labels": []}
136
{"id": "193-27", "labels": []}
137
{"id": "202-27", "labels": [{"id": "60096130", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "202-26", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60086176", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60038601", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4
X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60086182", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60039535", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "202-28",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
138
{"id": "282-9", "labels": [{"id": "60087541", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60090710", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}, {"id": "60087756", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60088633", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
139
{"id": "184-3", "labels": [{"id": "60219060", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "184-1", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "184-4", "
format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
140
{"id": "198-2", "labels": []}
141
{"id": "263-5", "labels": []}
142
{"id": "200-1", "labels": [{"id": "60227841", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "200-2", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60227603",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60228736", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "200-35", "format
": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60227831", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere
": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
143
{"id": "270-15", "labels": [{"id": "270-16", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
144
{"id": "260-41", "labels": [{"id": "60193227", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": null}, {"id": "60390372", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address":
"Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60207220", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": "Address -
extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "260-42", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"
id": "260-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
145
{"id": "251-4", "labels": []}
146
{"id": "180-11842", "labels": []}
147
{"id": "234-2", "labels": []}
148
{"id": "217-9", "labels": []}
149
{"id": "211-49", "labels": []}
150
{"id": "310-25", "labels": []}
151
{"id": "270-46", "labels": [{"id": "270-45", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"61128181", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4
X16AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
68
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:75==
152
{"id": "217-7", "labels": [{"id": "217-8", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60175474", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "217-6",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60175134", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT",
"ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR
-placeholder"}, {"id": "60142088", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60171436", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}]}
153
{"id": "311-5", "labels": [{"id": "311-7", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"311-6", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60234536", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "311-4", "format": "
SUBSECTION"}]}
154
{"id": "150-10190", "labels": []}
155
{"id": "178-8", "labels": [{"id": "178-7", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
156
{"id": "180-11843", "labels": []}
157
{"id": "259-1", "labels": []}
158
{"id": "180-11888", "labels": []}
159
{"id": "180-12093", "labels": []}
160
{"id": "198-21", "labels": [{"id": "198-22", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"198-20", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "198-21", "format": "SUBSECTION
"}]}
161
{"id": "287-12", "labels": []}
162
{"id": "239-20", "labels": [{"id": "239-785", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60029253", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
163
{"id": "270-14", "labels": []}
164
{"id": "197-2", "labels": []}
165
{"id": "283-13", "labels": [{"id": "283-14", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60299368", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60243802", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "283-7",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
166
{"id": "270-13", "labels": []}
167
{"id": "194-14", "labels": [{"id": "194-2", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"194-3", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
168
{"id": "311-4", "labels": [{"id": "311-5", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60235836", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
169
{"id": "160-3", "labels": [{"id": "160-7", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"160-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
170
{"id": "217-1", "labels": [{"id": "60131088", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "63A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "217-2", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60131083",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "50A", "dimension": null, "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60131074", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address":
"Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
171
{"id": "176-7", "labels": []}
172
{"id": "293-14", "labels": [{"id": "293-13", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60181836", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension":
null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "65940709",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address
": null}, {"id": "293-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60187356", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": "4X10CU", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "293-20", "format
": "SUBSECTION"}]}
173
{"id": "217-8", "labels": []}
174
{"id": "180-12239", "labels": []}
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
69
==PAGE:76==
175
{"id": "270-71", "labels": []}
176
{"id": "193-3", "labels": []}
177
{"id": "275-12", "labels": []}
178
{"id": "220-2", "labels": [{"id": "220-1", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
179
{"id": "251-24", "labels": [{"id": "60290227", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "80A", "dimension": "4X50AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "251-30", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "251-25",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
180
{"id": "228-18", "labels": []}
181
{"id": "218-10", "labels": [{"id": "61913447", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "218-9", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "62022478",
"format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address
": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "60152685", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address
-extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "62022476", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "62022482", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "
Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "218-11", "format": "
SUBSECTION"}]}
182
{"id": "245-4", "labels": [{"id": "60247206", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60247219", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60261006", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60247210", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
183
{"id": "281-58", "labels": [{"id": "281-58", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"281-56", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60115466", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "63A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address
-extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
184
{"id": "228-20", "labels": []}
185
{"id": "281-1", "labels": []}
186
{"id": "251-12", "labels": []}
187
{"id": "275-41", "labels": []}
188
{"id": "191-12", "labels": [{"id": "60195212", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": null, "address": null}, {"id": "60195521", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "65A", "dimension": null, "address
": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
189
{"id": "266-1", "labels": []}
190
{"id": "160-3", "labels": [{"id": "160-7", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"160-4", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
191
{"id": "149-55", "labels": [{"id": "149-57", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60996206", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60996208", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id":
"60996234", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4
X10AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}, {"id": "149-54",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
192
{"id": "241-25", "labels": [{"id": "241-26", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"60047012", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "25A", "dimension":
null, "address": null}, {"id": "60019415", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "63A", "dimension": null, "address": null}, {"id": "60043321", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
193
{"id": "242-2", "labels": []}
194
{"id": "176-12", "labels": []}
70
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
==PAGE:77==
195
{"id": "210-22", "labels": [{"id": "60007904", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": null, "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "210-23", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
196
{"id": "220-15", "labels": []}
197
{"id": "282-23", "labels": [{"id": "60088819", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "282-22", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "282-24",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60109231", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT",
"ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR
-placeholder"}, {"id": "60118455", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}, {"id": "60112184", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "
dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
198
{"id": "186-10991", "labels": [{"id": "60084864", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT
", "ampere": "25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60084862", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"25A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder
"}, {"id": "186-11290", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60084871", "
format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "
address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
199
{"id": "275-14", "labels": []}
200
{"id": "266-33", "labels": [{"id": "60173522", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "50A", "dimension": "4X16CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "266-34", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "266-32",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
201
{"id": "191-13", "labels": [{"id": "60984126", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "63A", "dimension": "4X16AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "62016467", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"63A", "dimension": "4X16AL", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "191-11", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
202
{"id": "251-13", "labels": []}
203
{"id": "296-14", "labels": [{"id": "296-15", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id":
"296-9", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60040981", "format": "
CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere": "35A", "dimension": null, "address": "Address
-extracted -GDPR-placeholder"}]}
204
{"id": "191-14", "labels": [{"id": "60195362", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "
ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195334", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195381", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195368", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195375", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195337", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195391", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195356", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "191-15", "format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "191-13",
"format": "SUBSECTION"}, {"id": "60195386", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT",
"ampere": "35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR
-placeholder"}, {"id": "60195401", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195344", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}, {"id": "60195350", "format": "CONNECTION_POINT", "ampere":
"35A", "dimension": "4X10CU", "address": "Address -extracted -GDPR-
placeholder"}]}
205
{"id": "181-1", "labels": [{"id": "181-23", "format": "SUBSECTION"}]}
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
71
==PAGE:78==
206
{"id": "283-4", "labels": []}
72
Data extraction from existing photos of power grid installations to verify database integrity
