==PAGE:1==
Unravelling the dynamics of
solvated glucose in the terahertz
range through computer
simulations
by
Oscar Garcia Garcia
submitted to obtain the
MasterŌĆÖs degree on biomaterial engineering for medicine
at
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
First supervisor:
Assoc. Prof. J┬┤ogvan Magnus Haugaard Olsen
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Second supervisor:
Prof. Klaus Braagaard M├Ėller
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Third supervisor:
Prof. Peter Uhd Jepsen
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In the pursuit of continuous glucose monitoring, terahertz spectroscopy emerges as
a promising avenue for non-invasive measurements in biological tissue. However,
advancing this technique necessitates a deep understanding of the interaction be-
tween glucose and water. In this thesis, a comprehensive analysis of the molecular
dynamics of solvated glucose is presented. First, the vibrational power spectrum
is dissected into inter and intramolecular motions and compared for different water
models. Next, the GROMOS 56A CARBO force field is used to compute the line-
shape function of glucose in water and compared to experimental data, finding that
non-polarizable force fields fail to reproduce the transition dipole of hydrogen bond
stretching. Finally, a discussion regarding potential advancements, encompassing
both experimental and computational domains, is provided.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
The journey of learning a new topic is both a challenge and a pleasure. The presence
of exemplary mentors facilitates the latter. For this reason, I express my sincere grat-
itude to my supervisors Magnus and Klaus, who have provided invaluable expertise
and have triggered fruitful discussion. I am equally thankful to Peter for his endless
support. Special appreciation goes to Lorenza for her dedicated time spent in the
lab, meticulously conducting measurements and wrestling with the data processing
protocol. I extend my gratitude to the entire Glaze team for their commitment in
pushing terahertz technology forward. Finally, I thank Arnau and Berta for being
the best travel buddies.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Prior art and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
THz spectroscopy
6
2.1
THz time-domain systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Attenuated total internal reflection geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Molecular dynamics simulations
13
3.1
From experiments to models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
The GROMOS 56A CARBO force field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Water models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4.1
Vibrational power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4.2
Total dipole moment autocorrelation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results and discussion
20
4.1
Lineshape function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.1
Experimental practises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
Computational methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
A Derivation of dipole autocorrelation absorption
24
B Preparation of molecular dynamics simulations
27
B.1 Minimization and equilibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
B.2 Production and dipole moment calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
C Gromacs code
30
C.1 Molecular dynamics paramenter (.mdp) files . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
C.1.1
Minimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
C.1.2
NVT equilibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
C.1.3
NPT equilibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
C.1.4
NVT2 equilibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
C.1.5
NVE equilibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
C.1.6
Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
C.2 Protein Data Bank (.pdb) file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
C.3 Job file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
1
==PAGE:5==
Contents
2
C.4 Get frame script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Some say we know less about the depths of the ocean than the surface of the
moon. Truth is, we know even less about water in our own cells. As familiar as it
might sound, water is an utterly complex and enigmatic substance, showing different
flavours of anomalous behaviours which ultimately disrupt any holistic theoretical
framework that tries to describe it [1].
Perhaps the most notable property of water is the ability to form, and to destroy,
hydrogen bonds. Hydrogen bonds are electrostatic interactions between a hydrogen,
which is covalently bound to a more electronegative atom named the donor, and
another electronegative atom with a lone pair of electrons, named the acceptor [2].
In a water molecule, the oxygen atom has two lone pairs. This means each oxygen
can act as an acceptor for two hydrogen bonds. At the same time, each of the
hydrogens in each molecule can intervene in another hydrogen bond. Therefore,
each water molecule can coordinate with up to four other water molecules, forming
a tetrahedral structure.
The high number of hydrogen bonds that water can form gives rise to exotic
properties, such as its high boiling point or the lower density of its solid state
compared to its liquid state. All these play important roles in biological systems. For
example, lakes start freezing at the surface because ice is less dense than liquid water.
The ice sheet on the surface acts as an insulating layer that delays solidification of the
water mass below, preserving the aquatic ecosystem which would otherwise freeze
in cold winters.
As an ubiquitous solvent in biological systems, water can also form hydrogen
bonds with biomolecules. There is increasing scientific evidence that water does not
act only as a passive solvent, but changes the properties of the solute and plays a
crucial role in the dynamics of biological systems at microscopic scale by modifying,
for example, protein folding [3] or enzyme-substrate interactions [4]. The study of
these interactions, called solvation science, is an emerging research topic [5], and
will be central in this thesis .
Carbohydrates are one of the fundamental biochemical building blocks of life
and, as such, their interaction with water is key in their functionality. Arguably,
glucose is the most important carbohydrate for human beings, and for all organisms,
as it serves as the major source of energy. The glucose metabolism starts with intake
of food and subsequent degradation of complex biomolecules ultimately into glucose,
3
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1. Introduction
4
which occurs in the digestive tracts. Then it migrates into the bloodstream, where it
is transported into every cell of the body. This transport is regulated by the hormone
insulin, which facilitates uptake of glucose by cells and promotes the storage of excess
glucose in the liver and muscles as glycogen [6].
A disorder in the regulation of blood glucose is named diabetes, which exists
in two types. Type 1 diabetes occurs when the immune system mistakenly attacks
and destroys the insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas.
As a result, the
body cannot produce enough insulin, leading to high blood glucose levels. Type 2
diabetes, which is more common, develops when the pancreas fails to produce enough
insulin [6]. In both types of diabetes, the inability to regulate blood glucose levels
properly can lead to various complications, including cardiovascular problems, nerve
damage, kidney issues, and other serious health problems [7]. It is key for efficient
management of diabetes to measure the concentration of glucose in blood.
Glucose, this simple yet extensively studied molecule, still poses a challenge
within the biosensing community. To date, there is no technique that allows in-vivo
non-invasive continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) within clinical range, from 2
to 20 mM. The quest for CGM has now become the holy grail of biosensing, and
the scientific community has explored many approaches to solve this issue, ranging
from minimally-invasive electrochemical biosensors [8] to miniaturised Raman spec-
trometers [9, 10]. The description of these techniques is beyond the scope of this
work. However, notably, none of these fulfil the requirement for the perfect glucose
biosensor: non-invasive, portable, continuous, universal and sufficiently precise and
accurate within the clinically relevant concentration range.
It is well known that terahertz (THz) spectroscopy can be used to determine
the concentration of glucose in aqueous solutions [11].
Recent publications hint
that it is also possible to measure changes in glucose concentration in biological
tissues, both ex-vivo [12] and in-vivo [13]. Although a comprehensive explanation
about the interaction between THz and all the constituents of biological matrices
is still missing, the publications above suggest that THz spectroscopy has sufficient
specificity to provide clinically accurate measurements. While still very unexplored,
the THz range opens new approaches to solve the ever-lasting challenge of CGM.
1.2
Prior art and scope
The goal of the present work is to investigate the interaction between glucose and
water in the THz range through molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and empirical
measurements. Is it possible to reproduce the experimental absorbance of solvated
glucose computationally? Which vibrational modes does the THz field couple to?
What is the most appropriate water model? Any further knowledge along these lines
can help in the development of THz-based glucose biosensors, with the ultimate goal
to establish a technological platform for non-invasive CGM.
Many authors have explored water-only systems in the THz and infrared range.
Hardet et al. used classical MD simulations to compare the spectral properties of
fixed-charge and polarizable water models [14]. They found that, at timescales in the
hundreds of picoseconds range, the latter shows better agreement with experimental
observations. Sidler et al. justified this behaviour by acknowledging that two fixed
dipoles oscillating against each other, as it would be the case in a hydrogen bond
stretching, do not change the overall dipole moment [15]. Thus, any fixed-charge
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1. Introduction
5
model will not show a transition dipole associated with these dynamics and will
therefore not reproduce the experimental observations accurately. Their approach
was to amend the water model by allowing charge transfer between hydrogen bond
dimers, obtaining a better experimental fit for their classical simulations.
Heyden et al. took a different approach [16]. Instead of using classical dynamics,
they employed ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD), which inherently account for
electronic polarizability. In their work, they derived an expression for the absorbance
with explicit spatial dependence. This allowed them to study the range of influence
of the different vibrational modes in the system, finding that the dynamics in the
THz range extend well beyond the first solvation layer. This finding prompted them
to speculate that THz spectroscopy could sensitively detect changes in solvation such
as, for example, protein folding. In a quest to further dissect the THz spectrum
of water, Imoto et al. computed the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of their AIMD
simulations to perform instantaneous normal mode analysis [17]. With this, they
could disentangle translational, vibrational and rotational motions of the hydrogen
bonds from the predominant intramolecular librational peak (vide infra), concluding
that the tetrahedral hydrogen bond network is perturbed upon increase of pressure.
Other authors have focused on the study of water-solute systems in the THz
range. Heugen et al. used MD simulations to study the dynamics of lactose in water
[18]. They used a geometric criterion to quantify the number of hydrogen bonds in
a given time frame and computed a time-dependent autocorrelation function. With
this, they could deduct the hydrogen bond lifetime, predicting a value of Žä = 1.3
ps in the presence of a solute as compared to the Žä = 0.9 ps of bulk water. In
an extension of this work, Heiyden et al. performed classical MD simulations of
three different carbohydrates in water, namely trihalose, lactose and glucose [19].
While the discussion of their computational results is scarce, they empirically show
that the change in absorbance with respect to bulk water is more prominent for
those carbohydrates that form a larger number of hydrogen bonds with the solvent.
Not only restricted to carbohydrates, Conti et al. performed MD simulations of an
enzyme of the metalloproteinase family with different substrates [4]. They observed
a correlation of the vibrational density of states of water molecules around the
substrate with those in the first solvation shell of the enzyme. This correlation was
observed to be stronger in substrates with recognition motifs specific to the enzyme,
showing evidence of substrate-specific water-protein coupling.
The collection of scientific publications compiled above underscores the fact that
water serves a role far beyond that of a mere passive solvent. Delving into the phys-
ical principles behind solute-solvant interactions through solvation science promises
to enrich the understanding of biological systems and opens new avenues for tech-
nological advances that will bring value to society.
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
THz spectroscopy
2.1
THz time-domain systems
The terahertz range is a section of the electromagnetic spectrum which lies between
microwaves and infrared. THz waves are too fast in frequency to be generated by
electronics, which typically reach only a few tenths of gigahertz. On the other side,
THz waves are too low in energy to be detected with solid state devices, such as
photodiodes, which suffer from inherent thermal noise. Historically, this has imposed
a technological challenge to develop instrumentation within this range. However,
recent advances in semiconductor processing and fabrication have opened the doors
to scalable THz instruments [20].
The most common approach to generate and detect THz is named time-domain
spectroscopy (TDS). THz-TDS systems are composed of a femtosecond laser, a
beamsplitter, a delay unit and two photoconductive antennas, arranged in an inter-
ferometer setup, as depicted in figure 2.1. The femtosecond laser generates broad-
band pulses of light, which are split in the two arms of the interferometer by the
beamsplitter before being guided towards the photoconductive antennas. These an-
tennas are, in their most simple form, pieces of semiconductor showing fast recombi-
nation times, where two metal dipole strips have been deposited. Upon illumination
of the gap between the two metal strips by the femtosecond pulse, photocarriers are
generated in the semiconductor substrate.
While femtosecond lasers usually generate a continuous spectrum, the mathemat-
ical derivation of the equations governing THz-TDS systems becomes more intuitive
if a sum of N discrete modes is considered. With this in mind, and approximating
the femtosecond laser field as a plane wave, the optical intensity incident on the
semiconductor can be written as
I(t) = E2(t) =
 
N
X
i=1
Ai sin(Žēit + ŽĢi)
!2
(2.1)
where I is the optical intensity, E is the electric field and Žē and ŽĢ are the angular
frequency and the phase of each mode of the N modes, respectively. By applying
trigonometric relations, equation 2.1 can be rewritten as
6
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2. THz spectroscopy
7
3
2
1
5
7
8
6
4
A
Figure 2.1: Basic elements of a THz-TDS system. The femtosecond laser beam
(1) is split in two by a beamsplitter (2) in an interferometer configuration. One of
the arms is guided by mirrors (3) to a delay unit (4) and subsequently redirected
to the receiver (6). The other arm is directly guided to the emitter (5). A set of
THz lenses (7) is used to collimate and focus the beam onto a silicon prism (8)
where the specimen is placed. The two insets show the metal dipole strips on the
semiconductor substrate with the laser beam focused on the gap. A constant voltage
is applied in the emitter, while the generated current is measured in the detector.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2. THz spectroscopy
8
I(t) =
N
X
i=1
A2
i
2 (1 ŌłÆcos(2Žēit + 2ŽĢi)) +
NŌłÆ1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
AiAj
"
cos  (Žēi ŌłÆŽēj)t + (ŽĢi ŌłÆŽĢj) ŌłÆcos  (Žēi + Žēj)t + (ŽĢi + ŽĢj)
#
(2.2)
As shown by the expression above, the intensity in the semiconductor is a sum
of terms oscillating at 2Žēi, Žēi + Žēj and Žēi ŌłÆŽēj for all possible combinations of i and
j, this is, for all the possible combinations of modes in the laser.
However, the carrier recombination in the semiconductor, which typically hap-
pens in the hundreds of femtoseconds timescale, is too slow to follow the fast terms
at 2Žēi and Žēi + Žēj. Instead, the conductivity of the substrate only follows the slow
term Žēi ŌłÆŽēj, effectively forming a low pass filter. Therefore, equation 2.2 can be
simplified as
Ieff ŌłØ
NŌłÆ1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
AiAj cos(ŌłåŽēijt + ŌłåŽĢij)
(2.3)
where ŌłåŽēij = Žēi ŌłÆŽēj and ŌłåŽĢij = ŽĢi ŌłÆŽĢj.
The conductivity of the semiconductor is proportional to the effective intensity
Ieff(t), which, as stated by equation 2.3, is modulated by the difference frequency
terms ŌłåŽēij. For broadband light sources such as the femtosecond laser, these dif-
ference frequency terms lie in the THz range. For example, a transform-limited
Gaussian pulse of 150 fs would have a maximum separation of modes of around 3
THz. Therefore, the conductivity of the substrate beats in the THz range.
If a constant voltage is applied to the two metal strips, a varying current modu-
lated by the conductivity of the semiconductor will flow across the gap, as dictated
by OhmŌĆÖs law
Jemi(t) ŌłØŽā(t)Eb
(2.4)
where Jemi is the electrical current density across the dipole gap, Žā ŌłØIeff is the
conductivity of the semiconductor, proportional to the effective intensity, and Eb is
the electric field created by the bias voltage applied across the dipole. In virtue of
MaxwellŌĆÖs equations, a varying current density radiates an electromagnetic field as
ETHz ŌłØdJemi
dt
ŌłØEb
dŽā(t)
dt
ŌłØEb
dIeff(t)
dt
(2.5)
and by inserting equation 2.3 into 2.5, one arrives to
ETHz ŌłØŌłÆ
NŌłÆ1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
AiAjŌłåŽēij sin(ŌłåŽēijt + ŌłåŽĢij)
(2.6)
Hence, a photoconductive antenna to which a bias voltage is applied radiates in
the THz range and is therefore called the emitter.
The THz radiation is directed towards a specimen by a set of reflective and
transmissive optical elements and subsequently guided towards the other photocon-
ductive antenna, namely the detector. Similarly as in the emitter, the conductivity
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2. THz spectroscopy
9
of the detector substrate is modulated by the optical intensity of the femtosecond
laser. However, there is no bias voltage applied to the dipole. Instead, the imping-
ing THz radiation creates a current across the gap between the metal strips of the
detector, which is measured with tailored electronics that ultimately perform the
function of an amp-meter.
Again, expressing the current across the detector gap as OhmŌĆÖs law,
Jdet ŌłØ
1
Tint
Z Tint/2
ŌłÆTint/2
Žādet(t)ETHz(t)dt
(2.7)
where the integral has been added to account for the very slow temporal response
of the electronics that measure electrical current compared to the other time depen-
dencies of the system. As discussed above, the conductivity of the photoconductive
antenna Žā is proportional to the effective intensity Ieff. However, the optical path
that the femtosecond laser follows to the detector has a delay Žä with respect to the
emitter. Therefore,
Žādet(t) ŌłØIeff(t ŌłÆŽä)
(2.8)
and by inserting equations 2.8 and 2.6 into 2.7, one obtains
Jdet ŌłØ
1
Tint
Z Tint/2
ŌłÆTint/2
Ieff(t ŌłÆŽä)ETHz(t)dt
ŌłØŌłÆ1
Tint
 NŌłÆ1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
AiAjŌłåŽēij
Z Tint/2
ŌłÆTint/2
sin(ŌłåŽēijt + ŌłåŽĢij)dt
ŌłÆ
NŌłÆ1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
NŌłÆ1
X
k=1
N
X
l=k+1
AiAjAkAlŌłåŽēklTint
Z Tint/2
ŌłÆTint/2
cos(ŌłåŽēij(t ŌłÆŽä) + ŌłåŽĢij)
sin(ŌłåŽēklt + ŌłåŽĢij)dt
!
(2.9)
The apparently complicated expression above can be simplified by acklowledging
that the integration time Tint is much longer than any other timescale in the system.
If so, one can observe that the integral over a sine is zero, nuling the first term of the
equation. Additionally, by exploiting the sine orthogonality property, one can infer
that the quadruple summation in the second term will only be non-zero when the
frequencies of the trigonometric functions coincide. After performing the integral
and evaluating, one obtains
Jdet(Žä) ŌłØŌłÆ1
2
NŌłÆ1
X
i=1
N
X
j=i+1
A2
i A2
jŌłåŽēij sin(ŌłåŽēijŽä)
(2.10)
The equation above does not show a physical time dependence, which has been
dropped during the integration. Instead, it is a function of the time delay Žä between
the THz pulse and the femtosecond laser arriving into the detector. For any given
time delay, a constant current is generated and measured with a current meter.
Now, the delay unit comes into play. Extending or shortening one of the arms of
the interferometer with respect to the other one effectively changes Žä. By varying
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. THz spectroscopy
10
Figure 2.2: Absolute value of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of a typical THz
measurement with no specimen, showing a bandwidth of around 5 THz and a dy-
namic range of 80 dB. Inset: time-domain representation of the recorded pulse.
this delay, the detector effectively performs a cross-correlation between the terahertz
field and the optical intensity, yielding the interference pattern shown in the inset
of figure 2.2. The absolute value of the Fourier transform of this pulse is shown in
the main figure. This spectrum serves as the basis for the calculation of the optical
properties which will be described in the forthcoming.
2.2
Attenuated total internal reflection geometry
Water is highly absorptive in the THz range. Because of this, a transmission geom-
etry, (this is, where the specimen is placed between the emitter and the detector)
would strongly attenuate the signal. While attempts have been made to perform
spectroscopy of aqueous solutions in transmission, these required very thin liquid
layers, in the range of 100 ┬Ąm [21], which make it impractical.
Another approach is to use a semi-transparent window, usually made of high
resistivity silicon, where the specimen is placed on top and the antennas are arranged
in an angle at the bottom [11]. The THz signal reflects first on the bottom surface
of the window and subsequently on the top surface. The specimen induces a change
in the second reflection, from which the optical properties can be retrieved. Since
the first reflection is not affected by the sample, it can be used for calibration.
This reflection geometry is therefore said to be self-referenced. However, the cavity
formed by the two interfaces causes a Fabry-Perot effect, which in turn results in a
train of pulses in time domain and a combed spectrum in frequency domain. These
artifacts induced by the setup degrade the quality of the data and complicate its
analysis.
A third approach is to use an attenuated total internal reflection (ATR) prism.
As depicted in figure 2.1, the sample is placed on the upper surface of the prism,
usually made of high-resistivity silicon, and the antennas are placed at the bottom.
Note that, in a usual setup, the THz beam is set to be at normal incidence with
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. THz spectroscopy
11
the input and output surfaces of the prism. According to SnellŌĆÖs law, at any in-
cidence angle larger than the critical angle ╬Ėc = sinŌłÆ1 ├änsample
nprism
├ż
, where nprism and
nsample are the refractive indices of the prism and sample, attenuated total internal
reflection will occur. An evanescent field will interact with the specimen, acquiring
the spectroscopic fingerprints of the sample which can subsequently be retrieved by
applying Beer-LambertŌĆÖs law [22]. However, the above is only true in the limit where
the specimen has low absorption, this is, when
╦£nsample = nsample + i╬║sample Ōēłnsample
(2.11)
As discussed above, this is not the case for water in the THz range. Because of
this, a mathematical treatment considering the refractive index of the sample to be
complex is required [23, 24]. For p-polarisation, the Fresnel reflection coefficients
between two media i and j can be written as [25]
ri,j(Žē) = ╦£ni(Žē)Ci,j(Žē) ŌłÆ╦£nj(Žē) cos ╬Ėi
╦£ni(Žē)Ci,j(Žē) + ╦£nj(Žē) cos ╬Ėi
,
(2.12)
where ╦£n is the complex refractive index of the respective media and
Ci,j =
s
1 ŌłÆ╦£n2
i (Žē)
╦£n2
j(Žē) sin2 ╬Ėi.
(2.13)
One can define a complex transfer function as the ratio between the measured
THz pulse with a sample and a reference THz pulse where no sample is place on the
ATR silicon prism.
T(Žē) = Esample(Žē)
Ereference(Žē) = rprism,sample(Žē)
rprism,air(Žē)
(2.14)
Substituting equation 2.12 into 2.14 and assuming a real refractive index of the
prism, which is a good approximation for silicon [26], results in
╦£nsample = 1
ŽĢ
ŌĆ”
1
2

1 ┬▒
┬╗
1 ŌłÆ(2ŽĢnprism sin(╬Ėi))2

(2.15)
where
ŽĢ = cos(╬Ėatr)
nprism
├ģ1 ŌłÆT ┬Ę rprism-air
1 + T ┬Ę rprism-air
├Ż
(2.16)
Finally, the absorption coefficient can be calculated from equation 2.15 as
╬▒ = 4ŽĆ╬║sample
╬╗0
(2.17)
with ╬║sample being the imaginary part of the complex refractive index and ╬╗0 the
vacuum wavelength.
2.3
Methods
The spectroscopic measurements were performed using the TeraFlash Pro from Top-
tica Photonics AG [27]. The THz beam was shaped by a set of home-made polymeric
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. THz spectroscopy
12
lenses and directed towards a high-resistivity silicon ATR prism from Tydex Optics
[28]. The free-space THz path was purged with nitrogen to mitigate the presence
of water vapour absorption lines in the recorded spectrum, although traces of these
can still be seen in figure 2.2 at around 3 THz and above. This setup was used to
measure deionized water and glucose in water at a concentration of 20 mM. For each
of the two specimens, three independent samples were recorded, which allowed to
estimate the experimental error. For each of the samples, a reference spectrum of air
was recorded, which allowed to compute the refractive index and the absorption co-
efficient as indicated in equations 2.15 and 2.17, respectively. The results are shown
in figure 2.3. The blue plots correspond to the deionized water specimen, which
shows very good agreement with the literature [29]. The orange plots correspond
to the 20 mM glucose in water specimen, which is noticeably different to the water
sample at the high frequency end of the graph.
Figure 2.3: Experimental refractive index and absorbance for water (blue) and sol-
vated glucose at 20 mM (orange). The grey bars indicate the standard error of the
mean.
The grey bars represent the standard error of the mean. These are notably large
for the absorption coefficient, which is attributed instabilities in the peak power
of the spectrometer. Additionally, the standard error of the mean increases with
frequency due to the worse signal-to-noise ratio at higher frequencies, as shown in
figure 2.2.
The experimental measurements above, as well as the data treatment protocol,
were conducted by Lorenza Pia Foglia, to whom acknowledgement is due.
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Molecular dynamics simulations
3.1
From experiments to models
It is the basis of physical sciences to develop models that describe empirical obser-
vations. Given the inherent complexity of nature, it often proves impractical, if not
impossible, to develop holistic models that encompass all facets of physics. Instead,
one accepts a set of approximations which render practicality to the model at ex-
pense of generality. If these approximations are sound, the model would still capture
the relevant physical properties of the system under study and provide results which
are satisfactorily close to the empirical observations.
At a molecular level, one can approximate matter as masses and charges that
interact with each other following a set of defined rules. In classical dynamics, these
rules are NewtonŌĆÖs equations of motion, which deterministically predict the evolution
of the system as a function of time for a given set of initial conditions.
For sufficiently small systems, these equations might be solved analytically to
retrieve the physical magnitude of interest. However, large systems containing a vast
number of particles, for which it is not possible to derive a closed-form analytical
equation, are often the focus of interest.
Classical computational MD leverages
the power of modern computers to solve NewtonŌĆÖs equations at discrete time steps,
obtaining the trajectories of the particles in the system at each of the frames.
This attempt to discretize the continuous nature of time requires to take steps
well shorter than the dynamics of the system.
Trajectories are updated by the
integration algorithm, among which the leapfrog integrator is the most common in
MD, and reads as [30]
ŌāŚv
├ģ
t + 1
2Ōłåt
├Ż
= ŌāŚv
├ģ
t ŌłÆ1
2Ōłåt
├Ż
+ Ōłåt
m
ŌāŚF(t)
(3.1)
ŌāŚr (t + Ōłåt) = ŌāŚr(t) + Ōłåt ŌāŚv
├ģ
t + 1
2Ōłåt
├Ż
(3.2)
Positions and velocities are computed at interleaved steps, in a scheme that
reminds to the movement of the amphibian that bears its name. The calculation of
each new velocity requires knowledge of the forces that act on all the elements of
the system. The set of equations used to compute these forces receives the name
of force field, and is key in the accuracy of the simulations. Most force fields are
parameterised based on empirical observations [31].
Some of them, such as the
Optimized Potentials for Liquid Simulations (OPLS), prioritise generality, while
13
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3. Molecular dynamics simulations
14
others are designed to reproduce specific physical properties within a narrow range
of molecular species and thermodynamic conditions, such as the GROMOS 56A
CARBO.
It is not straightforward to measure trajectories of molecules experimentally.
Instead, the output of the MD simulation shall be used to calculate a physical
magnitude that can be measured empirically.
For example, temperature can be
retrieved from MD simulations by averaging the kinetic energy of all particles in the
system and applying the equipartition theorem. Similarly, pressure can be computed
through the calculation of the virial tensor, which requires knowledge of positions
and forces in a given time frame.
Spectroscopic experiments utilize the interaction of light and matter to calculate
optical properties of the sample, such as absorption coefficient and refractive index.
The derivation of these observables from MD trajectories is possible through the
dipole time-correlation formalism, which reads as [16]
I(Žē) = ╬▒(Žē) ┬Ę n(Žē) =
1
4ŽĆ╬Ą0
2ŽĆŽē2╬▓
3cV
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
Ō¤©ŌāŚM(0) ┬Ę ŌāŚM(t)Ō¤®eŌłÆiŽētdt
(3.3)
The lineshape function I(Žē), defined as the product of the absorption coefficient
and the refractive index, can be calculated by taking the Fourier transform of the
temporal autocorrelation of the total dipole moment ŌāŚM(t) and multiplying by a
frequency dependent factor. The total dipole moment of the system can be retrieved
from trajectories of the charges in the system as
ŌāŚM(t) =
N
X
n=1
ŌāŚ┬Ąn(t) =
N
X
n=1

I
X
i=1
qi,n(ŌāŚri,n ŌłÆŌāŚr0,n)

(3.4)
where ŌāŚ┬Ąn(t) is the molecular dipole moment, qi,n and ŌāŚri,n are charges and positions
of each of the I atoms in a molecule and ŌāŚr0,n is the center of mass of each of the N
molecules in the system.
Therefore, equation 3.3 sets the linkage between MD simulations and spectro-
scopic experiments. The derivation of this formalism, based on FermiŌĆÖs golden rule,
is relegated to appendix A.
3.2
The GROMOS 56A CARBO force field
The accuracy of MD simulations hinges on the set of equations used to describe
the interactions between the molecules, namely the force field. Many different force
fields for carbohydrates in water have been developed, each designed to capture
different physical phenomena [32, 33, 34].
Hydrogen bonds between water and glucose happen mainly through the hydroxil
groups of glucose. The orientation of these hydroxil or hydroxymethyl groups plays
an important role in the dynamics of the system and should therefore be well char-
acterised in the force field of choice. The GROMOS 56A CARBO was developed by
Hansen et al. to reproduce the relative free energies of hydroxymethyl rotamers in
hexopyranose carbohydrates and account for anomerization (this is, interconversion
between ╬▒-D-glucopyranose and ╬▓-D-glucopyranose)[35]. The functional form of the
model reads as follows:
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3. Molecular dynamics simulations
15
V = Vbonded + Vnonbonded
Vbonded =
N╬Š
X
ij
K╬Šij
2
╬Šij ŌłÆ╬Š0ij
2 +
N╬Ė
X
ijk
K╬Ėijk
2
cos(╬Ėijk) ŌłÆcos ╬Ė0ijk
2
+
NŽĢ
X
ijkl
KŽĢijkl
1 + cos mŽĢŽĢijkl ŌłÆŽĢ0ijkl

(3.5)
Vnonbonded =
c
X
ij
qiqj
4ŽĆŽĄ0rij
+
LJ
X
ij,i╠Ė=j
├▒C12
ij
r12
ij
ŌłÆC6
ij
r6
ij
├┤
The first element of the bonded term corresponds to intramolecular bond stretch-
ing truncated to second order, this is, a harmonic potential, where K╬Šij is the force
constant and ╬Š0ij is the interatomic distance at equilibrium. The second element of
the bonded term, namely the valence angle potential, describes the angle between
the subscripted atoms using a harmonic cosine potential with K╬Ėijk as the force con-
stant and ╬Ė0ijk the equilibrium angle. The third element of the bonded term accounts
for torsions. Since torsions are periodic, so must be the functional form describing
the torsion potential energy. This periodicity is accounted in the cosine function.
The energy has a minimum when the argument of the cosine is ┬▒ŽĆ and a maximum
when it is null. The term ╬Š0ijkl sets the torsional angle where the maximum occurs.
Most torsional energies, but not all, are minimised for anti-periplanar geometries
[31], equivalent to setting ╬Š0ijkl = 0. Two anomers of glucose exist in solvation,
namely ╬▒-D-glucopyranose and ╬▓-D-glucopyranose, which differ from each other by
the torsion of the hydroxil group attached to the first carbon. Therefore, the force
field must account for two minima in the torsional potential energy. This is done by
the mŽĢ term, which sets manifold periodicities in the torsion. The GROMOS 56A
CARBO force field is designed to account for this anomerization [36].
The first element of the non-bonded term corresponds to electrostatic interac-
tions, adopting the form of a Coulomb potential where rij is the distance between
the charges. Finally, the second element of the non-bonded term is a Lennard-Jones
potential which accounts for van der Waals interactions. The term with a twelfth
power dependency accounts for the repulsive force that occurs when the electron
clouds of two proximal atoms start to overlap. This effect, derived from PauliŌĆÖs ex-
clusion principle, is usually called exchange repulsion. The term with a sixth power
dependency also arises from quantum effects due to the coupling between the elec-
tron wavefunctions of adjacent atoms. This coupling creates an induced dipole in
each of the atoms, which ultimately exerts an attractive force referred to as London
or dispersion force.
3.3
Water models
From the complex physical properties of water stems a vast collection of water mod-
els. A minimalistic yet effective approach is the Simple Point Charge (SPC) model
[37]. It represents each water molecule as a rigid structure comprising one negative
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3. Molecular dynamics simulations
16
charge located at the oxygen atom and two positive charges at the hydrogen posi-
tions, with values qO = ŌłÆ0.82 e and qH = ŌłÆqO/2 = 0.41 e. This accounts for charge
neutrality while creating a dipole moment of 2.27 D. Building on this scheme, the
Extended Simple Point Charge (SPC/E) model adds an average polarisation cor-
rection to the electrostatic potential energy function, which ultimately leads to a
slight correction in the charges qO = ŌłÆ0.8476 e and qH = ŌłÆqO/2 = 0.4238 e, result-
ing in a dipole moment of 2.35 D [38]. Thanks to this reparametrization, the bulk
properties of the SPC/E model are more similar to the experimental values of liquid
water than the SPC model [39]. While it is possible to render flexibility to the water
models above by introducing a bonded potential energy, neither the SPC nor the
SPC/E were conceived with this purpose. Instead, the Flexible Water Single Point
Charge (SPC/Fw) model utilises harmonic potentials to account for intramolecular
bond stretching and bending, showing superior results in spectroscopically-relevant
quantities such as dielectric constant or Debye relaxation time [40].
Another family of water models is the Transferable Intermolecular Potential
(TIP), which include molecules containing up to six particles.
The TIP3P is a
3-site model similar to the SPC, only differing from it by the values of the charges
and the parameters of the Lennar-Jones potential [41]. The TIP4P is a 4-site model
featuring a massless dummy particle in the bisection of the HOH bond where the
negative charge is located [41]. The TIP5P is a 5-site model which includes two
massless charged dummy particles representing the lone pairs of the oxygen atom in
a tetrahedral geometry [42]. The TIP6P is a 6-site model specifically designed for
ice systems, which combines the dummy particles of the TIP4P and the TIP5P [43].
The computational cost scales with the number of sites. Moreover, flexible mod-
els require a shorter time-step to follow the fast dynamics of the OH bond. None
of the models above is universally superior to the others. Instead, each shows bet-
ter performance within the range of physical properties it has been parametrized
for. Unfortunately, a water model specifically designed to reproduce spectroscopic
properties in the THz range does not exist.
3.4
Methods
3.4.1
Vibrational power
The MD simulations were performed using Gromacs 2023.1.
First, a simulation
domain with only water molecules was created and validated. To this end, four dif-
ferent water models, namely SPC/E, SPC/Fw, TIP3P and TIP4PEw were tested.
The system was prepared as described in appendix B. In brief, a cubic simulation
domain of 5 nm of side length was created and the gmx solvate command was used
to distribute water molecules therein. An energy minimisation step was performed
utilising the steepest descent integrator until the energy change was below machine
tolerance. Next, a first equilibration step in NVT ensemble using a Nose-Hoover
thermostat, where initial velocities were generated at 298.15 K, was performed dur-
ing 100 ps. Subsequently, the system was equilibrated in NPT ensemble using a
Nose-Hoover thermostat and a C-rescale barostat during 100 ps. After, the system
was switched back to NVT ensemble for 100 ps more, utilising the same simulation
parameters as for the first NVT equilibration. The mean temperature and pressure
of the last 50 ps of this NVT equilibration was calculated, and the trajectories of
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3. Molecular dynamics simulations
17
the frame that minimised the Euclidean norm distance to mean temperature and
pressure were saved as initial coordinates of the next equilibration step in NVE en-
semble. This NVE equilibration was run for 100 ps and was used as the last step
before production in NVE ensemble.
The system was then put in production for 500 ps. Since water molecules were
set to be flexible, the frequency of the fastest dynamics, corresponding to asym-
metric stretching of the OH bonds, was expected to be around 3615 cmŌłÆ1, which
corresponds to a period of approximately 9 fs. To satisfy Nyquist sampling theorem,
trajectories were saved every 4 fs.
After production, the Gromacs function gmx velacc was used to compute the
velocity autocorrelation function and its Fourier transform, namely the vibrational
power spectrum, as
S(Žē) =
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
Ō¤©ŌāŚv(0) ┬Ę ŌāŚv(t)Ō¤®eŌłÆiŽētdt
(3.6)
Results are shown in figure 3.1 for the four different water models under study,
namely SPC/E (red), SPC/Fw (blue), TIP3P (green) and TIP4PEw (orange). The
dashed grey vertical lines correspond to the expected peak positions according to the
literature [44]. The lines at 3615 cmŌłÆ1 and 3450cm ŌłÆ1 correspond to asymmetric
and symmetric stretching of the OH bond, respectively.
The peak at 1640cmŌłÆ1
stems from HOH bending. In the inset, the peaks at 550 cmŌłÆ1 and 50 cmŌłÆ1 arise
from molecular librations and hydrogen bond bending, respectively, while the faint
shoulder at 250 cmŌłÆ1 corresponds to hydrogen bond stretching.
Figure 3.1: Vibrational power spectrum of water computed using gmx velacc for the
for SPC/E (red), SPC/Fw (blue), TIP3P (green) and TIP4PEw (orange) models.
None of the four water models show perfect agreement with the experimental
results reported in the literature, particularly at the high frequency end of the plot.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3. Molecular dynamics simulations
18
However, within the region of interest of this work, from 0 cmŌłÆ1 to 130 cmŌłÆ1, all
four models seem to capture the dynamics of the hydrogen bond bending, and show
good agreement with similar reported computational results [15]. The SPC/E model
will be used in the forthcoming analysis.
3.4.2
Total dipole moment autocorrelation
Next, the gmx dipoles command was used to compute the autocorrelation function
of the total dipole moment of the water-only system. The result is shown in the first
panel of figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Total dipole moment autocorrelation (top) of water calculated using the
gmx dipoles command and lineshape function (bottom) calculated by taking the
FFT of the total dipole moment autocorrelation, substracting the background offset,
multiplying by the frequency-dependent prefactor in equation 3.3 and normalising.
As stated by equation 3.3, the lineshape function can be computed by taking
the Fourier transform of the dipole autocorrelation and multiplying by a frequency-
dependent prefactor. The result of such calculation is shown in the second panel
of figure 3.2. Similarly to the vibrational power, the lineshape function shows well-
marked peaks corresponding to symmetric and asymmetric OH stretching at around
3200 cmŌłÆ1, HOH bending at 1640 cmŌłÆ1 and molecular librations at 550 cmŌłÆ1. How-
ever, the spectral fingerprints corresponding to the hydrogen bond dynamics at 250
cmŌłÆ1 are underestimated as compared to existent literature [17]. As discussed by
Sidler et al., non-polarizable water models lack a transition dipole for hydrogen bond
stretching [15]. While a flexible water model should account for some change in the
molecular dipole moment upon hydrogen bond stretching, thus creating a transi-
tion dipole, the present results show that this is still insufficient to induce a visible
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3. Molecular dynamics simulations
19
feature in the lineshape function.
Oppositely, hydrogen bond bending, corresponding to the peak at 50 cmŌłÆ1, does
change the molecular dipole moment, even in rigid models, and should therefore
imprint a signature in the lineshape function. However, computational and experi-
mental results show that this peak is weak [15], mainly buried under the tail of the
molecular libration at 550 cmŌłÆ1. This is consistent with the findings in the present
work. Therefore, the region of interest, form 0 to 130 cmŌłÆ1, presents a featureless
monotonically increasing lineshape function.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Results and discussion
4.1
Lineshape function
The lineshape function I(Žē) = ╬▒(Žē)┬Ęn(Žē) was computed using the methods detailed
previously and is illustrated in Figure 4.1. The upper panel depicts the experimental
data, whereas the lower panel exhibits the results of MD simulations. In both plots,
the blue curve represents water, while the orange curve corresponds to solvated
glucose at a concentration of 20 mM in water.
Figure 4.1: Lineshape function of water (blue) and solvated glucose (orange) ob-
tained from experimental results (top) and MD simulations (bottom).
Both the experimental and computational data exhibit featureless spectra within
the range of interest. Notably, the hydrogen bond bending resonance, expected at
50 cmŌłÆ1 according to the the vibrational power spectrum, is absent in the empirical
observations. This is in good agreement with literature [15], and is attributed to
20
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
21
the weak transition dipole moment of this motion.
At the high frequency end of the spectra, the experimental results exhibit an
increasing trend which hints the presence of a resonance peak beyond the range
shown here. The limited bandwidth of the THz spectrometer makes it difficult to
determine if this peak corresponds to the hydrogen bond stretching resonance at
250 cmŌłÆ1 or the tail of the librational motion at 550 cmŌłÆ1. Considering the notable
difference in the lineshape function of the two specimens, the former can be argued to
be the cause, since the presence of glucose is not expected to influence the librational
dynamics.
Conversely, the computational results lack a clear increasing trend at the high
frequency end of the graph. This discrepancy is attributed to the underestimation
of hydrogen bond stretching by the non-polarizable model employed in this simula-
tion. Such an observation supports the hypothesis that the experimental lineshape
function is primarily influenced by hydrogen bond stretching rather than librational
dynamics.
Moreover, the computational spectra for water and solvated glucose present very
little difference throughout the range of interest. Again, this is attributed to the
misrepresention of the hydrogen bond dynamics by the water model. Because of the
lack of polarizability, the peak at 250 cmŌłÆ1 is not present and therefore the presence
of glucose is not patent in the results. To obtain faithful computational spectra that
allow a quantitative estimations of the glucose concentration, a polarizable force
field is required (vide infra).
Finally, it should be noted that the values of the computational lineshape func-
tion differ by about an order of magnitude from the experiments. The Gromacs
function used to calculate the dipole moment autocorrelation performs a normal-
isation which is poorly described in the documentation. The resulting values are
scaled by the frequency-dependent prefactor in Equation 3.3 to obtain units of cmŌłÆ1.
However, hidden factors in the Gromacs calculation might render this unit conver-
sion ineffective. While Figure 4.1 still displays the units of the ordinate axis, the
reader must refrain from making a quantitative comparison between the values in
the experimental and computational plots.
4.2
Future perspectives
4.2.1
Experimental practises
The results presented in this thesis, along with the literature discussed herein, indi-
cate that THz spectroscopy is a promising technique to measure glucose in water.
However, the experimental data presented here suffers from large standard devia-
tion. To render robustness to the results, a larger collection of measurements could
be taken to decrease the standard error of the mean.
The spectral range of the TeraFlash Pro system falls short to unravel the dy-
namics of hydrogen bond stretching at 250 cmŌłÆ1. To improve the understanding
of the influence of glucose, the bandwidth of the THz spectrometer shall be in-
creased. While this is still a technological challenge, there is active ongoing research
to improve the performance of THz-TDS systems [45], and the perspective of having
spectrometers beyond 250 cmŌłÆ1 is well within reach.
This improvement shall be accompanied by adjustments in the measurement
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
22
setup. For instance, the polymeric lenses used in this work exhibit increasing dis-
persion and absorption beyond 4 THz [46]. Instead, reflective optics, such as off-axis
parabolic mirrors, shall be used to exploit the full range of the spectrometer. Sim-
ilarly, the presence of water vapour decreases the signal quality. To avoid this, an
airtight nitrogen purging system including the sample receptacle could be imple-
mented. While feasible, these modifications increase the complexity of the exper-
imental setup and make patent that improvements in bandwidth require state-of-
the-art techniques.
4.2.2
Computational methods
The comparison between the experimental and computational data shows that the
model chosen to perform MD simulations does not truthfully represent reality. As
discussed above, this is likely due to the lack of polarizability of the SPC/E model.
To address this limitation, polarizable force fields, such as the one proposed by
Patel et al. for hexopyranose monosaccharides [47], can be employed. Polarizable
force fields account for the fact that the electron cloud around atoms can deform, or
polarise, in response to the electrostatic field created by the surrounding particles.
However, integrating polarizable force fields into Gromacs poses a challenge, as
they are not natively supported. Therefore, alternative MD software platforms like
CHARMM prove to be more suitable options for accommodating polarizable force
fields.
An alternative approach is to employing ab initio methods. AIMD explicitly con-
sider the electronic wave function and its interactions with external perturbations.
When an external electric field is applied, the electron density function is modified
to minimise the total energy of the system, leading to the induced polarisation. This
approach, taken for example by Imoto et al., effectively produces the peak at 250
cmŌłÆ1 [17]. However, it does so at the expense of computational resources, which
ultimately impose a practical limit on the simulation time and domain size. For
a glucose concentration within the biologically relevant range, the vast number of
water molecules required for the simulation might render this approach ineffective.
==PAGE:26==
Conclusion
The experimental and computational results presented in this thesis underscore the
intricate interplay between glucose and water molecules. The computational meth-
ods used herein present intrinsic limitations that prevent their applicability in the
THz range. First, non-polarizable force fields do not capture the hydrogen bond
stretching dynamics. Second, available water models are not parameterised with
empirical data in this region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Consequently, compu-
tational results fail to fully replicate experimental observations. Future perspectives
include the application of polarizable force fields or AIMD. Moreover, a complete
study of the hydrogen bond stretching dynamics would require data at frequencies
above 250 cmŌłÆ1, which is beyond the capabilities of the spectrometer employed here.
Overall, this works presents a comprehensive description of the interaction between
water and glucose and highlights avenues for further advancement in this field.
23
==PAGE:27==
Appendix A
Derivation of dipole
autocorrelation absorption
FermiŌĆÖs Golden rule describes the probability per unit time of a transition between
discrete eigenstates of matter. The transition rate is given by
wnm = 2ŽĆ
ŌäÅ|Unm|2╬┤(Em ŌłÆEn ┬▒ ŌäÅŽē)
(A.1)
where U is the Hamiltonian of an external perturbation in the form of an electric
field described by V = Ue┬▒iŽēt. This external perturbation can be written in terms of
the vector potential in the Coulomb gauge. After taking the dipole approximation,
which considers the wavelength of the field much larger than atomic displacements,
it can be expressed as [48]
U = ┬▒iA0Žē
2c
╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą
(A.2)
and the transition rate can therefore be rewritten as
wnm = 2ŽĆE2
0
ŌäÅ
|Ō¤©m| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą |nŌ¤®|2╬┤(Žēnm ┬▒ Žē)
(A.3)
The change of energy per unit time in the electromagnetic perturbation is given
by the product of the transition rate, the photon energy and the occupation proba-
bility of the initial state, summed over all possible initial and final states.
╦Öuem =
X
nm
PnwnmŌäÅŽēnm +
X
nm
PmwmnŌäÅŽēmn
(A.4)
where the first term accounts for absorption while the second term accounts for
stimulated emission. By inserting expression A.1 into A.4 one obtains
╦Öuem = 2ŽĆE2
0
ŌäÅ
h X
nm
Pn|┬Ąnm|2ŌäÅŽēnm╬┤(Žēnm ┬▒ Žē) +
X
nm
Pm|┬Ąmn|2ŌäÅŽēmn╬┤(Žēmn ┬▒ Žē)
i
(A.5)
where the shorthand notation ┬Ąnm = Ō¤©m| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą |nŌ¤®has been used. By acknowledging
that |┬Ąnm|2 = |┬Ąmn|2 and that ╬┤(Žēnm ŌłÆŽē) = ╬┤(Žēmn + Žē), one obtains
╦Öuem = 2ŽĆE2
0
ŌäÅ
ŌäÅŽē
h X
nm
(Pn ŌłÆPm)|┬Ąnm|2╬┤(Žēnm ŌłÆŽē)
i
(A.6)
24
==PAGE:28==
Appendix A. Derivation of dipole autocorrelation absorption
25
The occupation probability is given by the Boltzmann distribution
Pm = PneŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽēnm
(A.7)
where ╬▓ =
1
kBT is the inverse of the product of the Boltzmann constant and the
temperature of the medium, known as the thermodynamic beta. Using equation
A.7, the population difference can be written as
(Pn ŌłÆPm) = Pn(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽēnm).
(A.8)
Inserting equation A.8 into A.6 leads to
╦Öuem = 2ŽĆE2
0
ŌäÅ
ŌäÅŽē(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽē)
X
nm
Pn|┬Ąnm|2╬┤(Žēnm ŌłÆŽē)
(A.9)
The delta function can be expressed in its integral form as
╬┤(Žēnm ŌłÆŽē) = 1
2ŽĆ
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
dtei(ŽēnmŌłÆŽē)t
(A.10)
which, inserted into A.9, leads to
╦Öuem = 2ŽĆE2
0ŌäÅŽē
ŌäÅ
1
2ŽĆ(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽē)
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
X
nm
Pn Ō¤©n| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą |mŌ¤®Ō¤©m| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą |nŌ¤®ei(ŽēnmŌłÆŽē)tdt
= E2
0Žē(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽē)
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
X
nm
Pn Ō¤©n| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą |mŌ¤®Ō¤©m| eiŽēmt╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬ĄeŌłÆiŽēnt |nŌ¤®eŌłÆiŽētdt
(A.11)
The unitary time-evolution operator U(t) can be expressed as
U(t) |nŌ¤®= eŌłÆi ╦å
H0t/ŌäÅ|nŌ¤®= eŌłÆiEnt/ŌäÅ|nŌ¤®= eŌłÆiŽēnt |nŌ¤®
(A.12)
By inserting A.12 into equation A.11 one obtains
╦Öuem = E2
0Žē(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽē)
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
X
nm
Pn Ō¤©n| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą |mŌ¤®Ō¤©m| U(t)╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬ĄU(t) |nŌ¤®ei(ŽēnmŌłÆŽē)tdt
= E2
0Žē(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽē)
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
X
nm
Pn Ō¤©n| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą(0) |mŌ¤®Ō¤©m| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą(t) |nŌ¤®eŌłÆiŽētdt
= E2
0Žē(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽē)
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
X
n
Pn Ō¤©n| ╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą(0)╦å╬Ą ┬Ę ┬Ą(t) |nŌ¤®eŌłÆiŽētdt
(A.13)
where the identity operator P
m |mŌ¤®Ō¤©m| = I has been used to drop the sum over
the final state and the dipole moment operator ┬Ą(t) has been given an explicit time
dependence.
The absorption cross-section Žā(Žē) describes the rate of energy absorption per
unit time by the material relative to the total intensity of incident light
==PAGE:29==
Appendix A. Derivation of dipole autocorrelation absorption
26
Žā(Žē) = ╦Öuem
I
=
╦Öuem
1
2cn(Žē)╬Ą0E2
0
= 2E2
0Žē(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽē)
cn(Žē)╬Ą0E2
0
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
Ō¤©╦å╬Ą┬Ę┬Ą(0)╦å╬Ą┬Ę┬Ą(t)Ō¤®eŌłÆiŽētdt (A.14)
Finally, the absorption coefficient is calculated as the absorption cross-section
summed over all molecules in the sample volume V as
╬▒(Žē) =
P
I
V
= 2Žē(1 ŌłÆeŌłÆ╬▓ŌäÅŽē)
cV n(Žē)╬Ą0
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
Ō¤©M(0) ┬Ę M(t)Ō¤®eŌłÆiŽētdt
(A.15)
In the limit of ŌäÅŽē being smaller than kBT, this is, the photon energy being
smaller than the thermal energy of the system, the exponential expression in the
prefactor can be expanded into a Taylor series, leading to
╬▒(Žē) =
2Žē2╬▓
cV n(Žē)╬Ą0
Z +Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
Ō¤©ŌāŚM(0) ┬Ę ŌāŚM(t)Ō¤®eŌłÆiŽētdt
(A.16)
which differs by the expression found in the literature by a factor of
1
12 [16].
==PAGE:30==
Appendix B
Preparation of molecular
dynamics simulations
B.1
Minimization and equilibration
The computation is governed by the job.sh script, wherein all the Gromacs com-
mands are called, as well as some auxiliary Python routines.
First, the gmx pdb2gmx command takes the Protein Data Bank (.pdb) file con-
taining the glucose topology and generates a Gromos87 (.gro) file and a topology
(.top) file. In the topology file, the selected force fields and water models are speci-
fied. Unless clearly indicated, the water model used in the present work is SPC/E
and the force field is the GROMOS 56A CARBO.
The auxiliary Python script convert.py is used to format the topology file, as
described in the documentation of the force field [35].
Next, the gmx editconf
command is used to generate a box and place the glucose molecule in the center
of the computational domain, and the gmx solvate is used to fill the box with the
water model of choice.
The system is now ready for minimisation, which is required to remove steric
clashes. gmx grompp is used to compile the .gro and .top files into a binary exe-
cutable as dictated by the Molecular Dynamics Parameter (.mdp) file. This gen-
erates a warning, which should be accepted by setting the flag -maxwarn 1. The
computation, executed by the gmx mdurn command, uses the steepest descent in-
tegrator until the energy change between steps is below machine tolerance or after
100000 steps. Energies are saved every 100 steps. The molecules are set to be flexi-
ble, this is, to account for intramolecular potentials, and this selection will be kept
for the entire simulation. The total energy of the system is shown in the top row
of figure B.1, where it can be seen that the system relaxes as the steepest descent
integrator propagates.
Next, a first equilibration in NVT ensemble using a leap-from integrator is per-
formed during 100 ps with a time step of 0.5 fs. This time step is sufficiently small
to capture the fast dynamics of the OH bond. The initial velocities of all molecules
in the system are generated according to a Maxwell distribution at temperature of
298.15 K and a Nose-Hoover thermostat is applied to keep the temperature constant.
Energies are saved every 200 time steps, from which pressure and temperature are
calculated and shown in the second row of figure B.1.
After, an NPT equilibration is performed with the same parameters as the pre-
27
==PAGE:31==
Appendix B. Preparation of molecular dynamics simulations
28
Figure B.1: Control parameters of the different steps in the equilibration of the
system.
vious step except for a C-rescale barostat set to a reference pressure of 1 bar. As re-
quired by the Gromacs documentation, the pressure coupling constant tau-p should
be set to be at least twice the temperature coupling time constant tau-t. Energies
are saved every 200 time steps, from which pressure and temperature are calculated
and shown in the third row of figure B.1.
Subsequently, the barostat is removed to perform a second NVT equilibration,
using the same parameters as the first one, except that energies and trajectories
are saved every 5 steps. The Python script get frame.py calculates the mean pres-
sure and temperature of the first 50 ps and finds the frame within the last 50 ps
that minimises the norm to the mean pressure and temperature. The coordinates
and velocities of this frame are saved and used as starting condition for the pro-
==PAGE:32==
Appendix B. Preparation of molecular dynamics simulations
29
ceeding NVE. Since no pressure nor temperature coupling are used in the NVE,
the system must conserve energy. However, because of the Verlet cut-off scheme,
some pair interactions are not accounted, which creates a numerical error in the
total energy that accumulates with increasing simulation time. Because of this, the
verlet-buffer-tolerance is set to 0.00001 kJ/mol/ps as advised by the Gromacs
documentation for NVE ensembles.
B.2
Production and dipole moment calculation
After all the above, the system is equilibrated and ready to start production in NVE.
The parameters for production are the same as for the NVE equilibration, except
that energies and positions are saved every 4 ps to capture the fast dynamics of
the OH bond. Pressure and temperature during production are shown in the first
row of figure B.2, while the total energy of the system is shown in the second row.
Thanks to the decreased verlet-buffer-tolerance, the energy drift is kept small
even in NVE ensemble. By performing a linear fit, the energy drift is estimated to
be 8.13 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ6 Hartree/(molecule┬Ęps).
Figure B.2:
The computation of the total dipole moment autocorrelation is done using the
gmx dipoles command. To give statistical significance to the results, all steps from
NVT equilibration to total dipole moment calculation are repeated a 100 times.
This prepares 100 different uncorrelated ensembles, for which the total dipole mo-
ment autocorrelation of only the water molecules in the systems is independently
computed and averaged as indicated by the brackets in equation 3.3.
==PAGE:33==
Appendix C
Gromacs code
C.1
Molecular dynamics paramenter (.mdp) files
C.1.1
Minimization
; General settings
define
=-DFLEXIBLE
; Make molecules flexible
integrator
= steep
; Choose integrator type
nsteps
= 100000
; Max number of integration steps
nstenergy
= 100
; Save energies every steps
; Nonbonded settings
cutoff-scheme
= Verlet
; Buffered neighbor searching
coulombtype
= PME
; Particle Mesh Ewald
rcoulomb
= 1.0
; SR electrostatic cutoff (nm)
vdwtype
= Cut-off
; Plain cut-off list
rvdw
= 1.0
; SR van der Waals cutoff (nm)
DispCorr
= EnerPres
; Correct LR dispersion E and P
C.1.2
NVT equilibration
; General settings
define
=-DFLEXIBLE
; Make molecules flexible
integrator
= md
; Leap-frog integrator
dt
= 0.0005
; Time step 0.5 fs
nsteps
= 200000
; Number of steps (total 100 ps)
nstenergy
= 200
; Save energies every steps
continuation
= no
; First dynamics run
constraints
= none
; No bonds converted to constraints
; Nonbonded settings
cutoff-scheme
= Verlet
; Buffered neighbor searching
nstlist
= 10
; Update neighbor list every steps
coulombtype
= PME
; Particle Mesh Ewald
rcoulomb
= 1.0
; SR electrostatic cutoff (nm)
vdwtype
= Cut-off
; Plain cut-off list
30
==PAGE:34==
Appendix C. Gromacs code
31
rvdw
= 1.0
; SR van der Waals cutoff (nm)
DispCorr
= EnerPres
; Correct LR dispersion E and P
pme-order
= 4
; Cubic interpolation
fourierspacing
= 0.16
; Grid spacing for FFT
; Temperature coupling
tcoupl
= Nose-Hoover
; Type of thermostat
tc-grps
= System
tau-t
= 1.0
ref-t
= 298.15
; Temperature (K)
nhchainlength
= 1
; Pressure coupling
pcoupl
= no
; No pressure coupling in NVT
; Periodic boundary conditions
pbc
= xyz
; 3-D PBC
; Velocity generation
gen-vel
= yes
; Vel from Maxwell distribution
gen-temp
= 298.15
; Temp for Maxwell distribution
gen-seed
= -1
; Generate a random seed
C.1.3
NPT equilibration
; General settings
define
=-DFLEXIBLE
; Make molecules flexible
integrator
= md
; Leap-frog integrator
dt
= 0.0005
; Time step 0.5 fs
nsteps
= 200000
; Number of steps (total 100 ps)
nstenergy
= 200
; Save energies every steps
continuation
= yes
constraints
= none
; No bonds converted to constraints
; Nonbonded settings
cutoff-scheme
= Verlet
; Buffered neighbor searching
nstlist
= 10
; Update neighbor list every steps
coulombtype
= PME
; Particle Mesh Ewald
rcoulomb
= 1.0
; SR electrostatic cutoff (nm)
vdwtype
= Cut-off
; Plain cut-off list
rvdw
= 1.0
; SR van der Waals cutoff (nm)
DispCorr
= EnerPres
; Correct LR dispersion E and P
pme-order
= 4
; Cubic interpolation
fourierspacing
= 0.16
; Grid spacing for FFT
; Temperature coupling
tcoupl
= Nose-Hoover
; Type of thermostat
tc-grps
= System
==PAGE:35==
Appendix C. Gromacs code
32
tau-t
= 1.0
ref-t
= 298.15
; Temperature (K)
nhchainlength
= 1
; Pressure coupling
pcoupl
= C-rescale
pcoupltype
= isotropic
tau_p
= 2.0
ref_p
= 1.0
; Pressure (bar)
compressibility
= 4.5e-5
; Periodic boundary conditions
pbc
= xyz
; 3-D PBC
; Velocity generation
gen-vel
= no
C.1.4
NVT2 equilibration
; General settings
define
=-DFLEXIBLE
; Make molecules flexible
integrator
= md
; Leap-frog integrator
dt
= 0.0005
; Time step 0.5 fs
nsteps
= 200000
; Number of steps (total 100 ps)
nstenergy
= 200
; Save energies every steps
continuation
= yes
constraints
= none
; No bonds converted to constraints
; Output control
nstenergy
= 5
; Save energies every steps
nstxout
= 5
; Save positions every steps
nstvout
= 5
; Save velocities every steps
; Nonbonded settings
cutoff-scheme
= Verlet
; Buffered neighbor searching
nstlist
= 10
; Update neighbor list every steps
coulombtype
= PME
; Particle Mesh Ewald
rcoulomb
= 1.0
; SR electrostatic cutoff (nm)
vdwtype
= Cut-off
; Plain cut-off list
rvdw
= 1.0
; SR van der Waals cutoff (nm)
DispCorr
= EnerPres
; Correct LR dispersion E and P
pme-order
= 4
; Cubic interpolation
fourierspacing
= 0.16
; Grid spacing for FFT
; Temperature coupling
tcoupl
= Nose-Hoover
; Type of thermostat
tc-grps
= System
tau-t
= 1.0
==PAGE:36==
Appendix C. Gromacs code
33
ref-t
= 298.15
; Temperature (K)
nhchainlength
= 1
; Pressure coupling
pcoupl
= no
; Periodic boundary conditions
pbc
= xyz
; 3-D PBC
; Velocity generation
gen-vel
= no
C.1.5
NVE equilibration
; General settings
define
=-DFLEXIBLE
; Make molecules flexible
integrator
= md
; Leap-frog integrator
dt
= 0.0005
; Time step 0.5 fs
nsteps
= 200000
; Number of steps (total 100 ps)
nstenergy
= 200
; Save energies every steps
continuation
= yes
constraints
= none
; No bonds converted to constraints
; Nonbonded settings
cutoff-scheme
= Verlet
; Buffered neighbor searching
verlet-buffer-tolerance = 0.00001; Max error for pair interactions
nstlist
= 10
; Update neighbor list every steps
coulombtype
= PME
; Particle Mesh Ewald
rcoulomb
= 1.0
; SR electrostatic cutoff (nm)
vdwtype
= Cut-off
; Plain cut-off list
rvdw
= 1.0
; SR van der Waals cutoff (nm)
DispCorr
= EnerPres
; Correct LR dispersion E and P
pme-order
= 4
; Cubic interpolation
fourierspacing
= 0.16
; Grid spacing for FFT
; Temperature coupling
tcoupl
= no
; Pressure coupling
pcoupl
= no
; Periodic boundary conditions
pbc
= xyz
; 3-D PBC
; Velocity generation
gen-vel
= no
==PAGE:37==
Appendix C. Gromacs code
34
C.1.6
Production
; General settings
define
=-DFLEXIBLE
; Make molecules flexible
integrator
= md
; Leap-frog integrator
dt
= 0.0005
; Time step 0.5 fs
nsteps
= 1000000
; Number of steps
nstenergy
= 200
; Save energies every steps
continuation
= yes
constraints
= none
; No bonds converted to constraints
; Output control
nstenergy
= 8
; Save energies every steps
nstxout
= 8
; Save positions every steps
; Nonbonded settings
cutoff-scheme
= Verlet
; Buffered neighbor searching
verlet-buffer-tolerance = 0.00001; Max error for pair interactions
nstlist
= 10
; Update neighbor list every steps
coulombtype
= PME
; Particle Mesh Ewald
rcoulomb
= 1.0
; SR electrostatic cutoff (nm)
vdwtype
= Cut-off
; Plain cut-off list
rvdw
= 1.0
; SR van der Waals cutoff (nm)
DispCorr
= EnerPres
; Correct LR dispersion E and P
pme-order
= 4
; Cubic interpolation
fourierspacing
= 0.16
; Grid spacing for FFT
; Temperature coupling
tcoupl
= no
; Pressure coupling
pcoupl
= no
; Periodic boundary conditions
pbc
= xyz
; 3-D PBC
; Velocity generation
gen-vel
= no
C.2
Protein Data Bank (.pdb) file
COMPND
GLB
AUTHOR
OSCAR GARCIA
HETATM
1
C4
GLB
1
0.0021
-0.0041 0.0020
1.0
HETATM
2
O4
GLB
1
-1.3354 -0.5003 0.0853
1.0
HETATM
3
HO4
GLB
1
-1.9053 -0.2191 -0.6436
1.0
HETATM
4
C3
GLB
1
-0.0187 1.5275
0.0104
1.0
HETATM
5
O3
GLB
1
-0.7069 2.0027
-1.1483
1.0
==PAGE:38==
Appendix C. Gromacs code
35
HETATM
6
HO3
GLB
1
-0.7580 2.9665
-1.2078
1.0
HETATM
7
C2
GLB
1
1.4223
2.0468
-0.0005
1.0
HETATM
8
O2
GLB
1
1.4165
3.4735
0.0804
1.0
HETATM
9
HO2
GLB
1
2.2979
3.8712
0.0782
1.0
HETATM
10
C6
GLB
1
0.8845
-2.0301 1.1697
1.0
HETATM
11
O6
GLB
1
1.5358
-2.5013 2.3512
1.0
HETATM
12
HO6
GLB
1
1.6194
-3.4636 2.3970
1.0
HETATM
13
C5
GLB
1
0.8084
-0.5023 1.2042
1.0
HETATM
14
O5
GLB
1
2.1285
0.0420
1.1493
1.0
HETATM
15
C1
GLB
1
2.1738
1.4693
1.2018
1.0
HETATM
16
O1
GLB
1
3.5344
1.9046
1.1672
1.0
HETATM
17
HO1
GLB
1
4.0713
1.5757
1.9012
1.0
END
C.3
Job file
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --partition=q48
#SBATCH --nodes=1
#SBATCH --time=2-00:00:00
#SBATCH --job-name=20mM-glucose-in-tip4p
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=8 #mpi
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=6 #openmp
#SBATCH --mem=0
#SBATCH --exclusive
module purge
source /comm/groupstacks/gromacs/bin/modules.sh
module load gromacs-avx2-gcc/2023.1
module load python/3.9.4
export OMP_NUM_THREADS=${SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK}
#Generate glucose topology
gmx_mpi pdb2gmx -f input_files/glb.pdb -o glb.gro -i posre.itp...
...-p topol.top -water spce -ff gromos53a6carbo
#Convert topology according to Carbo documentation
python input_files/convert.py
#Center glucose molecule and generate box
gmx_mpi editconf -f glb.gro -o glb_center.gro -c -box 4.36 4.36 4.36
#Solvate
gmx_mpi solvate -cs spc216 -cp glb_center.gro -o solv.gro...
...-p top_new.top
#Minimization
==PAGE:39==
Appendix C. Gromacs code
36
gmx_mpi grompp -f mdp/min.mdp -c solv.gro -p top_new.top...
...-o min.tpr -maxwarn 1
srun gmx_mpi mdrun -s min.tpr -o min.trr
-c min.gro -e min.edr...
...-g min.log
echo "Potential" | gmx_mpi energy -f min.edr...
...-o output_files/min_potential.xvg
for i in $(seq 1 100); do
#Clean files
./reset.sh
#NVT equilibration
gmx_mpi grompp -f mdp/nvt_eql.mdp -c min.gro -p top_new.top...
...-o nvt_eql.tpr -maxwarn 1
srun gmx_mpi mdrun -s nvt_eql.tpr -o nvt_eql.trr -c nvt_eql.gro...
...-e nvt_eql.edr -g nvt_eql.log
if [ "$i" = "1" ] || [ "$i" = "50" ] || [ "$i" = "100" ]; then
echo "Saving NVT $i"
echo "Temperature" | gmx_mpi energy -f nvt_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/nvt_temperature_${i}.xvg
echo "Pressure" | gmx_mpi energy -f nvt_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/nvt_pressure_${i}.xvg
fi
#NPT equilibration
gmx_mpi grompp -f mdp/npt_eql.mdp -c nvt_eql.gro -p top_new.top...
...-o npt_eql.tpr -maxwarn 1
srun gmx_mpi mdrun -s npt_eql.tpr -o npt_eql.trr -c npt_eql.gro...
...-e npt_eql.edr -g npt_eql.log
if [ "$i" = "1" ] || [ "$i" = "50" ] || [ "$i" = "100" ]; then
echo "Saving NPT $i"
echo "Temperature" | gmx_mpi energy -f npt_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/npt_temperature_${i}.xvg
echo "Pressure" | gmx_mpi energy -f npt_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/npt_pressure_${i}.xvg
echo "Density" | gmx_mpi energy -f npt_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/npt_density_${i}.xvg
fi
#NVT2 equilibration
gmx_mpi grompp -f mdp/nvt2_eql.mdp -c npt_eql.gro -p top_new.top...
...-o nvt2_eql.tpr -maxwarn 1
srun gmx_mpi mdrun -s nvt2_eql.tpr -o nvt2_eql.trr -c nvt2_eql.gro...
...-e nvt2_eql.edr -g nvt2_eql.log
if [ "$i" = "1" ] || [ "$i" = "50" ] || [ "$i" = "100" ]; then
==PAGE:40==
Appendix C. Gromacs code
37
echo "Saving NVT2 $i"
echo "Temperature" | gmx_mpi energy -f nvt2_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/nvt2_temperature_${i}.xvg
echo "Pressure" | gmx_mpi energy -f nvt2_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/nvt2_pressure_${i}.xvg
fi
#Get frame closest to the mean temperature and 1 bar pressure
echo "Temperature" | gmx_mpi energy -f nvt2_eql.edr...
...-o nvt_temp_last.xvg -xvg none -b 50
echo "Pressure"
| gmx_mpi energy -f nvt2_eql.edr...
...-o nvt_pres_last.xvg -xvg none -b 50
output=$(python3 input_files/get_frame.py)
read -r time temp pres <<< "$output"
echo "Time = $time"
echo \Temperature = $temp"
echo \Pressure = $pres"
echo "0"
| gmx_mpi trjconv -f nvt2_eql.trr -s nvt2_eql.tpr...
...-o nvt_eql_cut.gro -dump $time
#NVE equilibration
gmx_mpi grompp -f mdp/nve_eql.mdp -c nvt_eql_cut.gro...
...-p top_new.top -o nve_eql.tpr -maxwarn 1
srun gmx_mpi mdrun -s nve_eql.tpr -o nve_eql.trr...
...-c nve_eql.gro -e nve_eql.edr -g nve_eql.log
if [ "$i" = "1" ] || [ "$i" = "50" ] || [ "$i" = "100" ]; then
echo "Saving NVE $i"
echo "Temperature" | gmx_mpi energy -f nve_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/nve_temperature_${i}.xvg
echo "Pressure" | gmx_mpi energy -f nve_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/nve_pressure_${i}.xvg
echo "Total-Energy" | gmx_mpi energy -f nve_eql.edr...
...-o output_files/nve_energy_${i}.xvg
fi
#Production
gmx_mpi grompp -f mdp/prd.mdp -c nve_eql.gro -p top_new.top...
...-o prd.tpr -maxwarn 1
srun gmx_mpi mdrun -s prd.tpr -o prd.trr -c prd.gro -e prd.edr...
...-g prd.log
if [ "$i" = "1" ] || [ "$i" = "50" ] || [ "$i" = "100" ]; then
echo "Saving NVE $i"
echo "Temperature" | gmx_mpi energy -f prd.edr...
...-o output_files/prd_temperature_${i}.xvg
echo "Pressure" | gmx_mpi energy -f prd.edr...
...-o output_files/prd_pressure_${i}.xvg
echo "Total-Energy" | gmx_mpi energy -f prd.edr...
==PAGE:41==
Appendix C. Gromacs code
38
...-o output_files/prd_energy_${i}.xvg
fi
#Total dipole moment autocorrelation calculation
echo "3" | gmx_mpi dipoles -f prd.trr -s prd.tpr -corr total...
...-c output_files/dipcorr_total_${i}.xvg
done
C.4
Get frame script
#!/usr/bin/env python3
import numpy as np
temp_data=np.loadtxt(ŌĆÖnvt_temp_last.xvgŌĆÖ);
pres_data=np.loadtxt(ŌĆÖnvt_pres_last.xvgŌĆÖ);
temp_time=temp_data[:,0]; temp=temp_data[:,1];
pres_time=pres_data[:,0]; pres=pres_data[:,1];
temp_mean=np.mean(temp); pres_mean=np.mean(pres);
temp_vect=abs((temp-temp_mean));
temp_vect=temp_vect/np.max(temp_vect);
pres_vect=abs((pres-1));
pres_vect=pres_vect/np.max(pres_vect);
min_index=np.argmin(temp_vect+pres_vect);
print (pres_time[min_index], temp[min_index], pres[min_index])
==PAGE:42==
Bibliography
[1] P. Ball, ŌĆ£WaterŌĆöan enduring mystery,ŌĆØ Nature, vol. 452, no. 7185, pp. 291ŌĆō292,
2008.
[2] Y. Mar┬┤echal, The hydrogen bond and the water molecule: The physics and
chemistry of water, aqueous and bio-media. Elsevier, 2006.
[3] D. Mallamace, E. Fazio, F. Mallamace, and C. Corsaro, ŌĆ£The role of hydrogen
bonding in the folding/unfolding process of hydrated lysozyme: A review of
recent nmr and ftir results,ŌĆØ International journal of molecular sciences, vol. 19,
no. 12, p. 3825, 2018.
[4] V. Conti Nibali and M. Havenith, ŌĆ£New insights into the role of water in bi-
ological function: Studying solvated biomolecules using terahertz absorption
spectroscopy in conjunction with molecular dynamics simulations,ŌĆØ Journal of
the American Chemical Society, vol. 136, no. 37, pp. 12800ŌĆō12807, 2014.
[5] M. Havenith, ŌĆ£Solvation science: A new interdisciplinary field,ŌĆØ 2016.
[6] M. N. Nakrani, R. H. Wineland, and F. Anjum, ŌĆ£Physiology, glucose
metabolism,ŌĆØ 2020.
[7] J. M. Forbes and M. E. Cooper, ŌĆ£Mechanisms of diabetic complications,ŌĆØ Phys-
iological reviews, vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 137ŌĆō188, 2013.
[8] Y. Zou, Z. Chu, J. Guo, S. Liu, X. Ma, and J. Guo, ŌĆ£Minimally invasive elec-
trochemical continuous glucose monitoring sensors: Recent progress and per-
spective,ŌĆØ Biosensors and Bioelectronics, p. 115103, 2023.
[9] J. W. Kang, Y. S. Park, H. Chang, W. Lee, S. P. Singh, W. Choi, L. H.
Galindo, R. R. Dasari, S. H. Nam, J. Park, et al., ŌĆ£Direct observation of glucose
fingerprint using in vivo raman spectroscopy,ŌĆØ Science Advances, vol. 6, no. 4,
p. eaay5206, 2020.
[10] B. Todaro, F. Begarani, F. Sartori, and S. Luin, ŌĆ£Is raman the best strategy
towards the development of non-invasive continuous glucose monitoring devices
for diabetes management?,ŌĆØ Frontiers in Chemistry, vol. 10, p. 994272, 2022.
[11] P. U. Jepsen, U. M├Ėller, and H. Merbold, ŌĆ£Investigation of aqueous alcohol
and sugar solutions with reflection terahertz time-domain spectroscopy,ŌĆØ Optics
Express, vol. 15, no. 22, pp. 14717ŌĆō14737, 2007.
39
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
40
[12] H. Chen, X. Chen, S. Ma, X. Wu, W. Yang, W. Zhang, and X. Li, ŌĆ£Quantify
glucose level in freshly diabeticŌĆÖs blood by terahertz time-domain spectroscopy,ŌĆØ
Journal of Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves, vol. 39, pp. 399ŌĆō408,
2018.
[13] O. Cherkasova, M. Nazarov, and A. Shkurinov, ŌĆ£Noninvasive blood glucose
monitoring in the terahertz frequency range,ŌĆØ Optical and Quantum Electronics,
vol. 48, pp. 1ŌĆō12, 2016.
[14] E. Harder, J. D. Eaves, A. Tokmakoff, and B. Berne, ŌĆ£Polarizable molecules in
the vibrational spectroscopy of water,ŌĆØ Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, vol. 102, no. 33, pp. 11611ŌĆō11616, 2005.
[15] D. Sidler, M. Meuwly, and P. Hamm, ŌĆ£An efficient water force field cali-
brated against intermolecular thz and raman spectra,ŌĆØ The Journal of Chemical
Physics, vol. 148, no. 24, 2018.
[16] M. Heyden, J. Sun, S. Funkner, G. Mathias, H. Forbert, M. Havenith, and
D. Marx, ŌĆ£Dissecting the thz spectrum of liquid water from first principles
via correlations in time and space,ŌĆØ Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, vol. 107, no. 27, pp. 12068ŌĆō12073, 2010.
[17] S. Imoto and D. Marx, ŌĆ£Pressure response of the thz spectrum of bulk liquid
water revealed by intermolecular instantaneous normal mode analysis,ŌĆØ The
Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 150, no. 8, 2019.
[18] U. Heugen, G. Schwaab, E. Br┬©undermann, M. Heyden, X. Yu, D. Leitner, and
M. Havenith, ŌĆ£Solute-induced retardation of water dynamics probed directly
by terahertz spectroscopy,ŌĆØ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 103, no. 33, pp. 12301ŌĆō12306, 2006.
[19] M. Heyden, E. Br┬©undermann, U. Heugen, G. Niehues, D. Leitner, and
M. Havenith, ŌĆ£Long-range influence of carbohydrates on the solvation dynamics
of water answers from terahertz absorption measurements and molecular mod-
eling simulations,ŌĆØ Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 130, no. 17,
pp. 5773ŌĆō5779, 2008.
[20] V. Cherniak, T. Kubiczek, K. Kolpatzeck, and J. C. Balzer, ŌĆ£Laser diode based
thz-tds system with 133 db peak signal-to-noise ratio at 100 ghz,ŌĆØ Scientific
Reports, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 13476, 2023.
[21] L. Chen, G. Ren, L. Liu, P. Guo, E. Wang, Z. Zhu, J. Yang, J. Shen, Z. Zhang,
L. Zhou, et al., ŌĆ£Probing nacl hydrate formation from aqueous solutions by
terahertz time-domain spectroscopy,ŌĆØ Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
vol. 22, no. 32, pp. 17791ŌĆō17797, 2020.
[22] W. N. Hansen, ŌĆ£Expanded formulas for attenuated total reflection and the
derivation of absorption rules for single and multiple atr spectrometer cells,ŌĆØ
Spectrochimica acta, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 815ŌĆō833, 1965.
[23] A. Mendoza-Galv┬┤an, J. M┬┤endez-Lara, R. Mauricio-S┬┤anchez, K. J┬©arrendahl, and
H. Arwin, ŌĆ£Effective absorption coefficient and effective thickness in attenuated
total reflection spectroscopy,ŌĆØ Optics Letters, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 872ŌĆō875, 2021.
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
41
[24] M. J. Guerrero, A. Mendoza-Galv┬┤an, and E. Strupiechonski, ŌĆ£Electromagnetic
analysis of water spectra in bulk and film forms at terahertz frequencies in
a modified attenuated total reflection configuration,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on
Terahertz Science and Technology, 2023.
[25] A. Soltani, T. Probst, S. Busch, M. Schwerdtfeger, E. Castro-Camus, and
M. Koch, ŌĆ£Error from delay drift in terahertz attenuated total reflection
spectroscopy,ŌĆØ Journal of Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves, vol. 35,
pp. 468ŌĆō477, 2014.
[26] A. Soltani, D. Jahn, L. Duschek, E. Castro-Camus, M. Koch, and W. Withay-
achumnankul, ŌĆ£Attenuated total reflection terahertz time-domain spectroscopy:
uncertainty analysis and reduction scheme,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on Terahertz
Science and Technology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 32ŌĆō39, 2016.
[27] N. Vieweg, F. Rettich, A. Deninger, H. Roehle, R. Dietz, T. G┬©obel, and
M. Schell, ŌĆ£Terahertz-time domain spectrometer with 90 db peak dynamic
range,ŌĆØ Journal of Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves, vol. 35, pp. 823ŌĆō
832, 2014.
[28] ŌĆ£TYDEX THz Prisms ŌĆö tydexoptics.com.ŌĆØ https://www.tydexoptics.com/
products/thz_optics/thz_prism/. [Accessed 03-03-2024].
[29] G. J. Wilmink, B. L. Ibey, T. Tongue, B. Schulkin, N. Laman, X. G. Peralta,
C. C. Roth, C. Z. Cerna, B. D. Rivest, J. E. Grundt, et al., ŌĆ£Development
of a compact terahertz time-domain spectrometer for the measurement of the
optical properties of biological tissues,ŌĆØ Journal of biomedical optics, vol. 16,
no. 4, pp. 047006ŌĆō047006, 2011.
[30] R. W. Hockney, S. Goel, and J. Eastwood, ŌĆ£Quiet high-resolution computer
models of a plasma,ŌĆØ Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 148ŌĆō
158, 1974.
[31] C. J. Cramer, F. Bickelhaupt, et al., ŌĆ£Essentials of computational chemistry,ŌĆØ
ANGEWANDTE CHEMIE-INTERNATIONAL EDITION IN ENGLISH-,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 381ŌĆō381, 2003.
[32] D. Kony, W. Damm, S. Stoll, and W. F. Van Gunsteren, ŌĆ£An improved oplsŌĆō
aa force field for carbohydrates,ŌĆØ Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 23,
no. 15, pp. 1416ŌĆō1429, 2002.
[33] K. N. Kirschner, A. B. Yongye, S. M. Tschampel, J. Gonz┬┤alez-Outeiri╦£no, C. R.
Daniels, B. L. Foley, and R. J. Woods, ŌĆ£Glycam06: a generalizable biomolecular
force field. carbohydrates,ŌĆØ Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 29, no. 4,
pp. 622ŌĆō655, 2008.
[34] O. Guvench, E. Hatcher, R. M. Venable, R. W. Pastor, and A. D. MacK-
erell Jr, ŌĆ£Charmm additive all-atom force field for glycosidic linkages between
hexopyranoses,ŌĆØ Journal of chemical theory and computation, vol. 5, no. 9,
pp. 2353ŌĆō2370, 2009.
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
42
[35] H. S. Hansen and P. H. H┬©unenberger, ŌĆ£A reoptimized gromos force field for
hexopyranose-based carbohydrates accounting for the relative free energies of
ring conformers, anomers, epimers, hydroxymethyl rotamers, and glycosidic
linkage conformers,ŌĆØ Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 998ŌĆō
1032, 2011.
[36] M. L. Batista, G. Perez-Sanchez, J. R. Gomes, J. A. Coutinho, and E. J.
Maginn, ŌĆ£Evaluation of the gromos 56acarbo force field for the calculation of
structural, volumetric, and dynamic properties of aqueous glucose systems,ŌĆØ
The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 119, no. 49, pp. 15310ŌĆō15319, 2015.
[37] H. J. Berendsen, J. P. Postma, W. F. van Gunsteren, and J. Hermans, ŌĆ£In-
teraction models for water in relation to protein hydration,ŌĆØ in Intermolecular
forces: proceedings of the fourteenth Jerusalem symposium on quantum chem-
istry and biochemistry held in jerusalem, israel, april 13ŌĆō16, 1981, pp. 331ŌĆō342,
Springer, 1981.
[38] H. J. Berendsen, J. R. Grigera, and T. P. Straatsma, ŌĆ£The missing term in effec-
tive pair potentials,ŌĆØ Journal of Physical Chemistry, vol. 91, no. 24, pp. 6269ŌĆō
6271, 1987.
[39] P. Mark and L. Nilsson, ŌĆ£Structure and dynamics of the tip3p, spc, and spc/e
water models at 298 k,ŌĆØ The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, vol. 105, no. 43,
pp. 9954ŌĆō9960, 2001.
[40] Y. Wu, H. L. Tepper, and G. A. Voth, ŌĆ£Flexible simple point-charge water
model with improved liquid-state properties,ŌĆØ The Journal of chemical physics,
vol. 124, no. 2, 2006.
[41] W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrasekhar, J. D. Madura, R. W. Impey, and M. L.
Klein, ŌĆ£Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water,ŌĆØ
The Journal of chemical physics, vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 926ŌĆō935, 1983.
[42] M. W. Mahoney and W. L. Jorgensen, ŌĆ£A five-site model for liquid water and
the reproduction of the density anomaly by rigid, nonpolarizable potential func-
tions,ŌĆØ The Journal of chemical physics, vol. 112, no. 20, pp. 8910ŌĆō8922, 2000.
[43] H. Nada and J. P. van der Eerden, ŌĆ£An intermolecular potential model for the
simulation of ice and water near the melting point: A six-site model of h 2 o,ŌĆØ
The Journal of chemical physics, vol. 118, no. 16, pp. 7401ŌĆō7413, 2003.
[44] J.-J. Max and C. Chapados, ŌĆ£Isotope effects in liquid water by infrared spec-
troscopy,ŌĆØ The Journal of chemical physics, vol. 116, no. 11, pp. 4626ŌĆō4642,
2002.
[45] R. B. Kohlhaas, S. Breuer, S. Nellen, L. Liebermeister, M. Schell, M. P. Semtsiv,
W. T. Masselink, and B. Globisch, ŌĆ£Thz tds system with 105 db dynamic range
based on transition metal doped ingaas,ŌĆØ in 2019 44th International Conference
on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-THz), pp. 1ŌĆō3, IEEE,
2019.
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
43
[46] P. D. Cunningham, N. N. Valdes, F. A. Vallejo, L. M. Hayden, B. Polishak,
X.-H. Zhou, J. Luo, A. K.-Y. Jen, J. C. Williams, and R. J. Twieg, ŌĆ£Broad-
band terahertz characterization of the refractive index and absorption of some
important polymeric and organic electro-optic materials,ŌĆØ Journal of applied
physics, vol. 109, no. 4, pp. 043505ŌĆō043505, 2011.
[47] D. S. Patel, X. He, and A. D. MacKerell Jr, ŌĆ£Polarizable empirical force field
for hexopyranose monosaccharides based on the classical drude oscillator,ŌĆØ The
Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 637ŌĆō652, 2015.
[48] M. Fox, Optical properties of solids, vol. 3. Oxford university press, 2010.
