==PAGE:1==
Developing a deep generative
model for mass spectrometry
proteomics data
Rasmus Møller Larsen
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The aim of this thesis is to develop a deep generative model for mass spec-
trometry proteomics data. Specifically, single-cell and bulk protein abundance
datasets, which have up to 70% of the values missing, will be modelled with a
variational autoencoder called protVI. protVI models the underlying missing-
data mechanism causing the data missingness and protVI imputes these missing
values. Additionally, protVI finds biological meaningful low-dimensional repre-
sentations of cells by removing unwanted technical variability such as batch
effects. protVI’s performance is evaluated on one bulk dataset and two single-
cell datasets by evaluating the model’s imputation performance on artificially
introduced missing values. The results from the evaluation show that protVI has
comparable or better performance than the best-performing imputation meth-
ods commonly applied to protein abundance data.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis corresponds to the work of 30 ECTS points and fulfills the require-
ments for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering degree (Mathematical Modelling
and Computation) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis
was supervised by Soroor Hediyeh-zadeh, Sabrina Richter, Fabian Theis and
Ole Winther.
The thesis deals with developing a deep generative model for imputing missing
values in mass spectrometry proteomics data.
Lyngby, 4-Marts-2024
Rasmus Møller Larsen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Soroor Hediyeh-zadeh and Sabrina Richter
for always being helpful and ready to discuss ideas or issues, even on short
notice. I would also like to thank my supervisor Ole Winther for being flexible
in terms of my study program during my master’s degree. Finally, I would like
to thank my family for their constant support throughout my studies.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
The building block of life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
The central dogma in molecular biology . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Genome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Transcriptome
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Proteome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.5
Bulk vs single-cell sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Proteomics workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Sample preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Mass spectra acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Peptide identification and quantification . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.4
Protein aggregation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.5
Abundance matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Downstream tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Differential abundance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Cell type annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Data integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.4
Cell clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3
Theory
13
3.1
Missing data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Types of missingness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Ignorability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.3
MNAR models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Deep latent variable models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Variational autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Amortized variational inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
The reparameterization trick
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Models
27
4.1
Benchmark models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
protDP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.2
k-nearest neighbour imputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.3
Downshift models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
protVI: a deep generative model for mass spectrometry data . . .
30
4.2.1
Baseline variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Selection variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.3
Conjunction variant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.4
Hybrid variant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.5
Imputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.6
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Experiments
39
5.1
Mann (in-house)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
Latent representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.2
Imputation using the pilot study as ground truth . . . . .
44
5.1.3
Imputation with artificial missingness
. . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.4
Missing-data mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Brunner2022
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2.1
Imputation with artificial missingness
. . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2.2
Missing-data mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Schoof (in-house) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3.1
Latent representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Discussion of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Conclusion
59
6.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A Additional results from experiments
61
A.1 Mann (in-house)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Brunner2022
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.3 Schoof (in-house) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
B Generation of artificial missingness
69
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Acronyms
AE autoencoder.
DE differential expression.
DLVM deep latent variable model.
ELBO evidence lower bound.
IWAE importance weighted autoencoder.
KNN k-nearest neighbour.
LC-MS liquid chromatography mass spectrometry.
M(C)AR missing completely at random or missing at random.
MAR missing at random.
MCAR missing completely at random.
MNAR missing not at random.
MS mass spectrometry.
MSE mean squared error.
PG protein group.
==PAGE:14==
xii
Acronyms
PGM probabilistic graphical model.
PTM post-translational modification.
SCM structural causal model.
VAE variational autoencoder.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Single-cell omics techniques have the potential to revolutionize the medical field
by providing unprecedented insights into cellular heterogeneity and molecular
mechanisms underlying diseases. These techniques hold great promise for ad-
vancing personalized medicine by uncovering individual variations in cellular
responses to treatments, identifying biomarkers, and guiding precision thera-
peutics tailored to individual patients. In more recent years, single-cell omics
technologies have aided in discovering anti-cancer drugs [BLH+18], revealing
complex interactions within gene regulation in biological processes that control
the spread of tumor cells [CPS+18], and explaining the complexity of tissue-
and disease-specific regulatory processes [SKG+17].
Within the field of single-cell proteomics, recent improvements in mass spec-
trometry (MS)-based proteomics have occurred, resulting in datasets with now
a few thousand samples at single-cell resolution [PHS+20] [LKCS23].
If the
improvements follow the same trajectory as seen for transcriptomic data, then
proteomics data will soon be high-throughput, and scaleable computational tools
are needed to analyse this vast amount of data.
Due to limitations in MS-based acquisition methods, up to 70% of the protein
(or peptide) intensities are not measured, i.e., not available in the protein abun-
dance (data) matrix [VG23a]. Several downstream tasks, such as differential
abundance analysis, cell type annotation and trajectory inference, assume that
the dataset contains no missing values. Thus, a model able to impute the values
of missing intensities in the protein abundance data is crucial.
Contributions To the best of our knowledge, the model developed in this
thesis, which we call protVI, is the first deep generative model targeting MS-
based proteomics data which can impute missing protein intensities at a sample-
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
specific level. Existing methods targeting protein abundance data impute miss-
ing values on an aggregated resolution, i.e., not sample-specific [LS23] [VG23b].
The consequence is that sample-specific variance is not considered during im-
putation and these methods are heavily dependent on a strong relationship
between average protein intensity and said detection proportion. In contrast to
these existing methods, protVI can also find a low-dimensional representation
of the data, which can be used for visualization and cell-type annotation. This
low-dimensional representation of the data can account for unwanted technical
variability in the data, i.e., batch effects. Finally, protVI is highly extendable,
which makes it ideal as a base model for further extensions.
The remainder of this thesis is organized as follows:
Chapter 2: Background
In chapter 2, the central dogma in molecular biology is presented, and the study
of protein abundances is motivated. Afterwards, a generic proteomics workflow
is covered, which guides us on how to model the protein abundance data. Finally,
some of the key challenges in single-cell proteomics acquisition are covered.
Chapter 3: Theory
In chapter 3, we present the types of missing data and how to model these
missing data types in an unbiased manner. Afterwards, the class of deep latent
variable models are presented including the variational autoencoder, which is
the model type used to model the protein abundance data.
Chapter 4: Models
In chapter 4, we first present existing models commonly used to impute missing
protein intensities. These models will be compared against in the experiments.
Afterwards, the model developed in this thesis, called protVI, is thoroughly
described and the model’s structure is motivated using the knowledge acquired
from chapter 2 and 3.
Chapter 5: Experiments
In chapter 5, we first evaluate protVIs performance on four proteomics datasets.
In this context, the low-dimensional representation of the data encoded by
protVI is evaluated.
Furthermore, the imputation performance is evaluated
on artificially generated data missingness.
Chapter 6: Conclusion
In chapter 6, we conclude the thesis and summarize the results from the experi-
ments. Additionally, we discuss potential future work such as extensions to the
model.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Background
In this chapter, we start by presenting an overview of the cell by introducing
the central dogma in molecular biology, and the motivation behind studying the
proteome. Afterwards, a proteomics workflow is presented, which will guide us
on how to model the proteomics data. The proteomics workflow is here divided
into an experimental workflow and subsequent downstream tasks.
2.1
The building block of life
The cell is the functional unit of life, as we know it. A cell’s functionality is
plentiful, leading to a dynamic internal cell state with complex regularization.
A cell’s internal state changes throughout the cell’s lifecycle and due to external
factors, such as nutrient scarcity and temperature changes. A cell’s current state
is heavily dependent on its protein expression, as proteins are the functional
actors of the cell.
Proteins take e.g., part in cell-to-cell signalling, nutrient
transportation and gene regularization.
2.1.1
The central dogma in molecular biology
An important theory in molecular biology is the central dogma in molecular biol-
ogy. It states that genetic information, namely DNA which is a sequence of the
four nucleotides ATCG, "flows" in one direction with RNA as an intermediate
state and the end product being a protein.
DNA
−→
transcription RNA
−→
translation Protein
==PAGE:18==
4
Background
More precisely, the enzyme RNA-polymerase binds to a promoter region in
the DNA, starting the transcription of the corresponding protein-coding DNA
region, called a gene.
The product of transcription is pre-mRNA, which is
afterwards spliced into a (mature) mRNA molecule by the spliceosome. During
splicing, non-coding regions of the pre-mRNA, called introns, are removed, and
the remaining coding regions, called exons, join together. Finally, ribosomal
subunits assemble on the strand of mRNA, where they proceed to attract tRNA
molecules tethered to amino acids. A long chain of amino acids emerges as the
ribosome translates the mRNA sequence by sequentially matching triplets of
nucleotides, known as codons, with candidate tRNA molecules. The resulting
long chain of amino acids folds, yielding a protein. The protein may afterwards
be subject to post-translational modifications (PTMs).
Much effort has been put into understanding life at the cellular level as it is e.g.,
vital for understanding diseases and developing targeted drugs. Thus, omics
methods have been developed to inspect a cell’s genome, epigenome, transcrip-
tome and proteome.
These omics methods are complementary as they each
provide unique information about the cell and its current state - as will be
discussed in the following sections.
2.1.2
Genome
The set of all DNA instructions found in a cell.
The genome can be inspected by sequencing a cell’s DNA. Access to the DNA
allows researchers to identify the location and function of genes and regulatory
elements and uncovers genetic features such as open reading frames (ORFs) or
CpG islands, which indicate promotor regions. The genome can also be analysed
through an evolutionary lens, where homologous DNA sequences from different
organisms are compared and phylogenetic trees derived. Thereby, allowing mu-
tation rates, common ancestry and time since species separation to be inferred.
These insights are invaluable when tracking how a virus, such as SARS-CoV-
2, mutates. DNA sequencing can also be used to find mutations and diseases.
One popular example of a disease caused by a mutation in the DNA is sickle
cell disease. Sickle cell disease is a group of blood disorders resulting from an
abnormality in the oxygen-carrying protein hemoglobin in red blood cells. The
cause of sickle cell disease is the inheritance of two abnormal copies (one from
each parent) of the β-globin gene that makes hemoglobin. The gene defect is
caused by a single nucleotide mutation where a GAG codon changes to a GTG
codon of the β-globin gene. This results in the amino acid glutamate being sub-
stituted by valine, and leads to serious health issues including pain, anaemia,
swelling in the hands and feet, bacterial infections and strokes.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The building block of life
5
2.1.3
Transcriptome
The set of all RNA expressed in a cell - includes coding and non-coding RNA.
Knowing the DNA sequence and the position of its regulatory elements provides
invaluable information about a cell. However, the DNA provides very limited
information about the dynamics and real-time operations of a cell. A gene can
e.g., code for multiple proteins, due to alternative mRNA splicing sites and exon
combinations. Information which is not captured in the DNA. Alternative splic-
ing is naturally occurring and commonly seen in eukaryotes; however, a variant
could potentially result in a non-functional enzyme and an induced disease state.
This makes RNA sequencing invaluable. In RNA sequencing techniques, such
as RNA-seq, which uses next-generation sequencing (NGS) to sequence thou-
sands of genes in a short period of time, a snapshot of a cell’s RNA content at
the time of sequencing is obtained. More precisely, a preselected library of RNA
molecules is selected for sequencing, and the output of the sequencing is an RNA
profile, i.e., which genes are currently expressed and how many of each RNA
molecule is in the cell. This information can be used to detect changes in dis-
ease states in response to therapeutics and drugs under different environmental
conditions, when comparing genotypes and other experimental designs.
2.1.4
Proteome
The set of all proteins expressed in a cell.
The transcriptome provides information about a cell’s dynamics. However, it
has been shown that measured proteomic differences poorly correlate with cor-
responding transcriptomic differences between biological states. It has e.g., been
found that metabolic pathways, such as oxidative phosphorylation, and protein
production processes such as ribosomes, typically show negative correlations be-
tween protein and RNA across tumor samples [YAOY+21]. When comparing
the RNA expression with the protein abundance measured in a cell, it can also
be observed that the transcriptome is less stable due to the regularization of
both transcription and translation. Furthermore, insight into post-translational
modifications (PTMs) is inaccessible to transcriptomic analysis. Thus, to form
an accurate and deeper understanding of translational regulation, especially
given cellular heterogeneity in any given disease, single-cell proteomics is a nec-
essary and complementary tool to existing single-cell omics technologies such as
scRNA-seq [HSL+23].
==PAGE:20==
6
Background
2.1.5
Bulk vs single-cell sequencing
In earlier years, due to technical limitations and cost, most early omics technolo-
gies, e.g., RNA-seq, could only perform bulk sequencing, i.e., cell population-
level sequencing, which has severe limitations. Cellular diversity and heterogene-
ity can e.g., not be addressed by bulk techniques, since it queries the expression
of several thousand cells and provides an average expression profile which in
most cases obscures crucial differences between individual cells. Being able to
observe cell-to-cell differences is critical to accurately understand the biology of
disease. Furthermore, the study of rare cell populations is not accessible in bulk
data since it does not have the sensitivity to detect such rare cells, like cancer
stem cells. The role of rare cells in disease can only be addressed by single-cell
sequencing techniques.
2.2
Proteomics workflow
Since this thesis focuses on developing a generative model for protein abundance
data, a proper description of how the data is acquired is necessary. This knowl-
edge guides us on how to model the protein abundance data. We will highlight
key challenges in the workflow, which the model developed should (and will)
address. A workflow using bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics will
be presented as all the datasets used in this thesis are acquired with this ex-
perimental method. MS-based proteomics has found noticeable traction in the
experimental community as it can capture thousands of unique protein types
while needing very little biological material. Furthermore, it has the potential
to be high-throughput, i.e., large quantities of cells can be sequenced over rela-
tively short periods. Both bulk and single-cell datasets have been acquired using
MS-based proteomics, and generating single-cell datasets with a few thousand
cells has just recently become possible. MS-based proteomics is the term used
for proteomics data acquired using a mass spectrometer, which measures ion
mass-to-charge (m/z) values and signal intensities. A workflow is called bottom-
up if peptides (rather than proteins) are quantified by the mass spectrometer. A
bottom-up MS-based proteomics workflows can be further categorized by e.g.,
peptide identification protocol and peptide quantification protocol. A summary
of a generic bottom-up MS-based proteomics workflow is depicted in Fig. 2.1.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Proteomics workflow
7
Figure 2.1: Illustration of a bottom-up proteomics workflow. Figure courtesy
of Shuken et. al. [Shu23]
A bottom-up MS proteomics workflow can be summarized as follows. Proteins
are extracted from the sample and then "digested" into smaller pieces of the pro-
teins, namely peptides. Afterwards, the peptides are analysed by a mass spec-
trometer. The acquired MS data is compared to a reference peptide database
to identify the peptides, and the signal strength of the peptides is used to quan-
tify the peptide’s relative abundance. Finally, the peptides are aggregated into
the original proteins and the relative protein abundances are computed. The
resulting data can be organized into a matrix, where each entry in the matrix
is an intensity and represents the abundance of a particular protein in a given
sample. Let’s now present this workflow in more detail.
2.2.1
Sample preparation
In a bottom-up MS-based proteomics workflow, samples are prepared as batches
and placed onto plates. Samples, such as tissue or plant samples, are first split
into smaller uniform units, e.g., single cells. Separation at single-cell resolution
can be performed using a laser cutting system. The cells in the samples are
afterwards lysed, i.e., the cell membranes are ruptured, and the proteins are
separated from the other types of molecules in the lysate, e.g., lipids and car-
bohydrates in a process called precipitation. Subsequently, these proteins are
"digested" into peptides by the enzyme proteases. The peptides are now ready
for liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis.
==PAGE:22==
8
Background
2.2.2
Mass spectra acquisition
The prepared samples, i.e., the peptides, are then loaded into a liquid chro-
matography instrument, where they are subjected to a process called chromato-
graphic separation. In this process, the peptides are first mixed with a solvent
to form a mobile phase. The mobile phase carries the peptides through the
chromatography column while interacting with the stationary phase. The sta-
tionary phase is a solid material, which causes the peptides to move through
the column at different rates, based on the peptides chemical properties. As
peptides elude from the liquid chromatography instrument, they enter the mass
spectrometer, where they are first transformed into (charged) gas-phase pep-
tide ions, also called precursor ions. These precursor ions are then measured
by the mass spectrometer, yielding a spectrum measuring mass-to-charge (m/z)
and signal intensity. Since peptides elude at different rates, peptides will hit the
mass spectrometers sensor at different times, which is denoted as retention times
(RT). Thus, several mass spectra are measured across a single run as depicted
in Fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Mass spectra at different retention times. Each of the five colors
corresponds to a single peptide type. Inspired by Shuken et. al.
[Shu23].
A peptide type usually has several peaks within a fixed retention time and
multiple peptide types may share the same mass-to-charge bands within the
same retention time.
During sample preparation and mass spectra acquisition unwanted technical
variability, called batch effects, are introduced into the data.
Batch effects
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Proteomics workflow
9
are systematic variations in experimental measurements that arise from non-
biological sources, such as differences in sample processing, instrument vari-
ability, or experimental conditions. Batch effects are strong in proteomics and
especially in single-cell proteomics [VG23a]. In proteomics analysis, biological
variability is of interest and not technical variability, as biological variability can
give insights into cell type variability. Thus, batch effects should be accounted
for in subsequent biological analysis.
2.2.3
Peptide identification and quantification
The data produced by a single LC-MS run is a large collection of spectra, each
with a retention time, m/z values and intensities. The task is now to identify
and quantify the peptides based on these mass spectra. Peptides are identified
by comparing the mass spectra against a database of known protein sequences.
The search algorithm matches the experimental spectra with theoretical spectra
generated from the protein database to identify peptides. Identified peptides are
assigned scores based on the quality of the spectral matches. These scores are
afterwards used to filter out false discoveries.
With a peptide identified, the relative abundance of a peptide is usually quan-
tified based on its chromatographic profile, such as its height or the area under
the curve (AUC), and several chromatographic peaks are aggregated by com-
puting the sum, median or mean. Since peptide types have different ionization
levels, these abundances are only relative quantities and MS-derived quantities
of different peptides can therefore not be accurately compared.
Not all peptides present in a sample will be identified (and quantified) as the
mass spectrometer will not detect non-charged (neutral) precursor ions [Shu23].
Additionally, the mass spectra of a peptide may not match the corresponding
theoretical spectra generated from the protein database.
Failure to identify
peptides is exacerbated by noise in the spectra and multiple peptide signatures
measured in the same mass spectra. It has been observed that peptides with
smaller intensities are less likely to be identified, as they are more likely to
fall below the mass spectrometer minimum detection limit. Furthermore, these
peptides are more difficult to distinguish from background noise and therefore
more likely to be filtered out in the process of reducing false peptide discoveries.
This relationship between peptide intensity and detection probability is also
partly captured in the datasets as depicted in Fig. 2.3. However, the exact
relationship depends on the experimental acquisition method and computational
identification method used.
==PAGE:24==
10
Background
Figure 2.3: Relationship between detection proportion and observed protein
log-intensity in four proteomics datasets acquired using a) DIA-
LFQ [BTV+22], b) DIA-TMT, c) DIA-PASEF [RTS+23] and d)
DIA-LFQ. Each point represents a peptide in the dataset. Peptide
intensities are estimated as the average of the log intensities across
all samples (ignoring missing values). The detection proportion is
the number of samples where the peptide is observed divided by
the total number of samples.
2.2.4
Protein aggregation
With peptides identified and quantified for each of the samples, the peptides
may be combined into proteins for later analysis. This step is not necessary as
the downstream analysis may be performed on the peptides instead. The task
of protein aggregation is challenging since peptides can be ambiguous regarding
the proteins or genes from which they originate. Thus, peptides are sorted into
protein groups (PGs), which are the proteins from which the peptide may origi-
nate. The proteins in the protein groups are reported as the proteins identified.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Downstream tasks
11
2.2.5
Abundance matrix
The output of a MS-based proteomics workflow is an abundance matrix. Each
entry in the matrix is an intensity and represents the relative abundance of a
particular protein in a given sample (e.g., a single cell). Usually, a few thou-
sand distinct protein types are measured.
Instead of protein intensities, the
abundance matrix may contain peptide intensities, depending on how much
preprocessing has been performed.
There is usually one order of magnitude
more quantified peptides than proteins.
Recall that due to failed peptide identifications and protein identifications, not
all intensities are measured for the proteins of interest. The raw abundance
matrix usually has between 40 −50% missing entries, but abundance matrices
with 70% missing entries also exist. Unmeasured intensities could be due to
the protein not being expressed, i.e., biological missing. However, in MS pro-
teomics a large fraction of unmeasured intensities are expressed in the cell, but
not measured, i.e., technical missing. Biological and technical missingness bear
different information and distinguishing the two leads to biologically meaningful
insights, but they are very hard to distinguish. Most downstream tasks assume
no missing intensities. Thus, it is necessary to impute the missing intensities
without introducing additional bias.
2.3
Downstream tasks
With an abundance matrix acquired, several biologically relevant computational
analyses (also known as downstream tasks) can be performed.
Downstream
tasks, such as differential abundance analysis, cell type annotation and data
integration, which are successfully being applied to scRNA-seq data, are also
applicable to proteomics abundance data.
2.3.1
Differential abundance analysis
In differential abundance analysis, the goal is to identify proteins which are dif-
ferentially abundant between two user-defined subpopulations. More precisely,
the log-fold change is defined as the difference between the mean log abundance
(h) of a protein (p) between two populations (A and B), when batch effects have
been removed. The log-fold change is defined as:
βp := log hB
p −log hA
p
==PAGE:26==
12
Background
and we consider the null hypothesis of the form H0,p : βp = 0. Differential abun-
dant proteins can e.g., be used as biomarkers, which is a measurable indicator
of the severity or presence of some disease state.
2.3.2
Cell type annotation
The goal of cell type annotation is to annotate unknown samples, such as cells,
based on the protein abundances of known cell types. Using these known cell
types, a prototypical protein abundance of each of these cell types can be es-
tablished. Based on these prototypical protein abundances, unknown cell types
can be annotated, given their protein abundance has been measured.
2.3.3
Data integration
For data integration, the goal is to combine data from multiple experiments while
preserving the biological signal and minimizing technical variations introduced
by the different experiments. Data integration becomes e.g., invaluable when
constructing a cell atlas, which is a comprehensive map of the various cell types
(often from multiple datasets) and their characteristics, e.g., protein abundance.
2.3.4
Cell clustering
The goal of clustering is to identify distinct cell types or subtypes based on e.g.,
protein abundance data. Typically, a low-dimensional representation of each cell
based on its protein abundance is acquired in an unsupervised setting. With
this representation of the cells, clusters may be identified which may constitute
distinct cell (sub)populations.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Theory
This chapter covers the theory and concepts used to model the protein abun-
dance data. Since the proteomics data contains missing intensities and an un-
derlying missingness pattern exists, a general treatment on data missingness
and how to model missing data is necessary. What follows is an introduction to
deep latent variable models (DLVMs) which are particularly compelling models
to model single-cell data, since these models are highly flexible and single-cell
data usually have biological meaningful low-dimensional representations. After-
wards, a particular family of DLVMs will be introduced, namely the variational
autoencoder (VAE), which makes inference of model parameters tractable. The
models introduced will be used as the starting point for modelling the proteomics
data.
Despite previous work on handling missing data using VAEs and models alike,
we still start from a "first-principle" approach by introducing these concepts.
This is motivated by our model deviating from these previous works and thereby
making the concepts necessary to re-introduce. Previous work will be mentioned
when noticeable model similarity occurs.
3.1
Missing data
In this section, we will cover the concepts of data missingness essential for
the modelling. First, the notation used throughout the thesis is introduced,
followed by the types of missingness and how to properly handle these types of
missingness. Examples are provided along the way.
Let x = (x1, ..., xd) be a random variable taking values in the d-dimensional
==PAGE:28==
14
Theory
fully-observed feature space X = X1 × ... × Xd. Additionally, let the missing
mask m ∈{0, 1}d be a random variable defined as,
mj =
(
1
if xj is observed,
0
if xj is missing/unobserved.
, ∀j ∈{1, ..., d}
then we can introduce the incomplete random variable xobs = (xobs
1 , ..., xobs
d ) ∈
X ′, where X ′ = (X1 ∪{NA}) × ... × (Xd ∪{NA}) with NA used for an observation
which is not available. The random variable xobs denotes the observed elements
in x and can be defined by,
xobs = NA ⊙(1 −m) + x ⊙m
where ⊙denotes the Hadamard product, and we define NA · 0 = 0, NA · 1 = NA,
and NA + k = NA for k ∈X ′
w, where w ∈{1, ..., d}. Similarly, we can introduce
the missing elements in x by xmis ∈X ′ as,
xmis = NA ⊙m + x ⊙(1 −m)
Notice the fully-observed random variable x can be recomposed by,
x = xobs ⊙m + xmis ⊙(1 −m)
In relation to data with missing values, we assume that we can obtain (partially-
observed) samples from (xobs, m) ∼pD(xobs, m), where pD(xobs, m) is the un-
derlying data-generation process, and we define D = {xobs
i
, mi}n
i=1 as a dataset
with n i.i.d samples.
When referring to a dataset, either fully observed or partially observed, a data
matrix notation may be used, e.g.
X or Xobs, where each row is a sample.
Similarly, a matrix M may be used to refer to the mask of the dataset. Sample
i in row i is then indexed by xi (and mi).
Moving forward we assume p(x, m) = pψ,θ(x, m), where pψ,θ(x, m) = pψ(m|x)pθ(x),
i.e., the fully-observed joint distribution can be parameterized by ψ and θ, and
we denote pψ(m|x) as the missing-data mechanism.
3.1.1
Types of missingness
With the notation in place, the types of data missingness will be defined using
the missing-data mechanism as first formulated by Rubin [Rub76].
Definition 3.1 (Missing-data mechanisms [Rub76]). The missing-data mecha-
nism is
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Missing data
15
• missing completely at random (MCAR) if
pψ(m|x) = pψ(m)
• missing at random (MAR) if
pψ(m|x) = pψ(m|xobs)
• missing not at random (MNAR) if m depends on xmis and optionally on
xobs.
Notice that missing data assumed to be MCAR imposes the strongest assump-
tion on the missingness mechanism since it is assumed the missingness is (com-
pletely) independent of the data. On the contrary, missing data assumed to be
MNAR is theoretically the weakest assumption, since the mask m may depend
on both the observed data xobs and the missing data xmis. A common type of
a MNAR mechanism is the self-masked MNAR mechanism.
Definition 3.2 (Self-masked MNAR mechanism [MZ21]). The missing-data
mechanism is self-masked MNAR if
pψ(mj|x) = pψ(mj|xj),
∀j ∈{1, ..., d}
With the definition of the different missing-data mechanism types provided, a
few examples seem appropriate.
Example 3.1 (Probabilistic graphical models of MCAR, MAR and MNAR).
Let x and m be random variables, each with two features, x1, x2 and m1, m2
respectively, and z is an underlying random variable. We can then create a set of
non-exhaustive probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) for the different missing-
data mechanism types:
In the PGMs, fully-shaded circles are fully-observed random variables, partially-
shaded circles are partially-observed random variables, and unshaded circles are
==PAGE:30==
16
Theory
unobserved random variables. Additionally, dashed arrows are optional relation-
ships which would not change the type of missing-data mechanism.
For the PGMs, we will also assume ∃x1 ∈X1, ∃x2 ∈X2, s.t.
p(x1, x2) >
0 ∧(∀f, g ∈F, x1 ̸= f(x2) ∧x2 ̸= g(x1)).
Otherwise, the MNAR and self-
masked MNAR examples could be MAR, since if either x1 or x2 is always avail-
able, then the other (unobserved) data feature can be computed and therefore
yields no additional information for the conditional distribution of the mask,
i.e., p(m|x) = p(m|xobs).
From the PGMs it can e.g., be seen that in the MCAR case, m1, m2 ⊥⊥x1, x2, z,
and in the MAR case, m2 ⊥⊥x2, z | x1 and in the self-masked MNAR, m2 ⊥⊥
x1|x2. Notice, that all the PGMs are consistent with definition 3.1 and definition
3.2.
In all the PGMs, x1 ⊥⊥x2 | z, however, the missing-value mechanism p(m|x)
imposes no such restriction. This independence is due to how the data distri-
bution pθ(x) is defined in this example. From the graphical models, it should be
clear that including more features will yield exponentially more possible graphs
for the MAR and MNAR cases. However, only one PGM exists for the MCAR
case, when assuming the data generation pθ(x) remains the same.
Continuing from example 3.1, let’s now provide examples of generative processes
yielding MCAR, MAR and self-masked MNAR data.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Missing data
17
Example 3.2 (Data generation). To satisfy the assumption in example 3.1, we
assume each random variable is dependent on noise (n) which corresponds to an
exogenous random variable - as defined in structural causal models (SCMs) by
Pearl [MP19]. Thus, the generative processes can be written as (fully-observed)
SCMs as follows:
MCAR
nz ∼N(0, 2)
nx1 ∼N(5, 2)
nx2 ∼N(4, 2)
nm1 ∼N(0, 1)
nm2 ∼N(0, 1)
z ←nz
x1 ←z + nx1
x2 ←z + nx2
m1 ←1[nm1 > 0]
m2 ←1[nm2 > 0]
MAR
nz ∼N(0, 2)
nx1 ∼N(5, 2)
nx2 ∼N(4, 2)
nm2 ∼N(0, 1)
z ←nz
x1 ←z + nx1
x2 ←z + nx2
m1 ←1
m2 ←1[x1 + nm2 > 0]
Self-masked MNAR
nz ∼N(0, 2)
nx1 ∼N(5, 2)
nx2 ∼N(4, 2)
nm1 ∼N(0, 1)
nm2 ∼N(0, 1)
z ←nz
x1 ←z + nx1
x2 ←z + nx2
m1 ←1[x1 + nm1 > 0]
m2 ←1[x2 + nm2 > 0]
Notice, that in the generative processes for MCAR data, each mask is generated
independently of the other endogenous variables. In the generative process for
MAR data, x1 is fully observed, and the partially observed random variable m2
only depends on x1. Finally, in the generative process for self-masked MNAR
data, a mask only depends on the corresponding variable being masked.
3.1.2
Ignorability
With the three missing-data mechanisms defined, the next question becomes
whether a missing-data mechanism can be ignored when estimating the param-
eters of the data distribution X which contains missing values.
In a likelihood-based framework, the parameters (θ) of a model, which best
estimate the data distribution, are found by maximizing the likelihood of the
data (X):
ˆθ = argmax
θ
L(θ; X)
==PAGE:32==
18
Theory
In this setting, it is assumed that there are no missing values in the dataset,
and the samples are i.i.d. Thus, the likelihood of the data becomes:
L(θ; X) =
n
Y
i=1
p(xi; θ)
When the dataset contains missing values, the statistical inference should in
principle be performed on the joint distribution of the data (X) and the mask
(M), since they constitute the dataset1, and the likelihood becomes:
L(θ, ψ; X, M) =
n
Y
i=1
p(xi, mi; θ, ψ)
However, since Xmis is unobserved this likelihood becomes intractable to com-
pute, and the unobserved data is therefore integrated out:
L(θ, ψ; Xobs, M) =
Z
L(θ, ψ; X, M) dXmis =
n
Y
i=1
p(xobs
i
, mi; θ, ψ)
Let’s now determine if it is necessary to include the mask M and therefore
also the missing-data mechanism pψ(m|x) in the likelihood function when in-
ferring the data distribution parameter θ for the three types of missing-data
mechanisms. To do so, the concept of an ignorable missing-data mechanism is
needed.
Definition 3.3 (Ignorable missing-data mechanism [lit02]). The missing-data
mechanism is ignorable, if
argmax
θ∈Ωθ
L(θ, ψ; Xobs, M) = argmax
θ∈Ωθ
L(θ; Xobs), ∀ψ ∈Ωψ
Thus, if the maximum likelihood estimate of the data distribution parameter θ
for datasets with missing values can be computed without modelling the missing-
data mechanism, the missing-data mechanism is said to be ignorable.
Theorem 3.1 (Ignorability of a missing-data mechanism [lit02]). The missing-
data mechanism is ignorable if the following two conditions hold
(i) the parameters ψ and θ are distinct, i.e. Ωψ,θ = Ωψ × Ωθ
(ii) the observed likelihood can be factorized as follows,
L(θ, ψ; Xobs, M) = pψ(M|Xobs)L(θ; Xobs)
1Including the mask when the dataset is fully observed is redundant, since pψ(m = 1|x) =
1, ∀x ∈X d. Hence, pψ,θ(m = 1, x) = pθ(x).
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Missing data
19
Condition (i) is a technical condition required to split the likelihood into two
factors as in condition (ii).
Let’s now use Theorem 3.1 to determine if the missing-data mechanism is ig-
norable for M(C)AR and MNAR data.
Corollary 3.1. The missing-data mechanism is ignorable for M(C)AR data.
Proof. Since MCAR can be viewed as a special case of MAR, a proof for MAR
is sufficient.
L(θ, ψ; Xobs, M) =
Z
pψ,θ(X, M) dXmis
=
Z
pψ(M|X)pθ(X) dXmis
=
Z
pψ(M|Xobs)pθ(X) dXmis
(Def. 3.1 for MAR)
= pψ(M|Xobs)
Z
pθ(X) dXmis
= pψ(M|Xobs)L(θ; Xobs)
Corollary 3.2. The missing-data mechanism is not ignorable for MNAR data.
Proof. Without loss of generality, let’s assume the MNAR setting, where the
mask M only depends on the missing values Xmis (and therefore not Xobs).
L(θ, ψ; Xobs, M) =
Z
pψ,θ(X, M) dXmis
=
Z
pψ(M|X)pθ(X) dXmis
=
Z
pψ(M|Xmis)pθ(X) dXmis
Clearly,
Z
pψ(M|Xmis)pθ(X) dXmis ̸∝
Z
pθ(X) dXmis
Thus, in the general case ignoring the missing-data mechanism for MNAR data
will lead to an incorrect parameter estimation of θ in a maximum likelihood-
based framework - and the imputation of missing values will be biased. In con-
trast, ignoring the missing-data mechanism for M(C)AR is theoretically sound
when estimating θ in a maximum likelihood-based framework.
==PAGE:34==
20
Theory
Let’s finish this section with an example which shows that ignoring the missing-
data mechanism for MNAR data will lead to biased (and therefore incorrect)
imputation.
Example 3.3 (Missing value imputation in a MNAR setting). Assume a density
model (pψ,θ(xobs, m)) has been trained using maximum likelihood on partially-
observed data which are self-masked MNAR, and a sample k has the data xk =
(NA, 12) and mask mk = (0, 1). We now want to impute the most likely value for
the missing value x1 for sample k. Since the data is assumed to be self-masked
MNAR x1 ⊥⊥m2 | x2 and therefore p(x1|m1, m2, x2) = p(x1|m1, x2). Let’s now
simplify this conditional probability:
p(x1|m1, x2) = p(x1, m1, x2)
p(m1, x2)
= p(m1|x1)p(x1|x2)p(x2)
p(m1|x2)p(x2)
∝p(m1|x1)p(x1|x2)
Assume the density of the conditional data distribution, p(x1|x2 = 12) and the
density of the missing-data mechanism, p(m1 = 0|x1) - as estimated by the
model - are the left and middle plot respectively. Additionally, the plot to the
right is the (unnormalized) posterior distribution.
Based on the plots, ignoring the missing-data mechanism would lead to vastly
different imputed values as argmaxx1 p(x1|x2 = 12) = 7.6, compared to including
the missing-data mechanism which imputes the value to be argmaxx1 p(m1 =
0|x1)p(x1|x2 = 12) = 2.6. Notice, according to the (middle) plot of the missing-
data mechanism, smaller x1-values are less likely to be observed.
To summarize, when modelling M(C)AR data the missing-data mechanism may
be ignored as it does not change the maximum likelihood estimate of the data
distributions model parameter θ. In contrast, including the missing-data mech-
anism is necessary when modelling MNAR data, otherwise the imputation of
missing values is biased. We must empathise that an unbiased estimate is still
an estimate and therefore may be incorrect. Additionally, a MNAR model (a
model modelling the data as MNAR) may lead to a biased estimate of imputed
missing values if the mechanism is not correctly modelled, e.g., if not all relevant
variables are considered or the relationship between these variables is incorrect.
In this case, a MAR model may outperform an ill-defined MNAR model.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Missing data
21
3.1.3
MNAR models
Since M(C)AR data can be modelled with conventional methods, which ignore
the missing-data mechanism, we’ll skip those for now - and focus on how to
model MNAR data.
There exist three popular ways of modelling the joint distribution of the data
x and the mask m in the MNAR case. These models are distinguished by how
they factorize the joint distribution. The choice between the selection model
and pattern mixture model usually comes down to the ease of modelling the
data generation process of said data [Spo21].
Selection model
In the selection model, the factorization of the joint distribution follows how the
missing-data mechanism is defined:
pψ,θ(x, m) = pψ(m|x)pθ(x)
Let’s give an example where the selection model is natural to use.
Assume
in a clinical survey, for each decrease of 0.1 in quality of life, the chance of
being missing doubles, then it would be natural to model this data using a
selection model since this description fits the missing-data mechanism pψ(m|x)
[LDC+12].
Pattern mixture model
In the pattern mixture model, the factorization of the joint distribution is "re-
versed":
pψ,θ(x, m) = pψ(x|m)pθ(m)
Let’s give an example where the pattern mixture model is natural to use. As-
sume in a clinical survey, participants with missing data have a 0.1 lower quality
of life than those observed, then it would be natural to model this data using a
pattern mixture model since this description is more easily modelled by pψ(x|m)
[LDC+12].
Conjunction model
In the conjunction model, an auxiliary variable z is introduced:
pψ,θ(x, m) =
Z
pψ1(m|z)pψ2(x|z)pθ(z) dz
The model assumes two modalities and therefore allows for more flexibility be-
tween the data distribution and mask distribution. More precisely, the model
avoids the information bottleneck of the imputed data during the mask recon-
struction (or vice versa) [CXWY23].
==PAGE:36==
22
Theory
3.2
Deep latent variable models
In this section, we introduce deep latent variable models (DLVMs), which is the
model class we will use for modelling the proteomics abundance data. Later, we
will extend this class of generative models to handle missing values using the
framework discussed in section 3.1.
DLVMs are a class of generative models, that find low-dimensional data repre-
sentations. Since the model class is generative, new samples can be produced by
sampling from the generative process. DLVMs assume the following generative
process:
z ∼p(z)
x|z ∼pθ(x|z) = p(x|fθ(z))
DLVMs include a latent representation z ∈Zw and the fully-observed data
x ∈X d, where w < d. p(z) is the latent variables prior distribution. pθ(x|z)
is from the exponential family and parametrized by the mapping fθ, called the
decoder. The decoder is often a non-linear mapping, e.g., a neural network.
Unfortunately, calculating the likelihood of the fully-observed data x is compu-
tationally intractable, since pθ(x) =
R
pθ(x, z)dz, i.e., the latent variable z is
being integrated out [Mur23]. Thus, several different models have been proposed
to do the inference of the model parameters, e.g., the variational autoencoder.
3.2.1
Variational autoencoder
The variational autoencoder (VAE), as proposed by Kingma and Welling [KW22],
is a DLVM which performs amortized variational inference to infer the pa-
rameters. To do so, they introduce a parameterizable distribution qϕ(z|x) =
q(z|gϕ(x)), called the variational distribution. The variational distribution is
parameterized with a mapping gϕ called the encoder. Similar to the decoder,
the encoder is usually a non-linear mapping, e.g., a neural network. With the
introduction of the encoder, the VAE can be depicted as in Fig. 3.1.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Deep latent variable models
23
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a variational autoencoder.
Figure inspired by
Kingma et. al. [KW19]
The inference and generative process of a VAE can then be summarized as fol-
lows. Inference: The input data x is first mapped to the parameters of the
variational distribution using the encoder gϕ. Generative: A sample z, also
called the latent representation, is then drawn from the variational distribu-
tion. Afterwards, the latent representation z is mapped to the data distribution
parameters using the decoder fθ and finally the input is reconstructed as x′.
Notice the large resemblance to the autoencoder (AE), which compresses (en-
codes) the input data x directly to a lower-dimensional representation z (also
called the bottle-neck) and afterwards decompresses the low-dimensional repre-
sentation directly to x′. In contrast to the AE, the VAE maps the input data
x first to a latent distribution qϕ(z|x), and afterwards to a data distribution
pθ(x|z), which among other allows generating new data through sampling. The
variational autoencoder encourages the latent distribution to be compact due
to the introduction of the approximated prior latent distribution q(z).
With the variational distribution qϕ(z|x) introduced, let’s now show how it can
be used to optimize the model parameters θ and (now also) ϕ.
3.2.2
Amortized variational inference
As mentioned in section 3.2, the marginalized likelihood pθ(x) is computation-
ally intractable in a DLVM. So is computing the posterior distribution pθ(z|x),
since the marginal likelihood pθ(x) is necessary to compute the posterior dis-
tribution. However, it is possible to introduce an approximate posterior (varia-
tional) distribution qϕ(z|x), such that:
qϕ(z|x) ≈pθ(z|x)
When variational inference is amortized, the same variational inference model,
i.e., encoder and variational distribution family, is used for all samples. For
non-amortized variational inference, one inference model is considered for each
==PAGE:38==
24
Theory
sample. Using the variational distribution, the likelihood of a single sample x
can now be re-written to the following computational tractable expression:
L(θ, ϕ; x) = pθ(x) =
Z
pθ(x, z)dz =
Z pθ(x, z)
qϕ(z|x) qϕ(z|x)dz = Eqϕ(z|x)
"
pθ(x, z)
qϕ(z|x)
#
Due to the general issue of arithmetic underflow when multiplying probabilities
as done in the likelihood function L (when multiple samples are considered), the
log-likelihood l is instead maximized during optimization (or the negative log-
likelihood, which usually corresponds to the loss function, is minimized). The
log-likelihood l yields the same optimal set of parameters as when optimizing the
parameters for the likelihood L since the logarithm is a (positive) monotonous
transformation. Thus, with the use of variational inference, the log-likelihood l
to maximize becomes:
l(θ, ϕ; x) = log p(x) = log Eqϕ(z|x)
"
pθ(x, z)
qϕ(z|x)
#
Unfortunately, the log-likelihood l is numerically unstable, due to the large
variance of the denominator
1
qϕ(z|x). Let’s now present two ways to handle this
issue.
3.2.2.1
ELBO
This numerical instability can be handled by using Jensen’s inequality, yielding
the evidence lower bound (ELBO):
log Eqϕ(z|x)
pθ (x, z)
qϕ (z|x)

≥Eqϕ(z|x)

log pθ (x, z)
qϕ (z|x)

=: ELBO(θ, ϕ|x)
The ELBO can be further re-written:
ELBO(θ, ϕ; x) = Eqϕ(z|x)
"
log pθ(x, z)
qϕ(z|x)
#
= Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z) −log qϕ(z|x) + log pθ(z)]
=
Reconstruction Error
z
}|
{
Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] −
Regularization
z
}|
{
DKL (qϕ(z|x) | p(z))
The regularization term is the Kullback-Leibler divergence and determines how
strictly the variational distribution should follow the prior latent distribution.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Deep latent variable models
25
The ELBO can be extended by introducing a hyperparameter β to weight the
regularization term. This extension is also known as a beta-VAE. Reducing the
hyperparameter β yields a less constrained latent space as a diverging variational
distribution is less penalized.
3.2.2.2
Weighted importance sampling
An alternative approach to handle the numerical instability of the log-likelihood
is to introduce weighted importance sampling. VAEs using this technique are
also known as an importance weighted autoencoder (IWAE). In importance sam-
pling, K latent representations z are sampled and used to estimate the data
likelihood.
IWAEK(θ, ϕ; x) = Ez1,...,zK∼qϕ(z|x)
"
log 1
K
K
X
k=1
pθ (x, zk)
qϕ (zk|x)
#
Increasing K leads to the lower bound getting strictly tighter and approaches
the true data log-likelihood in the limit of K →∞.
3.2.3
The reparameterization trick
With the introduction of the variational distribution, a final problem arises
during optimization, namely that the gradient can not "flow through" the vari-
ational distribution to the parameters of the encoder, due to the sampling of
z - and therefore the encoders parameter ϕ can not be optimized to minimize
the loss.
This problem is solved using the "reparameterization trick".
As-
sume the variational distribution is chosen to be an isotropic normal distribu-
tion, and the output of the encoder can be split into a mean and variance,
(µϕ(x), σϕ(x)) = gϕ(x), then instead of sampling by z ∼N(µϕ(x), σϕ(x)I)),
the distribution can be reparameterized as:
z = µϕ(x) + σϕ(x) ⊙ϵ with ϵ ∼N(0, I)
The reparameterization trick allows all parameters (including those in the en-
coder) to be differentiable and therefore also optimizable since there is a deter-
ministic path through the neural network(s) as depicted in Fig. 3.2.
==PAGE:40==
26
Theory
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the reparameterization trick for an encoder re-
turning the parameters θ = {µ, σ}.
On the left, the variable
z ∼q(z|µ, σ) is a stochastic node and therefore blocks the gra-
dient’s path to the encoder’s parameters when performing back-
propagation (the algorithm used to compute the gradients). On
the right, the gradient only passes through deterministic nodes
and therefore reaches the parameters of the encoder. Figure in-
spired by Kingma et. al. [KW19]
The reparameterization trick can also be applied to other parameterizable distri-
butions often within the exponential family [Mur23]. This family of variational
distributions (Q) usually assume the mean-field assumption, i.e., the variational
distribution factorizes into multiple independent distributions within the expo-
nential family, as follows:
QMF :=
(
q : q(z|x) =
J
Y
j=1
qj(zj|xj)
)
where zj is a component of z and q is a distribution from the exponential family.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Models
"All models are wrong, but some
are useful."
George Box
In this chapter, first other imputation methods are discussed. Afterwards, we
describe the model, protVI, which is a deep generative model for protein abun-
dance data, and the model proposed in this project. protVI is a variational
autoencoder which models the missing-data mechanism of MNAR data and
performs batch correction. protVI makes it possible to perform cell type anno-
tation, imputing missing intensities and data visualization. With the missing
intensities imputed, downstream tasks such as differential abundance analysis
and trajectory inference can be performed.
4.1
Benchmark models
Let’s now present the models with which we will benchmark protVI against
during the later experiments. These imputation methods are a mix of general-
purpose methods and models developed specifically for imputing proteomics
abundance data. All these methods are commonly used for proteomics abun-
dance data [SEP+21] [VG23a] [EFW+23].
==PAGE:42==
28
Models
4.1.1
protDP
Gordon et. al. [LS23] proposes a generalized linear model called protDP, which
models the relationship between the average protein intensity and detection
proportion (see Fig. 2.3) across samples with a zero-truncated binomial distri-
bution, as follows:
di ∼ZB(n, pi)
where n is the sample size and di is the number of detected intensity values in
protein i. The probability of detecting protein i, is given by:
logit pi = β0 + β1 · µobs,i
where µobs,i is the average observed protein intensity of protein i, and β0 and
β1 are weights. Thus, protDP can be viewed as a self-masked MNAR model
at the aggregated level, which models the missing-data mechanism but not the
joint intensity data distribution as well. With this relationship between average
protein intensity and detection proportion modelled, they use a technique called
"exponential tilting" to impute the missing intensities. In exponential tilting,
Bayes theorem is applied, yielding an expression to compute the missing protein
intensities. The average missing protein intensities µmis are computed using
the mean µobs and variance σ2
obs of the observed protein intensities and the
parameter estimation of the logit-linear part of the generalized linear model,
namely the slope β1, as follows:
µmis = µobs −β1 · σ2
obs
Since protDP performs the imputation at the aggregated level, protein correla-
tions within a sample are not utilized for the missing value imputation. Thus,
the model is particularly sensitive to signal strength between protein intensity
and detection probability. Another drawback is that the same imputed intensity
of a protein will be used for all samples with the protein missing.
4.1.2
k-nearest neighbour imputation
In k-nearest neighbour (KNN) imputation, each sample’s missing values are
imputed by using the mean value from the k nearest neighbours i.e., samples,
found in the dataset. Only samples with the missing feature available are con-
sidered as neighbours for said feature. Two samples are close if the features
that neither sample is missing are close as measured by a distance metric. The
distance metric is usually the L2-norm. KNN imputation is a MAR model, as
the missing-data mechanism is not modelled. Hence, the imputation of MNAR
data will be biased.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Benchmark models
29
4.1.3
Downshift models
Since missing protein intensities tend to have lower values than observed intensi-
ties, missing intensities can be imputed by weighting missing protein intensities
by the average protein intensity. The downshift methods assume left-censoring
and use different heuristics to 1. decide which observed intensities to use when
imputing the missing intensities and 2.
determine proportionally how much
lower the corresponding missing protein intensities should be imputed.
Two
strategies are used for the first decision, namely to either consider all observed
intensities for each missing intensity, i.e., a "global" strategy or consider the
intensities associated with each protein, i.e., a "local" strategy. With these two
decisions decided upon, the imputed missing values are computed by sampling
from a normal distribution as follows:
µmis ∼N(µmis | µobs −k · s, k · σ2
obs)
where the µobs and σ2
obs are estimated from the observed intensities considered
and the parameters, scale k and the downshift s are predefined. Here, we will
use the scale k = 0.3 and downshift s = 1.8, as they perform well across the
datasets. As a last downshift method, the minimum intensity of each observed
protein intensity is used to impute said proteins’ missing intensities.
These
downshift models are used in several papers to impute missing intensities for
proteomics abundance data [TTS+16].
==PAGE:44==
30
Models
4.2
protVI: a deep generative model for mass spec-
trometry data
Let’s now motivate the design choices of the model, called protVI, developed in
this thesis. protVI should ideally be able to find biologically meaningful latent
representations of the proteomics data since the goal of the model is to discover
new biological insights in the proteomics dataset.
Thus, any clusters in the
latent representation should be biological-based rather than due to technical
reasons, such as the sample preparation plate. A biological meaningful latent
representation could e.g., allow for cell type annotation, data integration and
cell clustering.
An example of a latent representation with the batch effect
removed is depicted in Fig. 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Latent representation before and after conditioning on batch.
Left: Cells are initially clustered by batch due to a strong batch
effect. Right: Cells are clustered by cell type after removing the
batch effect.
protVI should also be able to impute missing intensities, as downstream tasks
such as differential abundance analysis and trajectory inference, assume no miss-
ing intensities. Recall from section 2.2.3, that the protein detection probability
depends on said protein intensity. Hence, the data is MNAR, and as discussed
in section 3.1.2, it is necessary to model the missing-data mechanism as well,
otherwise, the imputed intensities are biased.
Deep latent variable models, as introduced in section 3.2, is a class of mod-
els which can be extended to 1.
find low-dimensional representations of the
data while removing batch effects and 2. model the missing-data mechanism.
Within the class of DLVMs, we will use a VAE, hence the model parameters are
estimated using variational inference by introducing the variational distribution
(and an encoder). We will explore four protVI variants. The first variant does
not model the missing-data mechanism, while the three remaining variants do
==PAGE:45==
4.2 protVI: a deep generative model for mass spectrometry data
31
model the missing-data mechanism. These model variants are motivated by the
knowledge from section 2.2.3, that the missingness pattern is highly complex
for proteomics data as protein abundance data contains unknown proportions
of MCAR and MNAR data [VG23a]. Fig. 2.3 suggests e.g., that modelling the
data missingness as self-masking is insufficient since the relationship between
protein intensity and detection probability varies by protein and dataset. All
four protVI variants are depicted in Fig. 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Graphical representations of the four protVI variants. The base-
line is a MAR model, and the remaining model variants are MNAR
models as they model the missing-data mechanism.
The MNAR variants (selection, conjunction and hybrid variant) are extensions
to the MAR variant (baseline). The conjunction variant and hybrid variant have
less restrictive assumptions on the missing-data mechanism compared to the
selection variant. These variants allow an unobserved sample-specific variable,
i.e., the latent representation, to influence the detection probability as well.
Hence, neither of these models model the missing-data mechanism as (strictly)
self-masking. This flexibility can potentially improve the imputation compared
to the selection variant as the self-masked MNAR missing-data mechanism may
not be sufficient.
Let’s now introduce each of the variants. Since the MNAR variants are exten-
sions to the MAR variant and only differ in the generative process, the inference
process will only be introduced in the MAR variant, i.e., the baseline variant.
4.2.1
Baseline variant
For the inference process, protVI uses a neural network as the encoder. The
neural network is a feed-forward neural network since no spatial nor tempo-
==PAGE:46==
32
Models
ral dependency exists between the proteins in the dataset. Since the protein
abundance data is only partially observed, samples have variable lengths. A
feed-forward neural network assumes a fixed-length input. Thus, we introduce
an imputation function l that transforms xobs into a complete input vector
l(xobs) ∈X such that l(xobs)obs = xobs. Thereby, the input to the encoder is
the same fixed size for all samples as the missing intensities contain values as
well. The imputation function used is zero-imputation, i.e., missing intensities
(NA) are set to the value zero, as the input to the model. Previous work [MF19]
has shown that zero imputation performs almost as well as oracle imputation,
i.e., if the ground truth values were used.
The baseline variant is similar to the VAE called scVI [LRC+18], which models
RNA expression data and has found traction in the single-cell community. How-
ever, scVI normalizes the RNA expression which improves the latent representa-
tion of the cells. We did not see an improvement in the latent representation of
protein abundance when protVI normalized the protein abundance data. Thus,
protVI as presented here does not apply normalization to the protein abun-
dance data. Since RNA expression data is count data, the data distribution is
modelled using a count distribution. scVI uses a zero-inflated negative binomial
distribution by default. scVI is not directly applicable to model protein abun-
dance data (nor as a baseline variant), since protein abundance data is not count
data, but in the domain of non-negative real numbers. Protein abundance data
which has been log-normalized appears to follow a normal distribution (See Fig.
A.6 and Fig. A.2). All protVI variants model the (log normalized) data using a
normal distribution since we will apply a log transformation on the raw protein
abundance data.
An important difference between RNA expression data and protein abundance
data is data missingness.
In expression data, no entries in the dataset are
missing. The true expression in a cell is likely to be larger than the measured
expression, but a value of zero is interpreted as the gene is not expressed rather
than a "missing" entry in the dataset. This difference is crucial as expression
data can be modelled as fully observed as the input becomes automatically fixed-
length. Furthermore, it is redundant to model the missing-data mechanism.
The generative process and the corresponding graphical model of the baseline
variant are depicted in Fig. 4.3.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 protVI: a deep generative model for mass spectrometry data
33
zn ∼N(0, I)
µnp = f p
1 (zn, sn)
xnp ∼N(µnp, σ2
p)
Figure 4.3: Generative process (left) and graphical model (right) of protVIs
baseline variant.
The generative process uses one neural network, f1 : Zw × {0, 1}K →X d to
decode the protein abundance since the decoding of the latent representation is
assumed to be highly non-linear. The network takes the latent representation
and a one-hot encoding of the batch id of said sample as input. Decomposing
the input to the decoder into the batch and latent representation encourages
the latent representation to be biologically meaningful since it is redundant to
encode the batch id in the latent representation. The decoder’s neural network
is a feed-forward neural network since no spatial nor temporal dependency exists
between the proteins in the dataset. Instead of parameterizing the variance of
the protein abundance (σ2) with a neural network, a set of learnable weights
is used. Thus, the model assumes that a protein type has the same variance
across all samples, thereby reducing the number of learnable weights.
With the model specified, the likelihood of the data can be defined by first
factorising the joint distribution of the data according to the baseline model.
Under the MAR assumption, the relevant quantity to maximise is the likelihood
of the observed data:
pθ
 xobs | s

=
Z pθ
 xobs | z, s

p(z)
qϕ (z | xobs)
qϕ
 z | xobs
dz
= Ez∼qϕ(z|xobs)
"
pθ
 xobs | z, s

p(z)
qϕ (z | xobs)
#
As discussed in section 3.2.2, optimising the log-likelihood directly is intractable.
Thus, we introduce the ELBO and IWAE. The IWAE can be formulated as
follows:
IWAEK(θ, ϕ) =
n
X
i=1
E
"
log 1
K
K
X
k=1
wki
#
==PAGE:48==
34
Models
and the importance weights become:
wki = pθ
 xobs
i
| zki, si

p (zki)
qϕ
 zki | xobs
i

The ELBO can be formulated similarly:
ELBO(θ, ϕ) = Eqϕ(z|xobs
i
)

log pθ(xobs
i
|z, s) −log qϕ(z|xobs
i
) + log pθ(z)

= Eqϕ(z|xobs
i
)

log pθ(xobs
i
|z, s)

−DKL
 qϕ(z|xobs
i
) | p(z)

4.2.2
Selection variant
The formulation of the missing-data mechanism for proteomics abundance data
fits the selection variant naturally, as the detection probability increases as the
protein intensity increases. The generative process and the corresponding graph-
ical model of the selection variant are depicted in Fig 4.4.
zn ∼N(0, I)
µnp = f p
1 (zn, sn)
xnp ∼N(µnp, σ2
p)
logit θnp = β0 + β1 · xnp
mnp ∼B(θnp)
Figure 4.4: Generative process (left) and graphical model (right) of protVIs
selection variant.
Notice by the generative process, that the missing-data mechanism is assumed
to be self-masked, and the detection probability follows a Bernoulli distribution,
with the probability parameter modelled using a logit-linear function. The pa-
rameters, β0 and β1 of the logit-linear function are inferred by the model from
the data.
With the model specified, the likelihood of the data can be defined by first
==PAGE:49==
4.2 protVI: a deep generative model for mass spectrometry data
35
factorising the joint distribution of the data according to the selection model:
pψ,θ
 xobs, m | s

=
ZZ pψ
 m | xobs, xmis
pθ
 xobs | z, s

p(z)
qϕ (z | xobs)
qϕ
 z | xobs
pθ
 xmis | z, s

dxmisdz
= Ez∼qϕ(z|xobs),xmis∼pθ(xmis|z,s)
"
pψ
 m | xobs, xmis
pθ
 xobs | z, s

p(z)
qϕ (z | xobs)
#
By introducing a hyperparameter α to weigh the missing-data mechanism, the
modified importance weights become:
wki = pψ
 mi | xobs
i
, xmis
ki
α pθ
 xobs
i
| zki, si

p (zki)
qϕ
 zki | xobs
i

Furthermore, the ELBO becomes:
ELBO(ψ, θ, ϕ) = Eqϕ(z|xobs
i
)

α log pθ(xobs
i
|z, s) + log pψ(mi|xobs
i
)

−DKL
 qϕ(z|xobs
i
) | p(z)

This formulation of decomposing the model as a selection model is similar to
the MNAR model proposed by Ipsen et. al. [IMF21]. However, we also consider
a conditional embedding by integrating the batch effect. Additionally, we weigh
the missing-data mechanism by the hyperparameter α in the objective function
to adjust the importance of the missing-data mechanism’s self-masked compo-
nent during parameter inference. Including the hyperparameter is motivated
by the observation that the signal of the missing-data mechanism assumed to
be self-masked is insufficient to model the relationship. Notice, the special case
where α = 0 which corresponds to the baseline variant shown in Fig. 4.2
4.2.3
Conjunction variant
In the conjunction variant, it is assumed that an underlying representation in-
fluences the missing-data mechanism. The generative process and the corre-
sponding graphical model of the conjunction variant are depicted in Fig 4.5.
==PAGE:50==
36
Models
zn ∼N(0, I)
hn = fh(zn, sn)
µnp = gp
1(hn)
xnp ∼N(µnp, σ2
p)
logit θnp = gp
2(hn)
mnp ∼B(θnp)
Figure 4.5: Generative process (left) and graphical model (right) of protVIs
conjunction variant.
In the conjunction model, a shared representation hn is introduced, which is
produced from a neural network fh, the detection probability θnp and protein
abundance xnp are afterwards produced by two linear layers, g1 and g2, respec-
tively. This structure encourages the hidden representation hn to be informative
for both the mask and protein abundance since the linear layers are less versa-
tile than a neural network. The conjunction model imposes fewer assumptions
on the missing-data mechanism compared to the selection model. This may be
advantageous since the missing-data mechanism in protein abundance is highly
complex as it contains both MCAR and MNAR data and in unknown propor-
tions.
This formulation of decomposing the model as a conjunction model is similar
to the MNAR model proposed by Chen et. al. [CXWY23]. However, we also
consider a conditional embedding by integrating the batch effect.
The derivation of the ELBO and the modified importance weights follow the
same steps as those for the selection variant and have therefore been omitted.
4.2.4
Hybrid variant
In the hybrid variant, the self-masking component introduced in the selection
variant is also used.
Additionally, the model assumes that the missing-data
mechanism is influenced by a sample-specific hidden variable. The generative
process and the corresponding graphical model of the hybrid variant are depicted
in Fig 4.6.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 protVI: a deep generative model for mass spectrometry data
37
zn ∼N(0, I)
µnp = f p
1 (zn, sn)
xnp ∼N(µnp, σ2
p)
hnp = f p
2 (zn)
logit θnp = β0 + β1 · xnp + β2 · hnp
mnp ∼B(θnp)
Figure 4.6: Generative process (left) and graphical model (right) of protVIs
hybrid variant.
The hybrid variant was motivated by allowing for a sample-specific effect on the
missingness while keeping the degrees of freedom limited through an additive
logit-linear assumption.
The derivation of the ELBO and the modified importance weights follow the
same steps as those for the selection variant and have therefore been omitted.
4.2.5
Imputation
When protVI has been trained, it can impute missing values as follows:
ˆxmis = E

xmis | xobs, m

≈
L
X
l=1
E

xmis | xobs, m, zl

where L latent representations are sampled from the variational distribution
q(z | xobs).
This formulation of imputing missing intensities can be further
expanded based on the protVI variant, and whether the model uses importance
weights or not.
4.2.6
Implementation
The model protVI and its variants are implemented in Python using the frame-
works PyTorch [PGM+19] and scvi-tools [GLX+22]. This language and tooling
==PAGE:52==
38
Models
were chosen, because the single-cell community favours these (and the program-
ming language R). scvi-tools integrates well with several single-cell libraries, such
as AnnData [VRT+21] and Scanpy [WAT18]. AnnData standardizes the format
of abundance and expression data. Scanpy is a framework for preprocessing and
visualization of single-cell abundance and expression data.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Experiments
In this chapter, the performances of the protVI variants are evaluated on a bulk
proteomics dataset and two single-cell proteomics datasets. By introducing addi-
tional missing values, we evaluate the protVI variants’ imputation performances
and compare them to the results from the benchmark models. We also explore
protVIs capability to produce a biologically meaningful low-dimensional latent
representation of the data by removing unwanted batch effects.
5.1
Mann (in-house)
The patient cohort study produced by Mann group is an in-house clinical study
containing samples from human patients with different diagnoses. The samples
are cells extracted from the patient’s brain fluids, which are separated from the
blood in the brain by the blood-brain barrier. The samples were prepared across
7 days using a total of 56 plates. The preparation date and plate are available
for each sample in the dataset.
Additionally, the biomarker Qalb, which is
associated with the thickness of the blood-brain barrier, has been measured for
each sample.
A larger Qalb is associated with a weaker blood-brain barrier
which causes more missing protein intensities due to contamination from the
blood (See Fig. A.1). In the patient cohort study, two datasets are available:
A main study dataset and a pilot study dataset.
The main study contains
samples from 4566 human patients and in total 2018 unique protein types have
been measured. 30.4% of the protein intensities are not available, i.e., missing
measurements. The pilot study contains 454 samples and 2703 unique proteins.
The samples used in the pilot study are from a subset of the same patient
cohort used in the main study. The patient a sample originates from has been
registered. In the pilot study, the measurement instrument’s sensitivity has been
==PAGE:54==
40
Experiments
increased, thereby decreasing the number of missing protein intensities for said
patient subset. For the patient cohort measured in both the pilot study and
the main study, 31.2% of the protein intensities are missing in the main study,
compared to 23.7% in the pilot study. Protein abundance matrices of the main
and pilot study are depicted in Fig. 5.1.
(a) main study
(b) pilot study
Figure 5.1: Protein abundance matrices in log-scale for the main and pilot
study.
Samples (rows) were grouped by preparation date and
proteins (columns) were sorted by protein detection proportion.
Lighter colours in the protein abundance matrix correspond to
more abundant proteins in a sample. The color white in the ma-
trix corresponds to missing protein intensity measurements.
Since protein abundance data is partly MNAR (and partly MCAR), it becomes
difficult to evaluate the models’ performances: It is not possible to add addi-
tional MNAR data without changing the underlying MNAR-data mechanism.
Fortunately, the main and pilot study contain an overlapping patient cohort
and the pilot study contains fewer missing values than the main study for this
patient cohort.
The protein intensities measured in the pilot study but not
in the main study could therefore be used to evaluate a model’s imputation
performance. To evaluate the imputed missing intensities, the pilot and main
study must first be integrated as there are variations between the protein in-
tensity measurements due to e.g., different measurement instrument sensitivity,
different patient-specific cells measured and other external factors not properly
accounted for. Protein intensities measured in both the main and pilot studies,
which correspond to 539, 467 protein intensities, are used to integrate the two
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Mann (in-house)
41
studies. Two transformations are applied: A plate normalization, followed by
a linear correction. The plate normalization is applied to the main and pilot
study separately. The transformations work as follows:
Plate normalization.
The mean and variance are computed using all the
observed intensities in the protein abundance matrix (and stored for later).
The samples are afterwards normalised using the mean and variance of the
samples within the same plate. Finally, the samples are rescaled by the mean
and variance of all the observed intensities in the protein abundance matrix.
Linear correction. The difference between overlapping protein intensities in
the main and pilot studies is regressed out using linear regression (with an
intercept). The predictor variable is the protein intensity in the pilot study and
the target variable is the protein intensity in the main study.
Figure 5.2: Integration of main and pilot study. Scatter plots of the protein log
intensities overlapping in the main and pilot study after applying
different integration methods.
According to Fig. 5.2, the plate normalization slightly increases the Pearson cor-
relation and decreases the mean squared error (MSE) between the overlapping
intensities in the two studies, and the linear correction reduces the MSE further.
Despite the integration of the studies, a noticeable variation still exists between
a protein intensity measured in the main study and the corresponding protein
intensity in the pilot study. Thus, using the measured protein intensities in the
pilot study as the ground truth for the missing protein intensities in the main
study will still not be perfect for evaluating model performance. Nevertheless,
we use the pilot as a starting point for evaluation.
As discussed in section 2, as the protein abundance increases, so does the prob-
ability of measuring the protein. Let’s see if this relationship is also observable
==PAGE:56==
42
Experiments
in this patient cohort by plotting the average protein log intensity against the
protein detection proportion. As depicted in Fig. 5.3, higher protein abundance
increases the probability of measurement. However, in this dataset, this rela-
tionship is very weak for average protein intensities between 12 and 15 and data
missingness appears to be MCAR.
Figure 5.3: Avg. log-protein intensity plotted against protein detection pro-
portion for the main and pilot study.
Let’s now train the protVI variants on the data from the main study.
The
protVI variants were optimized using adaptive moment estimation (Adam) with
a learning rate of 1e−3 and with a batch size of 64 samples. The dataset was
split into a training and validation dataset with a 90%/10% split, and the model
was trained for 1800 epochs. The validation set was used to select the values for
the hyperparameters and the neural networks structure. Both the encoder and
decoder used 1 hidden layer with 32 hidden units. Rectified linear unit (ReLU)
was used as the activation function between layers, followed by a dropout layer
set to a dropout rate of 10%. The latent representation was set to 10 dimensions.
The loss curves for all the variants are similar. Thus, it is only included for one
of the variants and depicted in Fig. A.3. Furthermore, maximising the IWAE
criteria did not improve performance. Thus, we have ignored it in the following
experiments.
5.1.1
Latent representations
Since the latent representation is almost identical for all the protVI variants. We
will only show the latent representations for one variant moving forward, namely
the baseline variant. According to Fig. 5.4 and Fig. 5.5, when conditioning
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Mann (in-house)
43
on the plate of a sample, the batch effect from the preparation day almost
disappears. Recall, in a single preparation day, multiple plates are prepared.
Hence, removing the batch effect of the plate also removes the batch effect seen
from the preparation day. Lastly, notice that log Qalb remains the strongest
(biological) factor.
Decreasing the KL weight (β) and thereby reducing the
strength of the prior latent distribution did not yield more than a single cluster
of the latent representation of data.
Figure 5.4: UMAP of protVIs latent representation of the main study with no
batch correction.
Figure 5.5: UMAP of protVIs latent representation of the main study with
sample plate corrected for.
==PAGE:58==
44
Experiments
5.1.2
Imputation using the pilot study as ground truth
Let’s now look at the imputation performance for each of the protVI variants and
compare these results to the results of the benchmark models. The intensities
measured in the pilot study, but not the main study are used as the ground
truth during evaluation.
Figure 5.6: MSE of missing intensities imputed using the pilot study as ground
truth.
Only the best-performing downshift model has been in-
cluded. Left: MSE computed using intensities in both the pilot
and main study. Right: MSE computed using the average protein
intensity of the intensities in both studies.
Notice, in Fig. 5.6, that none of the MNAR-based protVI models perform better
than the MAR-based protVI model (baseline) when evaluating the imputation
performance of missing values using the pilot study as ground truth. Addition-
ally, the best-performing models, namely KNN imputation, protVIs baseline
and protVI conjunction, have almost identical performances. These results are
likely due to how the models are evaluated. Recall, that the imputed missing
intensities are compared against those observed in the pilot study (but not in
the main study). As depicted in Fig. 5.2, the main and pilot studies are not
perfectly integrated. Assume a model imputes missing intensities in the main
study perfectly, i.e., the imputation error is zero for a hypothetical ground truth.
When evaluating the imputed intensities using the pilot study, the imputation
error will still not be zero. Hence, the models appear to perform very similar.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Mann (in-house)
45
5.1.3
Imputation with artificial missingness
Recall from section 4.2, that protein abundance data contains both MCAR
and MNAR missingness, but the proportions of these missingness types are un-
known. Let’s now introduce additional MCAR and MNAR missing data with
variable proportions into the data. The models’ performances are evaluated us-
ing these missing values as ground truth. We follow the procedure introduced
by Etourneau et. al. [EFW+23] and described in Appendix B. This procedure
generates pseudo MNAR values using a probit left-censoring mechanism. Both
the overall missing value rate and MNAR/MCAR proportion can be controlled.
In the experiments, the overall missing value rate was set to 2%, i.e., an addi-
tional 2% of the intensities have been masked. This corresponds to a test set of
128, 606 intensities. The results of the experiments are shown in Fig. 5.7 and
the distribution of the artificial missing intensities are depicted in A.5. Models
with an imputation performance of one order of magnitude worse than the best-
performing model have been excluded, i.e., the downshift models. Additionally,
the figure does not contain the performance of protVIs MNAR variants with
varying values of the hyperparameter α, since the protVI models did not out-
perform the baseline variant. Their imputation performance converged towards
the performance of the baseline variant as α →0.
Figure 5.7: The MSE of the best-performing imputation methods as a func-
tion of the proportion of MNAR data (compared to MCAR data)
artificially introduced in the main study.
According to Fig. 5.7, protVIs baseline variant outperforms all the other models
and the conjunction model performs almost identically to the baseline. These
results suggest that either the conjunction model is not able to add additional
information or no additional information exists in the dataset. We will explore
==PAGE:60==
46
Experiments
this further in section 5.2, where a dataset with a stronger relationship between
protein intensity and detection probability is used. Notice, that the selection
and hybrid variant performs better as the MNAR proportion increases. These
results are consistent with the expectation as these variants explicitly model
a self-masked MNAR mechanism.
Hence, these models should (as they do)
improve in imputation performance, when the missing data follows a self-masked
MNAR trend.
As protVIs selection variant and hybrid variant perform noticeably worse than
the baseline and conjunction variants, let’s explore the differences in what they
impute the missing values to be.
Figure 5.8: Average imputed protein intensity for each protein of the missing
and observed intensities on each axis.
According to Fig. 5.8, both the selection variant and conjunction variant impute
missing intensities lower than the observed intensities within the same protein.
Thereby further supporting that lower intensities are more likely to be missing.
However contrary to the selection variant, in the conjunction variant as the
protein intensities decrease, so does the difference between the predicted missing
intensity and predicted observed intensity for said protein. Since the conjunction
variant (and baseline variant) outperforms the selection variant (and hybrid
variant), it is plausible that the true relationship between observed and missing
intensities is closer to the relationship seen in the conjunction variant compared
to the selection variant. In Fig. 5.9 and 5.10, a subset of the observed intensities
is depicted together with imputed intensities including 95%-prediction interval.
Notice, that the selection variant has a larger uncertainty interval compared to
the conjunction (and baseline) variant.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Mann (in-house)
47
Figure 5.9: Log protein intensity rank plots for a subset of the observed and
protein log-intensities imputed intensities. protVIs selection vari-
ant was used to impute the intensities.
Figure 5.10: Log protein intensity rank plots for a subset of the observed and
protein log-intensities imputed intensities. protVIs conjunction
variant was used to impute the intensities.
5.1.4
Missing-data mechanism
Let’s finally look at how the protVIs MNAR variants predict the missing-data
mechanism by plotting the average detection probability against the mean im-
puted protein intensity for each protein. Here, we will only look at the results
from the selection and conjunction variants, since the results are similar for the
hybrid and baseline variants, respectively.
==PAGE:62==
48
Experiments
Figure 5.11: Missing-data mechanism results for protVIs selection variant.
Left: Average imputed protein intensity plotted against aver-
age protein detection probability. Right: Predicted vs observed
detection proportions for each protein.
Figure 5.12: Missing-data mechanism results for protVIs conjunction variant.
Left: Average imputed protein intensity plotted against average
protein detection probability. Right: Predicted vs observed de-
tection proportions for each protein.
According to Fig. 5.11, the selection variant appears to capture the trend be-
tween average observed log intensity and detection proportion. Recall protDP
is a benchmark model which models this relationship as well, but has been
excluded from the results since the remaining models outperform protDP no-
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Mann (in-house)
49
ticeably. We compare the logit curve estimated by protVIs selection variant
and protDP in A.4. According to Fig. 4.5, the conjunction variant is almost
able to predict detection proportion perfectly. These findings further support
the hypothesis that the conjunction model is not any more informative than the
baseline variant, since no restriction in the missing-data mechanism appears to
exist.
==PAGE:64==
50
Experiments
5.2
Brunner2022
In the single-cell proteomics dataset produced by Brunner et. al [BTV+22],
2501 unique proteins were measured for 434 HeLa cells. 234 of these cells were
treated with thymidine and nocodazole to produce four cell populations enriched
in specific cell cycle stages as depicted in Fig 5.13 (left). The remaining 200 cells
were untreated. The protein abundance matrix is depicted in Fig. 5.13 (right)
and the relationship between average protein abundance and protein detection
proportion is depicted in Fig. 2.3 a). Since the relationship between average
protein abundance and protein detection proportion appears to be stronger, this
dataset becomes particularly interesting for evaluating the imputation perfor-
mance of protVIs MNAR variants. 48.24% of the intensities are missing. Cells
in the dataset have not been annotated by the plate they originate from. Thus,
the latent representation is likely influenced by both technical variability and
biological variability. For that reason, we will ignore the latent representation.
(a) main study
(b) pilot study
Figure 5.13: Left: Cell cycle stages in the cell cycle. Figure courtesy of Brun-
ner et.
al.
[BTV+22].
Right: Protein abundance matrices
in log-scale for the pilot and main study. Samples (rows) were
grouped by cell cycle stage and proteins (columns) were sorted
by protein detection proportion. Lighter colours in the protein
abundance matrix correspond to more abundant proteins in a
sample. The color white in the matrix corresponds to missing
protein intensity measurements.
The protVI variants were trained using the same hyperparameters as before,
except the variants were trained for 4000 epochs and the hidden layer used 16
neurons for the encoder and decoder. The loss curves for all the variants are
similar. Thus, it is only included for one of the variants and depicted in Fig.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Brunner2022
51
A.7. Furthermore, the dataset was split into a training and validation dataset
with a 90%/10% split. The validation set was used to select the values for the
hyperparameters and the neural networks structure, i.e., the number of hidden
layers and number of neurons per layer.
5.2.1
Imputation with artificial missingness
Similar to subsection 5.1.3, we introduce variable proportions of MCAR and
MNAR data in order to evaluate the models’ imputation performance.
The
procedure for adding missing data into the data is in Appendix B. In the ex-
periments, the overall missing value rate was set to 8%, i.e., an additional 8%
of the intensities have been masked. This corresponds to a test set of 86, 833
intensities. The results of the experiments are shown in Fig. 5.14 and the dis-
tribution of the artificial missing intensities are depicted in A.11. Models with
an imputation performance of at least one order of magnitude worse than the
best-performing model have been excluded. Additionally, the figure does not
contain the performance of protVIs MNAR variants with varying values of the
hyperparameter α, since the protVI models did not outperform the baseline
variant.
Figure 5.14: The MSE of the best imputation methods as a function of the
proportion of MNAR data (compared to MCAR data) artificially
introduced in the patient cohort study.
According to Fig. 5.14, the best performing models are 5-nn (KNN), protVIs
baseline and conjunction variant for all MNAR (and MCAR) proportions. These
results support the previous results that modelling the missing-data mechanism
as done in the conjunction variant does not improve the imputation performance
==PAGE:66==
52
Experiments
over the baseline variant.
Furthermore, neither the selection nor the hybrid
variant outperforms the baseline variant. Since the dataset only contains 434
samples but 2501 unique proteins, it is plausible that not enough samples are
available to properly estimate protVIs parameters. KNN imputation is much
less sensitive to the number of samples available in the training dataset. We
have included rank plots for a subset of the protein log intensities imputed by
the selection and conjunction variant in A.9 and A.10.
As protVIs selection variant and hybrid variant perform noticeably worse than
the baseline and conjunction variants, let’s explore the differences in what they
impute the missing values to be.
Figure 5.15: Average imputed protein intensity for each protein of the missing
and observed intensities on each axis.
According to Fig. 5.15, the selection variant (and the hybrid variant) predicts
the missing intensities to be lower than the corresponding observed intensities for
each protein. On the contrary, the conjunction variant (and the baseline variant)
predicts the missing intensities to have the same intensities as the observed
proteins for each protein. Since the conjunction variant has the best imputation
performance, it is possible that most missingness is protein-related and not
intensity-related in this dataset.
5.2.2
Missing-data mechanism
Let’s finally look at how the protVIs MNAR variants predict the missing-data
mechanism by plotting the average detection probability against the mean im-
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Brunner2022
53
puted protein intensity for each protein. Here, we will only look at the results
from the selection and conjunction variants, since the results are similar for the
hybrid and baseline variants, respectively.
Figure 5.16: Missing-data mechanism results for protVIs selection variant.
Left: Average imputed protein intensity plotted against aver-
age protein detection probability. Right: Predicted vs observed
detection proportions for each protein.
Figure 5.17: Missing-data mechanism results for protVIs conjunction variant.
Left: Average imputed protein intensity plotted against average
protein detection probability. Right: Predicted vs observed de-
tection proportions for each protein.
==PAGE:68==
54
Experiments
According to Fig. 5.16, the selection variant appears to capture the trend be-
tween average observed log intensity and detection proportion. Recall protDP
is a benchmark model which models this relationship as well, but has been
excluded from the results since the remaining models outperform protDP no-
ticeably. We compare the logit curve estimated by protVIs selection variant
and protDP in A.8. According to Fig. 5.17, the conjunction variant is almost
able to predict detection proportion perfectly. These findings again support the
hypothesis that the conjunction model is not any more informative than the
baseline variant, since no restriction in the missing-data mechanism appears to
exist.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Schoof (in-house)
55
5.3
Schoof (in-house)
The single-cell protein abundance data produced by Schoof is an in-house dataset.
The dataset contains 13 different cell types of cells extracted from rats. 1034
unique proteins were measured across 2541 cells. 23.64% of the entries in the
protein abundance matrix are missing. Each cell has been annotated with the
sample batch it was prepared in. With this dataset, we will focus on the latent
representation produced by protVI, since cells have been properly annotated.
The protVI baseline variant was optimized using adaptive moment estimation
(Adam) with a learning rate of 1e−3 and with a batch size of 64 samples. The
dataset was split into a training and validation dataset with a 90%/10% split,
and the model was trained for 3000 epochs. The validation set was used to select
the values for the hyperparameters and the neural networks structure. Both the
encoder and decoder used 1 hidden layer with 32 hidden units. Rectified linear
unit (ReLU) was used as the activation function between layers, followed by a
dropout layer set to a dropout rate of 10%. The latent representation was set
to 10 dimensions and the KL-divergence weight (β) to 1.
5.3.1
Latent representations
Let’s now evaluate protVIs latent representation with and without performing
batch correction. The sample batch has been used as the batch effect in protVI.
Figure 5.18: UMAP of protVIs latent representation of the data with no batch
correction applied.
==PAGE:70==
56
Experiments
Figure 5.19: UMAP of protVIs latent representation of the data with batch
correction applied. The Plate was defined as the batch effect.
According to Fig. 5.18, the UMAP of protVI latent representation of the data
yields several clusters, and each cluster corresponds to the sample plate the cell
was prepared on. There appears to be no structure when coloring by cell type.
In contrast, when removing batch effects as seen in Fig. 5.19, samples with
the same cell type cluster together, but only a single large cluster emerges. In
A.12 and A.13, the UMAPs are shown as well with each cell type coloured at
a time. Reducing the weight on the KL-divergence did not yield more clusters
when applying batch corrections as well. Nevertheless, these results support
that protVI is able to find biologically meaningful latent representations of the
data.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Discussion of the results
57
5.4
Discussion of the results
In section 5, one bulk protein dataset and two single-cell proteomics datasets
were evaluated. Based on the experiments, we found that protVI was able to
find biologically meaningful latent representation by removing (unwanted) tech-
nical variabilities, i.e., batch effects. This was most noticeable in the single-cell
dataset provided by Schoof. The latent representation of the data produced by
protVI clustered cells by cell type instead of preparation plate after applying
batch correction. Based on the models’ imputation performances on the pro-
teomics datasets using artificial missingness, we observed that protVIs baseline
variant is the best-performing protVI model. Furthermore, the baseline variant
performed no worse than the best-performing benchmark models and in some
cases better. These results suggest that modelling the missing-data mechanism
as done by the protVIs MNAR variants is redundant and in most cases will
yield worse imputation performance. Previous work has shown modelling the
missing-data mechanism improves the performance in other datasets, e.g., image
datasets with values which are artificially MNAR. However, the results are based
on introducing self-masked MNAR data with a very strong relationship, e.g., us-
ing a logit [IMF21]. This missing-data mechanism would be in most real-world
datasets an oversimplified assumption, particularly for proteomics data. Recall,
that proteomics abundance data contain both MNAR and MCAR data and the
proportions of each type are unknown. Additionally, the MNAR mechanism is
not well understood in proteomics abundance data. An additional complication
with evaluating imputation performance is that introducing additional MNAR
data to an already partially observed MNAR dataset will generate a different
missing-data mechanism. This issue complicates the evaluation of the imputa-
tion performance of MNAR data. An interesting direction to explore would be
to evaluate imputation performance using differential abundance analysis. As-
sume, a smaller experiential workflow with higher precision has been carried out
with the differentially abundant proteins identified for a few cell types. Using
this dataset as ground truth for differential abundant proteins, a larger dataset
(with less precision and more missing intensities) may be constructed for the
same cell types. Missing intensities in the larger dataset may be imputed by
each model and the differentially abundant proteins identified can be compared
with the smaller reference dataset. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge
such datasets are not currently available in proteomics.
==PAGE:72==
58
Experiments
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this thesis, a deep generative model for mass spectrometry proteomics data
was developed. The model developed in this thesis, called protVI, targets pro-
tein (and peptide) abundance data and is applicable to both bulk and single-cell
data. In a MS-based proteomics workflow, protein abundance data is acquired
as the end product of a combined experimental and computational pipeline.
This pipeline introduces challenges in later biological-meaningful analysis: The
protein abundance data acquired by a MS-based workflow has up to 70% miss-
ing values with different causes of the missing values, and strong batch effects
persist in the data. protVI addresses these challenges. protVI is a variational
autoencoder which can impute missing protein intensities.
We explore four
variants of the model. Three of the variants model the missing-data mechanism
explicitly, which is a requirement to impute missing-not-at-random data without
introducing bias.
We evaluate protVI imputation performance on a bulk dataset and a single-cell
dataset by introducing additional missing protein intensities.
These missing
intensities are either missing-completely-at-random (MCAR) or missing-not-at-
random (MNAR), i.e., intensity dependent. We find that the protVI variant
not modelling the missing-data mechanism explicitly performs the best inde-
pendent of whether the missing intensities are MCAR or MNAR. This variant
is also competitive with state-of-the-art models used to impute missing values
in proteomics.
Modelling the missing-data mechanism explicitly in protVI does not improve
the imputation performance. It is possible that the missing-data is missing-
at-random (MAR) and not missing-not-at-random (MNAR). Existing literature
suggests that the missing-data mechanism is MNAR. However, they appear to
take a causal approach to missingness: A dataset may be self-masking, and
==PAGE:74==
60
Conclusion
therefore appear self-masked MNAR, yet be MAR, as including the missing-
data mechanism contains no additional information about the protein intensities
data distribution. This hypothesis is further supported by the proteins being
highly correlated within a sample cohort. Hence, modelling the missing-data
mechanism may be redundant, and will lead to imputation bias if not modelled
correctly.
Lastly, we find that all the protVI variants are able to find biologically meaning-
ful low-dimensional representations of the data by accounting for batch effects.
The latent representation of the data enables several downstream tasks such as
cell type annotation, data visualization and data integration.
The source code for the model and notebooks to reproduce the benchmarks are
available at:
https://github.com/RasmusML/protVI
6.1
Outlook
If high throughput sequencing in single-cell proteomics keeps improving at the
same rate as seen in the previous few years, then datasets with hundreds of
thousands of cells, each with thousands of unique proteins measured, will be
available within a couple of years.
Thus, a model such as protVI which is
highly scaleable, becomes increasingly more attractive to use. Furthermore, as
the number of available datasets increases, data integration (between datasets)
becomes increasingly more important.
We expect benchmark datasets where differentially expressed proteins are known
(as their relative abundances are controlled) to become available as well. Dif-
ferential abundant analysis will be a new and valuable opportunity to evaluate
protVIs imputation performance especially since protein abundance data is not
missing completely at random. Another exciting direction is to extend protVI
to be able to perform differential abundance analysis directly. VAEs target-
ing RNA expression data, such as the model called scVI, have already shown
great results as VAE models can use complex nonlinear mappings to capture
unwanted batch effects.
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
Additional results from
experiments
A.1
Mann (in-house)
Figure A.1: Left: QAlb distribution of the main study with the cutoff ranges
defined. Right: Protein detection proportion for the three QAlb
ranges. A larger QAalb is associated with more missing protein
intensities.
==PAGE:76==
62
Additional results from experiments
Figure A.2: Histogram of observed protein log-intensities in the main study.
Figure A.3: protVIs (baseline variant) loss per epoch evaluated on training
and validation by splitting the main study into a 90%/10% train-
ing and validation set.
Figure A.4: Protein detection probability curves for protDP and protVIs se-
lection variant. Notice that, protVIs selection variant captures
the relationship between average protein intensity and detection
proportion better when the average protein log-intensity is be-
tween 12 and 15.
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Brunner2022
63
A.2
Brunner2022
Figure A.6: Histogram of observed protein log-intensities.
Figure A.7: protVIs (baseline variant) loss per epoch evaluated on training
and validation by splitting the main study into a 90%/10% train-
ing and validation set.
Figure A.8: Protein detection probability curves for protDP and protVIs se-
lection variant.
==PAGE:78==
64
Additional results from experiments
Figure A.5: Stacked distribution of artificial missing intensities for different
MNAR (blue) and MCAR (orange) proportions.
Left: Total
number of proteins masked. Right: Masked proteins are nor-
malized by the proteins within the same range in the main study.
==PAGE:79==
A.2 Brunner2022
65
Figure A.9: Log protein intensity rank plots for a subset of the observed and
protein log-intensities imputed intensities. protVIs selection vari-
ant was used to impute the intensities. 95%-prediction intervals
have been included.
Figure A.10: Log protein intensity rank plots for a subset of the observed and
protein log-intensities imputed intensities. protVIs conjunction
variant was used to impute the intensities. 95%-prediction in-
tervals have been included.
==PAGE:80==
66
Additional results from experiments
Figure A.11: Stacked distribution of artificial missing intensities for different
MNAR (blue) and MCAR (orange) proportions. Left: Total
number of proteins masked. Right: Masked proteins are nor-
malized by the proteins within the same range.
==PAGE:81==
A.3 Schoof (in-house)
67
A.3
Schoof (in-house)
Figure A.12: UMAP of protVIs latent representation with no batch correc-
tion. Plots are colored by cell type.
==PAGE:82==
68
Additional results from experiments
Figure A.13: UMAP of protVIs latent representation with batch correction.
Plots are colored by cell type.
==PAGE:83==
Appendix B
Generation of artificial
missingness
It has become customary to add pseudo-missing intensities with different MCAR
and MNAR proportions and evaluate the performance using the mean squared
error (MSE). Here we present a procedure to produce pseudo-missing values
adopted from Etourneau et. al. [EFW+23]. The MNAR entries are generated
using a probit left-censoring mechanism, i.e., the probability for an intensity x to
be missing is 1−Φ(x | ν, τ), where ν and τ are mean and standard deviation from
the Gaussian cumulative distribution function Φ. The overall missing intensity
rate α and the MNAR proportion β are set by applying the following procedure:
1. Set τ = σ/2 where σ is the overall standard deviation of the dataset.
2. Compute the expected overall rates w of missing values when applying
probit left-censoring with parameters ν′ and τ, where ν′ are intensities in
the range of the 0% quantile and αβ% quantile. In practice, we compute
100 points in this range in total.
3. Interpolate the points (ν′, w) obtained, thereby constructing a curve.
4. Compute ν associated to αβ (the desired overall MNAR rate) with the
interpolated curve.
5. Add MNAR values using probit left-censoring with parameters ν and τ.
6. Add MCAR masks with probability α(1−β)
1−αβ .
==PAGE:84==
70
Generation of artificial missingness
This procedure ensures that the overall MNAR rate is αβ. Additionally, the
overall missing intensity rate is α, since
P(x is missing) = P((x is MCAR) ∪(x is MNAR))
= P(x is MCAR) + P(x is MNAR) −P((x is MCAR ) ∩(x is MNAR))
= α(1 −β)
1 −αβ + αβ −βα2(1 −β)
1 −αβ
= α
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[BLH+18]
Jonathan B Baell, David J Leaver, Stefan J Hermans, Gemma L
Kelly, Margs S Brennan, Natalie L Downer, Nghi Nguyen, Jo-
hannes Wichmann, Helen M McRae, Yuqing Yang, Ben Cleary,
H Rachel Lagiakos, Stephen Mieruszynski, Guido Pacini, Han-
nah K Vanyai, Maria I Bergamasco, Rose E May, Bethany K Davey,
Kimberly J Morgan, Andrew J Sealey, Beinan Wang, Natasha Za-
mudio, Stephen Wilcox, Alexandra L Garnham, Bilal N Sheikh,
Brandon J Aubrey, Karen Doggett, Matthew C Chung, Melanie
de Silva, John Bentley, Pat Pilling, Meghan Hattarki, Olan Dolezal,
Matthew L Dennis, Hendrik Falk, Bin Ren, Susan A Charman,
Karen L White, Jai Rautela, Andrea Newbold, Edwin D Hawkins,
Ricky W Johnstone, Nicholas D Huntington, Thomas S Peat,
Joan K Heath, Andreas Strasser, Michael W Parker, Gordon K
Smyth, Ian P Street, Brendon J Monahan, Anne K Voss, and Tim
Thomas. Inhibitors of histone acetyltransferases KAT6A/B induce
senescence and arrest tumour growth. Nature, 560(7717):253–257,
August 2018.
[BTV+22]
Andreas-David Brunner, Marvin Thielert, Catherine Vasilopoulou,
Constantin Ammar, Fabian Coscia, Andreas Mund, Ole B Hoern-
ing, Nicolai Bache, Amalia Apalategui, Markus Lubeck, Sabrina
Richter, David S Fischer, Oliver Raether, Melvin A Park, Florian
Meier, Fabian J Theis, and Matthias Mann. Ultra-high sensitiv-
ity mass spectrometry quantifies single-cell proteome changes upon
perturbation. Molecular Systems Biology, 18(3):e10798, 2022.
[CPS+18]
Joseph Cursons, Katherine A Pillman, Kaitlin G Scheer, Philip A
==PAGE:86==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gregory, Momeneh Foroutan, Soroor Hediyeh-Zadeh, John Toubia,
Edmund J Crampin, Gregory J Goodall, Cameron P Bracken,
and Melissa J Davis. Combinatorial targeting by MicroRNAs co-
ordinates post-transcriptional control of EMT. Cell Syst., 7(1):77–
91.e7, July 2018.
[CXWY23]
Jialei Chen, Yuanbo Xu, Pengyang Wang, and Yongjian Yang.
Deep generative imputation model for missing not at random data.
In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on In-
formation and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’23. ACM, October
2023.
[EFW+23]
Lucas Etourneau, Laura Fancello, Samuel Wieczorek, Nelle Varo-
quaux, and Thomas Burger. A new take on missing value imputa-
tion for bottom-up label-free lc-ms/ms proteomics. bioRxiv, 2023.
[GLX+22]
Adam Gayoso, Romain Lopez, Galen Xing, Pierre Boyeau, Valeh
Valiollah Pour Amiri, Justin Hong, Katherine Wu, Michael Jaya-
suriya, Edouard Mehlman, Maxime Langevin, Yining Liu, Jules
Samaran, Gabriel Misrachi, Achille Nazaret, Oscar Clivio, Chenling
Xu, Tal Ashuach, Mariano Gabitto, Mohammad Lotfollahi, Valen-
tine Svensson, Eduardo da Veiga Beltrame, Vitalii Kleshchevnikov,
Carlos Talavera-López, Lior Pachter, Fabian J. Theis, Aaron
Streets, Michael I. Jordan, Jeffrey Regier, and Nir Yosef. A python
library for probabilistic analysis of single-cell omics data. Nature
Biotechnology, 40(2):163–166, Feb 2022.
[HSL+23]
Lukas Heumos, Anna C. Schaar, Christopher Lance, Anasta-
sia Litinetskaya, Felix Drost, Luke Zappia, Malte D. Lücken,
Daniel C. Strobl, Juan Henao, Fabiola Curion, Hananeh Aliee, Me-
shal Ansari, Pau Badia-i Mompel, Maren Büttner, Emma Dann,
Daniel Dimitrov, Leander Dony, Amit Frishberg, Dongze He,
Soroor Hediyeh-zadeh, Leon Hetzel, Ignacio L. Ibarra, Matthew G.
Jones, Mohammad Lotfollahi, Laura D. Martens, Christian L.
Müller, Mor Nitzan, Johannes Ostner, Giovanni Palla, Rob Pa-
tro, Zoe Piran, Ciro Ramírez-Suástegui, Julio Saez-Rodriguez, Hi-
rak Sarkar, Benjamin Schubert, Lisa Sikkema, Avi Srivastava, Jo-
van Tanevski, Isaac Virshup, Philipp Weiler, Herbert B. Schiller,
Fabian J. Theis, and Single-cell Best Practices Consortium. Best
practices for single-cell analysis across modalities. Nature Reviews
Genetics, 24(8):550–572, Aug 2023.
[IMF21]
Niels Bruun Ipsen, Pierre-Alexandre Mattei, and Jes Frellsen. not-
miwae: Deep generative modelling with missing not at random
data, 2021.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[KW19]
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. An introduction to varia-
tional autoencoders. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learn-
ing, 12(4):307–392, 2019.
[KW22]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational
bayes, 2022.
[LDC+12]
Roderick J. Little, Ralph D’Agostino, Michael L. Cohen, Kay Dick-
ersin, Scott S. Emerson, John T. Farrar, Constantine Frangakis,
Joseph W. Hogan, Geert Molenberghs, Susan A. Murphy, James D.
Neaton, Andrea Rotnitzky, Daniel Scharfstein, Weichung J. Shih,
Jay P. Siegel, and Hal Stern.
The prevention and treatment of
missing data in clinical trials. New England Journal of Medicine,
367(14):1355–1360, 2012. PMID: 23034025.
[lit02]
Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
2002.
[LKCS23]
Andrew Leduc, Luke Koury, Joshua Cantlon, and Nikolai Slavov.
Massively parallel sample preparation for multiplexed single-cell
proteomics using npop. bioRxiv, 2023.
[LRC+18]
Romain Lopez, Jeffrey Regier, Michael B Cole, Michael I Jordan,
and Nir Yosef. Deep generative modeling for single-cell transcrip-
tomics. Nat. Methods, 15(12):1053–1058, December 2018.
[LS23]
Mengbo Li and Gordon K Smyth. Neither random nor censored:
estimating intensity-dependent probabilities for missing values in
label-free proteomics. Bioinformatics, 39(5):btad200, 04 2023.
[MF19]
Pierre-Alexandre Mattei and Jes Frellsen. Miwae: Deep generative
modelling and imputation of incomplete data, 2019.
[MP19]
Karthika Mohan and Judea Pearl. Graphical models for processing
missing data, 2019.
[Mur23]
Kevin P. Murphy. Probabilistic Machine Learning: Advanced Top-
ics. MIT Press, 2023.
[MZ21]
Chao Ma and Cheng Zhang.
Identifiable generative models for
missing not at random data imputation, 2021.
[PGM+19]
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James
Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia
Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Ed-
ward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani,
Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
==PAGE:88==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 32, pages 8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[PHS+20]
Rebecca Poulos, Peter Hains, Rohan Shah, Natasha Lucas, Dylan
Xavier, Srinivas Srikanth, Asim Anees, Jennifer Koh, Sadia Mah-
boob, Max Wittman, Steven Williams, Erin Sykes, Michael Hecker,
Michael Dausmann, Merridee Wouters, Keith Ashman, Jean Yang,
Peter Wild, Anna deFazio, and Qing Zhong. Strategies to enable
large-scale proteomics for reproducible research. Nature Commu-
nications, 11:3793, 07 2020.
[RTS+23]
Florian A. Rosenberger, Marvin Thielert, Maximilian T. Strauss,
Lisa Schweizer, Constantin Ammar, Sophia C. Mädler, Andreas
Metousis, Patricia Skowronek, Maria Wahle, Katherine Madden,
Janine Gote-Schniering, Anna Semenova, Herbert B. Schiller,
Edwin Rodriguez, Thierry M. Nordmann, Andreas Mund, and
Matthias Mann. Spatial single-cell mass spectrometry defines zona-
tion of the hepatocyte proteome. Nature Methods, 20(10):1530–
1536, Oct 2023.
[Rub76]
Donald B. Rubin.
Inference and missing data.
Biometrika,
63(3):581–592, 1976.
[SEP+21]
Harrison Specht, Edward Emmott, Aleksandra A. Petelski, R. Gray
Huffman, David H. Perlman, Marco Serra, Peter Kharchenko,
Antonius Koller, and Nikolai Slavov.
Single-cell proteomic and
transcriptomic analysis of macrophage heterogeneity using scope2.
Genome Biology, 22(1):50, Jan 2021.
[Shu23]
Steven R. Shuken. An introduction to mass spectrometry-based
proteomics. Journal of Proteome Research, 22(7):2151–2171, Jul
2023.
[SKG+17]
Ashis Saha, Yungil Kim, Ariel D H Gewirtz, Brian Jo, Chuan
Gao, Ian C McDowell, Barbara E Engelhardt, Alexis Battle, and
The GTEx Consortium. Co-expression networks reveal the tissue-
specific regulation of transcription and splicing.
Genome Res.,
27(11):1843–1858, November 2017.
[Spo21]
Aude Sportisse. Handling heterogeneous and MNAR missing data
in statistical learning frameworks : imputation based on low-rank
models, online linear regression with SGD, and model-based clus-
tering. Theses, Sorbonne Université, June 2021.
[TTS+16]
Stefka Tyanova, Tikira Temu, Pavel Sinitcyn, Arthur Carlson,
Marco Y. Hein, Tamar Geiger, Matthias Mann, and Jürgen Cox.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
The perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of
(prote)omics data. Nature Methods, 13(9):731–740, Sep 2016.
[VG23a]
Christophe Vanderaa and Laurent Gatto. Revisiting the thorny
issue of missing values in single-cell proteomics, 2023.
[VG23b]
Christophe Vanderaa and Laurent Gatto.
scplainer: using lin-
ear models to understand mass spectrometry-based single-cell pro-
teomics data. bioRxiv, 2023.
[VRT+21]
Isaac Virshup, Sergei Rybakov, Fabian J. Theis, Philipp Angerer,
and F. Alexander Wolf. anndata: Annotated data. bioRxiv, 2021.
[WAT18]
F. Alexander Wolf, Philipp Angerer, and Fabian J. Theis. Scanpy:
large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis. Genome Biol-
ogy, 19(1):15, Feb 2018.
[YAOY+21] Gali Yanovich-Arad, Paula Ofek, Eilam Yeini, Mariya Mar-
damshina, Artem Danilevsky, Noam Shomron, Rachel Grossman,
Ronit Satchi-Fainaro, and Tamar Geiger.
Proteogenomics of
glioblastoma associates molecular patterns with survival. Cell Rep.,
34(9):108787, March 2021.
