==PAGE:1==
Advancing Life Sciences Automation
by Machine Learning.
Master Thesis
Department of Technology, Management and Economics,
DTU Bio­Enginering.
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Advancing Life Sciences Automation by Machine learning.
Where AI Meets Robotics: A Fusion of Technologies.
Master Thesis
Feb 2024
By
Sana Ullah Khan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, DTU Bio­Enginering., Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den­
mark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
at the Technical University of Denmark in collaboration with DTU compute to fulfil the
requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree in Business Analytics.
Sana Ullah Khan ­ s203133
Signature
Date
ii
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
28 Feb. 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Bioengineering is crucial in today’s world. From growing modified plants to highly ad­
vanced lifesaving drugs, its applications are all over. Despite the advancements in the
field, there is still a lot to address in making its processes more automated and sustain­
able.
This study introduces an enhanced system that automates quality control in life science
laboratories using the Opentrons OT­2, the most economical but originally open­loop in­
dustrial liquid handling robot. This study builds upon a previous master’s thesis, which
faced limitations related to processing delays and real­time communication with the robot.
The proposed methodology in this study addresses these limitations and improves the
accuracy of the system. The system is also designed for real­world implementation in a
laboratory setting.
In doing so, vision­based artificial intelligence is integrated to monitor the robotic arm,
detect attached tips, measure the presence of liquid inside tips and provide realtime feed­
back to the robot against every step of its process. It is also capable of instantly interrupt­
ing the process if anything goes wrong. i.e., in the case of missing tips or no liquid inside
the tip. At the end of the process, it will document the whole operation by generating
detailed logs for future reference.
The results of this thesis exhibit the feasibility of developing an affordable and accurate
closed­loop intelligent robot that can smartly handle liquid­related operations in bioengi­
neering laboratories.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors, Marjan Mansourvar and Vilhelm Krarup Møller, for their
patience and guidance throughout the project. Their valuable knowledge, expert feedback
and recommendations have allowed me to learn and enforce new techniques into the
project and logically organise the entire workflow.
I am also sincerely grateful to Aske Unger for his advice and expertise in the field of
process knowledge. It helped me understanding the requirements and optimally design
the whole process.
iv
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
History of Automation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Automation in Life Sciences.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Large­scale analysis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Standardization in automated life science laboratory. . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.3
Ensuring Safety: The capstone of life science automation. . . . . . .
4
1.2.4
Future Market for Lab Automation in Bioengineering. . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
The Opentrons OT­2 robot. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Limitation in OT2­Robot. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Thesis Objectives. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Outline. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Literature Review
9
2.1
Existing solutions and their limitations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Methods proposed in previous study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Limitations of previous study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
Challenges in advancing the OT­2, towards AI enabled automation.
. . . . 10
2.3
Parallel processing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Challenges involved in Parallel computing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Convolutional neural network (CNN). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.1
Convolution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4.2
Key Components of CNN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4.3
Activation functions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.4.4
Model complexity.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.5
Transfer Learning. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.5.1
Mechanism of transfer learning.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.5.2
Limitations in transfer learning. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.6
YoloV8 for object detection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.6.1
Comparative Analysis of YOLOv8 and YOLOv5. . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.7
Image capturing for optimal data quality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
v
==PAGE:8==
2.7.1
Fast Forward MPEG (FFmpeg) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.7.2
Open Source Computer Vision (OpenCV) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3
Methodology
24
3.1
Overview of the Proposed Solution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Detailed Description of the System Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2.1
Data Collection.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2.2
Image Annotation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2.3
Implementation of parallel computation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2.4
Role of the Server. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2.5
Role of the Client.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3
Detecting missing tip position. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.4
Measuring liquid inside tip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Results.
35
4.1
Performance of the Proposed Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
Tips and liquid detection.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3
Readings from detected tips and liquids. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4
Results comparison. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5
Conclusion
41
5.1
Accomplishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Value addition to United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UNSDGs). 41
5.3
Future work.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Bibliography
45
A Appendix
49
vi
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
History of Automation.
From simple tools and machines to the sophisticated systems we have today, automation
has been part of human history for a very long time. Initially, automation in industries like
manufacturing was mainly mechanical, but with the progress in technology, especially
with the advent of computers and AI, automation began to take on tasks that were once
only possible for humans to perform.
In the past, people used simple tools like levers and pulleys to make their work easier.
These tools evolved into more advanced systems like waterwheels and windmills. These
early versions of automation did not require human effort to operate once they were set
up. As a result, tasks could be completed with less human labour. This was a significant
advancement that improved efficiency and productivity.
The Industrial Revolution was a significant shift, introducing machines that could do the
work of many people. For example, the invention of steam engines and automatic flour
mills revolutionised how goods were produced, leading to the first natural wave of in­
dustrial automation. This era showed how automation could increase production and
efficiency in industries like textiles and manufacturing.[1]
The late 20th and early 21st centuries brought the digital revolution, with computers and
the internet transforming how automation was implemented. Microprocessors made com­
puters more affordable and widespread, leading to the integration of digital controls in
manufacturing. This paved the way for more advanced forms of automation, including
robotics and AI, which have continued to advance and become an integral part of modern
manufacturing processes.
Today, automation and AI are everywhere, from factories to our daily lives, making tasks
quicker, safer, and more efficient. This ongoing evolution shows the potential for even
more significant advances in automation technology.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Automation in Life Sciences.
Automation in bioengineering laboratories refers to the use of innovation, using advanced
technologies and robotic systems to automate tasks that were previously performed man­
ually. These tasks are comprised of sample preparation, data collection, analysis, and
intelligent decision­making processes.
Following the general trend of technological evolution, automation has also made a sig­
nificant impact in the field of bioengineering. Just like transforming the industrial and
manufacturing processes, it has also brought remarkable changes to biological research
facilities. From the late 20th century, laboratories started using automated systems that
revolutionised their tasks like sequencing genes and screening drugs.[2] Automation in
life sciences laboratories is ongoing, but before when it was all manual work, human er­
ror and inconsistency in the laboratory could impact the quality and reliability of research
outcomes. It also frees up time for researchers, instead of monitoring procedures and
performing manual tasks, lab operators can focus on more complicated and meaningful
tasks, further improving the laboratory’s output.
Automating different manual tasks in the laboratory has become an important topic for
researchers. According to data obtained from the National Center for Biotechnologies,
there has been a significant increase in publications each year that aim to bring innova­
tion to labs by transforming manual work into state­of­the­art automation [3]. The graph
in the figure 1.1 below indicates a substantial increase in publications related to automa­
tion, starting from just a few in the early years to a dramatic spike in recent years. This
trend highlights the increasing interest and research in the field of automation within the
bioengineering and life sciences community.
Figure 1.1: PubMed: Automation in Life Sciences Publications.[3]
2
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:11==
1.2.1
Large­scale analysis.
The field of bioengineering requires the analysis of large volumes of samples on a regular
basis. This process, known as high­throughput testing, is of utmost importance in the
development of new drugs, vaccines, and other medical treatments. It is also critical in
the diagnosis and treatment of various diseases. However, manually analysing a large
number of samples is not only time­consuming but also prone to errors.[4]
Fortunately, automation technology has made it possible to carry out high­throughput test­
ing in a more efficient and accurate manner. The COVID­19 pandemic has highlighted
the importance of this technology as laboratories across the globe were able to scale up
their testing capacity to match the unprecedented demand for testing. In Denmark, a to­
tal of 60.0 million rapid antigen tests and 63.7 million PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction)
tests were conducted between February 2020 and March 2022.[5] This was only possible
because highly automated laboratories were established by Statens Serum Institut (SSI).
With the help of automation technology, laboratories can analyse a large number of sam­
ples in a shorter epoch of time without compromising on the accuracy and efficiency of
the testing process.
1.2.2
Standardization in automated life science laboratory.
With automation, every step of an experiment can be performed in the same defined
way, reducing the chance of variability that can emerge with manual processes. This
is essential in bioengineering research labs where experiments repeatedly need to be
replicated, and results have to be compared across different studies. Automation reduces
the risk of such errors and inconsistencies, leading to more reliable conclusions.
Automated systems are designed to meet regulatory needs and maintain detailed logs
of all lab activities. These logs capture specifics such as each experiment’s conditions,
timings, and results. Traditionally, data generation in bioengineering is recorded using pa­
per notebooks. However, this method lacks standardization and does not support easy
sharing, finding, or searching of information. These are key principles of FAIR (Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) data management in life sciences. By maintaining
detailed digital records, automated systems validate scientific work and enhance accu­
racy and efficiency. This shift towards digital documentation is a significant step towards
making lab data more FAIR.[6]
Standardized automation enable direct comparison of outcomes between laboratories and
teams. Results can be effectively compared when diverse teams use identical automated
protocols, eliminating uncertainties that originate from different uncontrolled manual pro­
cedures.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
3
==PAGE:12==
1.2.3
Ensuring Safety: The capstone of life science automation.
Laboratory accidents can result in serious consequences, including high­degree burns,
skin or eye infections, infections among lab operators or even a potential danger of re­
leasing harmful pathogens into the environment. This can harm humans, plants, animals
and economies and disturb the whole ecosystem in general. Despite following the strict
laws and regulations of biosecurity in life science procedures, such accidents still happen
regularly. As the number of bioengineering labs is increasing rapidly, data shows that the
number of accidents associated with these facilities also increases over time.
As the number of bio and chemical engineering labs is increasing rapidly, data shows that
the number of accidents associated with these facilities increases over time.[7]
Lab Type
Number of accidents
Number of laboratories
Accident rate (%)
Number of cases
Rate (%)
Number
Rate (%)
University
138
70
7231
43
1.9
Research institution
34
17
3506
20
0.97
Corporation
24
13
6178
37
0.39
Table 1.1: Analysis of accident rates in Bioengineering labs by institution type. [7]
The above table 1.1 shows data from a survey in Korea, showing a high number of aca­
demic accidents compared to corporate laboratories of life sciences and chemical engi­
neering. While strict SOPs are being followed everywhere, after looking into the data,
one can argue that this is because, usually, corporate facilities are more automated than
academic labs.
According to the data provided in the figure 1.2 below, it is clear that accidents occurring
from chemical or compound spillage are three times more common than the next most
frequent reason. The main reason behind this is the manual handling of dangerous liquids,
which increases the odds of accidental spills.
However, it is important to note that the danger of such accidents can be significantly
reduced by automating the handling of chemicals using automated liquid handlers. These
liquid handling robots are designed to automate the process of handling hazardous liquids,
lowering the chances of spills and minimizing the risks associated with manual work.
By executing such automated systems, organizations can not only ensure the safety of
their employees but also improve operational efficiency and accuracy. Therefore, it is
compulsory to consider implementing automated liquid handling robots and related lab
automation as part of the institution’s safety measures.
In an interview with bioengineering researchers from Herlev Hospital Denmark, they em­
phasized the importance of automation to reduce accidents.
4
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.2: Frequency analysis by accident types. [7]
“We are already working in a safe way, but it is brought to the next level when
we are now also avoiding contact with the samples during the pipetting, thanks to
the robot.”[8]
~ Martin Barfred Friis – Molecular Biologist, Herlev Hospital.
.
1.2.4
Future Market for Lab Automation in Bioengineering.
Recent market analysis indicates that the demand for lab automation is on the rise, and
companies and research facilities in developed countries are responding to meet this
demand. According to economy experts, the lab automation market is expected to expe­
rience a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 6.72% between 2023 and 2032, and this
growth is expected to increase the market’s total value to approximately 13.2 billion US
dollars[9].
One of the primary drivers of this growth is the integration of cutting­edge technologies
such as the Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI). These technologies
have significantly enhanced the capabilities of lab automation systems, making them more
efficient and accurate. As a result, the demand for lab automation is expected to increase
significantly in the future.
Studies have revealed that North America holds the largest market share in lab automa­
tion, comprising 37%, followed by Europe, which holds a 30% market share in global lab
automation. This indicates that lab automation is becoming increasingly popular in devel­
oped regions of the world, where there is a high demand for innovative technologies that
can help streamline laboratory processes and improve productivity.[9]
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.3: Lab automation market forecast between 2022 ­ 2032. [9]
1.3
The Opentrons OT­2 robot.
Robotics is a necessary part of lab automation, especially in bioengineering. One ex­
ample of such a robot is the Opentrons OT­2 liquid handler. Our project aims to improve
and automate the quality control of this robot. A liquid handling robot is a machine used to
move liquids, especially in small amounts. One of its critical tasks is pipetting, which trans­
fers precise volumes of liquid between containers. This is required in many experiments
where exact measurements are needed. The robot does this job accurately, reducing the
chance of errors. It also speeds up the process, saving valuable time. So, this robot is
essential for both precision and efficiency in life sciences.
The Opentrons OT­2 is a benchtop liquid handling robot that has gained overnight success
in its category. Alongside its flexibility in bioengineering laboratories, it is also designed
to be the most affordable automated liquid handling machine, which makes it an ideal
choice for labs of all sizes. With performance that is almost equivalent to robots that cost
ten times more, the OT­2 offers unparalleled value for money.
Figure 1.4: Opentrons OT­2 liquid handling robot.[10]
6
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:15==
According to recent data, shortly after its release in late 2018, Opentrans OT­2 gained
attention from life science researchers. Below graph in figure 1.5 the trend of different
liquid handling robots being used in the latest research showed that Opentrans competes
with other renowned brands, indicating that the OT­2 is one of the most widely used robots
in bioengineering laboratories. [11]
Figure 1.5: Publications trends of different liquid handling robots.[11]
One of the key features of the OT­2 is its ability to be controlled using a Python API from a
Jupyter Notebook, hosted on the Raspberry Pi of OT­2 robot. This allows users to create,
edit and run customized protocols directly on the OT­2. [10]
1.3.1
Limitation in OT2­Robot.
Opentrons OT2 has gained a lot of attention in a short period of time. However, it has some
limitations that need to be addressed. One of its significant limitations is that it is an open­
loop robot. This means that it performs actions based on predefined commands without
a feedback mechanism to confirm the success of its actions. As a result, it sometimes
misses some actions in specific scenarios. Here are some examples to illustrate this.
Missing tips: Researchers in bioengineering labs often complain that the robotic arm
does not pick up all eight tips before going towards the liquid aspiration step, and it con­
tinues doing all the predefined commands without knowing about it.
Missing liquid: Same as above, OT2 sometimes fails to aspire liquid in its tips. It might
be due to insufficient liquid reserves or some other issue. Due to its open­loop nature, it
does not know or acknowledge its errors. [12]
Tips overlapping: Another scenario is that it sometimes tries to pick up tips without
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
7
==PAGE:16==
knowing whether or not previous tips have been removed. This can damage the robot
floor and spill liquid placed on the robot floor.
1.4
Thesis Objectives.
These are the objectives of this thesis, which address the issues stated previously in
section 1.3.1.
• The main aim of this project is to enhance the existing algorithm for real­world en­
vironments. This enhancement considers various stages and potential challenges
during the implementation process. (Previous work and limitations are mentioned
in section 2.1 and 2.2 respectively).
• The second objective is to explore further improvements by training the algorithm
with more optimal data. This could involve modifying the object detection model to
increase its efficiency and accuracy.
• The final goal is to improve the algorithm to achieve higher speed and efficiency in
the automation process.
1.5
Outline.
Chapter 2:
A comprehensive literature review will be provided, covering all aspects of
the analyzed topic and project­related terminology.
Chapter 3: Used methodology, with implemented algorithms and undertaken approaches
will be discussed. This includes data capturing, preprocessing, implementing proposed
parallel processing and reviewing specific machine learning methods.
Chapter 4: In this section, Results will be presented in the form of tables and plots, both
for machine learning model estimation and predictions.
Chapter 5: This chapter will contain conclusions, limitations, and suggestions for future
improvements to the project.
8
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The DTU Findit domain was used for literature research. It’s an online library of scientific
resources maintained by the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The initial step was to search for articles and already existing related works. A lookup of
Opentrons programming and image analysis­related literature was performed to gain a
general understanding of the project domain. Further exploration started with a general
overview of object detection using different algorithms where the architectures are based
on convolutional neural networks (CNN) and then moved on to optimizing the detection
speed. This led to focusing on specific articles related to region­based CNN, parallel
computing, and transfer learning. Key terms that were searched during the process were
automation in bioengineering, Openteons programming, CNN, transfer learning for deep
learning models, automatic masking, transfer learning with yolo versions, and Detectron2
by Facebook.
2.1
Existing solutions and their limitations.
2.1.1
Methods proposed in previous study.
The current thesis builds on the foundation laid by the previous master thesis on qual­
ity control in life sciences laboratories. The study concerned creating a prototype that
utilizes the power of artificial intelligence to enhance the precision and reliability of lab
processes. An HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) API (Application Programming In­
terface) was used to connect the robot with the image processing functions through the
Raspberry Pi. In the initial stage of the research, a method was proposed that combines
the Opentrons OT2 robot and image analysis techniques, including the YOLOv5 object
detection model. The principal objective was to identify important components such as
pipette tips, liquid, and their respective colours.
The study also concentrated on the repetitive adjustment of boundary values for colour
recognition. The use of the HSV colour space for liquid colour detection was examined.
This revealed faster processing time for colour recognition when compared to deep learn­
ing algorithms. Overall, the research expanded the horizon of quality work done by the
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
9
==PAGE:18==
most used industrial liquid handler robot, which can directly impact the quality and relia­
bility of scientific research.
2.1.2
Limitations of previous study.
Processing time.
The research study faced a notable limitation concerning the processing time for predic­
tions. It took approximately 8 seconds to run predictions on one frame, which could slow
down the overall efficiency. This delay could be challenging in designing a system for
situations where fast responses or high throughput demands are critical. It was deter­
mined that this processing time was the main issue preventing the adoption of the system
in real life lab operations. It was declared as the key area for modification in future work.
In fact, this constraint was one of the main objectives for the current approach to reduce
the processing time as much as possible and enable practical real life applications of the
system.[13]
Communication efficiency.
The study found another major issue with the system ability to communicate efficiently with
the Opentrons robot. This was due to the need for more seamless and quick integration
between image analysis (Raspberry Pi) and robotic arm, which prevented the system from
operating in real time laboratory environments. Although the HTTP API was incorporated
to facilitate signalling between the robot and Raspberry Pi, but it had notable latency,
especially while transferring HD images for analysis. This delay was also responsible for
increasing overall response time.
In order to optimize the previous system, it is important to focus on enhancing processing
time and efficient way of signalling between the robotic arm and the image processing
unit. This will enable real­time functionality and help optimize the system’s performance
in automating life science laboratories. By addressing the limitations identified in the study,
these improvements were added to the objective of the current study.[13]
2.2
Challenges in advancing the OT­2, towards AI enabled
automation.
As discussed in section 1.3, the OT­2 is an open­source, precise liquid handling system
that automates various liquid handling tasks related to the bioengineering lab, it has three
major limitations, which are a challenge in making it AI enabled smart machine.
Open­loop design.
One major downside of this widely used machine is that it was originally designed as an
open­loop system. This means that it does not receive any feedback on its actions and
cannot determine whether its operations are precise or not. It executes all of its tasks
blindly and may ignore critical actions such as missing liquids or making errors in picking
10
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:19==
up the tip. Due to this limitation, laboratory operators must manually monitor the machine’s
actions, undermining its claim of being a fully automated robot.
Python packages compatibility.
The OT­2 robot runs on a special Linux system that is particularly developed for its hard­
ware. This customization only accepts those Python packages that are built to match its
architecture. Common packages that are developed for more typical setups may not work
on the OT­2 due to these differences. Consequently, only specialized or basic packages
that come with Python versions can be installed on it. For instance, it does not support
openCV or socket (the best Python package for server­client architecture) and can not be
installed on OT­2.
Low processing power.
The OT­2 robotic system are equipped with Raspberry Pi as its main processing unit,
which typically comes with ARMv8­A or ARMv7hf architecture processors. These pro­
cessors are sufficient for controlling an open­loop robot and automating systems but are
not as powerful as those found in conventional computers. Another issue is that Rasp­
berry pis are notorious for their thermal throttling, i.e. they can not run heavy processes
for longer as they are designed to reduce their processing when the processor tempera­
ture rises up to 82◦C. Raspberry Pi models may have varying amounts of RAM, usually
ranging from 1GB to 8GB. While the processor in the OT­2 is sufficient for controlling its
robotic arm, it may not be powerful enough to handle intensive image processing tasks,
which can be a challenge when it comes to real­time operations.
2.3
Parallel processing.
Our project faced a challenge with the OT­2 Raspberry Pi’s limited processing power when
running complex image processing algorithms. This posed a risk of crashing or thermal
throttling, delaying the real time image analysis. To overcome this limitation, we had to
develop an intelligent solution to process the images in real time without interruptions.
To address this issue, we implemented parallel computing, also known as parallel pro­
cessing, in our project. This approach involves dividing a large portion of a task into
several smaller portions, which can then be processed simultaneously by two or more
processors. Doing so could optimise the processing time and reduce the burden on a
single processor.[14]
Parallel computing is highly efficient for performing complex computations in real­time.
The assigned processors work on their respective tasks simultaneously, meaning the job
can be completed much more quickly than if a single processor were to handle the task
alone. This approach solves the problem of low processing power and ensures that the
image processing tasks are performed without any interruption or delay.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
11
==PAGE:20==
Overall, parallel computing has proven to be an effective solution for our project, and it has
helped us achieve real time image analysis without any issues. By dividing the tasks into
smaller portions and processing them simultaneously, we optimised the OT­2 Raspberry
Pi’s performance and achieved efficient and reliable results.
2.3.1
Challenges involved in Parallel computing.
With all the advantages, there are some challenges involved in parallel processing, some
of them are listed below,
• Data dependency is a common issue in parallel computing when one task requires
the output of another task to proceed. In such cases, the dependent task has to
wait for the other task to complete before it can begin, causing a delay in the overall
process. This can be a particularly challenging problem to address as it can result
in significant performance bottlenecks.[15]
• Load balancing is another crucial aspect of parallel computing. It involves distribut­
ing tasks evenly across all processors to avoid overloading some processors while
others remain idle. When tasks are not distributed correctly, it can lead to inefficient
use of resources, slowing down the entire system.[15]
• Synchronization is another challenging factor in parallel computing. Coordination
of tasks can be a complex issue, especially when complex systems are involved. It
is compulsory to make sure that all tasks are completed in the correct order and at
the right time to prevent errors and reduce processing time.[16]
• Communication Finally, Parallel computing systems can be affected by communi­
cation issues. This involves signalling and acknowledgement messages between
two processes to make sure that they are running in a synced and accident environ­
ment. Faults in this section can lead to delays, reduced efficiency, and even produce
errors that can crash the whole system, especially in fast­paced scenarios.[16]
2.4
Convolutional neural network (CNN).
Convolutional neural networks, also known as CNN or ConvNets are a type of deep learn­
ing algorithm that are primarily used for processing grid­structured data, particularly im­
ages. These networks were inspired by biological processes that occur in the human vi­
sual cortex and have been found to be particularly effective at image classification tasks.
The first architecture for a convolutional neural network was introduced in 1980, and since
then, a number of modifications and improvements have been made to the original design.
One of the most well­known and widely used versions of a CNN is called LeNet, which
was first developed by Yann Lecun and his team in 1989. CNN have become increasingly
popular over the years. They are now a practical and effective choice for researchers and
practitioners in a variety of fields, including computer vision, natural language process­
12
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:21==
ing, and speech recognition. With their ability to effectively process complex data struc­
tures and extract meaningful features, convolutional neural networks are likely to remain
an important tool for machine learning and artificial intelligence applications for years to
come.[17]
2.4.1
Convolution.
In CNN, the term ”convolution” is taken from a mathematical function that shares the
same name. To be specific, convolution is a mathematical operation that involves the
combination of two functions to create a third function. When we talk about CNN, these
two functions are the input image and the small filter matrix, which is also known as the
kernel in some literature, it is called the convolution matrix.[18]
Figure 2.1: An illustration of how and why the kernel (filter) is applied to produce mean­
ingful information. (Pstart = Pend ≡P, in which case we can replace Pstart + Pend by
2 × Padding as shown in the equation) 2.1
In image processing, a filter or kernel is used to perform several image manipulation tech­
niques. These include sharpening, blurring, embossing, edge detections and so on. This
is achieved by applying the kernel to the image through a dot product of the kernel with the
image pixel values of the whole image or just the mask region. The resulting convolution
(dor product) output represents the new pixel value matrix of the image at the center of the
kernel. The convolution operation is a fundamental building block of CNNs and plays an
important role in enabling the network to learn features that are important for the task. By
repeatedly applying the convolution operation with different specially designed or calcu­
lated kernels, the CNN can learn the shapes or patterns of increasingly complex features
that can be used to classify images or perform other tasks, such as object detection or
segmentation in our case.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
13
==PAGE:22==
2.4.2
Key Components of CNN.
CNNs consist of multiple layers that process input to produce output. These layers can
be classified into three types:
Convolution Layer:
The Convolution Layer is a type of layer that uses filters to perform convolution operations
while scanning the input I with respect to its dimensions. This layer has two hyperparam­
eters ­ the filter size F and stride S. The output generated from this layer is referred to as
a feature map or activation map, and it is denoted by O.
Figure 2.2: Input 6x6 Matrix Convolved with 3x3 Filter (Stride 1) to Produce 4x4 Out­
put.[17]
The general formula for calculating or designing the size of convolution map is as follows,
Feature map size =
⌊Input size −Filter size + 2 × Padding
Stride
⌋
+ 1
(2.1)
Where,
Input size is the size of the input image. 6X6.
Filter size is the size of the filter (height or width).3X3
Padding is the number of zero­padding pixels added to the input. 1.
Stride is the step size with which the filter moves across the input. 4X4
Pooling layer.
After a convolution layer, the POOL layer is used as a type of downsampling operation
that helps to maintain spatial invariance. It achieves this by reducing the output size of
the previous convolution layer, thereby simplifying the information that is passed to the
next layer. The POOL layer works by dividing the input image into small, non­overlapping
regions and taking the maximum or average value of each region. This way, the POOL
layer reduces the number of parameters in the network, which can help prevent overfitting
and improve computational efficiency.
There are two types of pooling: max pooling and average pooling. Max pooling selects
the highest value of the current view, while average pooling takes an average of the val­
14
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:23==
ues in the current view. Max pooling is commonly used to preserve detected features,
while average pooling is used for downsampling. It is typically applied in specific cases
or models such as the LeNet.
Figure 2.3: Applying Min and Average pooling on input 6x6 Matrix with 2x2 Filter (Stride
1) to Produce 3x3 Output for each.[17]
Fully connected layer (FC)
In a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), the fully connected layer (FC) is responsible for
processing a Final input, where each input is connected to all neurons. This means that
every neuron in the FC layer receives input from every neuron in the previous layer. The
FC layer is typically located towards the end of the CNN architecture and is often used to
optimize objectives such as class scores. Its function is to take the outputs of the previous
convolutional layers and perform classification or regression based on those features. The
FC layer can be seen as a traditional neural network where the input is flattened like a
stack of information next to each other and fed into a series of fully connected layers.
The output from the final FC layer is then used to make predictions about the input using
different activation functions like ReLU and softmax explain in section.
Figure 2.4: Representatiopn of a Fully connected layer (FC).[17]
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
15
==PAGE:24==
2.4.3
Activation functions.
Activation functions play a essential role in helping a neural network to analyse the data it
has processed. They act as a switch to decide whether a neuron should be activated or
not. To understand this concept, let’s take an example of making a fruit salad. Suppose we
want to put only sweet fruits in it. In this case, we can assume ourselves as an activation
function. We will taste each fruit to check if its sweet enough to go into the salad or not.
Similarly, in a neural network, the activation functions decide whether a portion of data will
go into the next or final layer or not. The data has already passed through various filters
and processes, and the activation functions decide whether it’s relevant to move onward
or not.[19]
In a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), each layer processes the input by analysing
different parts of an image. Then, the activation function comes into play and evaluates
the outputs from the layer. These outputs are represented by numbers identifying various
features or patterns detected in the image. The activation function applies a simple rule
to these outputs, which could involve retaining a pattern if it is strong or clear enough or
discarding it if it is weak.
ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit).
This function only passes values that are positive and puts all negative values to zero.
The formula for ReLU is fairly simple.
f(x) = max(0, x)
(2.2)
If the input x is greater than 0, it will result in x i.e. ame value. If x is less than or equal
to 0, it will return 0. Usually, ReLU acts as the default activation function, especially in
Convolutional Neural Networks, because it helps the model to train more easily and often
performs better.
Sigmoid function.
The sigmoid function results between 0 and 1, based on a fixed value between 0 and 1, it
acts as if it is a gate that opens and closes to regulate the input it receives.
σ(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.3)
where, e is the base of the natural logarithm, and x is the input to the function. Sigmoid
functions are generally used in machine learning i.e. binary classification problems be­
cause they help neural networks understand and learn from difficult patterns in data.
16
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:25==
Tanh (Hyperbolic Tangent).
The Tanh function is similar to the sigmoid function. However, the difference is that it
suppresses values between ­1 and 1, making it a zero­centered function. The advantage
of this is that it can help reduce bias in the gradients during the learning process, which
makes the learning process more efficient.
tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(2.4)
Softmax activation function.
Softmax activation function is used when we want to sort things into different categories.
In image classification and object detection, this is the most used function because it
can turn any list of numbers into probabilities added up to one, which makes it handy for
predicting different categories in the image. It is defined as follows,
p =





p1
...
pn




,
where
pi =
exi
∑n
j=1 exj .
(2.5)
2.4.4
Model complexity.
When designing a model in deep learning, it is important to evaluate its complexity in
order to avoid overfitting or underfitting. One way to estimate the complexity of a model
is by calculating the number of parameters in its architecture. This is especially true for
convolutional neural networks, where the number of parameters can quickly become very
large. For a given layer in a convolutional neural network, table 2.1 below illustrates how
this is done.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
17
==PAGE:26==
CONV
POOL
FC
Illustration
Input size
I × I × C
I × I × C
Nin
Output
size
O × O × K
O × O × C
Nout
Number of
parame­
ters
(F × F × C + 1) · K
0
(Nin + 1) × Nout
Remarks
­ One bias parameter per filter
­ In most cases, S < F
­ A common choice for K is 2C
­ Channel­wise Pooling.
­ In most cases, S = F
­ Input is flattened
­ The number of FC neurons is
free of structural constraints.
Table 2.1: Here: I is the length of the input volume size, F the length of the filter, P
the number of padding added, S is the stride, O is output of the feature map along that
dimension, K is the number of filter or kernels, and C is the channels depth, like initially
in RGB images, C = 3.
2.5
Transfer Learning.
Transfer learning is a powerful idea in deep learning that enables us to use the knowledge
that a neural network has learned from one task to apply it to a separate task. For instance,
a neural network that has learned to recognize objects like cats or vehicles can be used
to detect images of robotic hands by leveraging part of that knowledge. The idea behind
transfer learning is to make use of the knowledge acquired by a model that has been
trained with a large and precise amount of data on another task. [20]
In the figure 2.5 below, Model A is trained specifically for Task A in transfer learning.
Suppose we need to train a Model B for another task. We could either train Model B from
scratch, which would require a considerable amount of computation, time, and data; or,
we could initialize Model B with the same weights as Model A and transfer the knowledge
of Model A to Task B.
18
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.5: Transfer Learning flow chart.
2.5.1
Mechanism of transfer learning.
An interesting property of deep neural networks is that when trained on a large set of
images, the parameters of the early layer resemble each other regardless of the specific
task they have been trained on. For example, as shown in the image below, convolutional
neural networks tend to learn edges, textures, and patterns in the first layers. These layers
capture the features that are broadly useful for analyzing natural images. Features that
detect edges, corners, shapes and textures can be considered generic and used in many
different settings. The closer we get to the output, the more specific features the layers
tend to learn, such as object parts and objects. For example, the last layer in a network
trained for classification would be very specific. If the model is trained to classify breeds
of dogs, one unit would respond only to pictures of a specific breed. Transferring all layers
except the last few layers is the most common type of transfer learning, although not the
only one.[21]
Figure 2.6: Transfer Learning flow chart.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
19
==PAGE:28==
Generally, the most common practice is to transfer the first n layers from a pre­trained
model to a target network and randomly initialize the rest. Technically, the transferred
part does not have to be the first layer. If the tasks are the same but the input data type is
different, it is possible to transfer the last layers as well. For example, let us say we have
a face recognition model trained on RGB images. Our target is to build a face recognition
model that inputs images with a depth channel and RGB data. Given that we do not have
much data to train our new model from scratch, it might be worth transferring the later
layers and re­train the early ones.
Figure 2.7: Th most common Scenario in TF.
2.5.2
Limitations in transfer learning.
If transfer learning is such an effective method, why is it not used for all kinds of problems?
Although transfer learning is utilized in various tasks, it is not always feasible to transfer
useful information from one model to another. One such scenario can be where both
the types of data and the tasks are vastly different. For example, I highly doubt one can
transfer anything useful from a model trained on ImageNet to a model that is supposed
to learn how to allocate funds to maintain a profitable stock portfolio. Another scenario
where transfer learning might not be applicable is when the architecture of the model that
we want to transfer features from doesn’t meet our needs. A novel model architecture
wouldn’t be able to benefit from pre­trained models. When dealing with limited data, one
can start by training a general model architecture on a large dataset. Then, fine­tune the
model for a specific task.[22]
2.6
YoloV8 for object detection.
YOLOv8 is the latest version of the YOLO object detection model. It is an improved version
of the previous YOLO model. The new version uses a neural network architecture called
feature pyramid networks (FPNs) and path­aggregation networks (PANs) to make object
detection more accurate. To simplify the annotation process, a new labelling tool has been
introduced. This tool has several useful features, such as auto­labelling, labelling short­
cuts, and customizable hotkeys. These features help to identify images when modelling
models. [23]
20
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:29==
The FPN gradually reduces the spatial resolution of the input image and increases the
number of feature channels. This creates a characteristic map that can detect objects at
different scales and resolutions.
The PAN architecture combines different network levels via skip connections. This en­
ables the network to better capture features at multiple scales and resolutions. This is
essential for accurately detecting objects of different sizes and shapes.
2.6.1
Comparative Analysis of YOLOv8 and YOLOv5.
In this section, YOLOV8 is being compared to YOLOv5 because previous studies used
YOLOv5 while YOLOv8 is utilized in this proposed method. YOLOv8 outperforms YOLOv5
in many ways, including a better mAP (mean average precision), which measures how ac­
curate the model is. Below in figure 2.8 shows that YOLOv8 has fewer errors when tested
on a dataset of 100 samples dataset called RF100 from the Roboflow repository. This is
because YOLOv8 uses a new architecture that combines FAN and PAN modules. FAN
generates feature maps at multiple scales and resolutions, while PAN aggregates fea­
tures from different levels of the network to improve accuracy. The combined FAN and
PAN modules are better than YOLOv5, which uses a modified version of Cross­Stage
Partial Darknet (CSPDarknet) architecture, which is a convolutional neural network (sec.
2.4) and backbone for object detection that uses DarkNet­53.[24]
Another difference between the two models is that YOLOv8 was trained on a more ex­
tensive and diverse dataset than YOLOv5. YOLOv8 was trained on a combination of
the COCO dataset and some other datasets, while YOLOv5 was trained primarily on the
COCO dataset. This means that YOLOv8 performs better on a broader range of images
than YOLOv5.[25]
YOLOv8 includes a new labelling tool called RoboFlow Annotate, used for image anno­
tation and object detection tasks in computer vision. RoboFlow Annotate makes it easier
to annotate images for training the model and includes features such as auto labelling,
labelling shortcuts, and customizable hotkeys. In contrast, YOLOv5 uses a different la­
beling tool called LabelImg. None of the labeling tools were used in the methodology of
this paper. For the sake of keeping logs on the cloud, we used a completely different tool,
which is explained in section 3.2.2.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.8: YOLOs mAP@.50 against RF100. [25]
YOLOv8 also includes more advanced post­processing techniques than YOLOv5. These
techniques help to refine the detection results, remove redundant detections, and improve
the overall accuracy of the predictions. YOLOv8 uses Soft­NMS, a variant of the NMS
technique used in YOLOv5. Regarding their training data, both YOLOv5 and YOLOv8 use
mosaic augmentation on the training set. Mosaic augmentation is a data augmentation
technique that takes four random images from the training set and combines them into a
single mosaic image.[26]
2.7
Image capturing for optimal data quality.
Below listed two open­source packages were tested to capture quick and effective images.
• Fast Forward MPEG (FFmpeg)
• Open Source Computer Vision (OpenCV)
2.7.1
Fast Forward MPEG (FFmpeg)
FFmpeg is a command­line tool developed by the Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG).
It is a reliable and fast video encoding and decoding tool that is known for its efficiency.
With the help of FFmpeg, we can easily capture images and videos from sources like
Logitech webcams. It extracts image frames from the source’s video stream and lets us
specify parameters such as the number of frames and the resolution of the captured im­
age. Initially, we connected the camera to OT2 robot, which does not allow the installation
of external packages. This Linux command­line tool was perfect for this purpose.[27]
22
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:31==
Being fast in encoding and decoding is the signature of FFmpeg, but it takes time to initiate
this process. We found that FFmpeg had certain limitations when it came to meeting the
requirements of our project. While the processing speed was fast and it was lightweight, it
required some time for the camera to adjust its sensor and focus, similar to how our eyes
adjust when we enter a bright room after being in the dark. This delay in adjusting the
lighting before taking an image proved to be a major obstacle for our project’s feasibility,
as we aimed for a fast and lightweight solution.
2.7.2
Open Source Computer Vision (OpenCV)
OpenCV is one of the first and most used open­source library that has been developed to
address the needs of image processing and computer vision applications. It was initiated
by Intel in 1999, and since then it has grown into an extensive collection of more than
2500 optimized algorithms to perform complex digital image processing tasks. These al­
gorithms are designed to handle various tasks, including image manipulation, filtering,
capturing and processing some high level machine learning algorithms like face recogni­
tion.
One important benefit of OpenCV is that it is highly customizable, making it ideal for a
wide range of applications. However, it is worth noting that most of its algorithms are
processor hungry, which means that even in terms of capturing images from a camera,
OpenCV requires comparatively more power. This can be a drawback in some cases, but
for our project, it is a benefit since we can take benefit of the full range of features that
OpenCV offers.
Why Open CV is the Optimal Choice.
In the context of our image­capturing problem when we compair it to FFmpeg, OpenCV
stands out for its versatility and flexibility. It can be used on a wide range of platforms,
including Windows, Linux, and macOS, making it an ideal choice for developers and re­
searchers working on computer vision projects. Overall, OpenCV is a powerful tool that
offers a multitude of features and capabilities for processing digital images and videos,
making it an essential toolkit for anyone working in the field of computer vision.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
23
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This study aims to create a reliable and speedy system for real­life laboratory settings
in the bioengineering department. One of the key challenges we face is to reduce the
process execution time from 8 seconds to as few as possible. Below figure 3.1 illustrates
the research method. We begin by identifying the problem and reviewing different related
research, learning from past knowledge, collecting optimal data, and attaching accurate
labels. This is an important step that we optimize several times to increase efficiency. With
this information, we create and refine a model that guides the robot self­checking process,
ensuring accuracy. If the model or the system’s speed does not meet our standards, we
revisit and adjust our approach. This testing, refining, and enhancing cycle continues
until the robot can efficiently perform its tasks accurately and quickly. This step­by­step
method ensures the robot works accurately and fits seamlessly into the workflow of life
science labs, making it a valuable asset for automated quality control.
Figure 3.1: Generalized thesis flow­chart.
==PAGE:33==
3.1
Overview of the Proposed Solution.
Figure 3.2 illustrates the entire process in a flowchart. The study methodology involves
the use of an OT2 open­loop liquid handler robot, which is equipped with a Raspberry
Pi processor. A camera connected to a PC has been installed on the robot side. This
camera monitors the robotic arm during operation. Parallel computing has been imple­
mented to overcome this limitation because of the robot’s low­power processor, which is
insufficient to handle real­time image analysis while also controlling robotic operations.
Moreover, apart from basic Python packages that come built with Python, other external
packages like OpenCV can not be installed on the robot. It is read­only and restricted by
a manufacturer.
The project uses a server and a client set up for parallel computing, both running Python.
The PC serves as the server and listens to commands from the client, which is the Rasp­
berry Pi on the OT2 robot. After each operation, the robotic arm moves to a specified
location next to the camera. The client sends a signal to the server, indicating that the
arm is ready to be analyzed. The camera then captures an image, which is analyzed by
the PC. The study includes checking for attached tips, liquid inside tips, and the percent­
age of the tip filled with liquid. It also fits for missing tips and identifies the exact location
of the disappeared tip, if any.
The server then sends the findings to the client, which goes on to the next operation. This
process ensures that the robot performs automated quality checks, making it a closed­
loop intelligent robot. At the end of each operation, the client sends a shutdown request
to the server, which generates detailed logs of the entire process for future reference.
The percentage of the tip filled with liquid is used for liquid measurement, while a liquid
mask is created using the detected bounding box and Meta AI segment anything model
(SAM). The mask helps to count the pixels in the area filled with liquid, but it was slow, so
a machine learning model has been trained to calculate the exact amount of liquid using
the combination of the actual liquid volume and the percentage of the tip filled with liquid.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.2: System design: Advancing Life Science Automation.
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Detailed Description of the System Setup
In this section, we will explain how our system works. We will cover several aspects, such
as collecting data, object detection modelling, parallel computing, its role and processing
data simultaneously. The goal is to comprehensively understand each proposed section
by examining these elements in detail.
3.2.1
Data Collection.
In machine learning, data collection is critical to building a reliable model. Especially when
it comes to developing algorithms for image manipulation and analysis, like detecting
and measuring tips and liquids. This dataset should include images captured under all
possible scenarios. Below three distinct conditions were chosen to collect images.
• Images when all tips are attached.
• Images when some tips randomly missing.
• Images with tips filled with variable amounts of liquid and colours.
The model can better recognize patterns, understand various scenarios, and make accu­
rate predictions by including images in these different scenarios. The quality and quantity
of the data collected will play a significant role in the model overall performance. With
more images available, the model can perform better and learn how to handle real world
situations and complexities. So a larger dataset can help the model detect the presence
of tips, identify missing tips, and measure the amount of liquid in the tips more accurately.
Image Capture and Processing: FFmpeg vs OpenCV.
Equipping the Opentrons OT2 robot with a suitable camera is the key step in our project.
One of the most widely available web cameras, the Logitech C920 HD PRO. has been
selected because it provides a 78­degree field of view, better low­light performance and
HD capturing capabilities in the most economical way possible. This process involves
positioning the camera in a manner that it can efficiently scan our area of interest with
the best possible focus, eliminating the unwanted scenes for later analysis. After some
trial and error, we installed the camera on the side glass so that the line of sight towards
the robotic arm is clear without any obstruction. This is done carefully to ensure that the
camera stays steady during all operations. Once the camera is physically mounted on the
side glass, it is then connected to a PC which serves as the control centre for fro capturing
and processing images.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.3: Logitech C920 HD PRO.
Algorithm 1 Pseudo Code: Capture HD Image with Locked Focus and Open CAP
1: Input: project_name ←”default_project”
2: Output: image_path
3: project_folder ←Create and return project folder path
4: current_time ←Get current time in ”YYYYMMDDHHMMSS” format
5: image_name ←project_name + ”_” + current_time + ”_hd.jpg”
6: image_path ←Concatenate project_folder and image_name
7: Initialize camera with default ID (0)
8: Set camera width to 640 and height to 480
9: Set video codec to ’MJPG’
10: Disable auto­focus
11: Set focus value (e.g., 50 for closer objects)
12: ret, frame ←Capture image from camera
13: if ret is True then
14:
Save frame to image_path
15:
Print ”HD Image captured with locked focus: ” + image_name
16: else
17:
Print ”Failed to capture image”
18: end if
19: Release the camera
20: return image_path
The algorithm captures high­definition images with a locked focus. It creates a project
folder using a project name provided by the user. The current time is obtained and used
to create a unique name for the image. This name is combined with the project folder
path to form the full path where the image will be saved. The camera is initialized with a
default ID (0) and its settings are adjusted to capture images at a resolution of 640X480
pixels. A specific focus value is set, which can be adjusted based on the distance of the
objects being captured. This is the hidden magic trick to make the process fast without
wasting time to autofocus.
The algorithm tries to capture an image using a camera. If the capture is successful, the
image is saved to a path and a message is displayed. If it fails, a failure message is
displayed. Finally, the camera is released and the image path is returned as the output.
28
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:37==
This process ensures that each image is captured with consistent settings and saved in
an organized manner for easy retrieval.
Figure 3.4: Example for captured data.
3.2.2
Image Annotation.
Computer vision models are only as good as the data we provide them, and an essential
part of providing excellent data is having accurate labels. Providing accurate labels to
different regions of interest in the images is called image annotation. This is the process
of associating labels to the image by defining a bounding box and giving it a name. we
have used another data annotation platform called CVAT because of its fast and intuitive
user interface and ability to save annotated files for future use.
Figure 3.5: Image annotation via CVAT annotation tool.
A total of 400 Images of robotic­arm with different situations and conditions were selected
to train and validate the model; total annotated tips were around 3000 with 70% of them
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
29
==PAGE:38==
filled with different amounts of liquid inside them.
In order to make sure that the dataset format is suitable for applying transfer learning to
the deep learning model in later steps, we need to export the annotation information to
the YOLO dataset format. This format is widely used in object detection tasks and has
a clear structure that improves the efficiency and accuracy of model training. During the
image annotation process, we place a premium on the precise positioning of the bounding
boxes and the accuracy of the area encompassed by each box. This meticulous approach
enables us to furnish the deep learning network with rich and accurate inputs when our
dataset is ready for training, enhancing the model’s accuracy.
3.2.3
Implementation of parallel computation.
Parallel computation is proposed to overcome the low processing issue described in sec­
tion 2.2 and 2.3. It enables efficient use of resources, faster processing times and im­
proved performance. It allows the system to overcome the processing limitations of indi­
vidual components by enabling them to work together and share the workload and time.
Figure 3.6: Top to bottom: Server and client communication.
3.2.4
Role of the Server.
In this setup, the server has an important role in processing and analysing images when
instructed by the client. It listens for incoming connections and commands from the client.
When the server receives a ’capture_image’ command, it captures an image, processes
it using the trained model, and detects tips and liquid inside it. After detecting the tips
and liquid, the server sends back messages to the client. The server also keeps data
structures to track the tips and liquid volumes detected in each image. These data struc­
30
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:39==
tures are continuously updated based on the processed images. If the server receives a
’shutdown_server’ command, it will stop its operations and return the data it has collected
so far. This will allow for a graceful server shutdown when it is no longer needed.
Algorithm 2
Pseudo Code: A broad perspective of Start Server and Handle Client
Commands
1: Procedure: start_server
2: Initialize server socket with AF_INET and SOCK_STREAM
3: Set port number to 9999
4: Bind server socket to host address and port
5: Set server to listen for connections with a backlog of 1
6: Print ”Server started on port 9999”
7: try:
8:
while True do
▷Accept new connections
9:
Accept connection as client_socket from address addr
10:
Print ”Got a connection from addr”
11:
while True do
▷Handle client commands
12:
Receive command from client
13:
if command is empty then
14:
Break
15:
if command is ”capture_image” then
16:
Capture and analyse image
17:
elif command is ”shutdown_server” then
18:
Print ”Shutting down server.”
19:
Close server socket
20:
return Various returns
21:
else
22:
Print ”Unknown command: command”
23: except Exception as e:
24:
Print ”Server error: e”
25: finally:
26:
Close server socket
27:
Print ”Server has been shut down.”
3.2.5
Role of the Client.
The following briefly explains how a Raspberry Pi­equipped robot client can communicate
with a server. The client sends two main commands to the server: ’capture_image’ and
’shutdown_server’.
When the robotic arm picks up tips, aspire liquid in the tip, then it moves its robotic arm
to a defined position to look into the camera; at this position, the client (OT_2) sends a
’capture_image’ signal to the server and the server knows that the robotic arm is in a
position and is ready to be analysed.
The ’shutdown_server’ command, on the other hand, instructs the server to stop its op­
erations. This is useful when the client has completed tasks and no longer requires the
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
31
==PAGE:40==
server’s services to analyse its arm.
The client and server work together in a parallel computing setup, allowing the client
to overcome its low processing power. The client sends commands and images to the
server, which processes the images and sends back the results. This setup enables effi­
cient resource usage and faster processing times.
Algorithm 3 Pseudo Code: Request Image Capture from Server
1: Procedure: request_image_capture
2: Initialize client socket with AF_INET and SOCK_STREAM
3: Define host as ’Server IP’
▷Server’s IP address
4: Set port number to 9999
5: Connect client socket to server at (host, port)
6: Print ”Connected to server.”
7: Send ’capture_image’ command to server
8: Receive response from server
9: Print response
10: Close client socket
finally, when all processes are completed by a robot, it will send a Shutdown command to
the server and the server will release all processes and generate logs.
Algorithm 4 Pseudo Code: Request Shutdown Server
1: Procedure: shutdown_server
2: Initialize client socket with AF_INET and SOCK_STREAM
3: Define host as ’Server IP’
▷Server’s IP address
4: Set port number to 9999
5: Connect client socket to server at (host, port)
6: Print ”Connected to server.”
7: Send ’shutdown_server’ command to server
8: Close client socket
9: Print ”Sent shutdown signal to server.”
3.3
Detecting missing tip position.
The algorithm for detecting missing tip positions from a set of already detected tips is a
precise and systematic process that employs a checklist approach. Initially, the algorithm
sets an expectation of having eight tips. From the information of their bounding boxes,
it calculates the centre point of each tip, since we know that in our robotic hand, all tips
are horizontally aligned, we are confident that their centre is also aligned. We also know
that all tips are at equal distances in our robotic hand. So, from all this information, the
algorithm calculates the horizontal distance between each tipsorts the detected tips by
their positions.
32
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:41==
If the number of detected tips differs from the expected number, the algorithm determines
which tips are missing. It uses the calculated distance between the first and last detected
tips to estimate the position of each tip and checks each expected position to see if there
is a detected tip nearby. If no tip is found nearby for each expected position, the algorithm
marks that tip as absent and notes its position.
In the end, the algorithm returns two lists showing which tips were present (represented
with 1 for present and 0 for missing) and the positions of any missing tips. This approach
provides a clear and accurate identification of precisely which tips were not detected,
allowing for a more efficient and effective process in identifying any missing tips.
Overall, this algorithm is a crucial tool in detecting missing tips from a set of detected tips,
providing an efficient and accurate identification of any missing tips by comparing what is
expected against what is present.
Algorithm 5 Find Missing Tips
1: Input: bounding_box_centers ­ A dictionary with center points of detected tips
2: Output: tip_presence, missing_tip_positions ­ Lists indicating presence of tips and
positions of missing tips
3: Set expected_tip_count to 8
4: Get detected_tip_centers from bounding_box_centers[’Tip’]
5: Initialize tip_presence with ones, indicating all tips are present
6: Initialize missing_tip_positions as an empty list
7: if length of detected_tip_centers is not equal to expected_tip_count then
8:
Calculate expected_horizontal_distance between tips
9:
for each expected tip position i from 0 to expected_tip_count ­ 1 do
10:
Calculate expected center x­coordinate (expected_center_x)
11:
Initialize found as False
12:
for each detected_center in detected_tip_centers do
13:
if
abs(detected_center[0]
­
expected_center_x)
≤
ex­
pected_horizontal_distance / 2 then
14:
Set found to True
15:
Break
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
if not found then
19:
Mark tip i as missing in tip_presence
20:
Append i + 1 to missing_tip_positions
21:
end if
22:
end for
23: end if
24: return tip_presence, missing_tip_positions
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
33
==PAGE:42==
3.4
Measuring liquid inside tip
he final algorithm that we developed focuses on accurately measuring the liquid inside
the tip. The process involved in this algorithm is quite straightforward. We first detected
the tips and their bounding boxes as well as the liquid and its bounding box. The initial
logic was also relatively simple. We calculated the vertical distance between the tip and
its bounding box and then determined how much portion of the tip were filled with liquid.
However, we realized that to achieve greater accuracy, we needed another parameter to
relate to the percentage of the tip filled with liquid. We initially tried using the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) [28], a state­of­the­art auto­segment detection model developed
by Meta AI. Our idea was to use SAM to detect the mask of the liquid portion, calculate
the pixels inside it, and then train a regression model with these two parameters. Un­
fortunately, the SAM model was not accurate enough for our image data, and it required
fine­tuning. As this was a relatively young model released in mid­2023 with minimal lit­
erature available, we added it as future work due to time constraints during our thesis
project.
Instead, we trained a regression model with two parameters: the percentage of the tip
filled with liquid and the actual amount of liquid inside it. We generated this data and
trained a regression model, which provided satisfactory results with a Mean Absolute
Error (MAE) of up to 87%. This approach allowed us to achieve greater accuracy in
our measurements and ensured that the algorithm could be used effectively in practical
applications.
34
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Results.
4.1
Performance of the Proposed Solution
This chapter will highlight the observed findings regarding detecting tips, liquids and liquid
levels. One of the most critical aspects we will examine is the processing time of these
detections and how well they perform in real time. We will use mean accuracy (mAP) as
our assessment metric to evaluate the quality of the pipette tip and liquid detection.
Our test results show that liquid­level detection accuracy is high when the liquid volume
exceeds 20 µL. However, we also observed specific challenges when the liquid volume
is much lower, such as when only 5% of the tip is filled. This highlights the importance
of robust detection and accurate measurement in real­world applications, even at low
volumes. We will explore these findings in­depth better to understand this technology’s
potential use cases and limitations. In the research, various machine learning models
were fine­tuned to obtain the best hyperparameters. The model was trained multiple times
with a large number of epochs, but with exceedingly large epochs, the model became
prone to overfitting due to the symmetric shape of the object of interest (tips). The results
presented below were taken from a fairly small epoch, making it easier to comprehend
and understand.
4.2
Tips and liquid detection.
We should look at some key parameters to understand how well a model performs. The
losses during training and validation are the first ones to be checked. These include
box, classification, and direction­focused loss (DFL). They help us understand how well
the model has learned to identify and classify objects. All these losses have decreased
over time, which is a good sign. It means the model is improving at understanding the
notions it is trained on and making fewer mistakes when identifying objects. The next
thing to consider is the model accuracy, which can be measured by looking at mA@0.5,
mA@0.95, and recall metrics. The mAP@0.5 score is very high, indicating that the model
is quite good at identifying objects when the criteria are not too strict. The mAP0.95 score
is lower, which is expected because it is a more demanding standard. However, it is still
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
35
==PAGE:44==
quite good, indicating that the model is dependable even under strict conditions. Lastly,
the recall is perfect, which means the model is excellent at finding all the relevant objects
in the images it was tested on.
Figure 4.1: Object detection model performance.
Table 4.1: Model Performance Metrics
Metric
Value
mAP@50
0.995
mAP@95
0.88513
Recall
1.0
After extensive testing and evaluation, it can be concluded that the model has been per­
forming exceptionally well. The model has consistently decreased losses over time, which
is a positive sign of its learning and adaptation capabilities. Moreover, the model has
been scoring high in critical metrics, indicating that it meets the set standards for its in­
tended use. One of the model’s key strengths is its ability to identify and classify objects
accurately. The models training has enabled it to understand various objects well and
accurately recognize them even in complex environments. The model has also shown
great precision in object detection, ensuring that it does not miss any objects that should
be detected. This is particularly important in such applications where missing a single
36
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:45==
object can fail the whole purpose, i.e. like in our system, a quality check is the main pur­
pose, so it should not miss any object. In addition to its accuracy, the model’s balance
between precision and recall is also notable. The model can identify objects accurately
without falsely identifying irrelevant objects. This balance is crucial for creating a reliable
and practical model that can be used in real­world applications.
(a) Light colour liquid and one tip missing.
(b) Transparent tip with no liquid.
(c) Dark liquid with one tip missing.
(d) Different liquid quantity in all tips.
Figure 4.2: Real­time Tips and liquid detection.
4.3
Readings from detected tips and liquids.
Our system has successfully detected the presence of tips and liquid, and has imple­
mented a bounding box around all the detected objects. This mechanism enables us to
count and measure the detected objects accurately by employing the methods and al­
gorithms discussed in Section 2. As a test, we have taken a common 12x8 ”Greiner 96
well plate” and purposely skipped to attach some tips to demonstrate the accuracy of our
model. Despite this, our model has been able to detect the connected tips and whether
liquid is present inside them with precision. Additionally, the corresponding status of each
tip has been mapped to its respective location in the 12x8 96­well plate. Figure 4.3 dis­
plays which specific tip is missing, which can serve as a reference for future work.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.3: The left side shows the counts of detected tips and liquid, while the right side
displays the layout indicating which tips are missing from the 96­well plate. ′A′ mean is
attached, ′MISSING′ indicates that this specific tip is absent.
Figure 4.4: 12x8 Greiner 96 well plate: It can be seen from the alignment of plate with the
output logs that there is no liquid at positions where the system detected it ’MISSING’ in
above figure 4.3. A red circle highlights empty positions.
38
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:47==
Measuring liquid.
According to the process outlined in section 3.4, our system has successfully generated
a log that can accurately measure the amount of liquid inside the tip. It’s worth noting that
the values obtained have 95% accuracy, within the expected range. However, we believe
this figure can be improved even further by using more advanced cameras capable of
capturing more explicit images or employing the highly accurate SAM model.
Implementing the SAM model can significantly enhance the accuracy of our system to
a level that meets or even exceeds our expectations. This would enable us to obtain
exact measurements of liquid levels, making it easier to monitor and manage fluid levels
in various applications.
Figure 4.5: Liquid volume in 12x8 Greiner 96 well plate in figure 4.4, zero indicates that
there is no liquid as tips were missing on these positions.
4.4
Results comparison.
This section explains a comparison between two methods for object detection. This com­
parison is based on the observation and model validation values and other functions. By
analyzing this table, we can easily understand the differences between the two methods.
The comparison shows that the proposed method has a similar performance to the previ­
ous one for object detection when the criteria are not too strict. However, when the model
is evaluated using the mAP@0.95 score, which is a more demanding standard, the newly
trained model outperforms the previous one by 7%. Additionally, there are slight improve­
ments in Recall values, which indicate that the model predicted 100% True positive cases
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
39
==PAGE:48==
during evaluation, and it never failed to detect a tip. This is quite impressive.
Although the improvement in model evaluation values is slight, it is essential to consider
another critical factor when designing a practical model: the execution time. In object
detection, a model with high accuracy usually requires more time to process image data.
Therefore, if we want to speed up the process, we might have to sacrifice some accuracy.
This is a trade­off that we must take into account. A balanced model that maintains good
speed and accuracy is the best choice for any objective.
Considering our objective to speed up the process and make it feasible for natural lab
environments, our proposed method is approximately 86.25% faster than the previous
one, which is an outstanding improvement. Moreover, the newly proposed method can
keep track of every movement and maintain detailed logs for future reference, making it
a reliable and efficient option.
Previous method
Improved method
mAP@50
0.99
0.99
mAP@95
0.81
0.88
Recall
0.98
1
Processing time
8 Sec.
1.3 Sec.
Working in real­lab en­
vironment
NO
YES
Communication
method
NO real­time
communication
Real­time python
server and client setup
Record Logs for future
reference
NO
YES
Table 4.2: Comparison with previous method.
40
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
5.1
Accomplishment
The project succeeded in achieving all three major objectives; it succeeded in enhancing
the existing algorithm and made it ready to be adapted to real­life labour environments.
There are significant improvements in processing time, from eight seconds to close to one
second, compared to the previous version. And there are also improvements in algorithm
detection. During all testing phases, it always identified a tip. With all those improvements
and by integrating machine learning into affordable robotics, the project has shown that
high­quality lab automation can be achieved without the high costs usually associated
with such technology. Making efficient and safe lab operations available to a wider audi­
ence potentially speeds up research and improves research outcomes in less financially
developed regions of the world.
In summary, the project successfly all major objectives and describes a meaningful step
ahead in making lab automation more accessible and affordable, which could lead to
broader adoption of automated processes in various scientific fields, improving efficiency,
safety, and the reliability of lab results across the globe.
5.2
Value addition to United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals (UNSDGs).
In 2015, the collective effort of 93 countries created and agreed upon the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). These goals provide directions and proposals to
secure a more promising and sustainable future. After the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) tackled various global challenges
such as inequality, health, poverty, education and environmental decline.
It is essential to align bioengineering research facilities with the UN­SDGs to extend sci­
entific research and ensure that technological progress contributes positively to transna­
tional sustainability and human well­being.[29] Lab automation aligned to the UN­SDGs
can enhance processes, reduce waste, optimise energy consumption, and encourage
innovation that addresses different global challenges.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
41
==PAGE:50==
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure.
SDG 9 aims to create robust infrastructure and promote sustainable industrialization. This
project, which involves the automation of quality control in life science laboratories using
the Opentrons OT­2, aligns with this goal. The OT­2, an economical industrial liquid­
handling robot, is made more efficient and intelligent by integrating vision­based artificial
intelligence. This innovation not only improves the accuracy of the system but also makes
it accessible to new startups and labs in underdeveloped countries.
SDG12: Responsible Consumption and Production.
One of the most practical ways to minimise and improve efficiency in laboratory proce­
dures is through automation. By enforcing automated systems, it is feasible to estimate
and control the amount of utilised materials accurately, reducing waste significantly and
increasing sustainability. The project helps achieve this by performing automated quality
checks. This ensures resources are used efficiently and waste is reduced.
Figure 5.1: Symbolic representation of the impact of automation on the SDGs. [29]
5.3
Future work.
The study results at hand has proven to be highly accurate in detecting tips and liquids in
real­life lab environments with quick results. However, when it comes to measuring water
quantity, the results are only approximate, leaving room for improvement. To achieve
more precise measurements, we recommend utilizing the ’Segment anything model’ in a
more proficient manner, which would allow for more accurate masking.
Additionally, we suggest creating a web­based GUI to provide a more user­friendly expe­
rience when handling parallel computing. Our bioengineers are experts in their field, but
there is always a learning curve when adopting new automation. The web­based app we
propose would help overcome this learning curve, making it easier for users to operate
the system.
In order to streamline the process even further, we propose integrating the Opentrans
API with some large language models. This would enable the autogeneration of code
for customized lab operations without requiring any prior programming knowledge. The
concept is to detect Labwares on the open trans­OT2 robot floor, mark their position, and
generate a script for robot operations with minimal text input.
42
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:51==
Overall, we believe that implementing these improvements would enhance the precision
and user­friendliness of the system, bringing us closer to achieving optimal performance
in real­life lab environments.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Bibliography
[1]
Mikell P. Groover. Historical development of automation. Accessed: 2023­17­10.
2023. URL: https://www.britannica.com/technology/automation/Feedback-controls.
[2]
Holland and Davies JA. Automation in the Life Science Research Laboratory. 2020.
URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fbioe.2020.571777/full.
[3]
Author Name. PubMed. Accessed: 2024­26­01. 2024. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/?term=automation.
[4]
PhD Tanvir Khan. An Overview of High Throughput Screening. 2023. URL: https:
//www.the- scientist.com/an- overview- of- high- throughput- screening- 71561#:~:
text=High%20throughput%20screening%20(HTS)%20relies,%2C%20chemical%2C%
20or%20pharmacological%20samples..
[5]
Statens Serum Institut. Covid­19 ­ Danmark (region) ­ Opdateret den 13. Feb. 2024.
2024. URL: https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/220fef27d07d438889d651cc2e00076c/
page/Covid-19-Regionalt/.
[6]
David I. Walsh et al. Standardizing Automated DNA Assembly: Best Practices, Met­
rics, and Protocols Using Robots. 2019. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC6819997/.
[7]
Young Hee Roh Jong Gu Kim Han Jin Jo. Analysis of accidents in chemistry/chem­
ical engineering laboratories in Korea. August 2023. URL: ttps://aiche.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/prs.12528#prs12528-bib-0015.
[8]
flow­robotics. Danish hospitals use flowbot® ONE for COVID­19 sample prepara­
tion. Accessed on February 2024. URL: https://flow- robotics.com/user- stories/
herlev-hospital/.
[9]
IATT Report for the STI Forum 2021. Lab Automation Market (By Process: Discrete
Processing, Continuous Flow; By Automation Type: OEM, Aftermarket; By End­
User: Modular Automation Systems, Total Automation Systems) ­ Global Industry
Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends, Regional Outlook, and Forecast 2023­2032.
2023. URL: https://www.precedenceresearch.com/lab-automation-market.
[10]
opentrons. The OT­2: Your Personal Pipetting Robot. URL: https://opentrons.com/
products/robots/ot-2/.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
45
==PAGE:54==
[11]
PubMed. PubMed. Accessed: 2024­26­01. 2024. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/?term=Tecan.
[12]
José Luis Villanueva­Cañas et al. “ROBOCOV: An affordable open­source robotic
platform for SARS­CoV­2 testing by RT­qPCR”. In: BioRxiv (June 2020). Preprint.
[13]
H. Yu et al. “Image Processing for Robotic Control in Life Science Laboratory Au­
tomation”. In: 2023 5th International Conference on Robotics and Computer Vision
(ICRCV). IEEE. Sept. 2023, pp. 305–309.
[14]
Geoffrey C. Fox, Roy D. Williams, and Guiseppe C. Messina. Parallel computing
works! Elsevier, 2014.
[15]
P. Czarnul, J. Proficz, and K. Drypczewski. “Survey of methodologies, approaches,
and challenges in parallel programming using high­performance computing sys­
tems”. In: Scientific Programming (2020), pp. 1–19.
[16]
A. F. Lorenzon and A. C. S. Beck Filho. Parallel computing hits the power wall:
principles, challenges, and a survey of solutions. Springer Nature, 2019.
[17]
Stanford’s Computer Science and ICME departments. Convolutional Neural Net­
works cheatsheet. 2023. URL: https://stanford.edu/~shervine/teaching/cs- 230/
cheatsheet-convolutional-neural-networks.
[18]
S. Albawi, T. A. Mohammed, and S. Al­Zawi. “Understanding of a convolutional
neural network”. In: 2017 International Conference on Engineering and Technology
(ICET). IEEE. Aug. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[19]
R. Chauhan, K. K. Ghanshala, and R. C. Joshi. “Convolutional neural network (CNN)
for image detection and recognition”. In: 2018 First International Conference on Se­
cure Cyber Computing and Communication (ICSCCC). IEEE. Dec. 2018, pp. 278–
282.
[20]
K. Weiss, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and D. Wang. “A survey of transfer learning”. In:
Journal of Big Data 3.1 (2016), pp. 1–40.
[21]
M. Hasanat et al. “Performance evaluation of transfer learning based deep con­
volutional neural network with limited fused spectrotemporal data for land cover
classification”. In: International Journal of Electrical & Computer Engineering 13.6
(2023). ISSN: 2088­8708.
[22]
Colin Raffel and et al. “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text­
to­text transformer”. In: The Journal of Machine Learning Research 21.1 (2020),
pp. 5485–5551.
[23]
X. Zhai et al. “YOLO­Drone: An Optimized YOLOv8 Network for Tiny UAV Object
Detection”. In: Electronics 12.17 (2023), p. 3664.
[24]
B. Selcuk and T. Serif. “A comparison of YOLOv5 and YOLOv8 in the context of
mobile UI detection”. In: International Conference on Mobile Web and Intelligent
Information Systems. Springer Nature Switzerland, Aug. 2023, pp. 161–174.
46
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:55==
[25]
Francesco Jacob Solawetz. What is YOLOv8? The Ultimate Guide. Jan 11,2023.
URL: https://blog.roboflow.com/whats-new-in-yolov8/.
[26]
Diana Margarita Córdova­Esparza Juan Terven. A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW
OF YOLO ARCHITECTURES IN COMPUTER VISION: FROM YOLOV1 TO YOLOV8
AND YOLO­NAS . URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.00501.pdf.
[27]
ffmpeg. ffmpeg Documentation. Accessed: 2023­21­09. 2024. URL: https://ffmpeg.
org/ffmpeg.html.
[28]
Alexander Kirillov et al. Segment Anything. Accessed: October 2023. Apr. 2023.
URL: https://research.facebook.com/publications/segment-anything/.
[29]
IATT Report for the STI Forum 2021. Emerging science, frontier technologies, and
the SDGs. 2021. URL: https://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/files/2021- 05/IATT%
20report%20on%20emerging%20techs%202021.pdf.
[30]
Syed Zahid Ali. Principles Of YoloV8. Accessed: Jan, 2024. 2024. URL: https://
medium.com/@syedzahidali969/principles-of-yolov8-6a90564e16c3.
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER A
Appendix
Experience Our Project in Action:
Click Here to watch a short YouTube Video demon­
stration.
Figure A.1: Benchtop Opentrons OT­2 Liquid Handler.
Figure A.2: Research trends of Automation and liquid handlers in bioengineering publi­
cation.[3]
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.3: YOLOv8 architecture.[30]
.
Algorithm 6 Transfer Learning on YOLOv8
1: Data: Target dataset (Xt, yt), Pre­trained YOLOv8 model
2: Result: Fine­tuned YOLOv8 model
3: Initialize YOLOv8 model with pre­trained weights
4: Freeze the convolutional layers to retain learned features
5: Adjust the final layers to match the number of target classes
6: for each epoch e = 1 to E do
7:
for each batch (Xbatch, ybatch) in (Xt, yt) do
8:
Zero the gradients
9:
Perform forward pass to get ypred = YOLOv8(Xbatch)
10:
Calculate loss = CustomYOLOLoss(ypred, ybatch)
11:
Backward propagate gradients
12:
Update weights with optimizer
13:
end for
14:
Optionally evaluate on validation set
15: end for
16: return Fine­tuned YOLOv8 model
50
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.4: Artificial neural network architecture
.
Algorithm 7 Neural network training
Require: X, y, E, net
Ensure: net
1: Initialize network net
2: while e ≤E do
3:
Zero the gradient
4:
Perform forward pass ˆy = net(X)
5:
Calculate loss loss = MSE(y, ˆy)
6:
Backward propagate gradients
7:
Adjust the weights
8: end while
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.5: Applying image augmentation during training
52
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
==PAGE:61==
Advancing Life Sciences Automation By Machine Learning.
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
