==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
English: Optimization of vehicle routing for waste collection in
skip containers
Dansk: Optimering af ruteplanlægning for afhentning af affald i
containere
Date: 10-03-2024
Rasmus Emil Røgen
s174042
Supervisor: Stefan Røpke
Industry Supervisor: Kristian Hauge
AMCS Group Danmark
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis deals with waste management and in particular we focus on transportation of skip
containers by trucks. Given a set of orders that needs to be carried out, the goal is to optimize
the routes of the trucks, in order to minimize the total distance driven. Minimizing the dis-
tance driven is important because it reduces the cost of operation and reduces the emission of
greenhouse gasses. The problem is a so-called Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP),
and it is modelled as an Integer Problem (IP) using a Set Partitioning formulation. We de-
velop a Column Generation Variable Neighborhood Search (CGVNS)-based heuristic in order
to solve the problem, as literature tells us it takes too long to solve using usual exact methods.
The VNS heuristic improves the solution found by a greedy algorithm by on average 22.5%
and 8-20% compared to the commercial solver from Transvision (now called AMCS). The VNS
heuristic performs on average 2.6% worse than a similar Tabu-based heuristic from Hauge et al.
2014.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Integer Programming formulation
10
3
Heuristic
11
3.1
Column Generation framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Restricted Master Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Pricing Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Variable Neighborhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
The Fix method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Time limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.7
Greedy solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Computational Results
19
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Parameter tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Software, Hardware and setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5
Comparing the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Discussion
26
6
Conclusion
27
References
28
Appendix
29
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
A particular problem in waste management deals with the disposal of waste in skip containers.
Waste is put into skip containers e.g. by citizens that bring their waste to a central hub, as
is the case with "recycling stations" in Denmark. Citizens are advised to bring their bulkier
waste such as old furniture, bikes, TV’s, garden waste etc. to a recycling station where there
are skip containers for each type of waste. This helps with sorting the waste, and the large
scale makes it easier to manage the waste and its further handling. Figure 1 shows an example
of what a recycling station in Denmark looks like. Another use of skips is in the construction
business, where bulky waste is produced at construction sites. The waste is placed in skips at
the construction site, and likewise will have to be transported to another location for further
processing.
Figure 1: A recycling center, photo by Reno Djurs I/S. Copied from Wøhlk and Laporte 2022.
When a skip is full, it is taken by truck to a "dumpsite", and in many cases the full skip must
be replaced by an empty skip, so people can continue to discard their waste. A dumpsite could
be e.g. a recycling/reclamation facility or a landfill or something else. In this thesis we consider
a dedicated service that is handling the transportation of skips for a number of customers. They
control a fleet of vehicles that transport skips around, such as the vehicle seen in Figure 2. The
service compiles a list of orders, such as pickups of skips, deliveries of skips and more, for a given
day. There are some depots from which skips can be picked up as needed. An example of the
locations of depots, dumpsites and customers can be seen on Figure 3.
3
==PAGE:5==
Figure 2: Skip containers being transported
on a truck1.
Figure 3: Locations of depots, dumpsites and
orders in a problem instance.
This gives rise to a Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP), as the routes for each truck must be
planned, to complete all the orders of that day. Optimization of the routes is desired, as it can
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and cost of operation, by minimizing the total distance driven
by the trucks. In this thesis we focus on trucks that can carry many skips of smaller size, as
seen in Figure 2.
1.1
Literature review
The problem studied in this thesis is a variant of skip pickup and delivery introduced in Meule-
meester et al. 1997, and first described in Cristallo 1994. The aforementioned is also referred to
as the roll-on-roll-off VRP defined in Bodin et al. 2000. Cristallo 1994 formulated the problem as
an integer linear program, and also presented a constraint relaxation algorithm. Meulemeester
et al. 1997 developed heuristics for the problem, and also solved a real life problem with an exact
enumerative algorithm, but it is worth noting that the instance was very small (30 customers)
and the capacity of each truck was only 1 skip. The capacity is the number of containers that
each truck can carry at a time. In Hauge et al. 2014, a hybrid column generation heuristic is
tested for the problem with larger than 2 capacity. They formulate a column generation pro-
cedure: a master problem with a reduced set of routes, and a pricing problem that iteratively
identifies the best candidate routes to introduce in the master problem. The proposal by Hauge
et al. 2014 is to use a heuristic to solve the pricing problem. They implemented this with a Tabu
search, and the algorithm showed good results when compared with exact solution methods for
large instances with over 60 customers.
A recent paper, Wøhlk and Laporte 2022, studies the problem with capacity=2, for which they
develop an exact model with valid inequalities to tighten the model, and a Variable Neighborhood
Search (VNS) inspired heuristic. The computational results show that the heuristic was at least
1https://www.alamy.com/skip-lorry-truck-towing-a-trailer-loaded-with-delivery-of-thirteen-empty-yellow-
industrial-steel-rubbish-skip-bins-marked-as-crane-tested-uk-motorway-image244358945.html
4
==PAGE:6==
as good as the exact method computed with CPLEX, when CPLEX was given 2 hours and the
heuristic less than half a minute.
An in-depth literature review H. and P. 2015 provides a great overview of research and practices
in the field of waste collection. In H. and P. 2015 three main categories are defined: Residential,
Commercial and Roll-on-roll-off waste collection. The problem in our thesis is in the commercial
category, or in the roll-on-roll-off category, if we extend their definition to include trucks that
can carry many more than one skip at a time. One of the things that make this problem both
hard and interesting is that it falls between categories as defined in earlier literature. From this
literature review we find that, it is well known in general that heuristics are preferred over exact
methods for this type of problem, and for large problem instances such as real life problems (see
Hauge et al. 2014, H. and P. 2015, Wøhlk and Laporte 2022).
A closely related problem to the one studied in this thesis is stochastic in nature, as it incorpo-
rates into the model, how much rubbish is in each trash-bin at a given time. This kind of model
has been investigated in Bouleft and Elhilali Alaoui 2023 and in Wu 2022. They consider the
case where sensors inside the bins are collecting data, which is associated to the idea of smart-
cities. This other dynamic problem deals with scheduling routes for collection of trash, in order
to deliver the best service in terms of minimizing the number of trash-bins that get full, because
full trash-bins are an inconvenience to the users. In Wu 2022 a priority is also considered, giving
high priority to e.g. medical waste. See Table 1 for an overview of the reviewed literature.
Table 1: Table of reviewed literature
Paper
Capacity
Exact
Heuristic
Orders
Cristallo 1994
1
x
x
-
Meulemeester et al. 1997
1
x
x
160
Bodin et al. 2000
1
x
x
50-199
Hauge et al. 2014
8
x
x
100
H. and P. 2015
-
-
-
-
Wu 2022
Bins
x
x
30 bins
Wøhlk and Laporte 2022
2
x
x
5-185
Bouleft and Elhilali Alaoui 2023
Bins
x
x
∼620 bins
1.2
Problem statement
In this thesis we consider the deterministic problem described in the Introduction. Here we
state the problem, and the delimiting assumptions, in detail. The aim is to minimize the total
distance driven by the trucks. We assume that all orders are known ahead of time, and that
all orders must be fulfilled. We assume that it is possible to fulfil all orders with the available
vehicle-fleet, within the time-window. The destination of the trash could be one of many things,
for example a recycling facility, landfill, gasification- or incineration-plant, and we refer to these
simply as dumpsites.
We assume that all routes share a predefined depot as the start and end. This means that if
the start-depot is depot 13, then all routes must start and end in depot 13. We consider these
order types: pickup, delivery, change and swap, explained by Figures 4-7.
5
==PAGE:7==
• A pickup order means that a skip must be picked up and taken away. If it is a full skip
that is picked up it must be emptied at a dumpsite, before being delivered to a depot or
another location.
Figure 4: Pickup order.
• A delivery order is one where a skip must be delivered to the specified location. It can
come from any source such as a depot or it can be a skip that was picked up from another
location earlier in the route.
Figure 5: Delivery order.
6
==PAGE:8==
• A change order is the same as a pickup order, except the skip must be returned to the
same location it was picked up from, after being emptied at a dumpsite. This type of
order is for example used if the skip is owned by the company at that specific location, or
if there is not enough space to perform a swap.
Figure 6: Change order.
• The swap order is an order that combines a pickup and delivery order, such that a skip
must be picked up, and in the same visit, must be replaced with an empty skip.
Figure 7: Swap order.
7
==PAGE:9==
We also have something called an annihilation, which is when an empty container from one
order is reused to be delivered to another order. This saves two trips to depots, one where a
container is returned to a depot and one where a container is picked up from the depot. It is
therefore always beneficial to apply annihilation if possible, however it can only happen if there
is no violation of the capacity in any intermediate stops due to the extra container being on the
truck. An example of the annihilation principle can be seen on figure 8.
Figure 8: Annihilation principle in effect. First a pickup is performed, followed by a delivery.
We assume that the capacity of each truck is 8 skips. We consider a skip to be either empty
of full. In each instance all orders must be fulfilled, and we assume there are enough trucks
available to do that. Each instance has an associated time-window, e.g. 06:30-19:30. From now
on we just refer to the number of seconds since the start of the time-window, and the max-time is
defined as the difference between the start and end of the time-window in seconds. For example,
the max-time for the time-window 6:30-19:30 is 46800 seconds. All the trucks must be back at
the start-depot no later than the max-time.
We assume that depots have enough/unlimited capacity of empty skips, and that the number
of skips at each depot at the end of the day is irrelevant. In reality one might need to consider
a limited amount of skips available at depots, and that the location of the skips at the end of
day will affect the next day.
For every depot, dumpsite and order we have their location given in x- and y-coordinates. We
assume that the trucks follow a direct path between each location, i.e. the distance between two
locations is equal to the euclidean distance between the two. This means that the distance is
symmetric and it fulfills triangle-inequality for the distances. We assume that the trucks travel
at a constant speed of 60 km/h. For each order, depending on the type of skip, it takes a specific
amount of time to load and/or unload the skip, and this needs to be accounted for when making
the routes.
8
==PAGE:10==
The time spent loading and unloading is a constant amount (it depends only on the amount and
types of orders, which is known in advance). As we assume constant travel speed, minimizing
the total time spent will also minimize the total distance driven. In Hauge et al. 2014 the com-
putational results are presented with regards to total time, and we use the same instances for the
computational results in this thesis. In order to best compare the results we obtain with the ones
in the literature, we therefore change our aim of optimization to minimize the total time.
9
==PAGE:11==
2
Integer Programming formulation
The IP formulation is a mathematical formulation of the problem. Formulating the IP can be
seen as the step that brings the problem to the form of a concrete mathematical model. The
particular IP formulation we have chosen is a Set Partitioning formulation. What makes it a
set partitioning model is that each route handles a set of orders and all orders must be fulfilled
exactly once. That means that the task is to partition the total orders into the set of chosen
routes that minimize the total cost. We denote the set of all routes R, and the set of all orders
in the instance O. Let the cost of a route be the total time it takes to complete the route, and
denote the cost by cr. By ao,r = 1 we have that order o is serviced by route r, and by ao,r = 0
we have that order o is not serviced by route r. We let the variable xr = 1 be the decision to
include route r in the solution, and xr = 0 otherwise. The set partitioning model is then defined
by the following equations:
min
X
r∈R
crxr
(1)
subject to
X
r∈R
ao,rxr = 1
∀o ∈O
(2)
X
r∈R
xr ≤N
(3)
xr ∈{0, 1}
∀r ∈R.
(4)
In order to calculate the cost of a route we make use of the following definitions.
Variable
Explanation
C
Set of all container types
V
Set of all customers
O
Set of all orders
S
Set of sites
xi,j
Equal 1 if the route goes directly from location i to j.
ti,j
Time spent driving from location i to j.
hf,p
c
Handling time picking up full container c.
he,p
c
Handling time picking up empty container c.
hf,d
c
Handling time delivering full container c.
he,d
c
Handling time delivering empty container c.
pf
i,c
Whether we pick up a full container c at location i or not.
pe
i,c
Whether we pick up an empty container c at location i or not.
df
i,c
Whether we deliver a full container c at location i or not.
de
i,c
Whether we deliver an empty container c at location i or not.
df
s,c
Whether we deliver a full container c at dumpsite s or not.
10
==PAGE:12==
Now we can define the equation which gives the total cost of a route.
cr =
X
c∈C

hf,p
c
X
i∈V
pf
i,c + hf,d
c
X
i∈V,s∈S
df
s,c + he,p
c
X
i∈V
pe
i,c + he,d
c
X
i∈V
de
i,c

+
X
i,j∈V 2
 ti,jxi,j

3
Heuristic
In this section we explain the heuristic developed to solve the problem. The heuristic is based
on a technique called Column Generation (CG), which is a technique that is used for hard OR-
problems. Column generation splits up the problem into smaller and more manageable parts.
Column generation can have faster solution time compared to other solution methods, due to
this. It is an iterative procedure, with a master problem which is iteratively fed information
from a pricing problem. In this thesis we combine the framework of column generation with a
heuristic called Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS). VNS is a search algorithm, and we use
this in the pricing problem, in order to speed up the solution process even more. The starting
point for the development of the heuristic is the IP formulation of the problem.
3.1
Column Generation framework
In column generation the mathematical problem is split into smaller problems, which are easier
to solve. Column generation is therefore used when the problem is too costly to solve as it is.
In column generation there is a master problem and a pricing problem. The master problem is
simply the LP-relaxation of the IP-problem, but we will be using the Restricted Master Problem
(RMP), which is the master problem restricted to a certain set of routes. The pricing problem
corresponds to finding the route with the most negative reduced cost. To calculate the reduced
cost the dual variable values are needed from the RMP, so the RMP must be solved before the
pricing problem. The role of the pricing problem is to provide the RMP with new routes to
introduce into its restricted set of routes. The RMP is solved again with more routes, then
the pricing problem is solved, etc. The above explains the iterative procedure of the column
generation framework, which is illustrated in Figure 9.
11
==PAGE:13==
Restricted
Master
Problem
Pricing
Problem
Feasible 
solution
Dual values
Routes
Figure 9: The CG framework illustrated.
The stopping criteria of column generation is that there are no negative reduced costs to be
found in the pricing problem. The reduced cost is a measure of how much the objective value
could change if the associated route was introduced into the restricted set. We are minimizing
and are therefore looking for negative reduced cost, but since there are none, the solution to the
RMP with the current set of routes is optimal for the master problem problem. In this project
we solve the pricing problem using a heuristic, and we therefore lose the promise of optimality,
in the hopes that the computation time of the algorithm can be brought down. Due to this
we simply restore integrality-constraints in the final RMP to get the solution to the original IP
problem.
3.2
Restricted Master Problem
Here follows the mathematical formulation of the RMP.
min
X
r∈R′
crxr
(5)
subject to
X
r∈R′
ao,rxr ≥1
∀o ∈O
(6)
X
r∈R′
xr ≤N
(7)
xr ∈[0; 1]
∀r ∈R′
(8)
As we previously mentioned, the RMP is simply the master problem restricted to the set of
routes R′. This is a much smaller set of routes than the set of all possible routes. This means
that it is fast to solve the RMP, which is good as we have to solve the RMP in each iteration,
in order to get new dual values for the pricing problem. We have to point out that due to a
12
==PAGE:14==
technicality in the algorithmic procedure, we have changed constraints (6) to greater than or
equal to 1. We will treat this in details later on in Section 3.5 The Fix method.
3.3
Pricing Problem
As we stated earlier, the pricing problem needs the values of the dual variables to calculate the
reduced cost of each of the potential new routes. Let γ be the dual variable corresponding to
constraint (7) and let αo be the dual variables corresponding to the constraints (6). We define
yo = 1 if order o is fulfilled in the route, and yo = 0 otherwise. The cost of a route r is cr. The
objective function of the pricing problem is then given below.
min cr −γ −
X
o∈O
yoαo
(9)
For the pricing problem we in theory want to obtain the route with the minimal objective value.
However this is a computationally hard problem to solve, and we therefore propose to use the
heuristic Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) to approximately solve it. This means that we
can not guarantee optimality, but we are able to get results very fast.
3.4
Variable Neighborhood Search
VNS is a metaheuristic originally developed to tackle large combinatorial problems. VNS is
built on the understanding that small changes in the solution can be used in order to perform
local search, and that larger changes can be utilized to get out of local minima. In VNS there is
a descent phase, where local search is used in order to obtain a local minimum, and then there
is a perturbation phase to get out of the corresponding valley. Both phases utilize systematic
change of neighborhood. We start with the fact that a deterministic combinatorial problem may
be formulated as
min{f(x)|x ∈X}
where f(x) is the value of a solution x, and x is in the feasible set X. A solution x∗is optimal
if it holds that
f(x∗) ≤f(x)∀x ∈X.
In the context of our VRP a solution to the pricing problem is a feasible route, x therefore denotes
a certain route. In the following we present a few functions which are needed for VNS.
We define the function NeighborhoodChange which changes the incumbent solution to the given
new one, if its value is better. The given new solution comes from the k’th neighborhood, and
if it is chosen then k is set to its initial value of 1, otherwise k is increased in order to consider
the next neighborhood.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 10: NeighborhoodChange function. Copied from Hansen and Mladenović 2018.
The next function we need is called Variable Neighborhood Descent (VND). We denote the
neighborhoods as Nk, k = 1, ..., kmax. In most cases kmax ≤2 is used for local search heuristics2,
and in our heuristic we use kmax = 2. In order for the algorithm to be different from steepest
descent k must be different from 1. VND will find the best neighbor in Nk and use that as
the input along with the incumbent solution to NeighborhoodChange. NeighborhoodChange
returns either a new incumbent solution and k = 1 or an increased k, which means that VND
will look in the next neighborhood for a new solution.
Figure 11: VND function. Copied from Hansen and Mladenović 2018.
In our heuristic we define the neighborhood for VND with k = 1 as all the routes that can be
obtained by either inserting a new order somewhere in the route, or removing an order from
the route. After both we apply an annihilation-performing function. The annihilation function
simply looks for a possible annihilation and if it finds one it performs it, see Algorithm 1. We
simply look for the first possible annihilation, because the function is run every time there has
been a change to the route. It could be beneficial to look for all possible annihilations and pick
the best one instead, but for simplicity we went with this one.
Algorithm 1 Annihilation
for i = 1, ...,#orders in route −1 do
for j = i, ...,#orders in route do
if Possible annihilation between i and j then
Perform annihilation
Return
end if
end for
end for
2Hansen and Mladenović 2018
14
==PAGE:16==
For k = 2 we define it as the routes that can be obtained from the same actions, insert/remove
+ annihilation, performed on the optimal route from N1, see Algorithm 2. We perform total
enumeration of the neighborhood in order to find the best candidate. Luckily this takes very
little computational time.
Algorithm 2 VND Neighborhood
x ←initial route
y ←empty array
Best ←x
for i = 1, ..., k do
for j = 1, ...,#orders not in route do
y ←all possible insertions of order j in route x + annihilation
end for
for k = 1, ...,#orders in route do
y ←remove order k from route x + annihilation
end for
x ←best route in y
if x < Best then
Best ←x
end if
end for
Return Best
We define the Shake function, which generates a random route from the k’th neighborhood of
x. It is assumed that the routes in Nk are numbered as {x1, ..., x|Nk|}. The neighborhoods used
here are not necessarily the same as in the VND.
Figure 12: Shake function. Copied from Hansen and Mladenović 2018.
Indeed we use a different neighborhood for k = 2, as we effectively use all the routes that can be
obtained through 2 consecutive insert/remove + annihilation actions, see Algorithm 3. For k = 1
the neighborhood is the same neighborhood as for VND with k = 1. In the implementation we
have to account for the possibility that an insertion will result in an infeasible route, which we
have done by trying a maximum of 25 times with random insertions, after which we will perform
a removal instead, which we have not seen result in an infeasible route with the considered data
instances.
15
==PAGE:17==
Algorithm 3 Shake Neighborhood
x ←initial route
for i = 1, ..., k do
r ←random binary (0 or 1)
if r = 1 then
x ←random order inserted in x + annihilation
if Failed 25 insertions then
x ←random order removed from x + annihilation
end if
else
x ←random order removed from x + annihilation
end if
end for
Return x
Finally we have all the building-blocks of the General VNS (GVNS). The GVNS is the heuristic
we use to solve the pricing problem, and it is given below. First the Shake function is used in
order to escape local minimum and then VND is used to explore the neighborhood and find an
optimum. Finally NeighborhoodChange is applied to update the incumbent solution and k. The
heuristic is run until the time limit tmax is reached.
Figure 13: GVNS function. Copied from Hansen and Mladenović 2018.
3.5
The Fix method
With the CG framework and VNS heuristic we were ready to start solving the given instances.
However, we noticed that even though the value of the LP went down during the iterative
procedure, the IP solution remained the same even after many iterations. An explanation of
this is that the procedure did not produce routes that really complimented each other, so even
though it produced good individual routes it failed at producing an overall good set of routes
for the IP. We came up with a solution to this problem, which is to fix a route in the solution
with certain intervals (the intervals are a parameter to this method). This is done by first fixing
the route with the maximal value in the LP after some iterations, meaning that this route must
from now on be in the solution of the LP (with a value of 1). We also introduce an artificial
α, which you can recall is the dual variables corresponding to the constraints (6). We modify
α by setting the dual values corresponding to the orders that are fulfilled by the fixed route to
16
==PAGE:18==
minus a large number. This makes it so that any route that uses the same orders is essentially
out of the question. Then after some additional iterations we fix another route also, so now 2
routes are fixed in the solution of the LP, and modify α correspondingly. We do this as many
times as there are vehicles in the problem instance. In this way we end up with a set of routes
with size equal to the number of vehicles, which is what we are looking for. However the CG
procedure may end early due to no negative reduced cost routes found in the pricing problem.
If the procedure ends early we are still happy, as there is a good chance that a different and
better solution has been reached compared to the initial solution. This sounds great, but a new
problem arose: after fixing a route in the LP there was a large chance that no solution could
be found in the next iteration. This was due to the equality-constraint which ensured that all
orders must be handled exactly once, which was not able to be fulfilled. We therefore had to
change the constraint to greater-than-or-equal to make the fix method and the whole procedure
work. Changing the constraint has the implication that an order may be fulfilled more than
once, which is not possible. If a full container is picked up by one truck, then there will not
be a full container to be picked up be another truck later on. If the second truck is expecting
to use that container in annihilation, it is in big trouble. There is however a way to repair the
solution in a post-processing step, where all routes with overlapping orders are identified and it
is tested what the cost of removing the overlapping order is for each route, and the least costly
one is chosen. As this problem of overlapping was discovered late in the project, it has not been
implemented in the code, and the results might therefore be taken more as guidelines, as the
actual value could be a bit different. However we assess that we are talking about a fairly small
deviation, meaning that the solution we have found is indeed a good estimate solution, which is
all you can hope for with a heuristic.
Algorithm 4 The Fix method and overview of algorithm
x ←initial solution
for i = 1, ..., nV do
for j = 1, ..., itr_max do
Solve RMP
Create artificial α
Generate routes (GVNS)
if No negative reduced cost then
Restore integrality, solve and stop
end if
Update RMP
end for
Fix a route
end for
Restore integrality and solve
3.6
Time limit
We define a time limit for the whole algorithm as 1 hour (3600s). We then have to limit the
time that is spent on each VNS iteration in accordance with this, otherwise VNS will continue
for a long time. The VNS heuristic takes as input a number of routes, n, each of which it will
try to improve sequentially. With the outline of the algorithm given in Algorithm 4 in mind, we
define the time limit given to each route in the VNS as
17
==PAGE:19==
t =
3600s
nV · itr_max · n
and an example from the computational experiments is
t =
3600s
14 · 25 · 30 = 0.34s.
3.7
Greedy solution
During initial testing it was found that starting from a completely empty route was not very
good. The algorithm only had one route to modify in the pricing problem in the first iteration,
2 routes in the second iteration, and slowly increasing the number of routes to the maximum
allowed. This, together with the fact that the initial dummy solution which covers all orders is a
bad starting point, called for a different approach. The idea we came up with is to create a very
basic set of routes to start the algorithm. We do this with a so-called greedy algorithm. Greedy
algorithms are characterized by the way that they operate, which is to take the best here-and-
now decisions. Normally this strategy will result in a fairly decent solution to a problem, but far
from optimal. It will however give us a good starting point, from which we can improve using
the CG method. The algorithm is as follows. Create as many empty routes as there are vehicles
in the problem instance. Take the first order and insert it in the route that when the order has
been inserted has the minimal time spent of all the routes. To state in another way, try inserting
the order in each of the routes, and pick the one with the lowest resulting total time of the route.
We continue with the second order inserting it in the same way, such that it minimizes the time.
We do this iteratively for all orders in the instance. The process is illustrated in figure 14.
Figure 14: Illustration of the greedy algorithm on an instance with 2 trucks and 3 orders.
18
==PAGE:20==
4
Computational Results
This section is dedicated to testing the heuristic on some instances of the problem. First we
describe the data, and the setup, then we state the computational results, and finally we compare
with results from the literature.
4.1
Data
This section aims to describe, visualize and analyze the data that make up the problem instances
used for the computational results.
The data consists of a list of terminals (depots and dumpsites) and a list of orders. The data has
been anonymized by renaming. "4 of the 9 data sets are as provided: A68, B58a, B58b and C48.
From instances B58a and B58b, which share start depot, another five instances were created
by combining the orders randomly. The number in the name of an instance is the number of
orders." -From the file Notes.txt accompanying the data set.
First let us look at the locations of the depots, dumpsites and orders. The data has x- and
y-coordinates of each of these, given in UTM format, meaning that the distance between points
has the unit meters. A plot of the locations can be seen on Figure 15. We see that the depots
and dumpsites are spread fairly evenly across the area, while the orders are clustered tightly,
except for a few outliers. The locations of the depots and dumpsites are constant throughout the
data set, while the cluster of orders is changing. We notice similarity in locations of orders for
the original data, and the instances generated from those data. On Figure 16 we see a bar-plot
of the distribution of the different order-types in each instance. We see that in all instances
there are many swap orders, and in instances A68 and C48 there are as many change orders as
swap orders. There are not a lot of delivery or pickup orders over all. Therefore, most customers
must need an empty skip to replace their full skip.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 15: The locations of depots (Blue), dumpsites (Green) and orders (Red) in the instances.
Figure 16: The distribution between order-types in the instances. Cng: Change | Swp: Swap |
Del: Delivery | Pic: Pickup.
20
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Parameter tuning
The algorithm depends on some parameters that need to be chosen before running the algorithm.
The parameter values will have an effect on the solution process, and ultimately on the resulting
objective value. The parameters in the algorithm is the number of routes that are entered into
the pricing problem in each iteration, nr, as well as the number of iterations between each
fix operation, ni. In order to determine values which result in good objective values, different
configurations are tested on the instance A68 with a time limit of 1 hour, like the final runs
are. Due to the long computation time needed and the time available in the project, we have
only tested 4 different configurations, and each configuration is only tested once. The resulting
objective value of these experiments can be seen in Table 2. We observe some difference between
the objective value depending on the configuration. The best values (out of the tested ones) are
nr = 30 and ni = 25, meaning that there will be generated maximum 30 columns per iteration,
and there will be 25 iteration between each fix operation.
nr= 30
nr= 10
ni= 15
178764
179011
ni= 25
175285
177023
Table 2: Objective values from different parameter configurations.
If we had more time available we could have tested more configurations to hopefully obtain even
better results. An efficient way to search for the best configuration, is to search near the best
known configuration. That means that we should extend the search around nr = 30, ni = 25,
in the directions away from where we have already searched. Another extension here is to run
multiple times for each configuration, in order to capture the variability which is present because
of the randomness involved in the algorithm. It might be that on average another configuration
would perform better, which we will not know because we only tested once.
4.3
Software, Hardware and setup
The software used is Julia 1.8.1, Gurobi and the computations were done on an i7-6700k pro-
cessor. The computer used was my own PC. The algorithm was configured in a way such that
the maximal time it could use was 1 hour. However the algorithm may stop earlier due to no
negative reduced cost found in an iteration.
4.4
Results
Here we state the results of the computational experiments for the heuristic on the problem
instances. Each instance was solved 3 times due to the randomness involved in the process. It
can be seen on the graphs of the objective value over iterations on Figures 17-25, that there is
an initial flat phase, where the LP solution is equal to the greedy solution. This flat phase takes
about 5-15 iterations. Next we observe a rapid decrease in objective value, which slowly flattens
out. At 25 iterations we observe a jump up in objective value, which is exactly where we fixed
one route in the solution, and that explains the increase in objective value. However we notice
that no jump occurs at the other times where we fix i.e. 50, 75 iterations and so on. The reason
for this is a bit mysterious, but it could be that the routes match well due to the artificial alpha.
In the end of each graph we see another increase in objective value, which is because we have
21
==PAGE:23==
restored integrality constraints after the algorithm has stopped. In some cases the final jump
is somewhat large (∼5%) and in other cases it is very minor (∼0.5%). One theory we had was
that more iterations would mean a smaller final jump, due to there being more routes available,
however there does not seem to be evidence to support this theory in the results. On average the
final integer solution was found to be a 22.5% reduction compared to the initial greedy solution.
This is an expected value, as the greedy solution will often be fairly decent, but not really close
to optimal, meaning there is room for some improvement, which is exactly what our algorithm
does.
Figure 17: Objective value during execution.
Figure 18: Objective value during execution.
Figure 19: Objective value during execution.
Figure 20: Objective value during execution.
Figure 21: Objective value during execution.
Figure 22: Objective value during execution.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 23: Objective value during execution.
Figure 24: Objective value during execution.
Figure 25: Objective value during execution.
In Table 3 we state the best and worst objective values obtained out of the 3 runs, and in Table
4 we state the average. We see that in most cases there is very little difference between the best
and worst values, which we take as a sign that the heuristic is quite robust and consistent.
Instance
Best
Worst
C48
113099
116577
A68
172968
180429
B58a
198574
200615
B58b
174403
186693
B68a
251214
252161
B68b
207500
212630
B80a
243762
245926
B80b
240745
245209
B100
306195
327708
Table 3: Best and worst objective value of 3 runs.
23
==PAGE:25==
4.5
Comparing the results
In this section we compare the results obtained using the VNS heuristic to those presented in
Hauge et al. 2014. The results we are comparing to are obtained using a commercial solver from
AMCS (then called Transvision) and a heuristic which is basically the same as our heuristic, but
is build on Tabu Search instead of VNS to solve the pricing problem. The problem instances are
the same, but in Hauge et al. 2014 they have additional constraints: there are constraints that
dictate which containers can be stacked on top of each other, and there can be a maximum of
2 full containers on a truck at a time. This means that the capacitated VRP we have solved is
a relaxation of their problem. In our problem we are more free when it comes to the inventory
of the trucks, meaning that some routes that are infeasible in their problem are feasible in our
problem. This leads to the conclusion that we can expect it to be possible to obtain at least as
good objective values or even better ones for our problem. All the solvers have had a time limit
of 1 hour. When we look at the comparison of results in Table 4 we see that our VNS-based
heuristic out-performs the commercial solver by quite a bit with an 8-20% relative reduction in
objective value. Our heuristic then clearly is better than the commercial solver. The missing
values from the commercial solver in Table 4 is due to there being no results for those instances
in Hauge et al. 2014. However when we look at the comparison with the Tabu-based heuristic
the picture is different. The results are a bit mixed, with some positive reductions and some
negative. There are more negative relative reductions than positive, meaning that mostly our
heuristic performs worse than the Tabu heuristic. The average reduction compared to the Tabu
heuristic is -2.6%. When we take into account that our problem is easier than theirs, we can
most certainly conclude that the Tabu heuristic performs better than our VNS heuristic for
these problems.
VNS
Commercial
Reduction
Tabu
Reduction
C48
114988
135780
15.3%
124860
7.9%
A68
176380
192540
8.4%
163500
-7.9%
B58a
199709
234360
14.8%
184920
-8%
B58b
181882
226140
19.6%
184260
1.3%
B68a
251561
-
-
231360
-8.7%
B68b
209436
-
-
201600
-3.9%
B80a
245166
-
-
243480
-0.7%
B80b
243524
-
-
244200
0.3%
B80c
316477
-
-
304200
-4%
Table 4: Comparison of results. The reduction is the relative reduction compared to the com-
mercial and Tabu solutions.
Our heuristic was set to stop when no negative reduced cost was found in an iteration, which lead
to the algorithm stopping much earlier than the full 1 hour which was the maximum allowed
time. We did not time the run, but we have a good estimate of how much time was used.
The estimate is based on the observation that most of the time was spent on the VNS part of
the algorithm, which we had set a time limit on. The running time of the algorithm can then
be calculated by the number of iterations before stopping divided by the maximum amount of
allowed iterations, multiplied by the 60 minutes time limit. The estimated running times are
presented in Table 5. We see that the running times are between 15 and 37 minutes, and the
24
==PAGE:26==
average running time was 26.5 minutes.
Instance
C48
A68
B58a
B58b
B68a
B68b
B80a
B80b
B100
Time (m)
15.9
15.1
23.8
20.7
37.0
25.5
35.7
35.2
29.3
Table 5: Running time of the VNS-algorithm.
25
==PAGE:27==
5
Discussion
In this thesis we have worked with the real world problem of transportation of skip containers.
The problem has been defined and it was modelled as a capacitated vehicle routing problem.
The integer model formulation can be solved using commercial solvers, but it can be practically
infeasible due to the long computation time needed. We have presented a greedy algorithm for
the problem that can obtain a somewhat decent solution. This solution is used as the starting
point for the CG-VNS heuristic that was developed as an alternative to the commercial solver.
The advantage of the heuristic is that less computation time is needed, but the draw-back of
the heuristic is that we can not promise optimality. We have implemented the heuristic in the
described way and this allows us to solve real world instances of the problem. It is important to
note that the described CG-VNS algorithm is not the only way to design a CG-VNS algorithm
for this problem. There are many choices that have been made in regards to the design of the
algorithm, and other designs are possible, for better or worse.
In regards to the performance of the heuristic, we solved instances of the problem and compared
the results with those found in Hauge et al. 2014 as they solved the same instances. The choice
was made to exclude the stacking rules from our problem, to make the problem easier to model.
This made it so that a direct comparison of the results is impossible, but comparing the results
still holds some merit. We found that Tabu outperformed VNS by a bit. A really hard question
to answer is: what made Tabu outperform VNS? There are far too many factors that play in
to answer this completely, but one thing that might have played a role is the design of certain
parts of the algorithm and particularly the considered neighborhoods, where the Tabu algorithm
includes more operators than the VNS algorithm. Another thing is the implementation, which
can be done in more or less efficient ways. In my implementation I have not particularly tried
to optimize the code for fast execution. Also, the computer (mostly CPU) used to run the
algorithm has an impact on the speed of the execution of code.
If I had more time to work on the project I would like to have included the stacking rules for
better comparison, and simply to model the problem that I set out to model. Other than that it
could have been nice to run more parameter tests in order to maximize the performance of the
algorithm on the problem instances. The same goes for optimizing the code which can directly
increase the performance. Another possible future work is to experiment with different/addi-
tional operators for defining the neighborhood of a route. This will probably affect the results
a lot also. It is also possible to fix a route instead of restoring integrality when no negative
reduced cost is found, and that might improve the solution.
26
==PAGE:28==
6
Conclusion
We have worked with the capacitated vehicle routing problem and have found that the problem
is complex and hard to solve. We have presented a greedy heuristic, and proposed a column
generation variable neighborhood search heuristic for the problem, with an important feature
being the fix method. We have found that our heuristic is able to reduce the solution value of
the greedy heuristic by 22.5% on average. We compared the computational results with those
of Hauge et al. 2014, which have additional constraints in the problem. Here we discovered that
our heuristic was able to obtain better results than the commercial solver from Transvision, with
an 8-20% reduction in objective value. When comparing to the Tabu heuristic we found that
our heuristic fell short, as the VNS objective values were on average 2.6% higher compared to
the Tabu results. We speculate that this mostly has to do with the implementations/designs of
the two algorithms. We found that there is room for improvement of the VNS heuristic, and
describe several possible improvements to the algorithm in the discussion. Overall the project
has been a success in that the problem has been investigated, and a detailed solution method
has been described, implemented, tested and compared.
27
==PAGE:29==
References
Bodin, Lawrence et al. (2000). “The Rollon–Rolloff Vehicle Routing Problem”. In: Transportation
Science 34.3, pp. 271–288. doi: 10.1287/trsc.34.3.271.12301. url: https://doi.org/
10.1287/trsc.34.3.271.12301.
Bouleft, Yousra and Ahmed Elhilali Alaoui (2023). “Dynamic Multi-Compartment Vehicle Rout-
ing Problem for Smart Waste Collection”. In: Applied System Innovation 6.1. issn: 2571-5577.
doi: 10.3390/asi6010030. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2571-5577/6/1/30.
Cristallo, G. (1994). “Optimisation de tournées de véhicules de transport container”. In: Mémoire
de licence en Sciences Economiques et Sociales, Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix,
Namur, Belgium.
H., Han and Cueto E. P. (2015). “Waste Collection Vehicle Routing Problem: Literature Review”.
In: PROMET - TrafficTransportation 27.4, pp. 345–358. doi: 10.7307/PTT.V27I4.1616.
Hansen, Pierre and Nenad Mladenović (2018). “Variable neighborhood search”. In: Handbook of
Heuristics 1-2, pp. 759–787. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-07124-4_19.
Hauge, Kristian et al. (2014). “A Hybrid Column Generation approach for an Industrial Waste
Collection Routing Problem”. English. In: Computers and Industrial Engineering 71.1, pp. 10–
20. issn: 0360-8352. doi: 10.1016/j.cie.2014.02.005.
Meulemeester, L De et al. (1997). “Optimal sequencing of skip collections and deliveries”. In:
Journal of the Operational Research Society 48.1, pp. 57–64. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.jors.
2600325. url: https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jors.2600325.
Wøhlk, Sanne and Gilbert Laporte (2022). “Transport of skips between recycling centers and
treatment facilities”. In: Computers and Operations Research 145, p. 105879. issn: 0305-0548.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2022.105879. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0305054822001502.
Wu, Hailin et al. (2022). “Optimization of Vehicle Routing for Waste Collection and Transporta-
tion”. In: International journal of environmental research and public health 17. issn: 1660-4601.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17144963.
28
==PAGE:30==
Appendix
29
==PAGE:31==
Technical University of Denmark
Project plan
English: Optimization of Vehicle Routing for Waste Collection in
Skip Containers
Dansk: Optimering af Ruteplanlægning for Afhentning af Affald i
Containere
September 2024
Rasmus Emil Røgen
s174042
Supervisor: Stefan Røpke
Industry Supervisor: Kristian Hauge
AMCS Group Danmark
==PAGE:32==
1
Project description
The project is a mathematical modelling project within the field of Operations Research (OR). The aim of
this project is to solve a special case of the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) posed by the company AMCS.
The essence of the problem is to plan routes for trucks, to carry out orders such as delivery, pick up and
emptying of skip containers, see illustrations below. The objective is to minimize the total distance driven
while carrying out the orders. The large number of possible routes, and ways to stack the containers on the
trucks, make the problem much too time consuming to solve to optimality using exact methods. Therefore
heuristics are developed in this project, in order to solve the problem to near-optimality in a shorter time.
The trade-off between optimality and computation time is investigated by analysis of computational results.
The computational results are based on deploying the solution-methods to problem-instances, courtesy of
AMCS.
Figure 1: Example of skip containers being trans-
ported on a truck1.
Figure 2: Example of locations of depots, dumpsites
and orders in a problem instance.
1https://www.alamy.com/skip-lorry-truck-towing-a-trailer-loaded-with-delivery-of-thirteen-empty-yellow-industrial-steel-
rubbish-skip-bins-marked-as-crane-tested-uk-motorway-image244358945.html
1
==PAGE:33==
2
Project timetable
Schedule for the Project Period
35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52
1
2
3
4
Project plan
Project plan hand in
Data
Master problem
Pricing problem
Variable neighborhood search
Subset row inequalities
Computational results
Report
Introduction and literature
Data and visualisation
Model
Results
Conclusions etc.
There are a number of activities that need to be done during the project-period. The project runs from week
35 of 2023 until the end of week 4 of 2024. After the first month a project plan (which is this document)
must be handed in. The plan is therefore to work on the project plan as one of the first things. At the
same time it is also important to get familiar with the (first) data-set and code a data-loader. Additionally,
the report-document will be set up with a rough structure in the beginning, and the plan is to write on the
report along the way, but also leave a buffer for finishing the report at the end of the project period.
The plan is to skip working on a Mixed Integer Program (MIP) model, as there are examples in the literature
that showcase the long computation time needed. Instead, one or more heuristics will be developed and
implemented. The work with the heuristic is split in parts. First the framework must be established by
developing and implementing the (Restricted) Master problem and the Pricing Problem. Then an Variable
Neighborhood Search is developed and implemented to solve the pricing problem. An option is to implement
Subset row inequalities in the master problem for better results. Finally, results will be computed using the
implemented solution-methods.
2
==PAGE:34==
A second data-set may be coming from AMCS, in which case additional work might be required, as the data
and format could be different from the first data-set.
3
Learning objectives
There are a number of learning objectives within this project. One of them is to work independently and
reflect on own learning, as well as being able to manage all phases of a project.
These objectives are
important for a smooth project, and are demonstrated by e.g. this project plan and the revised project plan
that must be handed in with the final thesis. The written thesis as well as the oral examination requires
the student to master the skill of communicating research-based knowledge. In order to start the project a
complex technical scientific issue must be understood through analysis of the individual parts that make up
the issue. For this project it is also needed to delimit the complex, open issue, so as to, via analysis and
modelling, develop processes for solving the issue. Another learning objective is to seek out and make use
of current research in the field of OR, to develop and solve problems. A major objective of the project is
to demonstrate that the student masters methodologies, theories and tools in the specialist field of OR, and
that he masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work.
4
Auto evaluation
What follows is a brief evaluation of my own work in regards to the project process. In the beginning of the
project I was very motivated and made goals for each day, which I followed. In the middle of the project
period I was overall less motivated and would often skip making goals or not reach the goals. This was
in part due to that it was mostly coding, which was frustrating work. When the code was starting to be
ready my motivation was high again, due to the end being in sight. I think that the roller coaster ride that
my motivation took during the project is very typical, and I also think that I dealt with it well, since the
project turned out well in my opinion. During the project I was sick for a while, which resulted in a 6 week
delay, and I dealt with this by shifting the project plan by 6 weeks. I made an important decision to exclude
the part of the problem formulation about container stacking, as I deemed it too time-consuming, and the
problem was still relevant and challenging to solve without it. I also had to leave out subset row inequalities,
as the coding of the rest took more time than anticipated. Overall I think that the work I have done in this
project lives up to my own expectations, as I knew that my functional impairment would limit me.
3
