==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Entropy bounds for semi-device-independent
quantum randomness certification
Student
Nicol`o Sguerso
DTU supervisor
Jonatan B. Brask
UNITN supervisor
Sonia Mazzucchi
DTU cosupervisor Carles Roch i Carceller
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Probabilistic aspect of Quantum nature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Randomness basics - philosophy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
PRNG VS TRNG VS QRNG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Positioning of QRNG technology in the quantum realm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.1
QRNG application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
State of the art
8
2.1
Bell violation and randomness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
QRNG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Device dependent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Device Independent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Semi-Device Independent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
AEP - Asimptotic Equipartition Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Entropy Accumulation Theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Generalized Entropy Accumulation Theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Semi-definite Programming - SDP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Convex optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Project description
16
3.1
Randomness certification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
QRNG structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
RNG work-flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:3==
3.2.2
Entropy estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
From PG to SDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Von Neumann bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Description of the See-saw SDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5.1
Roch POVM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5.2
Roch experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Implementation
29
4.1
Getting Started . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.3
Objective function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
37
5.1
Roch’s experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
SeeSaw SDP VS Hmin SDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Shannon VS Hmin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Conclusions
40
A Appendix
41
Bibliography
44
2
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Jonatan Bohr Brask and Carles Roch i
Carceller, for their invaluable guidance support throughout my thesis and for the amazing demostration of
how amazing the research field is.
Next, I am deeply grateful to the entire QPIT research team, and especially the quantum theory group, for
creating a stimulating and supportive environment, always ready for an amazing deep quantum conversation
or maybe just laughing and having a great time.
Finally, i want to thank my italian supervisor Sonia Mazzucchi for helping me whenever I needed.
1
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
This thesis explores the subject of Quantum Random Number Generation (QRNG), a technology with signif-
icant potential for various disciplines. The work aims to provide a comprehensive understanding of QRNG,
including its underlying principles, diverse applications, and key distinctions compared to traditional Random
Number Generation (RNG) techniques.
Following a thorough review of the current state of the art in this active research area, the thesis examines
various approaches employed to generate randomness. Subsequently, it outlines the core of the project, Ran-
domness Certification, emphasizing its importance and objectives. This section further details the method-
ologies developed to effectively bound the Von-Neumann Entropy, a critical parameter utilized in subsequent
entropy calculations for different protocols.
The thesis further presents an optimization tool strategically implemented to exploit the Von-Neumann bound
and enhance the computed entropy. Moving forward, the Implementation section analyzes the actual code
developed for the project. This section provides a clear explanation of the code, along with justifications
for the technical decisions made during its development. Additionally, it elucidates the various protocols to
which the developed Semidefinite Programming (SDP) algorithm has been applied.
Finally, the thesis culminates in the presentation of the results obtained for each aforementioned protocol,
accompanied by insightful comparisons to showcase their relative performance. This comprehensive analysis
serves to illuminate the effectiveness and potential of the developed methodologies.
1.1
Probabilistic aspect of Quantum nature
Quantum mechanics, the cornerstone of modern physics, is a theory that provides a description of the
physical properties of the smallest particles in the universe, namely atoms and subatomic particles. One of
the most intriguing aspects of quantum mechanics is its inherent probabilistic nature, a stark contrast to the
deterministic laws of classical physics.
In classical physics, if the initial conditions of a system are known, the future behavior of that system can be
predicted with absolute certainty. However, in quantum mechanics, we can only predict the *probability* of
finding a system in a particular state. This is encapsulated in the famous Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle,
which states that it is impossible to simultaneously know the exact position and momentum of a particle.
This probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics stems from its wave-particle duality.
Particles such as
electrons and photons exhibit both particle-like and wave-like properties.
When these particles are not
observed, they exist in a superposition of states, described by a wave function. The wave function provides
the probabilities of the possible outcomes of measurements made on the system.
When a measurement is made, the wave function ’collapses’ to a single state, and this state is one of the
possible states that the system could have been in before the measurement. The probability of each state is
given by the square of the amplitude of the wave function at that state, a rule known as Born’s rule.
2
==PAGE:6==
This probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics, known as the Copenhagen interpretation, has been
the subject of much debate and philosophical discussion. Despite its counter-intuitive nature, it has been
incredibly successful in predicting experimental results and is fundamental to technologies such as lasers and
semiconductors.
In conclusion, the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics represents a fundamental shift in our under-
standing of the physical world. It challenges our classical intuition and opens up a realm of possibilities that
are being explored in fields as diverse as cryptography, computing, and materials science.
1.2
Randomness basics - philosophy
Randomness is a fundamental concept with wide-ranging applications across various scientific disciplines and
technological advancements. Despite its significance, the notion of randomness is multifaceted and subject
to interpretation within different domains of science. In this brief overview, we elucidate the pivotal role
randomness plays in diverse branches of science and technology, delineating between apparent randomness
and intrinsic randomness.
Apparent randomness serves as a crucial element for efficiently describing natural phenomena across scien-
tific realms, prominently in physics. Notable works by Penrose (1979), Schr¨odinger (1989), Khinchin (2014),
Tolman (2010), and Halmos (2013) delve into the concept of apparent randomness, highlighting its manifes-
tation as an outcome of incomplete knowledge regarding a system under consideration. This is exemplified
in classical mechanics, where the intricate dynamics of many-body systems preclude precise predictions de-
spite possessing perfect initial condition knowledge. Consequently, statistical mechanics and thermodynamics
emerge as indispensable frameworks employing probability distributions and statistical ensembles for more
accurate descriptions.
Similarly, chaotic systems exemplify apparent randomness within deterministic chaos theory, as even minor
deviations in initial conditions lead to divergent trajectories, rendering long-term predictions practically
infeasible. Quantum mechanics further underscores the significance of apparent randomness, wherein the
inherent uncertainty regarding a system’s state necessitates probabilistic descriptions using density matrices
to encompass statistical ensembles of pure states.
However, quantum physics introduces a distinct form of randomness known as intrinsic randomness, which
persists irrespective of complete knowledge about a system’s state. Even if the system’s state is precisely
known, quantum mechanics dictates intrinsically probabilistic outcomes, challenging deterministic notions.
This acceptance of intrinsic randomness within quantum mechanics underscores a paradigm shift towards
probabilistic interpretations.
To delineate these concepts formally, we follow the following definitions [1]:
Definition 1: Apparent (or epistemic) randomness arises solely from incomplete knowledge about a system’s
state. Probability and stochastic processes serve as tools to describe partial knowledge, contingent upon
underlying hidden variables. Complete knowledge of these variables would enable deterministic predictions.
3
==PAGE:7==
Definition 2: Intrinsic (or inherent, ontic) randomness persists despite complete knowledge of a system’s state.
Probabilistic predictions are inevitable, reflecting the inherent probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics.
While apparent randomness may coexist due to incomplete knowledge, intrinsic randomness transcends de-
terministic frameworks, challenging traditional notions of predictability.
In summary, the distinction between apparent and intrinsic randomness elucidates the nuanced nature of
randomness within scientific inquiry, particularly in the realm of quantum mechanics where probabilistic
interpretations redefine our understanding of fundamental principles.
Randomness philosophy
The concept of randomness serves as a foundational element in various scientific
and practical applications such as Monte Carlo simulations, opinion polling, and cryptography. Ensuring the
authenticity of random sequences, particularly for cryptographic purposes, poses a significant challenge,
demanding an exploration of the inherent nature of randomness.
Two contrasting perspectives regarding the nature of randomness, namely epistemic and ontic, are delineated.
Epistemic randomness suggests that apparent randomness arises due to limitations in our knowledge or
precision of observations, implying a deterministic underlying reality. In contrast, ontic randomness posits
that randomness is an intrinsic property of the universe, independent of human observation or deterministic
models.
This philosophical debate traces back to ancient philosophical inquiries, where early atomists like Leucippus
and Democritus viewed the world as deterministic, attributing chance occurrences to human limitations.
Conversely, Epicurus proposed an objective chance, introducing the notion of indeterminacy to accommodate
free will within a deterministic framework.
The discussion extends to the interplay between intrinsic randomness and free will, where the existence of free
will is considered incompatible with strict determinism but potentially facilitated by intrinsic randomness.
However, the mere presence of randomness, particularly in quantum mechanics, does not inherently explain
the phenomenon of free will, necessitating a deeper understanding of the complex relationship between
physical phenomena, space-time, and consciousness.
Contemporary discussions explore various interpretations of quantum mechanics, including the many-worlds
interpretation, in relation to free will, highlighting the multifaceted nature of this philosophical inquiry. Ulti-
mately, the pursuit of understanding the origins and implications of randomness transcends mere theoretical
discourse, encompassing profound implications for our perception of reality and human agency.
Differences between Classical and Quantum randomness
Classical mechanics, rooted in determin-
istic principles, posits a world where events unfold along predetermined trajectories dictated by initial con-
ditions.
Laplace and Popper’s formulations of determinism underscore the notion that, given complete
knowledge of a system’s initial state and governing laws, its future evolution becomes uniquely determined.
Classical mechanics, exemplified by Newton’s laws, asserts a deterministic worldview where the motion of
physical systems is entirely predictable.
4
==PAGE:8==
In contrast, quantum mechanics introduces a paradigm shift by embracing intrinsic randomness as an in-
herent feature of reality. Born’s interpretation of the wave function implies a fundamentally probabilistic
description of quantum phenomena, challenging deterministic frameworks. Unlike classical mechanics, where
unpredictability arises solely from incomplete knowledge or measurement precision, quantum randomness
transcends epistemic limitations, manifesting as nonlocal correlations and contextual measurement outcomes.
Classical mechanics, epitomized by Arnol’d’s treatise, emphasizes determinism by asserting that a system’s
past and future are uniquely determined by its initial conditions, leading to a predictable evolution governed
by Newton’s equations. However, the existence of deterministic chaos underscores the practical unpredictabil-
ity inherent in classical systems, although it remains theoretically deterministic.
Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, introduces indeterminism at a fundamental level, where deter-
ministic equations alone, such as Schr¨odinger’s equation, fail to capture the full complexity of quantum
evolution. State reductions during measurements introduce indeterministic elements, necessitating proba-
bilistic descriptions to account for measurement outcomes. The similarity to Boussinesq’s ideas of multiple
solutions in differential equations suggests a departure from deterministic frameworks, hinting at the intrinsic
randomness inherent in quantum mechanics.
Ultimately, while classical mechanics adheres to deterministic principles, quantum mechanics embraces in-
trinsic randomness as an integral aspect of reality, challenging traditional notions of predictability and de-
terminism. The distinction between classical and quantum randomness underscores the profound conceptual
differences between these two foundational theories in physics, shaping our understanding of the nature of
reality at its most fundamental level.
1.3
PRNG VS TRNG VS QRNG
Randomness plays a crucial role in various scientific and practical applications, prompting significant re-
search efforts to understand and generate high-quality random sequences. In this discussion, we explore the
differences between three types of random number generators (RNGs): pseudo-random-number generators
(PRNGs), true RNGs (TRNGs), and quantum RNGs (QRNGs).
PRNGs rely on deterministic algorithms to process an initial random seed, producing sequences of numbers
that exhibit properties resembling randomness. These generators are fast, cost-effective, and suitable for many
applications. However, the randomness of PRNG outputs and their privacy depend on assumptions about
the computational power of potential adversaries. This criterion falls short of the demand for unpredictability
by any observer, regardless of computational capabilities.
TRNGs, on the other hand, exploit physical processes inherently difficult to predict, such as meteorological
phenomena or the movements of a computer mouse.
By harnessing these unpredictable events, TRNGs
generate random sequences that are not based on computational algorithms. While TRNGs offer higher
randomness compared to PRNGs, their implementation may introduce challenges related to controlling en-
vironmental factors and ensuring consistency in randomness generation.
5
==PAGE:9==
Quantum RNGs (QRNGs) represent a paradigm shift in randomness generation by exploiting quantum
processes believed to be fundamentally random. For instance, QRNGs based on single-photon interference
utilize the quantum superposition principle to produce random outcomes. However, implementing QRNGs
faces practical challenges due to imperfections in devices and the potential for memory effects that introduce
correlations among generated bits.
Certifying the randomness and privacy of RNG outputs is essential for ensuring their suitability for crypto-
graphic applications. Current certification methods rely on statistical tests to assess randomness, but these
tests may not distinguish between classical RNGs and QRNGs. Moreover, verifying the privacy of symbols
generated by QRNGs poses additional challenges, as potential adversaries could exploit memory-stick attacks
to predict outcomes.
Device-independent QRNGs (DIQRNGs) offer a promising solution to address these challenges by providing
protocols for generating certified randomness without detailed knowledge of the inner workings of the devices.
These protocols leverage principles from quantum physics, such as the violation of Bell inequalities, to certify
randomness based on general assumptions about the setup.
Furthermore, while PRNGs, TRNGs, and QRNGs differ in their underlying mechanisms and generation
principles, it’s possible to state that the quality of a random number generator (RNG) is based on the
amount and weakness of the assumpions needed to run the RNG. [2]
Finally, RNGs remains a challenging yet essential task with implications for both practical applications and
fundamental physics research. Ongoing efforts in developing DIQRNG and Semi-DIQRNG protocols aim to
overcome existing limitations and provide robust solutions for certified randomness generation.
1.4
Positioning of QRNG technology in the quantum realm
1.4.1
QRNG application
The field of quantum information science is revolutionizing various aspects of technology, with Quantum
Random Number Generation (QRNG) emerging as a crucial pillar in this transformation. Unlike traditional
Random Number Generators (RNGs) based on deterministic algorithms, QRNGs leverage the inherent ran-
domness of quantum processes to generate truly unpredictable and unbiasable sequences of bits. This inher-
ent unpredictability arises from the fundamental principles of quantum mechanics, such as superposition and
measurement, which defy classical deterministic explanations.
QRNGs hold immense potential across a diverse range of applications where security and randomness are
paramount. One prominent application lies in cryptography, where secure communication relies heavily on
unpredictable keys for encryption and decryption. Traditional RNGs, vulnerable to potential biases and
predictable patterns, pose a significant security risk. QRNGs, on the other hand, offer a robust solution by
providing demonstrably random keys, significantly enhancing the security of cryptographic protocols.
Beyond cryptography, QRNGs play a vital role in quantum simulations.
Accurately simulating complex
6
==PAGE:10==
quantum systems requires high-quality random numbers to generate representative initial states and model
stochastic processes. Traditional RNGs fail to meet this requirement as they are inherently limited by classical
physics. QRNGs, drawing upon the true randomness of quantum phenomena, provide an indispensable tool
for conducting reliable and accurate quantum simulations, paving the way for advancements in materials
science, drug discovery, and other scientific endeavors.
Furthermore, the field of quantum key distribution (QKD), a secure communication protocol utilizing quan-
tum mechanics for key exchange, heavily relies on high-quality randomness.
QRNGs prove essential for
generating random numbers used to encode and transmit keys, ensuring the security and effectiveness of
QKD protocols.
In conclusion, QRNGs, drawing upon the unique properties of quantum mechanics, offer a paradigm shift
in generating truly random numbers. Their diverse applications span across various fields, including cryp-
tography, simulations, , quantum key distribution. As the field of quantum information science continues
to evolve, QRNGs are poised to play a pivotal role in ensuring security, advancing scientific discovery, and
unlocking the boundless potential of quantum technologies.
7
==PAGE:11==
2
State of the art
2.1
Bell violation and randomness
Bell’s inequality, also known as the Bell test or Bell experiment, is a real-world physics experiment designed
to test the theory of quantum mechanics in relation to Albert Einstein’s concept of local realism.
Bell’s inequality is a term encompassing a number of closely related results in physics, all of which determine
that quantum mechanics is incompatible with local hidden-variable theories. These ”hidden variables” are
putative properties of quantum particles that are not included in quantum theory but nevertheless affect the
outcome of experiments.
Bell’s theorem states that if nature actually operates in accord with any theory of local hidden variables,
then the results of a Bell test will be constrained in a particular, quantifiable way. If a Bell experiment
is performed and the results are not thus constrained, then the hypothesized local hidden variables cannot
exist.
The implications of Bell’s inequality are profound. As of 2015, all Bell tests have found that the hypothesis
of local hidden variables is inconsistent with the way that physical systems behave [[3]]. This supports the
position that there is no way to explain the phenomena of quantum mechanics in terms of a more fundamental
description of nature that is more in line with the rules of classical physics. Bell inequality violations are also
used in some quantum cryptography protocols, whereby a spy’s presence is detected when Bell’s inequalities
cease to be violated.
That the violation of Bell inequalities is an indicator of quantum randomness was probably recognized early
on by many physicists but was made explicit only recently in [4]–[5].
Furthermore, by means of CHSH inequality, formulatedby John Clauser, Michael Horne, Abner Shimony,
and Richard Holt, offers an experimental framework to bolster Bell’s theorem, which posits that local hidden
variable theories fail to elucidate certain quantum mechanical phenomena, notably entanglement.
This
inequality is formulated assuming the presence of hidden local variables and imposes a constraint on the
expected values of a Bell test experiment. Thus, the experimental violation of the CHSH inequality serves
as evidence against the existence of local hidden variables.
Moreover, winning, aka violating CHSH inequality, the CHSH game more than 75% of the time also implies
the presence of randomness in Alice and Bob output, leading to the generation of entropy [6]. This conclusion
arises from considering a scenario where Alice and Bob’s output (a,b) are deterministic functions, denoted as
a(x, r) and b(y, r), respectively, based on Alice and Bob’s inputs and shared random bits, aka shared hidden
variable. However, such functions would constitute a local hidden-variable theory, which Bell’s Theorem
disproves. Thus, if x and y are random and there is no communication between Alice and Bob, it follows
that there must be at least some randomness in the outputs a and b.
8
==PAGE:12==
2.2
QRNG
The generation of genuine randomness is generally considered impossible with only classical means. On the
basis of the degree of trustworthiness on devices, quantum random number generators (QRNGs) can be
grouped into three categories. The first category, practical QRNG, is built on fully trusted and calibrated
devices and typically can generate randomness at a high speed by properly modelling the devices. The second
category is self-testing QRNG, in which verifiable randomness can be generated without trusting the actual
implementation. The third category, semi-self-testing QRNG, is an intermediate category that provides a
tradeoff between the trustworthiness on the device and the random number generation speed.
2.2.1
Device dependent
A Device Dependent QRNG can be developed using a straightforward process, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Various implementations give rise to a diverse range of Device Dependent QRNGs.
These systems are
notable for their high generation speed and relatively low cost. In practice, quantum effects coexist with
classical noise, which can be effectively subtracted from the quantum randomness by accurately modeling
the underlying quantum process.
The randomness produced by Device Dependent QRNGs is generally
sufficient for real-world applications, provided the model aligns well with the implementation. However, true
information-theoretic security in QRNGs is achievable only when the model assumptions are met. In scenarios
where devices are manipulated by adversaries, the output may lose its genuine randomness. For instance, if a
Device Dependent QRNG is entirely supplied by a malicious manufacturer who copies an extensive random
string to a large hard drive and sequentially outputs numbers from it, the manufacturer can predict the
QRNG’s output.
Figure 1: Electron spin detection in the Stern–Gerlach experiment. Assume that the spin takes two directions
along the vertical axis, denoted by |↑⟩and |↓⟩. If the electron is initially in a superposition of the two spin
directions, |→⟩= (|↑⟩+ |↓⟩/
√
2), detecting the location of the electron would break the coherence, and the
outcome (↑or ↓) is intrinsically random.
Single photon detector
Quantum processes inherently exhibiting probabilistic outcomes, particularly
those disrupting coherent superposition, provide a foundation for generating truly random numbers. Ex-
ploiting readily available high-quality optical components and the potential for miniaturization, present-day
Quantum Random Number Generators (QRNGs) predominantly leverage photonic systems. A typical QRNG
comprises an entropy source responsible for generating well-defined quantum states alongside a corresponding
detection system. However, the inherent randomness is often intertwined with classical noise sources. Ide-
9
==PAGE:13==
ally, the extractable quantum randomness should be quantifiable and dominate the overall output. Through
randomness extraction techniques, genuine randomness can be isolated from the mixture of quantum and
classical noise, ensuring high-quality and unpredictable random numbers, given the initial assumption.
A few examples of this kind of QRNG are the following:
• qubit state
• spatial mode
• temporal mode
• multiple photon-number states
Macroscopic Photodetector
The effectiveness of an optical QRNG hinges significantly on the employed
detection device. Beyond single-photon detectors (SPDs), high-performing macroscopic photodetectors have
found application in numerous QRNG designs. This parallels advancements in Quantum Key Distribution
(QKD), where protocols utilizing optical homodyne detection were established to potentially achieve higher
key rates over low-loss channels [7]. Two specific examples of QRNGs implemented with macroscopic pho-
todetectors are the following:
• vacuum noise
• amplified spontaneous emission
We leave the reader to change to read more about the above techniques at [8].
2.2.2
Device Independent
Device-independent randomness generation seeks to tackle the issue of Quantum Random Number Generation
(QRNG) by utilizing the inherent unpredictability linked with the violation of Bell inequalities. Specifically,
it involves a quantum system comprising two distinct parts labeled A and B. These parts, upon receiving
respective inputs denoted as Va and Vb, produce corresponding outputs, Xa and Xb. If, over n successive
uses of the devices, the observed data violates a Bell inequality, it becomes possible to ascertain that the
output string (Xa1 ,Xb1 ),...,(Xan,Xbn) contains a certain level of min-entropy. This holds true even when
conditioned on the values of the inputs (Va1 ,Vb1 ),...,(Van ,Vbn ). Subsequently, a randomness extractor
can be applied to the outputs, resulting in the acquisition of nearly uniform random bits. Notably, this
determination can be made irrespective of any detailed assumptions concerning the internal operations of
the devices.
In fact, the security of Device-Independent (DI) protocols are based on a set of minimal assumptions:
• Firstly, both the devices and potential eavesdroppers must adhere to the principles of quantum theory
or at least the no-signaling principle.
10
==PAGE:14==
• Secondly, the initial randomness seed used must be independent and uncorrelated with the behavior of
the devices.
• Thirdly, the two quantum devices involved in each successive measurement must remain noninteracting.
• Fourthly, it is implicit that the devices can be secured to ensure they do not inadvertently leak infor-
mation to adversaries.
Beyond these fundamental requirements, the devices remain largely uncharacterized, with no specific assump-
tions made regarding the measurements they execute, the quantum state being measured, the Hilbert space
dimension, and other related factors.
The concept of device independence (DI) extends beyond randomness generation to encompass adversarial
applications like quantum key distribution (QKD) [[9]] and coin tossing [[10]], as well as nonadversarial appli-
cations such as state estimation [[11]], entanglement witnesses [[12]], and self-testing of quantum computers
[[13]]. In adversarial scenarios involving device independence, it is often noted that the protocol’s correct-
ness can be verified without assuming knowledge of the devices’ inner workings, suggesting that the devices
themselves could have been prepared by potential adversaries. This realization has two main implications
concerning the theoretical analysis of device-independent randomness generation. - Firstly, if adversaries are
permitted to prepare the quantum devices, there is nothing preventing them from entangling the devices with
a quantum state stored in their memory. Consequently, they could potentially measure their quantum state
in a manner that provides them with useful information about the remaining output string produced by the
devices. Therefore, it is necessary to demonstrate that the device’s output appears random even with respect
to the quantum side information held by the adversary. However, methods introduced in Ref. [[14]] have
thus far only been shown to estimate randomness against classical side information, i.e., adversaries lacking
entanglement with the quantum devices. Secondly, if adversaries possess prior knowledge of the inputs used
to sample the devices, they could exploit this information to program the devices in a manner that mimics
the violation of a Bell inequality while also gaining substantial information about the generated outputs.
Consequently, a random, private seed is required to select the inputs and initiate the protocol. Additionally,
initial randomness is necessary to extract uniform random bits from the devices’ outputs. This leads to the
concept of device-independent randomness expansion (DIRE), with a scheme achieving quadratic expansion
proposed in Ref. [[14]], which also suggested the use of more than one pair of devices to achieve greater (e.g.,
exponential) expansion.
2.2.3
Semi-Device Independent
Device dependent QRNGs can be vulnerable to security risks, especially when aiming for high speed. Con-
versely, devide-independent QRNGs guarantee information-theoretic security regardless of device specifics,
but suffer from impractically slow generation rates. To strike a balance, semi-device-independet QRNGs hold
promise by offering a trade-off between fully trusted and self-testing approaches, achieving both reasonable
speed and security.
As illustrated in Figure , a typical QRNG consists of two main components: an entropy source emitting
quantum states and a detection system that measures these states and outputs random bits. In trusted-
11
==PAGE:15==
device QRNGs, both the source and the detector require accurate characterization, whereas self-testing
QRNGs guarantee randomness independent of the specific devices employed.
Real-world scenarios often involve situations where either the source or the detector is well-characterized,
while the other component remains untrusted. This is where semi-self-testing QRNGs come into play, relying
on partial trust in specific device components.
These schemes, typically built upon a simpler ”prepare-and-measure” setup (avoiding the complexities of a
Bell test), achieve easier implementation by incorporating a limited level of trust in the devices involved.
However, they still rely only on general assumptions about the device’s physical characteristics, such as a
limited number of possible states (bounded dimension) , trustworthy measurement devices , or a reliable
source [15].
2.3
Entropy
Introduction:
Entropy is a fundamental concept in physics that plays a pivotal role in various subfields,
including thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, information theory, and quantum mechanics. This section
explores the definition, interpretation, and computational methods of entropy highlighting its significance
and applications.
Definition
In thermodynamics, entropy is defined as a measure of the disorder or randomness of a system.
It is associated with the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of an isolated
system tends to increase over time, leading to the arrow of time and the directionality of physical processes.
In statistical mechanics, entropy is related to the number of microscopic configurations consistent with the
macroscopic properties of a system, providing a bridge between the microscopic and macroscopic descriptions
of matter.
In information theory, entropy represents the average amount of information produced by a stochastic source
. It quantifies the uncertainty or randomness associated with the outcomes of a random variable, serving as
a measure of the amount of surprise in a message or a data set [16]. In quantum mechanics, von Neumann
entropy is used to quantify the entanglement and mixedness of quantum states, playing a crucial role in the
study of quantum information theory and quantum computing [17].
Interpretation
The interpretation of entropy varies across different fields of physics. In thermodynamics,
entropy is often associated with the degree of disorder or the dispersal of energy in a system. In statistical
mechanics, it is interpreted as a measure of the multiplicity of possible microscopic states consistent with
the macroscopic properties of a system, reflecting the uncertainty or lack of information about the exact
microstate.
In information theory, entropy is interpreted as a measure of uncertainty or randomness in a message or
data set. A high entropy indicates greater uncertainty and unpredictability, while low entropy signifies more
order and predictability in the data. In quantum mechanics, entropy is associated with the entanglement
12
==PAGE:16==
and mixedness of quantum states, reflecting the degree of correlation and the amount of classical information
needed to describe the state [18].
Different Ways to Compute Entropy
Entropy can be computed using various mathematical formula-
tions depending on the context. In thermodynamics, entropy change is calculated using the differential form
of the entropy function and the concept of heat transfer. In statistical mechanics, entropy is often computed
using the Boltzmann entropy formula, which relates entropy to the number of microstates consistent with a
given macrostate.
In information theory, entropy is computed using Shannon’s entropy formula, which quantifies the average
amount of information produced by a random variable. In quantum mechanics, von Neumann entropy is
computed using the density matrix formalism, which describes the statistical ensemble of quantum states.
More specifically, in this thesis we use particularly min entropy, Hmin and Shannon entropy.
2.3.1
AEP - Asimptotic Equipartition Property
The Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP),, plays a pivotal role in classical information theory.
It
establishes the Shannon entropy (denoted as H(X)) as the fundamental quantity governing various problems
involving independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables.
The AEP is directly linked to the weak law of large numbers and states that, as the number of trials n
becomes sufficiently large, the outcome of a random experiment characterized by an i.i.d. sequence Xn =
(X1, X2, ..., Xn) belonging to the n-fold product space Xn, where each variable is drawn from a common
probability distribution P on a set X, will with high probability reside within a specific set of ”typical
events.” These typical events, each occurring with a probability close to 2−nH(X), collectively encompass a
region with an approximate cardinality of 2nH(X)[19].
2.3.2
Entropy Accumulation Theorem
The Entropy Accumulation Theorem (EAT) unveils a crucial relationship between the uncertainty present
in a multi-part system and the uncertainty of its individual parts. It applies to scenarios where the system
consists of individual components, each with its own associated information.
The theorem, as presented in the original paper, states that the minimum uncertainty, quantified by the
smooth min-entropy, of the entire system is greater than or equal to the sum of the uncertainties of each
individual part, considering the information available about that part after a specific step. This ”information”
is referred to as the conditional state.
The significance of EAT lies in its ability to simplify complex analyses. By allowing the study of uncertainty
in the entire system through the lens of its individual components, the theorem offers a powerful tool for
understanding the accumulation of randomness in various information processing tasks. This has crucial ap-
13
==PAGE:17==
plications, particularly in the realm of quantum cryptography, where understanding the inherent randomness
is essential for guaranteeing secure communication.
2.3.3
Generalized Entropy Accumulation Theorem
The Generalized Entropy Accumulation Theorem (GEAT), as presented in the original paper, establishes a
crucial connection between the min-entropy of a sequence of outputs from a process and the von Neumann
entropies associated with individual steps in the process. It applies to scenarios where: Outputs: The process
generates a sequence of outputs Side Information: There exists additional information (E) updated at each
step, referred to as side information. Non-Signalling Condition: The past outputs do not influence the
future side information (a ”no-signalling” condition).
If the process satisfies the above conditions, the min-entropy of the combined outputs (A1, ..., An) conditioned
on the final side information (E) is lower bounded by the sum of the von Neumann entropies of individual
outputs (Ai)Metger2022. This theorem holds significant importance because:
Figure 2: GEAT scheeme[20]
• Generalizes the Entropy Accumulation Theorem (EAT): GEAT extends the EAT by allowing for a
more flexible model of side information. In EAT, past side information cannot be updated, and newly
generated side information has to satisfy a specific condition.
• Simpler Applications: The more flexible side information model in GEAT allows it to be applied to
broader scenarios, including prepare-and-measure protocols, leading to simplified analyses compared to
using the EAT.
In essence, GEAT provides a powerful tool for analyzing the accumulation of randomness in various infor-
mation processing tasks by establishing a connection between the minimum uncertainty in the final output
and the individual contributions from each step in the process.
In the realm of information theory, the Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP) and entropy accumulation
are intertwined concepts that shed light on the behavior of randomness.
AEP lays the groundwork by
explaining how the inherent randomness, measured by entropy, accumulates across a sequence of independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
random variables.
It asserts that with high probability, the observed
sequence will likely fall within a specific set of ”typical events” whose overall randomness, quantified by
entropy, closely resembles the average randomness of the individual variables. This essentially reflects how
randomness progressively ”spreads out” across the sequence, leading to a higher total entropy as the number
of trials increases.
14
==PAGE:18==
The Generalized Entropy Accumulation Theorem (GEAT) builds upon AEP and offers a more comprehen-
sive framework for analyzing the behavior of randomness[20]. Unlike AEP which strictly deals with i.i.d.
sequences, GEAT extends its reach to analyze arbitrary sequences, even those with dependencies between
the variables. This allows for the investigation of more complex scenarios that are closer to real-world prob-
lems. GEAT establishes bounds on how much the observed entropy can deviate from the expected value,
offering valuable insights into the typicality and atypicality of sequences and the underlying randomness.
Therefore, AEP forms the foundation for understanding entropy accumulation in simple cases, while GEAT
unlocks the potential to analyze more intricate and realistic scenarios involving dependencies and non-i.i.d.
sequences. This generalization provides a more powerful tool and a deeper perspective on the nature of
randomness in information theory.
2.4
Semi-definite Programming - SDP
2.4.1
Convex optimization
Semidefinite programming (SDP) is a subfield of mathematical programming concerned with the optimization
of a linear objective function (a user-specified function that the user wants to minimize or maximize) over
the intersection of the cone of positive semidefinite matrices with an affine space.
In the realm of quantum information, the utility of semidefinite programming (SDP) is profound and multi-
faceted. The mathematical foundations of convex optimization, duality, and SDP formulations are establish-
ing a robust theoretical framework for addressing optimization challenges in quantum systems. The efficacy
of SDP in quantum information is further demonstrated through a series of examples and applications, en-
compassing quantum state tomography, quantum entanglement, quantum steering, quantum measurement,
quantum state discrimination, quantum self-testing and quantum randomness certification. This exploration
serves as a valuable resource for researchers at the intersection of optimization and quantum information,
paving the way for future breakthroughs in this rapidly evolving field.
The utility of SDP in solving quantum mechanics problems is significant. Many quantum mechanics problems
can be formulated as SDP because the mathematical description of quantum states and quantum measure-
ments are in terms of positive semidefinite operators[21]. SDP can handle nonlinearity and noncommutativity,
which are common features of quantum mechanics, by using auxiliary variables and matrix inequalities. Fur-
thermore, SDP can exploit the structure and symmetries of quantum mechanics problems to simplify and
improve the optimization process[21]. Lastly, SDP can be solved efficiently and accurately using powerful
algorithms and software tools that are widely available and easy to use. This makes SDP an indispensable
tool in the field of quantum mechanics.
15
==PAGE:19==
3
Project description
In this section we present the idea of a new process bounds entropy for semi-device-independent quantum
randomness certification. Furthermore, it is shown a real world experiment to which is applied such method.
3.1
Randomness certification
In this section, we explain the main concepts and ideas that shapes the generation and certification of
randomness. For the purpose of this thesis, we explain the process of randomness certification in the case of
prepare and measure state discrimination protocols..
State discrimination protocol works as follow. A preparation device takes a binary input x ∈{0, .., n} and
emits a quantum system |x⟩. The central assumption of the protocol is that the overlap of the prepared
possible states is lower bounded. In other words, we assume that the states are nonorthogonal and hence
not deterministically distinguishable. Afterwords, the state is sent to a measurement device that output
b ∈{0, .., m}. In such protocol, Bob’s goal is to discriminate the state correctly, thus to guess x.[15]
While, in randomness certification, the goal is to certify randomness in presence of an eavesdropper that has
some kind of power over the measurement box. Where Eve’s goal is to guess Bob’s outcome, b. Thus, the
goal is to maximize Eve’s probability guess.
The reason why state discrimination protocol are useful to randomness certification is based on the fact
the following smart protocol such as Unambiguous quantum state discrimination (USD), Minimum Error
State Discrimination (MESD) and Maximum Confidence state Discriminatoin, force the eavesdropper to
manipulate the measurement device coherently with the observed probabilities. That is why such protocol
are used for semi-self-testing QRNG.
In this case, we focus on Semi-Device-Indipendent scenarios with n prepared state.
Alice has set of n prepared state which she can chose from to send Bob with choosing probability of p(x =
i), iϵ{1, 2, ..., n}. Instead Bob, once he receives the state perform a measurement on it to guess which is the
state sent by Alice. By doing so Bob can obtain different m outputs with different probabilities. Those
probabilities are based upon the measurement, that is described by a POVM, Πλ
b .
The main purpose of the protocol is to compute the guessing probability that an adversary, such as Eve, has
to guess the measurement outcome.
In the literature it’s possible to find two different way through Eve can interfere/have some info about the
system. Those are the following :
• Classical correlation : Eve has some classical interference with the measuring box of Bob
• Quantum correlation : Eve has an entangled state with the measurement device, which might give more
knowledge
16
==PAGE:20==
Depending on the correlation between Eve and the measuring setup it also varies the amount of entropy that
is possible to certify. In fact, the greater the knowledge that Eve has, the lower is the entropy that is possible
to certify.
Anyway, from any QRNG based on prepare and measure protocol the maximum amount of entropy that is
possible to certify is −log2(k + 1). Where k represent the number of prepared states.[22]
3.2
QRNG structure
As we explained in the introduction and in the state of the art section of this thesis, random numbers can be
generated in different ways. RNG, TRNG, QRNG are all different techniques that can be used, each of them
with different advantages and disadvantages. In regards to QRNG, we saw and explained a possible approach,
the violation of the Bell inequality. Now, and with this thesis project we followed a different approach based
called ”prepared stated”.
In the following section we dive into
• high level view of RNG work-flow
• prepared states QRNG protocols
• Entropy estimation
• bounding entropy
3.2.1
RNG work-flow
In order to have a better understanding of what this thesis is about and to fully understand the framework in
which our studies reside we need to have clear in mind what the process of generating randomness implicates.
The process of generating random numbers require 3 main sub-processes:
• generation of raw random number
• entropy estimation
• randomness extraction
The first sub-process can be anything, no limitations are set. Thus, it can be a PRNG, or even an elementary
process of coin-tossing. Indipendently from the process of ”raw-randomness” choosen, it is worth noting
that this process determine the quality of the randomness, and the amount of randomness that is possible to
extract from it. That is why a quantum protocol is desirable, as we show later in section
17
==PAGE:21==
Afterwards, it is time to estimate how random the previous process is. In order to achieve that, we use
the notion of entropy as indicator of such ”randomness”. As we explained in the state of the art section,
it is possible to compute this information about the previous process with different tools, such as Hmin or
Shannon entropy. According to the formula chosen, the amount of entropy may very even though the rng
process is the same, as we show later on in the result section
Finally, the randomness extractor takes as input the ”raw” random bits and its entropy estimation and
outputs a string of certified random bits., see more at [23].
It is worth noting that, the importance of the entropy estimation is given by the following equation:
K = N × H −err(ϵ)
This equation represents the number of bits that the randomness extractor is able to generate.
• N, is the amount of bits that the first process outputs.
• H, is the entropy estimation
• ”errors” indicates some imperfection errors that may happen during the process of randomness extrac-
tion, that does not allow for a perfect randomness extraction.
As it is possible to note, the better the entropy estimation, the greater is the amount of certified random
bits. Thus, better performance at generating random bit per seconds.
3.2.2
Entropy estimation
Now that we have a high level idea of the RNG process, it is easier to state the goal of this thesis : ”bounding
the maximum amount of entropy that is possible to estimate from a semi-Device-Independent QRNG”.
Regarding entropy, it is important to state from which ”point of view” is seeing and computed. In order
to better understand what that means, it is important to have in mind the prepared and measure setup for
QRNG with one single difference. Previously, we considered Alice and Bob as the only actors playing a role
in the protocol. But, to make sure that the random bits follow the definition of randomness : ”N bits are
perfectly random if they are unpredictable, not only by the user of the device, but by any observer ” [2] a
new actor is introduced in the scheme, Eve.
In this case, this new actor represent someone who as some additional knowledge about the measurement
(black blox). This extra knowledge can be either classical or quantum.
Given this new actor, the concept of entropy changes in meaning, since the entropy is now computed over
the probability guess of Eve. Thus, entropy represents the uncertainty of Eve over the output measurements
b, or ”how likely is that Eve is able to predict successfully the ouput of the black-box measurement”.
Furthermore, in order to give a lower bound of the entropy that is possible to estimate, in this thesis,
18
==PAGE:22==
we compute the maximum probability guess that Eve can possibly has, in order to maximize the entropy
estimation.
In the next paragraphs are introduced the concepts of
• probability guess
• entropy estimation
For sake of clarity, from now on whenever we mention the ”probability guess” (PG), we are referring to Eve’s
PG towards the output of the measurement of the prepared state set-up.
Probability guess
Now, in this paragraph, we mathematically describe the guessing probability of an
observer for the prepare and measure QRNG set-up.
Furthermore, we proceed steps by steps, starting
from a Device-dependent scenario to a semi-Device-Independent, or more precisely, measurement-Device-
Independent.
As we described in the State of the art section, when we talk about Device Dependent QRNG, we are referring
to a scenario where both ”prepare” and ”measure” ”boxes” are characterized, or both processes are ”trusted”.
This implicate that the probability guess of an observer, is defined as follow :
PG =
X
x
px max
b
p(b|x)
p(b|x) = Tr(pxΠb),
px = |ψx⟩⟨ψx|
Where
• x ∈{0, ..., n} : represents the index of one of the prepared states used in the protocol
• b ∈{0, .., m} : represents the index of one of the possible measurement outputs
• px : probability of choosing x as prepared state for the protocol
Thus, the probability guess of an observer is given by the sum of the products between the probability of
choosing the prepared stated x and the most likely measurement output b given the chosen prepared state.
Now that, we can move forward expressing the PG with the case of a semi-Devide-Indipendent QRNG set,
where the measurement is not trusted/characterized. Thus, we can think in term of a black box where the
user of the QRNG have no idea about how the measurement is performed.
This lead to an attitude to
expect the ”worst case scenario” for the user of the QRNG, which represents the ”best case scenario” for
the intruder Eve. Thus, it means that the user is expecting Eve to have some sort of correlation with the
measurement device, and that always act iwth the best strategy possible to guess the measurement output.
This correlation might be :
19
==PAGE:23==
• classical : Eve has some additional information about the measure, which the user do not
• quantum : Eve has an entangled particle with the prepared state that allows a better guessing proba-
bility
Now, in order to describe this additional layer of level of Eve’s knowledge about the measurement, we
introduce the concept of λ.
λ represent the different possible strategies that Eve can play with regards of a specific prepared state. Similar
to the prepared state, also Eve’s strategy has a probability of being chosen from the user point of view. Thus,
we can now formally describe Eve’s PG, from the user point of view, as follow:
PG =
X
x
px
X
λ
q(λ) max
b
Tr{pxΠλ
b }
(1)
where
• P
λ q(λ) Tr{pxΠλ
b } = p(b|x) : represents the PG of b given x, from the users perspective/ based on the
user knowledge/observations
• Tr{pxΠλ
b } = p(b|x, λ) : represents the PG of b given x and Eve’s strategy/choice
From the users perspective, since we do not know what is the strategy chosen by Eve, we need to keep in
consideration that multiple choices could have been taken, thus it is important to average Eve’s strategy
Entropy estimation
Now, that we have defined the guessing probability of Eve, we can move forward,
showing the process of entropy estimation.
As we discussed in the state of the art section, we can estimate Entropy with different approaches. Each of
them has their own advantages and disadvantages. For example, Hmin gives the most conservative Entropy,
but on the other hand is simple to compute:
Hmin = −log2(PG)
Now, thanks to this formula is easier to understand relation between PG and Entropy.
20
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3: Enter Caption
In fact, from the above plot, it is crystal clear that the better is the Eve’s PG, the worst is the amount of
entropy that is possible to certificate. This is why, it is interesting for security reason to understand what is
the best Eve’s strategy possible, in order to securely state how random a process is. This kind of reasoning
follows the concept of ”expect the worst case scenario, and you will not be surprised”.
Said that, we need to acknowledge that this kind of estimation is quite simple. This is due to the fact that
we are not taking into consideration important aspects such as whether the generation of random bits is an
identical Independent and identically distributed random process(i.i.d.).
The importance of understanding whether the QRNG process follow a i.i.d. process is based on the assumption
that Eve can learn some side information to the measurement that can lead to a better guessing strategy
throughout different rounds of the proces. This is crucial if we want to follow the principle of ”expect the
worst case scenario”.
In order to follow this principle, we follow a new approach initially proposed for QKD, where it is taken
into consideration that Eve is able to accumulate some side information during the process. Thus, through
the usage of the Generalised Entropy Accumulation Theorem, they developed a lower bound of the Entropy
represented by non i.i.d. process of n rounds[24].
Hε
min (An | En)Mn◦···◦M1(ρR0E0)Ω≥nh −nα −1
2 −α
ln(2)
2
V 2
−g(ε) + α log (1/ Prρn[Ω])
α −1
−n
α −1
2 −α
2
K′(α)
(2)
Now, given this bound it is possible to reduce our problem of entropy estimation to an other lower bound
the Von-Neumann entropy used in the above equation. This allow us to solve the problem in a much easy
manner. In fact, with this method we do not need to care about the different rounds of the process, but this
method allows us to use the Von-Neumann entropy to certify the entropy of given QRNG system with the
assumption of eavesdropper who is able to accumulate side information.
21
==PAGE:25==
In the next section we will dive better into the linearization of PG and use equation 2 for QRNG setup.
3.3
From PG to SDP
In this section we dive into the process of design a semi-definite-program, SDP, given the PG seen before in
equation 1.
From the PG in question, it is possible to notice that it is not linear, thus it cannot be use as objective
function in an SDP problem. More specifically, it has the following features that make it non-linear:
• maxb
• q(λ) multiply Πλ
b
In order to linearize and correctly design an SDP problem, we simply start to define PG(x) as follow :
Pg(x) =
X
λ
q(λ) max
b
Tr{pxΠλ
b }
(3)
It has to be read as the probability guess of Eve to guess b given the prepared state x.
Afterwards, we proceed to get rid of the max. To do so, we set λx = optimal b, which gives the max value.
Pg(x∗) =
X
λ
q(λ) Tr{px∗× Πλ
λx∗}
(4)
Finally, we linearize it defining a new element :
M λ
b = q(λ)Πλ
b
where, b = λx∗. In this way, we get the new Pg(x∗) as follow :
Pg(x∗) =
X
λ
Tr{px∗M λ
b }
(5)
Now that we have a linear Pg, we can define the SDP problem of estimating Eve’s probabiliy to guess correctly
b.
First thing first, we define the objective function that we want to maximize :
max
M λ
x
Pg(x∗) = max
M λ
x
X
λ
Tr[px∗M λ
b ]
(6)
Secondly, we set the constraints as :
• Πλ
b is a positive operator-valued measure, POVM
• Tr[px∗M λ
b ] must be coherent with the observed data
22
==PAGE:26==
• q(λ) is a valid probability distribution
The above constraints need to be specified better in order to be used in an SDP program. Thus, we write
them down in their complete form :
POVM and q(λ)
A POVM must fulfill the following properties :
• P
b Πλ
b = 1
• Πλ
b ≥0
• Πλ
b = (Πλ
b )†
On the other hand a valid probability distribution must follow 2 properties:
• P
λ q(λ) = 1
• q(λ) ≥0
But, we need to remember that we combined these two element into M λ
b . Thus, we the above properties are
encoded in the following constraints:
M λ
b ≥0,
M λ
b = (M λ
b )†
(7)
X
b
M λ
b = 1
d Tr
"X
b
M λ
b
#
× 1
(8)
Where equation 15 is given by the following equations:
X
b
M λ
b = q(λ) × 1
(9)
Tr
"X
b
M λ
b
#
= Tr [q(λ) × 1] = q(λ) × Tr [1] = q(λ) × d
(10)
Thus,
q(λ) = 1
dTr
"X
b
M λ
b
#
(11)
Finally, replacing the the above result in 9, we obtain equation 15
23
==PAGE:27==
Probability Distribution
The last constraint impose that the measurement of the black-blox measure-
ment device must be coherent with the observed data, given by :
X
λ
Tr

ρxM λ
b

= p(b|x)
(12)
Finally, we can write down the whole optimization problem as following:
max
M λ
x
Pg(x∗) = max
M λ
x
X
λ
Tr[px∗M λ
b ]
(13)
M λ
b ≥0,
M λ
b = (M λ
b )†,
(14)
X
b
M λ
b = 1
d Tr
"X
b
M λ
b
#
× 1,
(15)
X
λ
Tr

ρxM λ
b

= p(b|x)
(16)
3.4
Von Neumann bound
As we introduced earlier in this section, until now we have presented a way to estimate entropy through the
maximization of Eve’s Pg. More over, what we want to prove is that Eve is able to accumulate some side
information during each round. That is possible because in this prepare and measure Semi-DI approach,
the measurement device is considered to be a black-blox with some kind of correlation with Eve. Thus, it is
reasonable to accept the hypothesis that Eve is accumulating and accessing side informations already during
the process and not only at the end of the, such as in a QKD procotols and applications.
Thus, it is important to adjust the formulation of the estimation of entropy. To do so, it comes in handy
theorem 9 presented in, Generalized Entropy Accumulation Theorem, [24]. It shows how it is possible to
lower bound the conditional smooth min entropy of a n rounds process with Von Neumann entropy per round
minus some correction terms.
With this result it possible to tackle 2 different problems:
• achieving a higher estimation of entropy : due to the use of Von Neumann entropy
• avoiding to compute : Hε
min (An | En)Mn◦···◦M1(ρR0E0)Ω
Thanks to the work carried on previously by my co-supervisor, Carles Roch i Carceller , the conditional Von
Neumann entropy discussed above, can be lower bounded with a new SDP problem, where the derivation is
shown in the appendix, using an approach called see-saw.
This means that the objective function is solved, in our case minimized, multiple times over different variables.
In this case, the optimized variables in the first round are carried and fixed as constants in the second round,
where the sdp solves over other variables that are used in the subsequent step.
24
==PAGE:28==
3.5
Description of the See-saw SDP
Now that it has been explained the reason why we bounded the conditional Von Neauman Entropy, we can
dive into the corresponding SDP, modelled following a see-saw approach.
First thing first, we start by defining what it is the objective function that the SDP is optimizing over.
In this case is the following:
minimize
{...}
cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2
X
b,λ
Tr

M λ
b ρx∗ 
zλb
i
+
 zλb
i
∗+ (1 −ti) µλb
i

+ 1
D Tr
"X
b′
M λ
b′
#
tiµλb
i
(17)
Where :
• cm = Pm
i=1
wi
ti log 2
•
wi, ti represent weights and nodes of a Gauss-Radau quadrature, [25]
• M λ
b = Πλ
b q(λ)
• ρx∗is the chosen prepared state
Finally, zλb
i
and µλb
i
are complex number defined such that zλb
i
 zλb
i
∗= µλb
i
when the result is optimal.
It is important to notice that in the above formulation, equ.17, we did not specified which is the variable to
optimize over. This is due to the fact that such variable change during the process, and we give the specific
formulation for each step.
Afterwards, it is worth noting that the constraints the objective function is constrained by depends on the
variable that is optimized over. Thus, we discuss each constraint in the relative paragraph that explain each
step of this see-saw approach.
Finally, the final algorithm that compute the lower bound of the conditional Von Neumann entropy, is
composed by 2 steps. In each step, is computed a different version of the equ. 17 under different constraints.
1 SDP : zλb
i , µλb
i
In this paragraph, we present the first SDP that is optimized over : zλb
i , µλb
i .
The relative objective function is :
minimize
{zλb
i ,µλb
i }
cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2
X
b,λ
Tr

M λ
b ρx∗ 
zλb
i
+
 zλb
i
∗+ (1 −ti) µλb
i

+ 1
D Tr
"X
b′
M λ
b′
#
tiµλb
i
Which is constrained by :
Γb,λ,i =
 
1
zλb
i
 zλb
i
∗
µλb
i
!
≥0
25
==PAGE:29==
2 SDP : M λ
b
On the other side, the second SDP is optimized over M λ
b
minimize
{M λ
b }
cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2
X
b,λ
Tr

M λ
b ρx∗ 
zλb
i
+
 zλb
i
∗+ (1 −ti) µλb
i

+ 1
D Tr
"X
b′
M λ
b′
#
tiµλb
i
and is constrained by :
M λ
b ≥0,
X
b
M λ
b = 1
D Tr
"X
b
M λ
b
#
1,
X
λ
Tr

ρxM λ
b

= p(b | x)
This set of constraints are quite the same that we use to maximize the probability guess of Eve, 14.
Finally, the see-saw steps can be summarized with the following steps :
• 1) Initialize a random M λ
b
• 2) Run the the first SDP with the related constraint, 3.5
• 3) Fix zλb
i , µλb
i
• 4) Run the second SDP with the related constraints, 3.5
• 5) Fix M λ
b and go to step 2
It is wort noting that when it comes to the implementation, this loop goes until the improvement of the
optimal solution is lower than a certain threshold.
3.5.1
Roch POVM
In this section, we present a family of POVM that are used in our SDPs to reach a greater entropy estimation
out of a semi-device-independent QRNG protocol. More specifically, our goal is to find a measurement which
yields an outcome with a certifiable randomness greater than one bit.
Measurements which are good candidates are those which are extremal and unique.
• A POVM P = {πb}, is said to be extremal if it cannot be expressed as a convex combination of other
POVMs
• A POVM P = {πb} is said to be unique if, for a particular set of preparations {ρx}, the observed
probabilities p(b|x) are only reproducible with a measurement represented by that POVM P
26
==PAGE:30==
The following POVM is extremal and unique
ˆπ0 = 1
2

1 −pinc
1 + δ
 
1 +
1 + δ
√
1 −δ2
WQ
1 + δ −pinc
X −
pinc
1 + δ −pinc
Z

ˆπ1 = 1
2

1 −pinc
1 + δ
 
1 −
1 + δ
√
1 −δ2
WQ
1 + δ −pinc
X −
pinc
1 + δ −pinc
Z

ˆπ∅= pinc
1 + δ [1 + Z],
(18)
WQ =
s
(1 −δ2)

1 −2pinc
1 + δ

and
pinc =
X
x
px Tr [ρxπ∅]
(19)
Where pinc represent the probability of getting an inconclusive result.
It is worth sayin that such POVM is been designed for the following pairs of qubit states :
ρ0 = 1
2
h
1 +
p
1 −δ2X + δZ
i
ρ1 = 1
2
h
1 −
p
1 −δ2X + δZ
i
for X, Y, Z being the Pauli matrices. Note that these states are pure, in fact
Tr[ρ2
x] = 1
and their overlap is given by ⟨ψ0| |ψ1⟩= δ, for ρx = |ψx⟩⟨ψx|
3.5.2
Roch experiment
Finally, we briefly introduce to the experiment that has been carried out my co-supervisor. From which, we
extract the observed statistics that later on we use to estimate the entropy of this QRNG protocol with the
see-saw approach that have been discussed in the previous sections.
About this experiment we start defining the prepared states as
 ˜ψ0
E
=
r
1 + d01
2
|0⟩+
r
1 −d01
2
|1⟩+ 0|2⟩
 ˜ψ1
E
=
r
1 + d01
2
|0⟩−
r
1 −d01
2
|1⟩+ 0|2⟩
 ˜ψ2
E
=
1
√
2
d02 + d12
√1 + d01
|0⟩+ 1
√
2
d02 −d12
√1 −d01
|1⟩+
s
1 −|d02 + d12|2
2 (1 + d01) −|d02 −d12|2
2 (1 −d01) |2⟩
(20)
where the variable dxy represent the overlapping between the 3 prepared states, and |x⟩, xϵ{0, 1, 2} represent
the vector with one on the x’s index and 0 in the other position.
27
==PAGE:31==
d01 = e−α2
d02 = e−(α−β0)2
2
e−
β2
1
2
d12 = e−
β2
0
2 e−(α−β1)2
2
About the protocol itself, it is sufficient to say that two signals are prepared and sent to the measurement
device. Then, a measurement is applied to such prepared state and depending on the configuration of the
”click” or ”no-click” of both signals a b ∈{0, 1, 2, 3} is ouputed.
Preparation
Laser
EOM
AWG
AOM
SSPD
pol.
controller
Measurement
: click
: no click
Figure 4
What it is interesting is that out of this real world experiment we are able to certify a higher entropy using
the see-saw SDP described above instead of using a classic Hmin SDP. We show this result in the result
section.
28
==PAGE:32==
4
Implementation
In this section we dive into the implementation of the SDP used to estimate the entropy of a measurement
semi-Device-Independet QRNG device. The goal is to give the reader all the necessary information and
competences to reproduce the results on their own. Finally, it is possible to download or view the source
code at github.com/nicoloSguerso.
4.1
Getting Started
First thing first, we list all the tools used to write the code with relative packages and version:
tool
version
python
3.10.9
cvxpy
1.3.2
numpy
1.26.0
matplotlib
3.8.0
chaospy
4.3.13
Table 1: tools used
Pyhton is a programming language that lets you work quicklyand integrate systems more effectively
CVXPY is an open source Python-embedded modeling language for convex optimization problems
Numpy is the fundamental package for scientific computing in Python.
matplotlib is a comprehensive library for creating static, animated, and interactive visualizations
Chaospy is a numerical toolbox for performing uncertainty quantification using polynomial chaos expan-
sions, advanced Monte Carlo methods implemented in Python
CVXPY played a crucial role throughout my five-month master thesis project. This powerful library enabled
me to effectively model and solve the essential semidefinite programming (SDP) problems encountered during
my research [26][27].
4.2
Code
As we said, we encoded all SDPs problems in Python with CVXPY. The next paragraph shows how different
part of the SDP are encoded with such tools.
First thing first, each SDP problem is defined by the following knowledge blocks :
• variables the SDP run over
29
==PAGE:33==
• constrains
• objective function
Those elements constitute our optimization problem that must follow the charatteristic described in the state
of the art section 2.4.
In this section, as we said above, we dive into the implementation of SDP problem. More specifically, we
implent the SDP used to bound the Von Neumann described in section 3.5. For more information about the
implementation of different SDPs regarding protocol such as Minimum Error State Discrimination (MESD)
and Unambiguous State Discrimination (USD), the reader is invited to check out the appendix ??.
4.2.1
Variables
As we described in the previous section our see-saw process is composed by 2 SDP. The first one run over 2
complex variables, zλb
i , µλb
i . While the second SDP optimize over M λ
b . The difference between the 2 variables
are simple. The first one is a complex number while the second a a set of matrices. Both are defined over λ’s,
aka Eve’s strategies, and b’s, Bob measurement outcome. This is why we opted to memorize both variables
as dictionaries, such that it is more intuitive to link a specific value to a set of indexes. More over, each
variable must be declared by means of the command cvxpy.Variable(), denoting it as the variable which the
objective function runs over. Finally, in the brackets it is possible describe what kind of variable is, giving
the shape, feature such as if it is complex or semidefinite. Any ways, those characteristics can always be
modelled with constraints.
1 # first
SDP
variables
declaration
2
z = {}; mu = {}
3
for i in range(m_radau):
4
z[i] = {}; mu[i] = {}
5
for l in (range(nL)):
6
z[i][l] = {}; mu[i][l] = {}
7
for b in (range(nB)):
8
z[i][l][b]
= cp.Variable(complex = True)
9
mu[i][l][b] = cp.Variable(complex = True)
10
11 # second
SDP
variables
declaration
12
M = {}
13
for l in (range(nL)):
14
M[l] = {}
15
for b in (range(nB)):
16
M[l][b] = cp.Variable ((dim ,dim), complex = True)
What it is important to notice is that the variable dim is strictly related to the number of prepared state
by Alice. Otherwise, a different way to say it, dim represent the number of levels of the quantum system
prepared by Alice. In our case, either 2 or 3.
30
==PAGE:34==
4.2.2
Constraints
Afterwards, it is time to describe the implementation of the constraints. Once again, the SDP in step 2 and
4 are constrained differently since the use different variables. CVXPY imposes to gather all the constraints
in a single list that later is inputed with the objective function to cvxpy.Problem(obj, constraints).
We start to describe to implementation of the first SDP, which is constrained as follow :
Γb,λ,i =
 
1
zλb
i
 zλb
i
∗
µλb
i
!
≥0
1
gamma
= {}
2
constraints = []
3
for i in range(m_radau):
4
gamma[i] = {}
5
for l in (range(nL)):
6
gamma[i][l] = {}
7
for b in (range(nB)):
8
gamma[i][l][b] = cp.Variable ((2 ,2) ,complex = True)
9
10
constraints
+= [ gamma[i][l][b][0][0]==
1.0
]
11
constraints
+= [ gamma[i][l][b][0][1]== z[i][l][b]
]
12
constraints
+= [ gamma[i][l][b][1][0]==
cp.conj(z[i][l][b]) ]
13
constraints
+= [ gamma[i][l][b][1][1]==
mu[i][l][b]
]
14
constraints
+= [ gamma[i][l][b] >> 0
]
With this simple snippet of code, we define a new variable that describe Γb,λ,i. Now, since variables in
optimization problems may take any values, we need to fix those values of the matrix elements to ones
defined by zλb
i , µλb
i . We accomplish this simply by imposing each matrix element to be equal to the values
described above. Finally, we impose that Γb,λ,i is semidefinite using the command ¿¿ 0. Of course it is worth
noting that each constraint is added to the same list, as said before.
Now, the second SDP is constrained with more constrains Now, a good starting point is to note that for
representing M λ
b , we need to declare n ∗m variables, where n are the number of λ’s and m are the number
of Bob measurement outcome. Thus, we need to constrain every variable of this set.
(1)M λ
b ≥0,
(2)
X
b
M λ
b = 1
D Tr
"X
b
M λ
b
#
1,
(3)
X
λ
Tr

ρxM λ
b

= p(b | x)
We start by imposing that M λ
b to be positive semi definite:
1
for l in range(nL):
2
for b in range(nB):
3
constraints
+= [ M[l][b] >> 0.0 ]
Afterwards, for each λ, we define second constraint as follow:
1
for l in range(nL):
31
==PAGE:35==
2
sum_M_b = 0.0
3
for b in range(nB):
4
sum_M_b = temp_l + M[l][b]
5
constraints
+= [sum_M_b
== 0.5* cp.trace(sum_M_b)*np.identity (2)]
The implementation is quite straight forward, infact before setting the constraint we compute the sum M λ
b ,
given a fix λ. Then you simply follow the equation.
Finally, we implement the third constraint, which allows Eve to manipulate the outcome measurement as
long as the the result is following the observed statistic.
1 for b in range(nB):
2
for x in range(len(zeta)):
3
constraints
+= [sum( [cp.trace(zeta[x] @ M[l][b]) for l in range(nL)]) = pbx[b][x]]
Once again, the implementation is simple and intuitively follow the above equation. It is worth noting, that
since we want to fix the possible values of P
λ Tr

ρxM λ
b

to the observed statistics,p(b | x) , we need to
iterate over all b’s and x’s.
4.2.3
Objective function
Finally, once variable, constraints are set it is time to describe the objective function to Maximize or Minimize.
In CVXPY, the definition of such function is quite intuitive, in fact the manner of describing it follow the
mathematical description give from the SDP.
To declare the objective function, it is necessary to declare a new python variable, not a CVXPY variable,
and assign it the operation relative to the objective function.
minimize
{...}
cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2
X
b,λ
Tr

M λ
b ρx∗ 
zλb
i
+
 zλb
i
∗+ (1 −ti) µλb
i

+ 1
D Tr
"X
b′
M λ
b′
#
tiµλb
i
Now, that is how we implement such function :
1
obj = c_m
2
suma = 0.0
3
for i in range(m_radau):
4
for l in range(nL):
5
for b in range(nB):
6
m_b_prime = sum([M[l][bb] for bb in range(nB)])
7
suma = suma +
8
(w[i]/(t[i]*np.log (2)))*
9
( ( cp.trace(M[l][b]@zeta [0])
) *
10
( z[i][l][b] + np.conj(z[i][l][b]) + (1-t[i])*mu[i][l][b]
) +
11
( ( 1/np.trace(id_2) ) * cp.trace(m_b_prime) *t[i]*mu[i][l][b] ) )
12
13
obj = obj + cp.real(suma)
14
constraints
+= [obj
>= 0.0]
15
32
==PAGE:36==
16
prob = cp.Problem(cp.Minimize(obj), constraints )
It is worth noting that:
• obj : is the python variable representing the objective function
• suma : represents the sum of all the iteration of the summation
• m b prime: is M λ
b′
• thanks to the summation property we pushed all the elements in the same loop for a better readability
and easier implementation
Once obj is defined, we conclude the SDP program imposing the last constraint. Such constraint impose to
that the value of the objective function must be greater or equal than 0. That is because the result of this
SDP represent the entropy per round of a QRNG using MCD protocol.
After that, we can finally define the problem with the command cvxpy.Problem(cvxpy.Minimize(obj), con-
straints). The command minimize, define the optimization that the solver apply to the objective function.
Finally, we can solve the problem with the following command:
1 try:
2
mosek_params = { " MSK_DPAR_INTPNT_CO_TOL_REL_GAP ": 1e-1 }
3
prob.solve(solver=’MOSEK ’,verbose=False , mosek_params = mosek_params )
4
5 except
SolverError:
6
something = 10
In this case the implementation is not as linear as the other examples. This is due to the fact that during
different trail the basic solvel of CVXPY was having some trouble with numerical imprecision. That is been
solved using a more precise solver called MOSEK [28].
4.3
Protocols
Now, what we have shown is the general implementation of the see-saw process used to estimate the Shannon
entropy from equation 2. What I did not take into consideration was the protocol that the QRNG is using.
This is beacuse such information is intrinsecally encoded into 2 variables:
• M λ
b
• number of Bob’s measurement output
This is because, M λ
b is defined as M λ
b = q(λ)Πλ
b , thus the information about what is the measurement
that need to be perfomed reside in Πλ
b , varying from protocol to protocol. Infact, since different protocols
33
==PAGE:37==
follow different measurement and probability distribution changing the POVM used change the protocol used.
Instead, the number of Bob’s measurement output intrinsically describe the protocol adopted, infact MESD
and USD have different number of possible outcomes.
In the case of MCD, Maximum Confidence Discrimination, this is how M λ
b has been encoded. First, we
encode the POVM described by
ˆπ0 = 1
2

1 −pinc
1 + δ
 
1 +
1 + δ
√
1 −δ2
WQ
1 + δ −pinc
X −
pinc
1 + δ −pinc
Z

ˆπ1 = 1
2

1 −pinc
1 + δ
 
1 −
1 + δ
√
1 −δ2
WQ
1 + δ −pinc
X −
pinc
1 + δ −pinc
Z

ˆπ∅= pinc
1 + δ [1 + Z],
(21)
where δ represent the overlapping between the prepapred states, pinc is the probability of getting inconclusive
results (labeled as b = ∅) and X, Z being the relative Paoli matrixes.
with
WQ =
s
(1 −δ2)

1 −2pinc
1 + δ

and
pinc =
X
x
px Tr [ρxπ∅]
(22)
1
povm_roch
=[]
2
povm_roch
+=
3
[ 0.5* ( 1- (( p_ine
/(1+ olap))) ) * ( id_2 + ((1+ olap)/(np.sqrt(1-olap **2))) *
(( w_q
/(1+ olap -p_ine)) *uf.X())
- (( p_ine
/(1+ olap -p_ine)) *uf.Z()) ) ]
4
5
povm_roch
+=
6
[ 0.5* ( 1- (( p_ine
/(1+ olap))) ) * ( id_2 - ((1+ olap)/(np.sqrt(1-olap **2))) *
(( w_q
/(1+ olap -p_ine)) *uf.X())
- (( p_ine
/(1+ olap -p_ine)) *uf.Z()) ) ]
7
8
povm_roch
+= [ (p_ine
/(1+ olap)) *( id_2 + uf.Z()) ]
afterwards, we define the conditional probability distribution that this POVM represent, aka p(b|x) =
Tr[ρxΠλ
b ].
1
pbx_q = []
2
for b in range(nB):
3
pbx_q.append ([
np.trace(rho [0]
@povm_roch [b] ) ,
4
np.trace(rho [1]
@povm_roch[b] ) ] )
5
pbx_q = np.array(pbx_q)
Now, that define the distribution that the Bob measurement must follow, we finally define M λ
b :
1
q = []
2
for l in range(nL -1):
3
q += [np.random.uniform ()/float(nL)]
4
q += [1.0 -np.sum(q)]
5
6
# generation
of M = q(l)Pi_l_b
7
dim= 2
8
M = {}
9
for l in range(nL):
34
==PAGE:38==
10
M[l] = {}
11
for b in range(nB):
12
M[l][b] = q[l] * povm_roch[b]
Where, q represent the probability of Eve to choose a specific strategy, λ. Of course, this process is done for
each λ and b.
Carles’s setup
Now, that we showed the implementation of this see-saw process, we show what are the
necessary modification to implement an actual experiment that has been carried by my co-supervisor Carles
Roch i Carceller during his phd, explained in section 3.5.2.
Since, the above implementation is general, we need to change only the info that strictly define the protocol,
such as the prepared states and the probability distribution of bob measurement.
The following is the implementation of the prepared state
1
2 k_0 = np.array ([1 ,0 ,0])
3 k_1 = np.array ([0 ,1 ,0])
4 k_2 = np.array ([0 ,0 ,1])
5
6 # prepared
state
7 psi = []
8 psi += [np.sqrt( (1 +d_01) /2) *k_0
+ np.sqrt( (1 -d_01)/2) *k_1 + 0 *k_2 ]
9 psi += [np.sqrt( (1 +d_01) /2) *k_0
- np.sqrt( (1 -d_01)/2) *k_1 + 0 *k_2
]
10 psi += [
11
( 1 /np.sqrt (2)) *( (d_02 +d_12) /np.sqrt (1 +d_01)) *k_0 +
12
( 1 /np.sqrt (2)) *( (d_02 -d_12) /np.sqrt (1 -d_01)) *k_1 +
13
np.sqrt (1
-( np.absolute (( d_02 +d_12))**2 /(2 *(1 +d_01))) -
14
( np.absolute (( d_02 -d_12))**2/(2*(1
-d_01)))
15
) *k_2
16 ]
corresponding to :
d01 = e−α2
d02 = e−(α−β0)2
2
e−
β2
1
2
d12 = e−
β2
0
2 e−(α−β1)2
2
 ˜ψ0
E
=
r
1 + d01
2
|0⟩+
r
1 −d01
2
|1⟩+ 0|2⟩
 ˜ψ1
E
=
r
1 + d01
2
|0⟩−
r
1 −d01
2
|1⟩+ 0|2⟩
 ˜ψ2
E
=
1
√
2
d02 + d12
√1 + d01
|0⟩+ 1
√
2
d02 −d12
√1 −d01
|1⟩+
s
1 −|d02 + d12|2
2 (1 + d01) −|d02 −d12|2
2 (1 −d01) |2⟩
(23)
While for the distribution function we use the data from the physical experiment. Where the statistics from
the experiment, are just regular frequencies. That is, if event (x,b) occurred nx,b times, then to transform
35
==PAGE:39==
them in probability the follwing transformation is needed
p(b|x) =
nx,b
Ntotal
for N total being the total number of observed events. Which give us the following distribution .
1 # Probabilities
form
the
experiment
2 pbx_data_pre = [[0.13989849772376486 ,
3.761722275674886e-06,
0.21619729355191886] ,
3
[3.851979122798424e-06,
0.14087367793231773 ,
0.2142886655999398] ,
4
[0.8600968405060467 ,
0.8591220135834479 ,
0.4637432523440593] ,
5
[8.097910655883051e-07,
5.467619586736753e-07,
0.10577078850408206]]
6
7 pbx_data_pre = np.array( pbx_data_pre )
Where the columns represent the 3 prepared states and the rows the ouput, 4, giving a 3 × 4 matrix.
Now, the last element that we need to start the see-saw process is an initial M λ
b , as the algorithm requires.
For this purpose, we have 2 choices:
• compute it
• choose it at random
Both approaches work fine, in fact we implemented both. If you choose to compute it is necessary to run
the Hmin SDP. In this one you just input the states and observed probabilities, and the SDP takes care of
finding a suitable POVM and bounds the guessing probability. You can then take this POVM and put it as
an initial point in your see-saw, as show in appendixA.
Otherwise, you can initialize it at random with the only risk that the solver do not converge to the global
maximum result, as we show in the result section.
36
==PAGE:40==
5
Results
In this section, we show the result obtained from the implementation discussed in the previous section.
5.1
Roch’s experiment
About Roch’s experiment, which is a real world experiment, that has been discussed in section 3.5.2, we
computed both the entropy with Hmin SDP and see-saw approach getting the following results:
Shannon
Hmin
1.80804
1.1086
Table 2: entropy estimation from Roch’s experiment data
Furthermore, we show an euristic to show that the see-saw SDP is actually converging to the maximum value.
To show that, we initialize a random M λ
b , as we discussed in 4.3, and the we verify that no other result is
higher than the one obtained by computing the real M λ
b from the data experiment.
Figure 5: Histogram showing different local maximum of the see-saw process based on Roch’s experiment
setup. this see-saw has been run 100 times
What it is possible to claim is that all the the results obtained are lower or equal to the entropy got by
initializing M λ
b not at random, but based on the experiment data. Thus, the see-saw process converged
correctly and worked as expected.
37
==PAGE:41==
5.2
SeeSaw SDP VS Hmin SDP
In this section we present the result obtained by applying the see-saw process and compare with what a
different estimation process such as Hmin can get.
In this part, we show how entropy varies based on the overlaping of the prepared states over Maximum
Confidence Discrimination protocol.
Which allow us to reach more than one bit of randomness with 2
prepared state, k=2. More over, to better understand the advantage of the implementation of the see-saw
process, we compare result from it with entropy estimated with a classical Hmin procedure.
Figure 6: comparison between the entropy computed with the see-saw process and Hmin. Both use the family
of POVM develped by Carles Roch i Carceller that we presented in section 3.5.1
It is possible to notice how there is a bit numeric instability in the interval [0, 0.2] of overlapping for Shannon
entropy. But besides that it is important to notice how it is possible to extract more randomness from the
same protocol by choosing a better tool to estimate it.
5.3
Shannon VS Hmin
Now, we show the results obtained by using MCD with both see-saw, Shannon Entropy, and Hmin Entropy.
But must importantly, we extend and show the result with 2 and 3 prepared states, k=2 and k=3.
Once again, we remember that thanks to Ioannou , the maximum amount of entropy per k is given by .
−log2(k + 1). Thus, [k = 2] = 1.6 and [k = 3] = 2 as it is possible to verify in the next plots.
38
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
Now, in order to help the reader to better visualize the advante of this new approach of estimating entropy
through the see-saw process discussed in the previous sections. We show the entropy estimation capabilities
of both see-saw SDP process and Hmin SDP.
The plot shows the entropy in the interval of [0.95, 1] of overlapping, which give the greatest amount of
entropy. It is worth noting that although both techniques are upper bounded identically, see-saw process
given the same amount of overlap is able to estimate more entropy giving an advantage to the final user of
the QRNG.
Figure 8
39
==PAGE:43==
6
Conclusions
This study delved into the realm of entropy bounds for semi-device-independent quantum randomness gener-
ators (QRNGs). We present a novel approach for extracting a greater amount of entropy from such QRNGs,
leveraging a state discrimination protocol.
Our key finding is that this new method surpasses the entropy estimation capabilities of established classical
methods, exemplified by Hmin. Furthermore, it possesses a crucial security advantage. The proposed process
remains secure even against an adversary, denoted as Eve, who accumulates side information throughout
the entire random number generation process. Remarkably, this ability to retain randomness certification
persists even when granting Eve such information access.
In essence, while our method empowers Eve by allowing her to accumulate leaked side information, it demon-
strably certifies randomness exceeding the classical Hmin approach.
40
==PAGE:44==
A
Appendix
Von Neumann bound Derivation
Here we explicitly show all steps to get to the expression in Eq. 17. Recall one begins with expressing the
VonNeumann entropy using the relative entropy as
H (B | E, X = x∗) = −D (ρ ˜
BE (x∗) ∥1 ⊗ρE (x∗))
for
˜Ψx∗=
X
b
|b⟩⟨b| ⊗˜σx(b),
being the classical-quantum state (with ˜σx(b) = TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx] ) shared between Bob and Eve after Bob’s
measurement, and
˜σx =
X
b
˜σx(b) =
X
b
TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx]
the state that Eve holds, also after Bob’s measurement. As shown in [29] applying the Gauss-Radau quadra-
ture to an integral representation of the logarithm yields a variational upper bound for the quantum relative
entropy,
D(ρ∥σ) ≤
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2 inf
Zi

1 + Tr
h
ρ

Zi + Z†
i + (1 −ti) Z†
i Zi
i
+ ti Tr
h
σZiZ†
i
i
for Zi being arbitrary complex matrices. In our case, this turns into the following variational lower bound
on the Von-Neumann entropy for a particular preparation x∗:
H (B | E, X = x∗) ≥cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2 inf
Zi
X
b
Tr
h
(|b⟩⟨b| ⊗TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx∗])

Zi + Z†
i + (1 −ti) Z†
i Zi
i
+ ti
X
b
Tr
h
(1B ⊗TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx∗]) ZiZ†
i
i
= cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2 inf
Zi
X
b
Tr
h
(|b⟩⟨b| ⊗TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx∗])

Zi + Z†
i + (1 −ti) Z†
i Zi
i
+ ti
X
b,b′
Tr
h
(|b′⟩⟨b′| ⊗TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx∗]) ZiZ†
i
i
= cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2 inf
Zi
X
b
TrE
n
TrB
h
(|b⟩⟨b| ⊗TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx∗])

Zi + Z†
i + (1 −ti) Z†
i Zi
io
+ ti
X
b,b′
TrE
n
TrB
h
(|b′⟩⟨b′| ⊗TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx∗]) ZiZ†
i
io
= cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2 inf
Zi
X
b
TrE
n
TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx∗] TrB
h
(1 ⊗|b⟩⟨b|)

Zi + Z†
i + (1 −ti) Z†
i Zi
io
+ ti
X
b,b′
TrE
n
TrB [(Πb ⊗1) Ψx∗] TrB
h
(1 ⊗|b′⟩⟨b′|) ZiZ†
i
io
,
(24)
41
==PAGE:45==
where we defined cm = Pm
i=1
wi
ti log 2. Let us now define
Zb
i := TrB [(1 ⊗|b⟩⟨b|)Zi] = ⟨b |Zi| b⟩
Zb†
i Zb
i := TrB
h
(1 ⊗|b⟩⟨b|)Z†
i Zi
i
=
D
b
Z†
i Zi
 b
E
Zb
i Zb†
i
:= TrB
h
(1 ⊗|b⟩⟨b|)ZiZ†
i
i
=
D
b
ZiZ†
i
 b
E
.
Then, our lower bound on the Von-Neumann entropy turns into :
H (B | E, X = x∗) ≥cm +
m
X
i=1
wi
ti log 2 inf
Zb
i
X
b
Tr
h
Ψx∗

Πb ⊗

Zb
i + Zb†
i + (1 −ti)Zb†
i Zb
i

+ tiΨx∗

1B ⊗Zb
i Zb†
i
i
(25)
Hmin SDP - Roch experiment
In this section of the show the code used to compute the Hmin value out Roch’s experiment data. Further-
more, out of this SDP we also compute the initial M λ
b used in the see-saw process to compute the Shannon
Entropy for this experiment. What it is worth noting is that the following piece of code is universal, in the
sense that define the Hmin SDP. Thus if you want to used for an other protocol such that USD, you only need
to set the correct probability distribution, the prepared state and the desired overlapping of the prepared
state. Thus we wont show other code. In order to view all the code developed for this thesis you are invited
to check github.com/nicoloSguerso.
1
alfa = 0.41
2
beta = 0.66
3
4
d_01 = np.e**( -alfa **2)
5
d_02 = np.e**(
-(( alfa -beta)**2 /2 )
) *np.e**(
-( beta **2 /2))
6
d_12 = np.e**(
-( beta **2 /2)) *np.e**(
-( (alfa -beta)**2/2))
These parameter represent the overlaping of the prepared states. While the following represent the definition
of them:
1
# prepared
state
2
k_0 = np.array ([1 ,0 ,0])
3
k_1 = np.array ([0 ,1 ,0])
4
k_2 = np.array ([0 ,0 ,1])
5
6
psi = []
7
psi += [np.sqrt( (1 +d_01) /2) *k_0
+ np.sqrt( (1 -d_01)/2) *k_1 + 0 *k_2 ]
8
psi += [np.sqrt( (1 +d_01) /2) *k_0
- np.sqrt( (1 -d_01)/2) *k_1 + 0 *k_2
]
9
10
psi += [( 1 /np.sqrt (2)) *( (d_02 +d_12) /np.sqrt (1 +d_01)) *k_0 +
11
( 1 /np.sqrt (2)) *( (d_02 -d_12) /np.sqrt (1 -d_01)) *k_1 +
12
np.sqrt (1
-( np.absolute (( d_02 +d_12))**2 /(2 *(1 +d_01)))
13
-( np.absolute (( d_02 -d_12))**2/(2*(1
-d_01)))) *k_2
14 ]
1 M={}
42
==PAGE:46==
2 # Variable
3 for l in range(nL):
4
M[l] ={}
5
for b in range(nB):
6
M[l][b] = cp.Variable ((3 ,3), complex = True )
7
8 # Constraints
9 constraints = []
10 for l in range(nL):
11
suma= 0.0
12
for b in range(nB):
13
constraints
+= [ M[l][b] >> 0.0
]
#positive
semidefinite
constraint
14
constraints
+= [ M[l][b] == cp.transpose(cp.conj(M[l][b])) ]
15
16 # constraint
over
the
observed
pbx
17 for x in range(nX):
18
for b in range(nB):
19
constraints
+= [
20
pbx[b][x] == ( sum( ( cp.trace( np.outer( psi[x] ,np.conj(psi[x])) @M[l][b] )
21
for l in range(nL)
) )
22
)]
23
24 # constraint
that
binds
the sum of the
variable M to the
identity
matrix
times q(l
25 for l in range(nL):
26
suma = sum( ( M[l][b] for b in range(nB))
)
27
constraints
+= [ suma == ( 1/dim *cp.trace(suma) * identity_matrix ) ]
28
29 pgX = 0.0
30 for l in range(nL):
31
pgX = pgX + cp.real( cp.trace( np.outer(psi[xstar], np.conj(psi[xstar ])) @M[l][ xstar] ))
32
33 constraints
+= [pgX
>= 0]
34
35 prob = cp.Problem( cp.Maximize(pgX) ,constraints )
36 try :
37
prob.solve(solver= ’MOSEK ’, verbose = False)
38 except
SolverError:
39
prob.solve(solver= ’SCS’, verbose = False )
40
41 res = prob.value
42 # print(pg.value)
43 hmin_res = -np.log2(res)
Infact, to compute the Hmin for the family of POVM designed by Carles Roch i Carceller, it is possible to use
the same code and change only the prepared state, defining the right observed statistic and set the desired
overlap.
43
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
M. N. Bera, A. Ac´ın, M. Ku´s, M. W. Mitchell, and M. Lewenstein, “Randomness in quantum mechanics:
Philosophy, physics and technology”, Reports on Progress in Physics, vol. 80, no. 12, p. 124 001, Nov.
2017. doi: 10.1088/1361-6633/aa8731. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1361-
6633/aa8731.
[2]
A. Ac´ın and L. Masanes, “Certified randomness in quantum physics”, Nature, vol. 540, no. 7632,
pp. 213–219, Dec. 2016, issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10 . 1038 / nature20119. [Online]. Available: http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature20119.
[3]
L. K. Shalm, E. Meyer-Scott, B. G. Christensen, et al., “Strong loophole-free test of local realism”,
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 115, p. 250 402, 25 Dec. 2015. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.250402. [Online].
Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.250402.
[4]
A. Valentini, “Signal-locality in hidden-variables theories”, Physics Letters A, vol. 297, no. 5, pp. 273–
278, May 2002, issn: 0375-9601. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0375960102004383.
[5]
L. Masanes, A. Acin, and N. Gisin, “General properties of nonsignaling theories”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 73,
p. 012 112, 1 Jan. 2006. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.73.012112. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.73.012112.
[6]
S. Aaronson, “Introduction to quantum information science lecture notes”, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.scottaaronson.com/qclec.pdf.
[7]
F. Grosshans, G. Van Assche, J. Wenger, R. Brouri, N. J. Cerf, and P. Grangier, “Quantum key
distribution using gaussian-modulated coherent states”, Nature, vol. 421, no. 6920, pp. 238–241, Jan.
2003, issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature01289. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature01289.
[8]
X. Ma, X. Yuan, Z. Cao, B. Qi, and Z. Zhang, “Quantum random number generation”, npj Quantum
Information, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 16 021, Jun. 2016, issn: 2056-6387. doi: 10.1038/npjqi.2016.21. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/npjqi.2016.21.
[9]
J. Barrett, L. Hardy, and A. Kent, “No signaling and quantum key distribution”, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
vol. 95, p. 010 503, 1 Jun. 2005. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.010503. [Online]. Available: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.010503.
[10]
J. Silman, A. Chailloux, N. Aharon, I. Kerenidis, S. Pironio, and S. Massar, “Fully distrustful quantum
bit commitment and coin flipping”, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 106, p. 220 501, 22 Jun. 2011. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.106.220501. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
106.220501.
[11]
C.-E. Bardyn, T. C. H. Liew, S. Massar, M. McKague, and V. Scarani, “Device-independent state
estimation based on bell’s inequalities”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 80, p. 062 327, 6 Dec. 2009. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevA.80.062327. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.80.
062327.
[12]
J.-D. Bancal, N. Gisin, Y.-C. Liang, and S. Pironio, “Device-independent witnesses of genuine multipar-
tite entanglement”, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 106, p. 250 404, 25 Jun. 2011. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
106.250404. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.250404.
44
==PAGE:48==
[13]
S. Pironio and S. Massar, “Security of practical private randomness generation”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 87,
p. 012 336, 1 Jan. 2013. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.87.012336. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.87.012336.
[14]
S. Pironio, A. Ac´ın, S. Massar, et al., “Random numbers certified by bell’s theorem”, Nature, vol. 464,
no. 7291, pp. 1021–1024, Apr. 2010, issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature09008. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09008.
[15]
J. B. Brask, A. Martin, W. Esposito, et al., “Megahertz-rate semi-device-independent quantum random
number generators based on unambiguous state discrimination”, Physical Review Applied, vol. 7, no. 5,
May 2017, issn: 2331-7019. doi: 10.1103/physrevapplied.7.054018. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.7.054018.
[16]
“Entropy, relative entropy, and mutual information”, in Elements of Information Theory. John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd, 2005, ch. 2, pp. 13–55, isbn: 9780471748823. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/047174882X.
ch2. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/047174882X.ch2. [Online].
Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/047174882X.ch2.
[17]
M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information: 10th Anniversary
Edition. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[18]
R. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, and K. Horodecki, “Quantum entanglement”, Rev. Mod.
Phys., vol. 81, pp. 865–942, 2 Jun. 2009. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.81.865. [Online]. Available:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.81.865.
[19]
M. Tomamichel, R. Colbeck, and R. Renner, “A fully quantum asymptotic equipartition property”,
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 5840–5847, Dec. 2009, issn: 1557-9654.
doi: 10.1109/tit.2009.2032797. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2009.
2032797.
[20]
T. Metger, O. Fawzi, D. Sutter, and R. Renner, “Generalised entropy accumulation”, in 2022 IEEE 63rd
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), IEEE, Oct. 2022. doi: 10.1109/
focs54457.2022.00085. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FOCS54457.2022.00085.
[21]
F. G. S. L. Brand˜ao, A. Kalev, T. Li, C. Y.-Y. Lin, K. M. Svore, and X. Wu, Quantum sdp solvers: Large
speed-ups, optimality, and applications to quantum learning, 2019. arXiv: 1710.02581 [quant-ph].
[22]
M. Ioannou, J. B. Brask, and N. Brunner, “Upper bound on certifiable randomness from a quantum
black-box device”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 99, p. 052 338, 5 May 2019. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.99.052338.
[Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.052338.
[23]
N. Nisan and A. Ta-Shma, “Extracting randomness: A survey and new constructions”, Journal of
Computer and System Sciences, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 148–173, 1999, issn: 0022-0000. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1006/jcss.1997.1546. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0022000097915464.
[24]
T. Metger and R. Renner, “Security of quantum key distribution from generalised entropy accumu-
lation”, Nature Communications, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 5272, Aug. 2023, issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/
s41467-023-40920-8. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-40920-8.
[25]
P. J. Brown, H. Fawzi, and O. Fawzi, “Device-independent lower bounds on the conditional von neu-
mann entropy”, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235652074.
45
==PAGE:49==
[26]
A. Agrawal, R. Verschueren, S. Diamond, and S. Boyd, “A rewriting system for convex optimization
problems”, Journal of Control and Decision, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 42–60, 2018.
[27]
S. Diamond and S. Boyd, “CVXPY: A Python-embedded modeling language for convex optimization”,
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 17, no. 83, pp. 1–5, 2016.
[28]
M. ApS, Xxx, 2019. [Online]. Available: YYY.
[29]
P. Brown, H. Fawzi, and O. Fawzi, Device-independent lower bounds on the conditional von neumann
entropy, 2023. arXiv: 2106.13692 [quant-ph].
46
