==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master Thesis
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB
Analysed in Isogenic Background
Vince Balázs
s184472
March 28, 2024
Supervised by:
Egon Bech Hansen
Professor
Lise Friis Christensen
PhD Graduate
National Food Institute, DTU
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
National Food Institute
Kemitorvet, building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Telephone: +45 35 88 70 00
==PAGE:3==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Abstract
With consumer trends towards a plant-based diet rising globally, developing better products is
of great interest within the food industry. Current plant-based dairy alternatives (PBDA) lag
on many sensory qualities, an issue to which fermentation by Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB) could
be a remedy. Many desired ﬂavour and textural characteristics from fermentation are a result of
proteolytic activity in LAB. The cell envelope protease (CEP) is a major contributor to proteol-
ysis. The goal of this project was to investigate CEPs from LAB of plant origin regarding their
substrate preference and proteolytic activity. Therefore, LAB from the National Food Institute
Culture Collection (NFICC) were screened for CEPs homologous to the well-known dairy strain
Lactococcus lactis Wg2. From the identiﬁed 24 CEPs, 11 proteases were cloned into L. lactis
MG1363, a plasmid-free, non-proteolytic strain. MG1363 served as an isogenic background for
the expression of these proteases in soy and bovine milk. The cloned CEPs were all from the
species Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides and were classiﬁed into three groups based on amino
acid sequence homology. PrtP-A type proteases showed a close relation to the CEP of L. lactis
Wg2 and SK11, PrtP-B type proteases were the predominant type for L. pseudomesenteroides,
with great evolutionary distance to Wg2 and PrtP-C type proteases presented the last group.
Gibson Assembly of the PrtP encoding genes with the prtM and promoter regions from Wg2
in a pAK80 vector was successful with no introduced mutations around the junctions in most
cases. The MG1363 clones showed distinct acidiﬁcation proﬁles in both bovine and soy milk.
Compared to positive controls which included an MG1363 clone with prtM and prtP genes
from Wg2 and SK11, all cloned strains with protease from L. pseudomesenteroides showed
slower acidiﬁcation. PrtP-C type proteases from NFICC96 and NFICC202 as well as PrtP-B
type proteases from NFICC180 and NFICC339 exhibited no proteolytic activity in either of
the tested media. PrtP-A from NFICC96 correlated best with control strains. The remaining
strains with PrtP-B proteases acidiﬁed bovine milk to a pH of 4.5, albeit slowly, in 30-36 hours.
In soy milk the presumably proteolytic strains performed better, acidifying to pH 4.5 in 25
hours or faster, equaling the rate of the SK11 control. In the future, the proteases could be
subject to additional analysis such as proteomics in a chemically deﬁned medium with varying
N-sources to better understand their proteolytic nature and peptide proﬁle.
i
==PAGE:4==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at the National Food Institute, at the Technical
University of Denmark, in partial fulﬁlment for the Master of Science degree in Food Technology.
Vince Balázs - s184472
Signature
Date
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude for the expert laboratory assistance I received from Bodil
Madsen and Katja Ann Kristensen. Furthermore, I thank Lise Friis Christensen for her su-
pervision and Egon Bech Hansen for his guidance and tremendous patience throughout the
project. I thank Joanna Ivy Irorita Fugaban for sharing her expertise and luck with me.
I would also like to thank my family and my dearest friends Benedek Gaál and Szilárd Mikola -
who is by the way the funniest person I know - for their unconditional support, and for bringing
endless amusement into the monotony of the past years.
Most of all, I would like to thank Krőceus, for more reasons than I can write about here. It
would not have been possible without you.
ii
28/03/2024
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory and Background
3
2.1
Lactic Acid Bacteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Application of LAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
LAB as starter culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Qualiﬁed presumption of safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Leuconsostoc spp. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Metabolism of Lactic Acid Bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Proteolytic system of LAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Cell envelope protease in LAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Fermentation of plant-based dairy alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Oﬀ-ﬂavours and anti-nutrients in PBDA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Materials and Methods
13
3.1
Bacterial strains used for cloning and acidiﬁcation experiments . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Cloning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Primer design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.2
DNA extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.3
DNA ampliﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.4
Gibson Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.5
Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.6
Veriﬁcation by Sanger sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Acidiﬁcation experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
DNA and Data analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results and Discussion
23
4.1
Strain selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Morphology of NFICC96 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Sequence analysis and domain architecture of PrtP-homologs . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Cloning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.1
Troubleshooting Gibson Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.2
Optimising transformation protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Acidiﬁcation experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4.1
Growth rates by PrtP homology-type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Conclusion
47
5.1
Future prospects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Appendix
59
iii
==PAGE:6==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
List of Abbreviations
CEP:
Cell envelope protease
aa:
Amino acids
PBDA:
Plant-based dairy alternatives
LAB:
Lactic acid bacteria
EFSA:
European Food Safety Authority
MALDI-TOF:
Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight
CFU:
Colony forming unit
MRS:
De Man–Rogosa–Sharpe
LB:
Lysogeny broth
PCR:
Polymerase Chain Reaction
GA:
Gibson Assembly
NFICC:
National Food Institute Culture Collection
RT:
Room temperature
O/N:
Over-night
OD600:
Optical density at 600nm
NCBI:
National Center for Biotechnology Information
MG1363:
Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris MG1363
Tm:
Melting temperature
PBS:
Phosphate-buﬀered saline
SS:
Secretory signal
FAA:
Free amino acids
CDM:
Chemically deﬁned medium
HPLC:
High-performance liquid chromatography
GC-MS:
Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
iv
==PAGE:7==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
1
Introduction
In recent years, much of the public discourse and ongoing research in the scientiﬁc community
has revolved around one pivotal topic: climate change [1]. This is for a good reason, too. Over
the past decades, signs and symptoms of a globally changing climate caused by anthropogenic
emissions are increasingly felt across the planet. Record-high temperatures, shifting rainfall
patterns and severe droughts are becoming more common, inﬂuencing the global food supply
chain for the worse [2].
The food industry is currently estimated to represent about a third of all human emissions
[3], and with growing populations, the demand and burden put on the food supply chain is
also expected to rise [4]. As such, any measure taken to reduce the industry’s eﬀects on the
environment, while protecting its integrity, is fundamentally a step in the right direction.
A rising climate awareness in the public has slowly changed consumer preferences over the
years, too, with many steering towards a plant-based diet [5]. However, that is not the only
concern of consumers: animal welfare, health and dietary reasons or simply lifestyle choices all
play a role in these shifting trends. Yet, many plant-based products will still struggle com-
mercially for several reasons [6]. When compared to meat or dairy products, higher prices and
a lower nutritional value of plant-based products will often deter consumers from purchasing
said products [7], [8]. Even more crucially, undesirable sensory qualities, such as texture, taste
and odour pose an obstacle that plant-based foods must tackle to compete with similar animal
products on the market [9], [10].
Overcoming these issues through comprehensive research in food science is critical in leading
the industry towards a more sustainable future [11]. One of the main topics of interest within
the ﬁeld is plant-based dairy alternatives (PBDA), as PBDAs are proven to have a signiﬁcantly
lower ecological impact than dairy goods [12]. A growing demand led to many positive improve-
ments in the quality of PBDAs recently, yet mimicking dairy products remains a challenge [13].
Fermentation is a prominent way of improving the shelf-life, stability, taste, and textural qual-
ity of foods. Fermentation has been used for millennia in a myriad of staple food products like
bread, cheeses, and beverages like beer or wine [14]. With the right processes, fermentation
may be applied to boost consumer perception and acceptance of PBDA [9]. Lactic acid bacteria
(LAB) are some of the most used microorganisms in fermentation. LAB have been extensively
studied in dairy products, still, their potential for use in PBDA is yet to be fully exploited. This
is partly because many of the common LAB strains used in the dairy industry perform poorly
in plant-based substrates, and the knowledge surrounding the metabolism of LAB isolated from
plant habitats is limited [15].
1
==PAGE:8==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Through the production of their namesake, lactic acid, and other metabolites, LAB are capable
of improving the safety and sensory qualities of a variety of foodstuﬀs. Apart from acid pro-
duction and a lowered pH, protein hydrolysis is another major mechanism by which LAB are
capable of altering the properties of food matrices and producing aroma compounds [16]. LAB
have an extracellular proteolytic system, called cell envelope protease (CEP) which is respon-
sible for initiating this hydrolysis. Through the activity of these CEPs LAB can break down
proteins into smaller peptides, which then can be metabolised by the organism by a complex
and highly regulated peptide uptake system [17], [18]. Investigating the proteolytic activity
of LAB in plant-based substrates plays a central role in identifying or developing strains for
application in future PBDA productions.
1.1
Aim of the study
This project oﬀers to broaden our understanding of LAB and their cell envelope proteases by
screening the National Food Institute Culture Collection (NFICC) at DTU for CEP homologs
from plant-derived LAB and cloning them into an isogenic background for further analysis.
Tests on acidiﬁcation and growth rate protein degradation were considered for the characteri-
zation of these CEPs. The project aim and goals were addressed in the following order:
• The NFICC strain collection was screened for CEPs homologous to that of the well-
characterized Lactococcus lactis (L. lactis) strain Wg2. Since it has been demonstrated
that the expression of CEPs is directly linked to the growth of LAB [17] [18], identifying
CEP homologous genes should provide enough evidence pointing towards proteolytic ac-
tivity by the strain. After screening, 16 LAB were identiﬁed to carry CEP homologous
genes, out of which CEPs from 9 Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides strains were selected
for cloning.
• It was assumed that diﬀerences in the genes homologous to the PrtP encoding sequence
inﬂuence acidiﬁcation rates in diﬀerent media [19], [20].
Accordingly, cloning of the
selected proteases was performed by inserting the prtP homologous genes into a plasmid
starting precisely from the start codon until the stop codon of said genes. The maturation
protein-encoding gene prtM and the promoter regions were from L. lactis Wg2.
The
plasmid was then transformed into the plasmid-free, non-proteolytic L. lactis MG1363.
• The resulting clones were hypothesized to express functioning proteases during growth
and to show distinct acidiﬁcation rates depending on the diﬀerent CEPs [21]. To test this
assumption, the clones were examined in bovine and soy milk, along with the L. lactis
strains SK11, Wg2 and the non-proteolytic strain MG1363.
2
==PAGE:9==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
2
Theory and Background
This chapter aims to equip the reader with the necessary theory needed to better interpret the
project’s goals, data and experiments conducted within. Background information on lactic acid
bacteria and their metabolic system is laid out ﬁrst, and then the current state of plant-based
dairy alternatives is discussed in some detail.
2.1
Lactic Acid Bacteria
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are a heterogeneous group of non-respiring but aerotolerant, Gram-
positive bacteria with low guanine-cytosine content. LAB are acid-tolerant, non-sporulating
and can be either rod-shaped or spherical [22]. An important characteristic of LAB is the
production of lactic acid as their main fermentation metabolite [23]. It is due to this attribute
that LAB has been poorly deﬁned for the better part of the past century, with the term often
associated with other lactic acid-producing organisms as well, such as Biﬁdobacterium. Lactic
acid bacteria have been identiﬁed as early as 1873, and the ﬁrst comprehensive classiﬁcation of
LAB was attempted as early as 1919 by Orla-Jensen [24] based on sugar utilization capacity,
glucose fermentation characteristics, cell morphology, and optimum growth temperatures. Cur-
rently, by LAB we understand the common name for bacteria in the order of Lactobacillales
and until recently, this included six families: Aerococcacea, Carnobacteriacease, Enterococcaceae,
Streptococcaceae, Lactobacillaceae and Leuconostocaceae. In 2020 however, a revision of LAB
taxonomy suggested the union of Lactobacillaceae and Leuconostocaceae, and the reclassiﬁca-
tion of over 300 species into 31 genera, including the reclassiﬁcation of the genus Lactobacillus
and its 261 species into 25 genera, including 23 novel ones [25].
LAB are extensively studied microorganisms and have been isolated from a variety of envi-
ronments, including plants, fruits, vegetables, fermented foods, insects, animal faeces, soils,
mammalian gastrointestinal tract, reproductive systems and cavities [26], [27]. This shows that
LAB are capable of thriving in highly diverse ecological niches, consequently resulting in a great
variation between species. In these nutrient-rich niches with an abundance of available carbohy-
drates, LAB generally can outcompete other microorganisms by high growth and acidiﬁcation
rates [28]. To facilitate this high growth LAB underwent considerable evolutionary changes
characterized by extensive genome reduction and lost cellular functions in their biosynthetic
pathways [17].
Genome sizes vary greatly in LAB species, from 1.8 to 3.4 Mbp, with an estimated 1700-2800
protein encoding genes [29]. The genetic material of LAB is found mostly on chromosomes, but
it is not uncommon for LAB to carry plasmids. If the replication of plasmids is not connected
to bacterial cell division, the plasmids can be lost, and some cell functions are lost if they were
encoded in plasmid DNA [30]. With the large variance in the genome size and a long history of
taxonomic ambiguities surrounding LAB, phenotypic approaches to identifying LAB can often
3
==PAGE:10==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
prove to be problematic. To avoid misidentiﬁcation, genotyping tools are employed to correctly
identify LAB, like sequencing of the conserved 16S rRNA gene or Multi-Locus Sequence Typing
(MLST) and even whole genome sequencing [14]. These genotyping tools formed the basis of the
2020 reclassiﬁcation of the genus Lactobacillus as well. With the existing databases, faster and
more cost-eﬀective tools, such as MALDI-TOF (Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-
Time of Flight) mass spectrometry are also often used to identify LAB to a strain level [31].
2.1.1
Application of LAB
The application of LAB spans a variety of industries. LAB can be used to beneﬁt human health,
with several strains being used as probiotics [32]. For a LAB strain to be considered probiotic,
it has to be isolated from the human gut ﬂora, to ensure its safety for human consumption.
This also assures that the strain has a high adhesion ability to the intestinal cell walls, and by
these means has the opportunity to limit the concentration of potentially harmful organisms
by competitive exclusion and colonization resistance [33].
The major application of LAB however is in the food industry. Their importance in fermentation
processes cannot be overemphasized. Fermented and brined vegetables, sourdough, soya curd,
alcoholic beverages and fermented meats are just a few examples of the employment of LAB in
the industry [34]. Apart from the obvious beneﬁts of extending shelf life by lowering pH and
improving consumer acceptance by enhancing certain properties of foods, it can also produce
bacteriocins.
Bacteriocins are antibiotic peptides that are by-products of the fermentation
processes by most LAB strains and act as bio-preservative agents that inhibit the growth of
foodborne pathogens [35], [36]. Bacteriocins provide food manufacturers an opportunity to
create clean-label products with natural ingredients, an important new feature for customers
who are increasingly more conscious about their food choices, especially in Scandinavia [37].
The main benefactor of the widespread applicability of LAB, however, is the dairy industry.
Many dairy products such as keﬁr, cheeses, and yoghurts would not be possible if it were not
for LAB.
2.1.2
LAB as starter culture
Accordingly, thanks to their extensive use in dairy, the souring and curdling capabilities of
LAB in milk are well understood. For dairy products, LAB are used as starter cultures [36].
The term starter culture refers to a consortium of a large number of cells, often from multiple
strains that create a protocooperative environment in the food matrix, accelerating fermenta-
tion processes. In milk fermentation, an example of a frequently used starter culture would
be a mix of Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. Bulgaricus and Streptococcus thermophilus in yo-
ghurt production. Lb. Bulgaricus lacks enzymes to produce many amino acids, but it has an
extracellular caseinolytic protease while S. thermophilus lacks this protease but can synthe-
4
==PAGE:11==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
size most amino acids [38]. The combination of these organisms results in stable fermentation
with reduced acidiﬁcation times and better ﬂavour production, with fewer oﬀ-ﬂavour-associated
volatile compounds [39]. These are some of the most important considerations when choosing
suitable strains for starter cultures, along with salt and temperature tolerance, exopolysac-
charide and bacteriocin production [9]. Traditionally, starter cultures have had an undeﬁned
composition of microorganisms, selecting for the best natural starters by closely controlling the
growth environment. Nowadays, to eliminate the possibility of variance in the production line,
deﬁned strain starters are used. These starters have a smaller but well-deﬁned consortium of
organisms selected based on very speciﬁc traits [36].
2.1.3
Qualiﬁed presumption of safety
The most important factor in using any microorganism for food production is safety. In the
European Union, the responsible organisation for communicating emerging risks in the food
production chain and recommending food safety guidelines is the European Food Safety Au-
thority (EFSA) [40]. All microorganisms used in food production must be approved by EFSA
and are listed under a generic risk assessment approach called Qualiﬁed Presumption of Safety
(QPS) [41], [42]. To be approved, a comprehensive literature review must be conducted on the
organism, eliminating the risk of safety concerns not only in humans but animals and in the
environment too. QPS-approved microorganisms have been thoroughly investigated on their
origins, pathogenicity, toxin production, metabolic activities and side eﬀects after consumption.
Manufacturers can use the QPS scheme to quickly evaluate potential new strains for food pro-
duction as long as the strains belong to the QPS taxonomic units [41]. Many LAB strains are
included on the QPS list, because of their long history of apparent safe use in food production.
2.1.4
Leuconsostoc spp.
Leuconostoc are a genus of cocci-shaped bacteria within the family of Lactobacillaceae. Leu-
conostoc species are heterofermentative, intrinsically vancomycin-resistant and catalase-negative.
Species belonging to the genus can grow under extreme conditions and are native to plants.
Some species, most notably, Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides
have been isolated in milk as well, where their growth is poor with limited proteolytic activity
[43], [44]. Leuconostoc spp. are economically signiﬁcant LAB, used for the fermentation of
sauerkraut, kombucha, sourdough and meat products. Leuconostoc species are known to pos-
sess some negative aspects such as slime formation during fermentation, and even have been
identiﬁed in clinical isolates. Regardless, due to their long history of human exposure and
consumption, they are generally recognized as safe [42].
Less is known about the physiology and genetics of Leuconostoc than of Lactococcus species,
nonetheless, their signiﬁcance in dairy products is widely recognised [45]. Leuconostoc spp.
are responsible for the openness of cheeses through CO2 production and can alter the ﬂavour
5
==PAGE:12==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
composition of dairy products [44]. Metabolite production by Leuconostoc spp. includes ac-
etaldehyde, acetate and lactate, making them important species for non-starter cultures in some
dairy products.
A species of the Leuconostoc genus that might harbour commercial potential is Leuconostoc
pseudomesenteroides. Often found in fermented vegetables, this species has reportedly been
used to produce exopolysaccharides (EPS) [44], [46]. These biopolymers consist of monosac-
charides that are linked together through glycosidic bonds, forming high molecular weight
compounds. EPS are considered bio-thickeners and are used as emulsiﬁers, and gelling agents,
improving the viscoelastic properties and stability of foods.
Accordingly, they are of great
interest within the food industry, especially for PBDA producers, where these properties are
hard to optimize while keeping a clean label [47].
Yet, a deeper understanding of such Leuconostoc species is crucial in developing better starter
cultures for both dairy and plant-based dairy alternatives, as seen through the example of an L.
pseudomesenteroides strain isolated from a commercial dairy starter culture [48]. L. pseudome-
senteroides was used in conjunction with Lactococcus lactis subs. lactis biovar diacetylactis, to
reduce the oﬀ-ﬂavour associated with acetaldehyde produced by the former strain. However, L.
pseudomesenteroides was reported to carry plasmid-encoded diacetyl reductase. Diacetyl is a
volatile compound giving buttermilk and sour cream their characteristic ﬂavour. By degrading
diacetyl, L. pseudomesenteroides decreased the stability and ﬂavour of the ﬁnal product over
time [48].
Screening strain collections like DTU’s NFICC may reveal many promising strains with the
potential to be used as starter cultures in food production. Leuconostoc strains have been
isolated from plant materials and have been tested for proteolytic activity at DTU [19]. L.
pseudomesenteroides is a species with QPS status based on the species not harbouring any
acquired antimicrobial resistance genes to clinically relevant antimicrobials [40]. There is only
limited knowledge on the application of L. pseudomesenteroides strains. Investigating these
strains further is of great interest but to do so, a more holistic understanding of the proteolytic
systems in LAB is needed ﬁrst.
2.2
Metabolism of Lactic Acid Bacteria
The growth kinetics of microbes follow 5 distinct stages in batch conditions: lag phase, ac-
celeration phase, exponential growth phase, stationary phase and ﬁnally death phase.
Mi-
croorganisms utilise several pathways to synthesize cellular components and obtain energy for
growth. This growth usually comes to a halt due to many factors: substrate depletion, a change
in pH or temperature, build-up of toxic compounds can all play a role in growth arrest [49], [50].
6
==PAGE:13==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
LAB thrive in nutrient-rich environments, where plentiful available carbohydrates are essen-
tial [15]. Based on their catabolism and fermentation products, LAB can be divided into two
groups: homo and heterofermentative LAB [51]. Homofermentative LAB utilises the Embden-
Meyerhof-Parnas pathway to metabolise hexoses into pyruvate, which is then converted into
lactate. Lactic acid is the only end-product, and pentoses are not fermented. Heterofermen-
tative LAB on the other hand can use the pentose phosphate pathway to ferment pentoses
into lactic and acetic acid. When it comes to hexose utilization, a distinction can be made be-
tween obligate and facultative heterofermentative LAB. In facultative heterofermentative LAB,
hexose fermentation will mostly result in lactic acid production, however, in glucose-limiting
substrates, hexoses are also metabolised to produce acetic acid and ethanol. Obligate hetero-
fermentative LAB, and hexose metabolism in all cases will result in lactic and acetic acid, CO2
and ethanol production [26].
Carbohydrate utilisation is only part of the equation, as LAB also require nitrogen sources for
growth. Many LAB have developed complex proteolytic systems to better harness environ-
mental proteins [17]. This mechanism is crucial for the food industry, as many food-altering
features of LAB come from proteolysis.
2.2.1
Proteolytic system of LAB
The competitive nature of LAB resulted in many strains losing important biosynthetic path-
ways. In the dairy LAB strains such as L. lactis, auxotrophy to many amino acids, like Glu,
Met, His, Leu, Ile and Val and a dependence on a proteolytic system for milk proteins is ob-
served [18], [52]. Dairy strains like Lactococcus lactis can hydrolyse caseins, and through an
extensive transport system, they can utilise the resulting peptides to meet their amino acid
requirements [53].
An overview of the proteolytic system in LAB is shown in Figure 1 [18]. The proteolysis of en-
vironmental proteins like casein is initiated by a cell wall-bound proteinase called cell envelope
protease (CEP) [54]. After CEP cuts the peptide bonds of milk proteins, the resulting peptides
are transported through the cell membrane via several peptide uptake systems. These include
an oligopeptide permease (Opp) for oligopeptides between lengths of 4 and 35 amino acids, an
ion-linked transported for di- and tripeptides (DtpT) and a transporter called Dpp for peptides
with 2 to 9 amino acid residues [55]. Opp and Dpp is part of the adenosine triphosphate binding
cassette (ABC) transporter family, however, Dpp shows a preference for hydrophobic branched-
chain amino acids containing shorter peptides. DtpT is a proton motive force-driven transport
system, belonging to the peptide transport (PTR) family [56]. The transported oligopeptides
into the cytoplasm are further degraded by intracellular peptidases with overlapping speciﬁci-
ties. The intracellular peptidases can be categorized into endopeptidases (PepO, PepF, and
PepG), aminopeptidases (PepN, PepC and PepP) and di- and tripeptidases (PepD, PepV and
PepT) and proline speciﬁc peptidases (PepX, PepQ, PepR and PepI) [56], [18]. Concurrently
7
==PAGE:14==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 1: A simpliﬁed representation of the function and regulation of proteolytic system in lactococci in casein
breakdown, as illustrated by [18]. The CEP PrtP is shown to cleave casein molecules into smaller peptides, which
are then transported by Opp, Dpp and DtpT through the cell membrane. Intracellular peptidases (PepN, PepO,
PepX etc.) further break down short peptides. Ile, Leu and Val are shown to interact with the transcriptional
repressor CodY.
with aminopeptidases and PepX, the ﬁrst to act on oligopeptides are endopeptidases as they
can hydrolyse casein-derived peptides. Together, these peptidases can remove the N-terminal
residues of peptides. The resulting di- and tripeptides are further cleaved by di- and tripepti-
dases into amino acids. The free amino acids are then utilised by LAB for metabolic processes,
energy formation and protein synthesis [56].
The proteolytic system of LAB is highly regulated by the transcriptional regulator CodY. The
regulation is dependent on the availability of amino acid residues, speciﬁcally Ile, Leu and Val
[57]. CodY senses these residues and represses gene expression within the proteolytic system
of LAB by binding to the genes encoding the CEP, its maturation protein and the oligopeptide
transport system. Isoleucine, leucine and valine are found in milk only in limited quantities,
and by downregulating proteolytic enzymes the cell can save energy in environments with high
amounts of available amino acids [57].
2.2.2
Cell envelope protease in LAB
Cell envelope proteases are subtilisin-like serine proteases or subtilases in the S8A subfam-
ily [53]. In LAB where CEPs are present, they are covalently attached to the peptidoglycan
8
==PAGE:15==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
layer of the cell wall and are responsible for the diﬀerent proteolytic phenotypes. It has been
demonstrated that CEP activity directly correlates to LAB growth in both milk and protein-
supplemented growth media. The proteolytic activity of LAB strains steers acidiﬁcation rates
and ﬂavour composition in food matrixes and is of great signiﬁcance in the dairy industry [18],
[52].
CEP homologs have been characterised and studied in several LAB species. In L. lactis, this
protease is known as PrtP or lactocepin [18], [52]. The nomenclature of CEP homologs follows
a somewhat logical order (e.g. CEP homologs from Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus are called
PrtR, from Streptococcus thermophilus it is PrtS and Lactobacillus helveticus is PrtH, etc.),
but for simplicity, this report will use the nomenclature PrtP for all proteases homologous to
that of L. lactis Wg2, diﬀerentiating by an added suﬃx referring to the grouping and the strain
of origin used in the study.
The encoding genes for cell envelope proteases can be chromosomal or on plasmid. PrtP is
encoded by the gene prtP, and its maturation protein, PrtM is encoded by the gene prtM. PrtP
maturation is dependent on the peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase activity of PrtM [52], [18].
The proline residues inﬂuenced by PrtM activity are crucial for some proteases’ conformational
changes and the autocatalytic processes of proteases are dependent on it. The prolines aﬀected
by PrtM are suspected to be in the protease (PR) domain, however, the exact position where
PrtM inﬂuences prolines is yet to be identiﬁed [58].
The structure of PrtP was thoroughly examined in comparative sequence studies by Siezen et
al. [52], suggesting a multi-domain structure. Further studies on PrtP homologs reveal that
many LAB strains share these functional domains. The domain architecture of PrtP starting
from the N-terminus begins with a pre-pro (PP) domain, followed by the protease (PR) domain.
The PP domain consists of a signal sequence responsible for secretion and activation, and a pro
sequence that is removed by autocatalytic processing (about 40 and 150 residues long, respec-
tively). The protease domain (around 500 residues) is deﬁned as the region with homology to
the Bacillus protease subtilisin. Some PrtP homologs contain a proteas-associated (PA) domain
as well. This domain ( 150 residues) is usually inserted in the middle of the PR domain and
has low sequence identities among PrtP homologs [52]. Flanking the C terminus end of PR is
the A domain (⇠400 residues), whose function is unknown. The domain is suspected to play a
role in the speciﬁcity of the proteases, as even a few amino acid diﬀerences in the A domain can
inﬂuence protease preference for ↵s1-caseins and β-caseins [59]. Furthermore, the length of the
A domain may contribute to binding the proteins more eﬃciently and closer to the catalytic
cleft of the enzyme [60]. The A domain is followed by the B domain, a domain of varying
lengths (about 500 residues) which contributes to the stability of the protease. Removal of the
B domain results in decreased proteolytic activity [61]. It is assumed that the stability and
activity of PrtP associated with the B domain come from the domain’s interaction with cal-
9
==PAGE:16==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
cium ions [62]. Some PrtP homologs contain a spacer helix (H) spacer domain (⇠200 residues)
ﬂanking the C terminal end of the B domain. The H domain is responsible for positioning the
A and B domain outside the bacterial cell. Next is the cell wall spacer (W) domain (around 100
residues), which is assumed to act as an adhesin, binding the kappa casein located on the sur-
face of casein micelles [60]. Lastly, at the C terminus of PrtP is the anchor domain (AN). The
AN domain (⇠35 residues) features a conserved sorting signal with the LPxTG motif, followed
by a hydrophobic putative membrane-spanning alpha-helix and a short, negatively charged tail.
Figure 2: The domain architecture of selected PrtP homologs identiﬁed in LAB of various origin and subtilisin
as illustrated by [17]. The colour blue corresponds to the domains PP, grey PR (including PA), green A, purple
B, yellow H, light blue W, and orange to the AN domain.
A recent study by Christensen et al. [17] examining the domain architectures of PrtP homologs
from several plant, human and dairy-derived LAB strains suggested a further subdivision of the
A and B domains based on the ﬁbronectin type-III-like (Fn) structures. The domain architec-
tures are shown in Figure 2. The A domain typically contains three Fn structures, Fn1, Fn2 and
Fn3, while the B domain contains two to seven Fn domains. Furthermore, the study highlights
that the AN domain is not present in some PrtP homologs and is instead incorporated in the
W domain itself. Structural analysis shows that the W domain in a fully extended form can
span the cell membrane. Some PrtP homologs can also have a Surface layer protein A (SlpA)
domain instead of an AN domain. Lastly, it was also shown that domain architectures do not
always correlate with natural habitat or species of LAB strains, and high identity matches of
the PrtP are possible of LAB isolated from vastly diﬀerent environments [17].
PrtP homologs can be divided into two main groups depending on their speciﬁcity towards
casein [63].
Type PI proteases cleave mostly β-caseins and to some extent -caseins while
PIII-type proteases can hydrolyse not only ↵s1-caseins but β-caseins and -caseins as well.
10
==PAGE:17==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
2.2.3
Fermentation of plant-based dairy alternatives
Fermentation of plant-based perishable foods has a long history of employing LAB. In all bac-
terial food fermentations, LAB are in fact indisputably the most notable organisms used [64].
The focus of food fermentations has been predominantly preservation-oriented. However, with
growing trends pointing towards a more plant-centred diet, textural and nutritional qualities
are increasingly important. Hydrolysis of plant proteins is an excellent way to improve the de-
sirable and negate the unsatisfactory properties of some food products [15]. Hydrolysing plant
proteins may result in valuable bioactive peptides that could reduce the toxicity of some plant
proteins or cleave allergenic compounds [65]. The potential functional application of these pep-
tides is near limitless: they can act as emulsiﬁers, gelling, foaming agents or even antioxidants.
Fermentation and hydrolysis of plant proteins can help with solubility and digestibility as well
[8].
Special attention is devoted to soy products, as from all plant-based dairy alternatives, soy milk
is nutritionally the closest to bovine milk [66]. Soy and other plant-based milks are produced
through complex manufacturing processes. The processes at times are harsh, disrupting and
extracting the plant material, which is then ﬁltered and standardised before heat treated and
packaged [67]. Soybeans contain about 40% protein on a dry matter basis, and the resulting
soy milk usually contains about 3-4% w/v protein [68]
Traditionally, Bacillus strains have been used for the fermentation of soy products, like tofu or
miso [69]. Through proteolysis of soy proteins, Bacillus strains are able to improve the nutri-
tional quality of soy products, however, many of the desirable ﬂavour compounds associated
with dairy products are not produced as part of this process. Therefore, for PBDA production
other, similar to currently used dairy LAB strains could be investigated. For example, Strep-
tococcus thermophilus has been examined for its potential to ferment soy products, with both
a functional and a non-functional CEP (PrtS). The study found that the activity of PrtS is
directly linked to acidiﬁcation and growth rates in the strains [70].
2.2.4
Oﬀ-ﬂavours and anti-nutrients in PBDA
A major hurdle for PBDA’s consumer acceptance is oﬀ-ﬂavours. In plant-based food products,
there are several oﬀ-ﬂavour compounds such as n-hexanal and n-hexanol, alcohols, ketones,
furans phenols, terpenes and ﬂavonoids just to name a few. These all contribute to the “beany”
smell and ﬂavour of PBDAs [71]. These compounds are a result of enzymatic or non-enzymatic
reactions, lipid oxidation and even some proteolytic activities. Fortunately, LAB produce sev-
eral compounds as part of its metabolic pathways, like lactate, acetoin and diacetyl, which are
essential aroma compounds. Furthermore, through fermentation LAB show potential to remove
oﬀ-ﬂavour compounds like n-hexanal from legume and bean-based milks [72]. In dairy, often
several diﬀerent strains are carefully selected as starter cultures to achieve a delicate balance
11
==PAGE:18==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
in the peptide proﬁle during fermentation which contributes to the desired ﬂavours of dairy
products [73]. Since CEPs play a central role in proteolysis and the resulting peptide proﬁle,
examining them in plant matrices is important to develop better starter cultures for PBDAs,
with prospects of oﬀ-ﬂavour removal and improving desirable peptide proﬁles.
Another problem of PBDA is the presence of antinutrients in plants. For example, soybeans
contain tannins, phytates and trypsin inhibitors. Tannins may inactivate digestive enzymes,
reducing protein digestibility. Phytates inﬂuence the bioavailability of minerals by forming in-
soluble complexes with Ca2+, Mg2+, Fe2+ and Zn2+ [74], and are detrimental to the solubility
and functionality of proteins and carbohydrates. By inhibiting the activity of trypsin, trypsin
inhibitors lead to poor food utilization and digestion via pancreatic hypertrophy and metabolic
disturbance of amino acid utilisation [75], [76]. A Lactobacillus plantarum strain isolated from
a fermented cereal matrix has demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction of anti-nutrients found in
soy upon fermentation [77]. This further accentuates the importance of examining LAB from
plant origins for PBDA production.
12
==PAGE:19==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
3
Materials and Methods
This chapter details the materials used for the project as well as describes the methods upon
which the experiments were conducted. The section aims to provide all the necessary information
for the reader to successfully repeat the experiments.
3.1
Bacterial strains used for cloning and acidiﬁcation experiments
Initially, a total of 16 strains from the National Food Institute Culture Collection (NFICC) have
been screened and selected for this study with homology to the PrtP protease of L. lactis Wg2.
These included 13 Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides strains, one Leuconostoc mesenteroides,
one Leuconostoc lactis and a Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus strain. After further analysis of the
prtP sequence, cloning was performed on 9 strains with a total of 11 unique PrtP-like proteases.
A summary of the NFICC strains used for cloning is listed in Table 1 below.
Table 1: A list of the NFICC strains with plant origin used in this study. Leu. is short for Leuconostoc
PrtP-homology types have been identiﬁed based on phylogenetics. OPA-assay and pH-based screenings have
been conducted on selected strains previously at the institute by Sedó et al. (unpublished) and Genet et al.
[19] where noted. Isolation origin is as described by Christensen et al. [17].
NFICC ID.
Species
Origin
PrtP-homology
type
Cloned
Previous reported
screenings
Growth
condition
NFICC96
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Tap/tuber root
A, B, C
+
pH-based, OPA-assay
M17 at 30°C
NFICC99
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Fruit
B
+
M17 at 30°C
NFICC102
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Berry
B
+
M17 at 30°C
NFICC180
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Tap/tuber root
B
+
M17 at 30°C
NFICC202
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Seashore plant
C
+
pH-based
M17 at 30°C
NFICC227
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Seashore plant
B
+
pH-based, OPA-assay
M17 at 30°C
NFICC314
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Other plant material
B
+
M17 at 30°C
NFICC322
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Flower
B
+
pH-based, OPA-assay
M17 at 30°C
NFICC323
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Evergreen
B
pH-based, OPA-assay
M17 at 30°C
NFICC339
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Other plant material
B
+
pH-based, OPA-assay
M17 at 30°C
NFICC1993
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Other plant material
B, C
pH-based, OPA-assay
M17 at 30°C
NFICC2002
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Other plant material
A, B, C
pH-based
M17 at 30°C
NFICC2004
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Other plant material
A, B, C
pH-based, OPA-assay
M17 at 30°C
NFICC2041
Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus
Other plant material
D, E
pH-based
M17 at 30°C
NFICC80
Leu. lactis
Berry
F
pH-based
M17 at 30°C
NFICC115
Leu. mesenteroides
Berry
G
M17 at 30°C
Cell envelope proteases are attached to the cell wall by an anchoring domain which might inﬂu-
ence the activity of proteases. This facilitates the need to express the proteases in an isogenic
background, instead of simply purifying the proteases from the strains of origin. Previously,
from L. lactis SK11 and Wg2 the PrtP and PrtM coding genes, including their respective pro-
moter regions, were cloned into L. lactis MG1363 (MG1363) at the institute using the cloning
vector pAK80. The cloning vector pAK80 contains an erythromycin encoding gene as a selec-
tion marker, the E. coli replicon p15A, and the L. lactis replicon pCT1138, which originates
from the citrate plasmid of L. lactis subsp. lactis biovar diacetylactis. This replicon is very
stable in L. lactis, with a low copy number of 5-10 copies per cell [78], [79].
13
==PAGE:20==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
MG1363 has been used in this and previous studies for the expression of CEPs.
MG1363
is plasmid-free and lacks extracellular proteases, furthermore, the peptide transport system
in MG1363 is chromosomally encoded (which includes a DtpT, two sets of Opp and a non-
functional Dpp uptake system), meaning that MG1363 can fully utilise the peptides produced
by the cloned proteases, making it an attractive model organism to study CEPs on [54], [80].
The identiﬁcation number and key information about the strains are detailed in Table 2.
Table 2: MS number and important characteristics of of L. lactis MG1363 strains used in the study
MS strain ID
Description
Growth
condition
Resistances
MS22355
Lactococcus lactis MG1363, plasmid free
M17 at 30°C
Erythromycin 5 µg/mL
MS22418
MG1363 containing the plasmid pAK80
M17 at 30°C
Erythromycin 5 µg/mL
MS22421
MG1363 containing pIL18, a pAK80
plasmid with prtP and prtM from SK11
M17 at 30°C
Erythromycin 5 µg/mL
MS22425
MG1363 containing pIL22, a pAK80
plasmid with prtP and prtM from Wg2
M17 at 30°C
Erythromycin 5 µg/mL
MS22426
MG1363 containing pIL23, a pAK80
plasmid with prtP (without H, W and AN domains)
and prtM from Wg2.
M17 at 30°C
Erythromycin 5 µg/mL
All strains mentioned above were received in a lysogeny broth (LB) stock with 15% glycerol
(SSI Diagnostica, cat. 51204) and streaked on M17 agar (SSI Diagnostica, cat. 50131) plates
with 0.5% (w/v) glucose (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. G8270) and 5 µg/mL erythromycin (Merck, cat.
E5389) if the strain carried the resistance. After two days of incubation at 30°C, the strains
were re-streaked and incubated again for purity. Then, a single colony from each strain was
selected with an inoculation loop, saved in LB stock with 15% glycerol and frozen at -80°C.
All subsequent experiments were conducted with revived strains from these newly made stocks.
Henceforth, the bacterial strains will be referred to by their assigned NFICC or MS ID.
3.2
Cloning
3.2.1
Primer design
Primers were designed explicitly for amplifying the PrtP encoding region with a 15-20 base pair
homology to the vector fragment on both ends, while the vector fragment lacked overhangs to-
wards the inserts. This design was implemented so that a single set of primers was suﬃcient to
amplify the vector fragment to be used for the cloning of all unique prtP genes. Figure 3 shows
the resulting plasmid using such primers. Primers were designed based on melting tempera-
tures, with special attention to the melting temperature of the overlapping region where the
overhangs of the inserts and the vector fragment bind during Gibson Assembly. For successful
assembly, this should ideally be above 50°C. General primer design considerations were also fol-
lowed such as G/C anchor at the 3’ end and suﬃcient GC content (>40%). Primer pairs were
14
==PAGE:21==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
also subject to a Multiple Primer Analyzer online software (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA),
to avoid excessive primer-dimer formation and secondary structures. For veriﬁcation purposes
of the cloned plasmids, sequencing primers were designed to meet the criteria set by Euroﬁns
(Euroﬁns Genomics ES, Germany): 16-25 bp primer length, Tm of 50-62°C, GC content of
35-60%, GC anchor at 3’ end and no long runs of identical bases.
Figure 3: An example overview of the constructed plasmid for the insertion of the PrtP-B type protease from
NFICC96 into a pIL22 (a pAK80-based plasmid with prtP and prtM from Wg2), swapping the PrtP encoding
gene region originating from Wg2. Erm is the erythromycin encoding gene, p15A is the E. coli replicon, pCT1138
is the L. lactis replicon. With purple, the primers used for ampliﬁcation of the insert and vector fragment are
visualised.
Primers were produced by TAG Copenhagen A/S (Copenhagen, Denmark). Melting temper-
atures (Tm) were calculated in SnapGene software (Version 7.1, GSL Biotech LLC, USA),
however, for practical use the Tm calculated by TAG Copenhagen were used.
The list of
primers used in the project are detailed below in Table 3
15
==PAGE:22==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Table 3: Primers designed and used in the study for insert/vector fragment ampliﬁcation for Gibson Assembly,
and veriﬁcation of cloned plasmids by Sanger sequencing. Shown melting temperatures (Tm) are as described
by TAG Copenhagen A/S.
Primer name
Purpose
Sequence (5’-3’)
Tm (°C)
Template
Strain
(NFICC)
PrtP-A_ins_2_fw
Ampliﬁcation
of insert
GGAAAGTGGAGGATATTGGATGCAAAGGGAAAAGAAAGGG
66,5
prtP-A
96
PrtP-A_ins_2_rv
Ampliﬁcation
of insert
CAACGCATGGACAGGCTATTCTTCATG
59,7
prtP-A
96
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
Ampliﬁcation
of insert
GGAAAGTGGAGGATATTGGATGGGAGTTGTAAGAAAGAAAACGACTTC
68
prtP-B
96, 99, 102,
180, 227, 314,
322, 339
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
Ampliﬁcation
of insert
CAACGCATGGACAGGTTAATCATGTTTACGTTTAATGGTCACTATTGTC
67,1
prtP-B
96, 99, 102,
180, 227, 314,
322, 339
PrtP-C_ins_1_fw
Ampliﬁcation
of insert
GGAAAGTGGAGGATATTGGATGAGAAAACGACGAACTTATCTAATGTTC
67,1
prtP-C
96
PrtP-C_ins_2_fw
Ampliﬁcation
of insert
GGAAAGTGGAGGATATTGGATGAGAAAACGACAAGCTTATCTAATGTTC
67,1
prtP-C
202
PrtP-C_ins_1_rv
Ampliﬁcation
of insert
CAACGCATGGACAGGTTACTTACCAACTTGATGAACCACAACTTC
68,2
prtP-C
96, 202
pIL22_PrtP_fw
Ampliﬁcation
of vector
CCTGTCCATGCGTTGCG
51,9
pIL22
all strains
pIL22_PrtP_rv
Ampliﬁcation
of vector
CCAATATCCTCCACTTTCCAAAAGTTTC
57
pIL22
all strains
PrtP-S2-FW
Sanger
sequencing
GATTTGGTTATGAAACTTTTGG
47,4
prtP-Wg2
promoter
region
all clones
PrtP-V4-Fw
Sanger
sequencing
GCAGCAGTAAAGCAGTTGC
51,1
prtM-Wg2
all clones
3.2.2
DNA extraction
Total microbial DNA extraction form NFICC strains was conducted using the DNeasy Ultr-
aClean Microbial DNA Isolation Kit (Qiagen, cat. 12224-50), following the manufacturer’s
instructions (Quick start protocol, February 2017 issue), with the following exceptions: instead
of O/N cultures in liquid media, the bacteria were grown on M17 agar plates with 0.5% (w/v)
glucose and incubated at 30°C for two days. Then, 3-4 single colonies were selected with an
inoculation loop and directly resuspended in 300 µL PowerBead solution. This was done so to
avoid potential contamination of the growth medium. All centrifugation steps were conducted
at 13000 RPM (Centrifuge 5424R, Eppendorf) at RT. DNA was eluted in, 30 µL of elution
buﬀer (EB) and stored at -25°C until further use as EB does not contain EDTA, only 10mM
Tris-Cl.
Plasmid extraction from MS22425 was performed using the Plasmid Mini AX (A&A Biotech-
nology, cat. 010-50), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An additional lysis step was
performed as described below. The strains containing the plasmids were grown in 10 mL M17
broth with 0.5% (w/v) glucose and 5 µg/mL erythromycin. Cells were harvested by centrifu-
gation (Centrifuge 5810R, Eppendorf) at 4000 RPM at 4°C for 10 minutes. The supernatants
were resuspended in 600 µL buﬀer L1 and transferred to a 2 mL Rnase-free Eppendorf tube.
To each sample, 20 µL lysozyme (A&A Biotechnology, cat. 1005-10) and 10 µL mutanolysin
(A&A Biotechnology, cat. 1017-5) were added and incubated at 50°C for 30 minutes after
mixing. Protocol instructions were subsequently followed. Lastly, dried DNA pellets were dis-
16
==PAGE:23==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
solved in 50 µL nuclease-free water (Qiagen, cat. 1039498) and stored at -25°C instead of the
recommended TA buﬀer which contains EDTA and Tris-Cl. This was done so to avoid salts in
subsequent processes.
DNA concentrations were measured via Qubit dsDNA Broad Range assay with the correspond-
ing buﬀer and standards (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat. Q32853) on a Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer
using 1 µL of sample. Based on measurements, extracted DNA and plasmids were diluted to a
5 ng/µL concentration with nuclease-free water if used for polymerase chain reaction.
3.2.3
DNA ampliﬁcation
Ampliﬁcation of the vector and insert fragments was performed using PCR. For each sample,
1 µL of the template DNA with 5 ng/µL concentration was mixed with 19 µL of master mix
resulting in a 20 µL reaction volume. The master mix had the following composition: 10.4 µL
nuclease-free water, 4 µL HF buﬀer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat. F-518), 2 µL of each forward
and reverse primers (10 pmol/µL concentration), 0.4 µL dNTPs (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat.
R0191, 10 mM solution) and 0.2 µL Phusion polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, F-530L).
The thermocycler (Veriti 96 Well Thermal Cycler, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) PCR program
started with an initiation step at 98°C for 2min. Then a 3-step cycle of denaturation at 98°C
for 30s, annealing at 50°C for 30s, and extension at 72°C for 5min 30s was repeated 30 times.
A ﬁnal extension step was performed at 72°C for 8min before the samples were cooled down
to 4°C and kept there indeﬁnitely. The annealing temperature was determined from the lowest
melting temperature of the used primer pairs, while extension time within the 30 PCR cycles
was inﬂuenced by the length of the longest ampliﬁed fragment, with an approximate 50s/kb
extension time.
Ampliﬁed fragments were subjected to gel electrophoresis. A gel was cast using 200 mL TEA
buﬀer (BioRad, cat. 1610743) with 0.7% (w/v) agarose (Lonza, cat. 50074) and 1/10000 parts
SYBR Safe (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat. S33102). For PCR product extraction the full 20 µL
reaction volume was loaded in the wells with 1/5th part loading dye. The loading dye was an
in-house mix of 0.25% bromophenol blue (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. B8026) and 40% (w/v) sucrose
(Sigma-Aldrich, cat. S0389) solution. As the expected bands ranged from 5.4kb to 6.4kb, the
ladder used was λ DNA/HindIII Marker (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat. SM1010). The gels
were run at 50V for 2.5h followed by 45min at 100V. The bands were then visualized under UV
light (Safe Imager 2.0, Invitrogen), and subsequently cut out with FastGene Agarose Gel Band
Cutter (Nippon Genetics, cat. FG-830) and transferred to 1.5 mL Rnase-free Eppendorf tubes.
For gel puriﬁcation, the gel volumes were measured (100 g ⇠100 mL gel) and puriﬁed using the
QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, cat. 28704), following the manufacturer’s instructions.
To maximize DNA concentration, the maximum volume of gel (400 mL) was used for extraction
suited for the kit, and the recommended additional incubation times were applied throughout
17
==PAGE:24==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
the protocol, too. To elute the puriﬁed DNA, 30 µL of EB was used. Clean-up of PCR products
was also attempted without running them on agarose gel, using the kit QIAquick PCR Puriﬁ-
cation Kit (Qiagen, cat. 28104). After clean-up, DNA concentrations were measured again in
the same way as described in Section 3.2.2.
3.2.4
Gibson Assembly
Gibson assembly (GA) of inserts – the PCR ampliﬁed prtP genes – and vector fragment –
PCR linearized and ampliﬁed pAK80 vector with prtM and promoter region from Wg2 – was
ﬁrst attempted with the Gibson Assembly Master Mix from New England Biolabs (NEB, cat.
E2611L). For optimal cloning eﬃciency in the case of 2 fragments, this reaction required 50-100
ng vector fragments (around 0.02 - 0.5 pmol) with 2-3 molar excess of inserts. If the concentra-
tion of vector and inserts were high, the reaction was complemented with nuclease-free water
until a volume of 10 µL was reached. Then 10 µL of the GA master mix was added for a total
reaction volume of 20 µL. Gibson assembly with this mix was conducted at 45°C for 15min,
then samples were stored at -20°C until further use or put on ice and used for transformation
immediately.
With limited success achieved by using the NEB GA mix, Gibson assembly was also attempted
using the Invitrogen GeneArt Gibson Assembly HiFi Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, cat.
A46627). This mix requires higher amounts of DNA of the vector fragment (0.08 pmol) and
an equimolar ratio of vector: insert. With limited DNA available at lower concentrations, only
0.026 pmol of the vector and the same molarity of inserts were used. Similarly, when needed,
the reaction volume was completed to 10 µL by the addition of nuclease-free water. If the DNA
concentration of the inserts were too low and the reaction volume would have exceeded 10 µL,
simply a lower volume of inserts was used. The lowest amount of insert DNA used was 0.02
pmol for a reaction. Subsequently, 10 µL of the Gibson assembly mix was added on ice, for a
total reaction volume of 20 µL. Gibson assembly with the Invitrogen kit was conducted at 50°C
for 60 minutes. After incubation, the reaction was stored at -20°C until further use or stored
on ice until transformation.
To evaluate whether Gibson assembly was successful after incubation 5 µL of the reaction mix
was mixed with 1 µL loading dye and run on 0.7% agarose gel with the same conditions as
described in Section 3.2.3. To calculate the molarities of the vector and insert fragments, the
NEBioCalculator online tool was used [81].
3.2.5
Transformation
Transformation of the constructed plasmids was conducted into L. lactis MG1363 directly. For
this purpose, L. lactis electrocompetent cells were made. The plasmid-free MG1363 strains
18
==PAGE:25==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
were streaked on M17 agar plates with 0.5% glucose and incubated for 48h at 30°C. Then, sin-
gle colonies were inoculated in 10 mL M17 medium with 1% glucose at 30°C overnight. When
O/N cultures reached OD600=2 (Novasec Pro, Biochrom), 0.75 mL of the culture was inocu-
lated and incubated at 30°C in 50 mL M17 medium (OD600=0.03) supplemented with 0.25 M
sucrose, 1.5% glycine (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. 50046), 1% glucose. After 6-7 hours, when OD600
reached 0.5, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 10min at 4°C. The pellets
were washed with a 30 mL solution of 0.5 M sucrose and 10% glycerol (Merck, cat. 104094)
in Milli-Q water (Milli-Q EQ 7008/16, Merck). The cells were centrifuged for a second time,
and the pellets were resuspended in 0.5 mL of the same solution. The cells were then stored at
–80°C in 50 µL aliquots. The M17 and sucrose/glycerol solutions were sterile-ﬁltered with 0.22
µm pore size (Merck, cat. SLGV004SL) before incubation and washing. The sucrose/glycerol
solution was stored on ice until used to increase cell competency.
For transformation, the electrocompetent L. lactis cells were thawed on ice. 50 µL of cells were
mixed with 5 µL of Gibson reaction mix when NEB GA mix was used, and 25 µL of cells with
2.5 µL of Gibson reaction mix when the GA mix from Invitrogen was used. This resulted in
around 5-10 ng plasmid per transformation reaction. Negative controls were included with 5
µL nuclease-free water added to the cells. The positive control was a mix of 25 µL competent
cells mixed with 5 ng of puriﬁed plasmid DNA, pIL22 from MS2245. The transformation reac-
tions were set up in precooled electroporation cuvettes (BioRad, cat. 1652086). The cuvettes
were dried prior to electroporation. Furthermore, to make sure that the cells and the GA mix
reached the bottom of the cuvette, the cuvettes were gently tapped a few times. This also
eliminated any air bubbles that could compromise electroporation. The electroporation was
carried out at 25 uF capacitance and a resistance of 200 Ohm (MicroPulser, BioRad, USA).
For the ﬁrst round of transformation, a single pulse with a voltage of 2.0 kV was applied to
the cuvettes. Later, this was modiﬁed to two successive pulses at lower voltages, at 1.6 kV and
1.8 kV. In all cases, these electroporation parameters resulted in the electric ﬁeld time constant
being above 4.5 ms. After electroporation, 0.5 - 1 mL of ice-cold M17 recovery medium with 0.2
M sucrose, 0.5% glucose, 0.02 M MgCl2 (Sigma-Aldrich, M8266) and 0.002 M CaCl2 (Merck,
102083) was added to the cells, depending on the electroporation volume. The M17 recovery
medium was sterile ﬁltered with 0.22 µm pore size before use. After 2h of incubation at 30°C
with agitation at 300 rpm, 250 µL of the transformants were spread per plate on selective M17
agar plates with 0.5% glucose and 5 µg/mL erythromycin until all of the recovery media was
plated. The transformants were incubated for 48-72h at 30°C. After a CFU count to calculate
transformation eﬃciency, 8 colonies were re-streaked from every transformation reaction and
incubated once again to obtain pure colonies. From the re-streaked plates, 4 colonies were
picked and saved in lysogeny broth with 15% glycerol and stored at -80°C.
19
==PAGE:26==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
3.2.6
Veriﬁcation by Sanger sequencing
To verify that the transformants have the correct insert, for each unique transformation, 2 out
of the 4 colonies saved in LB stock were revived and incubated for 48h on selective M17 plates
with 0.5% glucose and 5 µg/mL erythromycin. Then plasmids were extracted, and concentra-
tions were measured as described in Section 3.2.2. Two suitable primers were chosen upstream
of the start codon of the PrtP fragments for Sanger sequencing as described in Section 3.2.1.
Sanger sequencing was carried out via the LightRun Tube GATC Biotech service by Euroﬁns
Scientiﬁc SE (Cologne, Germany). For this purpose, the sequencing primers were diluted to a
molar concentration of 5 pmol with nuclease-free water. 5 µL of the primers were then mixed
with 5 µL of the extracted plasmids with concentrations ranging from 50-80 ng/µL in 1.5 mL
Eppendorf tubes and shipped for sequencing.
3.3
Acidiﬁcation experiment
All 11 cloned strains and 4 control strains were selected for acidiﬁcation experiments. The four
control strains all included a pAK80 vector with erythromycin resistance, and 3 of them had
parts of the PrtM/PrtP coding regions from Wg2 and SK11 as described in Section 3.1. Acidi-
ﬁcation measurements were conducted in bovine skim milk and soy milk using the pH indicator
dyes bromocresol purple (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. 114375), and bromocresol green (Sigma-Aldrich,
cat. 114359) [82]. Flat-bottomed 96-well plates with a nominal well volume of 382 µL were used.
To each well, 98 µL milk mixture was dispensed, with 2 µL inoculum. On every plate, controls
were assigned to 8 wells each, the 11 cloned strains were tested in quadruplicates, and the
remaining 20 wells were uninoculated controls. The milk mixtures consisted of bovine milk or
soy milk, with 1% (w/v) added glucose, 5 µg/mL erythromycin, and 5% (v/v) pH indicator dye.
The organic bovine skim milk was produced by Arla Foods (Denmark) tapped in Slagelse Dairy
Center (M210) on the 6th of Match 2024, at 00:26, exactly 72 hours prior to the acidiﬁcation
experiment set-up date. The nominal nutritional value of skim milk on a w/w basis is as follows:
0.1% fat, 4.7% carbohydrates (out of which all are sugars), 3.5% protein, 0.11% salt. The soy
milk used was an unsweetened organic drink with 10% soy content called Soya Drik produced
by Naturli’ Foods A/S (Denmark) in Jutland. The expiration date of the soy milk was the 9th
of November 2024, with a time stamp of 16:24:50 and the production ID A313. It is unclear
when the soy milk was produced. The declared nutritional composition of soy milk is as follows
(w/w): 2.1% fats, 0.6% carbohydrates (out of which all are sugars), 0.6% ﬁbres, 3.7% protein,
0.09% salt. Both kinds of milk were stored at 4°C until the experimental setup date.
Inoculum was prepared by taking a single colony from freshly revived strains incubated on M17
agar plates with 0.5% glucose and 5 µg/µL erythromycin and inoculating them in 5 mL of the
same medium in liquid broth form, incubating at 30 °C overnight. The cultures were spun
20
==PAGE:27==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
down and washed with phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) twice. The resulting cell suspension
was diluted until an OD600 of 0.5 was reached. Centrifugation steps were carried out at 14000
RPM for 3 minutes at 4°C. OD600 was measured as described in Section 3.2.5.
The inoculated plates were then incubated at 30°C for 36h, and continuously measured for
colour change every 2 minutes by the software pH-MultiScan (version 6.0.2, HNH Consult
ApS, Denmark) in a scanner (Perfection V19 - B11B231201, Epson).
To convert the hue values acquired by the pH-MultiScan software into pH values, a calibration
curve was determined by Fugaban et al. for both soy and bovine milk (unpublished). A dilution
series of milk (both bovine and soy) containing lactic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. 69785) and the
pH indicator dyes bromocresol purple and bromocresol green was measured by a pH-probe
(SevenCompact pH meter S220, Mettler Toledo). The dilution series was then aliquoted to
96-well plates and measured for hue values by scanning. On the resulting pH and hue value
curve, a 5th-degree polynomial function was ﬁtted as described below on Formula 1.
It is
important to note that the lower and upper limits of the pH indicator dye mix used are 3.8 and
6.8, respectively, therefore values acquired outside this range are not accurate.
pH = 38.5 −1.032x1 + 0.011x2 −5.32 · 10−5x3 + 1.23 · 10−7x4 −1.076 · 10−10x5
(1)
3.4
DNA and Data analysis
Whole genome sequenced unassembled contigs of NFICC strains were analysed for protease
homology search in Qiagen CLC Main Workbench (Version 23.0.5, Qiagen Aarhus A/S, Den-
mark). The built-in BLAST function was run against a local database to identify proteases.
The basis of this database was the sequence of the known prtM and prtP region of L. lactis Wg2.
The BLAST results were collected in a table of identity. A phylogenetic tree was created based
on the multiple sequence alignment of the protein sequences and the discovered proteases were
grouped accordingly. The construction of the phylogenetic tree was based on the neighbour-
joining method, distances were calculated with Jukes-Cantor and the bootstrapping value was
set to 100 replicates. Primer design for Sanger sequencing of the cloned proteases, sequencing
veriﬁcation, alignments and translation of PrtM/PrtP encoding regions were conducted in the
CLC Main Workbench as well. For primer and plasmid design for Gibson Assembly, SnapGene
software (Version 7.1, GSL Biotech LLC, USA) was used. The amino acid sequences were run
against the InterPro database (version 98.0, EMBL-EBI, UK) [83] to identify known domains.
Note, that the prtM /prtP sequence of Wg2 was sequenced and published as early as 1988
(GenBank: M24767.1), however, a more recent submission to the NCBI in 2016, genome shot-
gun sequencing (NCBI Reference Sequence: NZ_LXWJ01000013.1) revealed some diﬀerences
in the prtM region of the protease of Wg2 compared to the ﬁrst published protease sequence.
21
==PAGE:28==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
These diﬀerences were also conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing of the region (unpublished work by
Ida Laforce, DTU). Though leaving the region of interest, prtP, unaﬀected, the new sequence
was used for plasmid and primer design, nevertheless.
Data handling and plotting of extracted data from acidiﬁcation curves were conducted in Mi-
crosoft Excel (Version 16.83), Python (Version 3.7) and pH-MultiScan software.
22
==PAGE:29==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
4
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, all data and results from the conducted experiments will be presented in detail,
along with the relevant ﬁgures necessary to interpret the data. The results will be continuously
analysed and discussed throughout the chapter.
4.1
Strain selection
Screening of the NFICC database showed homology to the PrtP amino acid sequence of L.
lactis Wg2 in 16 strains, with identities ranging from 18 to 96%. Interestingly, many of these
strains carried several, even up to three prtP-homologous genes. The alignment of the hit se-
quences was summarized in a phylogenetic tree, revealing the evolutionary distances between
the prtP-homologs as seen in Figure 4. Based on the phylogenetic tree, the identiﬁed proteases
could be grouped into three main groups, which were denoted as PrtP-A, PrtP-B, and PrtP-C.
Four more PrtP-homologs were identiﬁed and denoted as PrtP-D and PrtP-E in NFICC2041,
PrtP-F from NFICC80, and PrtP-G from NFICC115.
PrtP-A type proteases contain 1903 amino acids and are closest to that of L. lacits Wg2
which contain 1902 aa (>96% identity).
The PrtP-A type proteases found in NFICC2002
and NFICC2004 are identical, and PrtP-A from NFICC96 is very similar to these two. PrtP-B
type proteases seem to be the most prevalent group of proteases for L. pseudomesenteroides,
with all of the NFICC strains of this species carrying the gene with the exception of NFICC202.
PrtP-B type proteases typically contain 1802 amino acids, except PrtP-B of NFICC227, which
contains 1800 aa. PrtP-C type proteases contain 1803 amino acids, except for NFICC1993,
with 1805 aa. Interestingly, all of the L. pseudomesenteroides strains that did not contain a
full-length PrtP-C-like protease had shown hits for a much shorter (504 to 537 aa) PrtP-C
homologous sequence, with a second short (around 660 aa) complimentary, sometimes overlap-
ping sequence. These were denoted as C1 and C2 type, respectively, but were not included in
the phylogenetic tree in Figure 4. Lastly, the four more unique proteases are of varying length,
PrtP-D with 1973 aa, PrtP-E with 1494 aa, PrtP-F with 1466 and PrtP-G with 1454 aa.
The selection for cloned proteases was narrowed down from the abovementioned PrtP-homologs
to only include PrtP-A from NFICC96, PrtP-B from all L. pseudomesenteroides except for
NFICC1993, 2002 and 2004, and PrtP-C from NFICC96 and 202. NFICC1993, 2002 and 2004
are the intellectual property of Chr. Hansen A/S, therefore could not be included in the project.
NFICC2041 has shown poor acidiﬁcation rates in chemically deﬁned medium with diﬀerent N-
sources (Sedó Molina et al., to be published), and as PrtP-F, PrtP-G and PrtP-E all lack the
PA domain which might inﬂuence substrate speciﬁcity [18], the strains carrying these proteases
were excluded as well. Lastly, C1 and C2 type proteases were not investigated further either,
as C1 lacked the PA domain, furthermore, both C1 and C2 were presumed to be inactive. This
conﬁned selection however allowed the project to focus exclusively on L. pseudomesenteroides
23
==PAGE:30==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 4: Phylogenetic tree from the multi-sequence alignment of the amino acid sequence of PrtP homologous
proteases. Distances were calculated with Jukes-Cantor, and bootstrapping was performed with 100 replicates.
Metadata layer #1 shows the species of origin harbouring the protease, while Metadata layer #2 shows if cloning
was performed on the protease or not.
and characterise the nature and acidiﬁcation proﬁle of their proteases. Therefore, cloning was
only attempted for the PrtP homologs shown by green on the 2nd metadata layer of Figure 4.
At ﬁrst when screening for PrtP-homologs, alignments were done with a universal approach of
examining diﬀerences/similarities of all PrtP-A, PrtP-B and PrtP-C-like proteases compared
to PrtP from L. lactis Wg2 at once. Primers for GA assembly were chosen to include all po-
24
==PAGE:31==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
tential PrtP-like proteases in the project, and all subsequent cloning attempts and experiments
followed suit with this mindset. It was revealed after all GA and cloning have been conducted
that in fact some of the PrtP-regions share 100% identity among certain strains. Aligning all
PrtP sequences at once makes pointing out the exact diﬀerences less obvious, and the match-
ing identities of some PrtP-homologs eluded the researcher’s attention in the initial screening.
Therefore, the 11 proteases selected for cloning correspond only to 6 unique ones, with the
cloned PrtP-B protease of NFICC96, 314, 322 and 339 being identical, as well as the PrtP-B
protease of NFICC99, 102 and 180. All the diﬀerences and % identity of the examined PrtP-
homologs’ amino acid sequences are highlighted in the Appendix in Figure 18. The grouping
of PrtP-homologs into types A, B, and C becomes even more apparent, and so is the identity
match of the previously mentioned PrtP-B type proteases in some cases. A more thorough
analysis of the cloned proteases, their alignment and domain architecture are discussed in Sec-
tion 4.2.
4.1.1
Morphology of NFICC96
When plating NFICC96 from certain stocks, several cell morphologies could be observed on
the same plate. The plates mostly contained cells similar to the morphology of other L. pseu-
domesenteroides strains, but smaller colonies were also discovered. Further isolation of the
presumably mixed stock was performed by Joanna Ivy Fugaban suggesting that the isolate was
contaminated with a Lactococcus lactis strain (unpublished results). However, further isolation
of this L. lactis strain was unsuccessful. It is assumed that the Lactococcus is dependent for
growth on the L. pseudomesenteroides, furthermore, it might be presumed that the A-type
prtP homolog in sequencing data of NFICC96 is from this contaminant. This is supported by
the vast evolutionary distance of PrtP-A from PrtP-B (which is the dominant PrtP homolog in
L. pseudomesenteroides) and the similarity of this PrtP-A to PrtP of L. lactis Wg2. Further
analysis of the NFICC96 is needed to conﬁrm these assumptions, perhaps by MALDI-TOF
mass spectrometry and re-sequencing the new strains.
4.2
Sequence analysis and domain architecture of PrtP-homologs
Examining the diﬀerences between the amino acid sequences and the domain architectures of
the diﬀerent PrtP-homologs can help us understand the speciﬁcity of these proteases in diﬀer-
ent media. With the newfound knowledge on the identities of the PrtP-homologs described in
Section 4.1, the examined PrtP-homologs can be narrowed down to six groups which will be re-
ferred to as PrtP-A-NFICC96 (PrtP-A of NFICC96), PrtP-B-NFICC96 (PrtP-B of NFICC96,
314, 322, 339), PrtP-B-NFICC99 (PrtP-B of NFICC99, 102, 180), PrtP-B-NFICC227 (PrtP-B
of NFICC227), PrtP-C-NFICC96 (PrtP-C of NFICC96) and PrtP-C-NFICC202 (PrtP-C of
NFICC202). In the following section, when the alignment and domain architecture of the dif-
25
==PAGE:32==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
ferent PrtP-homologs are presented, only these six groups will be discussed, as they cover all
11 cloned proteases.
Taking the domain architecture laid out by Siezen et al. [52], and Christensen et al. [17], the
multiple sequence alignments show vastly diﬀerent domain structures between the A, B and
C-type proteases. A-type proteases include all domains characteristic of PrtP of Wg2, including
the PP, PR, PA, A, B, H, W and anchor domains. B-type proteases lack the H domain, while
C-type proteases lack not only H but W and an AN domain as well. A pairwise comparison of
the diﬀerent domains is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Pairwise comparison of the domains found in PrtP-homologs, based on their amino acid sequence.
The upper comparison gradient displays the number of alignment positions where the sequences diﬀer. The
lower comparison gradient shows the % identity, which is the % of overlapping alignment positions where the
sequences agree. A: PP-domain (187-196 aa), B: PR-domain (506-543 aa), C: A-domain (413-446 aa), D: B-
domain (460-618 aa), E: H-domain (221 aa), F: W-domain (69-129 aa), G: AN-domain (34-36 aa). The PA
domain is included in the PR domain. Blue shades denote minimum, and red shades maximum values. The
domains are as deﬁned in [17].
26
==PAGE:33==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
The aa acid sequence within a domain is well conserved in the same type of protease, with high
(>98%) identity and often just a few aa diﬀerences. On the other hand, the diﬀerence between
A, B, and C types is stark across all domains. From all domains, the PR domain shows the
greatest conservation between strains. It aligns with the ﬁndings of the InterPro search, which
identiﬁed this region as the subtilase protease domain (PS51892) in all sequences. The only
other identiﬁed domain present in all PrtP is the ﬁrst ﬁbronectin type-III domain in the A
domain (PF06280). For the pairwise comparison, the PA domain was included as part of the
PR domain. The PA domain tends to be highly varied between species, and relatively the low
identity % may be attributed to the inclusion of this domain [52]. The alignment shows greater
conservation for the rest of the PR domain.
Due to the diverse nature of these domains in length, charge and hydrophilicity, it is diﬃcult to
highlight how these diﬀerences might contribute to the folding and transport of the proteases.
Instead, the domains are investigated by looking at one type at a time. The diﬀerences in the
amino acid sequence are shown in Figure 6.
For PrtP-A type proteases the PrtP of SK11 was also included, as it was tested for acidiﬁca-
tion along with Wg2 and the clones too. The PP domain is identical for Wg2 and SK11, but
PrtP-A-NFICC96 diﬀers at 5 positions, changing the charge and hydrophilicity at 4 positions.
All of the changes are in the propeptide part of the PP domain, except for the residue at
position 4, a Glutamic acid (negatively charged) instead of Lysine (basic, positively charged).
The N-terminal of the PP domain begins with a 31-39 long signal sequence for Sec-dependent
translocation over the cell envelope. Subsequently, this change in charge at this position might
aﬀect the translocation of the protease, as most subtilisin-like proteases are translocated via the
signal peptide-dependent pathway [52]. It could also be that this does not aﬀect the transloca-
tion, since the cleavage site for signal peptidase I is predicted to be on the C-terminal end of
the prepeptide [17]. In the PR domain, 24 diﬀerences are observed, introducing 16 changes in
the polarity of the domain. It is known that changes in the PR domain inﬂuence the speciﬁcity
of the protease [52], and it is presumed that with the great variation within the domain, the
acidiﬁcation rates might diﬀer in the strains with PrtP-A proteases. The A domain is another
domain which is associated with the speciﬁcity of PrtPs [59]. There are 15 positions where the
residues diﬀer, with 12 of these changes inﬂuencing polarity too.
The A domain of PrtP-A-NFICC96 shows a much more hydrophilic proﬁle with these changes,
while SK11 contains more basic amino acids than Wg2 or PrtP-A-NFICC96. The B domain
is also varied with 31 changes. SK11 diﬀers with more positively charged amino acids whereas
the other two proteases have mostly negatively charged or hydrophilic amino acids. The B
domain is associated with the stability of the protease and reacts with the ions in the sub-
strate. Bruinenberg et al. Demonstrated that deletion of residues from the C-terminal end in
the B domain introduces instability and autoproteolysis of the enzyme [61]. It is also noted,
27
==PAGE:34==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 6:
Diﬀerences in the amino acid sequence of PrtP homologs.
A: PrtP-A type protease, B: PrtP-
B type protease, C: PrtP-C type protease.
Note that the displayed sequence was constructed by deleting
matching residues, therefore the size of the domains (red arrows) and the position of the shown residues are
not representative of the amino acids’ actual position within the PrtP sequence. For residue colouring, black
denotes hydrophobic, green hydrophilic, red acidic (negatively charged), and blue basic (positively charged)
residues.
however, that strains containing a CEP without the entire B domain can remain proteolytically
active. It is however assumed that there will be a diﬀerence between the rate of this activ-
ity, especially concerning SK11. The H domain alters in 8 positions, with PrtP-A-NFICC96
having a signiﬁcantly more hydrophobic domain proﬁle than SK11 and Wg2. The function
of the domain is debated, with Bruinenberg et al. [61] suggesting that it is dispensable for
the activity of the enzyme, Christensen et al. [17] hypothesizing it functions as a spacer do-
main providing distance to the cell surface. Hansen et al. [60] suggested that the H domain
could stock peptide products for OppA to receive later. It is unclear, how the abovementioned
changes in the amino acid sequence may aﬀect the proteolytic activity by the protease. In the
W domain, a large insert is observed for SK11 compared to Wg2 and PrtP-A-NFICC96. This
insert is in the middle of the W domain and contains mostly hydrophilic residues in the centre
and hydrophobic amino acids in the C-terminal end. Similarly to the H domain, there are only
suggestions as to what the purpose of the W domain is, without much research on its function.
28
==PAGE:35==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
It is accepted by many that the W domain also acts as a spacer to raise the CEP above the
surface layer of Gram-positive bacteria. However, Hansen et al. [60] proposed that it acts as
an adhesin binging -casein. Concerning acidiﬁcation, it is hypothesized that proteases with
this domain could better anchor proteins and therefore perform better in the tested substrates.
Lastly, the AN domain is characterised by the motif LPKTG for both SK11 and Wg2, while
for PrtP-A-NFICC96, it is LAKTA, which results in a more hydrophobic conﬁguration. The
subsequent hydrophobic membrane-spanning alpha-helix section is mostly identical, across the
three proteases, and so is the negatively charged tail, closing the C-terminal end of the enzyme.
In the case of PrtP-B type proteases, the residues show higher conservation across all domains.
The PP domain diﬀers in three positions, 104, 119 and 169. In position, this does not aﬀect
polarity, but in position 104 both PrtP-B-NFICC96 and PrtP-B-NFICC99 have a hydropho-
bic aa (Ala), while PrtP-B-NFICC227 has a hydrophilic residue (Ser). On position 119, it’s
the other way around, PrtP-B-NFICC96 and PrtP-B-NFICC99 have a hydrophilic Asparagine,
while PrtP-B-NFICC227 has a hydrophobic Isoleucine residue. In the PR domain, the residues
diﬀer at 9 positions, out of which 5 resulted in a change in hydrophilicity or charge in one of the
three PrtP-B proteases. In the A domain, 7 residues (5 of them with change in hydrophilicity),
and in the B domain 17 residues are diﬀerent out of which 11 changes the polarity of the domain
in that position. In the W domain, 3 out of the 7 diﬀerences show a change in the polarity
of the amino acids, furthermore, PrtP-B-227 shows two gaps compared to PrtP-B-NFICC96
and PrtP-B-NFICC99, in positions 1720 and 1721. The anchor domain is identical in all three
proteases.
An extracellular signal peptide prediction was carried out by Christensen et al. [17] by us-
ing SignalP, which revealed that the amino acid sequence corresponding to PrtP-C-NFICC96
might not contain a secretory signal (SS) peptide. The same study reports a low likelihood
for SS peptide in the sequence of PrtP-C-NFICC202 as well. This could mean that the pro-
tease may not be translocated and could hint towards poor proteolytic activity. In general,
the domains in PrtP-C-NFICC96 and PrtP-C-NFICC202 are nearly identical and show the
fewest diﬀerences from the three protease types. The PP domain shows 5 diﬀerences, two of
them close to the N-terminus of the propeptide at positions 5 and 6, two more close to the
N-terminus of the proposed propeptide region and one more at the C-terminus of the PP do-
main. Two residues in this domain that are hydrophilic in PrtP-C-NFICC96 are hydrophobic in
PrtP-C-NFICC202, while two positively charged residues in PrtP-C-NFICC96 are hydrophilic
in PrtP-C-NFICC202. The proteolytic domain diﬀers at 7 positions, where PrtP-C-NFICC96
shows positively charged and hydrophobic residues, and PrtP-C-NFICC202 tends to be more
negatively charged and hydrophilic. The A domain diﬀers in 3 amino acids, but polarities
are identical in both proteases. In the B domain, 6 changes are observed, where some residues
that are hydrophilic in PrtP-C-NFICC202 are hydrophobic in PrtP-C-NFICC96 and vice versa.
29
==PAGE:36==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
It is interesting to see the diﬀerences between the amino acids of the AN domain in the pro-
teases that carry the anchoring domain, displayed on Figure 7. With the lack of the typical
LPxTG motif in almost all proteases, the domain was only identiﬁed by InterPro in SK11 and
Wg2 (PS50847). The diﬀerences between the PrtP-A type proteases were described above, but
when aligning the AN domain from PrtP-B type proteases as well, the consensus motif shifts
to LPxTA. The third (x) residue is a basic positively charged Lysine for PrtP-A proteases,
while for PrtP-B proteases it is a positively charged acidic residue, Aspartic acid. The motif
is immediately followed by a highly hydrophobic region for PrtP-Bs, compared to the more
hydrophilic/negatively charged residues seen in PrtP-As. The rest of the domain shows alter-
ing aa residues between the two types; however, these residues are mostly characterised by the
same charge and hydrophobic conﬁguration.
Figure 7: Anchoring domain (AN) of PrtP-A and PrtP-B type proteases. A: Rasmol-coloring of amino acids,
B: polarity of amino acids. For polarity, black denotes hydrophobic, green hydrophilic, red acidic (negatively
charged), and blue basic (positively charged) residues.
30
==PAGE:37==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
4.3
Cloning
This study reports the successful cloning of 11 PrtP homologous proteases from 9 Leuconostoc
pseudomesenteroides strains into the plasmid-free L. lactis strain MG1363. A summary of the
constructed clones is shown in Table 4.
Table 4: A list of the constructed clones, detailing the proposed name of each clone, the contained plasmid
and the origin and classiﬁcation of the inserted prtP sequence. Primers used for insert and vector fragment
ampliﬁcation are shown too.
Strain name
Description
Veriﬁcation
Primers used
LP-96-B
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with B-type prtP from NFICC96
(a PrtP-B-NFICC96 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #1)
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-99-B
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with B-type prtP from NFICC99
(a PrtP-B-NFICC99 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-102-B
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with B-type prtP from NFICC102
(a PrtP-B-NFICC99 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-180-B
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with B-type prtP from NFICC180
(a PrtP-B-NFICC99 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-227-B
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with B-type prtP from NFICC227
(a PrtP-B-NFICC227 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-314-B
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with B-type prtP from NFICC314
(a PrtP-B-NFICC96 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-322-B
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with B-type prtP from NFICC322
(a PrtP-B-NFICC96 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-339-B
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with B-type prtP from NFICC339
(a PrtP-B-NFICC96 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-B_ins_1_fw
PrtP-B_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-96-A
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with A-type prtP from NFICC96
(a PrtP-A-NFICC96 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-A_ins_2_fw
PrtP-A_ins_2_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-96-C
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with C-type prtP from NFICC96
(a PrtP-C-NFICC96 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-C_ins_1_fw
PrtP-C_ins_1_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
LP-202-C
MG1363 containing pIL22 plasmid
with C-type prtP from NFICC202
(a PrtP-C-NFICC202 type protease)
Erythromycin resistance (5 µg/mL)
Sanger sequencing (isolate #2)
PrtP-C_ins_1_fw
PrtP-C_ins_2_rv
pIL22_PrtP_fw
pIL22_PrtP_rv
From the transformation plates, 4 isolates were saved in glycerol stock, out of which two iso-
lates were selected for each PrtP-homolog for Sanger sequencing, 22 in total. Plasmids were
31
==PAGE:38==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 8: Alignments of the Sanger sequencing results (CSY-XXX) and the constructed plasmid sequences. A:
PrtP-A-NFICC96 alignment, B: PrtP-B-NFICC96 group alignment, C: PrtP-B-NFICC99 group alignment, D:
PrtP-B-NFICC227 alignment, E: PrtP-C-NFICC96 alignment, F: PrtP-C-NFICC202 alignment. With yellow
colour the prtM sequence, with the other colours the respective prtP sequences are shown above the alignment.
Note that the ﬁgure does not show the entire length of the prtM and prtP sequences.
32
==PAGE:39==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
extracted for all, except for LP-96-B isolate #2. The initial Sanger sequencing with the primer
PrtP-S2-FW resulted in inconclusive sequence alignment for 4 isolates. For the remaining 17
samples Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed the presence of the PrtP region, meaning that there was
at least one conﬁrmed isolate for every PrtP fragment. The primer choice, however, was un-
fortunate, as PrtP-S2-FW, the only available primer at the time for this purpose, binds too
close to the start codon of the PrtP-region, so the alignment often started a dozen nucleotides
downstream of the start codon. Since the start codon is the junction between the insert and the
vector fragment, and fragment junctions can be prone to errors at GA [84] the exact nucleotides
sequence ﬂanking the start codon are of the greatest interest. For this reason, a new primer was
designed, PrtP-V4-Fw, further upstream of the start codon. This primer binds at the PrtM
region and should show a complete picture of the entire PrtP start codon and promoter region.
Sanger sequencing results with the new primer, PrtP-V4-Fw, conﬁrm the insertion of the PrtP
region, and the shows that in all cases the nucleotide sequence ﬂanking the PrtP start codon
shows no mutation compared to the expected plasmid sequence. There are two exceptions to
this seen in Figure 8: the sequencing result of LP-96-B isolate #1 and LP-96-C isolate #2
(denoted as CSY476_PrtP-96-B and CSY485_PrtP-96-C on Figure 8, respectively) exhibit
several alterations along the alignment of the PrtP region compared to the expected sequence
(Sanger_96-B_type and Sanger_96-C_type, respectively). In the case of LP-96-B isolate #1
the low conservation regions correspond to a deletion in the promoter region between the PrtM
and PrtP encoding sequences, and several mutations in the PrtP sequence. Interestingly, these
mutations are not in the vicinity of the start codon but are distributed evenly along the PrtP
sequence. Alignment on the translated sequences shows a 10 amino acid diﬀerence between the
target and the actual sequence as seen in Figure 8/B. For LP-96-C isolate #2 the alignment
shows a 2-amino acid diﬀerence compared to the expected sequence, 100 and 109 residues down-
stream of the start codon. How these diﬀerences aﬀect the expression of PrtP in these strains
is unclear. As discussed later in the report, experimental results show no diﬀerence between
the behaviour of LP-96-B compared to other strains with PrtP-B-like proteases in milk and soy
milk, while LP-96-C behaves similarly to LP-202-C.
4.3.1
Troubleshooting Gibson Assembly
Cloning of PrtP homologs into L. lactis MG1363 did not come without complications. In this
project, cloning was conducted through Gibson Assembly of the fragments. GA assembly is
a novel molecular biology tool, developed by Dr. Daniel G. Gibson at the J. Craig Venter
Institute in 2009 [85]. The method allows for the manipulation and assembly of large and
complex DNA fragments in a single-tube reaction. It oﬀers a variety of advantages compared
to other cloning methods, requiring fewer steps and reagents making it fast and simpler to
design. GA oﬀers seamless assembly via PCR ampliﬁcation of the assembled fragments with
overlaps. From the overlapping region, the fragments are chewed back by exonuclease from the
33
==PAGE:40==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
5’ end, the overlapping regions anneal, and DNA polymerase ﬁlls the gaps and ﬁnally, DNA
ligase completes the fusion. GA eliminates the need for restriction and ligase enzymes used
for restriction enzyme cloning, which reduces the chance of introducing scars at the junctions
between DNA fragments [85]. While this makes GA a very attractive and simple to design
and execute method, in reality, GA requires careful consideration at every step of the process.
This report indeed shows a story of many GA-associated challenges, with several unsuccessful
cloning attempts and a lengthy troubleshooting process.
Often one of the main issues with GA comes from primer design. Taking advantage of GA’s
ability to join PCR ampliﬁed fragments at any point, researchers have the opportunity to get
very speciﬁc as to where these fragments start and end and where they are joined together. A
drawback of this speciﬁcity is that choosing adequate primers can be diﬃcult, concerning opti-
mal length, melting temperature, ideal GC content and possible secondary structure formation
during ampliﬁcation. Luckily, in this study PCR ampliﬁcation of PrtP-like fragments and the
vector resulted in strong, speciﬁc bands, with only faint unspeciﬁc bands visible at the band
corresponding to the PrtP-A homolog of strain NFICC96. All bands had the expected lengths,
between 5.4 and 6.4 kb (Appendix, Figure 16).
The ﬁrst main challenge in cloning was to get high enough DNA concentrations for GA after
gel puriﬁcation of the PCR-ampliﬁed fragments. The recommended amount of DNA per reac-
tion is 50-100 ng DNA of the vector fragment and 2-3-fold molar excess of the insert for the
NEB GA mix, and 0.08 pmol of both vector and insert for the GA mix from Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc. While total amounts were easy to achieve by simply running multiple PCR reactions
for each fragment, after clean-up the eluted DNA concentration had to be very high to meet
the recommended volumes and DNA mass for the GA reactions. This is problematic, as the
Gel Extraction kit can only facilitate up to 400 mg gel per column, and the lowest possible
volume of elution buﬀer is 30 µL, notably limiting ﬁnal DNA concentrations. Usually, the pu-
riﬁed DNA concentrations ranged from 3.5 to 21 ng/µL for inserts and 31-42 ng/µL for vector
fragments. Since the maximum volume of vector/insert fragment mix should not exceed 10 µL,
the required DNA amounts were diﬃcult to achieve.
Several strategies were employed in an attempt to increase the DNA concentrations. The most
obvious way is through ethanol precipitation of the DNA. The DNA is precipitated using sodium
acetate, washed twice with ethanol of diﬀerent concentrations (70-100% v/v) then dried and
eluted in a lower volume of elution buﬀer, often water [86]. During precipitation, however, some
of the DNA can be lost, which is exactly what happened when this method was carried out
in this project. Another possible way to achieve higher concentrations is reusing the already
ampliﬁed PCR fragments as template DNA for another round of PCR [87]. Unfortunately,
after gel puriﬁcation of the twice ampliﬁed fragments, the change in concentrations was minor,
while excessive smearing was also observed on the gel (Appendix, Figure 17). With the added
34
==PAGE:41==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
risk of introduced mutations of too many PCR cycles, this method was abandoned, too. Gel
puriﬁcation leads to signiﬁcant loss of DNA, so to circumvent this problem, PCR products
were subjected to puriﬁcation with a PCR clean-up kit, without running them on agarose gel
ﬁrst. It was assumed that due to the absence of unspeciﬁc bands, it is possible to use such
kit which will result in much higher DNA concentrations while avoiding possible mutagenesis
by UV light during gel extraction. Indeed, using the QIAquick PCR puriﬁcation kit, DNA
concentrations were increased 3 to 10-fold, consistently achieving over 45 ng/µL DNA, which is
plenty high for GA. GA assembly was subsequently attempted with the NEB GA mix, and after
incubation, the GA mix was transformed into competent L. lactic cells. Sadly, no colonies were
observed on the transformation plates after two days of incubation. Positive controls showed
colonies, indicating successful electroporation, so the only explanation was the unsuccessful
Gibson assembly of the fragments. This hypothesis was conﬁrmed by visualising ﬁve selected
GA products, along with the inserts and inserts and vector fragments used for these reactions
by running them on an agarose gel as seen in Figure 9. No bands are visible at the expected
plasmid lengths, and strong bands are observed at the length of the inserts/vector fragment.
Figure 9: A gel visualisation of unsuccessful GA. The white arrows indicate fragments in the GA reaction mix
(lower is the insert, upper is the vector fragment), while the fragments are also visualised individually (96-B to
202-C), including the vector fragment (pIL22). The ladder is λ DNA/HindIII Marker.
This begs the question of whether mistakes were made during primer design, and whether the
overhangs added by PCR are even complimentary to the vector fragment or not.
Double-
35
==PAGE:42==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
checking primers and their binding sites, this possibility was ruled out. A plausible reason for
unsuccessful GA is that by not purifying the PCR products on a gel, too much junk DNA, such
as primer dimers or even just the primers themselves remained in the eluted DNA after clean-
up with the QIAquick PCR puriﬁcation kit. It was hypothesized that the remaining primers
could bind to the vector fragment instead of the inserts, signiﬁcantly reducing the eﬃciency of
GA. Running these “clean” products on gel revealed that indeed, the kit did not get rid of the
junk DNA, as seen in Figure 10. These products were then subjected to gel puriﬁcation, which
resulted in low DNA concentrations, again. GA was attempted once more on 6 selected frag-
ments (PrtP-A-NFICC96, PrtP-B-NFICC96, PrtP-C-NFICC96, PrtP-B-99, PrtP-C-202 and
PrtP-B-339) using the now both PCR and gel-puriﬁed fragments, and the incubated GA reac-
tions were run on a gel for visualisation. GA was encore unsuccessful (Appendix, Figure 19)
and the twice-puriﬁed fragments were not used later in the project.
Figure 10: A gel visualisation of PCR ampliﬁed fragments, cleaned up using only the PCR puriﬁcation kit
from Qiagen. It is seen that there is a large amount of secondary structures left in the puriﬁed DNA mixed.
These oligos are hypothesized to interfere with GA. The ladder is λ DNA/HindIII Marker.
This led to the conclusion that the enzymes NEB Gibson Assembly mix were not functioning
as intended. It is assumed that the repeated freeze-thaw cycles of the GA mix rendered the
enzymes inactive. The GA mix available at the laboratory was designed for 50 reactions (500
36
==PAGE:43==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
µL of enzyme mix in a single tube), and since this single tube was shared by many for diﬀerent
projects, it was unclear how many times the mix was thawed, and if it was stored according to
manufacturer’s instructions at all times since purchase. It has been shown that increasing the
number of freeze-thaw cycles can dramatically reduce the eﬃciency of the enzymes in the GA
mix [88].
A new GA mix was ordered from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, with only 10 reactions per tube
(100 µL enzyme mix), to reduce the possibility of mishandling the GA mix. To test the new
mix, insert and vector fragments were ampliﬁed by PCR anew, and gel puriﬁed. After measur-
ing concentrations, the insert with the highest concentration was selected namely PrtP-C from
NFICC96, mixed with the vector fragment and the new GA mix. The reactions were then set
up under four conditions: 50°C for 15 minutes and 60 minutes, and 45°C also for 15 and 60
minutes. Though the enzymes in the GA mix are all optimised to work best at 50°C it was
hypothesized that the relatively low melting temperature of the overlapping region between
vector/insert meant that annealing of the fragments could work better at lower temperatures.
GA reactions were visualised on a gel, as seen in Figure 11, indicating successful GA, with
visible bands where the plasmid is expected to be. The best condition seemed to be 50°C for
60 minutes, as it had the clearest band at the expected plasmid length, and the faintest band
where the insert/vector fragments are.
Figure 11: Optimisation of GA incubation times using the PrtP-C fragment from NFICC96. The white arrows
show leftover fragments at a reaction ran at 45°C, while at 50°C ran for 15 minutes interestingly all fragments
are gone, with a faint band (red arrow) at the expected plasmid length. The clearest band at the expected
plasmid length is for the sample ran at 50°C for 60 minutes. The ladder is λ DNA/HindIII Marker
With newfound conﬁdence, GA was carried out on all 11 PrtP-homologs and transformed into
L. lactis. Colonies were only observed for four transformants, for PrtP-B of strains NFICC96,
99, 227 and 322.
The number of colonies was also concerning, with only 2 CFU for each
transformant, with approximately 10ng DNA used for 50 µL competent cells. At ﬁrst, it was
37
==PAGE:44==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
suspected that GA failed once again since the new GA requires much higher DNA concentra-
tions than the NEB GA mix, and only about 1/3rd of this required DNA amount was used for
the reactions due to the limitations discussed above. However, running the GA products on a
gel, it was clear that GA worked for all fragments as demonstrated in Figure 12. This indicated
that while the troubles around GA have been resolved, new problems arose.
Figure 12: A gel visualisation of GA reaction mixes ran at 50°C for 60 minutes. The white arrows indicate
the plasmids, which are at the correct band length. Note that only 2 µL of the mix was visualised, hence the
faint bands. The ladder is λ DNA/HindIII Marker.
4.3.2
Optimising transformation protocol
These problems yielded from the electroporation step when conducting transformation with
the new GA reactions. When the electroporation cuvettes containing the competent cells and
the GA reaction mix were given an electric charge a loud pop sound and a visible electric dis-
charge were observed for some of the samples, with the exception of the abovementioned strains,
and the positive control. This phenomenon is referred to as arcing [89]. Arcing occurs when
the sample’s electrical resistance cannot sustain the applied voltage separation between the
electrodes, essentially killing the cells in the cuvette. Two factors inﬂuence this phenomenon:
temperature and salt concentration. It is crucial that the cuvettes are kept cold. Salts from
elution buﬀers or growth media aﬀect salt concentration, increasing conductivity, which leads
to arcing [89].
To prevent arcing the salt concentrations were reduced by adding small amounts (2.5 µL) of
water to the competent cell/GA reaction mix in the cuvette. In tandem, the volume of compe-
tent cells was reduced from 50 µL to 25 µL, and the GA mix from 5 µL to 2.5 µL per reaction.
Furthermore, instead of a single pulse of 2 kV, a multiple pulse electroporation strategy was
applied at lower voltages, ﬁrst with 1.6 kV, then 1.8 kV, while the time constant still exceeded
38
==PAGE:45==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
4.5 ms. The cuvettes were kept cold and were dried with a paper towel right before electro-
poration. Before the second pulse, the cuvettes were knocked once ﬁrmly to homogenise and
redistribute the competent cell/GA mixture at the bottom of the cuvette, and to get rid of
potential air bubbles. Another change was concerning the temperature of the recovery M17
medium, this time using an ice-cold medium instead of RT.
Following the adjustments, transformation eﬃciency was greatly improved as also indicated by
the CFU count of the positive control plates, which better-approximated values reported in
the literature for L. lactis [90], [91]. Previous attempts to clone into L. lactis MG1363 at the
institute and during this project have reported very low transformation eﬃciencies, ranging
from 5x105 to 3x104 CFU/µg plasmid DNA. With the new method, transformation eﬃciency
increased to 6x104 - 1.2x105 CFU/µg DNA with the puriﬁed plasmid pIL22 from MS22425.
For the constructed plasmids, of course, a lower eﬃciency is expected. The transformation
eﬃciency using approximately 10ng DNA (2.5 µL GA reaction mix) for 25 µL competent cells,
with added 2.5 µL water ranged between 250 CFU/µg DNA to 750 CFU/µg DNA, which is also
higher than previous attempts with similarly assembled plasmids at the Institute (unpublished).
In conclusion, the existing protocol at the institute for cloning into L. lactis MG1363 has been
generally followed, however, several adjustments have been made to create a more robust assay,
with better reproducibility. Yet, several things could be considered for a more eﬃcient GA and
subsequent transformation in the future:
• It is imperative that for all DNA or plasmid extractions, PCR and gel puriﬁcation water
is used for the elution of DNA. It is suspected that the arcing of the samples during
transformation was a direct result of the remaining salts from the elution buﬀer. When
eluting, DNA concentrations could be increased by incubating the columns with the water
for longer than the recommended 4-5 minutes. Lastly, the use of water enables air drying
of the eluted DNA, to further increase concentrations, without the risk of salting out.
• The signiﬁcance of keeping shared solutions sterile in the multi-user environment of the
laboratory facilities at the institute is also highlighted. Sterile ﬁltering of every solu-
tion used for either cell recovery after transformation could have eliminated potential
contaminants, which naturally increases the reliability of the experiments and saves time.
• Testing the GA mix ﬁrst with a single sample could save substantial time since identifying
the nature of the problem is a diﬃcult and lengthy process. Furthermore, by conducting
all GA and transformation with a non-functioning GA mix at the same time throughout
this project, much of the resources, such as agar plates and media, competent cells, and
cuvettes were wasted in vain.
• Adding further pulsing steps during transformation could potentially increase eﬃciency
even more. This is beneﬁcial, as currently transforming the GA mixture is so low that at
times only a handful of colonies was obtained per transformation reaction.
39
==PAGE:46==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
4.4
Acidiﬁcation experiments
The acidiﬁcation experiments were carried out to investigate the acidiﬁcation rates of the
MG1363 clones containing the PrtP homologous proteases from L. pseudomesenteroides with
plant origins and comparing it to similarly constructed MG1363 clones with the prtP genes
from well-known L. lactis strains Wg2 and SK11. A Wg2-derived clone was also included with
a truncated PrtP protease, without the domains H, W and AN. A non-proteolytic MG1363
clone was also included containing a pAK80 plasmid with erythromycin resistance, but without
any PrtP coding genes. The underlying assumption was that cloning prtP-homologous genes
into an isogenic background, with the same maturation protein in all clones and controls (ex-
cept the negative control 22418, which naturally does not have prtM/prtP genes, and MS22421,
with both prtM and prtP from SK11 instead of Wg2), the activity of the PrtP-homologous pro-
teases can be clearly examined and characterised. Including the truncated clone, MS22436 can
further highlight the domains mainly contributing to proteolytic activity within the protease.
The experiments were set up to create quadruplicates of each tested strain, with the control
(both positive controls and negative control) sampled in 8 wells. For both soy and bovine milk,
two individual 96-well plates were tested with this setup. An example of the plate layout is
shown in the Appendix in Figure 20, with acidiﬁed bovine milk at the end of the fermentation.
The values for acidiﬁcation curves have been averaged out and are shown without standard
deviation. This was necessary to improve the readability of the plots, though, in general very
little deviation is observed between the same colonies. The same curves are shown with stan-
dard deviation in the Appendix of the report in Figures 21 and 22. The experiments were
conducted for 36 hours, which proved to be a ﬁne decision, as much valuable data regarding the
strains is only revealed after the 30th hour of incubation, especially in the case of bovine milk.
The acidiﬁcation curves were based on hue values extracted from the scanner and converted to
pH using the formula described in Section 3.3.
In Figure 13 the acidiﬁcation proﬁles of the constructed strains in bovine milk are visualised
from the two individual plates (A and B), while in Figure 14, the acidiﬁcation curves are shown
from the two individual plates containing soy milk (C and D). In general, a clear distinction
can be made between positive and negative control strains, and the acidiﬁcation proﬁles of the
constructed strains adhere to either the proteolytic positive controls (MS22421, MS22425 and
MS22426) or the non-proteolytic control (MS22418). The proposed proteolytic constructed
strains based on the acidiﬁcation curves are LP-96-A, LP-96-B, LP-99-B, LP-102-B, LP-227-B,
LP-314-B and LP-322-B. The proposed non-proteolytic clones are LP-180-B, LP-339-B, LP-
96-C and LP-202-C. This is based on the ﬁnal obtained pH at the end of the experiment and
holds true for both bovine and soy milk. The behaviour of the strains is discussed in detail in
the following section.
40
==PAGE:47==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 13: Acidiﬁcation curves of diﬀerent Lactococcus lactis strains in bovine milk with 1% added glucose
and 5 µg/mL erythromycin after 36 hours of fermentation at 30°C. The pH values are converted from hue values
obtained by a high-resolution scanner based on pH indicator dyes and a corresponding calibration curve. A and
B correspond to two individual plates containing quadruplicates of each strain. The curves are an average of
the four insulated wells, and strains are displayed top to bottom based on the lowest pH value at the end of the
fermentation. Note, that for this reason, the colour in Figure A does not always correspond to the same strain
in Figure B. All the strains carried erythromycin resistance and contained a prtP-homologous gene, except for
the negative control MS22418.
41
==PAGE:48==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 14: Acidiﬁcation curves of diﬀerent Lactococcus lactis strains in soy milk with 1% added glucose and
5 µg/mL erythromycin after 36 hours of fermentation at 30°C. The pH values are converted from hue values
obtained by a high-resolution scanner based on pH indicator dyes and a corresponding calibration curve. C and
D correspond to two individual plates containing quadruplicates of each strain. The curves are an average of
the four insulated wells, and strains are displayed top to bottom based on the lowest pH value at the end of the
fermentation. Note, that for this reason, the colour in Figure C does not always correspond to the same strain
in Figure D. All the strains carried erythromycin resistance and contained a prtP-homologous gene, except for
the negative control MS22418.
42
==PAGE:49==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
In bovine milk (Figure 13), the positive control strains reached a pH of 4.5 after around 15
hours, while the constructed clones proved to be slower acidiﬁers, with great variation between
strains, too. LP-96-A was the ﬁrst to reach pH 4.5 after about 25 hours of incubation, while
LP-96-B and LP-227-B seemed to be the slowest to acidify milk below a pH of 5. It is also un-
clear what the ﬁnal pH of the milk would have been for these two strains, as the cut-oﬀfor the
experiments after 36 hours indicates that LP-96-B and LP-227-B could have acidiﬁed further.
LP-99-B, LP-102-B, LP-314-B and LP-322-B show similar trends, reaching a pH of 4.6 after
around 32 hours, and a ﬁnal pH of 4.5 after 36 hours. The proposed non-proteolytic strains fol-
lowed the exact same curve as the negative control MG1363, reaching a pH of 6.5 after 36 hours.
It is interesting to observe a slow growth by all proteolytic strains in bovine milk until a pH
of 5.5 was reached, after which growth accelerated signiﬁcantly. This created a visible bump
at the middle of the growth curve for the constructed clones but was not observed for positive
controls. The shift could indicate a change in the metabolism of the LAB clones. It is hypothe-
sized that the metabolic shift is an environmental stress response. LAB can modify proteolysis
depending on the environmental conditions, and it has been documented that under acidic
conditions, LAB reduce the number of amino acid transporters which leads to free amino acids
becoming limiting [92]. In turn, LAB increases the activity of their intracellular peptidases,
like PepN and PepO, which could lead to increased proteolysis and subsequent rapid growth.
Furthermore, oxidative stress can also increase the expression of other amino acid transport
and metabolism-related genes [92].
In soy milk (Figure 14), similar distinctions can be made regarding proposed proteolytic and
non-proteolytic clones, as the same strains follow the acidiﬁcation curves of the positive or
negative controls as in bovine milk. What is immediately clear, however, is that all of the
clones could grow better in soy milk with much less variance between the diﬀerent strains.
Albeit, positive control strains performed worse, MS22426 (Wg2#G3) taking 20, while MS2241
(SK11) 25 hours to reach pH 4.5. The exception is MS2241 (Wg2#G1) which reached that
in 12.5 hours. Generally, all of the proteolytic clones reached a pH of 4.5 in 25 hours, which
is a considerable improvement compared to bovine milk. LP-96-A was once again the fastest
acidiﬁer, reaching pH 4.5 in about 17-18 hours. The non-proteolytic clones showed a steady
growth rate throughout the experiment, reaching a ﬁnal pH of between 5 and 5.2, with the
negative control MS22418 growing to a pH of 5.3 by the end of the 36 hours. Interestingly, the
negative control, MS22418 diﬀers from other non-proteolytic strains in its acidiﬁcation curve
proﬁle, with much more limited growth for the ﬁrst 15 hours of fermentation, then a relatively
fast acidiﬁcation between 17 to 25 hours before it slows down once again. This curve is diﬀerent
from the linear acidiﬁcation proﬁle exhibited by the same strain in bovine milk.
Figure 15 indicates a very low variance between the individual inoculated wells in the same
strain. In bovine milk, the standard deviation is greater than in soy milk. The highest acid-
43
==PAGE:50==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 15: A Maximum acidiﬁcation rate per hour and B ﬁnal pH (at t = 36 hr) of the diﬀerent Lactococcus
lactis strains. To calculate the maximum acidiﬁcation rate, the pH data for each well was smoothened using a
moving average over 1 hr to reduce noise in the numerical derivative. The numerical derivative as a function
of time was then calculated, and then the maximum acidiﬁcation rate was averaged over the diﬀerent wells
corresponding to each strain. In A the mean and standard deviation of the maximum acidiﬁcation rate are
shown. To calculate the mean ﬁnal pH, the ﬁnal pH of each well corresponding to a certain strain was averaged.
iﬁcation rates expressed as a change in pH/hr (Figure 15/A) are also observed in milk, by
MS2241 (SK11). Most proteolytic strains exhibit higher max acidiﬁcation rates in bovine milk,
except for MS22425. It is surprising that the max acidiﬁcation rates of the non-proteolytic
strains equalled that of the clones in bovine milk. However, while the former exhibited these
rates at high pH early in the fermentation process of soy milk, the latter showed the highest
acidiﬁcation rates at the later stages of bovine milk fermentation. The fastest max acidiﬁcation
rate from clones was presented by LP-96-A, in both soy and bovine milk. It also acidiﬁed to
the lowest pH of the cloned strains as seen in Figure 15/B.
Comparing the acidiﬁcation curves and ﬁnal pH in soy and bovine milk reveals that the organ-
isms can in principle acidify to a lower pH in soy milk. This is true for non-proteolytic strains
as well. The hypothesis is that there are many short peptides in soy milk [93], which can be
readily used by LAB without a proteolytic system until the peptides are used up. The same
phenomenon is observed in bovine milk through the growth of the negative control MS22418,
though to a smaller extent. The short peptides may come from the industrial processing of
the soybeans, where through rough mechanical heat treatments many of intact soy proteins are
broken down. Luckily the amount of such peptides is limited enough to diﬀerentiate between
strains that may have an active proteolytic system and strains that do not.
44
==PAGE:51==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
4.4.1
Growth rates by PrtP homology-type
From the acidiﬁcation curves and the ﬁnal pH reached, it is assumed that strains harbour-
ing the PrtP-C type protease do not have an active proteolytic system. Both LP-96-C and
LP-202-C show similar growth to the negative control MS22418, indicating no proteolysis. As
detailed in Section 4.2, the pre-peptide domain in PrtP-C type proteases may lack a signal
peptide sequence, which could interfere with the expression of these enzymes. On the other
hand, nothing in the sequence of LP-180-B and LP-339-B indicates that their growth in bovine
and soy milk should diﬀer from LP-99-B and LP-314-B, respectively, as the proteases cloned
into these strains are theoretically identical. Sanger sequencing results in Section 4.3 reveal
no mutations for LP-180-B and LP-339-B, at least in the promoter region and the ﬁrst few
hundred nucleotides downstream of the prtP start codon. By sequencing the entire length of
the plasmid, the peculiar nature of these strains could be answered.
On the contrary, Sanger sequences showed mutations for LP-96-B along many nucleotides in
the prtP sequence. The mutations were scattered through the PP and PR regions evenly, in
the region where the gene was sequenced, for a total of 10 aa diﬀerence. If successfully cloned,
LP-96-B is expected to show the same growth proﬁle as LP-314-B, LP-322-B and LP-339-B as
the sequences should be identical in these strains. The sequencing results should point towards
LP-96-B not behaving similarly, which is not the case, in either of the investigated media. It is
unclear whether the quality of the extracted plasmid interfered with the sequencing, as the plas-
mid concentrations were lower than the recommended amount by Euroﬁns, or if the mutations
do not contribute at all to the speciﬁcity and expression of the protease. Re-extracting and
resequencing the plasmid, preferably the entire length of the PrtP encoding region is suggested
in the future.
The PrtP-A type protease of Wg2 (both #G1 and #G3) and LP-96-A seem to contribute to
faster acidiﬁcation in both bovine and soy milk compared to the strains with PrtP-B type pro-
tease. The maturation protein-encoding gene prtM and the promoter region of prtP are cloned
from Wg2 (a PrtP-A type protease) in all clones, which could explain the better expression of
the enzyme and therefore faster acidiﬁcation in strains with PrtP-A type proteases. Since the
diﬀerence is more pronounced in soy milk another plausible contributing factor might be the
absence of the helix domain in PrtP-B type proteases. It has been suggested that a function of
the H domain is to situate the rest of the protease outside the cell wall and could potentially act
as a stalk for the enzyme. Casein micelles are around 100 nm in diameter, and the approximate
length of the PrtP enzyme is 40 nm [60]. The C-terminal end of the PrtP is covalently bound
to the cell wall while the active site is at the N-terminal situated in a casein-rich environment.
However, the control MS22426, which lacks the entire H, W, and AN domain also grows equally
well in bovine milk when compared to other positive controls. Therefore, the reason for this
contrast of speciﬁcity between PrtP-A and B-type proteases likely comes from the dissimilar-
ity of the aa sequence of the proteases in a domain associated with the speciﬁcity of the enzyme.
45
==PAGE:52==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
One of these domains contained by all PrtP-A and B clones is the A domain. The charge
and hydrophilicity of the A domain have been shown to play a role in the speciﬁcity of the
domain down to even individual amino acids in SK11 and Wg2 [59]. Between A and B type
PrtPs, the diﬀerence in amino acid sequence is stark, with low identity % as seen in Figure
5. This makes a comprehensive analysis of the regions between the two types challenging. It
is noted though that the A domain in PrtP-B type proteases show a more hydrophilic proﬁle,
with a strong negatively charged region between the 274-278th residues within the domain.
The slowest acidiﬁer from the PrtP-B type strains, that is still proteolytic, LP-227-B diﬀers in
charge at the 43, 105 and 169th positions from the others. The shifts in residues show a more
hydrophilic proﬁle compared to LP-96-B and LP-99-B and indicate that these positions may
inﬂuence the speciﬁcity of the domain towards milk proteins. The signiﬁcance of the A domain
in speciﬁcity is further emphasized by the fact that in the PR domain, virtually no charge
diﬀerences are observed, despite several amino acid residues being shifted between the three
PrtP-B type strains in this domain as well. Lastly, the relative slower acidiﬁcation of LP-227-B
could also be explained by a two amino acid diﬀerence in the propeptide region of the PP
domain which changes the hydrophilicity on the 104th and 119th positions. The propeptide,
along with the maturation protein assists in the maturation of PrtP and changes within the
domain could alter the conformational maturation of the PrtP enzyme [17].
46
==PAGE:53==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
5
Conclusion
In conclusion, this study reports the successful cloning of PrtP homologous proteases into Lac-
tococcus lactis MG1363, and the ensuing testing of these strains in bovine and soy milk. The
PrtP encoding sequences from a total of 16 LAB strains of plant origin were investigated from
the NFICC, identifying 24 cell envelope proteases with homology to the PrtP of L. lactis Wg2.
Eleven of these proteases were selected for cloning all from the species L. pseudomesenteroides,
which could be grouped into three distinct types based on the alignment of their amino acid
sequence, denoted as PrtP-A, B, and C. The cloned prtP genes corresponded to 6 unique PrtPs,
one PrtP-A-type, three of the type PrtP-B and two PrtP-C-type.
Throughout the study, Gibson Assembly proved to be the main bottleneck, delaying much of
the laboratory work. The issues related to GA were eventually identiﬁed, and the prtP gene
from the L. pseudomesenteroides was successfully assembled with the prtM and respective
promoter sequences from L. lactis Wg2 in a pAK80 vector backbone. This design exclusively
allows for investigating the PrtP protease in relation to proteolytic activity, without deviations
introduced by the diﬀerent maturation proteins or promoter regions from the strains of origin.
The study also reports a more robust transformation assay with increased transformation eﬃ-
ciency for both puriﬁed plasmid and GA reaction mixes. Several small steps were introduced
to the current protocol in use at the Institute, such as making sure the recovery solutions were
at the correct temperatures and introducing a multi-pulse strategy at lower voltages when elec-
troplating.
The cloned strains were veriﬁed by Sanger sequencing, though, this was only partial and showed
point mutations in 2 of the 11 strains, namely LP-96-B and LP-96-C. Interestingly, these mu-
tations did not seem to aﬀect the acidiﬁcation proﬁles of said strains, while the acidiﬁcation
trends of LP-180-B and LP-339-B altered from the expected curve. It is unclear why this was
the case and fully sequencing the plasmid may answer these questions.
The acidiﬁcation experiments outline that the clones containing PrtP-C type protease are likely
proteolytically inactive, while most PrtP-B type clones (except LP-180-B and LP-339-B) can
acidify both soy and bovine milk under a pH of 4.5. This acidiﬁcation is rather slow compared
to control MG1363 strains with prtP from Wg2 and SK11, however, there is a less drastic
diﬀerence in the rate of acidiﬁcation in soy milk. In both soy and bovine milk, the fastest
acidiﬁed clone was LP-96-A, which in soy milk matched the acidiﬁcation rate of Wg2 and even
surpassed the rates demonstrated by SK11.
47
==PAGE:54==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
The theories behind the diverging acidiﬁcation proﬁle of the proteases concern the lack of signal
peptide in the pre-peptide domain of PrtP-C-type proteases, while the slow growth of some
PrtP-B protease-containing clones in bovine is attributed to the speciﬁcity of the A domain.
LP-96-A is thought to have similar acidiﬁcation rates to control strains due to the relatively
high identity % shared between these strains.
5.1
Future prospects
Testing these strains in bovine and soy milk was only the ﬁrst step in fully understanding the
behaviour of cell envelope proteases from LAB of plant origins if the scope is to identify better
strains for PBDA production. Continuing the research into the proteolytic activity of these
proteases, the following should be considered:
• Firstly, it is important to further isolate and identify the potential new strains in NFICC96.
It is assumed that the current PrtP-A protease found in the strain is a contaminant from
a Lactoccocus species. Sequencing the new isolates, along with the cloned plasmids should
be the basis of any future research on the strains/clones. Retesting these clones, along
with the strains of origin could also be relevant.
• To better understand the proteolytic nature of the proteases, an OPA assay on the fer-
mentation product could be carried out to determine the degree of hydrolysis. The nature
of the proteases could be further investigated through proteomics. The peptide products
of soy milk fermentation are of special interest, as the ﬂavour and texture of fermented
products are dependent on an ideal peptide proﬁle.
• Testing the strains in CDM, with diﬀerent N-sources, such as trypsin inhibitor and ca-
sein hydrolysate could highlight many of the relevant proteolytic characteristics of the
proteases
• Lastly, testing for oﬀ-ﬂavour anti-nutrient removal by GC-MS in PBDAs as substrates
for growth and investigating sensory properties through rheological analysis, HPLC and
even tasting could paint a complete picture of the proteases’ potential in PBDA product
development.
48
==PAGE:55==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
References
1.
Perga, M. E., Sarrasin, O., Steinberger, J., Lane, S. N. & Butera, F. The climate change
research that makes the front page: Is it ﬁt to engage societal action? Global Environmental
Change 80, 102675. issn: 0959-3780. doi:10.1016/J.GLOENVCHA.2023.102675 (May
2023).
2.
Owino, V. et al. The impact of climate change on food systems, diet quality, nutrition,
and health outcomes: A narrative review. Frontiers in Climate 4, 941842. issn: 26249553.
doi:10.3389/FCLIM.2022.941842/BIBTEX (Aug. 2022).
3.
Rosenzweig, C. et al. Climate change responses beneﬁt from a global food system approach.
Nature Food 2020 1:2 1, 94–97. issn: 2662-1355. doi:10.1038/s43016- 020- 0031- z.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s43016-020-0031-z (Feb. 2020).
4.
Lynch, J., Cain, M., Frame, D. & Pierrehumbert, R. Agriculture’s Contribution to Climate
Change and Role in Mitigation Is Distinct From Predominantly Fossil CO2-Emitting
Sectors. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 4, 518039. issn: 2571581X. doi:10.3389/
FSUFS.2020.518039/BIBTEX (Feb. 2021).
5.
Schiano, A. N., Harwood, W. S., Gerard, P. D. & Drake, M. A. Consumer perception of
the sustainability of dairy products and plant-based dairy alternatives. Journal of Dairy
Science 103, 11228–11243. issn: 0022-0302. doi:10.3168/JDS.2020-18406 (Dec. 2020).
6.
Aschemann-Witzel, J., Gantriis, R. F., Fraga, P. & Perez-Cueto, F. J. Plant-based food
and protein trend from a business perspective: markets, consumers, and the challenges
and opportunities in the future. Critical reviews in food science and nutrition 61, 1–10.
issn: 1549-7852. doi:10.1080/10408398.2020.1793730. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/32654499/ (2021).
7.
Adamczyk, D., Jaworska, D., Aﬀeltowicz, D. & Maison, D. Plant-Based Dairy Alternatives:
Consumers’ Perceptions, Motivations, and Barriers-Results from a Qualitative Study in
Poland, Germany, and France. Nutrients 14. issn: 2072-6643. doi:10.3390/NU14102171.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35631311/ (May 2022).
8.
Tangyu, M., Muller, J., Bolten, C. J. & Wittmann, C. Fermentation of plant-based milk
alternatives for improved ﬂavour and nutritional value. Applied Microbiology and Biotech-
nology 103, 9263–9275. issn: 14320614. doi:10.1007/S00253-019-10175-9/FIGURES/6.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00253-019-10175-9 (Dec. 2019).
9.
Huang, W., Wätjen, A. P., Prakash, S., Heiner Bang-Berthelsen, C. & Turner, M. S.
Exploring lactic acid bacteria diversity for better fermentation of plant-based dairy al-
ternatives OPEN ACCESS. Microbiology Australia 43, 79–82. doi:10.1071/MA22026.
https://doi.org/10.1071/MA22026 (2022).
49
==PAGE:56==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
10.
Madsen, S. K. et al. Development of a yoghurt alternative, based on plant-adapted lactic
acid bacteria, soy drink and the liquid fraction of brewers’ spent grain. FEMS microbiology
letters 368. issn: 1574-6968. doi:10.1093/FEMSLE/FNAB093. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/34308972/ (Aug. 2021).
11.
Clark, M. A. et al. Global food system emissions could preclude achieving the 1.5◦and
2◦C climate change targets. Science (New York, N.Y.) 370, 705–708. issn: 1095-9203.
doi:10.1126/SCIENCE.ABA7357. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33154139/ (Nov.
2020).
12.
Carlsson Kanyama, A., Hedin, B. & Katzeﬀ, C. Diﬀerences in environmental impact be-
tween plant-based alternatives to dairy and dairy products: A systematic literature review.
Sustainability (Switzerland) 13, 12599. issn: 20711050. doi:10.3390/SU132212599/S1.
https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/13/22/12599/htmhttps://www.mdpi.com/2071-
1050/13/22/12599 (Nov. 2021).
13.
Sedó Molina, G. E. et al. Development of a novel lactic acid bacteria starter culture
approach: From insect microbiome to plant-based fermentations. LWT 167, 113797. issn:
0023-6438. doi:10.1016/J.LWT.2022.113797 (Sept. 2022).
14.
Liu, W., Pang, H., Zhang, H. & Cai, Y. Biodiversity of lactic acid bacteria. Lactic Acid
Bacteria: Fundamentals and Practice, 103–203. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-8841-0{\_}2/
TABLES/22. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-94-017-8841-0_2
(Apr. 2014).
15.
Christensen, L. F., García-Béjar, B., Bang-Berthelsen, C. H. & Hansen, E. B. Extracellular
microbial proteases with speciﬁcity for plant proteins in food fermentation. International
journal of food microbiology 381. issn: 1879-3460. doi:10.1016/J.IJFOODMICRO.2022.
109889. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36057216/ (Nov. 2022).
16.
Kliche, T. et al. Screening for proteolytically active lactic acid bacteria and bioactivity
of peptide hydrolysates obtained with selected strains. Applied Microbiology and Biotech-
nology 101, 7621–7633. issn: 14320614. doi:10.1007/S00253-017-8369-3/FIGURES/7.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00253-017-8369-3 (Oct. 2017).
17.
Christensen, L. F., Høie, M. H., Bang-Berthelsen, C. H., Marcatili, P. & Hansen, E. B.
Comparative Structure Analysis of the Multi-Domain, Cell Envelope Proteases of Lactic
Acid Bacteria. Microorganisms 11, 2256. issn: 2076-2607. doi:10.3390/MICROORGANISMS11092256.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37764099/ (Sept. 2023).
18.
Savijoki, K., Ingmer, H. & Varmanen, P. Proteolytic systems of lactic acid bacteria. Applied
Microbiology and Biotechnology 2006 71:4 71, 394–406. issn: 1432-0614. doi:10.1007/
S00253-006-0427-1. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00253-006-
0427-1 (July 2006).
50
==PAGE:57==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
19.
Genet, B. M. et al. Selection of proteolytic LAB starter cultures for acidiﬁcation of soy
based dairy alternatives. LWT 184, 115082. issn: 0023-6438. doi:10.1016/J.LWT.2023.
115082 (July 2023).
20.
Christensen, L. F. et al. Lactococcus cell envelope proteases enable lactococcal growth
in minimal growth media supplemented with high molecular weight proteins of plant and
animal origin. FEMS microbiology letters. issn: 1574-6968. doi:10.1093/FEMSLE/FNAE019.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38479791/ (Mar. 2024).
21.
Helinck, S., Richard, J. & Juillard, V. The eﬀects of adding lactococcal proteinase on
the growth rate of Lactococcus lactis in milk depend on the type of enzyme. Applied and
environmental microbiology 63, 2124–2130. issn: 0099-2240. doi:10.1128/AEM.63.6.
2124-2130.1997. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9172328/ (1997).
22.
Gänzle, M. G. Lactic metabolism revisited: metabolism of lactic acid bacteria in food
fermentations and food spoilage. Current Opinion in Food Science 2, 106–117. issn: 2214-
7993. doi:10.1016/J.COFS.2015.03.001 (Apr. 2015).
23.
Tian, F. Lactic Acid Bacteria. Lactic Acid Bacteria: Omics and Functional Evaluation,
1–33. doi:10.1007/978-981-13-7832-4{\_}1/FIGURES/3. https://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/978-981-13-7832-4_1 (Jan. 2019).
24.
Orla-Jensen, S. The lactic acid bacteria https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=
&id=XvRGAQAAMAAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA79&ots=SgdOJN4C52&sig=uVU_zfY14MAidMOlIchT1gxM5ko
(1919).
25.
Zheng, J. et al. A taxonomic note on the genus Lactobacillus: Description of 23 novel
genera, emended description of the genus Lactobacillus Beijerinck 1901, and union of Lac-
tobacillaceae and Leuconostocaceae. International journal of systematic and evolutionary
microbiology 70, 2782–2858. issn: 1466-5034. doi:10.1099/IJSEM.0.004107. https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32293557/ (2020).
26.
Endo, A. et al. Fructophilic Lactic Acid Bacteria, a Unique Group of Fructose-Fermenting
Microbes. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 84, 1290–1308. issn: 10985336. doi:10.
1128 / AEM . 01290 - 18. /pmc / articles / PMC6146980 / /pmc / articles / PMC6146980 /
?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6146980/ (Oct.
2018).
27.
Makarova, K. et al. Comparative genomics of the lactic acid bacteria. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103, 15611–15616. issn:
00278424. doi:10.1073/PNAS.0607117103/SUPPL{\_}FILE/07117TABLE1.DOC. https:
//www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.0607117103 (Oct. 2006).
28.
Andersen, J. M., Pedersen, C. M. & Bang-Berthelsen, C. H. Omics-based comparative
analysis of putative mobile genetic elements in Lactococcus lactis. FEMS Microbiology
Letters 366, 102. issn: 0378-1097. doi:10.1093/FEMSLE/FNZ102. https://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/femsle/fnz102 (May 2019).
51
==PAGE:58==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
29.
Konings, W. N., Kok, J., Kuipers, O. P. & Poolman, B. Lactic acid bacteria: the bugs of
the new millennium. Current opinion in microbiology 3, 276–282. issn: 1369-5274. doi:10.
1016/S1369-5274(00)00089-8. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10851157/ (June
2000).
30.
Matthews, K. R., Kniel, K. E. & Montville, T. J. Food microbiology : an introduction.
https://www.wiley.com/en-dk/Food+Microbiology%3A+An+Introduction%2C+4th+
Edition-p-9781555819385 (2017).
31.
Sharma, A., Lee, S. & Park, Y. S. Molecular typing tools for identifying and character-
izing lactic acid bacteria: a review. Food Science and Biotechnology 29, 1301–1318. issn:
20926456. doi:10.1007/S10068-020-00802-X/TABLES/1. https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s10068-020-00802-x (Oct. 2020).
32.
Gupta, R., Jeevaratnam, K., Fatima, A., Scholar, P. & Graduate, P. Lactic Acid Bacteria:
Probiotic Characteristic, Selection Criteria, and its Role in Human Health (A Review). 5.
www.jetir.org (2018).
33.
Bermudez-Brito, M., Plaza-Díaz, J., Muñoz-Quezada, S., Gómez-Llorente, C. & Gil, A.
Probiotic Mechanisms of Action. Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism 61, 160–174. issn:
0250-6807. doi:10.1159/000342079. https://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000342079 (Oct.
2012).
34.
Ayivi, R. D. et al. Lactic Acid Bacteria: Food Safety and Human Health Applications.
Dairy 2020, Vol. 1, Pages 202-232 1, 202–232. issn: 2624-862X. doi:10.3390/DAIRY1030015.
https://www.mdpi.com/2624- 862X/1/3/15/htmhttps://www.mdpi.com/2624-
862X/1/3/15 (Oct. 2020).
35.
Yang, S. C., Lin, C. H., Sung, C. T. & Fang, J. Y. Antibacterial activities of bacteriocins:
application in foods and pharmaceuticals. Frontiers in Microbiology 5. issn: 1664302X.
doi:10 . 3389 / FMICB . 2014 . 00241. /pmc / articles / PMC4033612 / /pmc / articles /
PMC4033612/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4033612/ (2014).
36.
Altieri, C., Ciuﬀreda, E., Maggio, B. D. & Sinigaglia, M. Lactic acid bacteria as starter
cultures. Starter Cultures in Food Production, 1–15. doi:10.1002/9781118933794.CH1.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/9781118933794.ch1https:
/ / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1002 / 9781118933794 . ch1https : / /
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781118933794.ch1 (Jan. 2017).
37.
Edenbrandt, A. K. & Lagerkvist, C. J. Motives, propensities and consistencies among
Swedish consumers in relation to the food choice concept of clean eating. British Food
Journal 125, 125–145. issn: 0007070X. doi:10.1108/BFJ- 03- 2022- 0217/FULL/PDF
(2023).
52
==PAGE:59==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
38.
Hols, P. et al. New insights in the molecular biology and physiology of Streptococcus
thermophilus revealed by comparative genomics. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 29, 435–
463. issn: 0168-6445. doi:10.1016/J.FMRRE.2005.04.008. https://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.fmrre.2005.04.008 (Aug. 2005).
39.
Hati, S., Mandal, S. & Prajapati, J. B. Novel starters for value added fermented dairy
products. Current Research in Nutrition and Food Science 1, 83–91. issn: 23220007.
doi:10.12944/CRNFSJ.1.1.09 (2013).
40.
EFSA. Qualiﬁed presumption of safety (QPS) | EFSA 2023. https://www.efsa.europa.
eu/da/topics/topic/qualified-presumption-safety-qps.
41.
Koutsoumanis, K. et al. Update of the list of QPS-recommended biological agents inten-
tionally added to food or feed as notiﬁed to EFSA 15: suitability of taxonomic units notiﬁed
to EFSA until September 2021. EFSA Journal 20, e07045. issn: 1831-4732. doi:10.2903/
J.EFSA.2022.7045. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.2903/j.efsa.
2022.7045https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.2903/j.efsa.2022.
7045https://efsa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.2903/j.efsa.2022.7045 (Jan.
2022).
42.
Leuschner, R. G. et al. Qualiﬁed presumption of safety (QPS): a generic risk assessment
approach for biological agents notiﬁed to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).
Trends in Food Science & Technology 21, 425–435. issn: 0924-2244. doi:10.1016/J.TIFS.
2010.07.003 (Sept. 2010).
43.
Tomás, M. M. & Bou, G. LEUCONOSTOC. Molecular Detection of Human Bacterial
Pathogens, 1183–1194. doi:10.1006/RWFM.1999.0935 (Jan. 1999).
44.
Hemme, D. & Foucaud-Scheunemann, C. Leuconostoc, characteristics, use in dairy tech-
nology and prospects in functional foods. International Dairy Journal 14, 467–494. doi:10.
1016/j.idairyj.2003.10.005 (2004).
45.
Issa, A. T. & Tahergorabi, R. Milk Bacteria and Gastrointestinal Tract: Microbial Com-
position of Milk. Dietary Interventions in Gastrointestinal Diseases: Foods, Nutrients, and
Dietary Supplements, 265–275. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-814468-8.00022-3 (Jan. 2019).
46.
Paulo, E. M. et al. Production, extraction and characterization of exopolysaccharides
produced by the native Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides R2 strain. Anais da Academia
Brasileira de Ciencias 84, 495–507. issn: 1678-2690. doi:10.1590/S0001-37652012000200018.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22652760/ (June 2012).
47.
Jurášková, D., Ribeiro, S. C. & Silva, C. C. Exopolysaccharides Produced by Lactic Acid
Bacteria: From Biosynthesis to Health-Promoting Properties. Foods 2022, Vol. 11, Page
156 11, 156. issn: 2304-8158. doi:10.3390/FOODS11020156. https://www.mdpi.com/
2304-8158/11/2/156/htmhttps://www.mdpi.com/2304-8158/11/2/156 (Jan. 2022).
53
==PAGE:60==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
48.
Rattray, F. P., Myling-Petersen, D., Larsen, D. & Nilsson, D. Plasmid-Encoded Diacetyl
(Acetoin) Reductase in Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides. Applied and Environmental Mi-
crobiology 69, 304. issn: 00992240. doi:10.1128/AEM.69.1.304- 311.2003. /pmc/
articles/PMC152458//pmc/articles/PMC152458/?report=abstracthttps://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC152458/ (Jan. 2003).
49.
Prado Barragán, L. A., Figueroa, J. J. B., Rodríguez Durán, L. V., Aguilar González, C. N.
& Hennigs, C. Fermentative Production Methods. Biotransformation of Agricultural Waste
and By-Products: The Food, Feed, Fibre, Fuel (4F) Economy, 189–217. doi:10.1016/B978-
0-12-803622-8.00007-0 (Jan. 2016).
50.
Jaishankar, J. & Srivastava, P. Molecular basis of stationary phase survival and applica-
tions. Frontiers in Microbiology 8, 298976. issn: 1664302X. doi:10.3389/FMICB.2017.
02000/BIBTEX. www.frontiersin.org (Oct. 2017).
51.
De Angelis, M. & Gobbetti, M. Lactobacillus SPP.: General Characteristics. Reference
Module in Food Science. doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-100596-5.00851-9 (Jan. 2016).
52.
Siezen, R. J. Multi-domain, cell-envelope proteinases of lactic acid bacteria. Antonie van
Leeuwenhoek 76, 139–155 (1999).
53.
Ji, D., Ma, J., Xu, M. & Agyei, D. Cell-envelope proteinases from lactic acid bacteria:
Biochemical features and biotechnological applications. Comprehensive reviews in food
science and food safety 20, 369–400. issn: 1541-4337. doi:10.1111/1541-4337.12676.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33443792/ (Jan. 2021).
54.
Doeven, M. K., Kok, J. & Poolman, B. Speciﬁcity and selectivity determinants of pep-
tide transport in Lactococcus lactis and other microorganisms. Molecular Microbiology
57, 640–649. issn: 1365-2958. doi:10 . 1111 / J . 1365 - 2958 . 2005 . 04698 . X. https :
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04698.x (Aug.
2005).
55.
Fang, G., Konings, W. N. & Poolman, B. Kinetics and substrate speciﬁcity of membrane-
reconstituted peptide transporter DtpT of Lactococcus lactis. Journal of bacteriology 182,
2530–2535. issn: 0021-9193. doi:10.1128/JB.182.9.2530-2535.2000. https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10762255/ (May 2000).
56.
Hanne, K. S. & Pekka Varmanen, I. MINI-REVIEW Proteolytic systems of lactic acid
bacteria. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 71, 394–406. doi:10.1007/s00253- 006- 0427- 1
(2006).
57.
Den Hengst, C. D. et al. The Lactococcus lactis CodY regulon: identiﬁcation of a conserved
cis-regulatory element. The Journal of biological chemistry 280, 34332–34342. issn: 0021-
9258. doi:10.1074/JBC.M502349200. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16040604/
(Oct. 2005).
54
==PAGE:61==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
58.
Vos, P. et al. A maturation protein is essential for production of active forms of Lactococcus
lactis SK11 serine proteinase located in or secreted from the cell envelope. Journal of
bacteriology 171, 2795–2802. issn: 0021-9193. doi:10.1128/JB.171.5.2795-2802.1989.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2496115/ (1989).
59.
Vos, P. et al. Engineering of the Lactococcus lactis serine proteinase by construction of
hybrid enzymes. Protein Engineering, Design and Selection 4, 479–484. issn: 1741-0126.
doi:10.1093/PROTEIN/4.4.479. https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/protein/4.4.479
(Apr. 1991).
60.
Hansen, E. B. & Marcatili, P. Modeled Structure of the Cell Envelope Proteinase of Lac-
tococcus lactis. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8, 613986. issn: 22964185.
doi:10.3389/FBIOE.2020.613986/BIBTEX (Dec. 2020).
61.
Bruinenberg, P. G., De Vos, W. M. & Siezen, R. J. Deletion of Various Carboxy-Terminal
Domains of Lactococcus lactis SK11 Proteinase: Eﬀects on Activity, Speciﬁcity, and Sta-
bility of the Truncated Enzyme. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 66, 2859. issn:
00992240. doi:10 . 1128 / AEM . 66 . 7 . 2859 - 2865 . 2000. /pmc / articles / PMC92084 /
/pmc/articles/PMC92084/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC92084/ (July 2000).
62.
Exterkate, F. A. & Alting, A. C. Role of Calcium in Activity and Stability of the Lacto-
coccus lactis Cell Envelope Proteinase. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 65, 1390.
issn: 00992240. doi:10.1128/AEM.65.4.1390-1396.1999. /pmc/articles/PMC91197/
/pmc/articles/PMC91197/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC91197/ (1999).
63.
Exterkate, F. A., Alting, A. C. & Bruinenberg, P. G. Diversity of cell envelope proteinase
speciﬁcity among strains of Lactococcus lactis and its relationship to charge characteristics
of the substrate-binding region. Applied and environmental microbiology 59, 3640–3647.
issn: 0099-2240. doi:10.1128/AEM.59.11.3640-3647.1993. https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/8285671/ (1993).
64.
Gänzle, M. The periodic table of fermented foods: limitations and opportunities. Applied
Microbiology and Biotechnology 2022 106:8 106, 2815–2826. issn: 1432-0614. doi:10 .
1007/S00253-022-11909-Y. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00253-
022-11909-y (Apr. 2022).
65.
Day, L. Proteins from land plants – Potential resources for human nutrition and food
security. Trends in Food Science & Technology 32, 25–42. issn: 0924-2244. doi:10.1016/
J.TIFS.2013.05.005 (July 2013).
66.
Jeske, S., Zannini, E. & Arendt, E. K. Evaluation of Physicochemical and Glycaemic
Properties of Commercial Plant-Based Milk Substitutes. Plant foods for human nutrition
(Dordrecht, Netherlands) 72, 26–33. issn: 1573-9104. doi:10.1007/S11130-016-0583-0.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27817089/ (Mar. 2017).
55
==PAGE:62==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
67.
Jeske, S., Zannini, E. & Arendt, E. K. Past, present and future: The strength of plant-
based dairy substitutes based on gluten-free raw materials. Food Research International
110, 42–51. issn: 0963-9969. doi:10.1016/J.FOODRES.2017.03.045 (Aug. 2018).
68.
Jakobsen, J. et al. Naeringsstoﬁndhold i plantedrikke - Nutrient content in plant-based
beverages. www.food.dtu.dk (2022).
69.
Gopikrishna, T., Suresh Kumar, H. K., Perumal, K. & Elangovan, E. Impact of Bacillus
in fermented soybean foods on human health. Annals of Microbiology 71. issn: 18692044.
doi:10.1186/S13213- 021- 01641- 9. /pmc/articles/PMC8285709//pmc/articles/
PMC8285709/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC8285709/ (Dec. 2021).
70.
Boulay, M., Al Haddad, M. & Rul, F. Streptococcus thermophilus growth in soya milk:
Sucrose consumption, nitrogen metabolism, soya protein hydrolysis and role of the cell-wall
protease PrtS. International journal of food microbiology 335. issn: 1879-3460. doi:10.
1016/J.IJFOODMICRO.2020.108903. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33065381/
(Dec. 2020).
71.
Fischer, E., Cayot, N. & Cachon, R. Potential of Microorganisms to Decrease the "Beany"
Oﬀ-Flavor: A Review. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 70, 4493–4508. issn:
15205118. doi:10.1021/ACS.JAFC.1C07505/ASSET/IMAGES/MEDIUM/JF1C07505{\_
}0009.GIF. https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.jafc.1c07505 (Apr. 2022).
72.
Lee, C. & Beuchat, L. R. Changes in chemical composition and sensory qualities of peanut
milk fermented with lactic acid bacteria. International journal of food microbiology 13,
273–283. issn: 0168-1605. doi:10.1016/0168-1605(91)90085-4. https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/1911084/ (1991).
73.
Pillidge, C. J., Crow, V. L., Coolbear, T. & Reid, J. R. Exchanging lactocepin plasmids
in lactococcal starters to study bitterness development in Gouda cheese: a preliminary
investigation. International Dairy Journal 13, 345–354. issn: 0958-6946. doi:10.1016/
S0958-6946(03)00008-6 (Jan. 2003).
74.
Rekha, C. R. & Vijayalakshmi, G. Bioconversion of isoﬂavone glycosides to aglycones,
mineral bioavailability and vitamin B complex in fermented soymilk by probiotic bacteria
and yeast. Journal of applied microbiology 109, 1198–1208. issn: 1365-2672. doi:10.1111/
J.1365-2672.2010.04745.X. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20477889/ (2010).
75.
Reddy, N. R. & Pierson, M. D. Reduction in antinutritional and toxic components in
plant foods by fermentationa a The term ’plant foods’ is used in the context of food
derived from plant sources. Food Research International 27, 281 –290. issn: 09639969.
doi:10.1016/0963-9969(94)90096-5 (Jan. 1994).
76.
Salunkhe, D. & Chavan, J. Dietary tannins: consequences and remedies https://books.
google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=_E9yNLJNW0kC&oi=fnd&pg=PA1&ots=pqoTW_w-
Pn&sig=W7xdmlwUYmzYnMKRTHz3w-zXP04 (1989).
56
==PAGE:63==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
77.
Adeyemo, S. & Onilude, A. Enzymatic Reduction of Anti-nutritional Factors in Fermenting
Soybeans by Lactobacillus plantarum Isolates from Fermenting Cereals. Nigerian Food
Journal 31, 84–90. issn: 0189-7241. doi:10.1016/S0189-7241(15)30080-1 (Jan. 2013).
78.
Israelsen, H., Madsen, S. M., Vrang, A., Hansen, E. B. & Johansen, E. Cloning and partial
characterization of regulated promoters from Lactococcus lactis Tn917-lacZ integrants
with the new promoter probe vector, pAK80. Applied and Environmental Microbiology
61, 2540. issn: 00992240. doi:10.1128/AEM.61.7.2540-2547.1995. /pmc/articles/
PMC167525/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC167525/ (1995).
79.
Pedersen, M. L., Arrived, K. R. & Johansen, E. Genetic analysis of the minimal replicon
of the Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis biovar diacetylactis citrate plasmid. Molecular &
general genetics : MGG 244, 374–382. issn: 0026-8925. doi:10.1007/BF00286689. https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8078463/ (July 1994).
80.
Wegmann, U. et al. Complete Genome Sequence of the Prototype Lactic Acid Bacterium
Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris MG1363. Journal of Bacteriology 189, 3256. issn:
00219193. doi:10.1128/JB.01768-06. /pmc/articles/PMC1855848//pmc/articles/
PMC1855848/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1855848/ (Apr. 2007).
81.
NEBioCalculator https://nebiocalculator.neb.com/#!/ligation.
82.
Poulsen, V. K., Derkx, P. & Oregaard, G. High-throughput screening for texturing Lacto-
coccus strains. FEMS Microbiology Letters 366, 1. issn: 15746968. doi:10.1093/FEMSLE/
FNZ001. /pmc/articles/PMC6341772//pmc/articles/PMC6341772/?report=abstracthttps:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6341772/ (Jan. 2019).
83.
Paysan-Lafosse, T. et al. InterPro in 2022. Nucleic Acids Research 51, D418–D427. issn:
0305-1048. doi:10.1093/NAR/GKAC993. https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac993
(Jan. 2023).
84.
Snapgene. Gibson Assembly - Snapgene 2024. https://www.snapgene.com/guides/
gibson-assembly.
85.
Gibson, D. G. et al. Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilo-
bases. Nature Methods 2009 6:5 6, 343–345. issn: 1548-7105. doi:10.1038/nmeth.1318.
https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.1318 (Apr. 2009).
86.
Mäkinen, O. E., Wanhalinna, V., Zannini, E. & Arendt, E. K. Foods for Special Dietary
Needs: Non-dairy Plant-based Milk Substitutes and Fermented Dairy-type Products. Crit-
ical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 56, 339–349. issn: 15497852. doi:10.1080/
10408398.2012.761950. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10408398.
2012.761950 (Feb. 2016).
57
==PAGE:64==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
87.
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. PCR Cycling Parameters—Six Key Considerations for Suc-
cess | Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc - DK 2024. https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/
en/home/life-science/cloning/cloning-learning-center/invitrogen-school-
of- molecular- biology/pcr- education/pcr- reagents- enzymes/pcr- cycling-
considerations.html.
88.
Assembly, G. Gibson Assembly - Cloning Guide 2nd Edition (2017).
89.
Schlaak, C., Hoﬀmann, P., May, K. & Weimann, A. Desalting minimal amounts of DNA
for electroporation in E. coli: a comparison of diﬀerent physical methods. Biotechnology
letters 27, 1003–1005. issn: 0141-5492. doi:10 . 1007 / S10529 - 005 - 7867 - Z. https :
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16132844/ (July 2005).
90.
Le Bourgeois, P., Langella, P. & Ritzenthaler, P. Electrotransformation of Lactococcus
lactis. Electrotransformation of Bacteria, 56–65. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-04305-9{\_}6.
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-662-04305-9_6 (2000).
91.
Welker, D. L., Coburn, B. M., McClatchy, J. H. & Broadbent, J. R. Multiple pulse elec-
troporation of lactic acid bacteria Lactococcus lactis and Lactobacillus casei. Journal of
microbiological methods 166. issn: 1872-8359. doi:10 . 1016 / J . MIMET . 2019 . 105741.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31634499/ (Nov. 2019).
92.
Papadimitriou, K. et al. Stress Physiology of Lactic Acid Bacteria. Microbiology and molec-
ular biology reviews : MMBR 80, 837–890. issn: 1098-5557. doi:10.1128/MMBR.00076-15.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27466284/ (Sept. 2016).
93.
Battisti, I., Ebinezer, L. B., Lomolino, G., Masi, A. & Arrigoni, G. Protein proﬁle of
commercial soybean milks analyzed by label-free quantitative proteomics. Food Chemistry
352, 129299. issn: 0308-8146. doi:10.1016/J.FOODCHEM.2021.129299 (Aug. 2021).
58
==PAGE:65==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
6
Appendix
A collection of supplemental ﬁgures and tables related to this study.
Figure 16: Gel electrophoresis of the ampliﬁed PCR fragments. The ladder is λ DNA/HindIII Marker
Figure 17: Gel electrophoresis of twice ampliﬁed PCR fragments. The ladder is λ DNA/HindIII Marker
59
==PAGE:66==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 18: A pairwise comparison of the amino acid sequence of all PrtP homologous proteases identiﬁed in this project. The upper comparison gradient
displays the number of alignment positions where the sequences diﬀer. The lower comparison gradient shows the % identity, which is the % of overlapping
alignment positions where the sequences agree. Blue shades denote minimum, and red shades maximum values.
60
==PAGE:67==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 19: Second unsuccessful GA of selected fragments using products that have been puriﬁed with a PCR
puriﬁcation kit only. The lower fragments at around 5.4kb are the insert, and the upper bands at 6.4kb are the
vector fragments. The ladder is λ DNA/HindIII Marker.
Figure 20: A typical inoculation layout of the 96-well used for acidiﬁcation experiments. The ﬁgure is a scan
of an inoculated plate, bovine milk with pH indicator dye at the end of 36h of fermentation
61
==PAGE:68==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 21: Acidiﬁcation curves in bovine milk with standard deviation, as described on 13
62
==PAGE:69==
Cell Envelope Proteases from Diﬀerent LAB Analysed in Isogenic Background
Figure 22: Acidiﬁcation curves in soy milk with standard deviation, as described on 14
63
