==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Optimizing Machine Learning
Operations in Logistics
Exploring Best Practices and Evaluating Tools
Melina Siskou, s213158
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents the design and implementation of a Machine Learning Operations
(MLOps) pipeline in the context of demand forecasting for logistics hubs, using data
and a machine learning model codebase provided by DFDS Logistics. The primary
aim of the research is to bridge the gap between machine learning model development
and real-world operational deployment within a logistics setting, addressing the chal-
lenge of transitioning models from development to production environments. The
focus lies in constructing a functional MLOps pipeline that facilitates this transition,
leveraging the best practices and tools available in the rapidly evolving domain of
MLOps.
An iterative development process was employed, starting from an initial setup
without any MLOps practices and gradually advancing towards a mature pipeline.
This included the adoption of the Microsoft Maturity Model to guide development
choices, a comprehensive tool comparison to build the technology stack, and the
adoption of key practices such as Continuous Integration, Continuous Delivery, and
Continuous Training. The pipeline incorporated Docker for containerization, MLFlow
for experiment tracking and model registry, AWS S3 for storage, an MLFlow server
on AWS EC2 for collaboration, and a FastAPI application on AWS Fargate for model
deployment and service management.
The result is a comprehensive MLOps pipeline that automates the full cycle from
data extraction to model deployment and monitoring, effectively integrating the ML
model into production with a satisfactory level of maturity. The thesis also delves
into the impact of technical debt on long-term system performance, evaluating the
pipeline’s maturity through its adaptability to new algorithms, scalability for large
datasets, and operational resilience, thereby setting a trajectory for future advance-
ments.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Masters of Science degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence. The
workload of the project is 35 ECTS. The reader of this thesis is expected to have
basic knowledge of machine learning concepts.
Kongens Lyngby, March 20, 2024
Melina Siskou, s213158
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my sincerest thanks to my supervisor,
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, not only for sparking my interest in MLOps with his excellent
course but also for his supportive guidance during my thesis journey. His invaluable
advice and insightful feedback have been instrumental in the realization of this work.
I would also like to express my appreciation to the Data Analytics Department
at DFDS, for their willingness to provide me with the data and codebase that made
this thesis possible.
Lastly, I am forever grateful to my family and friends for their constant support
and encouragement.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Demand Forecasting in Logistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation, Objectives, and Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
From DevOps to MLOps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Maturity Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Tool Selection
8
3.1
Tool Selection Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Tool Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Other Tools and Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Final Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Considerations in Tool Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
MLOps Pipeline for Logistics Forecasting: A Case Study
30
4.1
Overview of Data Processing and Model Training . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Initial Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Pipeline Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Final Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Discussion
56
5.1
Progression Through MLOps Maturity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2
Final Assessment of Maturity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion
63
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
A Prediction API Swagger
65
B AWS Management Console
68
B.1 Amazon Elastic Container Registry - ECR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B.2 Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud - EC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.3 Amazon Simple Storage Service - S3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.4 AWS Fargate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C Dockerfiles
71
C.1 Deployment of MLflow Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
C.2 Deployment of FastAPI Prediction Application . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
C.3 Docker Compose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C.4 Data Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.5 Training and Evaluating Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
D GitHub Actions Workflows
77
D.1 Continuous Integration (CI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
D.2 Continuous Delivery (CD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
E Select and Upload Best Model Script
87
Bibliography
90
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Demand Forecasting in Logistics
Nowadays, logistics companies adopt ever-increasing precision forecasting efforts for
strategic planning and operational eﬀiciency. In this way, they can anticipate the
future needs of the supply chain, covering areas such as inventory management, allo-
cation of workforce and equipment, scheduling of vehicle maintenance, and optimiza-
tion of delivery routes. The primary aim of such forecasting is to ensure that the
right resources are in the right place at the right time, enabling logistics companies
to meet customer demands promptly while minimizing costs[68].
In this project, we will focus our attention to demand forecasting within the con-
text of a logistics hub. This entails calculating the volume of goods that need to
be collected from and delivered to a hub. Deliveries refer to the inbound flow of
goods into the hub from suppliers or other origins, while collections concern the out-
bound flow of these goods to their next destinations, whether that is a store, another
hub, or directly to the customer. Accurate forecasting of these activities enables hub
managers to streamline operations effectively. This includes optimizing vehicle and
workforce utilization to prevent emergency hires or surplus staﬀing, minimizing equip-
ment idle time, and ensuring assets are eﬀiciently utilized. Additionally, it aids in
keeping inventory levels balanced, thereby controlling costs associated with excessive
stock or shortages.
The approach to forecasting in logistics incorporates historical data analysis along-
side predictive modeling. The integration of Machine Learning (ML) into this frame-
work has revolutionized the generation of forecasts[2]. ML algorithms analyze histor-
ical data to identify patterns and relationships, enabling the accurate prediction of
future demands based on various factors, such as seasonal trends, shifts in market dy-
namics, and changes in consumer behavior. By utilizing the extensive data produced
across the logistics network, ML provides a dynamic and accurate tool for strategic
planning.
However, even with a sophisticated ML model capable of predicting demand with
high accuracy, the process of operationalizing ML models poses significant challenges.
These include ensuring the integrity and consistency of data from diverse sources and
seamlessly integrating these models into existing systems to align with operational
needs. Moreover, systems must be adaptable to handle fluctuations in demand, par-
ticularly during peak seasons, and there must be ongoing monitoring to maintain
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Motivation, Objectives, and Thesis Structure
2
accuracy as market dynamics shift. Adhering to regulatory standards and promot-
ing collaboration among data scientists, IT professionals, and operations staff is also
essential for successful implementation.
Machine Learning Operations (MLOps) addresses these operational challenges by
offering a structured framework that automates the deployment, monitoring, and
management of ML models, facilitating smoother integration of ML into business
operations and enabling companies to harness the full potential of ML for improved
eﬀiciency and informed decision-making.
1.2
Motivation, Objectives, and Thesis Structure
This thesis utilizes data and a machine learning model codebase for demand forecast-
ing provided by DFDS[24], a Danish international shipping and logistics company
established in 1866.
DFDS Logistics focuses on haulage and container activities,
leveraging a vast network that includes 24 ferry routes, 55 ferries, 8 port terminals,
and approximately 9,000 trailer and container units across Europe and Türkiye.
The motivation for this project is driven by the challenge to effectively transition
machine learning models from development to real-world deployment. It seeks to ad-
dress the challenges of deploying these models in production by exploring best prac-
tices, assessing system maturity, identifying supportive tools, and tackling common
deployment issues. The primary objective is to build a functional MLOps pipeline
to operationalize the DFDS-provided machine learning model, following an iterative
development process, that begins without any MLOps practices and aims towards a
fully matured MLOps pipeline. The project also entails a thorough evaluation and
selection of tools and technologies needed for the pipeline. It is important to note,
that improving the model’s accuracy is beyond the scope of this thesis.
The main structure of the thesis is organized into the following sections:
1. Background: This section explains the transition from DevOps to MLOps,
highlighting best practices and maturity models in the field.
2. Tool Selection: It provides a detailed comparison and exploration of various
tools and technologies for developing the pipeline.
3. MLOps Pipeline for Logistics Forecasting: This part describes the imple-
mentation and iterative enhancement of the MLOps pipeline.
4. Discussion: This section evaluates the completed pipeline, discusses areas
where it falls short, and suggests directions for future enhancements.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In this chapter, we are going to introduce the concept of Machine Learning Opera-
tions (MLOps), explaining its evolution from traditional DevOps practices. We will
explore the foundational principles and best practices that define MLOps and we
will examine structured frameworks, like maturity models, highlighting their role in
effectively shaping the implementation of machine learning projects.
As the machine learning community gains more experience with the deployment
and operation of machine learning systems, a common challenge is becoming increas-
ingly evident: the initiation and deployment phases of ML systems are relatively
straightforward and cheap, however, the subsequent maintenance phase presents sub-
stantial challenges, both in complexity and financial burden. This is because ML
systems not only inherit the conventional obstacles associated with software upkeep
but also encounter a suite of issues exclusive to the ML domain, thereby accelerating
the accumulation of technical debt[65]. This kind of debt is particularly challenging
to identify because it impacts the entire system, not just the individual pieces of
code. The dynamic nature of data within ML systems can compromise or render tra-
ditional software organizational methods ineffective, complicating the maintenance
further. Consequently, these complexities contribute to the fact that only a small
fraction of ML projects successfully transition and remain to production[76].
2.1
From DevOps to MLOps
To tackle these challenges, we delve into the inception of DevOps and its subsequent
evolution into MLOps.
2.1.1
DevOps
DevOps originated as a collection of practices designed to unify software development
(Dev) and software operation (Ops), promoting a culture of collaboration and shared
responsibility. It revolves around continuous integration (CI) and continuous delivery
(CD), two core practices that streamline the development process:
==PAGE:11==
2.1 From DevOps to MLOps
4
• Continuous Integration (CI): involves automatically integrating code changes
from multiple developers into a single software project multiple times a day.
This practice encourages frequent code commits, automated testing, and early
detection of issues, leading to higher quality software and faster development
cycles.
• Continuous Delivery (CD): extends CI by ensuring that software can be
deployed to production at any time. It automates the delivery of applications
to selected infrastructure environments, enabling teams to release new changes
to customers quickly and safely.
By integrating development and operations activities, automating pipelines, and
fostering a culture of rapid feedback and continuous improvement, DevOps helps
organizations achieve more eﬀicient and reliable software delivery [44, 64]
2.1.2
MLOps
MLOps builds upon the DevOps foundation, adapting its principles to the unique
requirements of machine learning model lifecycles. It focuses on enhancing software
delivery’s eﬀiciency, reliability, and speed, while also tackling ML-specific challenges
such as data versioning, model training, validation, and deployment[64, 77].
De-
spite being a relatively new field without a standardized process[64], MLOps has
established principles that serve as foundational guidelines. These principles dictate
methodologies and approaches that embody the ”best practices” in the field [44] :
• CI/CD: In MLOps, the CI/CD pipeline is tailored to the specific needs of
ML applications, extending traditional code testing to include data and model
validation. CI involves testing of both the code and ML components, such as
feature engineering and model convergence, ensuring that every aspect of the
application meets quality standards. The CD phase automates the deployment
of not only the application code but also the ML models and their data, main-
taining the models in a production-ready state.
• Continuous Training and Validation: Beyond CI and CD, MLOps intro-
duces continuous training (CT) to ensure that ML models are regularly updated
with new data, maintaining their accuracy over time. This includes validating
models against new data sets and retraining them as necessary to adapt to
changing patterns and trends.
• Reproducibility: The ability to duplicate an ML experiment and achieve the
exact same results is pivotal, ensuring that outcomes are consistent over time
and across different environments. This consistency is the backbone of repro-
ducibility in machine learning, where it is crucial not just to produce effective
models but also to understand and replicate the process that led to these models.
==PAGE:12==
2.2 Maturity Model
5
Experiment Tracking plays a vital role in this context. It involves systemati-
cally recording the details of the machine learning experiments - including the
data used, model versions, parameters, training algorithms, and results. This
practice allows the team to keep a detailed journal of their work, much like a
lab notebook in traditional scientific research.
• Data and Model Versioning: MLOps emphasizes the importance of tracking
and managing changes not only in code but also in the data and models used,
facilitating reproducibility and traceability across the ML lifecycle.
• Workflow orchestration: involves automating and managing the sequence
of tasks in the ML lifecycle, from data preprocessing to model training and
deployment. This ensures processes are executed in the correct order, eﬀiciently
and reliably, facilitating scalability and reducing manual errors.
• Collaboration: Emphasizes teamwork across data, models, and code, blending
technical cooperation with a culture of open communication.
• Continuous Monitoring: This involves tracking the performance and health
of models in production to identify model drift and operational challenges. It
facilitates prompt decisions on updates or retraining, ensuring the model’s ef-
fectiveness and adherence to compliance standards.
Figure 2.1: The MLOps lifecycle[59]
2.2
Maturity Model
Having delved into the core principles underpinning MLOps, our focus now shifts
toward their systematic and effective implementation. This is where the concept of a
maturity model proves helpful. A maturity model is a framework designed to make
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Maturity Model
6
the principles and practices of MLOps clearer. It helps organizations assess their
current capabilities, identify areas for improvement, and systematically advance their
practices in deploying and managing machine learning models. It also shows how
a machine learning project can get better over time, offering guidance on how to
improve step by step, avoiding the rush to meet high standards all at once[54].
The maturity model typically consists of various levels, each representing a stage
of sophistication in handling machine learning workflows. Although there is no uni-
versal maturity model, the two main ones were created by Google[35] and Microsoft
[54]. The Google model is structured into three levels: Manual process, ML pipeline
automation, and CI/CD pipeline automation. On the other hand, Microsoft’s model
is comprised of five levels:
Level 0: No MLOps At this level, data collection is manual, computing resources
are often unmanaged, and experiments lack consistent tracking, typically re-
sulting in a manually shared model file with specified inputs and outputs. The
release process is manual, with the scoring script—possibly developed long after
experiments and not version-controlled—handled by a data scientist indepen-
dently. The prediction application operates on a local server or user’s machine
without CI/CD practices or active model performance monitoring.
Level 1: DevOps but no MLOps At Level 1, structured processes start integrat-
ing into the lifecycle, focusing mainly on DevOps over specific MLOps method-
ologies. An automated data pipeline is established, but experiment tracking
and compute management are still inconsistent.
Scoring scripts, which are
likely version-controlled, mark a move towards discipline yet remain distinct
from MLOps practices.
These scripts and other components are handed to
software engineers, signaling collaboration but not complete integration. Basic
model tests are also likely introduced during application integration.
Level 2: Automated Training This level marks a shift towards more reproducible
and automated processes. Compute resources are now being managed, experi-
mentation becomes more systematic, with results tracked and both the training
code and the resulting models undergo version control.
Level 3: Automated Model Deployment A notable shift occurs in the model
release process, which moves to automatic release mechanisms, supported by a
scoring script that is version controlled and accompanied by tests. The release
process is significantly enhanced through a CI/CD pipeline.
In application
integration, extensive unit and integration tests with each model release are
introduced to reduce reliance on data scientist expertise for implementation.
Level 4: Full MLOps Automated Operations At this stage, the model under-
goes automatic retraining, activated by triggers from the monitoring system, a
process we already referred to as Continuous Learning. This strategy is pivotal
in addressing sudden data drifts, guaranteeing the model’s effectiveness when
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Maturity Model
7
against unforeseen changes in the data landscape. It enables the model to adapt
to rare events where patterns and trends significantly diverge from the norm,
maintaining its relevance and accuracy over time.
For the purposes of this project, the Microsoft Maturity Model has been selected
as the guiding framework over Google’s model, due to its more granular approach and
detailed guidance. This choice facilitates the evaluation and iterative enhancement
of the pipeline, allowing for the identification of specific areas for improvement in
each iteration. It is important to remember, however, that these maturity models are
adaptable; they’re meant to serve as flexible guidelines rather than rigid rules. This
adaptability ensures that we can tailor the maturity levels to fit the unique needs and
circumstances of the project at hand.
Figure 2.2: Microsoft Maturity Levels [76]
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Tool Selection
Over recent years, a growing number of tools have been developed to accommodate
machine learning operations[48]. This growth trend is marked by a yearly increase in
new tools and platforms, reflecting a dynamic evolution in the field[76]. According
to the Linux Foundation (LF) AI & Data Landscape[47], as of January 2024, there
are more than 400 open-source projects in this space, ranging from tools that target
specific, smaller aspects of a workflow, to multi-tool platforms aiming at creating a
complete, integrated ecosystem. Major tech companies have also entered the MLOps
arena. Google’s TensorFlow Extended (TFX), Microsoft’s Azure Machine Learning
and Amazon Web Services’ SageMaker are key examples.
Figure 3.1: The LF AI & Data Foundation Interactive Landscape [47]
==PAGE:16==
3.1 Tool Selection Process
9
3.1
Tool Selection Process
It is important to acknowledge that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to selecting
tools in this diverse field [64, 76]. The choice of tools for MLOps must align with
the context of the respective problem and setup[63], always keeping the project’s re-
quirements in mind[64]. All of these tools are designed with varying needs in mind,
meaning there is not a universally optimal tool that suits each need, for all organiza-
tions and problems equally[64].
During this project, for each task at hand, an initial survey of relevant tools was
conducted, leading to a shortlist of top choices, typically favoring popular tools and
personal familiarity. These contenders were then assessed based on four key criteria:
Cost, Complexity, Community and Coverage. While there was a strong inclination
towards open-source tools for their flexibility and community support, some propri-
etary services were considered, especially those that have widespread recognition and
were previously used.
3.1.1
Criteria for Tool Comparison
• Cost : This criterion assesses the financial implications of a tool and its capa-
bility to scale for large teams. For this assessment, pricing plans were reviewed,
and in some instances, the tools’ pricing calculators were used to create compa-
rable pricing scenarios.
• Complexity: This aspect of the evaluation examined the usability of the tool,
considering factors like ease of integration, user interface and the required level
of expertise. The goal was to find tools that offer advanced functionality while
remaining user-friendly. The evaluation looked into each tool’s documentation,
including available tutorials and starter guides, as well as relevant blog posts
and articles to get an idea of how easily someone could integrate and use the
tool.
• Community: The support and activity level of the tool’s community are critical
indicators of its reliability and potential for continued development. While not
the sole determinant, GitHub Stars were looked at for the open source tools, to
provide a quantifiable measure of the tools’ popularity and acceptance within
the ML community. A high number of stars typically indicates the level of trust
and satisfaction users have in the tool, serving as a proxy for its effectiveness,
usability and reliability. Also, comparing the history and trend of these stars
provided additional insights.
• Coverage: This final criterion assesses a tool’s coverage across the MLOps
pipeline stages by examining the specific features each tool provides and how
effective they are. It also assesses its scalability, which is crucial for manag-
ing growing data volumes and computational demands eﬀiciently. It evaluates
whether the tool can expand from small projects to enterprise-level operations
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Tool Comparison
10
without sacrificing performance or incurring excessive costs. The evaluation,
again, looked into each tool’s documentation, focusing on the features listed
and how they span across the MLOps pipeline stages.
3.2
Tool Comparison
This section explores the comparison of various tools used throughout the develop-
ment of this project’s pipeline. It highlights how each tool was evaluated based on
previously mentioned criteria and how it was finally selected, providing insights into
the decision-making process.
3.2.1
Experiment Tracking, Model Management and Beyond
The evaluation process began with a focus on identifying the most effective tools
for experiment tracking and insightful visualizations.
The primary contenders in
this exploration were MLflow, TensorBoard and Weights & Biases. However, as the
comparison progressed, it became clear that the functionality of some of these tools
extended beyond experiment tracking. Consequently, the scope of the comparison
broadened to also include model management and the tools’ capabilities to support
deployment processes.
MLflow [56] is an open-source platform for managing the entire machine learning
lifecycle, including experimentation, reproducibility, deployment and a central
model registry. It is designed for both individual and organizational use, offering
framework-agnostic capabilities for handling any ML library and programming
language, as well as supporting REST APIs. MLflow streamlines monitoring ex-
periments, comparing parameters and analyzing results, with minimal changes
to existing code. Users can easily interact with the platform via its web UI. It
also facilitates the comparison and deployment of ML models, packaging ML
code into reusable and reproducible modules and deploying models as a web
service using AWS SageMaker, Azure ML and Apache Spark. This facilitates
achieving CI/CD goals through cloud service functionalities. Given its broad
scope and versatility, MLflow has gained a lot of traction and has a very large
and active community, with a widespread adoption in the industry[57].
In terms of security, however, MLflow does not have robust security features
out-of-the-box. Therefore, it might require additional configuration and setup
to ensure the secure handling of sensitive data and managing access control.
Also, while MLflow supports collaboration, it does not have the same level of
collaboration features as some other platforms, since you can not share your
experiments, there is limited support for multi-user environments and no role-
based access control.
==PAGE:18==
3.2 Tool Comparison
11
TensorBoard [79, 1] is an open-source, web-based visualization tool designed to
facilitate machine learning experimentation. As an integral part of the Tensor-
Flow ecosystem, TensorBoard provides tooling for monitoring various aspects
of machine learning experiments, including tracking and visualizing metrics like
loss and accuracy, visualizing model graphs, viewing histograms of weights and
biases and projecting embeddings to lower dimensions. While its primary in-
tegration is with TensorFlow, plugins have extended its capabilities to other
libraries like PyTorch. TensorBoard includes unique features like the What-If
Tool (WIT) for model explainability and a managed service, TensorBoard.dev,
for hosting and sharing experiments. The platform is user friendly, especially
for those already familiar with TensorFlow, and supports a variety of visualiza-
tions, such as scalar summaries, model architecture graphs and distributions
of model parameters over time, enhancing the understanding and debugging of
machine learning models. Additionally, TensorBoard has a strong and active
community, mainly due to the widespread use of TensorFlow itself.
However, the platform is primarily designed for single-user scenarios, focusing
on local machine usage, which may not cater to the collaborative needs of
larger teams or organizations, as it also lacks features for user and workspace
management.
Moreover, it does not support data and model versioning, a
critical aspect for achieving full reproducibility of experiments. Users might also
experience performance issues when scaling to a large number of experiments,
as TensorBoard may not handle extensive data eﬀiciently [78].
Weights & Biases (Wandb) [1, 81] is a bit unique in this trio. While they do
offer a free version and have open-source client libraries to integrate into code,
the main platform, especially the cloud-based services where experiments are
logged and visualized, is not fully open source.
Nonetheless, it has gained significant popularity due to its user-friendly inter-
face, rich visualizations and ease of integration with multiple ML frameworks.
Wandb includes a wide range of features such as experiment tracking, hyper-
parameter tuning, a model registry for managing production models centrally
and a feature for scaling and automating workloads.
Additionally, Wandb’s
Artifacts provide version control for assets, ensuring reproducibility and trace-
ability throughout the ML lifecycle. Wandb is also great for collaborative work
since you can easily share experiments and results with team members, promot-
ing effective teamwork in machine learning projects.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Tool Comparison
12
Table 3.1: Comparison of MLflow, TensorBoard and Weights & Biases
Tool
Cost
Complexity
Community
Coverage
MLflow
Open-source
Offers
compre-
hensive
features
but comes with a
steeper
learning
curve,
especially
for
advanced
configurations
and
integrations.
Suitable
for
teams
looking
for a holistic ML
lifecycle solution.
Active
and
growing
with
contributors from
multiple
organi-
zations.
GitHub
Stars: 15.7k as of
2023.
Integrates
with
many
ML
li-
braries and plat-
forms,
including
PyTorch, Tensor-
Flow, Scikit-learn
and more.
TensorBoard
Open-source
Simple
for
Ten-
sorFlow
users
but
primarily
focuses
on
visu-
alization.
It is
less about holis-
tic
experiment
management
and more about
diving deep into
model
metrics,
parameters
and
architectures.
Large,
as
it
is
directly
linked
to
the
Tensor-
Flow community.
GitHub
Stars:
6.4k as of 2023.
Native to Tensor-
Flow but plugins
extend its capa-
bilities
to
other
libraries like Py-
Torch.
Wandb
Free for individ-
ual users; there’s
a cost for teams
and enterprises.
Balances ease-of-
use with powerful
features.
Its
cloud-based
na-
ture
reduces
server
manage-
ment
overhead.
Excellent
for
those who prior-
itize
interactive
visualizations
and user-friendly
interfaces.
Active and grow-
ing.
Regular
updates and fea-
tures
based
on
community
feed-
back.
GitHub
Stars: 7.4k as of
2023.
Out-of-the-box
integration
with
PyTorch, Tensor-
Flow, Keras and
many other ML
frameworks.
==PAGE:20==
3.2 Tool Comparison
13
Table 3.2: Feature Comparison of MLflow, TensorBoard and Wandb
Feature
MLflow
TensorBoard
Wandb
Experiment Tracking
✓
✓
✓
Advanced Visualizations
x
✓
✓
Model Registry
✓
x
✓
Reproducibility
✓
x
✓
Artifact Tracking
✓
x
✓
Built-in
Hyperparameter
Tuning
x
x
✓
Resource Management
x
x
✓
Collaboration Tools
x
✓
✓
Integration
with
CI/CD
Pipelines
✓
x
✓
Model Serving and Deploy-
ment
✓
x
✓
Figure 3.2: Comparative GitHub star history chart for MLflow, TensorBoard and
Weights & Biases, illustrating the trends in community interest and popularity over
time.
MLflow has experienced a steady and significant increase in stars over the
years[32]
3.2.1.1
Final Decision - MLflow
MLflow was ultimately chosen for its strong experiment tracking capabilities, model
registry and flexibility when integrating with existing tools.
All these attributes
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Tool Comparison
14
closely aligned with the project’s technical requirements and workflow preferences.
Additionally, its open-source nature and the support from an active community fur-
ther solidified this decision.
At the same time we need to acknowledge some trade-offs that had to be made
in the process. Firstly, MLflow’s visualization capabilities might not be as extensive
or user-friendly as those provided by TensorBoard or Weights & Biases, however, the
project’s existing codebase already included some visualizations that could be logged
as artifacts within each MLflow run. For collaboration, although MLflow does not
inherently offer the same level of built-in collaboration features as Weights & Biases,
setting up a remote MLflow server worked as a solution, enabling a potential team
to share experiments, models and results effectively. Regarding the lack of built-in
hyperparameter tuning, the project already utilized BayesSearchCV, so an MLflow
run could be used to log the results of each tuning session, including parameters and
metrics. Finally, security considerations, while important, were not the top priority
for this project.
3.2.2
Cloud Providers
Before using any cloud services, a logistics company looking to improve its forecast-
ing modelling would face significant challenges. The process would involve setting
up and maintaining physical servers and infrastructure to handle the computation
and storage needs. Training complex machine learning models on big data would
require substantial upfront investment in hardware. The company would also need
to predict its maximum computational needs in advance, often resulting in either un-
derutilized resources or insuﬀicient capacity during peak times. Collaboration across
different teams and locations would also be challenging and scaling the solution to
accommodate more data or complex algorithms would be both time-consuming and
costly. Updating the model or deploying it globally would involve manual interven-
tion, further adding to the delays and ineﬀiciencies.
After the introduction of cloud computing services, this scenario changes dramat-
ically.
The same logistics company can now access scalable computing resources
on-demand, without the need for significant upfront investment in physical infras-
tructure. Cloud services allow for the dynamic adjustment of computing power and
storage to match the exact needs of model training, ensuring that resources are ef-
ficiently utilized. This flexibility significantly reduces the time and cost associated
with training and deploying machine learning models. Once the model is trained,
it can be deployed instantly across the company’s global network, allowing for real-
time predictions based on the most current data. This shift not only optimizes op-
erational eﬀiciency but also enhances customer satisfaction through more accurate
collection/delivery predictions.
While the MLOps maturity model[54] clarifies the necessary practices to run a suc-
cessful MLOps environment, it does not explicitly describe the use of cloud services.
However, given their instrumental value at various stages of the pipeline, evaluating
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Tool Comparison
15
different cloud platforms becomes a crucial next step. Despite an initial preference
for open-source options, the project’s requirements for a scalable and robust infras-
tructure, capable of supporting enterprise-level needs, prompted the consideration of
the three leading cloud services: Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud Plat-
form (GCP) and Microsoft Azure. The main services that were considered were the
following:
• Cloud Storage: A vital service for securely saving and accessing data, cloud
storage offers the flexibility needed to manage growing data volumes. It elim-
inates the need for physical storage systems on-premises, providing a scalable,
reliable and cost-eﬀicient solution. Cloud storage is essential for storing models
and datasets used in training, for keeping track of MLflow run artifacts, as well
as any other storage need, like prediction storage.
• Cloud Compute: Providing access to powerful computing capabilities without
the need for physical hardware, cloud compute enables flexible, cost-effective
and eﬀicient operations. Cloud compute virtual servers can be quickly adjusted
to meet varying workload requirements, making them ideal for a wide range of
applications, from web hosting to complex data analysis and machine learning
training tasks.
• Serverless Containers: Serverless containers represent a significant shift from
traditional server-based setups in cloud computing by abstracting away the
underlying server management. In a conventional cloud compute setup, you
provision and manage servers, which involves selecting the right size, config-
uring the operating system and scaling the resources up or down based on
demand. This requires a deep understanding of the infrastructure and ongoing
maintenance, even when the servers are idle, leading to potentially unnecessary
costs.
In contrast, serverless containers automate these aspects.
When you
deploy containerized applications, such as a prediction service, on a serverless
platform, you do not have to worry about the server or cluster configuration,
maintenance and scaling. The serverless platform automatically allocates the
computing resources needed to run your containers, scales those resources up or
down instantly based on the number of requests your application receives and
you are billed only for the compute time your service actually consumes. This
approach is particularly cost-effective for applications with variable workloads,
as it eliminates the expense of underutilized resources.
• Container Registry: Serving as a repository for managing container images,
the container registry ensures that every team member or automated process
uses the same container images, leading to consistent environments and de-
ployments across the development lifecycle.
Similar to code version control,
container registries keep versions of each container image, making it easy to
roll back or deploy specific versions. They also easily integrate with CI/CD
pipelines, facilitating automated testing and deployment processes.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Tool Comparison
16
Together, these cloud services support the main needs of an end-to-end ML lifecy-
cle. The requirement for integrating these services was realized as a subsequent step
of the initial setup and use of MLflow, with the aim of remotely hosting it, linking
its runs to cloud storage and laying the groundwork for a CI/CD pipeline, training
on the cloud, automated deployment and prediction application serving.
The table below provides an overview of the primary services offered by AWS,
Google Cloud and Azure, corresponding to the key services discussed:
Service
AWS
GCP
Azure
Cloud Storage
S3
Cloud Storage
Blob Storage
Cloud Compute
EC2
Compute Engine
Virtual Machines
Container Registry
ECR
Container Registry
Container Registry
Serverless Containers
Fargate
Cloud Run
Container Instances
Next, follows a comparative analysis of these services from each provider. Note
that, container registries were not included in this comparison, as all of them deliver
robust features and the choice among them typically depends on the overall cloud
provider you are integrating with.
3.2.2.1
Cloud Storage
Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) [3, 21] is a scalable and durable platform
designed for a wide range of storage needs, using a unique bucket-based orga-
nization for data, which includes objects with data, metadata, and a unique
key, all under globally unique bucket names within the AWS namespace. S3
delivers high performance with rapid data retrieval and upload speeds, along
with a variety of cost-effective storage options such as Standard, Intelligent-
Tiering, Glacier, and Glacier Deep Archive. It guarantees high availability and
data durability through automatic replication across its distributed architecture,
using Same Region Replication (SRR) or Cross Region Replication (CRR) to
protect against failures or disasters. Capable of handling virtually unlimited
data volumes, S3 integrates best with other AWS services, enhancing its utility
as a data source for AWS solutions and ensuring robust security with server-side
encryption and AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) integration.
Google Cloud Storage (GCS) [21, 40] is noted for its user-friendly interface and
cost-effective storage solutions, organizing data as objects within buckets that
adhere to four storage classes: Standard, Coldline, Nearline, and Archive. It
is designed for scalability, automatically managing infrastructure and ensur-
ing data durability by replicating across different geographic locations. It of-
fers both multi-regional storage for global access with minimal latency and
regional storage options for cost savings in specific areas. GCS also includes ro-
bust security, featuring server-side encryption with both Google-managed and
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Tool Comparison
17
customer-managed keys. It integrates with Google Cloud Identity and Access
Management (IAM) for detailed access control, and seamlessly connects with
Google Cloud services for advanced data processing and analytics. Additionally,
GCS ensures low latency for fast, reliable data access, supports parallel uploads
and downloads for high throughput, and provides comprehensive audit logging
capabilities through integration with Google Cloud Monitoring and Logging.
Azure Blob Storage [11, 21] uses blobs (binary large objects) for storage, identified
by unique URLs that include the storage account, container, and blob name.
Blobs, which can store various types of unstructured data, are organized into
containers, similar to folders in a file system, for logical grouping. The service
guarantees durability via data replication within a single or across multiple
data centers and provides cost-effective storage tiers (Hot, Cool, Archive) for
managing data access frequency.
Azure Blob Storage integrates with Azure
Active Directory (Azure AD) and Shared Access Signatures (SAS) for secure
access control, and supports extensive integration with the Azure ecosystem,
benefiting Microsoft product users.
Its developer-friendly approach includes
support for RESTful APIs, Azure Storage SDKs, PowerShell cmdlets, Azure
CLI, and the Azure portal, streamlining management and access.
The choice among storage services typically depends on specific project needs,
budget and existing infrastructure, rather than fundamental storage capabilities. All
three services excel in scalability, accommodating everything from small to large en-
terprise workloads, and emphasize robust security measures, including various options
for server-side encryption and integration with their respective identity management
systems for secure access control. AWS S3 is favored for its broad feature set and
strong integration within the AWS ecosystem.
GCS offers the most competitive
pricing (Figure 3.3), it is user-friendly and easily integrates with Google’s analytics,
making it attractive for data-driven projects.
Azure Blob Storage is deeply inte-
grated with Microsoft’s suite of products, appealing mostly to those already within
the Microsoft ecosystem.
3.2.2.2
Cloud Compute
Amazon Elastic Compute (EC2) [7] is a scalable and flexible cloud computing
service that allows rapid deployment of applications without upfront hardware
investment.
Users can create, launch, and terminate server instances as re-
quired, with the ability to pay by the second for active servers, underlining
the service’s ”elastic” nature. Users can choose from a broad range of instance
types, like general-purpose, compute-optimized and memory-optimized. EC2’s
global presence spans 105 Availability Zones across 33 regions[10], offering low
latency worldwide. Its auto-scaling feature dynamically adjusts resources to
meet demand, while the hibernation feature pauses virtual machines to save
costs. Moreover, predictive auto-scaling analyzes historical usage patterns and
predicts future demand, facilitating eﬀicient resource use.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Tool Comparison
18
Figure 3.3: To conduct the above comparison of cloud storage costs, the respective
providers’ online pricing calculators were utilized [6, 34, 55]. The comparison focused
on the ’Standard’ tier for active data storage and a ’Cool’ or ’Infrequent Access’ tier
for less frequently accessed data. This selection was made because a comprehensive
comparison of all available storage options would be intricate and exceed the scope of
this project. To maintain consistency and enable a fair comparison, similar measures
such as the amount of storage (100 GB per month), the number of requests and data
retrieval volumes were used across all platforms.
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Tool Comparison
19
Google Compute Engine (GCE) [38] offers scalable virtual machines in Google’s
global network. With custom and predefined options, GCE matches resources to
workload needs across 40 regions and 121 zones[39]. Features like live migration
prevent downtime during maintenance and auto-scaling adjusts resources as
needed.
GCE is also offering suspension of virtual machines and predictive
auto-scaling to further improve eﬀiciency.
Azure Virtual Machines [53] offer a broad and deeply integrated computing so-
lution within Microsoft’s cloud ecosystem.
They support a wide variety of
computing solutions and are particularly appealing for organizations utilizing
Windows-based applications, offering special benefits like the Azure Hybrid Ben-
efit, which helps customers save on cloud costs by allowing them to use existing
Windows Server and SQL Server licenses in Azure[13]. With an extensive global
network that includes over 60 regions[12], Azure VMs provide the highest reach
and support both manual, automatic and predictive scaling. They have also
recently announced the option of VM hibernation[62].
Choosing between AWS EC2, Google Compute Engine and Azure VMs is a com-
plex task and again, comes down to the project’s specific needs—ranging from the
need for specialized VM types to budget considerations, regional coverage aspirations
and integration preferences with broader cloud ecosystems. EC2’s extensive service
range and global reach make it versatile for various applications. GCE excels for
projects using Google’s analytics, while Azure’s VMs offer the widest regional pres-
ence and will suit those embedded in Microsoft’s ecosystem.
Regarding costs, as
illustrated in Figure 3.4, Azure ranks as the most expensive, with AWS being the
most cost-effective.
3.2.2.3
Serverless Containers
AWS Fargate [4, 16] is a serverless compute engine for containers that allows users
to run containers without managing servers or clusters. This service enables
developers to run containers eﬀiciently by allowing for direct deployment onto
AWS, where Fargate takes responsibility for the provisioning, scaling, and man-
agement of the containerized applications. It smoothly integrates with AWS’s
suite of services, including Amazon ECS (Elastic Container Service) and Ama-
zon EKS (Elastic Kubernetes Service), making it a highly compatible option
for existing AWS customers.
Additionally, Fargate offers granular resource
management, enabling precise allocation of vCPU and memory to suit various
container workloads. This is complemented by the flexible networking capabil-
ities provided by Amazon VPC (Virtual Private Cloud), which ensures secure
networking among containers and other AWS services.
Google Cloud Run [16, 36] offers a fully managed platform that simplifies deploy-
ing containerized applications, emphasizing ease of use and developer produc-
tivity.
It auto-scales, including down to zero, ensuring cost-effectiveness for
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Tool Comparison
20
Figure 3.4: Comparison of cloud compute costs for general-purpose and compute-
optimized instances across Google Compute Engine, AWS EC2, and Azure Virtual
Machines, utilizing the respective providers’ online pricing calculators [6, 34, 55]. This
comparison considers the basic monthly cost of VM resources like vCPUs and mem-
ory for 10 hours of usage per month; however, total operational costs in production
environments will include additional factors such as data transfer, software licensing,
and more
applications with variable traﬀic. Cloud Run is versatile, supporting multiple
programming languages and runtimes like Node.js, Python, Go, and Java, and
also supports an event-driven approach, where container instances can be ac-
tivated by HTTP requests or by events from other services within the Google
Cloud ecosystem.
Azure Container Instances (ACI) [16, 49] is Microsoft’s serverless solution for
running containers, offering both Linux and Windows container compatibility.
It is designed for simplicity and is recognized for its quick deployment capabil-
ities, making it exceptionally suitable for sporadic and demanding tasks that
necessitate swift scaling. Moreover, it offers a per-second billing feature, which
ensures that users pay only for the exact amount of computing resources their
containers use. ACI is tightly integrated with other Azure services that enhance
its functionality, enabling scenarios like event-driven computing and deployment
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Tool Comparison
21
of microservices.
Figure 3.5: Pricing comparison of computational power (vCPU-second) and memory
usage (GiB-second) resources. The pricing for AWS Fargate has been recalculated
on a per-second basis for a more direct comparison, even though the original figures
were on a per-hour basis on the AWS website[5, 37, 50]
Summarizing, in terms of cost, Fargate is the least expensive for both compu-
tational and memory resources and Cloud Run the most expensive (Figure 3.5).
However, Cloud Run’s pay-as-you-go approach, including a generous free tier, might
make it a more cost-eﬀicient choice in the end. Complexity-wise, Fargate integrates
tightly with other AWS services, offering a more seamless experience if you’re al-
ready within the AWS ecosystem. However, this integration can add complexity if
you’re not familiar with AWS services. On the other hand, Cloud Run focuses on
simplicity and developer experience, making it easy to deploy containerized applica-
tions directly from source code with minimal configuration. ACI follows a similar
straightforward approach for container execution. Moreover, each of them draw on
their extensive networks of AWS, Google and Azure, respectively, offering ample sup-
port and resources. Finally, when evaluating coverage, each platform’s suitability is
again context-dependent, from ecosystem-specific integrations to global deployment
capabilities.
3.2.2.4
Final Decision - AWS
Following this comparison centered around aspects of cost, scalability, feature set,
and integration within the broader cloud ecosystem, the decision was finalized to
adopt AWS. For the sake of simplicity, it was also decided to adopt a single cloud
provider approach, utilizing services exclusively from AWS. This meant leveraging
S3 for all storage requirements, employing EC2 for hosting MLflow as well as for
model training purposes, and utilizing Fargate for serving the prediction application.
It is important to highlight, however, that based on the requirements of this project,
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Tool Comparison
22
any of the evaluated cloud platforms—AWS, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud
Platform—would be capable of fulfilling its needs.
The selection process revealed a clear pattern: choosing the right cloud service
depends on the project’s specific needs, budget limits, what infrastructure is already in
place, and the team’s knowledge and preferences for working within a certain cloud
ecosystem.
This means that deciding on a cloud provider goes beyond just their
technical features. It is about finding the right balance between what the provider
offers and the practical aspects of the project. It is important to understand these
factors to make choices that fit the project’s goals and the day-to-day realities of
working on it.
3.2.3
Model Serving Frameworks
Model serving involves integrating a trained machine learning model into a production
environment where it can receive and respond to requests by providing predictions.
This is commonly achieved by wrapping the model with a REST API, which serves
as an intermediary, allowing different applications to access the model’s predictive
capabilities. The API abstracts the model’s complexity, offering a straightforward
interface for other services to leverage its functions[43]. For instance, a logistics ap-
plication might query, ”What are tomorrow’s expected collections at the hub?”. The
API interprets this question for the model, which then predicts the number of collec-
tions and the API translates the prediction into a clear answer for the application to
use. Two commonly used frameworks for creating these APIs are Flask and FastAPI.
Flask [29] is a lightweight, flexible micro-framework for Python, designed to provide
just the essentials for web application development, such as routing and request
handling. Its extendable nature means you can easily enhance it by adding
various extensions. Fully compliant with the WSGI standard, Flask facilitates
straightforward deployment in production environments. It is ORM-agnostic,
allowing developers to easily integrate their preferred ORM system and can
eﬀiciently handle HTTP requests.
Since its debut in 2010, Flask has been
known for its simplicity, flexibility and a strong community.
FastAPI [28] is as a contemporary web framework tailored for building APIs with
Python 3.8+, adhering to the OpenAPI standard and fully compatible with
JSON Schema.
Since its introduction in 2019, FastAPI has rapidly gained
popularity for its speed, simplicity and ease of use. It is recognized for its high
performance, comparable to that of NodeJS and Go, offers an intuitive design
and is very easy to learn, aiming to minimize time spent on documentation,
debugging and code duplication.
FastAPI combines Starlette, a lightweight
ASGI framework/toolkit optimal for creating high-performance asynchronous
services, with Pydantic to ensure data validation.
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Tool Comparison
23
Table 3.4: Comparison between FastAPI and Flask
Criteria
FastAPI
Flask
Cost
Free and open-source.
Free and open-source.
Complexity
Slightly more complex due to its
use of type annotations, yet this
complexity brings the advantage of
built-in automatic data validation
and serialization.
Simpler and more flexible for begin-
ners, with a minimalistic approach.
Less inherent complexity, but lacks
some of FastAPI’s advanced fea-
tures by default.
Community
The community is growing rapidly,
indicating
strong
and
increasing
support. Resources and third-party
extensions are increasing. GitHub
stars: 68.5k
Well-established community with a
wide range of resources, tutorials,
extensions and plugins developed
over many years.
GitHub stars:
65.8k
Coverage
Offers extensive features for API de-
velopment out of the box, includ-
ing automatic OpenAPI documen-
tation, data validation and serializa-
tion without additional dependen-
cies. Better suited for applications
requiring asynchronous processing
and high performance.
Provides a wide range of function-
alities through extensions and is
highly adaptable to various types of
projects, not limited to APIs. How-
ever, it may require more external
libraries for features that FastAPI
offers by default.
Figure 3.6: Comparative GitHub Star History chart for Flask and FastAPI, illustrat-
ing that there’s a growing interest and perhaps a shift in the Python web development
community towards FastAPI[32]
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Other Tools and Technologies
24
3.2.3.1
Final Decision - FastAPI
Both FastAPI and Flask are open-source and they also both boast large and active commu-
nities, providing extensive support and documentation. However, for projects demanding
high performance and scalability, FastAPI stands out as the superior choice due to its com-
prehensive coverage and lower complexity compared to Flask. FastAPI is designed with an
API-first approach, defaulting to JSON for error messages and expecting dictionaries as re-
turn values from handlers, making it inherently suited for API development. This contrasts
with Flask, where error messages are HTML by default and responses need explicit conver-
sion to JSON, which can complicate REST client interactions and log readability. FastAPI
further reduces complexity by leveraging Pydantic for schema validation, which automati-
cally generates clear, human-readable error messages without the need for additional code or
libraries. Moreover, FastAPI’s integration of asyncio and type annotations boosts its speed
and enables eﬀicient, concurrent processing of HTTP endpoints, functionalities that Flask
does not offer, indicating a broader coverage in FastAPI’s design.
3.3
Other Tools and Technologies
During this project, some tools and technologies were chosen directly, without going through
the evaluation process described above. This decision was mainly made due to their widespread
adoption and my existing knowledge of how they work. Choosing these familiar and widely-
used tools helped move the project along more smoothly, considering the number of new
tools I was learning to use. This section will explain these tools and highlight how they are
essential for setting up an effective MLOps pipeline in the project.
3.3.1
Containerization with Docker
Containerization is a method of packaging software so that it can run consistently across
any computing environment. It involves encapsulating anything an application needs—its
code, necessary files and dependencies—into a single unit, called a container.
Then, as
long as the infrastructure is equipped to handle containers, the specifics of the underlying
operating system and dependencies become irrelevant, allowing the application to run with
no issues. This approach ensures that the software behaves identically, regardless of where
it is deployed, whether on a developer’s laptop, in a test environment, or in a production
system in the cloud[9].
Unlike virtual machines that emulate entire operating systems, containerization allows
applications to share the host system’s kernel while operating in isolated user spaces. This
results in containers being much lighter and more eﬀicient than VMs. While a VM includes
a full copy of an operating system, the application and the necessary binaries and libraries,
containers include just the application and its dependencies. This difference makes containers
start up faster and use fewer resources than VMs, offering a more scalable and cost-effective
solution for deploying applications[20].
Containerization ensures that machine learning models, their associated data processing
and training environments are packaged together. This consistency eliminates the ”it works
on my machine” problem, facilitating smoother transitions from development to production.
It allows for the replication of specific versions of the whole environment, ensuring that mod-
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Other Tools and Technologies
25
els are trained and deployed with the exact conditions they were developed in, enhancing
reproducibility and reliability[69]. In CI/CD processes, containers help automate the build-
ing, testing and deploying of applications by creating lightweight, ephemeral environments
that start up and shut down quickly for each stage of the pipeline. As will be discussed in
more detail in the setup sections, containerization serves as a foundational technology when
setting up cloud services and CI/CD.
Among the various tools available for containerization, Docker stands out as the most
dominant and widely used. The main concepts behind it include the Dockerfile, the Docker
image and the container registry. A Dockerfile is a straightforward text file containing a
list of commands Docker uses to build an image. This image is essentially a snapshot of
the application and its environment, ready to be executed. Once created, the image can
be stored in a container registry, meaning a library where images are kept for sharing or
deployment. From the registry, the Docker image can then be downloaded and run on any
system with Docker installed, transforming it into a running container [26].
As alternatives, Podman[61] enables container management without a daemon, enhanc-
ing security and simplicity, while Singularity[75], preferred in high-performance computing
environments, focuses on creating portable and secure containers, emphasizing ease of use
in scientific and complex computational tasks.
Figure 3.7: A Dockerfile outlines the application’s build instructions, which then
creates a Docker Image, encapsulating the application in a portable format. Finally,
this image is run as a Docker Container, providing a consistent and isolated runtime
environment[22]
3.3.2
Code Versioning with GitHub
One of the initial steps in this project was to establish a source code repository for hosting and
further developing the provided code. Given its widespread adoption, robust community, and
my prior familiarity with the platform, GitHub was the natural choice. Enhanced by Git’s
powerful version control capabilities, GitHub provides essential features for code versioning
and collaboration. Versioning enables team members to work on various aspects of a project
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Other Tools and Technologies
26
simultaneously, providing a structured approach for merging changes and resolving conflicts.
Moreover, it cultivates a culture aimed at bridging the gaps between different roles within a
project, effectively minimizing domain silos[44].
One alternative to GitHub is GitLab[33], known for its integrated CI/CD features, al-
lowing seamless automation of the code deployment process. Bitbucket[15], another viable
alternative, offers deep integration with Jira[8] and Trello[80], enhancing project manage-
ment and team collaboration. Furthermore, opting for a hosting solution tied to a project’s
cloud provider can bring extra convenience and seamless integrations. Services like Azure De-
vOps Repos[51], AWS CodeCommit[66], and Google Cloud Source Repositories[19] provide
native cloud integration, simplifying workflows.
Versioning is crucial for experiment tracking, allowing teams to maintain a detailed his-
tory of code iterations and the evolution of model versions. It also offers the flexibility to
revert to prior versions when needed. Additionally, code versioning is essential for ensuring
reproducibility in machine learning projects. By linking each experiment or model train-
ing run to a specific codebase state, teams can accurately replicate results, enhancing the
reliability of the workflow.
3.3.3
CI/CD with GitHub Actions
Following the selection of GitHub, GitHub Actions[30] were naturally chosen to implement
CI/CD and enable the automation of workflows directly within GitHub. Should an alter-
native hosting solution have been selected, it would be logical to adopt the corresponding
automation tool. For repositories hosted on Azure, Azure Pipelines[52]; on AWS, AWS Code-
Pipeline[67]; and on Google Cloud, Cloud Build[18] would be the natural choices for CI/CD,
seamlessly integrating with their hosting environment and facilitating workflow automation.
GitHub Actions automate the build, test, and deployment of pipelines by defining work-
flows in YAML files within a GitHub repository. These workflows can be triggered by various
GitHub events, such as push to a repository, pull request creation, or issue labeling, among
others.
The operation of GitHub Actions is based on worklfows that consist of one or more jobs.
These jobs can run sequentially or in parallel and are made up of steps that execute individual
tasks, such as running a script, installing dependencies, or deploying software. A significant
advantage of GitHub Actions is that each step in a job can use community-created actions,
which are reusable pieces of code, to perform common tasks, reducing the need to write
custom code for these operations. Central to the execution of these workflows are GitHub
Runners, which are hosted virtual machines provided by GitHub to run workflows. Each
virtual machine is equipped with a specific environment of tools, packages, and settings,
tailored for GitHub Actions to use. Runners can be either GitHub-hosted or self-hosted,
providing the flexibility to run jobs in a variety of environments[31].
In the context of MLOps, GitHub Actions can be a powerful tool across various stages
of a machine learning project. They enable automated testing with every new commit and
they trigger automated training and evaluation of models on fresh data or following code up-
dates. The automation extends to deployment processes, allowing for a painless deployment
of models across different environments—such as development, staging, and production—
with GitHub Actions managing the orchestration required for API deployment. Experiment
tracking and management are also enhanced through automated logging of experiment de-
tails and outcomes.
Finally, GitHub Actions can be configured to send notifications or
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Final Overview
27
generate reports following key workflow steps, such as the completion of model training or
deployment, facilitating eﬀicient monitoring and intervention when needed.
GitHub Actions usage is not entirely free and comes with certain limits, especially on
GitHub-hosted runners. GitHub offers a generous amount of free minutes for GitHub-hosted
runner usage on public repositories, making it highly accessible for open source projects.
However, for private repositories, the free plan includes a limited number of minutes per
month, after which charges apply based on usage.
3.4
Final Overview
In this chapter, a detailed comparison and exploration of different tools was undertaken,
along with an analysis of the technologies to be used in the pipeline development.
The
process primarily focused on evaluating factors such as cost, complexity, community support,
and coverage of features to ensure the selected tools meet the project’s needs effectively. It
is important to note that while the comparison may not be exhaustive or delve deeply into
every possible aspect, it offers a guideline for what to consider when comparing and selecting
tools, emphasizing the importance of these factors in the decision-making process.
Figure 3.8 shows the final toolkit selected from this analysis. In the following chapter,
the integration of these tools within the project’s pipeline will be discussed.
Figure 3.8: Overview of the final selection of tools that will be used in the pipeline
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Considerations in Tool Selection
28
3.5
Considerations in Tool Selection
Here, we explore some considerations and concerns that were surfaced during this tool com-
parison and selection process.
3.5.1
Challenges in Measuring Community Support
In evaluating the community’s support for open source tools, GitHub stars were used as a
proxy for popularity. However, this method has its limitations. The existence of practices
like purchasing GitHub stars—where bots are used to artificially inflate a repository’s star
count—means that a high number of stars does not always equate to genuine community
support or satisfaction[23, 41]. This diminishes the reliability of GitHub stars as a direct
measure of a tool’s popularity or acceptance within the community.
As an alternative metric, the number of package downloads could be considered, po-
tentially offering a more tangible sense of how widely a tool is being utilized.
Yet, this
approach is not without its own challenges either, since it is diﬀicult to discern whether a
download reflects active interest in the tool itself or if the tool was included as a depen-
dency within another package. For example, when installing TensorFlow, TensorBoard is
automatically installed as well. This ambiguity complicates the use of package downloads
as a straightforward indicator of a tool’s community.
3.5.2
Balancing Flexibility and Compatibility
When choosing tools for an MLOps project, understanding how different technologies can
work together seamlessly is crucial. This interoperability significantly impacts the project’s
feasibility and operational eﬀiciency. We have already seen the benefits of using a single cloud
provider as its services can easily interact, but integrating other tools introduces complexity.
For instance, the decision to adopt MLflow necessitated evaluating its compatibility with
storage solutions, highlighting how a decision on a tool could limit possible choices for other
tools.
I decided to initially concentrate on using tools that automate some initial stages rather
than the entire workflow[64]. Since a key objective of this project is to demonstrate the
iterative nature of pipeline development and how its maturity level can progress, adopting
a tool and subsequently making necessary adjustments, also seemed a suitable approach; as
the pipeline developed and matured, its evolving needs impacted tool selection.
3.5.3
Choosing Between Comprehensive Platforms and
Specialized Tools
Deciding whether to use a single platform that covers a wide range of MLOps needs or to
assemble a collection of specialized tools tailored to specific tasks, also presents a signifi-
cant consideration. All-in-one solutions, such as AWS, offer the convenience of integrated
services and can potentially reduce complexity. However, they might not always deliver the
specialized capabilities or the level of customization that dedicated tools can provide. As
already mentioned however, a combination setup raises the complexity of the project, and
==PAGE:36==
3.5 Considerations in Tool Selection
29
managing multiple tools and their interactions can become a project within a project. For
this project, a balanced, yet minimalistic approach was pursued[76].
3.5.4
Vendor Lock-In
While the decision for this project was consciously made to opt for simplicity by selecting
a single cloud provider, it is important to consider the critical concern of vendor lock-in.
Vendor lock-in, also referred to as vendor dependency, is commonly identified as a significant
barrier to cloud adoption[25].
This situation occurs when organizations find themselves
bound to a particular cloud provider, primarily due to differences in semantics, technologies,
and interfaces across various providers. These differences can hinder the ease of transferring
and integrating services between cloud platforms, adversely affecting cloud portability —
the ability to migrate assets from one cloud to another — and interoperability — the ability
of different cloud platforms to exchange assets easily[70].
Organizations may find themselves in a lock-in situation for various reasons, such as
the cloud provider no longer meets their needs, undesirable changes or updates to services,
price increases, more attractive offerings from other vendors, breaches of agreement, or other
factors that might compel an organization to consider switching[60].
Transitioning to a different provider, however, presents considerable challenges. Orga-
nizations will face complexities in migrating data, tackling issues such as data formatting
and the associated costs and duration of the move. Application transfer risks also emerge,
particularly the diﬀiculty and expense involved in reconfiguring applications to operate with
a new provider, especially when they rely heavily on specific features of the original provider.
Infrastructure transfer can also be challenging, as there are differences in virtual machine
formats, pricing, service offerings and architecture across providers.
Finally, the human
factor must be acknowledged, highlighting the significant learning curve IT teams will face
when adapting to the tools, configurations, and procedures of a new provider.[46].
To mitigate vendor lock-in, it is important to design applications to be as flexible and
loosely coupled as possible[46]. Firstly, using open-source tools wherever possible can signif-
icantly reduce dependency on any single vendor’s ecosystem. Additionally, leveraging cloud-
agnostic services and container technology can ease the migration between cloud providers.
Adopting APIs that abstract the complexity of underlying services and avoiding proprietary
data formats can also prevent lock-in, enabling the business to switch vendors without ex-
tensive rework. Finally, a multi-cloud strategy, where different cloud providers are used for
various functions such as data warehousing or compute resources, can lessen reliance on a sin-
gle provider. However, a multi-cloud approach may also introduce additional workload and
potential security challenges. By considering these strategies, organizations can maintain
the flexibility needed to navigate the rapidly evolving MLOps landscape without becoming
overly reliant on any single vendor.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER4
MLOps Pipeline for
Logistics Forecasting:
A Case Study
This chapter transitions from discussing the selection of tools and technologies to delving into
the implementation and enhancement of the pipeline. We begin by examining the provided
data and the training process to set up a foundational framework. This setup serves as the
baseline for a sequence of iterative enhancements, thoroughly explored in this chapter. Each
iteration aims to progressively refine the pipeline, gradually increasing its level of maturity.
4.1
Overview of Data Processing and Model Training
This section will briefly describe the dataset provided by DFDS and its preprocessing and
feature engineering steps to prepare the data for the machine learning workflow. It will also
provide a brief overview of the training process outlined in the codebase provided, introduce
the fundamental function of the models to be used in the pipeline, and describe the initial
setup before starting any pipeline impovements and iterations. As mentioned, these pro-
cesses were already in place in the DFDS-provided codebase. My task involved familiarizing
myself with them and making minor adjustments to ensure they run smoothly, guaranteeing
the effectiveness of the data pipeline and training/evaluation phase.
4.1.1
Data
Raw Data
Initially, the dataset comprises raw historical and future bookings, either of collections or
deliveries, within logistics hubs. Most importantly, this data includes information about:
• The scheduled dates for collections and deliveries
• Country and precise geolocations (longitude and latitude) for both collection and
delivery points
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Overview of Data Processing and Model Training
31
• Traﬀic Code classification, which categorizes bookings by geographic routes (domestic
vs. international), load capacity (full vs. part load), and cargo type (dry goods vs.
cold chain)
• Multiple entries for the same booking to account for changes over time, such as adjust-
ments in collection or delivery dates and locations. These updates may result from
customer requests or operational decisions, ensuring the dataset keeps a full record of
all changes including the latest status of a booking.
Data Preprocessing
The preprocessing phase focuses on cleaning the data by handling missing values, stan-
dardizing date formats, and removing any observation gaps—periods where data might be
inconsistent—to ensure continuity. It also involves filtering out irrelevant records, such as
empty bookings, and retaining only the last modification for each booking, thus reflecting
the most up-to-date state of the data.
Featurization
The featurization process includes:
• Integration of NUTS Geospatial Data: The NUTS (Nomenclature of Territorial
Units for Statistics) geospatial data, is a geocode standard by the European Union for
statistical referencing of country subdivisions[27]. By adding NUTS ids, the dataset
is enriched with detailed regional information, facilitating a more granular analysis.
• Temporal Features: Addition of features such as weekday, month day, day of the
year, and year to capture seasonal and temporal patterns.
• Holiday Indicator: Inclusion of a feature to indicate whether a day is a national
holiday or not.
• Filling Missing Records For days with no collections or deliveries (like Sundays or
Christmas), missing records are filled in to have continuous data.
• Lead Times Expansion: Lead time measures the days between booking and the
planned collection/delivery. It is used for dynamic forecasting, adjusting predictions
as the lead time shortens. For instance, extending a March 20 collection’s lead time
by 5 days means adding records for March 15-19, each showing a different lead time,
allowing models to adapt forecasts based on these varying lead times.
• Binning: A binning process transforms raw booking data into aggregated counts of
collections and deliveries, organizing records into bins by date, lead time, traﬀic code,
NUTS id and country.
• Splitting: Finally, splitting the data into training and testing gets it ready for model
training.
The final dataset, now enhanced with extra features, gives a deeper context to the time
series beyond the historical values of the data series itself.
4.1.2
Training Process and Models
The training process from the DFDS codebase, includes several steps to fine-tune the fore-
casting model. Numeric and categorical features undergo scaling and encoding, while cyclic
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Overview of Data Processing and Model Training
32
features are adjusted to maintain seasonality and natural cycles.
The model integrates
domain knowledge via monotonic constraints for booking-related features to ensure predic-
tions rise with certain feature increases. It uses Histogram-Based Gradient Boosting with
TimeSeriesSplit validation[73], a method from scikit-learn that systematically increases the
training set. Each new training set includes all data from the previous set plus more recent
data points, ensuring the model trains on a progressively larger historical context. Test sets
consist of future data not seen by the model, providing a realistic assessment of its perfor-
mance on time-series data. To emphasize recent trends, more recent data points receive
higher weights, ensuring the model prioritizes newer information.
Finally, model perfor-
mance is assessed both on training and test datasets, using Bayes Search cross-validation,
leading to the model’s final selection and saving.
As mentioned, this process uses the Histogram-based Gradient Boosting model. However,
for the A/B testing phase of the pipeline implementation, which will be detailed later on in
this chapter, I introduced Random Forest and XGBoost models for a comparative analysis.
The goal of this thesis is not to thoroughly investigate or perfect these models, nor to
determine which one performs best. Instead, it is about establishing a basic understanding
of how they work and using them to integrate multiple models into the pipeline, exploring
how to update a model that is actively running in production.
Random Forest Regression [42, 72] modeling employs an ensemble learning technique,
where it constructs multiple decision trees during the training phase and outputs the
average of their predictions.
By building numerous trees on varied subsets of the
data—achieved through bootstrapping (sampling with replacement)—and randomly
selecting subsets of features for splitting at each node, Random Forest mitigates the
risk of overfitting and introduces diversity among the trees, enhancing the model’s
generalization capabilities. When making predictions, the Random Forest algorithm
aggregates the outcomes of all individual trees, thereby leveraging collective wisdom
to achieve higher accuracy and stability in its predictions. This methodology takes
advantage of the strength of multiple learners, making it a powerful tool for tackling
complex predictive tasks with higher precision.
XGBoost Regression [42, 82] utilizes an advanced form of the gradient boosting frame-
work that is optimized for speed and performance. XGBoost, standing for Extreme
Gradient Boosting, constructs sequential decision trees, where each tree corrects er-
rors made by the previous ones. Unlike Random Forest, which builds trees in parallel,
XGBoost focuses on boosting weak learners sequentially to minimize errors through
gradient descent. This method allows for the eﬀicient handling of missing data, regu-
larization to prevent overfitting, and tree pruning. XGBoost also offers a fine-grained
control over the model training process, including learning rate adjustments and the
depth of the trees, enabling a more customized model optimization.
Histogram-Based Gradient Boosting [42, 71], like XGBoost, operates within the gra-
dient boosting family but introduces a significant innovation by binning continuous
features into histograms, thereby reducing the number of split points that need to be
considered during the tree-building process. This histogram approach not only speeds
up the computation but also reduces memory usage, making it highly effective for
large datasets.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Overview of Data Processing and Model Training
33
4.1.3
Data and Model Metrics
For simplicity, the analysis of this project focused exclusively on collection predictions, uti-
lizing data from the Vlaardingen oﬀice, noted for its consistent data entries from 2021 to
2023. Table 4.1 presents the data sizes and dimensions at various processing stages. Despite
containing over 637,000 records, the total size of the raw data is 5.31MB, indicating that
each record is quite compact, a typical case for datasets with basic numerical or categorical
features. Overall, the dataset sizes can be considered small to moderate.
Table 4.1: Data sizes and dimensions for collections data (Vlaardingen oﬀice, 2021-
2023)
Data Type
Size / Dimensions
Raw Data
5.31MB, 637,151 records
Processed Data
88.95KB, 2,732 records
Featurized Data
4.83MB, 66,528 records
Training Set
63,201 records
Testing Set
3,327 records
Number of Features
9
Figure 4.1 displays the CPU and memory utilization during the training of a Histogram-
Based Gradient Boosting model. This data was captured from a run on GitHub Actions,
utilizing a runner equipped with a 2-core CPU, 7GB of RAM, and 14GB of SSD storage[74].
The CPU usage peaked at 90% but averaged around 60% throughout the training, whereas
memory usage showed a slight peak approximately around 1.8GB, remaining relatively sta-
ble during the process. Metrics for the other models are not included as they demonstrated
similar patterns. Since these figures represent performance on relatively low-powered hard-
ware it suggests that the training process is computationally undemanding and does not
place excessive demands on the available resources. Additionally, Table 4.2 shows the sizes
and training times for each model, again indicating that the training process of this project
is not overly demanding on storage or time.
Figure 4.1:
CPU and memory usage during model training on GitHub Actions.
Plots were generated using the public GitHub Action: workflow-telemetry-action[17]
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Initial Setup
34
Table 4.2: Trained Model Size and Training Time on GitHub Actions
Model
Size
Training Time
Histogram-Based Gradient Boosting
0.5MB
4m 7s
Random Forest
1.45MB
4m 33s
XGBoost
1MB
3m 43s
4.2
Initial Setup
Having examined the data and modeling process of the provided codebase, we can now turn
our attention to the initial setup which sets the baseline, that will later undergo iterative
improvements to evolve into a mature MLOps pipeline.
Reflecting on the maturity levels discussed earlier in Section 2.2, our starting point is
at Level 0, which means there’s no MLOps infrastructure in place yet, processes are highly
manual and they have no automated mechanisms. Below, follows a rundown of the steps at
this stage, from gathering data to making predictions:
1. Data Collection and Processing:
• Bash script dump_production_databases.sh is executed to transfer data from
the production database to a local one for processing.
• The fetch.py script then retrieves raw data from the local database for a spec-
ified cargo type (either collection or delivery) and for a specific oﬀice (e.g.,
Vlaardingen).
• Next, prepare.py preprocesses the data, preparing it for further analysis.
• And featurize.py adds features to the dataset, prepping it for training.
Right now, these scripts require manual execution in sequence, with all data being
stored locally. Re-running these steps will result in new data overwriting the existing
files.
Import data from 
DFDS internal db
dump_production_
databases.sh
Fetch 
raw data
fetch.py
Preprocess 
data
prepare.py
Add 
features
featurize.py
RAW
DATA
DFDS
INTERNAL DB
LOCAL
POSTGRESQL DB
PROCESSED
DATA
FEATURIZED
DATA
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the data collection and processing pipeline, outlining the
sequence of scripts that need to be executed sequentially.
2. Training: The train.py script then trains the model on the local machine and saves
a pickle file containing the trained model. Following this, the evaluate.py script loads
the model and test data, makes predictions and reports performance metrics to assess
the model’s accuracy on unseen data. These two scripts must be executed repeatedly
for various experiments, with each run overwriting previous results. This setup lacks
==PAGE:42==
4.3 Pipeline Development
35
a systematic way to track experiments, making it challenging to replicate successes or
understand failures due to the absence of experiment and model tracking.
3. Prediction: Lastly, the predict.py script uses the locally saved model to make
predictions for the upcoming seven days, saving the output as a CSV file. At this
point, a prediction service is not implemented.
4.3
Pipeline Development
This section will delve into the details of the pipeline’s development journey, aiming to
elevate it from Level 0 to Level 4 in the maturity model. Key advancements across five
iterations are highlighted below:
• Iteration 1: Prediction Serving Application and Containerization
• Iteration 2: MLflow Integration and Data Management
• Iteration 3: Automated Training and Model Deployment
• Iteration 4: A/B Testing for Model Comparison
• Iteration 5: Model Performance Monitoring
4.3.1
Iteration 1
4.3.1.1
Prediction Serving Application using FastAPI
The first step of enhancing the pipeline, was to set up a prediction serving app using FastAPI,
turning the model into a ”Model as a Service” by exposing it through REST API endpoints.
This development significantly advanced the operationalization of the model, making it eas-
ier to access and integrate with other systems or applications. The app was also further
developed to enable users to select the prediction date and the days for which they need pre-
dictions for, moving away from the default setting of just using today’s date and generating
predictions for the next 7 days. Having FastAPI’s automatic Swagger documentation also
improved the setup, offering an easy-to-use and interactive interface for predictions, as seen
in Appendix A.
4.3.1.2
Containerization with Docker and Docker Compose
The central part of this iteration focused on containerization using Docker.
A Docker-
file was created to run the fetch, prepare, featurize scripts, using parameters such as
CARGO_ACTION, MIN_DATE, MAX_DATE and others, for configuration. Then, a Docker Compose
file was introduced, which serves as a tool to define and run a multi-container Docker appli-
cation, thereby automating the entire data processing workflow. The Docker Compose file
specifies the following services:
• db: Spins up the local PostgreSQL database and imports data from the DFDS pro-
duction database via the bash script.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Pipeline Development
36
• fetch, prepare, featurize: These processes, corresponding to their respective scripts,
are executed sequentially, with each configured as a separate service to improve mod-
ularity.
All Dockerfiles and Docker Compose can be found in Appendix C. This setup allows for
executing the entire data pipeline with a single docker-compose up command, a significant
improvement over the initial manual and sequential script execution.
Additionally, the
FastAPI serving application was also containerized, enabling it to operate alongside the
data pipeline containers, thus creating a unified ecosystem ready for deployment in either
local or cloud environments.
LOCAL
POSTGRESQL 
DB
Fetch raw
Prepare
Featurize
Data Pipeline
Manual
Experiments
Data
Preparation
Model
Training
Model
Evaluation
Model
Deployment
POST /predict
GET /model_info
Prediction
Service
DATA 
WAREHOUSE
DFDS INTERNAL DB
Development
Production
Trained
Model
Deploy
Manually
Figure 4.3: Iteration 1: Containerized data pipeline and FastAPI serving app with
manual experiments and deployment.
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Pipeline Development
37
4.3.2
Iteration 2
4.3.2.1
Setting Up MLflow
Moving on to iteration 2, the first step was adding MLflow to the pipeline. MLflow helps
organize and manage machine learning projects through these fundamental elements:
• Runs: These are single instances of tasks like model training. Each run logs its code,
parameters, and outcomes, and gets a unique ID for easy tracking.
• Experiments: A way to group related runs together. This makes it easier to compare
different model training attempts and see which one performs best.
• Tracking Server: This is where all the experiment data gets logged. It includes a
REST API for interactions, a user interface to visually compare experiments, and a
database to keep all the detailed records.
• Artifact Storage: A place to save the results of runs, such as model files or output
data, separate from the experiment logs for organized and scalable access.
• Model Registry: It’s where all the models are stored. This feature helps manage
the lifecycle of each model, with tools for version control and tracking different stages
of a model, like stage or production.
Before any training begins, MLflow is initialized
by setting up the tracking URI. This could point
to a local directory for development purposes or to
a remote server for team collaboration, as will be
implemented later on. In our case, we create an
experiment named ”Vlaardingen_dry_collection”
to focus on predicting collections of dry goods at
the Vlaardingen oﬀice.
If we were to work with
different cargo types or oﬀices, we would start a
new experiment.
This organization allows us to
easily compare different training runs under the
same project.
Figure 4.4: MLflow Experiments
For each model, multiple runs are conducted to test different parameters like the number
of iterations, size of training data, and learning rate and each run is tracked under the
experiment. Once training is complete, the final model performance metrics are logged (e.g.
mean absolute error or root mean squared error) and artifacts, such as the trained model
file, the training code and plots of performance over time are stored in the artifact storage
linked to the run.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Pipeline Development
38
Figure 4.5: MLflow Runs: Option to compare selected runs via the UI
Datasets used for each run can also be logged, allowing for comprehensive tracking of
the data alongside the models and metrics. When you log a dataset, MLflow generates a
unique hash code for it. This hash code acts like a fingerprint for the dataset, indicating its
contents. If the dataset changes in any way, even slightly, the hash code will also change.
This feature is particularly useful for ensuring the consistency of data used across different
runs or for identifying when different data has been used. If datasets are logged as artifacts,
they can also be downloaded for review or use in future runs.
The web UI enables the examination and visual comparison of all runs’ outcomes. Once
the best model version is identified, we can then move to the Model Registry and mark that
version as ”Staging” or ”Production”. Over time, as we retrain or tweak the model, new
runs are registered, and MLflow keeps track of these iterations. This allows for easy rollback
to previous model versions if needed and understanding the evolution of model performance
over time.
((a)) Metric comparison of different
MLflow runs, visualizing mean abso-
lute error (mae) across the first nine
runs.
((b)) MLflow Model Registry showcasing the
'Vlaardingen_dry_collection' model with
its version history and lifecycle stages.
The code below demonstrates the simplicity of integrating MLflow tracking into a project.
It shows setting up an experiment, initiating a run, logging parameters, metrics, saving the
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Pipeline Development
39
model, and optionally, the dataset—all within a few lines. The training process is implied
to take place within the start_run context but is excluded here for brevity.
1 import mlflow
2
3 # Set MLflow tracking URI and experiment name
4 mlflow.set_tracking_uri("your_mlflow_tracking_uri")
5 mlflow.set_experiment("your_experiment_name")
6
7 # Start an MLflow run
8 with mlflow.start_run(run_name="example_run"):
9
10
# Log parameters: Key-value pairs that are relevant to the run
11
params = {"param1": "value1", "param2": "value2"}
12
mlflow.log_params(params)
13
14
# Log metrics: Quantitative measures of performance
15
metrics = {"metric1": 0.95, "metric2": 0.85}
16
mlflow.log_metrics(metrics)
17
18
# Log the model
19
# Assuming the model variable is your trained model
20
mlflow.sklearn.log_model(
21
sk_model=model,
22
artifact_path="sklearn-model",
23
registered_model_name="example_model"
24
)
25
26
# Log input dataset (assuming path to dataset is known)
27
dataset_path = "path/to/dataset.csv"
28
mlflow.log_artifact(dataset_path , artifact_path="datasets")
Listing 4.1: Basic MLflow Configuration
4.3.2.2
Setting Up MLflow Tracking on AWS Infrastructure
To set up a centralized MLflow tracking system, enabling the entire team to access and
view experiments, integration of AWS services was the next step. The process involved the
following steps:
1. First, an S3 Bucket was set up to store MLflow artifacts like models and output files.
2. Next, an EC2 instance was deployed to serve as the remote tracking server for
MLflow.
3. To grant the required permissions, an IAM role with ”AmazonS3FullAccess” and
”AmazonRDSFullAccess” policies was assigned to the EC2 instance.
4. Then, a PostgreSQL database on Amazon RDS (Relational Database Service)
was established to act as the backend for storing MLflow’s metadata and logs.
5. With the infrastructure now ready, a Dockerfile detailing the MLflow server’s setup
was created (see Appendix C.1).
6. The Docker image for the MLflow server was then built and pushed to Amazon ECR
(Elastic Container Registry).
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Pipeline Development
40
7. The EC2 instance was accessed via SSH to pull the Docker image from ECR and run
the container.
8. As a result, the MLflow Tracking Server’s UI could be accessed using the EC2 in-
stance’s public IP address.
9. Finally, to complete the integration, the project’s MLflow tracking URI was updated
to point to the remote server.
With this setup, whenever a team member trains a model, the mlflow.start_run com-
mand in their script connects to the MLflow server on the EC2 instance. This process logs
all experiment data, including parameters, metrics, and tags, to the RDS database, while
artifacts like the trained model are stored in the S3 bucket. This setup automates the exper-
iment tracking process, requires no local setup, and enhances team collaboration by allowing
members to access and compare experiments via the MLflow server UI.
The MLflow server, unlike application code, doesn’t require frequent redeployment. It
is typically set up once and then updated or maintained only when necessary. Because of
this, its deployment will not be included in the CI/CD process later on.
4.3.2.3
Data Versioning
Having in mind simplicity and a minimal approach towards tools, a script was developed to
integrate MLflow with a custom form of data version control, leveraging MLflow’s capabilities
to log, version, and manage datasets alongside model training runs. This script uses MLflow
API to:
• Log Datasets: This functionality enables the recording of datasets as artifacts within
MLflow runs.
• Pull Datasets: The script can also be used to retrieve datasets from specific runs by
using their unique run IDs, or the most recent run by default, facilitating easy access
to the data used in any experiment.
In essence, this script automates the process of uploading and downloading data to and from
S3 via MLflow runs.
The integration of data versioning directly into MLflow streamlines the workflow by
removing the necessity for separate versioning tools. This setup leads to fewer transitions
between tools, saves time and simplifies the process. Moreover, it automates essential data
management tasks like logging and retrieval, minimizing manual work and maintaining an
orderly data environment.
While this method proved eﬀicient for the project at hand, it is important to recognize
that it may not be the optimal solution for all scenarios, particularly as data size and
complexity increase. With this custom script, the entire dataset for each run is stored in
cloud storage. This approach is manageable for datasets around 10MB, as in this project
(Subsection 4.1.3). However, for larger datasets, this can quickly lead to significant storage
requirements and increased costs. Furthermore, uploading and downloading large datasets
to and from the cloud can consume considerable network bandwidth, potentially slowing
down the iteration cycle for model training and evaluation.
A better strategy for handling large datasets involves using a centralized data store and
tracking changes with identifiers, like hashes. This method, used by Data Version Control
(DVC), significantly reduces storage needs by only recording and storing the differences
==PAGE:48==
4.3 Pipeline Development
41
between dataset versions, not complete copies of the data for each experiment. DVC stores
metadata and version information in a version control system, like Git, and keeps the actual
data in a centralized storage, such as S3. For projects with larger datasets, transitioning
to a tool like DVC would provide a more scalable and eﬀicient method for data versioning,
offering better control, with minimal storage overhead and enhanced operational eﬀiciency.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Pipeline Development
42
Data Pipeline
Orchestrated
Experiments
Data
Preparation
Model
Training
Model
Evaluation
Model
Deployment
REMOTE HOST
Prediction
Service
Capture
Dataset
Environment
Code
Logs/Metrics
Artifacts
Amazon EC2 instance
runs MLflow  tracking
server
Trained Models
Development
Production
Model
Registry
Deploy
Manually
Amazon
EC2
Elastic
Container
Registry
Build & push image to
AWS ECR
Pull and run on EC2
Amazon S3 Bucket for
storing the artifacts
Amazon RDS Instance
with PostgreSQL as the
MLflow backend store
Figure 4.7: Iteration 2: Orchestrated experiments with MLflow, utilizing EC2 for
MLflow server hosting, S3 for Artifact storage, and RDS as backend store
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Pipeline Development
43
4.3.3
Iteration 3
Before diving into the third iteration, let’s assess the pipeline’s progress using the matu-
rity model as a reference. So far, significant advancements include automating the data
pipeline with Docker Compose, deploying a prediction app automatically with FastAPI and
Docker, and implementing experiment tracking and model management via MLflow. These
developments have moved the pipeline towards Levels 1 (DevOps without MLOps) and 2
(Automated Training) of the maturity model, though not yet fully meeting all criteria of ei-
ther level. With this iteration, the goal was not only to solidify these levels, by fully meeting
their requirements, but also to achieve Level 3 (Automated Model Deployment), integrating
continuous integration and delivery practices into the MLOps workflow.
4.3.3.1
Version Control
First, a code repository was set up on GitHub to host the project’s codebase and facilitate
version control. Version control, particularly the use of branching and merging, is crucial
for enabling parallel development on different aspects of the project. It allows for isolated
experimentation, feature development, and incremental updates without disrupting the main
or production codebase.
In theory, a simplified structured branching strategy might involve the creation of three
primary branches: 'dev' for ongoing development, 'test' for dedicated testing and quality
assurance, and 'main', which exists by default and serves as the production or release branch.
The development workflow typically starts on the 'dev' branch, where new features, updates,
and bug fixes are developed. Upon completion, these changes are merged into the 'test'
branch for a comprehensive suite of unit and integration tests, ensuring the functionality
and stability of the code. Successful testing precedes a pull request to the 'main' branch,
marking the changes ready for deployment. Triggering this pull request initiates a CI/CD
workflow that automates the processes of building, training, and deploying the application.
These branching techniques were not applied in this project; however, a discussion regarding
their potential applications and benefits will be included in the discussion chapter.
4.3.3.2
Continuous Integration - Automated Training
With version control established, the pipeline was configured to trigger the Continuous Inte-
gration (CI) process, utilizing a workflow designed to run via GitHub Actions, as explained
in the previous chapter. The YAML workflow file is detailed in Appendix D.1.
This CI process ensures that any change to the codebase automatically triggers testing
and building, effectively training the model and preparing it for deployment. The workflow
triggers automatically upon any push or pull request to the main branch. If any part of
the job fails, such as a data test not passing, the workflow stops to save time and resources,
preventing unnecessary tasks like training a model on poor-quality data. The process works
as follows:
1. build: The workflow begins with setting up the build environment, where Docker
images are built through the docker-compose using cached layers to speed up future
runs. Additionally, dependencies are installed to ensure all necessary components are
available for the process.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Pipeline Development
44
2. download-data: Meanwhile, data needed for training the model is gathered in par-
allel. Data fetching can be done in three ways:
• Using the custom script from iteration 2 to fetch the latest data logged in MLflow
• Specifying a particular run ID to get data from a specific past run.
• Rerunning the entire data pipeline from scratch (db-fetch-prepare-featurize)
to update the data with new information or processing methods.
The first two methods are quicker, using existing data to train the model, while the
last method is used for a complete retrain, ensuring the data is completely up to date.
Once the data is ready, it is uploaded as an artifact in GitHub Actions. Artifacts
are temporary storage that helps pass data and files between different stages of the
workflow, like training and evaluation.
3. simulated-tests: For demonstration purposes, a simulated test step has been incor-
porated into the workflow at this point. This serves as a placeholder for potential unit
tests, data validation checks, or other forms of testing that might be applicable. We
will explore testing methodologies in more detail in the discussion chapter.
4. train-evaluate:
Next, the updated docker-compose file, now with 'train' and
'evaluate' options, proceeds with model training and logging of model details to
the already deployed MLflow server. This step requires AWS credentials to access the
S3 bucket where models and artifacts are stored. These credentials are securely stored
as GitHub Secrets, illustrating the workflow’s integration with AWS services.
After training, the workflow captures the latest MLflow run ID and stores it in an S3
bucket named 'mlflow-run-id'. This ensures easy access to the most recent version
of the model, helping to keep deployments organized and eﬀicient.
This CI setup not only automates the training process but also integrates cloud storage
and model management effectively, showing a big leap towards achieving a matured MLOps
system. However, it relies on the computing power of GitHub’s runners for training, which,
while suﬀicient for this project, might not meet the demands of more complex models or
data, hinting at the need for more scalable compute solutions in later improvements.
Figure 4.8: Snapshot of the CI workflow executed via GitHub Actions. It outlines
each job—building Docker images, downloading data, testing, training the model,
evaluating it, and cleanup—along with the time taken for each. The cleanup job
which concludes the process by resetting the environment for subsequent workflows,
is omitted from this snapshot for brevity. For an in-depth look at each job’s specific
steps, see Appendix D.1.
==PAGE:52==
4.3 Pipeline Development
45
4.3.3.3
Continuous Delivery - Automated Model Deployment
Following the successful conclusion of the Continuous Integration process, which signifies
that the model has been effectively trained and is prepared for deployment, the pipeline
can transition into the Continuous Delivery (CD) phase. This phase is dedicated to the
automated deployment of the validated model into a production environment, where it will
be served through a FastAPI application. While the first iteration discussed the setup of
FastAPI, deployment was limited to a local environment. In this iteration, the deployment
extends to a cloud environment, specifically utilizing AWS Fargate to host the application.
Before the development of the workflow could start, it was necessary to establish the
appropriate infrastructure within the Amazon Elastic Container Service (ECS). Below is an
overview of the key components involved in this setup:
1. Creating a Cluster: Initially, a cluster was established within ECS. This cluster acts
as a centralized environment for managing and running containerized applications. It
is the foundation upon which tasks and services are deployed and managed.
2. Defining a Task Definition: Then, a task definition is created. This definition
specifies the Docker container to be used, including its CPU and memory requirements,
container images, and networking setup. The task definition is a blueprint for running
tasks in the ECS cluster.
3. Launching a Service: With the cluster and task definition in place, the next step
is to launch a service within ECS. This service uses the task definition to operate
and sustain the required number of task instances within the cluster, guaranteeing
the application’s desired state by auto-replacing failing or halted tasks. The service
simplifies deployment by orchestrating task operations according to the task defini-
tion and manages the creation of new tasks, ensuring they are properly set up and
functional.
The development of the CD workflow file, as detailed in Appendix D.2, begins with the
build-and-push job. First, it configures the necessary environment and the installation of
required dependencies. Subsequently, the workflow retrieves the latest MLflow run ID from
the S3 bucket and downloads the corresponding model from MLflow.
This step ensures
that the deployment uses the most recent and validated model version. Following this, the
workflow proceeds to automatically build the FastAPI Dockerfile, which was initially created
during iteration 1. It then configures AWS credentials, authenticates with Amazon Elastic
Container Registry (ECR), and uploads the newly constructed Docker image to ECR. This
automated process closely resembles the manual deployment approach used with MLflow,
but now everything is handled automatically by the pipeline.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Pipeline Development
46
At this stage, it is important to note that the
deployment
involves
a
manual
approval
step,
so that someone can review the model before
it gets deployed.
This manual check has been
incorporated
into
the
CD
pipeline
using
the
workflow_dispatch feature.
This feature allows
for manually triggering workflows from GitHub’s
interface, offering a way to incorporate human
oversight before proceeding with deployment. An
alternative method could have been using GitHub
Environments, but this option isn’t available in
private GitHub repositories.
Figure 4.9: GitHub UI prompt-
ing confirmation for deployment.
If the manual trigger gets approved, the deployment process begins (deploy-to-fargate
job), sending the image to AWS Fargate. This updates the ECS service to adopt a new task
definition, which then initiates the launch of the new task and smoothly discontinues the
old one. This ensures a seamless update to the latest application version on Fargate.
Post-deployment, the workflow pauses until the service is fully operational, then conducts
a health check (integration-test job). This involves retrieving the public IP of the Fargate
task, which changes with each deployment, and executing a GET API call to verify that the
deployed model is performing correctly in the production setting.
==PAGE:54==
4.3 Pipeline Development
47
Data Pipeline
Orchestrated
Experiments
Data
Preparation
Model
Training
Model
Evaluation
Model
Deployment
Prediction
Service
Development
Production
Automated
Deployment
With Approval
Amazon
EC2
run tests
CI
Automated
Training
build
docker-
compose
download
data
train
evaluate
CD
Automated
Deploy
download
model
from
MLflow
deploy to
fargate
integration
test
build 
FastAPI
docker 
image
push to 
ECR
Manual approval
step needed
Elastic
Container
Registry
Running FastAPI
application as a
containerized task 
Deploy Fargate Task
REMOTE HOST
Figure 4.10: Iteration 3: Integration of CI/CD for automated model training and
deployment
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Pipeline Development
48
4.3.4
Iteration 4
At this stage, the pipeline includes all the foundational elements needed to reach maturity
level 3. From now on, iterations will aim to integrate features characteristic of Level 4: Full
MLOps Automated Operations, while also refining and enhancing Level 3 capabilities. A
more detailed discussion on how each iteration has advanced the pipeline’s maturity levels
will be provided in the following chapter.
4.3.4.1
A/B Testing For Models
In this iteration, we will focus on integrating A/B testing for models into the pipeline. As
noted at the start of the chapter, the initial codebase utilized Histogram-Based Gradient
Boosting. However, we are now introducing Random Forest and XGBoost models, as de-
tailed in Subsection 4.1.2. These models were chosen because of their similarity to the initial
model, as they are all tree-based regressors. This allowed the use of the same featurized data
across all of these models, simplifying the process by employing a single data pipeline for
all.
The team’s objective is to maintain eﬀiciency and customer satisfaction through accu-
rate forecasting models. Currently, let’s say that the existing forecasting model has been
performing reasonably well. However, with the influx of new data, there’s a chance that
another model could yield better results. By employing A/B testing, the team can conduct
a structured comparison of the current model against contenders such as Random Forest
and XGBoost, so that they can see if there’s a better fit.
To implement this, the following changes were made:
• Updating Code for Multiple Models: The code was updated to support multiple
regression models, such as Random Forest and XGBoost, alongside the already inte-
grated model. This enhancement was achieved by dynamically setting each model’s
hyperparameters based on the selected regressor, chosen through an environment vari-
able.
• Parallel Model Training in Workflow: The CI workflow was updated with GitHub
Actions’ matrix strategy, enabling simultaneous training for different model types. A
matrix setup leads to individual jobs for each model, facilitating parallel training and
evaluation. Unlike before, where only one model’s results were logged, this modifica-
tion led to the creation of three distinct runs in MLflow, one for each model.
• Determining and Uploading the Best Model:: After evaluating the models,
the workflow identifies and uploads the best-performing model. The process involves
collecting MLflow run IDs and then executing a script, detailed in the Appendix E, to
use these IDs for downloading and evaluating the models’ performance metrics, such
as root mean squared error. Once the top-performing model is identified, its MLflow
run ID is uploaded to an S3 bucket, indicating it is ready for deployment. In the CD
pipeline, no modifications are required; it continues to use the run ID from the S3
bucket to fetch the model for deployment.
==PAGE:56==
4.3 Pipeline Development
49
Figure 4.11: Snapshot of the updated CI workflow, showcasing parallel training
and evaluation of multiple models followed by the selection and uploading of the best
performing model.
Reflecting on MLOps best practices, A/B testing should not only consider training per-
formance but also assess how models perform under real-world conditions in production.
The ideal strategy would include running models in parallel on live traﬀic and evaluating
additional metrics like latency(how fast the models responds) and throughput(how many re-
quests they can handle), while also confirming that performance differences are statistically
significant. However, the approach taken here simplifies the A/B testing process to provide
a foundational setup for the pipeline. A more detailed exploration of how it ideally should
be conducted will be discussed in the following chapter.
4.3.5
Iteration 5
4.3.5.1
Monitoring
Currently, the pipeline only deploys the model as a prediction service without logging pre-
dictions. This setup poses a challenge in assessing the model’s real-world performance or
detecting any degradation over time. Without ongoing monitoring and periodic retraining,
models risk becoming obsolete due to evolving conditions. In this iteration, the plan is to
upgrade the system to record predictions and gather feedback, laying the groundwork for
ongoing model performance tracking. Such enhancements will help maintain the model’s
accuracy and reliability as it continues to serve its purpose.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Pipeline Development
50
Logging Predictions:
Let’s consider a
real-world scenario where a collection hub
must predict the next week’s collections to
effectively distribute resources like drivers,
trucks, and inventory. Each day begins with
planners reviewing these forecasts to guide
their decisions for the coming days. With daily
updates, they can adjust their strategies to en-
sure resources are used eﬀiciently. The more
consistent and accurate the predictions are,
the smoother the planning process becomes,
minimizing the need for emergency hires and
preventing resources from being underutilized.
Based on this scenario, it was decided that
checking predictions once a day is enough,
because operational planning at the collection
hub
is
centered
around
weekly
forecasts.
There’s less necessity for frequent, real-time,
minute-to-minute
adjustments
since
the
planning horizon extends over a week, and
predictions for a given day are likely to be
quite similar if made multiple times within
the same day.
Figure 4.12: MLflow dashboard dis-
playing daily runs for the ’Prediction
Monitoring’ experiment, where each
run is chronologically labeled and con-
tains the upcoming week’s predictions.
The initial step involved developing a script to forecast collections for the upcoming seven
days, scheduled to execute at the start of each day. Within MLflow, a new experiment titled
”Prediction Monitoring” was established, where each day a new run is recorded, saving as
an artifact a JSON file with the week’s predictions. This means, that each day accumulates
seven different forecasts, and the expectation is that predictions closer to the target day
would be more accurate.
Below is an example illustrating how the JSON file with daily predictions might appear.
The term ”lead time” indicates the number of days from when the prediction was made to
the date it refers to:
1 {
2
"collection_predictions": [
3
{
4
"prediction_date": "2024-02-06",
5
"date": "2024-02-07",
6
"value": 3,
7
"lead_time": 1
8
},
9
{
10
"prediction_date": "2024-02-06",
11
"date": "2024-02-08",
12
"value": 1,
13
"lead_time": 2
==PAGE:58==
4.3 Pipeline Development
51
14
},
15
{
16
"prediction_date": "2024-02-06",
17
"date": "2024-02-09",
18
"value": 9,
19
"lead_time": 3
20
},
21
// Additional predictions omitted for brevity
22
]
23 }
Listing 4.2: Snippet of collection predictions in JSON format
Logging Actuals:
Following the prediction logging mechanism, the next step involves
logging actual daily collection figures. For the purpose of just illustrating the monitoring
setup, a script was designed to fabricate realistic but simulated ’actual’ values. Under normal
operations, this script would run at the close of each day to log real collection numbers. Its
function is to search MLflow for predictions made for the current day, locate the relevant
prediction entries, and update the JSON artifacts with the simulated ’actual’ collections.
This approach serves as a placeholder, showcasing how real data would be recorded and
used for monitoring.
Below is the updated JSON, now including the actual values alongside the predictions:
1 {
2
"collection_predictions": [
3
{
4
"prediction_date": "2024-02-06",
5
"date": "2024-02-07",
6
"value": 3,
7
"lead_time": 1,
8
"actual": 3
9
},
10
// Additional predictions omitted for brevity
11
]
12 }
Listing 4.3: language
Visualizing Prediction Accuracy:
Having established a system for capturing both
predictions and actual outcomes and logging them to MLflow, a script was developed to
process the updated JSON artifacts from each MLflow run within the ”Prediction Moni-
toring” experiment and generate a bar graph that compares the predicted values against
the actual ones for a clear comparative analysis.
Furthermore, the script computes key
error metrics, including Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE),
and Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), to quantify the accuracy of the predictions.
Once the visualizations are created, the script saves the graph as an artifact and also logs
the calculated error metrics back into MLflow, enriching the run’s data.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Pipeline Development
52
Figure 4.13: Bar chart comparison of predicted versus actual collection values for
a seven-day forecast from a run in the ’Prediction Monitoring’ experiment.
Monitoring Model Performance and Taking Action:
For a logistics hub plan-
ning resources on weekly forecasts, the importance of prediction accuracy increases as the
lead time decreases.
• For a 1-day lead time, inaccurate predictions can immediately affect operations, po-
tentially leading to resource imbalances and the need for urgent adjustments. Consis-
tently wrong predictions for the following day indicate a critical issue with the model,
such as the model not capturing latest trends, thus quick retraining with fresh data
is critical to maintain operational fluidity.
• For a lead time of 3 days, the predictions are less time-sensitive, and there’s typically
enough time to adjust plans. While errors can still affect eﬀiciency and costs, a prompt
alert to review the forecasts would suﬀice and retraining the model is not immediately
necessary. Monitoring the frequency of these alerts would also help get an idea of the
model’s overall accuracy.
• Finally, for a lead time of 7 days, inaccurate predictions are of moderate concern.
They indicate potential future inaccuracies but don’t necessitate immediate action.
A script was designed to track the model’s daily predictive performance across these lead
times, creating a visual error graph that aids in evaluating accuracy over time (Figure 4.14).
Now, assuming that the team has established specific error thresholds for each of these
lead times, the script also features a basic alerting mechanism that functions in the following
way:
==PAGE:60==
4.3 Pipeline Development
53
Figure 4.14: This plot captures the prediction error over the course of a week, with
forecasts made at 1, 3, and 7 days in advance of a collection. The differing lead times
reveal how the forecast accuracy varies with the length of the lead time, with each
lea time exhibiting its distinct pattern of prediction error.
• For the most critical short-term forecasts, with a 1-day lead time, the system logs an
alert indicating immediate retraining is needed. Currently, this setup does not include
the actual automatic triggering of the retraining process, just the alert.
• A 3-day error beyond its threshold sends a review alert through Slack—a messaging
platform used by teams for communication—to a specialized channel, prompting a
less urgent, yet necessary review.
• For a 7-day error, the script holds off on sending alerts, to prevent unnecessary noise
and alert fatigue, maintaining focus on essential, time-sensitive issues.
Summarizing,
this iteration introduced basic monitoring for model predictions using
MLflow and custom scripts. Daily, the model generates weekly predictions that are logged
in MLflow under the ”Prediction Monitoring” experiment, with each prediction tagged by its
lead time to indicate the forecast period. By day’s end, actual values are recorded, facilitating
a comparison between predicted and actual outcomes. The monitoring strategy evaluates
prediction accuracy by lead time. Inaccurate next-day predictions trigger a retraining alert,
while 3-day forecasts exceeding error thresholds prompt a Slack review alert.
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Final Pipeline
54
4.4
Final Pipeline
The diagram below presents the pipeline in its final form. For clarity, intricate details from
earlier diagrams are excluded, and specifics of the CI/CD processes are omitted, except for
the newly introduced A/B testing. The addition of the Monitoring Service is also depicted.
Data Pipeline
Orchestrated
Experiments
Model
Deployment
Prediction
Service
Development
Production
Automated
Deployment
With Approval
Amazon
EC2
CI
Automated
Training
CD
Automated
Deploy
Monitoring
Service
A/B
Testing
Figure 4.15: Final Pipeline
To summarize, we began with a Level 0 MLOps pipeline, characterized by its simple,
script-based setup lacking integrated MLOps features. At this stage, there’s little automa-
tion, with manual processes predominating. Teams work in isolation, using local environ-
ments without version control for data or code, facing challenges in consistency and repro-
ducibility from development to production. The lack of continuous integration and delivery
results in manual, ad-hoc deployments, complicating version tracking and making it impos-
sible to assess the real-world performance of the model.
In contrast, the final stage of the pipeline integrates automation, monitoring, and con-
tinuous improvement into the workflow. Automated pipelines now manage the majority of
tasks across the machine learning lifecycle, including data handling, model training, and
deployment.
Containerization ensured consistency and isolation across environments, fa-
cilitating automatic updates and deployment of models with minimal human intervention.
FastAPI facilitates the deployment of a prediction service by leveraging AWS Fargate for
serverless container management.
At the core of these improvements is MLflow, which
==PAGE:62==
4.4 Final Pipeline
55
tracks experiments and manages the model registry for systematic versioning of models and
data. Hosted on AWS and complemented by S3 storage, this setup offers a secure and scal-
able environment for data and model artifact storage. GitHub Actions implement CI/CD
principles, ensuring updates undergo systematic testing and deployment, maintaining the
production’s model optimal. Moreover, a basic monitoring system proactively identifies and
resolves performance issues, ensuring sustained operational eﬀiciency.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER5
Discussion
This chapter evaluates the pipeline’s maturity, tracing its development from Level 0 towards
Level 4. It outlines the accomplishments of each iteration and explains how the maturity
model was adapted to this project’s requirements. Additionally, it discusses whether feature
integration alone is adequate for assessing maturity, while exploring scenarios and questions
to highlight the pipeline’s limitations and suggest areas for future improvement.
5.1
Progression Through MLOps Maturity
In Chapter 2, we explored MLOps best practices and the Microsoft Maturity Model, which
served as essential guides throughout this project’s development. The maturity model how-
ever, functions as a flexible framework for assessing an MLOps pipeline status, and does
not dictate a specific course of action. This flexibility allows for adaptation to the unique
needs and contexts of individual projects, acknowledging that there is not a one-size-fits-all,
step-by-step guide to transitioning from one level of maturity to the next.
To evaluate the progression of this project’s pipeline, I have created the table shown
below (Figure 5.1). Covering Maturity Levels 1 to 4, this table details the advancements
implemented for each maturity stage, mirroring my understanding of how the model fits
this project’s context. It also tracks the five iterations conducted throughout the project,
specifying the features introduced in each one. Additionally, ’X’ marks identify expected
features that are missing in the final pipeline setup, providing a clear view of areas where
the project fell short of the anticipated maturity advancements. This method isn’t about
setting a strict path on how to guide pipeline enhancement but rather offering insights into
this project’s development through the lens of MLOps maturity. It highlights the successes
and points out where the pipeline can do better. Essentially, it is a personalized application
of the Microsoft Maturity Model, designed to map this project’s journey and guide further
improvements. Below, follows a brief examination of the table’s insights:
1. The first iteration focused on containerization, automating the data processing and
the release of a FastAPI app. The element needed to advance the pipeline to Level 1
would be the incorporation of integration and unit tests, which the pipeline currently
lacks. The only instance where tests were simulated occurred during the CI process,
serving as a placeholder for future testing efforts.
2. The second iteration introduced MLflow, enhancing the pipeline with experiment
tracking, a model registry, and data versioning capabilities. This advancement moved
the pipeline towards Level 2, yet it did not fully satisfy all its criteria.
3. The third iteration marked a significant leap, fulfilling all prerequisites for Level 2(ex-
cluding testing) and nearly completing Level 3. By its conclusion, the pipeline sup-
==PAGE:64==
5.1 Progression Through MLOps Maturity
57
ported automated training and deployment, facilitated by an advanced CI/CD frame-
work using GitHub Actions for managed compute. Again, it is important to note the
absence of comprehensive testing alongside each release.
4. The fourth iteration brought in A/B testing capabilities during model training, round-
ing off the achievement of Level 3 maturity.
5. The final, fifth iteration initiated steps towards Level 4 by implementing basic moni-
toring strategies, though it stopped short on automating the retraining process.
Maturity Level
Functionality
Iteration
1
Iteration
2
Iteration
3
Iteration
4
Iteration
5
Level 1: DevOps no MLOps
Automated data pipeline
gathers data and prepares it 
✔️
Automated application
release
✔️
Basic integration tests exist
for the model
❌
Application code has unit
tests
❌
Level 2: Automated Training
Code is version controlled
✔️
Automated model training
✔️
Managed compute resources
✔️
Experiment tracking 
✔️
Model registry 
✔️
Version Control for Data
✔️
Level 3: Automated Model Deployment
Advanced CI/CD
✔️
Automated model release
process
✔️
Unit/Integration tests for
application code
and each model release
❌
Integrated A/B testing for
models
✔️
Level 4: Full MLOps Automated Retraining
Monitoring of production
models
✔️
Auto-triggered retraining
based on production data
❌
Figure 5.1: Key functionalities of each maturity level and their iteration-wise im-
plementation.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Final Assessment of Maturity
58
5.1.1
Maturity Model and Cloud Services
It is worth noting that although the Microsoft MLOps maturity model and similar frame-
works do not specifically list cloud capabilities as a requirement for reaching higher levels
of maturity, integrating cloud services is key to advancing MLOps maturity, by greatly im-
proving its eﬀiciency, effectiveness, and adaptability. Thus, even without explicit mention,
employing cloud services is generally anticipated in achieving advanced MLOps maturity,
thanks to the substantial advantages they provide in facilitating complex, scalable, and
secure ML operations. Here is a brief overview of the cloud services utilized in this project:
• Cloud storage for scalable data management. (Iteration 2)
• Virtual servers for hosting MLflow. (Iteration 2)
• Serverless containers for dynamically serving the prediction application, allowing for
auto-scaling of resources in response to application demand. (Iteration 3)
• A container registry to eﬀiciently manage and distribute Docker images. (Iterations
2, 3)
• GitHub Actions and Runners for automating the training process. (Iteration 3)
5.2
Final Assessment of Maturity
Given the above evaluation we can claim that the pipeline has reached Level 3 maturity
while also approaching Level 4. However, while the integration of features and technologies
indicates progress towards achieving a higher maturity level, it raises a critical question:
Is it suﬀicient to declare the pipeline has attained a certain level of maturity based solely
on these elements?
Surely, the presence of specific features provides a tangible measure
of the pipeline’s capabilities, but assessing maturity may involve more than a checklist of
implemented solutions.
True maturity in an MLOps pipeline should also be characterized by the qualitative
aspects of how these components are integrated and utilized. The concept of technical debt,
as discussed in the paper ”Hidden Technical Debt in Machine Learning Systems” [65], is
essential in understanding this aspect. Technical debt describes the long-term consequences
of earlier decisions made for short-term benefits, choosing quicker or easier solutions over
more robust and maintainable ones. Within machine learning systems, such technical debt
can initially remain hidden, and reveal its impact gradually, thereby affecting the system’s
scalability, maintainability, and overall effectiveness.
To critically assess the maturity of this project’s pipeline, we will explore a series of
questions and scenarios. These are designed to identify areas where the pipeline may be
lacking and pinpointing opportunities for future enhancements.
5.2.1
How straightforward is it to develop and test a new
algorithmic method?
This question seeks to evaluate the pipeline’s adaptability in the context of integrating
and testing new models.
At first glance, the pipeline provides a robust framework for
==PAGE:66==
5.2 Final Assessment of Maturity
59
model experimentation.
It supports A/B testing during the training phase, allowing for
the comparative analysis of different models’ performance. Integration with MLflow offers
a centralized platform for tracking experiments, while the CI/CD pipeline ensures that
improvements are compatible with existing components. Despite these strengths, certain
aspects of the pipeline might detract from its overall eﬀiciency.
Improving Code Implementation:
First of, in terms of coding, we should aim to
transition towards a modular architecture and reduce hard-coded elements as much as possi-
ble. This would mean defining each model as a distinct class that inherits from a base model
class. This base class includes common methods like train() and evaluate(). Adding a
new model would then become straightforward: we would just create a new class for it,
implement the two methods, and there would be no need to alter anything else in the code.
Necessary Tests:
Clearly, the absence of tests compromises the pipeline’s reliability
when making new changes. Here are some key tests to consider:
• Unit Testing: Tests individual components or functions to ensure they work correctly
on their own. For example, checking that data preprocessing functions correctly handle
missing values or, in our case, that new model-related functions operate as expected.
• Integration Testing: Ensures that different components of the pipeline work to-
gether correctly. For instance, verifying that the data preprocessing stage correctly
feeds into the new model training stage.
• End-to-End Testing: Checks the whole pipeline from start to finish to confirm it
functions as intended. This involves a complete run from data collection and prepro-
cessing to training the new model and making predictions, verifying the new model’s
integration.
Branching Techniques:
As mentioned in the previous chapter, the current pipeline
operates exclusively on the main branch, lacking a formal branching strategy. In real life
that would pose a huge burden for experimenting with a new model and increase the risk
of introducing errors directly into production. A better approach would be to introduce
feature branches for the development of new models, providing isolated environments to
freely experiment. Then, intermediary branches like 'develop' or 'staging' would work
as transitional steps between the feature branches and the main production branch. This is
where extensive integration tests would ensure that everything works together before moving
to production. Finally, setting up pull request (PR) policies would ensure thorough review
and approval by team members before any integration, aligning with best practices in both
software engineering and machine learning development.
5.2.2
How accurately can the effect of a new modification to the
system be assessed?
Let’s assume a new model has been developed and after it enters the A/B testing during the
CI/CD process, it gets deployed. However, as discussed during iteration 4, this approach
deviates from the MLOps best practice of conducting tests in a production environment,
which restricts our ability to thoroughly assess the impact of new changes. Furthermore,
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Final Assessment of Maturity
60
in the final iteration, we implemented a basic system for monitoring performance, focusing
on comparing predictions with actual outcomes and setting up simple alerts. Despite these
efforts, this setup falls short in providing a comprehensive evaluation of how the new model
measures up against its predecessor.
A/B Testing In Production:
A/B testing would ideally involve comparing two model
versions by exposing them simultaneously to a live environment. A portion of the traﬀic (e.g.,
user requests, data inputs) would be directed to model A, while another portion would be
directed to model B. Their performance is then evaluated using specific metrics like accuracy,
over a set period. This can be achieved through several deployment methods[43]:
• Shadow Deployment: The new model’s predictions are made but not used, allowing
comparison without affecting the user experience.
• Canary Deployment: Traﬀic to the new model is gradually increased, with con-
tinuous monitoring of its performance and impact. This strategy aims to limit any
potential issues to a small portion of users at first.
• Blue/Green Deployment: Maintaining two identical production environments, one
(Blue) with the current version and another (Green) with the new version. Traﬀic is
fully switched from Blue to Green after the new version is thoroughly tested and
confirmed stable.
This method offers a quick rollback option if needed, ensuring
minimal downtime.
Advanced Monitoring:
While MLFlow served as a valuable open-source tool for log-
ging and monitoring predictions, its approach was script-intensive and potentially complex.
For future enhancements, leveraging the AWS ecosystem, which is already utilized in the
project, could significantly improve the pipeline’s monitoring capabilities through a more
cohesive and automated approach. Let’s explore how this could look:
1. Data Storage Shift to RDS: Moving from storing predictions and actual values in
S3(in JSON format), to using Amazon RDS would offer a more structured and eﬀicient
solution for data storage and management. Predictions would be logged daily, with
actual values appended at day’s end, mirroring the current script’s functionality.
2. Automated Data Processing: Then, a script running on a schedule via AWS
Lambda, a serverless computing service that runs code in response to events, would
fetch predictions and actuals from RDS to calculate essential metrics.
This setup
would ensure regular, automated metric computation.
3. Metrics Monitoring with CloudWatch: By publishing these custom metrics to
AWS CloudWatch, we could then gain the ability to monitor these metrics closely.
Customizable dashboards in CloudWatch provide a quick overview of the system’s
health.
4. Proactive Alerts with CloudWatch Alarms: Setting up CloudWatch alarms
would ensure immediate notification when metrics hit the three different thresholds
mentioned in iteration 5.
5. Automating Actions with AWS Lambda: Beyond monitoring, AWS Lambda
could also trigger retraining in response to the 1-day lead time alert, thereby closing
the loop from monitoring to actionable insights.
==PAGE:68==
5.2 Final Assessment of Maturity
61
It is important to note that alongside functional monitoring of model performance, op-
erational monitoring plays an essential role too. It tracks resource usage, maintains service
health and availability, monitors response times and latency, and identifies errors and excep-
tions in the prediction application. By hosting the prediction application on AWS Fargate,
operational monitoring was inherently included (Figure 5.2). Fargate’s seamless integration
with CloudWatch ensures that logs and metrics are automatically forwarded for comprehen-
sive operational oversight. This underscores the advantage of leveraging integrated services
within the same ecosystem, as it naturally simplifies and enhances operations.
Figure 5.2: AWS CloudWatch dashboard displaying CPU and memory utilization
for the prediction application service
5.2.3
How will the system adapt to support larger datasets and
more complex model training tasks?
We have previously identified two main ineﬀiciencies when considering the system’s ability
to handle larger datasets and more complex models. First, regarding data versioning, adopt-
ing DVC (Data Version Control) would be a more eﬀicient strategy, mitigating potential
increases in S3 storage costs and operational delays that accompany larger datasets. Second,
we’ve acknowledged the limitations posed by training models with GitHub runners, which
may not be scalable or powerful enough for complex model training.
As an alternative,
a suggestion would be to utilize an appropriate EC2 instance type based on the model’s
computational requirements.
Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
Adopting EC2 instances for training models raises
considerations about quickly scaling infrastructure to meet increased training demands and
eﬀiciently adjusting EC2 resources to handle fluctuating computational needs. IaC, intro-
duces a method for managing and provisioning infrastructure through code, moving away
from manual setups, as we did in the AWS Management Console. This method involves
defining infrastructure elements like servers, networks, and storage within configuration files,
which can be version-controlled and shared. For example, as the pipeline’s computational
needs escalate, IaC would facilitate the seamless scaling of infrastructure—either horizon-
tally, by adding more instances, or vertically, by upgrading to more powerful instances—with
minimal code modifications.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Final Assessment of Maturity
62
5.2.4
How is the prediction application prepared to handle
sudden spikes in traﬀic or recover from service outages?
To assess the prediction application’s resilience, it makes sense to start with its AWS Fargate
infrastructure. Fargate provides a robust, serverless environment, that automatically scales
resources to meet application demands, maintaining responsiveness during traﬀic spikes.
This establishes a solid foundation.
However, evaluating the choice of FastAPI for the
prediction API is equally important, given its impact on the application’s resilience through
performance and scalability.
ML-Specific Model Serving Frameworks
While FastAPI, eﬀiciently handles asyn-
chronous requests, it may struggle with heavy loads or complex tasks.
This is because
FastAPI is not specifically designed for ML model serving and lacks advanced features such
as model versioning, request batching, and multi-model serving. In contrast, ML-specific
serving frameworks like BentoML[14] and NVIDIA’s Triton Inference Server[58] are equipped
with these capabilities, potentially offering better performance and functionality for complex
ML tasks.
Kubernetes
Lastly, given Kubernetes’[45] widespread popularity for managing container-
ized applications, it is important to consider how it could further enhance the pipeline’s capa-
bilities. Fargate and Kubernetes both support deploying, managing, and scaling container-
ized applications, with capabilities to automatically adjust to traﬀic or workload changes.
Fargate simplifies the process by abstracting server and cluster management; users only
need to specify their container and resource needs, and Fargate handles the rest. Kuber-
netes, while offering greater control over deployments, requires managing clusters and nodes,
which can be complex. However, Kubernetes’s cloud-agnostic nature reduces vendor lock-in
and, it can be more cost-effective for larger or steady workloads, making it a worthwhile
consideration.
Ιn conclusion,
the pipeline has shown significant progress, achieving what seems to be
Level 3 maturity. However, a closer look at certain scenarios reveals growing technical debt,
highlighting many areas for improvement. Should there be more time for development, a key
focus would be on implementing stress testing. This testing would be crucial for evaluating
the pipeline’s performance with large datasets, complex models, and traﬀic spikes, and
would help in guiding efforts to improve these primary weaknesses. Moreover, enhancing the
monitoring strategy would not only improve visibility into the pipeline’s performance but
also facilitate more effective A/B testing of models in production.
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER6
Conclusion
The primary goal of this thesis was to design and develop an MLOps pipeline tailored for
the creation, deployment, and management of forecasting models. These models are aimed
at accurately predicting demand within logistics, focusing on forecasting the quantities of
goods either collected from or delivered to a hub.
To meet the requirements of the pipeline, the project delves into MLOps concepts to pin-
point key best practices essential for the project’s success, including Continuous Integration
(CI), Continuous Delivery (CD), Continuous Training (CT), Reproducibility, Versioning,
Workflow Orchestration, Collaboration, and Continuous Monitoring. These principles were
the guiding elements to ensure the pipeline’s eﬀiciency and reliability. For a more structured
development process, the Microsoft Maturity Model was adopted. This framework served as
a roadmap, steering development choices and aiding in the evaluation of the final pipeline’s
effectiveness and maturity.
A thorough comparison of various tools was conducted, recognizing that the best choice
varies based on the project’s specific needs, since no single tool fits every scenario. This
involved evaluating factors like cost, complexity, community support, and feature coverage
to assemble the necessary technologies for building the pipeline. The review encompassed
tools for experiment tracking, model management, and model serving frameworks, alongside
comparisons of top cloud services: Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud Platform
(GCP), and Microsoft Azure, focusing on their offerings in cloud storage, compute services,
and serverless containers. Key tools such as Docker for containerization, GitHub for version
control, and GitHub Actions for CI/CD were also presented. This process highlighted the
importance of interoperability among technologies, the trade-offs between all-in-one plat-
forms and specialized tools, and addressed vendor lock-in challenges by emphasizing the
importance of a flexible design not overly reliant on any single provider.
Using data and a model provided by DFDS Logistics, the development process began
from a Level 0 maturity, with no MLOps practices in place. Through five iterative enhance-
ments, the project saw significant advancement, reaching automated training and model
deployment, and achieving a Level 3 maturity. This progress set the stage for the opera-
tion of the final pipeline. Its process begins by activating a data pipeline through Docker
Compose, to move fresh data from the production database to a local one for processing
and feature extraction. Following this, training experiments are conducted with MLFlow,
which tracks each run, including metrics, artifacts, parameters, and models, storing them in
a model registry. AWS S3 storage fulfills all storage requirements during these experiments.
The MLFlow server, hosted on an AWS EC2 instance, facilitates team collaboration and
each training run’s data is saved and versioned within MLflow, integrating data versioning.
This training process is fully automated via a CI workflow in GitHub Actions, which also
conducts A/B testing of models to identify the highest performer, flagging it for deployment.
Subsequently, a CD workflow, upon manual approval, automatically deploys the top model
==PAGE:71==
6 Conclusion
64
into production. This deployment is carried out through a FastAPI application hosted on
AWS Fargate, which provides auto-scaling capabilities and robust service management. Ad-
ditionally, a basic monitoring system logs daily predictions and actual outcomes in MLFlow,
issuing alerts for underperformance. Throughout this entire process, containerization plays
a critical role, ensuring environment consistency and isolation.
In conclusion, this thesis navigates the complexities of integrating machine learning
models with operational processes, underscoring the essential role of MLOps in connect-
ing theoretical data science to practical application. It outlines the successful design and
implementation of a fully functional MLOps pipeline and achieves a satisfactory level of ma-
turity. However, it also identifies areas of improvement, particularly in scalability, testing,
and adaptability, which could become critical with larger datasets and more complex mod-
els. While feature integration demonstrates progress, a truly mature pipeline also requires
qualitative assessments to ensure comprehensive integration.
This points towards future
enhancements aimed at minimizing technical debt and enhancing the system’s robustness
and flexibility, ultimately paving the way for a more mature and eﬀicient pipeline.
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIXA
Prediction API
Swagger
Figure A.1: Interface of the prediction API showcasing the available endpoints for
prediction and model information retrieval.
==PAGE:73==
A Prediction API Swagger
66
Figure A.2: Process of interacting with the API for predictions: The figure on the
left shows the API endpoint /predict used for submitting prediction requests, speci-
fying the organization and date range for the next 3 days, while the figure on the right
displays the successful server response, presenting the forecasted data. This sequence
demonstrates the complete workflow from making a prediction call to receiving the
predictions.
==PAGE:74==
A Prediction API Swagger
67
Figure A.3: API interaction process for model information retrieval: The figure on
the top depicts the GET request to the /model_info/organization_name endpoint
to obtain details of the model in production.
Figure on the bottom provides the
successful server response, which includes the model’s name, URI, unique identifier,
version, associated experiment name, MLflow version, run ID, and the UTC times-
tamp of creation.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIXB
AWS Management
Console
B.1
Amazon Elastic Container Registry - ECR
Figure B.1: Snapshot of the Amazon ECR showing the ’fastapi’ and ’mlflow-server’
repositories, where the Docker images for the FastAPI app and MLflow server are
hosted.
==PAGE:76==
B.2 Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud - EC2
69
B.2
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud - EC2
Figure B.2: Snapshot of the EC2 management dashboard showing the MLflow server
instance. The instance is currently operational, as evidenced by the green checkmark
next to the ’Running’ status, and it has passed all system status checks.
B.3
Amazon Simple Storage Service - S3
Figure B.3: Snapshot of the S3 management console displaying three General Pur-
pose buckets for project data storage on AWS. The buckets are designated for different
aspects of the project: ’mlflow-artifacts-focd’ for MLflow experiments, ’mlflow-run-id’
for tracking the run ID of the deployed model, and ’predictions-focd’ for storing pre-
diction outputs and actual values.
==PAGE:77==
B.4 AWS Fargate
70
B.4
AWS Fargate
Figure B.4:
Snapshot of the ECS (Elastic Container Service) cluster configura-
tion named ’fastapi-ecs’ within the AWS Management Console. It indicates that the
cluster is active and currently running a service called ’fastapi-service’, denoting full
operational status. The service is utilizing AWS Fargate to serve the FastAPI appli-
cation, which handles the prediction requests.
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIXC
Dockerfiles
C.1
Deployment of MLflow Server
1 # Base image: Python 3.8 on Debian slim for a smaller image size
2 FROM python:3.8-slim
3
4 WORKDIR /src
5
6 # Install a specific version of protobuf due to compatibility requirements
7 RUN pip install protobuf==3.20.0
8
9 # Install MLflow and its dependencies , including support for PostgreSQL and
AWS S3
10 # Also, create a directory for MLflow to use for temporary files or
configurations
11 RUN pip install \
12
mlflow \
13
psycopg2-binary \
14
boto3 && \
15
mkdir /mlflow/
16
17 # Expose port 5000 for MLflow server access
18 EXPOSE 5000
19
20 # Set environment variables for AWS and MLflow configuration
21 ENV AWS_DB_USERNAME=${AWS_DB_USERNAME}
22 ENV AWS_DB_PASSWORD=${AWS_DB_PASSWORD}
23 ENV AWS_DB_ENDPOINT=${AWS_DB_ENDPOINT}
24 ENV ARTIFACT_BUCKET=${ARTIFACT_BUCKET}
25 ENV AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=${AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID}
26 ENV AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=${AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY}
27
28 # Command to run the MLflow tracking server when the container starts
29 CMD mlflow server \
30
--host 0.0.0.0 \
31
--port 5000 \
32
--default-artifact-root ${ARTIFACT_BUCKET} \
33
--backend-store-uri postgresql://${AWS_DB_USERNAME}:${AWS_DB_PASSWORD}@$
{AWS_DB_ENDPOINT}:5432
Listing C.1: Dockerfile configuration for initializing the MLflow Tracking Server.
==PAGE:79==
C.2 Deployment of FastAPI Prediction Application
72
C.2
Deployment of FastAPI Prediction Application
1 # Specify the base image
2 FROM --platform=linux/amd64 python:3.10-slim-buster
3
4 # Update package lists and install necessary packages including compilers
and libraries
5 # Also, perform cleanup to minimize the image size
6 RUN apt-get update \
7
&& apt-get -y install gcc \
8
&& apt-get -y install g++ \
9
&& apt-get -y install unixodbc unixodbc-dev \
10
&& apt-get install -y curl \
11
&& apt-get install -y python3-dev libpq-dev \
12
&& rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/* \
13
&& apt-get clean
14
15 # Copy the Python requirements file into the container to install Python
dependencies
16 COPY src/api/requirements.txt /src/requirements.txt
17 RUN pip install --no-cache-dir --upgrade -r /src/requirements.txt
18
19 # Copying initialization files to cache them in docker layer for improved
build performance
20 COPY src/common/__init__.py /src/common/
21 COPY src/data/__init__.py /src/data/
22
23 WORKDIR /src
24
25 # Copy the application source code into the container
26 COPY params.yaml ../../
27 COPY src/api /src/api
28 COPY src/common /src/common
29 COPY src/data /src/data
30
31 # Expose port 80 for the application
32 EXPOSE 80
33
34 # Define the command to run the application using uvicorn with specified
host and port
35 CMD ["uvicorn", "api.app:app", "--host", "0.0.0.0", "--port", "80"]
Listing C.2: Dockerfile for configuring and running the FastAPI application.
==PAGE:80==
C.3 Docker Compose
73
C.3
Docker Compose
1 version: "3"
2 services:
3
# PostgreSQL database service setup
4
db:
5
build:
6
context: local/postgresql
# Location of the Dockerfile for PostgreSQL
7
args:
8
PGPASSWORD:
9
ports:
10
- "5432:5432"
# Exposes PostgreSQL port to the host
11
healthcheck:
12
test: pg_isready -U docker
# Checks if PostgreSQL is ready to accept
connections
13
networks:
14
- dev
15
16
# Data fetching service configuration
17
fetch:
18
build:
19
context: .
20
dockerfile: src/data/Dockerfile
21
target: fetch
22
args:
23
- MIN_DATE=2021-01-01
24
- MAX_DATE=2023-12-31
25
- CARGO_ACTION=collection
26
volumes:
27
- ./data:/data
# Maps a local directory to the container for data
persistence
28
environment:
# Environment variables for database access
29
- FOCD_SINK_HOST=${FOCD_SINK_HOST}
30
- FOCD_SINK_USER=${FOCD_SINK_USER}
31
- FOCD_SINK_PASSWORD=${FOCD_SINK_PASSWORD}
32
networks:
33
- dev
34
depends_on:
35
db:
36
condition: service_healthy
37
38
# Data preparation service setup
39
prepare:
40
build:
41
context: .
42
dockerfile: src/data/Dockerfile
43
target: prepare
44
args:
45
- CARGO_ACTION=collection
46
volumes:
47
- ./data:/data
48
49
# Feature engineering service configuration
50
featurize:
==PAGE:81==
C.4 Data Pipeline
74
51
build:
52
context: .
53
dockerfile: src/data/Dockerfile
54
target: featurize
55
args:
56
- CARGO_ACTION=collection
57
volumes:
58
- ./data:/data
59
60
# Model training service setup
61
train:
62
build:
63
context: .
64
args:
# AWS credentials for accessing necessary resources
65
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID}
66
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY}
67
dockerfile: src/train/Dockerfile
68
target: train
69
environment:
70
REGRESSOR: ${REGRESSOR}
# Defines the type of regressor to use
71
volumes:
72
- ./data:/data
73
74
# Model evaluation service configuration
75
evaluate:
76
build:
77
context: .
78
dockerfile: src/train/Dockerfile
79
target: evaluate
80
volumes:
81
- ./data:/data
# Data volume for access to the dataset and model
artifacts
82
- ./latest-run:/latest-run
# Volume for storing the latest run of
MLFlow
83
environment:
84
MODEL_NAME: ${MODEL_NAME}
# Specifies the model name for evaluation
85
86 networks:
87
dev: {}
Listing C.3: Docker Compose YAML for an integrated data processing pipeline
including services for database setup, data fetching, preparation, feature engineering,
model training, and evaluation.
C.4
Data Pipeline
1 # Use Python 3.10 slim image based on Debian Bullseye as the base image
2 FROM python:3.10-slim-bullseye as base
3
4 WORKDIR /src
5 # Combine apt-get update and install, and cleanup apt cache in one layer
==PAGE:82==
C.5 Training and Evaluating Model
75
6 RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y gdal-bin libgdal-dev g++ git \
7
&& rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*
8
9 # Install dependencies using pip
10 COPY ./src/data/requirements.txt /src/data/
11 RUN python -m pip install -U pip && pip install -r /src/data/requirements.
txt
12
13 COPY params.yaml /src/
14 COPY src/data/ /src/data/
15 COPY src/common/ /src/common/
16
17 # Fetch stage
18 FROM base as fetch
19 ARG MIN_DATE
20 ARG MAX_DATE
21 ARG CARGO_ACTION
22 ENV MIN_DATE=${MIN_DATE} \
23
MAX_DATE=${MAX_DATE} \
24
CARGO_ACTION=${CARGO_ACTION} \
25
FILENAME=${CARGO_ACTION:-$CARGO_ACTION}.parquet
26
27 WORKDIR /src
28 ENTRYPOINT ["python", "-m", "data.fetch", "$CARGO_ACTION", "$FILENAME", "--
min_date=$MIN_DATE", "--max_date=$MAX_DATE"]
29
30 # Prepare stage
31 FROM fetch as prepare
32 ENV FILENAME_IN=${CARGO_ACTION}.parquet \
33
FILENAME_OUT=${CARGO_ACTION}.parquet
34
35 WORKDIR /src
36 ENTRYPOINT ["python", "-m", "data.prepare", "$CARGO_ACTION", "$FILENAME_IN",
"$FILENAME_OUT"]
37
38 # Featurize stage
39 FROM prepare as featurize
40 ENV FILENAME_IN=${CARGO_ACTION}.parquet \
41
FILENAME_OUT=test_train_${CARGO_ACTION}.pickle
42
43 WORKDIR /src
44 ENTRYPOINT ["python", "-m", "data.featurize", "$CARGO_ACTION", "$FILENAME_IN
", "$FILENAME_OUT"]
Listing C.4: Multi-Stage Dockerfile for data Fetching, Processing and Featurization.
C.5
Training and Evaluating Model
1 # Use Python 3.10 slim image based on Debian Bullseye as the base image
2 FROM python:3.10-slim-bullseye as base
3
4 # Arguments for accessing AWS services
==PAGE:83==
C.5 Training and Evaluating Model
76
5 ARG AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
6 ARG AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
7
8 WORKDIR /src
9
10 # Update the package list and install necessary packages
11 RUN apt-get update \
12
&& apt-get install --no-install-recommends -y \
13
gdal-bin \
14
libgdal-dev \
15
git \
16
g++ \
17
chromium-driver
18
19 ENV GDAL_CONFIG /usr/bin/gdal-config
20 ENV CPLUS_INCLUDE_PATH /usr/include/gdal
21 ENV C_INCLUDE_PATH /usr/include/gdal
22
23 RUN gdal-config --version
24
25 # Copy Python requirements file and install Python dependencies
26 COPY ./src/train/requirements.txt /src/requirements.txt
27 RUN python -m pip install -U pip && pip install -r /src/requirements.txt
28
29 # Copy project files into the container
30 COPY params.yaml ..
31 COPY src/train/ /src/train
32 COPY src/common/ /src/common
33 COPY src/data /src/data
34
35 # Define train stage with entrypoint to run training script
36 FROM base as train
37 WORKDIR /src
38 # Set the default command to train the model
39 ENTRYPOINT ["python", "-m", "train.train", "test_train_collection.pickle", "
model_collection.pickle"]
40
41 # Define evaluate stage inheriting from train stage with entrypoint to run
evaluation script
42 FROM train as evaluate
43 WORKDIR /src
44 # Set the default command to evaluate the model
45 ENTRYPOINT ["python", "-m", "train.evaluate"]
Listing C.5: Dockerfile setup for training and evaluating model.
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIXD
GitHub Actions
Workflows
D.1
Continuous Integration (CI)
1 name: "1. CI - Model Build, Train and Evaluate"
2
3 on:
4
push:
5
branches: [ main ]
6
pull_request:
7
branches: [ main ]
8
9 permissions:
10
actions: read
11
contents: read
12
13 jobs:
14
# Job for building Docker images used in the workflow
15
build:
16
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
17
steps:
18
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
19
name: "Checkout Repository"
# Gets the code from repository
20
- name: "Setup Docker Environment & Install Compose"
21
run: |
22
sudo apt-get update
# Updates the package lists
23
sudo apt-get install docker-compose
# Installs Docker Compose for
managing multi-container applications
24
docker buildx create --use
# Sets up Docker Buildx for building
multi-platform images
25
- name: "Cache Docker Build Layers"
26
uses: actions/cache@v2
27
with:
28
path: /tmp/.buildx-cache
# Caches the Docker layers to speed up
subsequent builds
29
key: ${{ runner.os }}-buildx-cache
30
restore-keys: |
31
${{ runner.os }}-buildx-cache
32
- name: "Build Docker Images with Compose"
==PAGE:85==
D.1 Continuous Integration (CI)
78
33
run: docker-compose build
# Builds Docker images using the docker-
compose.yml file
34
35
# Job for downloading data required for training/testing the model
36
download-data:
37
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
38
steps:
39
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
40
name: "Checkout Repository"
41
- name: "Prepare Python Environment & Install Dependencies"
42
run: |
43
sudo apt-get update
44
sudo apt-get install python3.10 python3-pip
# Installs Python 3.10
45
python3.10 -m pip install -r src/common/requirements.txt
# Installs
required Python packages
46
- name: "Download Data & Upload as Artifact"
47
run: |
48
export PYTHONPATH=./:$PYTHONPATH
# Ensures Python can find modules
49
python3.10 common/mlflow_dvc.py
# Runs script to download data
50
echo "Data downloaded and ready for upload."
51
env:
52
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
# Uses GitHub
Secrets for AWS credentials
53
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
54
AWS_REGION: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
55
MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI: ${{ secrets.MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI }}
56
working-directory: ./src
57
- uses: actions/upload-artifact@v2
58
with:
59
name: data-artifact
# Uploads the downloaded data as an artifact
for use in subsequent jobs
60
path: ./data
61
name: "Upload Data as Artifact"
62
63
# Job for running simulated tests before training the model
64
simulated-tests:
65
needs: [build, download-data]
# This job depends on the build and
download-data jobs
66
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
67
steps:
68
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
69
name: "Checkout Code"
70
- name: "Setup Python Environment"
71
uses: actions/setup-python@v2
72
with:
73
python-version: '3.10'
74
- name: "Execute Simulated Tests"
75
run: |
76
echo "Initializing test environment..."
77
sleep 2
# Simulates time taken to set up the environment
78
echo "Running unit tests on the data processing and model code..."
79
sleep 1
# Simulates time taken to run tests
80
echo "All tests passed successfully!"
81
82
# Job for training the model using different regressors
==PAGE:86==
D.1 Continuous Integration (CI)
79
83
train:
84
needs: [simulated-tests]
# Depends on the successful completion of
simulated-tests
85
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
86
strategy:
87
matrix:
88
regressor: [HistGradientBoosting , XGBoost, RandomForest]
# Defines
a matrix strategy to run this job for each listed regressor
89
fail-fast: false
# Continues running even if one of the matrix jobs
fails
90
steps:
91
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
92
name: "Checkout Code"
93
- name: "Configure AWS CLI"
94
run: aws configure set default.region your-aws-region
# Configures
AWS CLI with region
95
env:
96
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
97
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
98
- name: "Retrieve Data Artifact"
99
uses: actions/download-artifact@v2
100
with:
101
name: data-artifact
# Downloads the data artifact prepared in the
download-data job
102
path: ./data
103
- name: "Collect Workflow Telemetry"
104
uses: catchpoint/workflow-telemetry-action@v2
# Collects telemetry
data for the workflow
105
- name: "Run Training"
106
run: docker-compose run -e REGRESSOR=${{ matrix.regressor }} train
#
Trains the model using the specified regressor
107
- name: "Upload Trained Model"
108
uses: actions/upload-artifact@v2
109
with:
110
name: model-artifact-${{ matrix.regressor }}
# Uploads the trained
model as an artifact
111
path: ./data/models/Vlaardingen_dry/${{ matrix.regressor }}
_model_collection.pickle
112
113
# Job for evaluating the trained models
114
evaluate:
115
needs: train
# Depends on the successful completion of the train job
116
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
117
strategy:
118
matrix:
119
regressor: [HistGradientBoosting , XGBoost, RandomForest]
# Repeats
evaluation for each regressor used in training
120
fail-fast: false
121
steps:
122
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
123
name: "Checkout Code"
124
- name: "Retrieve Data for Evaluation"
125
uses: actions/download-artifact@v2
126
with:
127
name: data-artifact
# Downloads the data artifact for evaluation
==PAGE:87==
D.1 Continuous Integration (CI)
80
128
path: ./data
129
- name: "Download Trained Models"
130
uses: actions/download-artifact@v2
131
with:
132
name: model-artifact-${{ matrix.regressor }}
# Downloads the model
artifact for the current regressor
133
path: ./data/models/Vlaardingen_dry
134
- name: "Configure AWS CLI"
135
run: aws configure set default.region your-aws-region
136
env:
137
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
138
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
139
- name: "Run Evaluation"
140
run: docker-compose run -e AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID -e AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
-e AWS_REGION -e MODEL_NAME=${{ matrix.regressor }} evaluate
141
# Executes the model evaluation script inside Docker, passing
necessary environment variables
142
env:
143
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
144
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
145
AWS_REGION: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
146
MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI: ${{ secrets.MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI }}
147
- name: "Rename Run ID File"
148
run: mv ./latest-run/latest_run.mlflow_dvc ./latest-run/${{ matrix.
regressor }}_latest_run.mlflow_dvc
149
# Renames the MLflow tracking file for clarity and differentiation
150
- name: "Upload MLflow Run ID as Artifact"
151
uses: actions/upload-artifact@v2
152
with:
153
name: mlflow-run-id-${{ matrix.regressor }}
# Uploads the MLflow
Run ID for future reference or analysis
154
path: ./latest-run/${{ matrix.regressor }}_latest_run.mlflow_dvc
155
156
# Job for selecting and uploading the best model based on evaluation
metrics
157
select-and-upload-best-model:
158
needs: [evaluate]
# Waits for all evaluation jobs to complete
159
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
160
steps:
161
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
162
name: "Checkout Code"
163
- name: "Install Python Dependencies"
164
run: pip install -r src/train/select_model_requirements.txt
165
- name: "Download MLflow Run ID Artifacts"
166
uses: actions/download-artifact@v2
167
with:
168
path: ./latest-run
# Downloads all MLflow Run IDs to access
evaluation metrics
169
- name: "Select Best Model and Upload Best Model's Run ID to S3"
170
run: |
171
export PYTHONPATH=./:$PYTHONPATH
172
python train/select_best_model.py
# Runs a script to select the
best model based on evaluation metrics and upload it to S3
173
env:
174
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
==PAGE:88==
D.1 Continuous Integration (CI)
81
175
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
176
AWS_REGION: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
177
working-directory: ./src
178
179
# Job for cleaning up any resources used during the workflow
180
cleanup:
181
needs: [select-and-upload-best-model]
# Executes after the select-and-
upload-best-model job completes
182
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
183
if: always()
# Ensures this job runs even if previous jobs fail
184
steps:
185
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
186
name: "Checkout Code"
187
- name: "Clean Up"
188
run: docker-compose down
# Brings down any Docker containers started
during the workflow to free up resources
Listing D.1: YAML configuration for CI workflow with GitHub Actions
==PAGE:89==
D.1 Continuous Integration (CI)
82
Figure D.1: Sequence of Continuous Integration (CI) Jobs in GitHub Actions
==PAGE:90==
D.2 Continuous Delivery (CD)
83
D.2
Continuous Delivery (CD)
1 name: "2. CD - Build and Deploy to AWS ECR and Fargate"
2
3 on:
4
workflow_run:
5
workflows: ["1. CI - Model Build, Train and Evaluate"]
6
types:
7
- completed
8
branches: [ main ]
9
conclusions: [success]
10
workflow_dispatch:
11
inputs:
12
deployToFargate:
13
description: 'Deploy to Fargate? (yes/no)'
14
required: true
15
default: 'no'
16
17 jobs:
18
# Job for building the Docker image and pushing it to AWS ECR
19
build-and-push:
20
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
21
steps:
22
- name: Check Out Repository
23
uses: actions/checkout@v2
24
25
- name: Set up Python Environment
26
uses: actions/setup-python@v2
27
with:
28
python-version: '3.10'
29
30
- name: Install API Dependencies
31
run: pip install -r src/api/requirements.txt
32
33
- name: Retrieve MLflow Run ID
34
run: aws s3 cp s3://mlflow-run-id/latest_run.mlflow_dvc ./latest-run/
latest_run.mlflow_dvc
35
env:
36
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
37
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
38
# Downloads the latest MLflow run ID from S3 to be used for model
retrieval
39
40
- name: Download Model Artifact
41
run: |
42
export PYTHONPATH=./src:$PYTHONPATH
43
python -m api.download_from_mlflow
44
env:
45
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
46
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
47
AWS_REGION: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
48
MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI: ${{ secrets.MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI }}
49
# Downloads the model artifact from MLflow using the previously
retrieved run ID
==PAGE:91==
D.2 Continuous Delivery (CD)
84
50
51
- name: Build Docker Image
52
run: docker build -t fastapi:latest -f src/api/Dockerfile .
53
# Builds a Docker image for the FastAPI application
54
55
- name: AWS ECR Configuration
56
uses: aws-actions/configure-aws-credentials@v1
57
with:
58
aws-access-key-id: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
59
aws-secret-access-key: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
60
aws-region: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
61
# Configures AWS credentials from GitHub Secrets
62
63
- name: Authenticate to Amazon ECR
64
id: login-ecr
65
uses: aws-actions/amazon-ecr-login@v1
66
# Logs in to the Amazon ECR
67
68
- name: Push Image to ECR
69
run: |
70
docker tag fastapi ${{ steps.login-ecr.outputs.registry }}/fastapi:
latest
71
docker push ${{ steps.login-ecr.outputs.registry }}/fastapi:latest
72
# Tags and pushes the built Docker image to Amazon ECR
73
74
# Conditional deployment job to AWS Fargate
75
deploy-to-fargate:
76
needs: build-and-push
77
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
78
if: github.event.inputs.deployToFargate == 'yes'
79
steps:
80
- name: Update ECS Service
81
run: |
82
aws ecs update-service --cluster fastapi-ecs --service fastapi-
service --force-new-deployment
83
env:
84
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
85
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
86
AWS_REGION: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
87
# Forces a new deployment to the specified ECS service, effectively
pulling the new Docker image
88
89
# Integration testing job that executes after deployment
90
integration -test:
91
needs: deploy-to-fargate
92
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
93
steps:
94
- name: Wait for ECS Service Stabilization
95
run: sleep 60
96
# Waits for a bit to allow the ECS service to stabilize after
deployment
97
98
- name: Obtain Fargate Task Public IP
99
id: fetch_ip
100
run: |
==PAGE:92==
D.2 Continuous Delivery (CD)
85
101
task_arn=$(aws ecs list-tasks --cluster fastapi-ecs --service-name
fastapi-service --query 'taskArns[0]' --output text)
102
eni_id=$(aws ecs describe-tasks --cluster fastapi-ecs --tasks
$task_arn --query 'tasks[0].attachments[0].details[?name==`
networkInterfaceId `].value' --output text)
103
public_ip=$(aws ec2 describe-network-interfaces --network-
interface-ids $eni_id --query 'NetworkInterfaces[0].
Association.PublicIp' --output text)
104
echo "public_ip=$public_ip" >> $GITHUB_ENV
105
echo "FastAPI service is available at: http://$public_ip/docs"
106
# Retrieves the public IP address of the deployed Fargate task to be
used for integration testing
107
108
- name: Display Fargate Task Public IP
109
run: echo "Public IP: $public_ip"
110
# Displays the public IP address for logging and debugging purposes
111
112
- name: Execute API Integration Tests
113
run: curl -X 'GET' "http://$public_ip/model_info/Vlaardingen_dry" -H
'accept: application/json'
114
# Performs a simple API call to the deployed FastAPI service to
validate its responsiveness
Listing D.2: YAML configuration for CD workflow with GitHub Actions
==PAGE:93==
D.2 Continuous Delivery (CD)
86
Figure D.2: Sequence of Continuous Delivery (CD) Jobs in GitHub Actions
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIXE
Select and Upload
Best Model Script
1
2 import mlflow
3 import logging
4 from common.config import config
# Assuming configuration settings for the
project
5 from common.s3_utils import S3Utils
# Utility class for S3 operations
6
7 logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)
8 logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)
# Set the logging level to INFO for
the script
9
10 def get_run_id_from_file(file_path: str) -> str:
11
"""Reads a run ID from a specified file and logs the operation.
12
13
Args:
14
file_path (str): The path to the file containing the run ID.
15
16
Returns:
17
str: The run ID read from the file.
18
19
Raises:
20
Exception: If there is an error opening or reading the file.
21
"""
22
try:
23
with open(file_path, 'r') as file:
24
run_id = file.read().strip()
# Remove any leading/trailing
whitespace
25
logger.info(f"Run ID {run_id} read from {file_path}")
26
return run_id
27
except Exception as e:
28
logger.error(f"Error reading run ID from {file_path}: {e}")
29
raise
30
31 def get_model_metrics(run_id: str, metric_name: str) -> float:
32
"""Retrieves a specific metric for a given MLflow run ID.
33
34
Args:
35
run_id (str): The MLflow run ID.
==PAGE:95==
E Select and Upload Best Model Script
88
36
metric_name (str): The name of the metric to retrieve.
37
38
Returns:
39
float: The value of the specified metric.
40
41
Raises:
42
Exception: If there is an error retrieving the metric from MLflow.
43
"""
44
try:
45
run = mlflow.get_run(run_id)
46
metric_value = run.data.metrics.get(metric_name)
47
logger.info(f"Metric {metric_name} for run ID {run_id} is {
metric_value}")
48
return metric_value
49
except Exception as e:
50
logger.error(f"Error retrieving metric {metric_name} for run ID {
run_id}: {e}")
51
raise
52
53 def find_best_model(run_ids: dict, metric_name: str) -> str:
54
"""Compares models based on a specified metric and returns the best
model's run ID.
55
56
Args:
57
run_ids (dict): A dictionary mapping model names to their MLflow run
IDs.
58
metric_name (str): The name of the metric to use for comparison.
59
60
Returns:
61
str: The run ID of the best model according to the specified metric.
62
"""
63
best_run_id = None
64
best_metric_value = float('inf')
# Assuming a lower metric (e.g., RMSE)
is better
65
# Iterate over each model and its run ID to find the best one
66
for model, run_id in run_ids.items():
67
metric_value = get_model_metrics(run_id, metric_name)
68
if metric_value < best_metric_value:
# Looking for the lowest RMSE
69
logger.info(f"New best model found: {model} with {metric_name} =
{metric_value}")
70
best_metric_value = metric_value
71
best_run_id = run_id
72
73
return best_run_id
74
75 def main():
76
logger.info("Starting model comparison...")
77
metric_to_compare = 'rmse'
# Metric to compare, e.g., Root Mean Square
Error
78
79
# Dictionary of regressors and their corresponding latest run IDs
80
regressors = ['RandomForest', 'XGBoost', 'HistGradientBoosting']
81
run_ids = {regressor: get_run_id_from_file(f"../latest-run/mlflow-run-id
-{regressor}/{regressor}_latest_run.mlflow_dvc") for regressor in
regressors}
==PAGE:96==
E Select and Upload Best Model Script
89
82
83
best_model_run_id = find_best_model(run_ids, metric_to_compare)
84
85
if best_model_run_id:
86
logger.info(f"Best model determined: Run ID {best_model_run_id}")
87
# Save the best model's run ID to S3
88
bucket_name = "mlflow-run-id"
# S3 bucket name
89
object_key = "latest_run.mlflow_dvc"
# Object key in S3
90
s3_utils = S3Utils(bucket_name)
91
s3_utils.save_run_id(best_model_run_id , object_key)
92
else:
93
logger.warning("No best model found.")
94
95 if __name__ == "__main__":
96
logger.info("Initializing MLFlow connection...")
97
mlflow.set_tracking_uri(config.mlflow_tracking_uri)
# Set MLflow
tracking URI from config
98
main()
Listing E.1: Script for model evaluation and selection: Automates evaluating models
using MLflow, identifies the best model based on metrics like RMSE, and uploads its
run ID to an S3 bucket for deployment.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
A Comprehensive Comparison of ML Experiment Tracking Tools. https://
towardsdatascience.com/a-comprehensive-comparison-of-ml-experiment-
tracking-tools-9f0192543feb. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[2]
Mohammadreza Akbari and Thu Nguyen Anh Do. “A systematic review of
machine learning in logistics and supply chain management: current trends and
future directions.” In: Benchmarking: An International Journal 28.10 (2021),
pages 2977–3005.
[3]
Amazon Simple Storage Service Documentation. https://docs.aws.amazon.
com/s3/index.html. Amazon Web Services, Inc., 2023.
[4]
Amazon Web Services. AWS Fargate Developer Guide. https://docs.aws.
amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/AWS_Fargate.html. Ac-
cessed: Feb 2024.
[5]
Amazon Web Services. AWS Fargate Pricing. https://aws.amazon.com/
fargate/pricing/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[6]
Amazon Web Services. AWS Pricing Calculator. https://calculator.aws/.
Accessed: Feb 2024.
[7]
Amazon Web Services, Inc. Amazon EC2 Documentation. https://docs.aws.
amazon.com/ec2/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[8]
Atlassian. JIRA Software by Atlassian. https://www.atlassian.com/software/
jira. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[9]
AWS. What is Containerization. https : / / aws . amazon . com / what - is /
containerization. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[10]
AWS Global Infrastructure. https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-
infrastructure/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[11]
Azure Blob Storage Documentation. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
azure/storage/blobs/. Microsoft, 2023.
[12]
Azure global infrastructure. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/explore/
global-infrastructure. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[13]
Azure Hybrid Benefit. https://azure.microsoft.com/en- us/pricing/
hybrid-benefit. Accessed: Feb 2024.
==PAGE:98==
Bibliography
91
[14]
BentoML. https://www.bentoml.com/. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[15]
Bitbucket. Bitbucket - Git repository management, pull requests
code review.
https://bitbucket.org/product/. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[16]
Boboev, Daler. Serverless Container Showdown: AWS Fargate vs Google Cloud
Run vs Azure Container Instances. https://medium.com/@dr.daler.boboev/
serverless-container-showdown-aws-fargate-vs-google-cloud-run-
vs-azure-container-instances-6dd91f9e7dda. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[17]
Catchpoint. GitHub Action: Workflow Telemetry Action. https : / / github .
com/catchpoint/workflow-telemetry-action. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[18]
Google Cloud. Google Cloud Build. https://cloud.google.com/build?hl=el.
Accessed: Mar 2024.
[19]
Google Cloud. Google Cloud Source Repositories Documentation. https://
cloud.google.com/source-repositories/docs. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[20]
Mike Coleman. Containers are not VMs. https://www.docker.com/blog/
containers-are-not-vms. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[21]
Comparison of S3, GCS, and Azure Blob Storage. https://airbyte.com/data-
engineering - resources /s3 - gcs- and - azure - blob- storage - compared.
Accessed: Feb 2024.
[22]
CTO.ai. Docker Image vs. Container vs. Dockerfile. https://cto.ai/blog/
docker-image-vs-container-vs-dockerfile/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[23]
Dagster. The Problem with Fake GitHub Stars. https://dagster.io/blog/
fake-stars. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[24]
DFDS. Logistics Solutions. https://www.dfds.com/en/freight-ferries-
and-logistics/logistics-solutions. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[25]
Tharam Dillon, Chen Wu, and Elizabeth Chang. “Cloud computing: issues and
challenges.” In: 2010 24th IEEE international conference on advanced informa-
tion networking and applications. Ieee. 2010, pages 27–33.
[26]
Inc. Docker. Docker Documentation. https://docs.docker.com. Accessed:
Feb 2024.
[27]
Eurostat. Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS) Geodata.
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/gisco/geodata/reference-data/
administrative-units-statistical-units/nuts. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[28]
FastAPI. FastAPI: Web framework for building APIs with Python 3.7+. https:
//fastapi.tiangolo.com/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[29]
Flask. Flask: A simple framework for building complex web applications. https:
//flask.palletsprojects.com/en/1.1.x/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[30]
GitHub. GitHub Actions. https://github.com/features/actions. Accessed:
Feb 2024.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
92
[31]
GitHub. Understanding GitHub Actions. https://docs.github.com/en/
actions / learn - github - actions / understanding - github - actions. Ac-
cessed: Feb 2024.
[32]
GitHub Star History for MLFlow, TensorBoard, and Weights & Biases. https:
//star-history.com/. Accessed: Jan 2024.
[33]
GitLab. GitLab - The One DevOps Platform. https://about.gitlab.com/.
Accessed: Mar 2024.
[34]
Google. Google Cloud Pricing Calculator. https : / / cloud . google . com /
products/calculator?hl=el. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[35]
Google. MLOps: Continuous delivery and automation pipelines in machine
learning. https://cloud.google.com/architecture/mlops-continuous-
delivery- and- automation- pipelines- in- machine- learning. Accessed:
Mar 2024.
[36]
Google Cloud. Google Cloud Run Documentation. https://cloud.google.
com/run/docs. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[37]
Google Cloud. Google Cloud Run Pricing. https://cloud.google.com/run/
pricing. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[38]
Google Cloud. Google Compute Engine - Scalable, High-Performance Virtual
Machines. https://cloud.google.com/products/compute. Accessed: Feb
2024.
[39]
Google Cloud Locations. https : / / cloud . google . com / about / locations.
Accessed: Feb 2024.
[40]
Google Cloud Storage Documentation. https://cloud.google.com/storage/
docs. Google Cloud, 2023.
[41]
The Guild. Judging Open Source by GitHub Stars. https://the-guild.dev/
blog/judging-open-source-by-github-stars. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[42]
Trevor Hastie et al. The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference,
and prediction. Volume 2. Springer, 2009.
[43]
Ioannis Karamitsos, Saeed Albarhami, and Charalampos Apostolopoulos. “Ap-
plying DevOps practices of continuous automation for machine learning.” In:
Information 11.7 (2020), page 363.
[44]
Dominik Kreuzberger, Niklas Kühl, and Sebastian Hirschl. “Machine learning
operations (mlops): Overview, definition, and architecture.” In: IEEE Access
(2023).
[45]
Kubernetes. Production-Grade Container Orchestration. https://kubernetes.
io/. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[46]
Purushottam Kumar and Prakash Kumar. “Vendor Lock-In Situation and Threats
in Cloud Computing.” In: International Journal of Innovative Science and Re-
search Technology 7.9 (2022).
==PAGE:100==
Bibliography
93
[47]
LF AI & Data Foundation. LF AI & Data Foundation Interactive Landscape.
https://landscape.lfai.foundation/. Accessed: Jan 2024. 2024.
[48]
AF Varon Maya and A Felipe. “The state of MLOps.” In: (2021).
[49]
Microsoft. Azure Container Instances Documentation. https://learn.microsoft.
com/en-us/azure/container-instances/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[50]
Microsoft. Azure Container Instances Pricing. https://azure.microsoft.
com/en-us/pricing/details/container-instances/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[51]
Microsoft. Azure DevOps Repos. https://azure.microsoft.com/en- us/
products/devops/repos. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[52]
Microsoft. Azure Pipelines. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/
devops/pipelines. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[53]
Microsoft. Azure Virtual Machines. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/
free/virtual-machines/search/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[54]
Microsoft. Machine Learning Operations Maturity Model - Azure Architecture
Center. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/ai-
ml/guide/mlops-maturity-model. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[55]
Microsoft. Microsoft Azure Pricing Calculator. https://azure.microsoft.
com/en-gb/pricing/calculator/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[56]
MLflow - A platform for the machine learning lifecycle. https://mlflow.org/.
Accessed: Jan 2024.
[57]
MLflow - HG Data. https://discovery.hgdata.com/product/mlflow. Ac-
cessed: Jan 2024.
[58]
NVIDIA. NVIDIA Triton Inference Server. https://developer.nvidia.com/
triton-inference-server. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[59]
NVIDIA. What Is MLOps? https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/what- is-
mlops/. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[60]
Justice Opara-Martins, Reza Sahandi, and Feng Tian. “Critical review of ven-
dor lock-in and its impact on adoption of cloud computing.” In: International
conference on information society (i-Society 2014). IEEE. 2014, pages 92–97.
[61]
Podman. Podman Features. https://podman.io/features. Accessed: Mar
2024.
[62]
Public preview: VM hibernation. https://azure.microsoft.com/en- us/
updates/public-preview-vm-hibernation/. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[63]
Emmanuel Raj. Engineering MLOps: Rapidly build, test, and manage production-
ready machine learning life cycles at scale. Packt Publishing Ltd, 2021.
[64]
Philipp Ruf et al. “Demystifying mlops and presenting a recipe for the selection
of open-source tools.” In: Applied Sciences 11.19 (2021), page 8861.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
94
[65]
David Sculley et al. “Hidden technical debt in machine learning systems.” In:
Advances in neural information processing systems 28 (2015).
[66]
Amazon Web Services. AWS CodeCommit. https://aws.amazon.com/codecommit/.
Accessed: Mar 2024.
[67]
Amazon Web Services. AWS CodePipeline. https://aws.amazon.com/codepipeline/.
Accessed: Mar 2024.
[68]
Mahya Seyedan and Fereshteh Mafakheri. “Predictive big data analytics for
supply chain demand forecasting: methods, applications, and research opportu-
nities.” In: Journal of Big Data 7.1 (2020), page 53.
[69]
Sami Ullah Shah. Containerization in MLOps. https://www.linkedin.com/
pulse/containerization-mlops-sami-ullah-shah/. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[70]
Gabriel Costa Silva, Louis M Rose, and Radu Calinescu. “A systematic review
of cloud lock-in solutions.” In: 2013 IEEE 5th International Conference on Cloud
Computing Technology and Science. Volume 2. IEEE. 2013, pages 363–368.
[71]
sklearn.ensemble.HistGradientBoostingRegressor. https://scikit-learn.org/
stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.HistGradientBoostingRegressor.
html. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[72]
sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestRegressor. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestRegressor.html. Ac-
cessed: Mar 2024.
[73]
sklearn.model_selection.TimeSeriesSplit. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.TimeSeriesSplit.html.
Accessed: Mar 2024.
[74]
Standard GitHub-hosted runners for private repositories. https://docs.github.
com/en/actions/using-github-hosted-runners/about-github-hosted-
runners/about-github-hosted-runners#standard-github-hosted-runners-
for-private-repositories. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[75]
Sylabs. Singularity User Guide. https://docs.sylabs.io/guides/3.5/user-
guide/introduction.html. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[76]
Georgios Symeonidis et al. “Mlops-definitions, tools and challenges.” In: 2022
IEEE 12th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference
(CCWC). IEEE. 2022, pages 0453–0460.
[77]
AI Tabassam. “MLOps: A Step Forward to Enterprise Machine Learning.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19298 (2023).
[78]
TensorBoard Tutorial: ML Experiment Visualization. https://neptune.ai/
blog/tensorboard-tutorial. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[79]
TensorBoard: Visualization for TensorFlow Projects. https://www.tensorflow.
org/tensorboard. Accessed: Feb 2024.
==PAGE:102==
Bibliography
95
[80]
Trello. Trello - Organize Anything with Anyone, Anywhere. https://trello.
com/home. Accessed: Mar 2024.
[81]
WB Documentation. https://docs.wandb.ai/guides. Accessed: Feb 2024.
[82]
XGBoost Documentation. https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
python/python_intro.html. Accessed: Mar 2024.
