==PAGE:1==
diane-pernille bendixen-fernex de mongex
luminescent centers generation by
irradiation-engineering in hexagonal
boron nitride
msc. project
Supervisors:
Assoc. Prof. Nicolas Stenger
Prof. Thomas Willum Hansen
PhD. Amedeo Carbone
Sr. Rsch. Shima Kadkhodazadeh
In collaboration between DTU Electro and DTU Nanolab
Sep 2023 - Feb 2024
==PAGE:2==
A B ST R A C T
Hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN) has emerged as a promising two-dimensional material, particu-
larly due to its luminescent centers, notably the new group of B centers, which exhibit remark-
able stability and single-photon nature. This research explores the generation and characteriza-
tion of luminescent centers in hBN deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate using irradiation techniques
with a commercial Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and Focused Ion Beam (FIB). Through
thorough Photoluminescence (PL) characterization, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) scans, and
SEM imaging, we investigate the impact of irradiation parameters on the reproducibility and
properties of luminescent centers.
Our findings demonstrate the successful reproduction of B centers, aligning with existing
literature.
We emphasize the crucial role of material-specific properties, such as the growth
conditions of hBN and irradiation-specific parameters, in this process. By integrating our results
with the existing research, we propose modifications to the experimental protocol, including
pre-annealing in an inert atmosphere and optimized electron beam parameters. This optimized
methodology holds promise for generating B centers in hBN in a reproducible manner, providing
a robust benchmark for future research in quantum technologies and other related fields.
==PAGE:3==
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
First, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my main supervisors, Assoc. Prof. Nicolas
Stenger and Prof. Thomas Willum Hansen, for their insights and enriching discussions.
Moreover, I would like to thank Senior Researcher Shima Kadkhodazadeh for her time partici-
pating both in the aforementioned discussions and in the laboratory sharing her knowledge on
the irradiation setup.
Special thanks go to Ph.D. Student Amedeo Carbone for the daily supervision during my project
and already during my stay at the Technische Universität München.
I also thank and acknowledge Postdoc Laura Casses for her tutoring, especially on the atomic
force microscope.
Finally, I thank the entire Quantum Photonics of Low-dimensional Systems (QLDS) Group led
by Prof. Martijn Wubs for welcoming me and making this yet another unforgettable experience
with lots of humor, daily language exchanges, and last but not least the many fruitful discus-
sions.
Thank you.
iii
==PAGE:4==
C O N T E N T S
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
1
1.2
Scope of work
2
2
Theoretical framework
5
2.1
Photoluminescence
5
2.2
Quantum emitters in hexagonal boron nitride
6
2.3
SEM Working Principles
9
2.4
Simulations
12
3
Experimental methods
15
3.1
Procedures
15
3.2
Optical characterisation
17
3.3
Atomic force microscopy
18
4
Experimental results
19
4.1
Sample production
19
4.2
FIB Irradiation
23
4.3
SEM Irradiation
27
5
Conclusion and outlook
37
a
Appendix
39
a.1
Photoluminescence setup
39
a.2
Sample production
41
a.3
Pre-characterization
42
a.4
Ion irradiation
43
a.5
Electron irradiation
48
References
48
==PAGE:5==
1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
1.1
motivation
The state-of-the-art quantum technology is continuously evolving, and to date, more than five
protocols have been established in the field of quantum computing [1]. Despite this variety, every
protocol has its limits, the most limiting factor being the scalability of qubits. Until now, the most
promising approach has been the superconducting qubit-based technology adopted by IBM and
Google, which has an added limiting factor, which is the need for constant cooling to cryogenic
temperatures below 50 mK [2]. This continuous need for cooling not only limits implementation
and scalability and requires space, but also appeals to large energy consumption. Therefore, the
interest in photonic technology in quantum computing has increased because qubits could oper-
ate at room temperature and potentially be more scalable and versatile [3]. Though promising,
this approach is neither without challenges, and the requirement for less noisy architectures and
better single-photon sources is currently being tackled. The latter suggests that some criteria
must be satisfied to obtain better single photon sources. The current criteria of interest are the
spectral properties, stability, efficiency (quantum yield), single-photon emission, site selectivity,
tunability, and reproducibility.
In 2016, increasing scientific interest in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) rose with the demon-
stration that single-photon emission in hBN was among the brightest reported so far with a
brightness comparable to semiconductor quantum dots [4]. The interest was further intensified
with the discovery that this two-dimensional (2D) material can host single-photon emitters (SPEs)
even at room temperature [5]. For both reasons, hBN has become a promising material in the
field of optoelectronic technologies with possible applications in quantum telecommunication
[6], quantum sensing [7], and more generally for light-based quantum technologies.
Since this discovery, various luminescent centers have been discovered or engineered in hBN.
One center is the V−
B spin defect with applications in magnetic quantum sensing [8]. A new class
of quantum emitters in the blue energy range surfaced [9, 10, 11], abbreviated to "B centers"
and in 2021, Fournier et al. showed that these emitters have non-classical properties at room
temperature while being position-controlled. Furthermore, at 5 K, it was shown that these have
a resolution-limited linewidth of (∼150 µeV) [9], which suggests that it is possible to extract as
much information as possible from the emitter while minimizing noise and other sources of
uncertainty.
Focusing on the latter introduced defect, this review of the literature aims to briefly investigate
existing protocols for reproducible generation of blue emitters. This contains relevant parame-
ters, synthesis, and materials that could affect our reproduction success rate. Along with this,
the literature review aims to identify current theoretical hypotheses for the origin of these B
centers to gain insight into their nature.
This benchmarking article by Fournier et al. [9] shows the successful generation of these so-
called B centers. For sample production, they have used high-purity hBN grown under high
pressure/high temperature (HPHT) using barium boron nitride (Ba3B2N4) as a solvent system.
Before the exfoliation, the substrates were cleaned using acetone for 5 min, isopropyl alcohol
(IPA) for 5 min, followed by 5 min of 30 W oxygen plasma treatment. They have tested two me-
chanical exfoliation methods, namely 1) with polymethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps on a SiO2/Si
substrate (with 285 nm SiO2 epilayer), and 2) with Scotch tape to exfoliate on Si substrate, allow-
ing them to rule out the role of a specific residue in the SPE generation process.
A conventional SEM was used for electron beam irradiation. The parameters were set to 15
keV of acceleration voltage under a current of 10 nA. The beam was adjusted to be 33 nm in
1
==PAGE:6==
2
introduction
Figure 1: The photophysical characterization of the B center at room temperature with (a) the zero-phonon
line and its phonon side band, (b) power dependence, (c) polarizability, (d) photon correlation,
(e) stability, and (f) lifetime. Reprinted from [9].
diameter with an irradiation time fixed at 1000 s per irradiated spot for the first sample. For the
second sample, the electron beam diameter was 1 µm with a reduced exposure time of 300 or
600 s. Sample 1 had a 60 nm-thick hBN flake whereas sample 2 had a 30 nm-thick hBN flake.
The optical characterization has been performed at both room temperature and low temper-
ature. From this study, the existence of the B center with zero-phonon line at 440 nm, spectral
stability, short lifetime, and non-classical behavior was demonstrated, as shown in Fig. 1. In 2023,
two-photon interference was further demonstrated for these B centers at cryogenic temperatures
(4 K) [12].
In 2022, Gale et al. suggested through their study that the generation of B centers with zero
phonon line at 436 nm was not due to material growth conditions, but rather to whether lumi-
nescent centers emitting at 305 nm were present on the flake before irradiation or not, as shown
in Fig. 2 [11]. They observed that these were present after annealing at 1000◦C in a nitrogen
atmosphere and that after this procedure carbon was introduced into the lattice. Therefore, they
proposed CBCN as the origin of the B centers. A year later, they described some of the photo-
physical properties of these B centers, based on this procedure [13]. Finally, in this work, it was
observed that excitation of a single B center for >4 h at powers greater than 1.00 mW causes the
system to irreversibly go into its dark state. The latter should be kept in mind for application
purposes.
1.2
scope of work
In this work, I am investigating the generation of luminescent centers through irradiation-
engineering aiming to reproduce and characterize the photo-physical properties of various lu-
minescent centers present in hexagonal boron nitride. There is a particular interest in the char-
acterization of the so-called B centers such that future theoretical calculations can be coupled to
the experimental results and aim toward determining their nature. The scope of the project is to
use the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and Focused Ion Beam (FIB) to irradiate flakes of
==PAGE:7==
1.2 scope of work
3
Figure 2: A cathodoluminescence (CL) characterization of hBN before and after irradiation by an electron
beam. From (a–e), normalized CL spectra of five hBN samples before (solid lines) and after
(dashed lines) electron beam irradiation. The black and red curves indicate samples that were as-
grown and annealed at 1000 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere, respectively. Type I hBN is grown
by HPHT and type II is commercially sourced hBN from HQ Graphene. Reprinted from [11].
hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN) to generate luminescent centers with features as site-selectivity,
and emission purity that act as single photon sources (SPS).
The main question explored in this project is whether it is possible to systematically reproduce
these emitters on a large batch of samples. It is important to explore the reproducibility of the
existing experimental protocol and to understand which parameters are crucial and not before
addressing their photophysical properties in full and aiming for large-scale production.
The report consists of five chapters, including this introduction. The next chapter introduces
the fundamental theoretical concepts of photoluminescence and quantum emitters in hexagonal
boron nitride. Moreover, the working principle of the scanning electron microscope is described,
and initial simulations are performed using the CASINO, Monte Carlo simulation software. Us-
ing the simulation results, generation hypotheses are proposed.
Chapter three presents the experimental procedures and methods developed and applied for
this project. In chapter four, the new samples are characterized experimentally, before and after
treatment or irradiation.
Multiple rounds of experiments were conducted, and the data are
presented in two sections. In the first part, the focused ion beam irradiation is considered, and
in the second part, the electron beam irradiation is considered. The final chapter summarizes
the most important results while focusing on further research.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
2
T H E O R E T I C A L F R A M E W O R K
This chapter serves to familiarise the reader with the theoretical concepts used to describe the
optical properties of the system presented in this thesis.
In this thesis, the quantum emitter in a low-dimensional system generated by irradiation-
engineering will be examined. Quantum emitters allow for control of the optical properties
of matter, while the irradiation-engineering allows for confinement of the quantum emitters’
position. By combining the control of optical properties and site-selectivity of quantum emitters,
one can manipulate their generation and implementation in engineering advanced devices.
In the following sections, the basic theoretical concepts of first quantum light-matter interac-
tion in terms of photoluminescence will be presented, after which quantum emitters in the form
of defects within the hexagonal boron nitride crystal will be introduced. Finally, a section on
irradiation physics and possible simulation techniques is presented.
2.1
photoluminescence
This section is based on [14]. Photoluminescence is a phenomenon that occurs in solids, where
light is re-emitted after absorption of photons with higher energy. The atoms in the solid emit
light by spontaneous emission once the electrons in the excited states relax down to a lower
energy level by a radiative transition, see Fig. 4. It is known to consist of fluorescence and phos-
phorescence. Phosphorescence is long-lived (>ms) with excitation energy stored in metastable
states. Fluorescence, on the other hand, is short-lived (ns) photoluminescence.
In a semiconductor
Due to the electron-phonon coupling in solids being strong and these scattering events occurring
on a short timescale, the excited electron will relax down to the bottom state of the conduction
band via phonon emission, after which it will either recombine non-radiatively or through pho-
ton emission. These re-emitted photons are thus generated by electrons transitioning from an
excited state |e⟩to a ground state |g⟩described by the transition matrix element:
M = ⟨g|H′|e⟩=
Z
ψ∗
g(r′)H′(r′)ψe(r′)d3(r)
(1)
where |ψg⟩, |ψe⟩are states, r is the position vector, and H′ is the perturbation Hamiltonian
caused by the light wave. It can be written as
H′ =
e
m0
(p · A) ,
(2)
with A the vector potential itself given by
A(r, t) = A0 (exp (k · r −ωt) + c.c.) .
(3)
At optical frequencies, the wavelength is on the order of 1µm and the dimension of an atom
10−10 m. Hence, k · r ≈10−3 and only the first term in the Taylor expansion of exp (k · r) must
be considered. This is called the electric-dipole approximation, and in this picture, the interaction
Hamiltonian introduced via the perturbation from the light wave becomes the following where
the electric dipole moment pe = −er is introduced:
H′ = −pe · E0.
(4)
5
==PAGE:10==
6
theoretical framework
(a) VNCB defect
(b) C2CN defect
Figure 3: Altered h-BN crystal structure when defects are introduced, adapted from [15].
with E0 = iωA0. Compared to absorption, luminescence is tied to energy relaxation mechanisms
in the solids, and the shape of the emission spectrum depends on the thermal distributions of
the electrons and holes within their bands. This is related to the photoluminescence intensity.
The spontaneous emission spectrum, however, also depends on the population factor, meaning
that a transition might have a high emission probability, but unless the upper level is occupied
and the lower level unoccupied, then no light will be emitted. These probabilities are denoted
"level occupancy factors". Together, the transition matrix element, joint density of states, and
level occupancy factors determine the photoluminescence intensity:
I(hν) ∝|M|2 · g(hν) · level occupancy factors
(5)
where the photon energy is given by its frequency ν and Planck’s constant h. As one may recall,
the first two terms determine the transition rate given by Fermi’s golden rule.
Finally, the electrons can also decay to the ground state through non-radiative relaxation, via
phonons. This process competes with the radiative decay that contributes to photoluminescence.
Thus, a radiative lifetime much shorter than the non-radiative lifetime is also required on top of
a high intensity I(hν) to obtain bright photoluminescence. The resulting radiative emission rate
from the competitiveness above-mentioned is called the luminescent efficiency or the quantum
efficiency. [14]
In an insulator
In an insulating material, the energies required to excite an electron to the conduction band are
very high, and thus this process does not happen unless the energy of the incoming light is
equally high. Hence, the photoluminescence that one can expect to observe within an insulator
will correspond to optically active defects within the lattice structure.
2.2
quantum emitters in hexagonal boron nitride
2.2.1
Hexagonal boron nitride
Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is a van der Waals (vdW) crystal with a very wide bandgap.
Crystalline h-BN is thus a wide-gap semiconductor or insulator in the earlier nomenclature. In
its bulk form, h-BN has an indirect band gap of 5.955 eV [16] while it has a direct band gap
for monolayer h-BN [17]. It has hence often been used as an insulating layer for other vdW
materials, like graphene. The two-dimensional material h-BN is composed of alternating boron
and nitrogen atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice structure. Its nearest neighbor distance, i.e.
in-plane distance between boron and nitrogen, is 1.446 Å and the layer-to-layer distance is 3.3
==PAGE:11==
2.2 quantum emitters in hexagonal boron nitride
7
Figure 4: Optical transitions between the ground state and excited state of a defect within the h-BN
bandgap, modeled as a two-level system. Absorption and emission transitions (left) in an iso-
lated atom, and (right) in a vibronic solid in which the electron-phonon interaction couples each
electronic state to a continuous band of phonons.
Å in AA’ stacking [17]. The schematics of a monolayer h-BN crystal structure including single
defects are displayed in Fig. 3, where the presented defects are the VNCB and C2CN defect.
In h-BN, there are two pairs of Raman-active phonon modes of E2g symmetry, one at a
wavenumber of 52.7 cm−1 and another at 1369 cm−1 [17]. The extent of electron-phonon cou-
pling is described either by the Debye-Waller (DW) factor or the Huang-Rhys (HR) factor. The
DW factor is the ratio between the zero-phonon line (ZPL) luminescence intensity and the total
luminescence from the center. The HR factor S is defined by IZPL/Itot = exp (−S) [18]. For a
previously investigated 2 eV emitter in h-BN, the DW factor has been determined to be ∼0.82 [5],
which is among the highest reported for quantum emitters, meaning the reproducibility of emis-
sion is high. Such high DW factors favor these centers for many applications, where a strong,
narrowband signal and high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) are needed.
On the market, one can find both low-quality and high-quality h-BN, the quality referring to
the amount of intrinsic defects within the lattice. An intrinsic defect can be a cluster or single
atom impurity allowing for localized electron states in the structure. These are different from
extrinsic defects which can be for example polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) molecules
[19].
The choice of h-BN will therefore impact the amount, type, and controllability of the
defects generated/activated within the crystal structure.
2.2.2
Quantum emitters
In 2016 [20], it was discovered that monolayer and multilayer h-BN can host quantum emitters at
room temperature with a reported value of the second autocorrelation function with zero time
delay of g(2)(0) < 0.5. Because of that, h-BN has attracted much-renewed attention. Within h-BN,
the structural imperfections and impurities in the crystal lattice lead to the formation of defects
as presented in Fig. 3. Owing to the substantial energy bandgap exhibited in h-BN, certain
defects within the material can be optically active upon laser excitation, before any excitation of
h-BN’s valence electrons. These so-called luminescent centers likely involve levels deep in the
band gap, far away from both the conduction and valence bands.
For an active luminescent center, the lowest energy state is occupied. Under non-resonant
excitation, the laser excites an electron that subsequently relaxes non-radiatively to the excited
state |e⟩. When the electron decays to the ground state |g⟩only by emission of a photon, it is said
to be emitted at the zero-phonon line (ZPL) energy as no phonon is taking part in the process.
The relaxation processes can have different origins such as phonon emissions and the relaxation
energies are denoted ∆e and ∆g for the excited and ground state respectively [14].
==PAGE:12==
8
theoretical framework
For an optical defect transition with a large Huang-Rhys factor, the process can be modeled
by a two-level system where the electronic states of the defect transition are dressed by vibra-
tional modes of the phonon environment [21]. This two-level system comprises a ground state
and an excited state of the atom, where the absorption and emission of electrons take place, see
Fig. 4a. Additionally, the vibrational environment of the host material (in this case, h-BN) intro-
duces electron-phonon coupling, see Fig. 4b. Consequently, each electronic state interacts with a
continuous band of phonons, as discussed in [14]. This interaction gives rise to Franck-Condon
vibronic states, for excited and ground states, given by the energies:
Ee + n hΩ
and
Eg + m hΩ,
(6)
where  h is the reduced Planck constant and Ωrepresents the phonon energy. The excited state
|e, n⟩represents the electron in the excited state with its environment containing n phonons,
where n is an integer. Similarly, the ground state |g, m⟩represents the electron in the ground
state with its environment containing m phonons, where m is an integer. Two vibrational states
within the same electronic state are thus separated by an energy of  hΩ. Moreover, Ee and Eg
are the energies of the state |e, 0⟩and |g, 0⟩respectively. Optical phonons in h-BN with energies
around 0.2 eV form near-discrete vibronic states that can be resolved optically even at room
temperature [22]. Finally, based on the supposed defect origin, the excitation mechanism might
also involve shelving states and interband transitions [21] in which case one or more energy
states must be added to the two-level scheme presented in Fig. 4.
Today, the common way to identify various defects is to observe their similarity and differ-
ences in emission characteristics. A more theoretical approach is under development with the
introduction of ab initio calculations [21].
One of the characteristics of interest is the single-photon nature. Identification of the single-
photon nature of the luminescent centers requires a brief understanding of the second autocor-
relation function, g(2), of the Fock states, presented in the following.
The second-order quantum coherence function g(2) is defined as [23],
g(2)(x1, x2; x2, x1) =
G(2)(x1, x2; x2, x1)
G(1)(x1, x1)G(1)(x2, x2)
(7)
Assuming a single-mode plane-wave quantized field, the electric field operator is given by,
ˆE(r, t) = i
X
k,s
E0,kek,s
h
ˆak,s(t)eik·r −ˆa†
k,s(t)e−ik·ri
,
(8)
where r is the position-vector, k is the wavevector of the light, and ˆa, ˆa† are the creation and
annihilation operators. In the dipole approximation, stating that the wavelength of the light is
long compared to the dimensions of the atom, |k · r| ≪1, the electric field is simplified.
We restrain ourselves and only consider the absorption of light which is the positive frequency
part of the field ˆE(+)(r, t),
ˆE(+)(r, t) = ˆE(+)(r) ˆae−iωt
(9)
where now ˆE(+)(r) is time independent, and ω is the angular frequency of the electric field.
Using that ˆE(+)(r) is the complex conjugate of ˆE(−)(r), we obtain:
g(2)(t1, t2) = ⟨ˆa†eiωt1 ˆa†eiωt2 ˆae−iωt2 ˆae−iωt1⟩
⟨ˆa†eiωt1 ˆae−iωt1⟩⟨ˆa†eiωt2 ˆae−iωt2⟩= ⟨ˆa† ˆa† ˆa ˆa⟩
⟨ˆa† ˆa⟩⟨ˆa† ˆa⟩
(10)
The spatial parts cancel out as well as the time-dependent parts, as shown explicitly. Using
the boson commutator relation ˆa ˆa† −ˆa† ˆa = 1 and the number operator ˆn = ˆa† ˆa, the resulting
expression becomes,
g(2)(τ) = ⟨ˆa†( ˆa ˆa† −1) ˆa⟩
⟨ˆa† ˆa⟩2
= ⟨ˆn( ˆn −1)⟩
⟨ˆn⟩2
(11)
==PAGE:13==
2.3 sem working principles
9
where τ = t2 −t1 is the delay time.
For Fock states |n⟩with n ⩾1, we obtain the following at zero time delay,
g(2)(0) = 1 −1
n
(12)
Regarding a single-photon source, characterized by light in the Fock state |1⟩, the second-
order correlation function at zero delay, g(2)(0), is expected to equal 0. Since this is the only
Fock state with g(2)(0) < 0.5, it indicates a possible single-photon. However, it is important to
note that while this condition is a strong indication of a potential single-photon source, it does
not guarantee it. Indeed, the presented condition applies to Fock states, which occur only if
photons are emitted by identical two-level emitters into the same spatial and temporal modes,
a scenario not always realized in experimental setups. To further confirm the single-photon
nature, complementary techniques such as Photon-Emission-Correlation Spectroscopy (PECS)
can be employed. PECS is particularly adept at resolving nonradiative transitions, properties
often exploited in various quantum technologies. [24].
2.2.3
Generation & activation
Various types of defects can be formed during the generation process, depending on the exact
experimental procedure.
From earlier works [21, 11], it has been investigated that possible
defects formed are:
VB, VN, VBN, ON, CB, CN,
(13)
where V indicates a vacancy. With carbon present in the crystal lattice or environment and due
to the mobile nature of the defects, we expect it to be possible to create carbon-based defects
such as VNCB, where carbon has been deposited at a vacant boron site, or even C2CN, both of
which are illustrated in Fig. 3. These are hypotheses for now, and their actual origin is still
under investigation. The majority of the studied emitters so far have a ZPL distributed between
550 and 600 nm with a PSB typically spaced at 160-180 meV from the ZPL [25, 15]. The newest
emitter, which is outside this range, is the B center with ZPL at 440 nm (= 2.82 eV) [9].
Once active, we want to consider their photophysical properties comprising the following factors
for each defect: spectral properties, temporal stability, efficiency (quantum yield), and single-
photon characteristics - the latter introduced above.
For application purposes, it is of outermost relevance to form defect sites through a site-
selective controlled generation process and since this has been difficult to obtain, we talk of the
generation process and the site-selectivity separately. Up until recently, the most common has
been the so-called uncontrolled generation where controlled generation of quantum emitters is
defined as the formation of one specific type of defect, hence with the same zero-phonon line
energy and other properties.
One of the common uncontrolled generation mechanisms is drop-casting a low-quality h-BN
solution, followed by thermal annealing in Argon [26] or exfoliation from bulk h-BN and these
methods are known to host many intrinsic defects. Starting with fewer intrinsic defects enables
more controlled generation via e.g.
oxygen irradiation, and oxygen plasma [26].
Moreover,
many strive to generate the quantum emitters through position-controlled processes such as
[20] thermal activation, nanoindentation with AFM [27], strain activation through transfer or
growth on pillared substrates [28], laser or gamma-ray damage, irradiation with ion-[8] as well
as electron- [9] beam. We have chosen to focus on the latter two in this project.
2.3
sem working principles
The Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) is an electron microscope that shoots, so-called, pri-
mary electrons, accelerated by an applied voltage, to a target sample, while secondary and
==PAGE:14==
10
theoretical framework
Electron gun
Condenser lenses
Aperture
Aperture
Objective lens
Anode
Scan coils
Beam alignment coils
Stigmator
Sample
BSE detector
ETD
(a) General scheme of an SEM.
(b) Picture of operating FIB-SEM, reprinted from [29].
Figure 5: (a) Scheme of the SEM electron column and (b) picture of the operating FIB-SEM device employed
in this study, namely the Helios 5 Hydra UX DualBeam facility at DTU Nanolab.
back-scattered electrons emitted upon interaction with the sample itself are collected by a detec-
tor. This section is based on [30]. The basics of the electron column are briefly covered, while
the main focus is turned toward image formation, i.e. the interaction between the electrons and
the target sample. A scheme of the SEM column is shown in Fig. 5. The function of the electron
column is to generate electrons, directing them towards the anode, filtering out the ones with
unwanted energies, and directing them towards the spot of interest on the sample. To keep
impurities out, the electron column is kept in a vacuum at all times. The diameter of the elec-
tron beam is controlled through the various apertures within the column and beam alignment
coils. The stigmators allow to adjust the astigmatism of the electron beam to achieve better SEM
images.
On the sample, electron scattering occurs via either elastic or inelastic scattering.
In elas-
tic scattering, the electron trajectory changes within the sample, while its kinetic energy and
velocity remain essentially constant. This represents the electrostatic deflection of incoming elec-
trons by the Coulomb field of each atomic nucleus in the sample and results in the generation
of backscattered electrons (BSE). Hence, elastic scattering is related to primary electrons being
purely deflected, whereas inelastic scattering relates to these primary electrons losing energy
due to interaction with matter. Inelastic scattering occurs when the incident electron trajectory is
only slightly perturbed, but energy is lost through energy transfer to either tightly bound inner-
shell electrons or loosely bound outer-shell electrons in the sample. It represents the Coulomb
interaction of the incoming electrons with the atomic electrons that surround each nucleus in the
sample. The latter results in the generation of various phenomena, such as heating (via phonon
excitation), cathodoluminescence, bremsstrahlung (continuum radiation), characteristic X-ray ra-
==PAGE:15==
2.3 sem working principles
11
Secondary electrons
Backscattered electrons
X-rays
Auger electrons
Figure 6: Schematic of interaction volume including the possible processes under electron beam irradiation.
diation, Auger electrons, and last but not least secondary electrons. The different processes are
collected and represented graphically in Fig. 6. Secondary electrons (SE) are defined as electrons
with an energy lower than 50 eV thus electrons originally belonging to the loosely bound outer-
shells of atoms in the sample [30]. Secondary electrons are further classified into SE1, SE2, and
SE3, referring to where they escape from the sample. SE1 are electrons that leave the sample
within the primary beam cross-section, SE2 are the ones leaving the sample outside this area,
and SE3 are electrons that have left the sample and interacted with the chamber surroundings
before detection.
The imaging mechanism is based on the detection of either BSE or SE leaving the sample
surface being collected by a detector. The in-lens detector (TLD) is used for detecting mainly
SE1, and the Everhart-Thornley detector (ETD) mainly for SE2. The BSE are collected by the
backscattered electron detector (BSED). The latter two are shown in Fig. 5(a). Finally, BSEs and
SEs contain different information. Due to their larger energy, BSE signal originates from deeper
layers of the sample, whereas SE originates from layers closer to the surface. Both of these are
shown in Fig. 6. With a BSE image, we can hence tell about changes in the material composition
from deeper layers, and with a SE image, we become aware of what happens in the upper layers.
Depending on the interaction volume, we can thus observe signals of different origins.
In this study, the SEM serves as a versatile tool primarily employed for its irradiation mech-
anism rather than its conventional function of image formation. Leveraging its capability as an
irradiation tool, we utilize the SEM to engineer defects within the h-BN lattice. We thus focus
on its irradiation properties such as doses, acceleration voltage, beam size, and irradiation time.
2.3.1
FIB module
We also investigate FIB-irradiated h-BN flakes and use the FIB-SEM Hydra presented in Fig. 5(b).
Though not the same irradiation source, the principles remain similar for both the electron- and
ion- columns. In contrast to the electrons, the ion species differ greatly in mass and therefore
it cannot be assumed that they have the same impact on the sample for the same acceleration
voltages. This mass difference can be taken into account to some extent by estimating the largest
possible energy that can be transferred in a collision event using the following formula [31]:
Emax = 2E0
 E0 + 2m0c2
Mc2
(14)
==PAGE:16==
12
theoretical framework
where E0 is the incident beam energy, c is the speed of light in vacuum, m0 the mass of the
incident particle, and M is the nucleus mass.
Emax is the maximum energy that the beam
particle can transfer to the atom targeted in the sample and if the transferred energy from the
incident beam exceeds an atomic displacement energy, the atom can be ejected from its site. This
formula can be used in the context of electrons and ions and it must be noted that while we may
choose irradiation energies for the different ion species such as to achieve similar maximum
energy transfers, this does not say anything about the statistical distribution of energy transfers
per collisions.
2.3.2
FIB-SEM doses
Under FIB-SEM irradiation, the software on the microscope indicates the calculated fluence in
units of pC/µm2. In literature, irradiation fluences are often presented in terms of electrons/µm2
or ions/cm2 which is why the presented formula for the fluence is given in those units, through
the division by the elementary charge and conversion of the length unit. Thus the operating
fluence can be estimated by [32]:
Fluence = Ibeam tdwell Nrepeats
q Abeam
(15)
where Ibeam is the beam current, tdwell is the dwell time i.e. the time the beam stays at each
pixel, Nrepeats is the number of repetitions, q is the charge of the particle, and Abeam is the
beam size area. The actual fluences and other parameters employed are presented later in section
4.3.
2.4
simulations
To gain a first understanding of the behavior of the electrons and ions shot in the h-BN/SiO2/Si
stack, we performed initial simulations.
2.4.1
TRIM simulations for Xe/O penetration in h-BN
The SRIM/TRIM [33] package is used to run Monte Carlo simulations of a beam of O-ions
directed onto a thick slab of h-BN over a SiO2/Si layer. Transport of Ions in Matter (TRIM) is
Monte Carlo-based where it is possible to simulate ion cascades to form a qualitative description
of the irradiation process. It does not account for all details, such as channeling effects in 2D
materials since it models the interaction material as an amorphous structure of atoms with a
certain density, thus not taking into account the crystal structure of the material itself, but can
still be useful for the estimation of certain parameters [32].
2.4.2
CASINO simulations for electron penetration in h-BN
We cannot utilize SRIM/TRIM simulations for electron trajectory simulations. Instead, to predict
the behavior of electrons in the h-BN/SiO2/Si stack, we employ the CASINO (Monte Carlo
Simulation of electroN trajectory in sOlids) program. Originally developed by R. J. Needs, M.
D. Towler, N. D. Drummond, and P. Lopez Rios at Cambridge University, CASINO conducts
2D quantum Monte Carlo electronic structure calculations and simulations. A key advantage
of CASINO over density functional theory (DFT) is its parallelizability, which overcomes the
limit imposed by interprocessor communication in DFT, while its scalability with system size
maintains comparable accuracy [34].
Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) stands as a versatile computational tool for exploring com-
plex quantum systems, providing precise approximations to the quantum many-body problem.
Despite the diversity in their approaches, QMC methods collectively employ Monte Carlo tech-
==PAGE:17==
2.4 simulations
13
niques to handle the multi-dimensional integrals inherent in various formulations of the many-
body problem [35]. One of the primary strengths of Quantum Monte Carlo methods lies in their
ability to directly address complex many-body phenomena embedded within the wave function,
surpassing the constraints of mean-field theory. This facilitates the computation of highly accu-
rate solutions to the Schrödinger equation, capturing the intricacies of realistic atomic systems
with remarkable precision.
The theory behind the CASINO program is based on the variational Monte Carlo (VMC)
method, in which the energy of the system is determined by calculating the expectation value
of the ground state of the Hamiltonian, itself being approximated by a trial function, whose
form is chosen following a prior analysis of the physical system being investigated. In the solid-
state application, one uses trial functions in the Slater-Jastrow form, in which a pair of up- and
down-spin determinants is multiplied by a Jastrow correlation factor. The electronic part of the
non-relativistic Born–Oppenheimer Hamiltonian, exhibiting time-reversal symmetry and being
spin-independent, is of interest and given by [34, 35]:
ˆH = −1
2
X
i
∇2
i −
X
i,I
ZI
|ri −xI| +
X
j<i
1
|ri −rj|,
(16)
where r, x are the position vectors with i and j labelling the electrons and I running over the
ions with charges ZI. Here, electron correlations are taken into account from the outset. Using
the variational theorem of quantum mechanics with a given trial function |ΨT⟩, the variational
energy is given by
EV =
R
ΨT(R) ˆH(R)ΨT(R)dR
R
Ψ2
T(R)dR
(17)
≈EVMC = 1
N
N
X
i=1
EL(Ri),
with EL(R) = Ψ−1
T
ˆHΨT,
(18)
where R = (r1, r2, ..., rN) is a 3N-dimensional vector encompassing the coordinates of all N
particles in the system and the sum runs over N such vectors. This energy is an upper bound
on the exact energy of the ground state E0, i.e. EV ⩾E0, and is one of the main parameters
calculated in such CASINO simulations.
Simulation results presented in Fig. 7 offer insights into the behavior of electrons within a
h-BN/SiO2/Si stack across different energy levels, namely 10 keV, 15 keV, and 30 keV. The stack
consists of a 140 nm-thick h-BN layer (comparable to sample B1 x14y41 presented in the results)
on top of a 220 nm-thick SiO2 layer itself on a Si substrate.
In the left column of Fig. 7, the incoming electron beam has a diameter of 6 nm, while in the
right column it has a diameter of 33 nm. These variations demonstrate the impact of both the
acceleration voltage and the diameter of the beam on the simulation outcomes.
The simulations reveal that the total interaction volume increases with higher acceleration volt-
ages, primarily due to an increase in the interaction depth along with a larger cross-sectional area.
Consequently, there is a heightened probability of interaction between incoming electrons and
material beyond the primary beam’s cross-section, leading to a slightly less controlled process
in terms of positioning.
Given our focus on defect generation within the h-BN rather than the substrate, we are par-
ticularly interested in the interaction dynamics within the h-BN layer. Therefore, the increased
interaction depth itself is not of significant interest, but rather the cross-sectional area is. By
defocusing the electron beam to a larger diameter, the simulations demonstrate a comparable
interaction depth as with the smaller beam, while also enabling increased cross-sectional area
interaction within the layers of interest.
==PAGE:18==
14
theoretical framework
Figure 7: CASINO simulations for a 140 nm thick h-BN flake on a Si/SiO2 substrate with a SiO2 layer
of 220 nm, under (top) 10 keV, (middle) 15 keV, and (bottom) 30 keV electron beam irradiation.
The primary beam is blue, where the backscattered electrons are indicated in red. For larger
acceleration voltages, the electrons penetrate deeper into the sample and the cross-section area
widens. This latter effect is also observed for a larger electron beam diameter, namely of 33 nm
(right column) compared to 6 nm (left column).
==PAGE:19==
3
E X P E R I M E N TA L M E T H O D S
During this experimental project, I have covered sample preparation, irradiation using a SEM-
FIB, described in Section 2.3, and sample characterization using various methods. Since the
project has been carried out in collaboration between DTU Electro and DTU Nanolab, procedures
and measurements have been performed in facilities from both departments. The details of the
sample preparation and irradiation procedures applied in the project are described in sections
3.1.1 and 3.1.2 while the methods used for sample characterization are described in the following
sections.
3.1
procedures
3.1.1
Exfoliation
The exfoliation was carried out in DTU 345 Lab while wafer cleaning was done in DTU 345
Chemistry Lab. The procedure is divided into the following main steps, the first step not being
carried out by me: preparation of Si/SiO2 substrate, cleaning of Si/SiO2 substrate, micromechan-
ical exfoliation of h-BN flakes on Si/SiO2 substrate.
Clean Si/SiO2 substrate
1. Pick a becker and wash it with acetone and then with Isopropanol (IPA). Remember to
dispose of the liquid in the correct waste container.
2. Fill the becker with acetone (enough for the samples to be covered).
3. Place samples on the holder, then sink the holder into the acetone in the becker.
4. Fill the Sonicator with deionized (DI) water to the line (the becker will be full and sink a
bit).
5. Place the becker in the Sonicator, set the time to 15 minutes, and turn it on (press the
SONIC button).
6. When finished, pull out a sample one by one from the becker. For each sample, place it on
a drying sheet and use the Nitrogen gun to dry them.
Beware, the samples can fly away, so hold them with the tweezers during this step.
7. Pick them up with the tweezers (on the borders!), turn them upside down, and let the
residual acetone dry. Then place the sample back in its spot.
8. Repeat the procedure (from point 2 and on) first with IPA, and finally with DI-water instead
of acetone.
Micromechanical exfoliation
The thin h-BN flakes are peeled from commercially available bulk crystals from HQ Graphene by
micromechanical exfoliation. In the process, the interlayer van der Waals interactions are further
weakened by peeling forces, separating the layered material. For graphene, it is customary to
use Scotch magic tape, while we use the low adhesion (blue) tape, EPL BT-150E-KL from Nitto
Denko for the h-BN bulk crystals.
Note that once steps 1-5 have been performed and the h-BN crystal has been transferred to the
blue tape, it can be reused multiple times without redoing this part.
15
==PAGE:20==
16
experimental methods
1. Use the blue tape: cut a rectangle and place it upside down - this is the "bottom tape".
Draw a square on it; it will indicate the deposition area of h-BN crystals.
2. Remove the protective layer from the h-BN crystal box.
3. Pick one small h-BN crystal and place it in the middle of the square.
4. Flip the tape a couple of times to stick them the most and evenly spread them.
5. Cut a new piece of blue tape and place it on the deposited h-BN - this is the "top tape".
Draw also a square on this tape.
Exfoliation onto the substrate can be done at room temperature or heated. For both cases:
1. Place the substrate down and put the top tape on the substrate.
2. Carefully remove the tape.
3. Your sample is now exfoliated.
4. Place another piece of blue tape on the bottom tape so that it can be used for the next
exfoliation, and throw away the used top tape.
3.1.2
Irradiation
Our primary focus has been to use the SEM-FIB for irradiation on h-BN, to generate defects in
the crystal structure that may act as luminescent centers. For this purpose, the Hydra FIB-SEM
dual beam system, presented in Section 2.3, is used, and the relevant input parameters that we
control to tune the fluence are:
• Acceleration voltage, expressed in keV
• Electrons/ions per spot, expressed in #e/cm2, #ions/cm2
• Current of the beam, expressed in nA
• Overlap coefficient, expressed in %
• Irradiation area and pitch size, expressed in µm2 and µm
The acceleration voltage is varied depending on the electron energy of interest. The beam
current is another crucial parameter, and its value is always recorded, after having properly
focused the SEM, to have an idea of how stable the instrument is going to be. With time, erosion
of the aperture occurs, which results in a less efficient sorting of electrons. Due to this, the value
of the measured beam current will differ from the set beam current and should be noted. Again,
its optimal value will depend on our purpose. In the defined area for each dose, the SEM is
effectively making single shots on the pixel level (with sub-nm resolution) with a pitch of tens of
nanometers between each single shot. The time spent by the SEM on this single shot is called the
dwell time, here 1 µs. The overlap coefficient means that the dwell time is equally spaced by a
distance corresponding to the electron-/ion- beam diameter.
Through the development of an experimental protocol for the controlled generation of lumi-
nescent centers through irradiation-engineering, an iterative process of trial and error has been
involved, employing beta irradiation on diverse samples to discern the optimal parameters. As
a result, the identified settings are presented as ranges, encapsulating the spectrum of values
tested for that outcome.
For FIB irradiation, rectangular areas are irradiated with a fixed length, a pitch of 2 µm, and a
constant O-ion base dose of 8 · 10−4 pC
µm2 with a pass span defined as 10, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000,
2500 and 5000. For SEM irradiation, rectangular areas of 1.5µm x 1.5µm are irradiated with a
pitch of 2 and 8 µm, at a current fixed to 13 nA for three acceleration voltages. The base dose
tested is 5.65
nC
µm2 with a pass span defined as 1, 10, 100 and 1000.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 optical characterisation
17
To investigate the impact of the Hydra FIB-SEM dual beam system’s default settings, I have
explored two distinct SEM approaches: 1) incrementally increasing the dose through iterative
passes (default), and 2) applying the full irradiation dose in a single time interval. In [9], the
procedure used is the second one, so my objective here is to evaluate the comparability between
these methodologies. The results will be discussed in Section 4.3.3.
3.2
optical characterisation
3.2.1
Setup
Figure 8: Schematic of the PL Setup of QLDS Group, reprinted from [22].
The main experimental setup is a PL/g2 setup located at the QLDS Group. The setup con-
sists of a confocal Nikon Ti-U Inverted microscope equipped with a high precision XYZ-stage,
a Shamrock 303i spectrometer connected at the input, and an electronically cooled Newton 970
electron-multiplying charge-coupled device (EMCCD). At one of the output slits of the spectrom-
eter, the beam path is coupled to a beam splitter and two APDs connected to a Time Tagger for
g2 measurements. The overall setup is sketched as shown in Fig. 8, where the last part of the
beam path, after the spectrometer, indicates the g2 module. For accessible reproducibility, the list
of components can be found in Appendix A.1. Several lasers, working at different wavelengths,
are at our disposition, but mainly the iQblue with a central wavelength at 405 nm is used in this
project. To measure the photoluminescence in h-BN, light of higher energy than the luminescent
center of interest is directed to the sample, hence our choice of laser.
==PAGE:22==
18
experimental methods
3.2.2
Photoluminescence
Photoluminescence spectroscopy probes the electronic transitions in a material under light exci-
tation to gain information about the energy difference between the involved bands or orbitals.
For photoluminescence experiments, the continuous wave (CW) diode laser emitting at 405 nm
is sent toward the microscope in a free-space configuration. Throughout its path, a short-pass
filter with a cut-off frequency at 424 nm is positioned to refine the laser signal. A 425 nm dichroic
mirror directs the laser to an objective, focusing it on the sample of interest. The light emitted
from the sample is collected by the same objective and guided by an optical extender to the input
of the spectrometer. Since the incident light will be more intense than the PL of the measured
material, it is blocked before it is detected by the CCD. Thus, at the input slit, a 420 nm long-pass
filter is placed, blocking the excitation light. Inside the spectrometer, the grating disperses light
and directs different wavelengths to different spatial positions on the CCD. The sample is placed
on the XYZ-stage, where the XY-part allows for the acquisition of PL maps and the Z-part allows
for easy adjustment of the laser focus before starting measurements.
This configuration is diffraction-limited, meaning that the beam spot of the laser extends over
only a few pixels on the CCD, and with the grating, the full spectrum of the emitter spans
over all pixels on the CCD. The spectrum obtained in this manner contains light emissions from
the material of interest alongside other sources. Following the measurement, it is imperative
to discern between the photoluminescence (PL) and other sources of contribution. We use an
entrance slit at the spectrometer entrance to reduce the contribution from other emitting things
around the region of interest, and we select only a few lines on the 2D CCD to also select
vertically. In PL measurements, noise needs to be addressed, primarily originating from dark
counts on the CCD. Dark counts stem from thermal energy exciting carriers in the CCD and
are wavelength-independent by nature. To mitigate this effect and subsequently reduce dark
count flow in the photodiodes, the CCD is cooled to -70°C, and despite these efforts, residual
contributions persist. These can be directly addressed by the spectrometer through the execution
of a dark count measurement prior to the PL measurement of interest. The resulting spectrum
is then:
Ispec(λ) = Iraw(λ) −Idark
(19)
A laser characterization has been performed for consistency and is in Appendix A.1.2.
3.3
atomic force microscopy
3.3.1
Setup
An atomic force microscope (AFM) uses Van der Waals forces to enable the recording of the
topography of the sample. In this project, the topology measurements are performed on the
s-polarized Scattering-type Near-Field Optical Microscope available in the QLDS Group [36].
The s-SNOM can be considered an atomic force microscope (AFM) with a monochromatic and
coherent light beam from a laser, focused on an oscillating tip apex of the instrument. Here, we
restrict ourselves to the AFM configuration of the s-SNOM [37].
==PAGE:23==
4
E X P E R I M E N TA L R E S U LT S
This section presents a full summary of the experiments conducted, and the corresponding
results carried out in collaboration with the QLDS Group. Initially, the focus is on sample pro-
duction and the impact of a pre-irradiation treatment. Subsequently, a detailed analysis is pro-
vided regarding the results obtained from irradiation experiments involving electrons and ions,
specifically Oxygen and Xenon. The final segment delves into identifying and characterizing
discovered quantum emitters, along with exploring their photophysical properties.
4.1
sample production
To recall, the silicon substrate has a 285 nm thermal SiO2 layer on top and the h-BN crystal
considered is acquired from HQ Graphene with a purity of grade A [38].
4.1.1
Optical images
The figures in this section exhibit the optical bright-field and dark-field images of the flakes
of interest for further analysis, where the flake of interest is highlighted with a red box when
necessary. All other relevant information is collected in an overview table in the Appendix A.2.
(a) 100x BF optical image with highlighted flake
(b) 100x DF optical image
Figure 9: Sample G1 x56y26 #01.
4.1.2
AFM Scans
AFM scans were performed on the chosen flakes to assess the thicknesses of the samples. As an
improvement from earlier studies, we have strived to perform an AFM scan at each step of the
process to have better control over changes in the thickness and surface without relying only on
the optical contrast to estimate these last. The full table can be found in Appendix A.2. This
assessment allows us to perform different analyses, namely investigating the impact of treatment,
consisting of 1) cleaning and 2) irradiation, on the thickness of the sample and investigating the
impact of sample thickness on eventual defect generation, including density, intensity, and depth.
19
==PAGE:24==
20
experimental results
(a) 20x BF optical image with highlighted flake #1
(b) 20x BF optical image with highlighted flake #3
Figure 10: Sample Th x67y58 #01 and #03.
(a) 100x BF optical image
(b) 100x DF optical image
Figure 11: Sample B1 x20y38 #01.
(a) 100x BF optical image
(b) 100x DF optical image
Figure 12: Sample B1 x14y41 #02.
4.1.3
Treatment
A key factor is the reproducibility of the results and to achieve this, we want to rule out the
possible impact of residues after exfoliation and other defects that arise from the atmosphere in
==PAGE:25==
4.1 sample production
21
(a) 100x BF optical image
(b) 100x DF optical image
Figure 13: Sample B3 x15y72 #01.
(a) 100x BF optical image
(b) 100x DF optical image
Figure 14: Sample B3 x16y71 #01.
which the samples are kept. To evaluate this, all samples have been prepared according to the
procedure in Section 3.1, in addition to which we have performed a treatment before irradiation.
The cleaning procedure applied has been chosen from the following list: None, annealing in
ambient atmosphere, annealing in graphite box in nitrogen atmosphere, mild oxygen plasma
irradiation, and annealing in an oxygen atmosphere.
Pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere
The cleaning procedure of easiest accessibility and reproducibility is the annealing in ambient
atmosphere treatment and is therefore the one we have chosen to pursue. To clean the samples
from tape and other carbon-related residues, annealing treatment was performed on a commer-
cial hotplate that allows temperatures up to 400◦C. The procedure performed in this study is to
place the sample of interest in a regular atmosphere on the hotplate for 3 hours at approximately
400◦C. The result of the procedure is exemplified with sample B1 x20y38 and B1 x14y41. In
Fig.15a,15b, the dark-field images after treatment are presented. Compared to Fig.11b,12b, the
dark-field optical images illustrate significant changes especially on the substrate after the treat-
ment, and indicate that tape residues in fact can be evaporated during the annealing process.
To support this, a PL-map before and after treatment is also performed, here under a 515 nm
excitation laser. As depicted in the spectra presented in Fig. 15c, the treatment does not exhibit
the expected energy filtering effect as indicated by the optical images. Instead, it introduces a
broad signal around 2eV, observable across the entire flake, as highlighted in the inset. It should
==PAGE:26==
22
experimental results
(a) DF optical image of B1 x20y38 after treatment
(b) DF optical image of B1 x14y41 after treatment
(c) PL characterization of B1 x20y38 before and after treatment under 515 nm excitation wave-
length
Figure 15: Optical dark-field image of sample B1 x20y38 and B1 x14y41 after the annealing at ambient
atmosphere. Compared with Fig. 11a and 12b, this shows how the treatment affects the reflec-
tion both where imperfections were present on the h-BN flake but mainly the changes in the
surrounding substrate. (c) PL characterization of B1 x20y38 before and after treatment.
be noted that while the broad characteristic displayed in the spectra may resemble the spectrum
of a potential emitter, it is well understood that amorphous carbon structures resulting from
scotch tape contamination or other polymer contaminants can produce PL spectra very similar
to the luminescent centers of h-BN [19]. This suggests the activation of defects during the heat-
ing process, specifically on the h-BN flake. Furthermore, this background uniformly pervades
all flakes subjected to annealing at ambient atmosphere treatment and is detectable under both
515 nm and 405 nm excitation wavelengths. The consistent presence of such a feature across the
flake supports the potential contamination-related origin. Finally, it should be noted that this
type of feature typically undergoes easy photobleaching upon laser irradiation under ambient
conditions, facilitating recognition [19].
==PAGE:27==
4.2 fib irradiation
23
In the following sections, photoluminescence spectra are presented in which the legends have
the format xXXyYY where XX indicates the x-position and YY the y-position relative to the pixel
dimensions of the photoluminescence map. These are represented graphically by crosses on the
corresponding PL map.
4.2
fib irradiation
Luminescent centers can be induced through various types of irradiation engineering, tailored
to the specific center of interest. For this reason, we initiated our investigation by conducting
FIB irradiation, specifically utilizing oxygen- and xenon-ion irradiation. For the oxygen- ion
irradiation, the section is further divided into the three treatments applied: none, pre-annealing
in ambient atmosphere, and pre-annealing in graphite box in nitrogen atmosphere.
4.2.1
Oxygen ion irradiation
No treatment
The flake of relevance here is G1 x56y26 #01.
Figure 16: PL map on G1 x56y26 #01 flake before irradiation under excitation wavelength at 515 nm (left)
and 405 nm (right) performed with a 50x objective.
Before proceeding with the irradiation, a PL pre-characterization is performed at two excita-
tion laser wavelengths, namely 515 and 405 nm. This PL pre-characterization is performed on all
samples to obtain a comparable analysis of the irradiation’s impact over the wavelength range
between 420 and 825 nm. The PL map of the flake, presented in Fig. ??, taken on the DTU DFM
PL Setup, is plotted in Fig. 16. The intensities are of orders up to 105 counts, and the large
PL intensity on both images is due to the laser reflection on the h-BN flake and could thus be
removed from the integration range. Removing the laser tail in the integration range results in
no contrast for the 405nm excitation and only a low contrast exhibiting the flake shape for the
515 nm excitation, corresponding to the h-BN Raman peak. For this purpose alone, the laser tail
is kept.
In addition to this, as part of the pre-characterization, AFM line scans are carried out from
which the flake thicknesses are determined. This is relevant for both simulation purposes and
to identify eventual changes in structure and thickness between before and after irradiation.
Using the FIB we conducted two consecutive irradiations on the same untreated flake G1
x56y26 #01. The irradiation pattern is shown in Fig. 17 and displays four irradiation series at
four different acceleration voltages, namely 2, 5, 8, and 12 keV. Along one series, the dose pattern
goes from low to high (from left to right), with the highest dose positioned most left. The white
spots exhibiting high contrast are encircled by yellow circles and are dust contamination. Later
==PAGE:28==
24
experimental results
Species:
Acc. V:
Oxygen
12 kV
Oxygen
8 kV
Oxygen
5 kV
Oxygen
2 kV
Sel. I:
Meas. I:
2 pA
4 pA
2.3 pA
2.73 pA
2.5 pA
2.8 pA
10 pA
7.9 pA
Passes
Dose

ions
cm2

1
3.8·1011
2.5·1011
1.2·1011
4.0·1010
10
3.8·1012
2.5·1012
1.2·1012
4.0·1011
100
3.8·1013
2.5·1013
1.2·1013
4.0·1012
1000
3.8·1014
2.5·1014
1.2·1014
4.0·1013
10000
3.8·1015
2.5·1015
1.2·1015
4.0·1014
Figure 17: On the left, the resulting FIB-irradiation pattern on flake G1 x56y26 with the four irradiation
series.
The yellow circles are dust contamination and are removed later with the help of a
nitrogen gun. On the right, a detailed table containing the parameters used for irradiation as
well as the resulting doses, expressed in ions/cm2.
in the process, these have been removed by a nitrogen gun. It is noteworthy that the impact of
the irradiation is already observable from the contrast changes on the SEM images.
After irradiation, clear PL features are visible at the irradiation spots as shown for the 8 (top)
and 12 (bottom) keV series in Fig. 18. Another PL map was performed for the other series, see
Appendix A.4.1. Under 515 nm excitation laser wavelength, there is a large background with a
maximum at around 1.9 eV on top of which there is a broad peak of around 1.55 eV, i.e. 800 nm.
Furthermore, it can be noted that the central wavelength wanders slightly spectrally from 1.57
to 1.55 eV (790 to 800 nm) for varying doses. This peak is in agreement with the V−
B -defect that
is known to exhibit a broad emission spectrum centered near 820 nm without a distinct ZPL [8].
To confirm the nature of the defect, an ODMR measurement should be performed due to the
spin-active nature of the V−
B defect. The integrated PL intensity is increasing for larger doses up
until the last dose (see the further-left irradiation spots) where the dose decreases, showing that
for both the 8 and 12 keV series, we have obtained and surpassed an optimum value for the dose,
also shown in Fig. 19a. The peaks are extracted using a Voigt function. A more refined dose span
would result in a better understanding of this. A PL measurement at 405 nm on the other hand
does not exhibit any evident PL features at the irradiated spots nor is the peak observed at 1.55
eV present under this excitation wavelength, which can be seen in Appendix A.4.1. Instead, one
can observe a large background emission with a central wavelength at 2.15 eV with no noticeable
dose dependence other than the significantly larger background for the highest irradiation dose.
Pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere
The flake of relevance is B1 x20y38 #01 for this section. For repetition purposes, the PL map
with corresponding PL spectra for the three irradiation series is displayed in Appendix A.4.4
and here, in Fig. 19b, the peak intensity of the 1.5 eV photoluminescence emission is depicted
as a function of the dose for the three energy series, 5 keV, 8 keV, and 12 keV. For all series, no
clear optimum is obtained after which the peak intensity drops. However, for 8 keV and 12 keV,
noting the linear evolving line on the log-scale, it suggests that a plateau is being established,
which is not the case for 5 keV for the doses at hand. This dose span is thus refined compared
to the analysis in Fig.19a and does not reach the same optimal value and dip. Other than simply
not having achieved the same maximal dose, this effect could also be due to the treatment.
An AFM map of the relevant area was measured, producing the profiles depicted in Appendix
A.4.4. A line profile from one irradiation series suggests material deposition at the center of the
irradiation spot with some additional accumulation on the verge of the spots. The observed
impact appears to depend on the irradiation dose and the acceleration voltage (up to some
point).
==PAGE:29==
4.2 fib irradiation
25
Figure 18: Post-PL map (left) of G1 x56y26 #01 with corresponding spectra (right) of the chosen spots indi-
cated by crosses on (a). There is a large PL emission at 1.55 eV along with a broad background
emission centered around 2 eV.
(a) Sample G1 x56y26. The corresponding PL maps
can be found in Appendix A.4.1
(b) Sample B1 x20y38
Figure 19: Peak intensity of the fitted voigt for the broad 1.5 eV PL emission peak as a function of the
oxygen-ion fluence, expressed in ions/cm2. In (a), it shows that for the 8 keV and 12 keV series,
an optimum is found for a dose of ≈3 · 1014 ions
cm2 .The lowest dose has been neglected in the
analysis due to the lack of possibility to identify its position. Note also that there is only one
data point for the 5 keV series. On (b) the dose span is shorter with more data points and shows
a similar tendency as (a) but without reaching a maximum value.
==PAGE:30==
26
experimental results
Pre-annealing in graphite box
The flake of interest is Th x67y58 #01 and has been treated with a pre-annealing in graphite
box in nitrogen atmosphere. Both the SEM image after treatment, PL integrated map, and AFM
data can be found in Appendix A.4.2. In this analysis, the post-PL map under 515 nm excitation
wavelength exhibits a large background. For the highest doses, the background, supposedly
introduced by the preannealing, is partly removed, yielding a lower PL intensity than its sur-
roundings. The AFM scans yield a lower thickness at the irradiation spots upon oxygen-ion
irradiation and the changes vary from 4 to 17 nm for increasing dose.
4.2.2
Xenon ion irradiation
The xenon irradiation was performed on one flake, which was annealed in a graphite box before
irradiation. A large and broad PL emission around a photon energy of 1.9 eV on the entire h-BN
flake, independent of the irradiation spot, is generated. The integrated PL intensity increased
from 3000+ counts to 8000+ after irradiation while no clear defect generation was produced
from this procedure. Therefore, this combination of annealing and xenon irradiation on flake Th
x67y58 #03, with SEM image in Appendix A.4.3, has been abandoned in further analysis.
4.2.3
Discussion
From the measurements presented, it is observed that under oxygen irradiation the material is
deposited on top, for pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere and no treatment, while material
is being removed for oxygen irradiation after pre-annealing in graphite box.
Moreover, this
pre-annealing treatment gives rise to a larger PL background than observed for the untreated,
supporting the idea of carbon-based defects introduced into the lattice. The untreated flake and
pre-annealed in ambient atmosphere flake allow to identify emitters at 1.55 eV and it is clear that
the generation is dose dependent and somewhat dependent on the acceleration voltage as well.
However, it is also noted that the behavior for acceleration voltages of 8 and 12 keV is similar,
suggesting that above a certain energy this becomes subordinate.
Although we did not anticipate it, through the map under 405 nm excitation wavelength, it is
confirmed that no B centers are generated during these ion-irradiation processes.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 sem irradiation
27
Figure 20: The SEM image (a) shows the irradiated spots with doses from left to right being: 5.54
nC
µm2 ,
56.5
nC
µm2 , 565
nC
µm2 , and 5.54
µC
µm2 . They are all irradiated at I = 13 nA under 15 kV acceleration
voltage. The optical image (b) shows how the pattern is visible upon irradiation for high doses.
On (d), the spectra both on Si and h-BN correspond to spots taken from the PL maps on (c).
4.3
sem irradiation
An electron irradiation has been performed on flake B3 x15y72 #01, B3 x16y71 #01, and B1
x4y41 #02. All are beta irradiations following different patterns. Fig. 24 shows the irradiation
pattern for B1 x14y41 #02 and the SEM images otherwise presented show the resulting electron
irradiation impact.
4.3.1
No treatment
This section is based on the results gathered on the irradiated flakes B3 x15y72 #01 and B3
x16y71 #01 who have undergone no ulterior treatment. The PL maps in Fig. 20,22 have been
taken on DFM PL Setup with the standard parameters.
We begin by taking a closer look at the 30 nm-thick B3 x15y72 #01 flake. One can nicely
distinguish the irradiation pattern from the SEM image, see Fig. 20a depicting post-irradiation
patterns on both h-BN (bottom) and Si (top), but also for the highest doses from the optical
images (see Fig. 20b), this last effect hinting that the SEM is generating luminescent centers by
acting in such a way as to alter the material. The ability to visually distinguish irradiated spots
helps in precise measurements, such as power series or g2, as it facilitates pinpointing the laser
focus on the relevant spot.
The hypothesis of material alteration is supported by AFM scans. Subsequent AFM mapping
(Fig. 21) reveals material removal on the substrate under SEM irradiation with the specified
parameters, while material deposition appears evident on the h-BN flake. A closer examination
in Fig. 21b highlights the formation of a crater on the h-BN and a distinct feature on the substrate.
The AFM scan profile further elucidates these observations, indicating a reduction in thickness
==PAGE:32==
28
experimental results
by 10 nm at the center of the well on the substrate, while an accumulation of material is apparent
on the corresponding position of the h-BN.
(a) 3D AFM map with h-BN (orange hue) on top of substrate (red
hue)
(b) Close-up of shape formation
(c) Slice of AFM scan from (a), from high to low
dose, the changes in thickness being promi-
nent for the highest dose.
Figure 21: Post-irradiation AFM scan of flake x15y72 #01 exhibiting a crater-like formation on top of the
h-BN and a clear removal for large enough doses on the substrate.
Using an excitation wavelength of 405 nm, we performed a post-PL map on the h-BN flake
and substrate of interest. The integrated PL maps are shown in Fig. 20c and single spectra
plotted for the selected spots are illustrated in Figure 20b. The results of the spectra demonstrate
that at a low electron dose, the PL emission on h-BN surpasses that of the substrate, with
peak emission around 2.1 eV. However, at higher doses, this trend appears to reverse. The PL
emission in the ring shape is now noticeably greater on the substrate than on h-BN. At the center
of irradiation, the PL emission on the substrate has reached zero, indicating that the background
emission has been deactivated, probably because of material removal. On the h-BN, there is still
a background present, but it is blue-shifted in comparison to the background emission otherwise
present. Furthermore, even though no emitter is observed in the 2.8 eV range, there is a distinct
difference in the shape of the PL spectra between the center of the irradiation spot and the rings
in h-BN, as highlighted in Figure 20b.
Overall, by overlaying the spectra on the h-BN and substrate, we deduce that the ring pattern
present on both series has similar PL shapes and intensity, allowing us to address the pattern
observed after SEM irradiation and further use this data for background correction purposes on
the relevant h-BN flakes. We now take a closer look at the pattern on the substrate. Performing
voigt fits, the dose maximum is extracted from which no significant dependence on the dose can
be deduced because the integrated PL intensity is approximately the same for the second and
fourth doses, both of which are larger than the others. In the center of the irradiation spot for
dose 565 nC/µm2 on the substrate, there is a clear position-dependent intensity profile.
In conclusion, the post-PL analysis has not allowed us to identify any possible emitters with
the 50x objective, and a large background is observable after the SEM irradiation with a center
energy of 2.1 eV. However, this should not be related to the background found in Section 4.1.3
as no treatment was performed on this sample and therefore must be related to irradiation.
Moreover, the broad emission is shifted at the irradiation spots.
Taking a closer look at the 60 nm-thick sample
B3 x16y71 #01, in this irradiation series,
in addition to the doses tested on the previous flake, a low electron energy irradiation was
performed, that is, 1 keV. The PL map, shown in Fig.22(d,e), exhibits emission around an energy
==PAGE:33==
4.3 sem irradiation
29
of 2.1 eV of great intensity compared to the surroundings with no other easily distinguishable
photoluminescence peaks. Furthermore, the emission area is much larger than the irradiation
spot. This suggests that at low energy, the interaction volume within the topmost h-BN layers
is larger and that the energy of the electrons is only large enough to displace atoms, such as
to generate defects with PL emission around 2.1 eV. Due to the huge background, it cannot be
ruled out completely that emission at 2.8 eV is being generated, just that if so is the case, it is
being buried by the large background PL emission. This is supported by the distinct shoulder,
at 2.8 eV, that can be observed only in parts of the map in Fig. 22d.
Another point to make from this irradiation series is that a longer time was spent at one
of the irradiation spots following the electron irradiation to take SEM images of the generated
structure. These images were taken mainly with a 1 and 3 keV electron beam, resulting in a
rectangular form, with the size of the SEM region of interest, around the spot. Although not
of the same intensity as when deliberately used for irradiating, a constant PL background is
introduced, and this might be due to carbon-contaminant deposition mediated by the constant
stream of electrons.
Figure 22: The SEM image (a) before and (b,c) after irradiation with (b) an acceleration voltage of 1 keV
and (c) one of 15 keV to target imaging of different layers and resolution. The irradiation pattern
on (b) consists of a top row with 1 keV and usual parameters using irradiation method 2 (see
Section 4.3) and a lower row all irradiated with 15 keV with dose span: 5.65
µC
µm2 , 56.5
nC
µm2 , 565
nC
µm2 , 5.65
µC
µm2 , and again 5.65
µC
µm2 The corresponding PL map (d) and spectra (e) show the
large background introduced everywhere but especially at the low irradiation dose.
4.3.2
Power series
This section presents an analysis of how the PL signal from the sample of interest depends on
the power of the excitation laser. The aim is to determine the power dependence, especially of
the background PL emission, on h-BN.
The flake B3 x15y72 #01 showed a significant background emission on the control irradiated
spots on the substrate as well as on the h-BN flake. To gain insight into the possible origin
and behavior of this photoluminescence, a power series of a spot centered approximately in the
==PAGE:34==
30
experimental results
Figure 23: Intensity as a function of the laser power in continuous wave regime with the laser spot in focus.
The background is highly power dependent, however for higher laser powers, the SNR of peak
A is reduced and so this peak emerges.
middle of an irradiation spot was performed. It should be noted that at low power there was no
evident feature. The dependence of power on the background is clear, and it must be noted that
a new peak emerges for higher laser powers.
4.3.3
Pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere
The flake of interest for this section is B1 x14y41 #02 with Fig. 12 showing the corresponding
pre-characterization optical images. Its thickness has been determined to be 140 nm via an AFM
line scan. The optical DF image before and after treatment, see Fig. 15b exhibits the behavior
discussed in Section 4.1.3. Moreover, on the SEM image in Fig. 24a, we observe that after pre-
annealing in ambient atmosphere, the flake surface appears uneven and looks like bubbles have
been created under the surface. Because of the thickness of the flake and the doses applied, the
optical image indicates little to no change after irradiation. The SEM images captured before and
after electron irradiation, however, reveal a pronounced change in the flake’s appearance under
fixed settings, indicating a discernible impact from the irradiation. However, the precise nature
of this impact remains unclear, necessitating further analysis. Using the through-lens detector
(TLD) in both secondary electron (SE) and back-scattered electron (BSE) modes during SEM
imaging enables a comprehensive examination of the upper and deeper layers. This examination
reveals that the composition of the material in the deeper layers remained unchanged, indicating
that the irradiation predominantly affects the upper layers, which is visible in Fig.24. From
Fig. 24d, one observes squares in the center of the irradiation surrounded by a circular contrast.
For the highest applied dose at each electron energy, the generated pattern is surrounded by a
significant dark circular line positioned at a radius between 3.4-3.7 µm from the center, for all
except the 30 keV series, where the radius is much larger. In particular, visible lines on different
parts of the flake suggest potential changes in material thickness or the presence of impurities.
Figure 24c also displays lighter regions surrounding the irradiated spots, indicative of charge
effects. These areas suggest almost complete circular symmetry for a given distance from the
irradiation center, indicating the probabilistic nature of the phenomenon.
Furthermore, an AFM map of the relevant area was generated, which yields the results de-
picted in Fig. 25a. A line profile from two of the irradiation series, see Fig. 25b suggests material
removal at the center of the irradiation spot and accumulation in a ring around it. The observed
impact of deposition seems to vary based on the irradiation dose, while an initial examination
of the milling reveals no discernible dependence on acceleration voltage.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 sem irradiation
31
Figure 24: SEM images of flake x14y41. Figure (a) is taken with the ETD and depicts the flake’s condition
before irradiation along with the irradiation pattern. The right irradiation series consists of
the same doses as the left ones but has been performed in a single pass, differing from the
other series. Figures (b, c, d) are after electron irradiation under varying parameters. Image (c)
utilizes the ETD, while (b, d) employ the TLD collecting BSE and SE, respectively. The inset on
(d) shows a resulting circular geometry despite the irradiation pattern on (a) being square.
The profiles obtained illustrate the extent of the impact of the irradiation, particularly evident
with the large pitch. To further refine precision, another irradiation with an even larger pitch
would be advantageous.
Combining SEM images with AFM scans, the distances from the irradiation center to the rings
exhibit comparable sizes. Specifically, the diameter of the ring observed for the highest dose at
15 keV measures at 7.4 µm through the SEM image, closely matching the distance extracted from
the AFM scan, which is 6-7.2 µm. However, compared to the CASINO simulations depicted in
Fig. 7, this interaction volume does not seem to exhibit the same accuracy. In particular, the
simulations indicate that the largest extent of the interaction volume for 15 keV electrons is 3 µm.
Finally, combining this with the post-PL maps measured, the distance corresponds roughly to
the position of the large and broad background emission.
Post-PL maps of all series were measured. Here, in Fig. 26a,26b, the 15 keV and 30 keV series
with default settings have been highlighted because of their interesting PL spectral signature at
some spots. Through post-PL analysis, a possible emitter has been identified for the highest
dose, namely 5650 nC/µm2, for both of the acceleration voltages mentioned above. These can
be found in Fig. 26a,26b and their insets. There is a large background everywhere on the flake,
observed after the treatment around a center energy of 2.1 eV. The latter might overshadow part
of the signal around 2.8 eV, but a distinct shoulder can be observed for position x64y17 (15 keV,
pink spot) and position x64y09 (30 keV, blue spot). Dividing now the data analysis, we take a
==PAGE:36==
32
experimental results
(a)
(b)
Figure 25: Post-irradiation AFM scan of sample B1 x14y41, with (a) map and (b) line cut through center
of irradiation. AFM map shows the two 15 keV series, namely (left) methodology 1 and (right)
methodology 2. The green line corresponds to the base height of the non-irradiated areas. The
red line indicates the milling depth of around 1 nm.
further look first at the 30 keV series, where the inset proposes a ZPL at 428 nm and PSB at 454
nm as indicated with the dashed blue line. This ZPL signature is not where it could be expected,
i.e. at 440 nm with PSB at 465 nm for a single emitter or at 436 nm for an ensemble of emitters
[9]. It is hence blue-shifted compared to what could be expected. On the other hand, the energy
difference between the peaks is 155 meV, which corresponds to the values previously reported
for one of the red-shifted phonon replicas. Assuming the same emitter origin, this suggests that
the emitter at hand might undergo an energy shift because of its local environment. Recalling
[24], emitters are usually not identical, and various factors, such as proximity to surfaces and
the alignment of excitation or emission dipoles, can affect their apparent brightness, even within
the same species. Finally, it should also be mentioned that the emitter properties for the 30
keV series have been identified in [39] upon post-annealing at 1000◦C. In this work, the B centers
were stable until 800◦C after which defect restructuring and diffusion in h-BN reportedly started
to occur and the energy shift was observed. Although no annealing has been performed at such
high temperatures here, the high acceleration voltage could have a similar effect on the material.
Taking a look at the 15 keV series, the shoulder has a larger SNR than the 30 keV series. First,
one notices that the background is indeed still present everywhere on the flake, even on the
nonirradiated spots. The intensity varies according to the chosen position on the flake, but not
in a systematic way. In fact, PL emission increases for the first three doses, whereas at the highest
dose, in the center of the irradiation spot, the intensity is lower. This might suggest that electron
beam irradiation alters the existing defects before the irradiation in such a way as to put them in
a dark state, i.e. not a photoluminescent state, but it may also be that we are somehow removing
contamination that we deposited in the previous passes. Looking now at the inset, in Fig. 26a,
the peaks of the supposed blue emitter have been highlighted, suggesting both a ZPL at 440 nm
and a PSB at 465 nm, which corresponds in energy to the blue emitter presented in [9]. Note
that at position x63y15 (gray line), either the same emitter or an emitter of the same type is
observable - considering that from the pixel size these two spots are just 1 µm away from each
==PAGE:37==
4.3 sem irradiation
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: Post-PL map (left) at room temperature under 405 nm laser excitation with integration over
range 1.5-3.1 eV and corresponding spectra (middle) and inset with restrained energy axis (right).
On (a), the 15 keV DTU series, (b), the 30 keV DTU series. The peak at 2.96 eV is due to the
shoulder of the excitation laser, and two peaks are identified at higher energies.
These are
identified at 2.82 eV and 2.65 eV for (a) and somewhat blue-shifted for (b) and are comparable
to, respectively, ZPL and PSB of a possible emitter corresponding to the one in [9].
other it is very probable that we are dealing with the same emitter as the numerical aperture is
large compared to this size, allowing one to detect light from a larger emission angle, thus also
explaining why it is both a little less clear and broader than at x64y17.
This is promising, and we must still identify the exact nature of the identified emitter both
by addressing the ZPL and the eventual changes in it, as well as the emersion of an extra
peak. For this reason, we performed an extra, smaller, PL map with longer integration time
and more focused spots to reduce defocusing effects, which were commented on in the previous
section. This PL map performed around the identified spot indicates that it did not bleach in
the meantime and allows comparison with data extracted from the bench-marking article from
[9]. On top of the setup-related dark-counts correction, a post-analysis background correction is
done using a multi-Voigt function. This consists of two Voigt functions, each having a Gaussian
and a Lorentzian component. Fig. 27 exhibits an almost perfect overlap in energy between the
two normalized PL signals, noting that the blue signal also comprises the laser tail at 2.95 eV.
Being the same emitter as presented above, the ZPL is found to be at 440 nm and a PSB at 465
nm.
4.3.4
Stability
As a step towards a complete description of the photo-physical properties of the emitter, a PL
stability measurement is performed in which the laser continuously excites the spot of interest
and records the photoluminescence intensity for 1 second of exposure time. The excitation laser
power is set to 1 mW at the entrance to the microscope.
A stability measurement is performed on the potential emitter, the result of which is shown
in Fig. 28 and suggests that the emitter is stable for times up to 50 seconds, after which the
peak intensity decreases until it completely disappears for times above 90 seconds. Moreover,
==PAGE:38==
34
experimental results
Figure 27: The blue dataset has undergone a background correction consisting of removing background
signal via a multi-voigt function correction.
The PL map is performed under 405 nm laser
excitation, at P = 0.189 mW in front of Nikon (DAC = 350), with a 100x objective with a numerical
aperture of 0.9.
with this spectral resolution, it is difficult to assess from the PL stability measurement whether
the observed emitter is a single emitter at 440 nm or an ensemble at 436 nm. Compared to the
literature, the time trace of the photon detection rate shows the stability of the identified blue
emitters for at least 300 seconds [9] at room temperature. In [40], the stability of the B center at
cryogenic temperature is reported to be at least 120 seconds.
The fact that the stability is short-lived rises the question of possible charging effect. To gain
more insight into the origin of this peak, an extra stability measurement would be advantageous,
in which instead of continuous illumination, the excitation laser is pulsed, i.e. turned on for a
time interval after which it is off for another time interval. This action should then be repeated
over a total time interval of 500 seconds. Due to time constraints, this was not attempted.
Finally, it must be mentioned that in the search for the spot of interest, it was observed that
some observed emitters were either blinking spectrally or moving spatially. However, no addi-
tional data could be collected to support this.
Figure 28: Stability measurement of the emitter identified in Fig. 27.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 sem irradiation
35
4.3.5
Discussion
In this work, the electron beam diameter used was 6.3 nm, allowing for a large focus and high
resolution. In [9], the beam diameter was defocused to 33 nm (for the generation of SPE en-
sembles) or 1 µm (for the generation of individual SPE) with the argument of compromising
between maximizing the interaction cross section and localization accuracy. This compromise
suggests that their probability of defect generation within the h-BN layer has been higher due
to the larger cross-sectional area of interaction in the upper layers compared to our procedure,
which is supported by the electron trajectory simulations in Fig. 7. Furthermore, this supports
the claim that these defects are within the h-BN layers and not at the substrate, and it also sup-
ports the hypothesis stated about the origin of the large PL background that we have observed,
namely that it is due to defects being generated in the Si layer rather than the h-BN.
An interesting point from the work of [40] is that they successfully reproduced B centers with
ZPL at 436 nm but their procedure is slightly different in terms of irradiation energy, current,
and total exposure time, while their choice of h-BN is also HPHT-grown by Taniguchi [41] (used
also in [9]). Their study focuses only on the photophysical properties at cryogenic temperatures,
restricting our possibility for comparison with that of this work.
In [11], a thorough study was conducted in which both the HPHT-grown h-BN and the com-
mercial HQ Graphene platform were tested. This study addressed the generation of defects at
436 nm, at room temperature, and proposed through cathodoluminescence (CL) measurements
that their generation was related to the prior annealing treatment rather than the choice of h-BN
manufacturer. It was concluded that the presence of B centers upon electron irradiation was
dependent on the presence of emitters at 305 nm before irradiation. Through this study, they
showed that the emitters at 305 nm were created during the annealing procedure - annealing
performed at 1000◦C for 1 hour in a N2 atmosphere. Finally, it was argued through their data
that for highly pristine, high-quality h-BN, neither annealing nor irradiation changed the CL
properties of the flake, indicating that the generation of B centers can occur only for h-BN of a
certain level of purity. Thus, the analysis proposed that the defect of interest has a structure of
CBCN. In linking with this study, it supports the importance of treatment while presenting a
possible trade-off under certain atmospheres.
In this work, the tested treatments were 1) none and 2) pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere.
The B centers that have been successfully reproduced at room temperature have ZPL at 440 nm
on the sample having undergone pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere. This is consistent with
the proposed generation scheme of [11] that its generation depends on annealing and therefore
the restructuring of intrinsic defects. Our analysis suggested that defects have indeed evaporated
on the substrate after treatment 2 but at the expense of introducing a broad background emission
around the energy range with a main peak at 2 eV on the h-BN flake. This could be due to the
ambient atmosphere and should therefore be avoided with a change in the annealing atmosphere
to N2. Finally, considering that it is a van der Waals material, h-BN could be able to attract other
atoms or molecules simply by van der Waals interactions, not entirely ruling out the possibility
of future contamination.
Part of the analysis of this section was also dedicated to understanding the impact of treatment
and sample thickness on defect generation through atomic force microscopy measurements. The
thickness of the sample was thoroughly measured at each step of the process, and upon irradi-
ation, the thickness depended highly on the irradiation dose, which showed that for low doses,
the changes are almost none, and as the dose increases, the surface thickness changes accordingly.
On the substrate, the milling pattern became more distinct showing up to a 10 nm difference
in the center of irradiation for the largest dose. The AFM scans show clear circular deposition
at a radius of 2.5-3 µm around the irradiation center for each dose. The maximal deposition
is 15 nm for the highest dose. It also becomes evident from this that at the irradiation center,
the thickness is larger than the non-irradiated part. This suggests either material deposition or
structural change via the migration of atoms to this area.
The results thus far also show that for our patterning, we are certain that the B centers are
generated within an area of 4µm x 4µm, for an irradiation area of 1.5µm x 1.5 µm thus allowing
==PAGE:40==
36
experimental results
micrometer precision. This suggests that the pattern used in this work is adequate, but could be
improved by further reducing the irradiation area to allow for even higher precision.
Finally, two irradiation methodologies were tested to investigate the impact of irradiation by
passes versus by one pass with a longer exposure time.
The SEM images in 24 showed an
overall similar circular geometry but also showed contrast differences. In terms of PL analysis,
emitters were identified for the first methodology, employing the passes, while no emitter was
observed for the second methodology. However, the latter methodology is used in [9] and has
previously produced emitters. Thus, the current conclusion of this analysis is that the generation
is somewhat independent of the methodology for the parameters used in this work.
==PAGE:41==
5
C O N C LU S I O N A N D O U T LO O K
In this thesis, the generation of luminescent centers in the two-dimensional material hexago-
nal boron nitride has been investigated experimentally. The experimental results were studied
through the quantum emitter framework and in combination with CASINO simulations.
Through experimental investigations, the V−
B center was successfully reproduced through fo-
cused ion beam irradiation with oxygen ions and conditions were varied to investigate the impact
on the generation of defects. Here one of the three following treatments was performed: none,
pre-annealing at 400 ◦C in ambient atmosphere, and pre-annealing in graphite box. The lumi-
nescent center was identified through PL measurements under a 515nm excitation wavelength
for both no-treatment and annealing in ambient atmosphere treatment. However, under 405nm
excitation wavelength, the luminescent center was not identified, from which it was concluded
that the excitation is too much out of resonance and cannot probe the energy states enough to
allow for photoluminescence emission. It was shown that for pre-annealing in the graphite box,
the broad background emission became so important that no other emission was identified. It
was also shown that, under our conditions, xenon-irradiation did not successfully produce lu-
minescent centers. For the identified V−
B -defect, a dose dependence was determined showing,
for sample G1 x56y26, without treatment, an optimum value of 1014 ions/cm2 under 8 and 12
keV. For sample B1 x20y38, a dose dependence was also determined but without an identified
optimum. It would be advantageous to perform additional irradiations in which the dose span
is finer and spans over the supposedly optimum keeping the sample parameters as fixed as
possible.
In this work, the novel B center was successfully reproduced at room temperature with pre-
liminary indications of some of the photophysical properties. The zero-phonon line is confirmed
to be 440 nm, with its phonon sideband at 465 nm, i.e. at an energy difference of 155 meV. The
stability of this emitter is determined to 90 s, lower than the previously reported values of [9]
and [13]. However, this result is only based on one emitter and not a statistically significant
amount.
Although reproducible, systematic reproducibility was not achieved. Therefore, some changes,
consisting of material- and irradiation parameters, to the experimental protocol presented in
this thesis should be suggested.
The choice of hBN growth method will affect the number
of intrinsic defects in the structure responsible for the generation of the B center.
Through
previous work, HPHT growth conditions have been favorable but not a necessity if e.g. a pre-
annealing treatment is performed. A pre-annealing treatment is also advantageous to uniformize
the samples, to e.g. remove post-exfoliation residues, but it should be performed in an inert
atmosphere preferentially in a flow. This thesis showed that the ambient atmosphere as well
as the graphite box introduced a large PL background emission and thus a choice of future
atmosphere could be a N2-atmosphere, also presented in some other works on B centers [11].
The pre-annealing temperature used in this work was 400 ◦C but temperatures up to either 800
◦C or 1000◦C could be tested, referring to [39].
Through SEM and AFM, the impact of oxygen ion irradiation and electron irradiation on the
hBN flakes has been investigated. It can be concluded that both irradiation procedures alter
the top-most layers of the flakes at the irradiation spot, observed through images taken with
the secondary electrons collected by the TLD. For electron irradiation, an additional circular
area was also generated with a radius up to 3.8 µm from the center of irradiation. The AFM
measurements additionally enlightened that the change in contrast to darker colors on the SEM
images was linked to material deposition/removal. The nature of the deposited material has not
been confirmed but the photoluminescence measurements exhibit large PL emission around 2 eV,
previously associated with the presence of amorphous, not structured, carbon. Moreover, it was
37
==PAGE:42==
38
conclusion and outlook
confirmed by a combination of SEM images and AFM scans that, depending on the acceleration
voltage and total dose, the electron beam irradiation gave rise to thickness changes at the center
of the irradiation spot altering the PL signature and redeposition in the surrounding circular area.
While the effect of deposition at the edges was present for both treatments investigated during
the project, the pre-annealed samples showed clear milling at the irradiation center, whereas the
untreated samples showed signs of material accumulation. Through control experiments, it was
concluded that deposition does not occur on the substrate, where on the contrary there is a clear
distance-dependent milling with the deepest change at the irradiation center.
From the findings made during the project, a thickness dependence of the hBN for emitter
generation cannot be ruled out, as proper emitters have only been observed on flake x14y41
with a hBN thickness of 140 nm.
A point that was made in the project is the choice of beam diameter under electron beam
irradiation. Compared to [9], it was concluded that the choice of the beam diameter can be
used as a tunable parameter to generate more or fewer centers. Moreover, the broader, more
defocused beam might enhance the probability of defect generation in hBN at the expense of
some accuracy, which is why this should be tested in further work.
Finally, all measurements have been performed at room temperature in this thesis. In future
work, it might be of interest to dive into low-temperature measurements to assess whether the
generated luminescent centers have the same properties as the benchmarking article for low-
temperature measurements, to support their shared origin.
==PAGE:43==
A
A P P E N D I X
a.1
photoluminescence setup
a.1.1
Hardware list
Component
Hardware
Microscope
Spectrometer
SR-303i, Andor
EMCCD
Newton DU970P-BVF, Andor
iQblue
0405L-13A, Integrated Optics
PicoQuant
LDH-IB-520-B, PicoQuant
LPF blue, 420 nm
LPF green, 550 nm
SPF blue, 424 nm
SPF green, 532 nm
LP DM, 425 nm
DMLP425R, Thorlabs
DM, 532 nm
Objective #1
50X CFI60/0.6 NA, TU Plan Epi ELWD, Infinity Corrected, Nikon
Objective #2
XXXX, 100x/0.9NA, WD XX, Nikon
XY stage
APD
SPCM-AQRH-15-FC, Excelitas
Time correlator
Table 1: Overview of all hardware used in Fig. 8
a.1.2
Laser characterization
39
==PAGE:44==
40
appendix
a.1.3
Focus trade-off
Due to our DFM PL Setup, the sample and the laser cannot simultaneously be in focus optically,
and since the hBN Raman peak of the hBN is not strong enough for us to identify when we are
in focus, we must perform a constant trade-off between being in complete focus on the sample
and the laser. The power dependence measurement was performed first when the sample was in
focus such that the laser was rather out of focus, and secondly when the laser was in focus. The
resulting PL spectra differ from each other and a peak is observable when in laser focus, which
is not present otherwise, as shown in Fig. 23,29.
Figure 29: Intensity as a function of the laser power in continuous wave regime with (a) when the confocal
optical image is in focus on the sample. This suggests that the choice of focus greatly impacts
the resulting spectra that we can observe for this excitation wavelength. A plausible hypothesis
is that under a broadened laser beam, we excite too large of an area, reducing the SNR of peak
A in the main text.
==PAGE:45==
a.2 sample production
41
a.2
sample production
Position
Size
Pre Irr
Irr. type
Irr. doses
Post Irr.
Cleaning
Notes
(µm)
(nm)
(ions/cm2)
(nm)
Batch 1
G1
36.40 x 26.00
-
Oxygen
1.19 · 1011
15-18
None
Contamination
x56y26/1
(21.56 x 12.57)
to 3.75 · 1015
has occurred
between pre-char.
and irradiation.
G1
na
na
na
na
na
None
The flake was
x56y26/2
destroyed
mechanically by
pincet.
Th
30.62 x 19.33
na
Oxygen
na
15-22
Pre-annealing
Varying
x67y58/1
in graphite box
thicknesses. Th
was annealed
before irradiation.
Th
13.63 x 27.24
na
Xenon
na
na
Pre-annealing
Th was
x67y58/3
in graphite box
annealed before
irradiation.
B1
121.75 x 77.64
a. 49
Oxygen
There are 3
x20y38/1
(75.57 x 51.00)
c. 25
thicknesses on this
flake, denoted a, b,
c.
B1
126.5 x 94
140
Electron
Pre-annealing in
x14y41/1
ambient atmosphere
B1
19.5 x 18.5
25
None
Pre-annealing in
x20y33/1
ambient atmosphere
B3
143 x 120
a. 100
Electron
None
x16y71/1
b. 80
B3
68 x 78
32
Electron
None
x15y72/1
B3
36 x 27
64
None
None
x13y71/1
==PAGE:46==
42
appendix
a.3
pre-characterization
Here are shown PL-pre characterization as well as optical bright-field and dark-field images of
all samples not-included in the main text but supporting the evidence presented in the results
section.
B1 x20y33 #01
(a) 100x BF optical image
(b) 100x DF optical image
(c) 100x DF optical image
==PAGE:47==
a.4 ion irradiation
43
a.4
ion irradiation
a.4.1
Oxygen-ion irradiation without treatment
Sample of interest is G1 x56y26
==PAGE:48==
44
appendix
(a) Post-PL map under 405 nm excitation wavelength with 8 keV series highlighted.
(b) Post-PL map under 405 nm excitation wavelength with 12 keV series highlighted.
(c) Post-PL map under 515 nm excitation wavelength with 2, 5, and 8 keV series.
Figure 31: Sample G1 x56y26
==PAGE:49==
a.4 ion irradiation
45
a.4.2
Oxygen-ion irradiation with pre-annealing in graphite box
Sample of interest is Th x67y58 #1.
Figure 32: SEM image with resulting irradiation pattern for Th x67y58 #1.
Figure 33: AFM scan for Th x67y58 #1 after oxygen-ion irradiation.
==PAGE:50==
46
appendix
a.4.3
Xenon-ion irradiation with pre-annealing in graphite box
Sample of interest is Th x67y58 #3.
Figure 34: SEM image with resulting irradiation pattern for Th x67y58 #3.
a.4.4
Oxygen-ion irradiation with pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere
Sample of interest is B1 x20y38.
Figure 35: SEM image with resulting irradiation pattern for B1 x20y38. Highlighted are the 5 keV series
(green), the 8 keV series (blue), and the 12 keV series (red).
==PAGE:51==
a.4 ion irradiation
47
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 36: Post-PL maps under 405 nm excitation wavelength with (a) 5 keV series, (b) 8 keV series, and (c)
12 keV series for sample B1 x20y38.
==PAGE:52==
48
appendix
Figure 37: Post-AFM scan with 12 keV (black), 8 keV (red), and 5 keV (green) lines. The blue line is the
substrate
a.5
electron irradiation
a.5.1
Photoluminescence data for sample B3 x15y72 with no treatment
a.5.2
SEM doses for sample B1 x14y41 with pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere treatment
Species:
Acc. voltage:
Electrons,
10 kV
Electrons
15 kV
Electrons
30 kV
Sel. current:
13 nA
13 nA
13 nA
Passes
Dose (nC/µm2)
1
5.65
5.65
5.65
10
56.5
56.5
56.5
100
565
565
565
1000
5650
5650
5650
a.5.3
Dimensions of the geometry on SEM images
Series:
10 kV
15 kV
(Method 1)
15 kV
(Method 2)
30 kV
Dose (nC/µm2)
Ring diameter (µm)
5.65
3.1
4.5
4.4
NA
56.5
3.9
5.8
5.6
NA
565
4.1
6.5
6.5
NA
5650
6.8
7.4
7.3
17.5
a.5.4
Photoluminescence data for sample B1 x14y41 with pre-annealing in ambient atmosphere
treatment
==PAGE:53==
a.5 electron irradiation
49
(a)
(b)
Figure 38: Post-PL maps under 405 nm excitation wavelength for sample B3 x15y72.
==PAGE:54==
50
appendix
Figure 39: Post-PL map at room temperature under 405 nm laser excitation with (a) integration over range
1.5-3.1 eV (top), and 2.5-3.1 eV (bottom). The peak at 2.96 eV is due to the shoulder of the
excitation laser, and two broad peaks are identified at higher energies. In (b), another PL map
with an integration range of 2.5-3.1 eV around the spot where the broad peaks were identified
on (a). These are identified at 2.82 eV and 2.65 eV and are comparable to respectively ZPL and
PSB of a possible emitter corresponding to the one in [9].
==PAGE:55==
R E F E R E N C E S
[1]
Gabriel Popkin. “Scientists are close to building a quantum computer that can beat a
conventional one.” In: Science (Dec. 2016). doi: 10.1126/science.aal0442. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1126/science.aal0442.
[2]
Frank Arute et al. “Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting proces-
sor.” In: Nature 574 (2019), pp. 505–510. doi: 10.1038/s41586- 019- 1666-5. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5.
[3]
Katharina Bader et al. “Room temperature quantum coherence in a potential molecular
qubit.” In: Nature Communications 5.1 (2014), pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6304. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6304.
[4]
Igor Aharonovich, Dirk Englund, and Milos Toth. “Solid-state single-photon emitters.” In:
Nature Photonics 10 (2016), pp. 631–641. doi: 10 . 1038 / nphoton . 2016 . 186. url: https :
//doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2016.186.
[5]
T. Tran et al. “Quantum emission from hexagonal boron nitride monolayers.” In: Nature
Nanotech 11 (2016), pp. 37–41. doi: 10.1038/nnano.2015.242. url: https://doi.org/10.
1038/nnano.2015.242.
[6]
Ali Al-Juboori et al. “Quantum Key Distribution Using a Quantum Emitter in Hexagonal
Boron Nitride.” In: Advanced Quantum Technologies 6.9 (2023), p. 2300038. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1002/qute.202300038. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
1002/qute.202300038. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/qute.
202300038.
[7]
C. L. Degen, F. Reinhard, and P. Cappellaro. “Quantum sensing.” In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 89 (3
July 2017), p. 035002. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.89.035002. url: https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.89.035002.
[8]
Mehran Kianinia et al. “Generation of Spin Defects in Hexagonal Boron Nitride.” In: ACS
Photonics 7.8 (2020), pp. 2147–2152. doi: 10.1021/acsphotonics.0c00614.
[9]
Clarisse Fournier et al. “Position-controlled quantum emitters with reproducible emission
wavelength in hexagonal boron nitride.” In: Nature Communications 12.1 (June 2021), p. 3779.
issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467- 021- 24019- 6. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-021-24019-6.
[10]
Brian Shevitski et al. “Blue-light-emitting color centers in high-quality hexagonal boron
nitride.” In: Phys. Rev. B 100 (15 Oct. 2019), p. 155419. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.100.155419.
url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.100.155419.
[11]
Angus Gale et al. “Site-Specific Fabrication of Blue Quantum Emitters in Hexagonal Boron
Nitride.” In: ACS Photonics 9.6 (2022), pp. 2170–2177. doi: 10.1021/acsphotonics.2c00631.
[12]
Clarisse Fournier et al. “Two-Photon Interference from a Quantum Emitter in Hexagonal
Boron Nitride.” In: Phys. Rev. Appl. 19 (4 Apr. 2023), p. L041003. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevAppl
ied.19.L041003. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.19.L041003.
[13]
Ivan Zhigulin et al. “Photophysics of blue quantum emitters in hexagonal boron nitride.”
In: Materials for Quantum Technology 3.1 (Mar. 2023), p. 015002. doi: 10.1088/2633-4356/
acb87f. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2633-4356/acb87f.
[14]
Mark Fox. Optical Properties of Solids. 2nd. Oxford Master Series in Physics. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2010.
[15]
M. Fischer et al. “Controlled generation of luminescent centers in hexagonal boron nitride
by irradiation engineering.” In: Science Advances 7.8 (2021), eabe7138. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
abe7138. url: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.abe7138.
51
==PAGE:56==
52
references
[16]
G. Cassabois, P. Valvin, and B. Gil. “Hexagonal boron nitride is an indirect bandgap semi-
conductor.” In: Nature Photonics 10 (2016), pp. 262–266. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nphoton.2015.277.
[17]
Bernard Gil et al. In: Nanophotonics 9.11 (2020), pp. 3483–3504. doi: doi:10.1515/nanoph-
2020-0225. url: https://doi.org/10.1515/nanoph-2020-0225.
[18]
J Walker. “Optical absorption and luminescence in diamond.” In: Reports on Progress in
Physics 42.10 (1979), p. 1605. doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/42/10/001.
[19]
Michael Neumann et al. “Organic Molecules as Origin of Visible-Range Single Photon
Emission from Hexagonal Boron Nitride and Mica.” In: ACS Nano 17.12 (2023), pp. 11679–
11691. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.3c02348.
[20]
T. Tran, K. Bray, and M. et al. Ford. “Quantum emission from hexagonal boron nitride
monolayers.” In: Nature Nanotech 11, 37–41 (2016). doi: 10.1038/nnano.2015.242.
[21]
Moritz Fischer et al. “Combining experiments on luminescent centres in hexagonal boron
nitride with the polaron model and ab initio methods towards the identification of their
microscopic origin.” In: Nanoscale 15 (34 2023), pp. 14215–14226. doi: 10.1039/D3NR01511D.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D3NR01511D.
[22]
Moritz Fischer. “Single-Photon Emitters in 2D Materials.” English. PhD thesis. 2021. url:
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/single-photon-emitters-in-2d-materials.
[23]
Christopher Gerry and Peter Knight. Introductory Quantum Optics. Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
[24]
Rebecca E.K. Fishman et al. “Photon-Emission-Correlation Spectroscopy as an Analytical
Tool for Solid-State Quantum Defects.” In: PRX Quantum 4 (1 Mar. 2023), p. 010202. doi:
10.1103/PRXQuantum.4.010202. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PRXQuantum.4.
010202.
[25]
Anand Kumar et al. “Localized creation of yellow single photon emitting carbon com-
plexes in hexagonal boron nitride.” In: APL Materials 11.7 (July 2023), p. 071108. issn:
2166-532X. doi: 10.1063/5.0147560. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0147560.
[26]
Toan Trong Tran et al. “Robust Multicolor Single Photon Emission from Point Defects in
Hexagonal Boron Nitride.” In: ACS Nano 10.8 (2016), pp. 7331–7338. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.
6b03602. url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b03602.
[27]
Xiaohui Xu et al. “Creating Quantum Emitters in Hexagonal Boron Nitride Determinis-
tically on Chip-Compatible Substrates.” In: Nano Letters 21.19 (2021), pp. 8182–8189. doi:
10.1021/acs.nanolett.1c02640.
[28]
Tieshan Yang et al. “Spin defects in hexagonal boron nitride for strain sensing on nanopillar
arrays.” In: Nanoscale 14 (13 2022), pp. 5239–5244. doi: 10.1039/D1NR07919K. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1039/D1NR07919K.
[29]
Helios 5 Hydra UX DualBeam — thermofisher.com. https://www.thermofisher.com/order/
catalog/product/HYDRAUX. [Accessed 27-02-2024].
[30]
Microscopy Australia. SEM The Image. https://myscope.training/SEM_The_image. Ac-
cessed on 05-03-2024. 2021.
[31]
Azin Ziashahabi et al. “Electron Beam Induced Enhancement and Suppression of Oxida-
tion in Cu Nanoparticles in Environmental Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy.”
In: ACS Nanoscience Au 3.5 (2023), pp. 389–397. doi: 10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.3c00018.
[32]
T. Zabelotsky et al. Exploring methods for creation of Boron-vacancies in hexagonal Boron Nitride
exfoliated from bulk crystal. 2023. arXiv: 2305.05241 [physics.app-ph].
==PAGE:57==
references
53
[33]
James F. Ziegler, M.D. Ziegler, and J.P. Biersack. “SRIM – The stopping and range of
ions in matter (2010).” In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B:
Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 268.11 (2010). 19th International Conference on
Ion Beam Analysis, pp. 1818–1823. issn: 0168-583X. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 /
j.nimb.2010.02.091. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0168583X10001862.
[34]
R J Needs et al. “Continuum variational and diffusion quantum Monte Carlo calculations.”
In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 22.2 (Dec. 2010), p. 023201. doi: 10.1088/0953-
8984/22/2/023201.
[35]
Jindˇrich Kolorenc and Lubos Mitas. “Applications of quantum Monte Carlo methods in
condensed systems.” In: Reports on Progress in Physics 74.2 (Jan. 2011), p. 026502. doi: 10.
1088/0034-4885/74/2/026502.
[36]
Laura Casses. “Near-field exploration of light-matter interactions on gold and van der
Waals materials.” English. PhD thesis. 2022.
[37]
P. Eaton and P. West. Atomic Force Microscopy. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[38]
Hexagonal Boron Nitride (h-BN). https://www.hqgraphene.com/h-BN.php. [Accessed: 29-02-
2024].
[39]
Yongliang Chen et al. “Annealing of blue quantum emitters in carbon-doped hexagonal
boron nitride.” In: Applied Physics Letters 123.4 (July 2023), p. 041902. issn: 0003-6951. doi:
10.1063/5.0155311. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/apl/article-pdf/doi/10.1063/
5.0155311/18056302/041902\_1\_5.0155311.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.
0155311.
[40]
Jake Horder et al. “Coherence Properties of Electron-Beam-Activated Emitters in Hexag-
onal Boron Nitride Under Resonant Excitation.” In: Phys. Rev. Appl. 18 (6 Dec. 2022),
p. 064021. doi: 10 . 1103 / PhysRevApplied . 18 . 064021. url: https : / / link . aps . org /
doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.18.064021.
[41]
T. Taniguchi and K. Watanabe. “Synthesis of high-purity boron nitride single crystals under
high pressure by using Ba–BN solvent.” In: Journal of Crystal Growth 303.2 (2007), pp. 525–
529. issn: 0022-0248. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrysgro.2006.12.061. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022024807000486.
