==PAGE:1==
Investigating the impact of Alternative Splicing
across multiple Proteomics Studies
Master Thesis in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
Author: Bernat Godayol Farran
Supervisor: Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Alternative splicing is a fundamental biological process, allowing a single gene to produce multiple isoforms
and thus conducting multiple cellular functions. Furthermore, it has been linked to relevant biological roles
such as cell fate determination and disease pathogenesis. Despite isoforms have been widely studied in the
field of transcriptomics, they have been overlooked in proteomics studies. Indeed, an intense debate persists
regarding the presence of alternative spliced isoforms in the proteome.
In this context, this study has systematically analysed the frequency of isoform changes across 37 proteomics
datasets, employing a rigorously validated methodology based on linear models. Additionally, this research
has conducted a comparative analysis between changes in splicing and protein abundance to elucidate their
relative impact and frequency.
Our results reveal that changes in splicing are frequent across datasets, specifically at a comparable
magnitude to variations in abundance. Moreover, our investigation has identified a confounding effect
associated with the total abundance of samples, impacting both alternative splicing and abundance analyses.
Overall, this study underscores the prevalence of alternative splicing in the proteome and emphasizes the
necessity to examine splicing changes when analyzing proteomics data.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my thesis supervisor Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup. His
guidance, sincere feedback and motivation have been a great source of learning and inspiration. Moreover, I
would also like to acknowledge the collaboration of Mikkel Swartz, whose insights and contributions have
played a key role in this investigation.
I would also like to thank Clara Gaja, Joan Cortés, Carla Soleta, Pol Hulsbus, Fiona Melzer and Lluïsa Mas
for their friendship and support, especially during the last month of my thesis. The discussions and cross
feedback have been extremely helpful. Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to Montserrat Farran,
Vicenç Godayol and Martina Godayol for their unconditional support.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This project comprises the research and findings of my Master's Thesis, undertaken to fulfil the
requirements for the M.Sc. in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology at the Technical University of Denmark.
This thesis accounts for 35 ECTS points and was conducted from August 28th, 2023, to February 28th,
2024. The project was executed within the Department of Health Technology Bioinformatics. Initially
proposed by Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup, the project involved the participation of two students: myself and
Mikkel Swartz. Although our tasks were similar, Mikkel Swartz focused on studying Alternative Splicing
using Isoform Abundance data, while I focused on peptide abundance data.
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
AS
Alternative Splicing
MS
Mass Spectroscopy
PSM
Peptide-Spectrum Match
FDR
False Discovery Rate
DIU
Differential Isoform Usage
DGA Differential Gene Abundance
MAD Median Absolute Deviation
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1. Introduction
3
1.1 Molecular Biology Background
3
1.1.1 Central Dogma of Molecular Biology
3
One gene, one protein?
4
1.1.2 Alternative Splicing
5
Mechanisms behind Alternative Splicing
5
Relevance of Alternative Splicing
7
1.2 Proteomics
8
1.2.1 Bottom-up proteomics
9
Steps in Bottom-up Proteomics
9
Limitations associated with Bottom-up proteomics
11
1.2.2 Comparative proteomics
13
Linear Models for Comparative Proteomics
13
2.4 Current Trends in Alternative Splicing and Proteomics
15
2.4.1 Prevalence of Alternative Splicing in the Proteome: A long debate
15
2.4.2 New Advances to evaluate Alternative Splicing in Proteomics
16
2.5 Aim of this project
17
2. Materials and Methods
18
2.1 Curation of Datasets
18
2.2 R environment
18
2.3 Differential Isoform Usage
19
2.4 Differential Gene Abundance
20
2.5 Validation
21
2.5.1 Total Abundance Cofactor Analysis
21
Significant Genes associated to each Variable
21
Significant genes in Models with and without Total Abundance Cofactor
22
2.5.2 Background Noise Analysis
23
2.5.3 False Discovery Rate Analysis
24
2.5.4 Minimum Number of Peptides
24
2.6 Comparison between DIU and DGA
25
2.7 Comparison between DIU using peptide and Isoform data
25
==PAGE:7==
3. Results
26
3.1 Data curation
26
3.2 Validation
26
3.2.1 Total Abundance Cofactor
26
Significant genes associated with each variable
27
Significant Genes in Models with and without Total Abundance Cofactor
28
3.2.2 Background Noise
30
Background Noise Results for Differential Isoform Usage with Peptide Data
31
Background Noise Results for Differential Gene Abundance
33
3.2.3 False Discovery Rate (FDR)
34
3.2.4 Minimum Number of Peptides
37
3.3 Comparison of DGA and DIU using Peptide Data
38
3.4 Comparison of DIU using Peptide vs. Isoform Data
40
4. Final Discussion
43
4.1 Perspective
43
4.2 Future perspectives
46
Bibliography
47
2
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
1. Introduction
In the following section we introduce the theoretical foundations relevant to our research, organized in four
different parts. The initial three parts correspond to the main areas involved in our study; biology,
proteomics and statistical tools. In each of these sections, we present the topics relevant to our research
project. The last part delves into the recent advancements in alternative splicing and proteomics research,
providing the required and updated context for presenting the results of our study.
1.1 Molecular Biology Background
This section briefly describes the Central dogma of Molecular Biology, then it delves into Alternative
Splicing (AS) as precursor of Protein diversity in Eukaryotic organisms, and it finishes describing the
Proteome Dynamics.
1.1.1 Central Dogma of Molecular Biology
The Central Dogma of Molecular Biology is a hypothesis proposed by Francis Crick, describing the flow of
genetic information inside a biological system. This theory declares that genetic information flows from
DNA to RNA, and from RNA to Protein (Crick, 1970). Additionally, the Central Dogma also proposes a
unidirectionality of this transfer of information, meaning that once the genetic information is transferred
from DNA to RNA, and then from RNA to protein, it cannot flow back from protein to RNA or DNA
(Ille et al., 2022). The Central Dogma describes three general transfers of biological sequential information:
DNA replication, Transcription and Translation. As this study focuses only on eukaryotic organisms, we
briefly describe the three general transfers of biological information:
During DNA replication, the DNA molecule, which stores the genetic instructions for all the vital
functions of a cell, is replicated to create two identical copies. Throughout this process, the DNA molecule
is unwounded by helicases and each strand serves as a template for the synthesis of a new complementary
strand by DNA polymerase (Stuart, 2013). This process is crucial to ensure that each new cell formed during
cell division has an entire set of genetic information, contained within the genome.
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1. Illustration depicting the Central Dogma of Molecular Biology. The general transfers (replication, transcription and
translation) are depicted in blue. Apart from the three general processes described, two special transfers depicted in red were
discovered later: The reverse transcription (RNA to DNA) and the RNA replication (RNA to RNA).
The next step described in the Central Dogma is Transcription. During this process, the DNA molecule is
converted into a transient messenger molecule called mRNA. To do this the RNA polymerase unwinds the
DNA double helix and one strand is used as a template to synthesize a complementary RNA molecule
(Borukhov & Nudler, 2008). After transcription, the RNA molecule is matured through several steps
involved in the post-transcriptional modifications of the RNA. During this phase, the non-coding regions
are removed, and the ends of the nucleotide sequence are chemically modified to create a mature mRNA
molecule that can be translated into protein.
The last step described is Translation. In this process, the ribosome reads the mRNA molecule in groups of
three nucleotides and uses this information to create an amino acid sequence that will potentially lead to the
synthesis of a protein (Eckner et al., 1991).
One gene, one protein?
After reviewing the main concepts of the Central Dogma of Molecular Biology, it could be logical to assume
that one gene produces a single protein. Indeed, this was widely believed for many years (Valdivia, 2007).
However, several lines of evidence contributed to a shift of paradigm. For instance, when the initial drafts of
the human genome were generated, the researchers were surprised by the low number of genes.
Surprisingly, we have almost the same number of genes as the tiny worm Caenorhabditis elegans (Pennisi,
2005).
Looking at the numbers, the Human Genome has approximately 25000 protein-coding genes.
However, humans produce around 90000 different types of proteins. With these numbers in hand, it
becomes clear that the axiom One gene, one protein is not accurate (Valdivia, 2007).
4
==PAGE:10==
To be able to redefine the axiom, we need to introduce the concept of protein isoform. A protein isoform is
defined as a member of a set of very similar proteins that are encoded by a single gene or gene family. Among
this set of protein isoforms, many perform similar roles but some of them have unique functions.
These isoforms - or also called proteoforms - can arise from a different number of processes related to DNA
allelic variations or post-transcriptional modifications.
More specifically, the primary mechanisms
contributing to the generation of isoforms include alternative splicing, the utilization of distinct
transcriptional start sites, and variations in transcriptional termination by polyadenylation (Smith &
Kelleher, 2013).
In our research project, we particularly focus on the study and detection of alternative
splicing events.
Finally, with all this information in hand, the revised axiom is presented as
One gene, many isoforms.
1.1.2 Alternative Splicing
In the previous section, we briefly introduced that, in eukaryotic organisms, the RNA undergoes some
post-transcriptional modifications before being translated into a protein. One of the main steps involved in
producing mature mRNA is splicing. When the pre-mRNA has been transcribed it contains several coding
and non-coding regions. During splicing,
the non-coding regions (introns) are removed from the
pre-mRNA molecule, and the coding regions (exons) are joined together to form the mature mRNA
transcript (Kelemen et al., 2013).
Mechanisms behind Alternative Splicing
The splicing process is carried out by a protein complex called the spliceosome. The spliceosome catalyzes
two main transesterification reactions, one removes the intron by cleaving the 5’ site, and the other one joins
the adjacent exons by ligating the 3’ splice site. By doing this, the introns are removed and a uniform mRNA
made of exons is generated. This complex machinery of proteins recognizes specific sequences at both ends
of introns called splice sites. It is interesting to mention that at least 15% of human genetic diseases emerge
from mutations in these sites (Matlin et al., 2005).
These splicing sites can be classified into two different types based on their similarity to the splicing site
consensus sequence. First, Strong splicing sites are very similar to the consensus sequence and are
consistently detected by the spliceosome, resulting in constitutive splicing.
5
==PAGE:11==
This means that introns containing these sequences will be most probably spliced. On the other hand, Weak
splice sites are not always detected by the spliceosome machinery and often result in the phenomenon
known as Alternative Splicing. In this process, weak splice sites are partially utilized in intron removal and
exon ligation reactions, generating different mRNA variants that will eventually lead to multiple isoforms
(Hastings et al., 2007).
Alternative splicing is a highly regulated process. As we have seen, the intrinsic splicing sequences (Strong
and Weak splicing sites) play a significant role in determining whether Constitutive or Alternative splicing
will occur. Nonetheless, they are not the only actors in regulating this process.
A group of proteins known as Splicing factors bind to specific target sequences located near the splicing
sites in both introns and exons. These specific sequences can be classified into exon splicing enhancers and
silencers and intron splicing enhancers and silencers. For example, when a splicing factor binds an exon
splicing silencer, the exon will not be included in the mature mRNA splicing. The same mechanism applies
to introns; when a splicing factor binds an intron enhancer, the intron will be included in the mature
mRNA splicing. Overall, we can observe how alternative splicing is highly regulated involving an interplay
between specific sequences and regulatory proteins (Marasco & Kornblihtt, 2022).
Figure 2. Illustration depicting the main Alternative Splicig
mechanisms and the mature mRNA
products (Verta & Jacobs, 2022).
6
==PAGE:12==
Five different patterns or modes have been described for Alternative Splicing, all of them are depicted in
Figure 2. Each one represents a different way in which exons and introns are spliced, generating a distinct
mRNA product. These modes include: exon skipping, intron retention, alternative 5' and 3' splice sites, and
mutually exclusive exons (Cartegni et al., 2002).
Relevance of Alternative Splicing
After having introduced the mechanisms of alternative splicing, it's crucial to understand its significance and
implications. In the next section, our main focus will be on addressing this question: What roles does
alternative splicing play in eukaryotic organisms?
As we have previously introduced, there is a great mismatch between the number of protein-coding genes in
our genome and the size of the proteome. Specifically, the number of alternative splicing events in the
human genome is estimated to be extensive, with studies suggesting that up to 95% of multi-exon genes
undergo alternative splicing . However, 60% of the genes in the fruit fly genome and only 2.9% of genes in
the green alga experience alternative splicing, implying that Alternative Splicing is deeply related to the
Organism Complexity (Yang et al., 2021). With this observation, we can unveil the main reason why
Alternative Splicing is relevant: It can be considered as a main mechanism contributing to Complexity and
Diversity.
Specifically, since alternative splicing expands the proteome by generating multiple isoforms from the same
gene, the organism is able to express proteins with different structural and functional properties, allowing
the adjustment of cellular processes and adaptation to different environmental conditions.
This complexity generated by Alternative Splicing is crucial in a large number of biological processes. For
example, AS is crucial for the correct development and differentiation of tissues and cells. For example, it
has been shown that during neuronal differentiation, Alternative Splicing regulates the metabolic pathways,
signaling activity and centriolar dynamics (Su et al., 2018). Another example has been observed in the
differentiation process of immune cells. In this case, it has been observe that Alternative Splicing plays a
central role in the differentiation of Dendritic cells, Macrophages and Natural killer cells (Z. Su & Huang,
2021).
Apart from differentiation, Alternative Splicing has also been linked other vital processes. One of the most
well-known is the regulation of cell fate throughout the modulation of apoptosis.
7
==PAGE:13==
Through Alternative Splicing, different isoforms of key apoptotic regulators such as caspases, apoptotic
receptors are generated. By regulating the balance between anti-apoptotic and pro-apoptotic isoforms, the
cell fate is determined (Z. Su & Huang, 2021).
Another interesting fact is that Alternative Splicing seems to have a key role in evolutionary adaptation.
An illustrative example of this, can be found in the Agouti gene of deer mice. In these animals, the selective
incorporation of noncoding exons, which augments protein translation, produces a lighter color of this
specie living in Sandy habitats (Mallarino et al., 2016).
Finally, one of the main factors driving significant interest in Alternative Splicing lies in its relationship with
the onset and progression of diverse diseases. Among theses various disorders, it is possible to find: cancer,
diabetes, obesity, neurodegenerative diseases, autoinmune diseases etc. To put an example, through
alternative splicing oncogenic isoforms can be generated. These oncogenic variants can be found as
signaling molecules and transcription factors altering cell proliferation, survival and metastasis. As an
example, the splicing factor SRSF1 has been shown to be upregulated in breast cancers, acting as an
oncogene in mammary epithelial cell transformation (Anczuków et al., 2015).
As we have shown, Alternative Splicing has a meaningful role in a large number of biological processes.
Therefore, studying and investigating Alternative Splicing can yield not only a better understanding of the
molecular mechanism of eukaryotic cells, but also insights on the development of new targeted therapies.
1.2 Proteomics
After exploring the biological foundations of our work, the next step consists of presenting the proteomic
background related to our study. This section is divided into two main topics. In the first section, we
introduce the concept of bottom-up proteomics, the steps involved and the main limitations are introduced.
In the second section, we give an overview of the two quantitative proteomics studies carried out in this
work.
8
==PAGE:14==
1.2.1 Bottom-up proteomics
Proteins are vital components studied for their key function in the majority of biological processes within
the cell. Moreover, in recent years, there has been a clear trend towards not only studying individual proteins
but also comprehensively characterizing the entire proteome. By investigating the proteome, we can get
insights into how proteins interact, regulate pathways and change between different physiological states. To
do this, proteomics has emerged as the discipline that not only tries to identify the proteins present in a
specific proteome but also tries to characterize the dynamics of a complex environment.
Among the different methodologies within proteomics, Mass spectroscopy (MS) procedures have become
the most high-throughput, reliable and accurate method for investigating the proteome. These procedures
can be divided into two main fields: bottom-up and top-down proteomics. The main difference between
these two techniques lies in the nature of the analyte. In bottom-up proteomics, the analyte is a peptide,
while in top-down proteomics, the analyte is a protein. Bottom-up proteomics takes advantage of the fact
that peptides are more easily separated than proteins, ionize better and are fragmented in a more predictable
way (Dupree et al., 2020).
Since all the proteomics datasets used in this study have been generated through bottom-up proteomics, the
next sections will cover the main steps and limitations involved in this approach.
Steps in Bottom-up Proteomics
The first step in bottom-up proteomics is the sample preparation (Figure 3 - 0). In this stage, proteins are
extracted from the biological sample. After extraction, proteins are usually denatured to unfold their tertiary
structure and the disulfide bonds are broken. Moreover, reduction agents are added to prevent protein
aggregation. Furthermore, one of the popular practices during this step involves the depletion of the most
common proteins. By doing this, a larger number of proteins can be detected, as the signal suppression
generated by common proteins is drastically reduced.
In the next step, the denatured proteins are enzymatically digested into peptides using a protease (Figure 3 -
1). The most commonly used is Trypsin, which cleaves after lysine or arginine residues.
9
==PAGE:15==
After digestion, the resulting peptide mixture is complex and needs to be separated (Figure 3 - 2) to
improve peptide detection in the MS. To do this, High-Performance Liquid chromatography (LC) is
typically used and it separates the peptides based on hydrophobicity, size and charge.
Figure 3. Illustration depicting the main steps involved in Bottom-up proteomics.
The separated peptides are transferred to the Mass Spectrometer (Figure 3 - 3) for analysis. Both for
Top-Down and Bottom-Up proteomics, the configuration of MS selected is tandem MS (MS/MS). In this
process, the MS1 spectra are employed to determine the intact mass of a peptide by measuring the
mass-charge ratio (m/z). In the next MS2, the peptide is fragmented and ions are produced. With the m/z of
the ions produced, future amino acid identification is possible (Figure 3 - 4) (Dupree et al., 2020).
Next, the MS/MS spectra are searched against a protein sequence database to identify the specific peptide
(Figure 3 - 5). Specifically, the search algorithm compares the given spectra to other theoretical spectra
collected in the database. The database is generated by performing in silico theoretical digestions and
MS/MS analysis of all the possible resulting peptides from a specific genome. The search outputs a list of
peptide-spectrum
matches (PSMs) between the observed spectrum pattern and the theoretical
fragmentation pattern. So, for each peptide, a list of potential matches is generated (Dupree et al., 2020).
Apart from peptide identification, mass-spectrometry results can also quantify the corresponding peptide
abundances. In order to quantify them, there are two main approaches. In methods that use isotopic labels,
a mass tag is associated to the analyte, which then is recognized by the mass spectrometer and facilitates the
determination of the relative abundance. On the other hand, in label-free approaches, the abundance is
inferred from the intensity of the signal in the mass spectra (Blein-Nicolas & Zivy, 2016).
10
==PAGE:16==
Usually, the main interest in proteomics research is not at the peptide level but at the protein level. This
means that the proteins present in the sample proteome need to be inferred. To do that, there are different
algorithms that work with grouping the PSMs from a specific peptide sequence and mapping them back to
the protein. Once the proteins are identified, their abundances can be also inferred by using different
methods such as summing the peptide abundances associated with each protein.
Limitations associated with Bottom-up proteomics
Now, we have seen the different procedures involved in Bottom-up proteomics. Despite it has been
consolidated as a valuable tool, it is subject to various factors that may introduce noise and bias in the
generated results. In this section, we provide a brief overview of some of the main factors that might limit
the performance of Bottom-up proteomics. It is important to mention, that some of these obstacles will be
analysed in our study in the process of validation of our results.
One of the primary sources of noise and variability emerges during the process of sample preparation.
Some of the main obstacles are incomplete lysis, contamination during sample handling and the use of
chemicals that can interfere with the following analysis. For example, detergent contamination can reduce
the column capacity and have poor ionization in both ESI and MALDI. Another example is bound to the
depletion methods used for reducing the most common proteins. Such methods can also generate the
nonselective loss of other relevant proteins. These examples introduce chemical noise that interferes with
posterior analyses leading to fluctuations, spectral artifacts and missing peptides (Dupree et al., 2020b).
Another of the most common limitations is related to the use of trypsin as the main protease for digesting
proteins before HPLC/MS. There are several reasons why the unique use of trypsin is restricting the full
comprehension of the proteome. For example, one of the main issues arises from the fact that nearly
one-third of the peptides produced by tryptic digestion are under 6 amino acids in length, while most of the
peptides detected by MS are between 7-35 amino acids. This will produce missing peptides that will
generate undetectable protein regions. This bias may lead to the overrepresentation of certain proteins in the
results. Another obstacle related to trypsin, and specially related to our project, is the generation of negative
biased results towards the splice junction peptides. In this case, the problem lies in the fact that the
nucleotides surrounding exons are rich in lysine and arginine coding triplets. This makes the abundance of
splice junction peptides remarkably low (Miller & Smith, 2023).
Another source of noise is related to the analytical equipment performance. This variation can arise from
factors such as detector instability, fluctuations in ionization efficiency, or instrument drift (Anderle et al.,
11
==PAGE:17==
2004). These issues can lead to fluctuations in signal intensity and reduced spectral quality, affecting the
trustworthiness of MS results.
Another main challenge is related to the wrong peptide identifications that will produce false positive
discoveries, where peptides that do not exist in the sample are mistakenly detected. These wrongly assigned
peptides are due to various factors. Apart from the already explained sources of variation and bias, other
reasons are incomplete or inaccurate databases and imprecise algorithms. This issue has direct consequences
in both identifying and quantifying proteins. Thus, to assess the quality of the peptides generated, the
metric False Discovery Rate (FDR) was introduced. When a PSM is generated, the degree of matching is
assessed by a software-specific score. If this score is below a certain threshold, the PSM is considered false.
Then, the FDR is calculated as the ratio between false PSMs and the total number of PSMs. Therefore, the
lower the FDR, the more trustworthy the peptide (Goloborodko et al., 2010).
Another substantial limitation in bottom-up proteomics appears during the protein inference process.
Specifically, one of the main challenges is related to the presence of Shared peptides. This means that
multiple proteins share a common peptide, creating the dilemma of assigning the peptide to a specific
protein. This complicates the accurate detection of individual proteins and limits the ability to distinguish
between protein isoforms or similar proteins (Miller & Smith, 2023).
Finally, one source of bias that is examined in this study is the role of the sample Total Abundance. Even
though it has not been extensively reviewed, Ryu et al. (2014) introduced it and gave a potential explanation
of why it’s important to take into account. The problem arises from varying total numbers of quantified
peptides and the subsequent unequal number of missing peptides across samples.
A missing peptide can
appear due to low peptide abundance (intensity-dependent), total abundance of the sample (quantitative
dependent) and random reasons. Specifically, missing peptides due to total abundance implies that the
sample quality was not good enough to yield more peptides. Therefore, it cannot directly be assumed that
peptides were missing due to a lower abundance but to the overall low total abundance from the low-quality
sample. In summary, these studies suggest that is relevant to differentiate between intensity-dependent and
total quantification-dependent missing mechanisms to avoid bias in the posterior analysis.
12
==PAGE:18==
1.2.2 Comparative proteomics
The main focus of this investigation has been the comparative study of the proteome between different
experimental conditions. Specifically, we are particularly interested in analysing changes in the proteome
at two different levels. Firstly, we aim to detect shifts at the overall protein level and secondly, we are also
interested in identifying changes in the isoform patterns and detecting splicing events.
For comparing the proteome at the protein level, the overall protein abundance linked to a specific gene was
compared. While this type of analysis is commonly known as Differential Protein Expression, we opted to
term it Differential Gene Abundance (DGA) analysis to emphasize the notion of evaluating the collective
protein products of particular genes. On the other hand, for comparing the proteomes at the isoform level,
the analysis was carried out using two different abundances: peptide and isoform (see IsoBayes in Current
Trends in Alternative Splicing and Proteomics). We named this type of analysis Differential Isoform Usage
(DIU)
While each analysis delves into distinct layers of the proteome, both methodologies rely on the application
of linear models to compare abundance data. For this reason, the following section briefly introduces the
statistical theory required for comprehending our results.
Linear Models for Comparative Proteomics
Linear models have become a very popular tool in the analysis of transcriptomics and genomics data due to
their simplicity and computational efficiency. As a result, they have emerged as one commonly employed
tool for analyzing proteomics data as well (Lin et al., 2022).
These models explore the relationships between the response variables and the explanatory variables. In
proteomics, the response variable is typically based on abundances, which can correspond to peptide,
protein or isoform. On the other hand, explanatory variables can consist of both continuous (e.g. age,
weight) or discrete variables (e.g. sample group, cell type). Apart from the main predictor variables, cofactors
can also be included. These variables account for potential confounding effects or sources of variability. In
constructing the regression model, each variable's influence on the response variable is quantified through
coefficients, indicating the strength and direction of the relationship (Law et al., 2020). Equation 1 describes
the general expression of a linear model:
13
==PAGE:19==
Where
represents the response variable,
describes the explanatory variables,
is the intercept,
for
are the coefficients for the
explanatory variables and finally,
is the error term. To illustrate
how the expression from above applies in a typical proteomics study, let’s consider one model with one
explanatory variable (Equation 2):
Where
can take Peptide, Isoform or Protein values, and
refers to the sample group.
This model is applied individually to each peptide, gene, or isoform. Once, the model is fitted and the
coefficients are estimated, the next step consists of performing statistical tests to determine whether the
differences in abundance between sample groups are statistically significant. This consists of testing whether
the coefficients associated with each variable (in our example, with the group variable) are significantly
different from zero. A coefficient significantly different from zero indicates that there is an association
between the response and the explanatory variable.
Common statistical tests used in proteomics studies include t-tests, ANOVA, or more advanced tools. One
of the most used packages for comparative studies is Limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). This library provides
advanced tools for conducting both DGA and DIU. For example in DGA, Limma employs an empirical
Bayes method to moderate the standard errors of the estimated coefficients and calculates a new t-statistic for
each coefficient. This borrowing of information across peptides or isoforms shrinks the variance estimates
towards a general value, making them more reliable, especially for peptides or isoforms with low expression
or small sample sizes. After calculating the new t-statistic, Limma calculates the p-values ( pAdj)for each gene.
If the
pAdj is lower than the threshold of
0.05, the gene can be considered as significantly differently
abundant when comparing between groups.
On the other hand for the DIU analysis, the approach is different. To test for differences between the
peptide/isoform usage, it tests if the coefficients estimated for each peptide/isoform differ with the rest of
the peptide/isoform coefficients of the same gene. The main approach consists of performing an F-test,
then, a p-value is calculated and the Benjamin-Hochberg procedure is carried out to determine the FDR
value for each gene. FDR values under 0.05 are deemed as significantly spliced.
14
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Current Trends in Alternative Splicing and Proteomics
After reviewing the main theoretical aspects of AS and Proteomics, this section describes the current trends
in the intersection between these two topics. Its objective is to depict the scientific gaps and questions that
our study seeks to address.
2.4.1 Prevalence of Alternative Splicing in the Proteome: A long debate
Due to the advances in high-throughput technologies like RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), the prevalence of
AS has been widely studied in transcriptomics. A full catalogue of AS transcripts has been generated and the
differential usage of transcripts has been acknowledged as a critical regulatory mechanism in multiple
biological processes. Nonetheless, the relevance of AS as a driving force of proteome complexity and its
functional implications still remains a matter of debate (Reixachs‐Solé & Eyras, 2022).
Due to the
significantly smaller amount of spliced genes in MS studies in comparison to the transcriptome analysis, two
distinct positions have been established in the scientific community (Manuel et al., 2023).
On the one hand, a group of studies challenges the idea that AS contributes to protein diversity (Tress
et al., 2017). One argument they propose is that the majority of genes express a single predominant main
transcript across cell lines, leading to the detection of only one specific isoform in MS (Tress et al., 2017).
Furthermore, they also argue that the low levels of Alternative Splicing variants at the protein level are
attributed to the fact that exons do not seem to be under selective pressure, and thus the majority of
alternative spliced transcripts are unlikely to be translated (Abascal et al., 2015, Tress et al., 2017). Other
studies even suggest that AS transcripts may not have a relevant function as protein (Del Pozo et al., 2021).
On the other hand, another group of studies supports the idea that even though there is not strong evidence
of AS isoforms at the MS level, it cannot be inferred that AS variants do not play a key functional
role and are not present in the proteome (Blencowe, 2017). Among these studies, different explanations
have been given for the lack of similarity between the transcriptomics and proteomics results. For example,
Blencowe pointed out the need to cautiously interpret the low detection degree of protein isoforms when
using MS, as their identification is definitely influenced by the coverage and limitations of this technology
(Blencowe, 2017b). An additional hypothesis states that the majority of AS studies in proteomics are carried
out in steady-state systems, contrarily to RNA-seq studies that compare different physiological conditions
(Nusinow et al., 2020).
15
==PAGE:21==
One more explanation for the divergence between transcriptomics and proteomics results lies in
post-splicing regulatory mechanisms governing protein abundance (Reixachs‐Solé & Eyras, 2022b). For
example, translation is controlled by global mechanisms and mRNA-specific systems. Global regulatory
mechanisms include reversible protein phosphorylation of initation factors like eIF2 and eIF4F (Gebauer et
al., 2012). Alternatively, mRNA-specific systems include, inhibitory secondary structures, upstream ORFs
and internal ribosome entry sequences (IRES) (Scarpin et al., 2022). In some cases these mechanisms may
result in certain isoforms that are detectable at the transcriptome level being absent in the proteome.
Overall, the prevailing uncertainty regarding the prevalence of alternative splicing in proteomes may impact
the fact that only 2% of proteomics studies currently consider and analyse isoforms (K.Vitting-Seerup,
personal communication, December 11, 2023).
2.4.2 New Advances to evaluate Alternative Splicing in Proteomics
To address the limitations mentioned in assessing AS in proteomics studies, new approaches are emerging.
One new approach called proteogenomics consists of integrating RNA-seq data in proteomics studies.
This methodology has been quite useful in decreasing peptide mapping uncertainty, augmenting
quantitative accuracy and finding novel peptides (Manuel et al., 2023b).
One advancement to enhance the detection of splicing events in proteomics is related to the use of new
proteases. As we introduced in the Limitations associated with bottom-up proteomics section, the usage of
Trypsin is related to a negative bias towards detecting and quantifying splice junction peptides. To address
this issue, new proteases such as LysC, AspN, GluC and chymotrypsin are proposed to unveil the missing
fractions of the proteome and detect new peptides (Giansanti et al., 2016).
In addition to these advancements, there are new bioinformatic tools that offer novel insights into the role of
isoforms in proteomics. One such tool is IsoBayes, which employs a Bayesian framework to infer the
presence or absence at the Isoform level. Furthermore, it leverages mass spectrometry (MS) data and has the
capability to integrate transcriptomics data (if available), thereby enhancing the accuracy of isoform
inference (Tiberi, S., 2023).
16
==PAGE:22==
2.5 Aim of this project
After providing the theoretical background and defining the current gaps and questions within the field, we
proceed to describe the principal research objectives of this project.
The primary objective of this research is to characterise and evaluate the occurrence of undescribed
alternative splicing events at a peptide level, across various proteomics datasets. To achieve this goal,
developing and validating a methodology capable of detecting alternative splicing events was crucial.
Additionally, during this research, we decided to add two additional goals. The first one involved studying
and comparing changes in protein abundance with changes in splicing, while the second one was focused on
assessing the impact of the Total Abundance confounder.
17
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
2. Materials and Methods
The following section describes the methods employed for analysing and validating our research objectives.
This includes a description of the data collection procedures, the computational environment used, and
through the distinct analyses used to assess our findings and validate our methodology.
2.1 Curation of Datasets
The proteomics datasets used in this study were obtained from the publicly available repository PRIDE
(Perez‐Riverol et al., 2021).
Then, a meticulous annotation and filtering process was conducted using
information retrieved from both PRIDE and systematic literature searches. Datasets were filtered based on
these criteria: First, datasets should be properly annotated, so that groups and experimental conditions could
be inferred from the sample naming. Second, the studies had to cover the investigation of different
experimental conditions. After filtering studies, a tabular file mapping each study to its comparisons
between sample groups was generated.
In addition, the following metadata was collected for each study: Organism, Year of Study, Instrument, the
utilisation of MaxQuant software, the False Discovery Rate associated with the MS study both for gene and
peptide data, and the number of replicates. In this case, metadata was also retrieved from both PRIDE and
systematic literature searches.
2.2 R environment
This project was entirely developed using R, a powerful tool for carrying out statistical computing,
performing data science tasks and plotting graphics (R Core Team, 2021). Specifically, the version 4.3.2 was
employed. Different R libraries have been utilised to conduct specific actions throughout the project. For
data manipulation, exploration and visualisation libraries from the tidyverse (Wickham et al., 2019)
environment were utilised. To optimise the performance by using parallelization, the libraries plyr
(Wickham, 2011) and doMC (Folashade, D., 2022) have been utilised. Finally, for carrying out both the
Differential Gene Abundance and the Differential Isoform Usage analyses, the package limma (Ritchie et
al., 2015) was employed.
18
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Differential Isoform Usage
This section will cover the procedure used for detecting splicing events for both Isoform and Peptide data. It
is important to mention, that the Isoform abundance files were generated using IsoBayes. To perform the
Differential Isoform Usage analysis two different data files were required. First, a file with the abundances of
each peptide/isoform is required. This tabular file comprises columns corresponding to the various samples
of the comparison and the rows correspond to the peptides/isoforms. Second, another tabular file that maps
each Isoform/peptide with its associated GeneID is also required.
Before analysing for splicing, the peptides/isoforms are filtered based on these criteria: First, the peptides
with less than 4 valid samples (i.e. non-missing values), were discarded. Second, the peptides/isoforms
without an associated GeneID were also excluded. Additionally, the Total Abundance of each sample is
computed.
The first step involved in Differential Isoform Analysis comprises defining the design matrix. This matrix
describes the independent variable structure of the fitted linear model. In our DIU study, the linear model
includes the intercept, the group variable and the Total Abundance cofactor (Eq. (3)).
The intercept was set at
because the model aims to capture the baseline abundance level when the
independent variables are zero. Based on the Eq. (3), the function stats::model.matrix() was used to generate
a design matrix. Subsequently, the linear model for each peptide/isoform is fitted using the function
stats::lmFit(). To analyse the splicing events associated with the linear model coefficients, the function
limma::diffSplice() is used.
Following this, to rank genes based on their splicing statistical certainty, the function limma::topSplice() is
utilised.
This function ranks genes based on the statistical results of a specified coefficient of interest,
enabling the identification of genes exhibiting differential splicing patterns. In this study, there was an
interest in finding significant spliced genes between experimental conditions; therefore, the coefficient
argument from limma::topSplice() was set to: coef = “group”, meaning that the topSplice orders
splicing events associated with the
. Moreover, the statistical test argument was set to test = “F”.
This option was chosen because it ranks genes based on the results of the F-test at gene level, providing a
global assessment of all the peptides/isoforms associated with each gene. To get the results for all the
analysed genes, the number argument was set to number = Inf.
19
==PAGE:25==
The output of this function is a data frame containing all the genes, ordered by splicing significance, along
with their corresponding statistical measures, such as log-fold changes and FDR. Genes with a FDR < 0.05
were denoted as Significantly Spliced.
The described process was carried out for all the comparisons across all the studies. For each comparison, the
limma::topSplice() output was collected and relevant metrics such as the number of spliced genes, the total
number of analysed genes and the number of peptides were stored for further analysis.
2.4 Differential Gene Abundance
This section covers the procedure used for detecting differential abundant genes. In this analysis, one file
with the abundances for each gene is required. This tabular file comprises columns corresponding to the
various samples of the comparison and the rows correspond to the GeneIDs. Again, before analysing for
differentially spliced analysis, the genes with less than 4 valid samples (i.e. non-missing values), were
discarded. Additionally, the Total Abundance of each sample is computed.
In the DGA study, the linear model includes the intercept, the group variable and the Total Abundance
cofactor (Eq. (4)).
The intercept was set to
because the model aims to capture the baseline abundance level when the
independent variables are zero. Based on Eq. (4), the function stats::model.matrix() was used to generate a
design matrix. Subsequently, the linear model for each gene is fitted using the function stats::lmFit(). To
analyse the differentially abundant gene with the linear model coefficients, the function limma::eBayes() is
used.
Following this, to rank genes based on their differentially abundant statistical certainty,
the function
limma::topTable() is utilised. In this study, there was an interest in finding significant abundant genes
between experimental conditions; therefore, the coefficient argument from limma::topTable() was set to:
coef = “group”, meaning that the function orders differently abundant events associated with the
experimental
. To get the results for all the analysed genes, the number argument was set to number =
Inf.
20
==PAGE:26==
The output of this function is a data frame containing all the genes, ordered by significance, along with their
corresponding splicing statistical measures, such as log-fold changes and FDR. Genes with a padj < 0.05 were
denoted as Significantly Differential Abundant.
The described process was carried out for all the comparisons across all the studies. For each comparison, the
limma::topTable() output was collected and relevant metrics such as the number of differentially abundant
genes and the total number of analysed genes.
2.5 Validation
2.5.1 Total Abundance Cofactor Analysis
The following section details the methodology utilised for analysing and quantifying the impact of the Total
Abundance Cofactor on both Differential Isoform Usage and Differential Gene Abundance. In this study
two different investigations were done.
Significant Genes associated to each Variable
In the first study, the impact of the Total Abundance Cofactor was assessed by quantifying the amount of
genes associated with the Total Abundance Cofactor, the Group variable and a Random Cofactor. This
assessment was carried out for DIU using peptide data, DIU using Isoform data and DGA. First, the
required files and the abundance filterings are identical to those needed for conducting DIU and DGA
analysis. Additionally, the comparisons with less than 4 replicates were also excluded. Two different linear
model structures (Eq. (5) and (6)) were used in this study:
Where
represents the Random Cofactor. The coefficients that were statistically tested for finding
significant genes were:
from Eq. (5) for detecting genes associated with the group variable,
from Eq.
(5) for detecting genes associated with the Total Abundance cofactor, and
from Eq.(6) for identifying
genes associated with the Random variable.
21
==PAGE:27==
Based on these two models, the two different design matrices were built and the already described
procedures for DIU (Section 3.3) and DGA (Section 3.4) were conducted. To clarify, these 2 models were
used in the three studies: DIU-pep, DIU-iso and DGA and, in each study, the number of significant genes
associated with each variable is examined. This means that the coefficient argument in the ranking functions:
limma::topSplice() and limma::topTable() was modified based on the coefficient examined. When the
number of significant genes associated with the Group variable was studied, the coefficient argument was set
to coef
=
“group”. On the other hand, when the effect of the Total Abundance Cofactor was
examined, the coefficient argument was set to coef = “total_abdc”. Finally, when the effect of the
Random Cofactor was assessed, the coefficient argument was set to coef = “rand”.
Additionally, when examining the random cofactor, the procedure was repeated 50 times for each
comparison and the median was computed. Finally, this procedure was carried out for all the comparisons
and the results were all collected.
Significant genes in Models with and without Total Abundance Cofactor
In the second study, the impact of the Total Abundance Cofactor was evaluated by comparing the amount
of genes associated with the Group variable between a model incorporating the Total Abundance Cofactor
and one without it. This assessment was carried out for DIU using peptide data, DIU using Isoform data
and DGA. First, the required files and the abundance filterings are identical to those needed for conducting
DIU and DGA analysis. Additionally, the comparisons with less than 4 replicates were also excluded. Two
different linear model structures (Eq. 7 and 8) were used in this study:
Based on these two models, the two different design matrices were built and the already described
procedures for DIU (Section 3.3) and DGA (Section 3.4) were conducted. In this case, for both
limma::topSplice() and limma::topTable() the coefficient argument was set to coef = “group”. The
outputs from both models were stored and compared. To determine the number of overlapping genes and
unique genes of each model, the Set Operations functions from sets{base} were used.
22
==PAGE:28==
2.5.2 Background Noise Analysis
This section outlines the procedure employed for analysing and quantifying the background noise for both
Differential Isoform Usage and Differential Gene Abundance.
The required files and the abundance
filtering is identical to those needed for conducting DIU or DGA analysis, depending on for which analysis
the background noise is being evaluated. Additionally, the comparisons with less than 3 replicates were also
excluded.
To conduct the Background noise Analysis, the permutation-based approach of Scrambling was employed.
This procedure involved altering the relationships between the dependent and the independent variables. To
do that, the design matrix was modified by shuffling the group variable. To conduct this action, the function
base::sample() on the group variable was employed. Following this, the already described procedure for DIU
(Section 3.3) or DGA(Section 3.4) was performed, and the number of significant genes was collected. For
each comparison, the Scrambling procedure was executed 50 times. Next, the median and the Median
Absolute Deviation (MAD, Eq. (9)) were calculated for the resulting 50 values.
In this equation,
represents the number of significant genes in each iteration,
denotes the median of
significant genes for the 50 iterations, and
represents the number of iterations.
This procedure was carried out for all the comparisons and the results were all collected. With these results,
further metrics were calculated to assess the differences between the original results (the number of
significant spliced/abundant genes) and the results from the scrambling procedure (median of significant
spliced/abundant genes). These metrics were the Fold Change (FC, Eq. (10)) and the Z - Z-Score using the
robust method (Eq. (11)).
Where
denotes the number of significant genes found with the original procedure and
represents the median of significant genes for the 50 iterations.
23
==PAGE:29==
2.5.3 False Discovery Rate Analysis
This section describes the methodology used to assess the impact of the FDR for the DIU using peptide data
study. The required files and the peptide filtering is identical to the one used in DIU - peptide. Additionally,
the comparisons with less than 3 replicates were excluded in this analysis.
To conduct the FDR analysis, various percentages of gene-peptide associations within the data were
randomly modified, ranging from 1% to 5%.
For each percentage, the gene-peptide associations were
modified using the function base::sample(). Following this, the already described protocol for DIU (Section
3.3) was conducted, and the number of significant genes was collected. This procedure was repeated 50
times for each percentage, and the median and MAD were derived. Given the introduction of 5 different
levels of FDR (from 1 to 5%), a total of 250 iterations were executed for each comparison.
This procedure was carried out for all the comparisons and the results were all collected. To assess the FDR
impact, various metrics were used to quantify the difference between the original and the FDR results.
These metrics were the Fold Change (FC, Eq. (10)), the Z - Score using the robust method (Eq. (11)) and
the Percentage of Change (Eq. (12)):
Where
denotes the median of significant spliced genes in a particular FDR percentage, and
represents the number of spliced genes in the original procedure.
2.5.4 Minimum Number of Peptides
This section describes the procedure used to analyse the impact of the Number of Peptides on the
Differential Isoform Usage study using peptide data. The required files and the peptide filtering is identical
to the one used in DIU - peptide.
Additionally, the comparisons with less than 4 replicates were also excluded. Furthermore, for this study, the
comparisons with a higher number of peptides and significant genes were prioritised. Specifically,
comparisons that were part of the upper quartile in both the number of peptides and the number of spliced
genes were selected.
24
==PAGE:30==
In this study, the number of spliced genes across a decreasing fraction of available peptides was calculated.
Specifically, nine levels of reduced peptide fractions, ranging from 0.9 to 0.1 of the initial set, with a
decrement of 0.1 at each interval were examined. To randomly subset the fraction of genes, the function
base::sample() was employed. With the new subset of peptides, the already described protocol for DIU
(Section 3.3) was conducted, and the number of significant genes was collected. For each comparison, this
procedure was repeated 9 times for each fraction of peptides, and all the results were collected.
2.6 Comparison between DIU and DGA
This section describes the methodology used to evaluate the differences between the DIU and the DGA
results. The required files were the output of limma::topSplice() and limma::topTable(). Additionally, the
comparisons with less than 4 replicates were also excluded.
To conduct this analysis, the results were compared and, to determine the number of overlapping genes and
unique genes of each model, the Set Operations functions from sets{base} were used. To quantify the degree
of similarity between the two results, the Overlap Coefficient (Equation (13)) was employed.
Where
correspond to the sets of significant spliced-abundant genes.
2.7 Comparison between DIU using peptide and Isoform data
This section details the methodology employed to compare the results obtained from the Differential
Isoform Usage (DIU) analysis using peptide data with those using isoform data. The required files were the
output of limma::topSplice() from both analyses. Additionally, the comparisons with less than 4 replicates
were also excluded. The methodology utilised in this context is consistent with that applied for assessing the
distinctions between DIU and DGA (Section 3.5.4), with the Overlapping Coefficient (Equation (13))
serving as the selected metric.
25
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
3. Results
3.1 Data curation
For obtaining reliable and robust results, it is crucial to carry out a meticulous process of data selection and
curation. Our main research questions are focused on the study of differential splicing and abundant events
between experimental groups. Thus, we selected proteomics datasets with well-annotated samples from
studies covering different experimental conditions.
With these premises, we ended up selecting 37 proteomics datasets from an initial list of 80 datasets. The
main reasons for excluding datasets were related to the presence of samples wrongly annotated (e.g. lack of
group information or complex naming) or because they belong to studies not examining different
experimental conditions. Additionally, since we were interested in studying DIU and DGA with other
metadata, we collected information about the organism, year of study, False Discovery Rate percentage,
software used and the number of replicates.
3.2 Validation
In order to verify our research findings, it is crucial to validate the methodology thoroughly. Therefore, each
aspect of the validation, including total abundance, noise assessment, false discovery rate (FDR), number of
replicates, and minimum number of peptides, is meticulously examined to ensure the reliability and
robustness of our results.
3.2.1 Total Abundance Cofactor
As we have previously described in the Introduction section, proteomics analyses are susceptible to factors
that can lead to the obtention of biased results. These confounding effects can emerge from multiple sources
such as the experimental setup and the posterior analysis, potentially distorting the interpretation of
findings by yielding both False Positive or False Negative results.
During our research project, we asked
ourselves about the possible confounding effect of the Total Abundance value. This value is defined as the
sum of all abundances for a given sample.
26
==PAGE:32==
The nature of abundance data varies depending on the particular study. For DIU studies, abundance can be
measured with peptide data (DIU-pep) or isoform abundances (DIU-iso). Differently, for the DGA, gene
abundances are used.
To examine the impact of this parameter, it was incorporated into the design matrix of the linear models, as
described in the Materials and Methods section. To explore the influence and possible confounding effect of
the Total Abundance, we present the results of two different analyses.
Significant genes associated with each variable
In the first place, we are showing the findings regarding genes associated with the Total Abundance cofactor.
This investigation is of great importance because we are trying to elucidate if the models can encounter
significantly differentially abundant and/or spliced genes when the Total Abundance is the variable under
scrutiny for identifying significant genes. Moreover, and to further validate the results, we decided to
compare the results from the model containing the Total Abundance cofactor, with the results from two
additional analyses. One is the same model but we focused on identifying significant genes based on the
sample group variable. The other analysis consists of a model including and testing for a random cofactor
that replaced the Total Abundance one.
Since including or not the Total Abundance cofactor in our methodology is of vital importance for
obtaining trustworthy results, we systematically investigated its inclusion across our three main studies:
DGA, DIU with Isoform data, and DIU with Peptide data (DIU-pep).
When examining the results presented in Figure 4. A, it seems evident that the percentage of significant
spliced and/or abundant genes is notably low for the model that includes and tests the random cofactor
across all three studies (DGA, DIU-iso, DIU-pep). This observation suggests that both the Sample Group
and Total Abundance variables consistently identify significant genes across the comparisons.
In the context of the percentage of significant genes revealed through testing the Total Abundance
Cofactor, it can be observed that the DIU studies (Figure 4.B, 4.C) are the ones yielding more genes
associated with this cofactor. This implies that these kinds of studies are more susceptible to find genes
associated with this confounding effect and consequently, adjusting for this cofactor in such studies is crucial
to ensure reliable results. Regarding the DGA study (Figure 4.C), the data seems to be distributed more
irregularly than the DIU studies and displays a more binary behaviour. Implying that there are more
comparisons with 0 significant genes than the DIU. Due to this fact, the median is lower than in the DIU
27
==PAGE:33==
studies. However, many of the non-zero comparisons, yield a significant fraction of differentially abundant
genes and, therefore, we would also encourage adjusting for the Total Abundance cofactor when conducting
DGA studies.
Figure 4. Percentage of Significant Genes associated to each variable (Group, Random, Total Abundance
Cofactor). Plot A, displays the result for DIU using isoform data, Plot B displays the results for DIU using peptide
data and Plot C display results for DGA.
Finally, the results of testing the Group variable indicate that the DIU study using isoform data would yield
a higher number of significant genes than the DIU using peptide data. Similarly, the results of the DGA
analysis indicate a substantial presence of significant differentially abundant genes. However, the median
fraction of significant genes in the DGA studies is lower when compared to the DIU studies. This difference
may again be attributed to the frequency of comparisons resulting in zero significant genes. We consider the
significant genes found during the evaluation of the Group variable as the valid and relevant outcomes since
they arise from the difference between experimental conditions, and not from differences in the Total
Abundance between samples.
Significant Genes in Models with and without Total Abundance Cofactor
In the previous section, we presented results indicating that a considerable proportion of significant spliced
and/or abundant genes are associated with the Total Abundance Cofactor across the three distinct studies
(DIU-pep, DIU-iso and DGA). With these results in hand, we asked ourselves whether the inclusion or
exclusion of the Total Abundance Cofactor in our models would change the number and composition of
significant genes associated with the Group variable.
28
==PAGE:34==
To investigate this, we used across the three studies two models: one integrating the Total Abundance
Cofactor and one without it. With these two models, we compared the number of significant genes
associated with the Group variable and whether the significant genes were common in both models.
The results presented in Figure 5 reveal several intakes. First, without adjusting for the Total Abundance
effect there is a substantial fraction of significant genes across the three studies that are not present in the
model accounting for the Total Abundance confounding effect. We consider these genes as False Positives
because they are wrongly associated with the Group Variable. In other words, these genes are regarded as
significant when the Group variable is tested, even though we understand that their significance is induced
by the Total Abundance confounding effect. The study that would be more sensible to yield more False
Positives genes by not incorporating the Total Abundance Cofactor is the DIU using Isoform data.
Figure 5. Percentage of Significant Genes corresponding to False Positives, True and False Negatives in relationship
to the model non-adjusting for Total Abundance. False postive correspond to genes only associated with the
non-adjusted model. True values correspond to genes associated to both the adjusted and non-adjusted model. False
Negatives correspond to significant genes only associated with the adjusted model. Plot A depicts results for the
DIU using isoform data, Plot B depicts results for the DIU using peptide data and Plot C depicts results for DGA.
In the second place, across the three studies, it is possible to observe a considerable proportion of significant
genes that are only present in the model that includes the Total Abundance cofactor. We consider these
genes as False Negatives when comparing the results between the two models. We designate them in this
particular way because without considering the Total Abundance Cofactor, these genes are classified as
non-significant because the confounding effect masks the true relationship with the Group variable. The
study that would be more sensible to yield more False Negatives genes by not incorporating the Total
Abundance Cofactor is the DIU using peptide data.
29
==PAGE:35==
In the third place, across the three studies, there is a notable portion of genes significant in both models. We
consider these genes as the True fraction of genes identified by the model not incorporating the Total
Abundance Cofactor. The study that contains a smaller fraction of genes present in both models is the
DIU using peptide data. This implies that it’s the one that displays more disparity between the results of the
two models. Consequently, this study appears to be the most sensible to the exclusion of the Total
Abundance Cofactor.
Overall, these results underline the importance of adjusting the models with the Total Abundance Cofactor
as they demonstrate the presence and prevalence of both False Positives and False Negatives in the model not
incorporating the Total Abundance Cofactor.
3.2.2 Background Noise
After exploring and validating the features and characteristics of the model, we formulated another question
for corroborating the methodology: Are the obtained results merely due to the inherent noise of the data?
Or, to which degree do they truly display the relationship between the signal and the associated variables?
As we discussed in the Introduction section, the abundance data contains some degree of noise that can
introduce random variability, distort the real signal and generate false relationships between variables.
Therefore, quantifying and examining it is crucial to ensure robust and trustworthy results.
Figure 6. Representations illustrating two methodologies used for validating the results. Figure A depicts how the
associations between the Sample Abundance (columns) and the Group variable are modified during the Background
Noise Assessment. Figure B depicts how the peptide associations are shuffled when FDR is added to the original data..
To do that, we opted for following a permutation-based approach called Scrambling (known also as
y-Randomization or y-Permutation). This technique involves randomly shuffling the relationship between
the dependent variable and the independent variable, allowing for a thorough assessment of the model's
performance and its ability to generalise effectively (Figure 6.A). To adapt this idea to our project, the group
labels were randomly assigned to each sample, and the number of significant genes was determined. By using
30
==PAGE:36==
this approach, we were altering the relationship between the abundance of a given sample (Y) and its sample
group (X1). This process was repeated 50 times and the median of significant genes was calculated for each
comparison. Once the results of the scrambling process were produced, they were compared to the
non-altered data results. These comparisons allowed us to assess the differences and quantify the noise
present in our data. As described in the Materials and Methods section, to quantify the differences between
the scrambled results and the original results, the Fold Change (FC) was used. It is worth mentioning that in
this thesis, we are presenting the noise results for two studies: the Differential Isoform Usage with peptide
data and Differential Gene Analysis.
In addition, we decided to pay special attention to the variation between the comparisons of different
replicate sizes, thus stratifying the results based on this variable. As introduced in the Introduction section,
comparisons with small replicate sizes are vulnerable to reduced statistical power and increased variability,
generating unreliable results.
Under these circumstances, it becomes evident the need to validate the
different replicate sizes for ensuring the robustness and reliability of our findings.
During the Background Noise Analysis, we also investigated the relationship between the significant
number of genes and the divergence between the scrambled and the unaltered data. With this examination,
we wanted to address the question: Are comparisons with a higher number of significant genes more reliable
and trustworthy? To explore this question, a scatter plot including the number of significant spliced and/or
expressed genes and the Fold Change extracted from the scrambling process was generated.
Background Noise Results for Differential Isoform Usage with Peptide Data
The results are presented in Figure 7.A illustrates the Fold Change (FC) between the number of significant
genes obtained from the original DIU - peptide analysis and the number of significant genes derived from
the scrambling process, stratified by the number of replicates. These results show that those samples with 3
replicates seem to have a significantly lower value of FC than those samples with 4 and 6+ replicates. This
lower FC value implies that the difference between the number of significant genes from both
methodologies is quite small, and therefore, the results are less trustworthy. This lower FC value could be
due to different aspects.
First, as we introduced in the Introduction section, it could be caused by the inherent variability associated
with small replicate sizes and their susceptibility to the methodology used in proteomics study. Another
possible explanation would be related to the nature of the scrambling procedure. When the scrambling
process is performed, the relationships between the X and the Y variables are shuffled and the significant
31
==PAGE:37==
genes are determined. The higher likelihood, specifically 1 in 10 chance, of samples with 3 replicates being
assigned the original or equivalent sample group disposition may contribute to the lower FC observed for
this replicate size.
In Figure 7.B, the relationship between the logarithm of the number of significant genes obtained from the
DIU-peptide analysis, and the logarithm of the Fold Change between the original and the scrambling results
is shown. From these results, it is possible to observe that both variables are notably correlated. It becomes
apparent that the comparisons with more significant differentially spliced genes are also the ones that present
more divergence with the scrambling results. With these results in hand, we suggest that the more
significantly spliced genes we identify, the more certain and confident we can be about the validity of our
findings.
Figure 7. Plot A depicts the Fold Change (FC) between the count of significant genes identified through the
original DIU-peptide analysis and those obtained from the scrambling process. The data is stratified based on the
number of replicates. Additionally, the plot displays the number of comparisons for each replicate size and
visualizes the corresponding median FC values. Plot B displays the Log10 relationship between the original
DIU-peptide analysis and the Log 10 FC values. Furthermore, the results have been stratified by replicate size.
Another aspect relevant to mention from Figure 7.B is how the comparisons of 3 and 4 replicates are
grouped in different areas of the scatter plot. The majority of comparisons with 3 replicates are related to a
lower number of significant spliced genes and thus, with smaller differences with the scrambling results
(lower FC). On the other hand, the comparisons with 4 replicates appeared to have more significant spliced
genes and therefore a higher difference with the scrambling results (high FC).
32
==PAGE:38==
To summarise and connect it with the obtained results from Figure 7. A, we have formulated three possible
explanations for why the comparisons with 3 replicates are associated with lower FC values and thus, less
trustworthy results. The first one was related to the inherent problem of working with few replicates, the
second one was focused on the nature of the scrambling process and the last one was based on the observed
relation between the number of significant genes and the divergence with the scrambling results. We cannot
be completely certain about which exact reason lies behind the lower FC values for comparisons with 3
replicates. As a result, we are unable to fully validate our methodology for the DIU-peptide study using this
replicate size. Therefore, we would recommend using the current methodology in comparisons with more
than 4 replicates or being extremely cautious when interpreting the results produced from comparisons with
3 replicates.
Background Noise Results for Differential Gene Abundance
The Background noise results for the DGA study are depicted in Figure 8.. From our observations, the
number of significant differentially abundant genes remains constant at 1 across all the comparisons for the
scrambling procedure. As a consequence, the FC is equivalent to the number of significant differentially
abundant genes in the original procedure.
Figure 8. Plot A depicts the Fold Change (FC) between the count of significant genes identified through the
original DGA analysis and those obtained from the scrambling process. The data is stratified based on the number
of replicates. Additionally, the plot displays the number of comparisons for each replicate size and visualizes the
corresponding median FC values. Plot B displays the Log10 relationship between the original DGA analysis and the
Log 10 FC values. Furthermore, the results have been stratified by replicate size.
33
==PAGE:39==
The difference in the median values between the 3 and 5 replicates compared to the 4 and +6 is due to many
comparisons with 3 and 5 replicates yielding very low values of significant abundant genes. Consequently,
these comparisons display a lower distance to the 1 gene yielded by the scrambling procedure.
These results, showing that only 1 gene has been found significant during the scrambling process across each
comparison, allow us to be confident that the fraction of background noise present in the Differential Gene
Abundance is minimal. Finally, after comparing the overall noise results for DIU and DGA we can state that
the DGA study tends to produce more robust and trustworthy results than the DIU.
3.2.3 False Discovery Rate (FDR)
As we introduced in the Introduction section, data from MS has inherently 1% error due to wrong
peptide-abundance associations. In other words, the machine mistakenly assigns a given abundance to an
incorrect peptide. As a result, this issue can produce False positives, leading to misidentifications and
Quantification
inaccuracies.
Considering
this
issue,
we
questioned
the
real
impact
of
this
peptide-abundance association error (FDR) on our results. To investigate this, we decided to carry out two
different experiments.
In the first place, the effect of 1% of extra wrong peptide association was studied. To address this, we applied
a methodology similar to the Background Noise analysis. The peptide-gene associations of 1% of the
abundance data were shuffled and the number of significant spliced genes was determined (Figure 6.B). This
process was repeated 50 times and the median percentage of change was calculated for each comparison. As
described in the Material and Methods section, the percentage of change is used to assess the difference
between the original count of significant spliced genes and the number of spliced genes when the FDR was
introduced.
By doing this analysis, we were able to observe if the results experienced significant changes when 1% of extra
peptide - abundance association error was introduced. If such changes occur, it would reveal that our
methodology is remarkably sensible to this issue and our current results would be put in doubt since they
already contain 1% of FDR.
Moreover, and motivated by the Background noise results, we were also intrigued by the possible role of the
replicate size in our findings. We asked whether the samples with fewer replicates would be more affected by
the additional 1% error in peptide-abundance association. As a result, we stratified the results based on the
replicate size.
34
==PAGE:40==
In the second place, the effects of different levels of FDR were studied. This experiment followed the same
methodology as the previous one, but increasing levels of FDR (up to 5%) were added. By doing this, it was
possible to observe the trend between the FDR level and the corresponding percentage of change.
Furthermore, this allowed us to explore the common thresholds, such as 1, 2 and 5%, and investigate the
percentage of change associated with each threshold.
Figure 9. Plot A depicts the % of Change between the count of significant genes identified through the original
DIU - peptide analysis and those obtained when 1% of FDR si added. The data is stratified based on the number of
replicates. Additionally, the plot displays the number of comparisons for each replicate size and visualizes the
corresponding median of % of Change. Plot B depicts the % of Change between the count of significant genes
identified through the original DIU - peptide analysis and those obtained when different levels of FDR (1-5%) are
introduced. Additionally, the plot displays the number of comparisons for each replicate size and visualizes the
corresponding median of % of Change. Plot C displays the Log10 relationship between the original DIU peptide
analysis and the Log 10 FC values. Furthermore, the results have been stratified by replicate size.
In Figure 9.A, the results of adding 1% of FDR are displayed. First and foremost, the median percentage of
changes across the different replicate sizes is notably low, with none of them surpassing the 10% of change.
Additionally, it’s important to underline that the medians indicate that the usual pattern consists of an
increase of genes when the FDR is introduced, rather than a reduction.
35
==PAGE:41==
However, there are a couple of points interesting to mention. One is that the samples with 3 replicates
present an inferior percentage of change in comparison with the other replicate sizes. This finding is
unexpected because in the previous background noise analysis this replicate size appeared to be the most
sensible to the introduced disturbance. Another interesting aspect is that the samples with more than 6
replicates seem to have a higher value of percentage of change with a median of 7%.
Intrigued by these findings, we decided to further investigate this matter by examining the relationship
between the percentage of change, the number of Significant Spliced Genes and the Replicate Size. The
results are displayed in Figure 9. B. They unveil a couple of noteworthy aspects. First, for the comparisons
that display a non-zero percentage of change, a relationship between the number of spliced genes and the
percentage of change appears (R2 = 0.55). It seems that those comparisons with a higher number of spliced
genes are less affected by the FDR effect. These results align with our expectations as it is comprehensible
that comparisons with fewer spliced genes present more divergence when new spliced genes are introduced.
Furthermore, this reinforces the concept already introduced in the Background noise results: the more
spliced genes found, the more trustworthy and reliable the results are.
Second, we can observe a different behaviour with those comparisons with less than 100 significant spliced
genes. On the one hand, the vast majority of comparisons with 3 replicates present 0% of change (- Inf in
scale Log10). On the other hand, those comparisons with more than 6 replicates, present a significantly
higher percentage of change. This divergence between comparisons with the same number of significant
spliced genes can be attributed to the difference in sample size. With these results, we would suggest that
comparisons with more replicates are also more sensible to the FDR effect than those with fewer replicates.
However, it would be interesting to further investigate the reason that lies behind it.
The Figure 9. C shows the results of introducing different percentages of FDR and their associated
percentage of change. From these results, it is possible to observe that the medians of the percentage of
change remain below 10% across all the different levels of added FDR. Additionally, it is possible to observe a
linear increase in the percentage of change with higher FDR levels. Therefore, we would propose that the
lower the FDR are, the more trustworthy and reliable the results will be.
To summarise, it has been possible to observe that the overall effect of FDR is notably low, implying that
our results cannot be explained by the inherently 1% error due to wrong peptide-abundance associations. We
are, therefore, more confident of the methodology employed. However, it is important to take into account
other aspects that we have also observed. First, it seems that the replicate size influences the sensibility of the
36
==PAGE:42==
comparison to FDR. Specifically, we speculate that those comparisons with higher replicate sizes are slightly
more sensible to wrong peptide-abundance associations. In the second place, the comparisons with a higher
number of spliced genes are also less sensitive to the FDR effect, thus making the results more credible and
accurate. Finally, it has become clear how higher percentages of FDR are associated with more disparity
between the original and the FDR results. Nevertheless, in none of the FDR levels, the statistics have
exceeded the 6% of change, allowing us to underline the minimal effect that the FDR seems to have in our
results.
3.2.4 Minimum Number of Peptides
After validating the methodology concerning the Total Abundance Cofactor, background noise, and the
False Discovery Rate (FDR), we asked whether there exists a minimum number of peptides from which the
results cannot be validated for the DIU -peptide study. Consequently, we were also interested in examining
if the relation between the number of peptides used and the amount of significant spliced genes followed a
specific trend. For instance, if it appears that a sigmoidal pattern describes the relation, we would be able to
define an inflection point and designate it as the minimum number of peptides required for validating the
splicing analysis.
To address these questions, the studies with a higher quantity of peptides and significant spliced genes were
selected. We adopted these criteria because, as indicated in the Background noise and FDR Results, it seems
that the more significant spliced genes are found, the more trustworthy the results are. After selecting the
comparisons following the methodology described in the Material and Methods, we ended up with 19
comparisons to perform the study. Then, to examine the specific pattern, the number of significant genes
were calculated with a decreasing fraction of the peptides used. It began by using all peptides, then
sequentially subsetting the dataset to a fraction of 0.9, 0.8, and so on, down to 0.1.
The results presented in Figure 10 display the pattern for 4 of the 19 comparisons used. In all of them, it is
possible to observe a clear decreasing linear trend for all the shown comparisons. It is important to mention
that these results also generalise for the other 15 comparisons. With these results, we are unable to define an
exact minimum number of peptides below which the results cannot be validated.
Nonetheless, with our findings, we can expect to identify a higher number of splicing events when analysing
a larger number of peptides.
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 10. Selection of 4 plots displaying the relationship between the number of observed
spliced genes when the fraction of peptides is sequentially reduced. A linear trend has been
added to emphasize the linear relationship.
3.3 Comparison of DGA and DIU using Peptide Data
After validating our methodology and quantifying the effect of distinct features such as confounders,
Background noise and FDR, we can now delve into analysing different research questions. Since we
validated the methodology for DGA and DIU using peptide data, we decided to explore the similarities and
differences in the results of these two analyses. We were intrigued to explore two different aspects. First, as
we introduced in the Introduction section, splicing changes have been extensively overlooked in the
proteomics field. Therefore, we asked about the prevalence of differential splicing events and if they were as
frequent as differential abundance events when using proteomics data.
Next, we explored if there was an overlap between the genes that were differentially spliced and those
differentially abundant. As introduced in the Introduction section, different transcriptomics and proteomics
studies have found that the overlap of differently expressed and spliced genes is very low, indicating that
expression and splicing mediate different biological signals. Hence, we believe it would be of great interest to
study this phenomenon using our validated methodology in proteomics data.
38
==PAGE:44==
To give an answer to these questions, the DGA and DIU - peptide analyses were conducted across 74
comparisons and the results were compared. It is relevant to note that the comparisons included in the
analyses consist of studies with validated replicate sizes, thus excluding those with only 3 replicates.
Figure 11. Plot A depicts the % of Significant genes only found in DGA (Abundant), those found in DGA and
DIU-peptide
(Abundant and Spliced) and those only found in DIU - peptide (Spliced). Plot B depicts an
histogram with the count of Comparisons for each bin of Overlap Coefficient. Plot C displays the relationship
between the number of significant Abundant and Spliced for each comparison. Additionally, the overall medians of
Spliced and Abundant genes have been added.
The Figure 11. A displays the percentage of significant genes into three groups: those found only as
differentially abundant, those identified as both differentially abundant and spliced, and those exclusively
identified as differentially spliced. There are several aspects important to discuss. First and foremost, it is
possible to observe that the difference in medians between the percentage of differentially spliced genes and
differentially abundant genes is only 0.27%. These results imply that splicing events are almost as frequent as
differentially abundant genes. As previously introduced, only a small fraction of studies are considering
isoform changes when performing proteomics studies. With these results, we can underline that by not
analysing splicing events we are missing a great deal of biological information.
39
==PAGE:45==
Another noticeable aspect from Figure 11. A is the significantly low number of genes that are differentially
spliced and abundant. Only a median of 0.11% of all genes are both spliced and expressed, meaning that just
3.61% of the significant genes display both features. To further explore this phenomenon, the overlap
coefficient between them was calculated, and a histogram of this parameter was built. We decided to use the
Overlap Coefficient instead of the Jaccard similarity because it fits better with the nature of our data.
Specifically, many comparisons exhibit significant differences in size between the sets of abundant and
spliced genes. In Figure 11. B it can be observed how the distribution is skewed towards the zero, implying
that the majority of comparisons exhibit a pretty low Overlapping Coefficient. After reviewing these two
figures, we can be more certain about the idea that differences in splicing and abundance regulate distinct
biological functions.
After analysing these results, we raised another question. We were interested in investigating if there was a
relationship between the number of differentially spliced genes and the number of differentially abundant
genes.
Are those comparisons with a higher number of spliced genes also yielding a larger number of
differentially abundant genes? Motivated by this matter, a scatter plot was built and is depicted in Figure 11.
C. From this figure, we cannot perceive a clear relationship between the number of significant genes from
both analyses. We hypothesise that the lack of correlation can be associated with the already mentioned
factor that changes in splicing and abundance regulate different biological functions.
Overall, from this investigation, we can extract two main ideas. Firstly, changes in splicing are as common as
changes in abundance when analysing proteomics data. Secondly, the fraction of genes that are both
differentially spliced and expressed is very low, implying that changes in splicing and abundance mediate
different biological functions. We believe that both of these findings point in the same direction: there is a
need to search for splicing events when analysing proteomics data. Otherwise, some relevant biological signal
can be ignored.
3.4 Comparison of DIU using Peptide vs. Isoform Data
After analysing the divergence between abundance and splicing using peptide data, we shifted our focus
towards examining the similarities and differences between the DIU using peptide and isoform data. We
were intrigued to explore different aspects. Firstly, we were curious to study if one data source was yielding
more splicing events than the other. In other words, is the isoform-transformed data more capable of
detecting splicing events than the raw peptide abundance data? Additionally, does there exist a relation
between the number of splicing events found from the two data sources?
40
==PAGE:46==
With this question, we were examining if the numbers of findings from the two data sources were consistent
across the comparisons or were presenting a very divergent pattern. Lastly, we were keen to examine if both
data inputs were finding the same spliced events or capturing different biological signals.
To answer these questions, both DIU - Isoform and DIU - peptide was conducted across 74 comparisons
and the results were compared. Notably, the comparisons included in the analyses consist of studies with
validated replicate sizes, thus excluding those with only 3 replicates. Furthermore, to study whether both
data inputs identified the same splicing genes, the Overlap Coefficient was used. Again, we chose this
method over the Jaccard similarity because it fits better with the nature of our data.
The Figure 12. A displays the percentage of significant spliced genes into three groups: those found only
from Isoform data, those identified from both Isoform and Peptide data, and those exclusively identified
from peptide data. There are several aspects worth discussing. First, it is possible to observe that the
proportion of significant spliced genes found using isoform data is substantially higher than that identified
using peptide data. More specifically and looking at the medians from Figure 12.A, the isoform data is
capable of finding more than double the number of genes present in the peptide data (specifically, 128%
more).
To further examine this phenomenon, Figure 12. C shows the relationship between the number of spliced
genes from both data sources. In the scatter plot, it is possible to observe a weak correlation (R2 = 0.22) that
indicates that those comparisons with more spliced genes from isoform data also tend to yield a significant
number of spliced genes from peptide data. However, it’s important to remark that this correlation is quite
weak and it would be hard to establish a definitive relationship.
Another important fact from Figure 12. A is the significantly low number of genes that are differentially
spliced from both data sources. Only a median of 0.13% of all genes are spliced in both DIU - peptide and
DIU - isoform, meaning that just 3% of the significant genes are significant in both analyses. To explore this
phenomenon further, it would be interesting to look at the distribution of Overlapping Coefficients in
Figure 12. B. It is possible to appreciate how the distribution is skewed towards zero, implying that the
majority of comparisons exhibit a pretty low Overlapping Coefficient.
41
==PAGE:47==
Figure 12. Plot A depicts the % of Significant genes only found in DIU - Isoform (Only in Isoform), those found
in DIU - isoform and DIU-peptide (Both in Isoform and Peptide) and those only found in DIU - peptide (Only in
Peptide). Plot B depicts an histogram with the count of Comparisons for each bin of Overlap Coefficient. Plot C
displays the relationship between the number of significant Spliced genes from Isoform and peptide. Additionally,
the overall medians of Spliced and Abundant genes have been added.
Results from both figures indicate a generalised lack of significant common genes across all the comparisons.
Initially, we did not expect these results as we speculated that both analyses would point towards the same
spliced genes. Nonetheless, we formulated the hypothesis that each data source conveys different
information, resulting in validated findings of spliced genes. Therefore, we suggest that the analyses should
be performed using both data sources when available since they both provide unique and distinct insights.
Overall, from this study, we can extract two main takeaways. Firstly, the Isoform data seems to capture a
significantly higher number of splicing events across the comparisons. Secondly, both data sources convey
different information, thus detecting mostly distinct splicing events.
42
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4
4. Final Discussion
In this section, the main intakes and implications from the Results section will be put into context.
Additionally, we present a brief dissertation on Future Perspectives.
4.1 Perspective
In the first place, we have been able to formulate and validate a methodology based on limma to detect
events of splicing across 37 proteomic studies. During our research, we evaluate the impact of 4 different
aspects in our methodology.
First, the analysis of the confounding effect of Total Abundance generated unexpected significant results.
The results displayed that a considerable amount of significant spliced or abundant genes are associated with
Total Abundance cofactor across the DGA, DIU - peptide and DIU -isoform. This suggests that variations
in Total Abundance between samples introduce significant bias when analysing DGA and DIU.
Furthermore, we also realised that not adjusting for the Total Abundance cofactor was related to yielding a
significant amount of False Positives and False Negatives results.
Both outcomes point in the same direction, we believe that there is a need to include the Total Abundance
when conducting DGA and DIU studies. Otherwise, genes that appear to be significant due to the
confounding effect, will appear as significant due to changes between conditions. Unfortunately, there is a
noteworthy lack of studies considering or discussing this confounding effect. In fact, after carrying out an
extensive literature search, we were able to only find one study that mentioned the Total Abundace effect
(Scarpin et al., 2022). Therefore, if the impact of this cofactor is further consolidated and validated, it would
mean that the vast majority of proteomics studies are potentially producing results that include a certain
number of False Positives and False Negatives of significant genes.
One of the main goals was to quantify and assess the impact of background noise in both DIU and DGA
analyses. Our findings reveal that the overall impact of background noise on DIU results is relatively small,
suggesting that our results are not attributable to noise in the data. However, two interesting aspects need to
43
==PAGE:49==
be considered. Firstly, the results pointed out that comparisons with 3 replicates are more susceptible to
background noise.
Unfortunately, even though offering three potential explanations (see 3.2.2 Background Noise), we are
uncertain of the root cause of this problem. Consequently, we exercise caution and avoid validating the
methodology for comparisons with less than 4 replicates. This lack of validation for comparisons with less
than 4 replicates can be extremely problematic since current proteomics experiments typically involve only
2-3 replicates (Schwämmle et al., 2013). Secondly, the results displayed that comparisons yielding a higher
number of significant spliced genes display a higher reliability. Hence, if a certain study encounters a lower
number of significant spliced genes, we would advise caution and further validation when interpreting the
results.
Additionally, the DGA results show that the amount of background noise present is minimal,
showing more robustness and reliability than the DIU study. This finding corroborates discussions at the
transcript level, suggesting that Differential Gene Expression (DGE) analysis typically exhibits greater
statistical power than Differential Transcript Usage analysis (DTU) (Love et al., 2018).
The influence of FDR was also assessed during the validation procedure. The main results underscored that
the influence of the wrongly assigned peptides is very limited in explaining our results, thereby strengthening
the confidence in the validity of our methodology. Nonetheless, a couple of aspects are worth mentioning.
It appeared that the comparisons with a higher number of replicates are more sensible to the FDR effect and,
as already pointed out by the background noise analysis, comparisons with more significant spliced genes are
also more trustworthy.
Another aspect we investigated during validation was the influence of the number of peptides on the
number of significant spliced genes. Our results displayed a clear linear relationship between these two
variables, indicating that fewer peptides are associated with a reduced number of identified spliced genes. As
a result, we cannot establish a minimum threshold of peptides necessary to ensure the reliability of our
results. We can uniquely argue that in studies where the number of peptides studied is significantly low,
possibly due to e.g. technical MS issues, researchers should anticipate a correspondingly low number of
identified spliced genes. As a consequence, their perspective on the real extent of alternative splicing events
could be restricted.
44
==PAGE:50==
From the DIU and DGA comparison, several different aspects are important to mention. We already
introduced that one of the potential reasons why AS in proteomics remained largely undetected was due to
the fact that most of the proteomic studies do not compare different conditions or physiological states
(Blencowe, 2017d). In our project we have compared the proteome across multiple conditions in 37
proteomics datasets and the results have displayed that changes in splicing are almost as frequent as changes
in abundance. These results have several implications.
First, we believe that our results seem to not support the position that the vast majority of genes only express
one single main isoform at the proteome level and the majority of alternatively spliced variants were not
functionally important if translated (Ezkurdia et al., 2015, Tress et al., 2017b). Instead, our findings
demonstrated that a significant number of proteins undergo changes in splicing between conditions,
apparently contradicting the concept of a single main isoform per gene. Furthermore, the observation of
splicing changes between different conditions suggests that spliced isoforms are indeed functionally relevant.
If isoforms were not functionally relevant, we would expect to observe them independently of specific
conditions. However, when we analyzed our results alongside the background noise data, we found that the
presence of spliced genes is not random but rather bound to specific conditions, indicating that splicing
events are indeed condition-dependent and likely functionally relevant.
Moreover, the fact that AS changes occur on a similar scale as changes in protein abundance is extremely
relevant, especially considering that changes in splicing have been largely overlooked in proteomics, with
only 2% of articles in the field considering isoform variants.
Another interesting issue was the low proportion of genes that experienced changes in splicing and
abundance. One possible explanation would be based on the hypothesis that changes in splicing and
abundance regulate different biological processes. While this explanation has already been proposed at the
transcriptomic level (Dam et al., 2023), we have been unable to find literature supporting it at the proteome
level. Nonetheless, and supporting this proposal, new studies indicate that changes in transcription and
splicing have distinct genetic bases, thus evolving independently and regulating distinct processes (Singh &
Ahi, 2022).
Finally, the comparison between DIU - peptide and DIU - isoform reveals that isoform abundance detects a
larger number of splicing events than raw peptides. However, the unexpectedly low overlap of spliced genes
between both analyses is noteworthy. At present, we propose the hypothesis that each data source conveys
distinct information. Therefore, we recommend utilizing both datasets when possible.
45
==PAGE:51==
To summarise, this research has effectively developed and validated a methodology using linear models to
detect alternative splicing events in proteomic datasets. The findings emphasize the common presence of
alternative splicing events across conditions, underscoring the importance of including isoform analysis in
proteomics studies.
4.2 Future perspectives
After presenting our results, it would be interesting to explore and set future directions that would expand
the knowledge and fill the current gaps in this field. First, we believe that, due to the impact and relevance of
the Total Abundance confounding effect, it needs to be further studied and validated. For example, one
possible direction to further explore this effect would consist of trying to find parameters that are also
correlated with it. For instance, we could select those genes that have been significantly associated with this
cofactor (either in DGA or in DIU) and analyse the number of Missing Peptides. Conducting this study
would be relevant since the only literature found on this topic directly links the confounding effect of Total
Abundance to Missing peptides (Ryu et al., 2014).
Another possible path to explore involves integrating transcriptomics data, thus adopting a proteogenomics
approach. This approach would yield an additional layer of results for comparative analysis. By conducting
Differential Expression and Differential Transcript Usage analyses, we can compare significant genes with
those identified in DGA, DIU-isoform and DIU-peptide studies. This investigation would directly assess the
divergence between transcriptomics and proteomics, thus reducing existing gaps between these two data
levels. Moreover, it would be also helpful to understand which kind of information is captured by isoform
data, and which one by peptide data.
46
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5
Bibliography
Abascal, F., Ezkurdia, I., Rodriguez-Rivas, J., Rodrı́Guez, J. M., Del Pozo, Á., Vázquez, J., Valencia, A., &
Tress, M. L. (2015). Alternatively
Spliced Homologous Exons Have Ancient Origins and Are
Highly Expressed at the Protein Level. PLOS Computational Biology, 11(6), e1004325.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004325
Anczuków, O., Akerman, M., Cléry, A., Wu, J., Shen, C., Shirole, N. H., Raimer, A. C., Sun, S., Jensen, M.
A., Hua, Y., Allain, F. H., & Krainer, A. R. (2015). SRSF1-Regulated Alternative Splicing in Breast
Cancer. Molecular Cell, 60(1), 105-117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.09.005
Anderle, M., Roy, S., Lin, H., Becker, C. H., & Joho, K. E. (2004). Quantifying reproducibility for
differential proteomics: noise analysis for protein liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry of
human serum. Bioinformatics, 20(18), 3575-3582. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bth446
Blein-Nicolas, M., & Zivy, M. (2016). Thousand and one ways to quantify and compare protein abundances
in label-free bottom-up proteomics. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Proteins And Proteomics,
1864(8), 883-895. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2016.02.019
Blencowe, B. J. (2017a). The Relationship between Alternative Splicing and Proteomic Complexity. Trends
In Biochemical Sciences, 42(6), 407-408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2017.04.001
Borukhov, S., & Nudler, E. (2008). RNA polymerase: the vehicle of transcription. Trends In Microbiology,
16(3), 126-134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2007.12.006
Cartegni, L., Chew, S. L., & Krainer, A. R. (2002). Listening to silence and understanding nonsense: exonic
mutations
that
affect
splicing.
Nature
Reviews
Genetics,
3(4),
285-298.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg775
Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN). (2023, 17 noviembre). A Grammar of Data Manipulation
[R package dplyr version 1.1.4]. https://cran.r-project.org/package=dplyr
47
==PAGE:53==
Crick,
F.
(1970).
Central
Dogma
of
Molecular
Biology.
Nature,
227(5258),
561-563.
https://doi.org/10.1038/227561a0
Dam, S. H., Olsen, L. R., & Vitting-Seerup, K. (2023). Expression and splicing mediate distinct biological
signals. BMC Biology, 21(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12915-023-01724-w
Del Pozo, F. C., Martínez-Gómez, L. E., Walsh, T. A., Rodriguez, J. M., Di Domenico, T., Abascal, F.,
Vázquez, J., & Tress, M. L. (2021). Assessing the functional relevance of splice isoforms. NAR
Genomics And Bioinformatics, 3(2). https://doi.org/10.1093/nargab/lqab044
Dupree, E. J., Jayathirtha, M., Yorkey, H., Mihăşan, M., Petre, B. A., & Darie, C. C. (2020a). A Critical
Review of Bottom-Up Proteomics: The Good, the Bad, and the Future of This Field. Proteomes,
8(3), 14. https://doi.org/10.3390/proteomes8030014
Dupree, E. J., Jayathirtha, M., Yorkey, H., Mihăşan, M., Petre, B. A., & Darie, C. C. (2020b). A Critical
Review of Bottom-Up Proteomics: The Good, the Bad, and the Future of This Field. Proteomes,
8(3), 14. https://doi.org/10.3390/proteomes8030014
Eckner, R., Ellmeier, W., & Birnstiel, M. L. (1991). Mature mRNA 3′ end formation stimulates RNA
export
from
the
nucleus.
The
EMBO
Journal,
10(11),
3513-3522.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1991.tb04915.x
Ezkurdia, I., Rodriguez, J. M., De Santa Pau, E. C., Vázquez, J., Valencia, A., & Tress, M. L. (2015). Most
Highly Expressed Protein-Coding Genes Have a Single Dominant Isoform. Journal Of Proteome
Research, 14(4), 1880-1887. https://doi.org/10.1021/pr501286b
Gebauer, F., Preiß, T., & Hentze, M. W. (2012). From Cis-Regulatory Elements to Complex RNPs and
Back.
Cold
Spring
Harbor
Perspectives
In
Biology,
4(7),
a012245.
https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a012245
Giansanti, P., Tsiatsiani, L., Low, T. Y., & Heck, A. J. R. (2016). Six alternative proteases for mass
spectrometry–based
proteomics
beyond
trypsin.
Nature
Protocols,
11(5),
993-1006.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2016.057
Gillet, L., Leitner, A., & Aebersold, R. (2016). Mass Spectrometry Applied to Bottom-Up Proteomics:
Entering the High-Throughput Era for Hypothesis Testing. Annual Review Of Analytical
Chemistry, 9(1), 449-472. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-anchem-071015-041535
48
==PAGE:54==
Goloborodko, A., Mayerhofer, C., Zubarev, A. R., Tarasova, I. A., Горшков, А. В., Zubarev, R. A., &
Горшков, М. В. (2010). Empirical approach to false discovery rate estimation in shotgun
proteomics.
Rapid
Communications
In
Mass
Spectrometry,
24(4),
454-462.
https://doi.org/10.1002/rcm.4417
Hastings, M. L., Allemand, E., Duelli, D. M., Myers, M. P., & Krainer, A. R. (2007). Control of Pre-mRNA
Splicing by the General Splicing Factors PUF60 and U2AF65. PLOS ONE, 2(6), e538.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0000538
Ille, A. M., Lamont, H., & Mathews, M. B. (2022). The Central Dogma revisited: Insights from protein
synthesis, CRISPR, and beyond. WIREs RNA, 13(5). https://doi.org/10.1002/wrna.1718
Kelemen, O., Convertini, P., Zhang, Z., Wen, Y., Shen, M., Falaleeva, M., & Stamm, S. (2013). Function of
alternative splicing. Gene, 514(1), 1-30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2012.07.083
Law, C. W., Zeglinski, K., Dong, X., Alhamdoosh, M., Smyth, G. K., & Ritchie, M. E. (2020). A guide to
creating
design
matrices
for
gene
expression
experiments.
F1000Research,
9,
1444.
https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.27893.1
Lin, M., Wu, P., Wong, T., Lin, I., Lin, J., Cox, J., & Yu, S. (2022). Benchmarking differential expression,
imputation and quantification methods for proteomics data. Briefings In Bioinformatics, 23(3).
https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbac138
Love, M. I., Soneson, C., & Patro, R. (2018). Swimming downstream: statistical analysis of differential
transcript
usage
following
Salmon
quantification.
F1000Research,
7,
952.
https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.15398.3
Mallarino, R., Linden, T. A., Linnen, C. R., & Hoekstra, H. E. (2016). The role of isoforms in the evolution
of
cryptic
coloration
in
Peromyscus
mice.
Molecular
Ecology,
26(1),
245-258.
https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.13663
Manuel, J. M., Guilloy, N., Khatir, I., Roucou, X., & Beaugerie, L. (2023a). Re-evaluating the impact of
alternative
RNA
splicing
on
proteomic
diversity.
Frontiers
In
Genetics,
14.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1089053
49
==PAGE:55==
Manuel, J. M., Guilloy, N., Khatir, I., Roucou, X., & Beaugerie, L. (2023b). Re-evaluating the impact of
alternative
RNA
splicing
on
proteomic
diversity.
Frontiers
In
Genetics,
14.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1089053
Marasco, L. E., & Kornblihtt, A. R. (2022a). The physiology of alternative splicing. Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biology, 24(4), 242-254. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-022-00545-z
Marasco, L. E., & Kornblihtt, A. R. (2022b). The physiology of alternative splicing. Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biology, 24(4), 242-254. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-022-00545-z
Matlin, A. J., Clark, F., & Smith, C. W. (2005). Understanding alternative splicing: towards a cellular code.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 6(5), 386-398. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm1645
Miller, R. M., & Smith, L. M. (2023). Overview and considerations in bottom-up proteomics. Analyst,
148(3), 475-486. https://doi.org/10.1039/d2an01246d
Nusinow, D. P., Szpyt, J., Ghandi, M., Rose, C. M., McDonald, E., Kalocsay, M., Jané‐Valbuena, J.,
Gelfand, E., Schweppe, D. K., Jedrychowski, M. P., Golji, J., Porter, D., Rejtar, T., Wang, Y. K.,
Kryukov, G. V., Stegmeier, F., Erickson, B. K., Garraway, L. A., Sellers, W. R., & Gygi, S. P. (2020).
Quantitative Proteomics of the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia. Cell, 180(2), 387-402.e16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.12.023
Pennisi,
E.
(2005).
Why
do
humans
have
so
few
genes?
Science,
309(5731),
80.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.309.5731.80
Perez‐Riverol, Y., Bai, J., Bandla, C., García-Seisdedos, D., Hewapathirana, S., Kamatchinathan, S., Kundu,
D. J., Prakash, A., Frericks-Zipper, A., Eisenacher, M., Walzer, M., Wang, S., Brāzma, A., &
Vizcaíno, J. A. (2021). The PRIDE database resources in 2022: a hub for mass spectrometry-based
proteomics
evidences.
Nucleic
Acids
Research,
50(D1),
D543-D552.
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1038
Regulation
of
mRNA
Splicing
by
Signal
Transduction
|
Learn
Science at Scitable. (s. f.-a).
https://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/regulation-of-mrna-splicing-by-signal-transduction-14
128469/
Reixachs‐Solé, M., & Eyras, E. (2022a). Uncovering the impacts of alternative splicing on the proteome with
current omics techniques. WIREs RNA, 13(4). https://doi.org/10.1002/wrna.1707
50
==PAGE:56==
Ritchie, M. E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C. W., Shi, W., & Smyth, G. K. (2015). limma powers
differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Research,
43(7), e47. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv007
Ryu, S. C., Qian, W., Camp, D. G., Smith, R., Tompkins, R. G., Davis, R. W., & Xiao, W. (2014). Detecting
differential protein expression in large-scale population proteomics. Bioinformatics, 30(19),
2741-2746. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu341
Scarpin, M. R., Simmons, C. H., & Brunkard, J. O. (2022). Translating across kingdoms: target of
rapamycin promotes protein synthesis through conserved and divergent pathways in plants. Journal
Of Experimental Botany, 73(20), 7016-7025. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erac267
Schwämmle, V., León, I. R., & Jensen, O. N. (2013). Assessment and Improvement of Statistical Tools for
Comparative Proteomics Analysis of Sparse Data Sets with Few Experimental Replicates. Journal
Of Proteome Research, 12(9), 3874-3883. https://doi.org/10.1021/pr400045u
SimoneTiberi. (s. f.). GitHub - SimoneTiberi/IsoBayes. GitHub. https://github.com/SimoneTiberi/IsoBayes
Singh, P., & Ahi, E. P. (2022). The importance of alternative splicing in adaptive evolution. Molecular
Ecology, 31(7), 1928-1938. https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.16377
Smith, L. M., & Kelleher, N. L. (2013). Proteoform: a single term describing protein complexity. Nature
Methods, 10(3), 186-187. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2369
Stuart,
D.
A.
(2013).
The
Mechanisms
of
DNA
Replication.
En
InTech
eBooks.
https://doi.org/10.5772/3433
Su, C., Dhananjaya, D., & Tarn, W. (2018). Alternative Splicing in Neurogenesis and Brain Development.
Frontiers In Molecular Biosciences, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2018.00012
Su, Z., & Huang, D. (2021). Alternative Splicing of Pre-mRNA in the Control of Immune Activity. Genes,
12(4), 574. https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12040574
Tress, M. L., Abascal, F., & Valencia, A. (2017a). Most alternative isoforms are not functionally important.
Trends In Biochemical Sciences, 42(6), 408-410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2017.04.002
Valdivia,
H.
H.
(2007).
One
gene,
many
proteins.
Circulation
Research,
100(6),
761-763.
https://doi.org/10.1161/01.res.0000263400.64391.37
51
==PAGE:57==
Verta, J., & Jacobs, A. (2022). The role of alternative splicing in adaptation and evolution. Trends In Ecology
And Evolution, 37(4), 299-308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2021.11.010
Wickham, H. (2011). The Split-Apply-Combine Strategy for Data Analysis. Journal Of Statistical Software,
40(1). https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v040.i01
Wickham, H., Averick, M., Bryan, J., Chang, W., McGowan, L. D., François, R., Grolemund, G., Hayes, A.,
Henry, L. B., Hester, J., Kühn, M., Pedersen, T. L., Miller, E., Bache, S. M., Müller, K., Ooms, J.,
Robinson, D. M., Seidel, D. P., Spinu, V., . . . Yutani, H. (2019). Welcome to the Tidyverse. Journal
Of Open Source Software, 4(43), 1686. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01686
Yang, P., Wang, D., & Kang, L. (2021). Alternative splicing level related to intron size and organism
complexity. BMC Genomics, 22(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-021-08172-2
52
