==PAGE:1==
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics
of thermoplastic polyurethane
Experimental
characterization
and
numerical
modeling of Elastollan 1190A
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of solid mechanics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
Experimental characterization and numerical modeling of Elastollan 1190A
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Asger Riis Vienberg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Asger Riis Vienberg, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of solid mechanics, Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://construct.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Solid Mechanics, De­
partment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mathematics, solid
mechanics, and polymer science.
Asger Riis Vienberg ­ S184154
Signature
Date
ii
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This report presents a study on thermoplastic elastomers’(TPEs) rate and temperature­
dependent mechanics, focusing specifically on the thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) Elas­
tollan 1190A. The work investigates the material’s response under varying temperatures
and loading rates through a series of uniaxial and relaxation tests. The development of
a feature tracking algorithm for strain measurements allows for the creation of stress­
strain curves at temperatures from −60◦C to 45◦C and strain rates from 0.001 s−1 to
approximately 0.1 s−1. Experimental data is used to investigate the applicability of the
Time­Temperature Superposition principle to large strains of up to 120% elongation. The
Bergström­Boyce and Three Network viscoelastic material models are calibrated up to
300% elongation based on the experimental and reference data in the literature. The cal­
ibrated models are then validated against a medium rate load case with a strain rate of
approximately 3s−1, showing good prediction of initial stiffness but deviations from exper­
imental results at larger strains. The mechanisms for this deviation and the validity of
extending the model beyond the calibrated range are discussed. Suggestions to over­
come these shortcomings are suggested.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Completing this master’s thesis has been an incredibly rewarding journey, one that I could
not have navigated alone. It is with deep gratitude that I acknowledge the contributions
of several individuals and organizations whose support was pivotal to my research and
writing.
Firstly, my heartfelt thanks go to Kim Lau Nielsen, whose expertise and guidance were in­
strumental in shaping both the theoretical framework and the narrative of this report. Kim’s
patience and willingness to address my numerous questions have been a cornerstone of
my learning and progress.
I am profoundly grateful to my supervisor, Christian Frithiof Niordson, for his invaluable
support and insights. His openness to my frequent, and occasionally impromptu, visits to
his office, along with his patience for what I termed ’silly questions,’ significantly enriched
my research experience. Christian’s perspectives and advice have been a guiding light
throughout this process.
Special thanks to Jacob Paamand Waldbjørn, whose assistance in planning and execut­
ing the experiments was crucial. His expertise and practical advice helped in navigating
the challenges of experimental research, ensuring the success of our work.
I owe a debt of gratitude to the technical staff, notably the technicians Troels and Ian,
whose unparalleled help with the experimental setups was indispensable. Their skills,
knowledge, and willingness to assist were critical in overcoming the technical challenges
of my research.
To my friends and family, your understanding and support during the most demanding
phase of this project have meant the world to me. Your patience and encouragement,
especially when I had to cancel plans during the last crucial month, provided me with the
strength and focus needed to complete this journey.
Finally, I extend my sincere appreciation to Coloplast for providing me with the oppor­
tunity to undertake this challenge. The provision of testing samples and the faith in my
capabilities have been key factors in the success of my thesis.
This thesis stands as a testament to the collective effort and support of each one of you.
I am eternally grateful for your contributions and for being part of this journey.
iv
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Material Science of Polymers and Thermoplastic Elastomers
. . . . . . . .
4
Kinematics of Large Deformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Hyperelasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Linear viscoelasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Time­Temperature Superposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Nonlinear viscoelasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Model integration and calibration methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Tangent stiffness and connection to FEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Experimental Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Measurement and Errors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Strain Measuring Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Results and Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Experimetal plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Experimental validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Material transition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Uniaxial results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Relaxation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Material model calibration and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Relaxation response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Validation Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Future Work and lessons learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Bibliography
71
A Souce code
75
B Experimental data
76
C Additional plots
79
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:9==
Introduction
The mechanical properties of thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs) are known to be strongly
dependent on both strain rate and temperature[1, 2, 3, 4]. These effects are essential in
understanding both the manufacture and the performance of the products produced by a
range of companies, particularly the members of the SPM22 ERFA group. The material of
focus in this project is Elastollan 1190A [5], as it is a widely used material in soft products.
Despite its widespread use, a study of the rate and temperature­dependent mechanics
of Elastollan 1190A has only been performed at small strains [6], and understanding the
large strain mechanics remains a challenge. It motivates the project to understand the
large strain behavior to improve the use and manufacturing of the products where mate­
rials like Elastollan 1190A are used. The lack of studies on large strains motivates the
experimental investigation performed in this project. The experimental campaign forms
the basis for selecting and calibrating accurate constitutive models for numerical simu­
lation and provides a framework for future investigation of similar materials. It has been
proposed that the interplay between time and temperature can be used to estimate high
rate behavior of polymer by varying the temperature [3, 7, 8] and that a master curve for the
yield stress of a polymer can found by the time­temperature­superposition [9, 10, 11, 12].
This report aims dive into this idea by performing an experimental study of the mechanical
properties of Elastollan 1190A under varying strain rates and temperatures. To perform
these tests, an experimental setup is designed to test mechanical properties at tempera­
tures from −60◦C to 45◦C. A purpose­built approach to strain measurement, using digital
image feature tracking, is introduced to overcome the challenges of low resolution. The
report presents a theoretical framework for modeling both linear and nonlinear viscoelas­
tic behavior of polymers. The time­temperature superposition theory and its relevance to
Elastollan 1190A is also presented. The experimental data is then used to calibrate the
two constitutive, and the performance of these models in predicting high­rate behavior
is evaluated. This analysis provides insights into the capabilities of the models and their
limitations.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:11==
Theory
This section introduces the theoretical framework for modeling the deformation of solid
polymeric material. The intention is to introduce the reader to the physics and mathemat­
ics used in modeling polymers. It serves as an overview of the theory, and for details,
the reader is advised to review the citations and references in this section. The section is
structured as follows.
• The Material Science of Polymers
The physics that occurs within the material is fundamental to all models used to
describe polymers. Polymer microstructure and its effect on the material response
is introduced, focusing on Thermoplastic Elastomers.
• Kinematics of Large Deformations
Soft polymers are often subject to use cases with large strains. Therefore, the kine­
matics of large deformations are introduced, presenting the mathematical frame­
works required to analyze materials undergoing finite strains.
• Hyperelasticity
Linear elasticity is seldom a good model for large deformations as the material stiff­
ness becomes strain­dependent. The concept of hyperelastic materials is intro­
duced, and three of the most common models are presented.
• Linear viscoelasticity
Polymer material shows a time­dependent loading. The concept of viscoelasticity
is introduced with a rheological interpretation of the Prony series model, and an
example problem is solved to illustrate the model.
• Time­Temperature Superposition
Time­Temperature superposition (TTS) is introduced to understand the interplay be­
tween time and temperature effects on the viscoelastic behavior of polymers. This
principle enables predicting material behavior over various temperatures and time
scales by consolidating temperature and time into one material timescale. It intro­
duces the mathematics of the theory and the assumptions that need to be fulfilled
for the theory to hold.
• Nonlinear Viscoelasticity
Extension from linear to nonlinear viscoelasticity is introduced to handle large defor­
mations with permanent sets. Two constitutive models, the Bergström­Boyce and
the Three Network model, are introduced.
• Numerical Integration and Model Calibration
The section introduces numerical integration methods for solving nonlinear deforma­
tion problems in uniaxial tension. An algorithm for integrating constitutive equations
numerically is presented. It then qualitatively discusses how this is used in fitting
material models. Finally, it shows how some key concepts for integrating constitu­
tive equations are relevant in Finite Element Analysis.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
3
==PAGE:12==
Material Science of Polymers and Thermoplastic Elastomers
Polymers are high­molecular­weight compounds characterized by their unique microstruc­
tural features, primarily consisting of long chains of repeating units known as monomers.
Polymers’ physical properties and behavior under various conditions are intrinsically linked
to their microstructure. The versatility of polymers’ physical and chemical structure al­
lows for a wide range of material properties, making them suitable for numerous appli­
cations across different industries. A polymer consists of polymer chains, which are long
molecules with repeating structures. In Figure 1, the structure of a polymer chain is rep­
resented.
Figure 1: A schematic representing the molecular structure of polyethylene. Reproduced
from [13]
The figure shows the structure of polyethylene, a simple polymer. A polymer can be
grouped into four different types of structures: linear, branched, crosslinked, and network.
In a linear structure, the overall structure resembles spaghetti; for a branched structure,
each polymer chain is not connected to its neighbor, but the chain itself has branches that
protrude out, like those of a tree branch. In crosslinked polymers, the individual chains are
linked together by covalent bonds. In the network structure, the monomers are connected
in a network structure. This microstructure gives rise to the properties of polymers, such as
their viscoelastic, thermal, and electrical properties. Figure 2 illustrates these structures.
(a) To the left is the linear structure, and to the right is the branched structure.
(b) To the left is the crosslinked structure, and to the right is the network structure.
Figure 2: Different types of polymer structures. Reproduced from [13]
4
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:13==
The microstructure is amorphous for rubber­like polymers and elastomers, meaning the
material has no ordered or repeating structure. The polymer chains are like spaghetti.
However, other polymers can be semicrystalline, meaning that crystalline regions are in­
terspersed within amorphous regions. These crystals are regularly shaped, thin platelets
(or lamellae). The molecular chains within each platelet fold back and forth on themselves,
with folds occurring at the faces. Hydrogen bonds hold together the crystalline regions.
This structure is termed the chain­folded model and is illustrated schematically in Figure
3.
Figure 3: Illustration of the crystalline structure in semicrystalline polymers. Reproduced
from [13]
Most modern polymers used for engineering purposes consist of more than one type of
monomer. This mixing of monomers is called copolymers. This allows the creation of poly­
mers with the material benefits of both components. Depending on how the monomers
are joined together, there are several types of copolymers. Elastollan is a block­type
copolymer where the different monomers are arranged in blocks, as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Illustration of the structure in a block copolymer, the colors indicate the two types
of polymers. Reproduced from [13]
If one block is amorphous at room temperature and one crystallizes, the block copoly­
mer will be a thermoplastic elastomer (TPE). TPEs represent a class of copolymers that
combine the processability of thermoplastics with the elastic behavior of elastomers. The
unique properties of TPEs are attributed to their microstructure; crystalized regions form
hard segments (HS) dispersed in the soft amorphous phase matrix called the soft seg­
ment (SS). The hard segments in this structure form mechanical crosslinks that will break
at high temperatures. This means they can be melted and cast while maintaining rubber­
like elasticity without chemical crosslinking, making them suitable for injection molding and
other high­volume manufacturing processes. In Figure 5, an illustration of this structure
is shown.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 5: Illustration of the mechanical crosslinking that TPEs form. Reproduced from
[13]
Elastollan is a subclass of thermoplastic elastomers called thermoplastic polyurethanes
(TPU), where the amorphous phase is composed of polyurethane.
Kinematics of Large Deformations
This section briefly introduces the mathematical framework of large deformations and
finite strains. For a more detailed and comprehensive introduction, the reader should
consult ’Applied Mechanics of Solids’ [14]. As is often the case with polymers, their ap­
plication introduces large deformations, and thus the strains are finite. This means that
the small strain definition ϵ = ∆L
L0 is no longer accurate as it diverges from the true strain
measure ϵtrue = ln

L
L0

under uniaxial loading. Some constitutive models use true strain
to describe the deformations of solids. However, the deformation gradient is commonly
used as the strain measure. The deformation gradient is the matrix that maps the shape
change of an infinitesimal line segment between the original and deformed configurations.
This is illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Illustration of the deformation of an arbitrary solid and the corresponding de­
formation of an infinitesimal line segment within the solid. Illustration reproduced from
[14]
The figure shows that a straight line is smoothly mapped to a curve in the deformed solid.
For an infinitesimally short line segment, this mapping can be mathematically described
as a stretch and a rotation, as an infinitesimal segment of a smooth curve approximates
a straight line. This mapping of stretch and rotation is represented by the deformation
gradient F:
6
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:15==
dyi = Fikdxk
(1)


dy1
dy2
dy3

=


1 + ∂u1
∂x1
∂u1
∂x2
∂u1
∂x3
∂u2
∂x1
1 + ∂u2
∂x2
∂u2
∂x3
∂u3
∂x1
∂u3
∂x2
1 + ∂u3
∂x3




dx1
dx2
dx3


(2)
For details on this result, see ’Applied Mechanics of Solids’ [14]. This deformation mea­
sure can describe both large strains and rotations. The deformation gradient can be
seen as the matrix that maps the undeformed configuration to the deformed configuration.
Many constitutive equations express deformation using the left Cauchy­Green deforma­
tion tensor.
B = F · FT ,
Bij = FikFjk
(3)
The deformation gradient can be decomposed into a left stretch and rotation F = VR. The
left stretch tensor can be found by V = B
1
2 and therefor B is called the ’left’ Cauchy­Green
deformation tensor. A corresponding ’right’ Cauchy­Green tensor also exits C = FT · F
and is also used in some constitutive models. Another important quantity is the relative
volume change, defined as:
J = det(F)
(4)
This can be realized by understanding that the volume of an infinitesimal cube is given by
det(Acube) where A is a matrix containing the three vectors spanning the cube. Cube is
infinitesimally small, so only straight lines can exist, and therefore, when deformed, it de­
formed into a parallelepiped. The volume of the parallelepiped is also given by det(Apip),
where Apip are a matrix of the vector spanning the parallelepiped. The deformation gra­
dient is the matrix that maps the lines from the undeformed configuration to the deformed
configuration Apip = FAcube. To find the volume, the deteminate is taken on both sides.
As the determinate operation is commutative, this yields.
det(Apip) = det(F) det(Acube) ⇒volpip = det(F)volcube
From this, it can be seen that J = det(F) is the relative volume change. Most polymers
without fiber reinforcement can be regarded as isotropic in behavior. To form isotropic
constitutive equations, using the invariants of the left Cauchy­Green tensor is convenient.
The invariants of a tensor are quantities that remain constant regardless of the choice of
coordinate system basis vectors. For the Cauchy­Green tensor, the three invariants are:
I1 = trace(B) = Bkk
I2 = 1
2
 I2
1 −B : B

= 1
2
 I2
1 −BikBki

I3 = det(B) = J2
(5)
Most hyperelastic and nonlinear viscoelastic models decompose stress into deviatoric and
volumetric components. Many polymers display nearly incompressible material behavior,
making it convenient to express the constitutive equations as a deviatoric and volumetric
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
7
==PAGE:16==
part. It can be done using an incompressible set of invariants and the relative volume
change. The deformation gradient is decomposed into dilational and distortional parts to
do this. The dilational and distortional of a tensor is given by:
distortional[A] = det[A]−1/3A = A∗
dilatational[A] = (det[A])1/3I.
(6)
with I being the identity tensor. The distortional part of a tensor, denoted using *, has
the property that the determinant is always one. Using F∗, a new set of incompressible
invariants for B∗can be formulated:
I∗
1 =
I1
J2/3 = Bkk
J2/3
I∗
2 =
I2
J4/3 = 1
2

I∗2
1 −B : B
J4/3

= 1
2

I∗2
1 −BikBki
J4/3

J =
p
det(B)
(7)
Many polymers show time­dependent material response. A deformation velocity measure
is needed to describe the viscoelastic response mathematically. For finite strains, the
velocity gradient is used.
Lij = ∂vi
∂yj
(8)
It quantifies the relative velocities of two material particles at positions y and y + dy in the
deformed shape. The velocity gradient can be expressed from the deformation gradient
as:
L = ˙F · F−1,
∂vi
∂yj
= ˙FikF −1
kj
(9)
Here, ∂vi is the relative velocity between these two particles. The velocity gradient can
be decomposed into the sum of stretch and spin rates:
L = D + W,
Lij = Dij + Wij
(10)
The stretch rate tensor
D = (L + LT )/2,
Dij = (Lij + Lji)/2
The spin tensor
W = (L −LT )/2,
Wij = (Lij −Lji)/2
This result is convenient for large strain viscoelastic material models as the time­dependent
deformation is often modeled by prescribing constitutive relations for D and W. For the
viscoelastic models introduced later in the text, the deformation gradient is decomposed
into elastic and viscous parts F = FeFv. The velocity gradient for this decomposition can
be found by applying the product rule for differentiation.
8
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:17==
L = ˙FF−1
L =
 d
dt (FeFv)

(FeFv)−1
=
h
˙FeFv + Fe ˙Fvi
(Fv)−1 (Fe)−1
= ˙Fe (Fe)−1 + Fe ˙Fv (Fv)−1 (Fe)−1
= Le + FeLv (Fe)−1
= Le + ˜Lv
(11)
where
Lv = ˙Fv (Fv)−1 = Dv + Wv,
˜Lv = ˜Dv + ˜Wv.
(12)
The constitutive model presented here prescribed in this report assumes that the viscous
deformation is irrotational[15] by setting ˜Wv = 0, and prescribes a constitutive equation
for the viscous stretch rate ˜Dv.
Hyperelasticity
Polymers are naturally soft materials and often undergo large deformations that violate
the small strain assumption. For finite strain of polymers, the stress becomes strain­
dependent. This class of materials is called hyperelasticity. The following section intro­
duces the fundamental principles of hyperelasticity and presents three commonly used
hyperelastic relations of interest. The stress­strain relation is derived from a strain en­
ergy density for hyperelastic materials. To formulate a hyperelastic relation, express the
strain energy density deformation gradient U(F). To ensure that the resulting constitu­
tive equation is isotropic, the strain energy density is formulated as a function of the left
Cauchy­Green invariants U(I1, I2, I3). To derive the stress­strain relation, realize that the
rate of change in the strain energy dU
dt equals the work rate. The rate of work can be
expressed in terms of nominal stresses on the undeformed body as Sji ˙Fij, where S is the
nominal stresses. Applying the chain rule yields.
dU
dt = ∂U
∂Fij   ∂Fij
∂t
= Sji   ∂Fij
∂t
(13)
∂U
∂Fij
= Sji
(14)
The relation for Cauchy stresses can be found by converting the nominal stress to Cauchy
stress.
σij = 1
J FikSkj = 1
J Fik
∂U
∂Fkj
(15)
When the strain energy is a function of the invariants of B∗, the relation between strain
energy and stress becomes.
σ = 2
J
 ∂U
∂I∗
1
+ ∂U
∂I∗
2
I∗
1

B∗−2
J
∂U
∂I∗
2
(B∗)2 +
∂U
∂J −2I∗
1
3J
∂U
∂I∗
1
−4I∗
2
3J
∂U
∂I∗
2

I
(16)
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
9
==PAGE:18==
While equation (16) represents the full expression relating strain energy to stress, many
polymers show little dependence on the I2 invariant. If I2 independence is assumed, the
equations can be simplified.
σij = 2
J
∂U
∂I∗
1
dev [B∗] + ∂U
∂J I
(17)
where I is the identity tenser, B∗= J−2/3B the isochorich left Green­Cauchy tensor and
I∗
1 the the first invariant of the Green­Cauchy tensor. The specific strain energy density
function U is a general function dependent on the material but can be approximated by
an infinite series[14].
U =
∞
X
i+j=1
Cij (I∗
1 −3)i (I∗
2 −3)j +
∞
X
i=1
1
Di
(J −1)2i
(18)
Here, the summation of the counter indices implies that it is a summation of all combina­
tions of i, j that satisfy the current count. The first summation is the deviatoric dependence
on the energy, and the second term is the volumetric.
Neo­Hookean
The Neo­Hookean hyperelastic model is one of the first and most widely used hyperelastic
models. Taking only the first term of equation (18) and assuming I2 independent yield the
Neo­Hookean model.
U = µ
2 (I∗
1 −3) + κ
2(J −1)2
(19)
where C10 = µ/2 and D1 = 2/κ and µ and κ are the shear and bulk modulus respectively.
This approach is phenomenological, but the same result is derived from considering the
entropy change in a network of chains. By using Gaussian chain statistics, the chains can
extend indefinitely. For the incompressible case, the strain energy density becomes.
U = 1
2Nkθ (I1 −3)
(20)
Where N, k, θ are the number of network chains per unit volume, Boltzmann’s constant,
absolute temperature, respectively, and 1
2Nkθ = µ. Stress­deformation relation becomes.
σij =
µ
J5/3 dev (B) + κ(J −1)I
(21)
To model the polymer chains as indefinitely extendable is not physical, and the Neo­
Hookean does not predict stiffening as the chain reaches maximum extendability and
the error grows large, usually above 30% elongation.
10
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:19==
Yeoh
The Yeoh hyperelastic model [16] is a phenomenological model. Yeoh suggested assum­
ing I2 independence and using the first three leading terms of (18). However, in the most
used version of the Yeoh model, higher­order terms of the volumetric response are often
truncated. Most polymers are close to incompressible, and the bulk modulus effect on the
material response therefore, higher­order volumetric terms are negligible.
σ = 2
J
h
C10 + 2C20 (I∗
1 −3) + 3C30 (I∗
1 −3)2i
dev [B∗] + κ(J −1)I
(22)
Where Ci0 and κ are material constants. The Ci0 constants relate to the shear modulus,
and at small strains, C10 ≈µ/2 is approximately the shear modulus and κ the bulk mod­
ulus. The model can be interpreted as a Neohookean model where the shear modulus
evolves with the strain. This is interpreted by Yeoh et al. [16] as caused by the polymers’
limited chain extensibility and crystallization.
The Eight­Chain Arruda Boyce model
Arruda­Boyce Eigth Chain model [17, 18] share some similarities with the Neo­Hookean
model as the Eight chain model is based on deriving the strain energy density by also
considering a network of chains. The model expresses the change in entropy as a function
of deformation and relates the change in entropy to the strain energy density. The Eight­
Chain model considers the limiting extendability of the chain by using Langevin chain
statistics instead of Gaussian. Langevin statistic use is nonlinear, making it inherently
more difficult to form an analytical expression for the entropy change. The model simplifies
the problem using eight chains arranged in the topology shown in figure 7.
Figure 7: Topology assumption used in the Eight­Chain model. Reproduced from[18].
The deformation imposed by the deformation gradient is then decomposed into a principle
street and imposed on the eight chains. This means that the topology shown in figure 7
is always assumed to align with the principle stretch direction and thus rotate with the
deformation. This assumption is handy as it means that the stretch of all chains in the
model is the same. The strain energy density of a chain of stretch is given by:
U = nkθN
rchain
Nl β + ln
β
sinh β

−θc′
with
β = L−1 hrchain
Nl
i
(23)
The constants n, k, θ, N, l and rchain are the chain link density, Boltzmann’s constant,
the absolute temperature, the number of chain links, the length of a chain link, and the
current length of a chain respectively. The function L−1 is the inverse Langvin function,
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
11
==PAGE:20==
with L(x) = coth(x)−1
x. The strain energy density function yields the following constitutive
relation.
σ =
µ
Jλ∗
L−1 
λ∗
λlock

L−1  1
λlock
 dev [B∗] + κ[J −1]I
(24)
Where µ is the initial shear modulus, κ is the bulk modulus, and λlock is the maximum
extendability of the polymer chains. The chain stretch is given by.
λ∗=
r
trace(B∗)
3
=
r
I∗
1
3
(25)
The inverse Langevin function cannot be expressed in close form; it is therefore often
approximated[19], one such approximation is given by L−1(x) ≈x3−x2
1−x2 . A Taylor expan­
sion of the strain energy density function is often used in literature[14]. The constitutive
relation from this expansion gives.
σ =
µ
J5/3
 
1 +
I∗
1
5
 λlock2 +
33 (I∗
1)2
525
 λlock4 + . . .
!
dev (B) + κ(J −1)I
(26)
Linear viscoelasticity
For most practical engineering cases, hyperelasticity alone is not enough to accurately
describe the material response of polymers as it only accurately captures the equilibrium
response. Polymers strongly depend on both the loading rate and temperature and gen­
erally exhibit a time­dependent response to loading. When the time­dependent response
to loading is reversible, it is termed viscoelastic. For many cases, linear viscoelasticity
can be used; for linear viscoelasticity, there is a requirement that all loads independently
contribute to the final state of the material. The time dependent response of the material
is often tested using a relaxation test. In such a test, the material is subjected to an in­
stant step in strain, and the stress over time is measured. In figure 8, the response to a
relaxation test is shown.
Figure 8: Relaxation response of a viscoelastic solid modeled by a one­term Prony series.
Coefficients are E0 = E1 = η = 5MPa subjected to a strain step of 0.01
12
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:21==
A Prony series often models this response. The rheological interpretation of this model
is shown in figure 9. This model was used to generate the report shown in figure 8. The
model shown in figure 9 is a one­term Prony model.
Figure 9: Rheological interpretation of a linear viscoelastic model with one Prony term.
The left side giver the viscoelastic response, and the right side gives the long­term equi­
librium response
This rheological representation is more than an aid to understanding the mathematics of
viscoelasticity. Bergström showed [20] that rheological and the more traditional integral
representations of linear viscoelasticity are mathematically identical. For this reason, the
rheological model is also called the differential form. The model has two main elements in
Figure 9. The spring and dashpot in the series provide the viscoelastic response and are
called a Maxwell element, or Prony term. The model’s long­term, or equilibrium response,
is the single spring with stiffness E0. When time goes to infinity, this spring will dominate
the behavior. Both springs respond linearly σ = Eϵ, and so does the dashpot with ˙ϵ = σ
η ,
where η is the viscosity of the dashpot. To find the governing equation start by writing the
force equilibrium between the internal and external force.
F = F1 + F0
(27)
Here F is the total force acting on the network, F0 is the force acting on the long­term
spring, and F1 is the force acting on the spring in the Maxwell element E1. This can be
written as a stress equilibrium if all connecting lines have the same cross­section. As this
is a model of a continuum this is the case.
F = F1 + F0
σA = σ1A + σ0A
σ = σ1 + σ0
(28)
It may seem strange to start with a force equilibrium. However, since the definition of
stress is σ = F/A, it is impossible to consider the stress equilibrium without first consid­
ering the forces. However, this step is often skipped in literature, and the stress equilib­
rium is presented directly. This will also be done in the following sections of this report on
nonlinear viscoelasticity. With the stress equilibrium, the stress in the Maxwell element
can be expressed in terms of the strain.
σ = E1(ϵ −ϵ2)
(29)
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
13
==PAGE:22==
By differentiating (29) with respect to time and inserting the equation, the flowrate of the
dampener ˙ϵ = σ
η yields.
˙σ1 = E1(˙ϵ −˙ϵ2)
˙σ1 = E1(˙ϵ −σ1
η )
˙σ1 + E1
σ1
η = E1 ˙ϵ
(30)
The stress equilibrium (28) is then differentiated with respect to time and inserted in (30)
˙σ −˙σ0 + E1
σ −σ0
η
= E1 ˙ϵ
(31)
˙ση −˙σ0η + E1σ −E1σ0 = E1 ˙ϵη
(32)
(33)
The stress of the long­term equilibrium spring is given by σ0 = E0ϵ.
˙ση −E0 ˙ϵη + E1σ −E1E0ϵ = E1 ˙ϵη
(34)
Simplifying (34) yield the equations found in literature [14].
E1σ + ˙ση = E1E0ϵ + (E1 + E0)˙ϵη
(35)
This differential equation will describe the stress history for an arbitrary strain history or
inversely. To recreat the response shown in figure 8 then equation (35) need to be solved.
For a relaxation test strainrate history is given by ˙ϵ = 0 and the initial condition is σ(0) =
(E1 + E0)ϵstep. The solution becomes.
σ(t) =

E0 + E1 exp
−E1t
η

ϵstep
(36)
For many practical problems, using a single Maxwell element/one Prony term is inade­
quate to describe the material response; in these cases, a Prony series is used. The
Prony series can be interpreted as adding more parallel Maxwell elements to the model
to get the desired response. This is rheologically represented in figure 10.
14
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:23==
Figure 10: Rheological interpretation of the Prony series viscoelastic model.
In this model, all the elements remain linear. The model works well for small strain prob­
lems where material response remains linear. In the viscoelastic case, linear refers to the
fact that each load independently adds to the final state, e.g., the superposition principle.
However, some extensions can be made to this model to make it more capable. The
spring can be extended to follow a hyperelastic stress­strain law. This modification will
allow the model to capture the viscoelastic response even at modest strains, as long as
superposition holds. However, at large strain, the Payne effect becomes significant, and
the superposition principle breaks down. The Payne effect[21] is a strain that depends on
the viscoelastic properties, similar to the hyperelasticity where the strain energy density
becomes dependent on the strain. Linear viscoelasticity cannot model the Payne effect,
thus motivating the introduction of nonlinear viscoelasticity, which will be discussed in
detail later.
Time­Temperature Superposition
Time­Temperature superposition is a theory that states that the effect of time and tem­
perature on the viscoelastic properties of a material can be expressed by a single vari­
able. When this is the case, the material is called thermorheologically simple[22]. Time­
Temperature superposition is a powerful concept for modeling the viscoelastic behav­
ior of polymers, as many polymers are thermorheologically simple materials. In a ther­
morheologically simple material, the long­term response is temperature­independent, with
only the viscoelastic response being temperature­dependent. The reason for this is that
the time­dependent response of the material comes from the rearrangement of polymer
chains after the solid has deformed. Take the case of a relaxation test where the polymer
chain is in an equilibrium position before an instantaneous stretch is applied. After the
stretch, the polymer chains are in a nonequilibrium position and will, over time, move to
the new equilibrium state in the deformed configuration. This causes a change in en­
tropy over time, and as the polymer chain reaches its new equilibrium, stress decreases
(relaxes). This polymer chain movement occurs on a molecular scale and is driven by
Brownian motion. An increased temperature increases Brownian motion, and therefore,
time and temperature have the same effect on the viscoelastic response. This is called the
Time­Temperature superposition, and a set of key assumptions must be met the principle
applies. The assumptions listed in Table 1.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
15
==PAGE:24==
Assumption
Description
Thermorheologically simple
The material’s elastic behavior is independent of tem­
perature.
Linear viscoelasticity
All loads contribute independently to the final state of
the material
Temperature stability
The material does not chemically change or degrade
over the test temperature range.
No physical aging
Changes in the material’s properties over time are neg­
ligible.
Negligible humidity response
Relative humidity does not significantly affect the ma­
terial’s properties.
Table 1: Assumptions for Time­Temperature Superposition Validity
The theory states that the viscoelastic responses depend on an internal time calculated
from the physical time and the temperature. Suppose the stress response of a relaxation
test can be plotted on a logarithmic time scale. In that case, the effect of temperature only
shifts along the logarithmic time axis. This concept is illustrated in Figure 11.
Figure 11: The plots show the intrinsic behavior of a thermorheologically simple material
undergoing a relaxation test at three different temperatures. The behavior is the same for
an arbitrary but consistent system of units.
From the figure, it can be observed that the effect of temperature only shifts the relaxation
curves in time. It is also evident from the curves that the instantaneous and equilibrium
response is independent of the temperature; only the viscous response depends on time.
The literature commonly employs two prevalent methods for Time­Temperature superpo­
sition: the Williams–Landel–Ferry (WLF) equation and the Arrhenius equation.
The Williams–Landel–Ferry(WLF) equation
The WLF equation, developed by Williams, Landel, and Ferry [3], is a procedure for shift­
ing experimental data using a shifting factor. The shifting factor is determined by Equation
(37):
log10(aT (T)) = C1(T −T0)
C2 + T −T0
(37)
16
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:25==
Where C1 and C2 are empirical constants, and T0 is a reference temperature, usually the
glass transition temperature or the temperature that best fits the data. The shifting factor
aT is used to shift time. In effect, this means that if the temperature changes, then the
time tT at a temperature of T is related to the time tT0 at the reference temperature T0 by
Equation (38):
tT = tT0
aT
(38)
The WLF equation is valid in [Tg, Tg + 100◦C]. Ferry[1] found the constant to have the
values C1 = 17.44 and C2 = 51.6 by testing a large number of polymers. These values
are sometimes referred to as universal constants but are, in fact, just an avenger of many
different polymers and vary from polymer to polymer.
Arrhenius equation
The WLF equation is only valid above the glass transition temperature. The Arrhenius
equation[7] is used for temperatures below the glass transition temperature. The Arrhe­
nius equation for the relaxation time τ is given by:
τ(T) = A exp

−Ea
RT

(39)
Here, A is a constant, Ea is the activation energy, R is the universal gas constant, and T
is the temperature. The relaxation time τ is the time it takes for an exponentially decaying
variable to decay to value 1/e of its original value; the decaying variable is the stress.
This equation can be transformed to express a shift factor, similar to the WLF equation,
by taking the logarithm on both sides:
ln[τ(T)] = ln(A) −Ea
RT
(40)
Then, taking the ratio between the relaxation time at T and the relaxation time at Tg and
converting to base ten logarithm, gives the shift factor:
log(aT ) = log
 τ(T)
τ(Tg)

= −
Ea
2.303R
 1
T −1
Tg

(41)
where the 2.303 factor is the conversion from ln to log10. As shown by Bergstrom [23],
the Arrhenius equation can be transformed into the WLF equation with a series of sim­
ple mathematical manipulations. For an arbitrary reference temperature, the Arrhenius
equation is written as:
ln(aT ) = Ea
R

1
Tg −Tz
−
1
T −Tz

(42)
Where Tz is the difference between the glass and chosen reference temperatures. Rear­
ranging the equation gives:
ln(aT ) =
1
Tg −Tz
· E0
R · T −Tg
T −Tz
(43)
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
17
==PAGE:26==
By defining Tg −Tz = C2 and converting from ln to log10, the equation becomes:
log10(aT ) =

Ea
2.303C2R

·
T −Tg
C2 + T −Tg
(44)
Introducing a second constant C1 =
Ea
2.303C2R makes the equation identical to the WLF
equation, with Equation (41) being a special case where C2 = Tg.
Nonlinear viscoelasticity
Following the concept of the rheological model in Figure 9 and 10, extending the model
to nonlinear viscoelasticity is conceptually simple. A nonlinear model can be created
by changing the definition of the springs to hyperelastic ones and making the dampers
nonlinear. Take the model in figure 9; if the springs are modeled using the Eight­Chain
model and the dashpot is given a power flow law on the form:
˙ϵ2 =
 σ
σ0
m
(45)
This would become a simplified version of Bergström­Boyce. Using a power flow equation
gives rise to an effect called a permanent set. If the exponent is high and the stress low,
as is the case for a material that has been loaded and unloaded, the flow rate becomes
practically zero. The material experiences an effective permanent deformation. However,
this is not true plasticity as, for an infinite time, the material will return to its original config­
uration. Some nonlinear viscoelastic, like the Bergström­Boyce, can include terms in the
flow equation that set the flow rate to true zero below a certain stress, making the model
capable of modeling plastic deformation. However, in these models, the line between
viscoelastic and viscoplastic blurs as a single term now gives rise to both effects. The
different terms are clarified in table 2
Term
Definition
Elastic
Reversible, time­independent deformation.
Viscoelastic
Reversible, time­dependent deformation.
Permanent set
viscoelastic deformation where the flow rate is so low that the defor­
mation is permanent for all practical purposes.
Plastic
Irreversible, time­independent deformation.
Viscoplastic
Irreversible deformation, where the rate of plastic deformation is time
(rate) dependent.
Viscous
Refers to the time­dependent deformation, e.g., the dashpot(s) in the
different models.
Table 2: definition of terminologi
The Bergström­Boyce model
The Bergström­Boyce (BB) model is a nonlinear generalization of the linear viscoelastic.
The rheological interpretation of the model can be seen in Figure 12.
18
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:27==
Figure 12: Rheological representation of the Bergström­Boyce model. Figure reproduced
from [18]
The model can model large strains, so the deformation gradient is used as the strain
measure. The networks act in parallel thus F = FA = FB. The summation of the two
networks fully gives the model’s response.
σ = σA + σB
(46)
The response of network A is given by the Eight­Chain model (24) with its own set of
hyperelastic constants µA, κA and λlock
A . For network B, The deformation gradients are
multiplicatively decomposed into viscous and elastic parts FB = Fe
BFv
B. The elastic defor­
mation of network B is also given by the Eight­Chain model (24) with its own set of elastic
constants µB, κB and λlock
B . For the original publication [24], the shear modulus of network
B is given as µB = sµA where s is the relative stiffness and he locking stretch and bulk
modulus are taken to be identical κA = κB, λlock
A
= λlock
B . For the implementation in Ansys,
the shear modulus µ and locking stretch λlock are independent material parameters for the
two hyperelastic networks. A relation for the dashpot must be given to finish the model.
Due to the multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient, the kinematic area
for network B is given by (12). The result is repeated here for convenience.
Lv
B = Dv
B + Wv
B,
˜Lv
B = ˜Dv
B + ˜Wv
B.
(47)
The model sets the viscous deformation to be irrotational, ˜Wv
B = 0 [15]. The flow equation
for the dashpot is given for the Bergstöm­Boyce model.
˜Dv
B = ˙γB (σB, Be∗
B ) Nv
B
(48)
Where ˙γB is the viscous flow rate, and Nv
B is the direction of the viscous flow. When
modeling the viscous flow, the flow direction is assumed to be coaxial with the deviatoric
stress. Stress is defined in the deformed configuration, but the flow acts on the intermedi­
ate configuration; therefore, there is a need to map the stress to the correct configuration.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
19
==PAGE:28==
This can be achived by perscribing the flow for ˜Dv
B instead of Dv
B. The normalized devia­
toric stress in network B gives the direction of the flow.
Nv
B =
dev [σB]
∥dev [σB]∥F
(49)
Where ∥dev [σB]∥F =
p
trace [dev [σB] dev [σB]] is the Frobenius norm, e.g., effective
scalar stress, thus, the viscous flow becomes.
˜Lv
B = ˙γv
BNv
B,
Fe
B ˙Fv
B (Fv
B)−1 (Fe
B)−1 = ˙γv
BNv
B,
˙Fv
B = ˙γv
B (Fe
B)−1
dev [σB]
∥dev [σB]∥F
Fe
BFv
B
(50)
The equation describes the kinematics of the viscous flow. The last part of the model is
the constitutive model for the effective flow rate ˙γB (σB, Be∗
B ). The constitutive equation for
˙γB is based on the assumption that reptation is the cause of the time­dependent response
of the polymer. A more detailed description of this mechanism can be found in section
8.1 of Bergströms book [18] and in Bergström’s articles on the model [24, 25, 26]. The
constitutive equation that arises from the use of reptation dynamics gives an equation for
the effective creep rate:
˙λv
B = C6

λv
B −1
C7
(51)
Where the equivalent stretch is given by the Eigth­Chain model.
λv
B =
s λv
1B
2 +
 λv
2B
2 +
 λv
3B
2
3
(52)
Where λv
iB are the princible viscous stretches, calculated form the deformation Fv
B of the
dashpot. This theory is formulated to relax a free chain inside a polymer matrix. There
are rarely free chains in the polymer; instead, there are free chain ends that quantitatively
behave similarly with the addition that one of the chain ends is fixed. This poses an energy
barrier to the relaxation process, and the model assumes that this energy barrier can be
modeled using a power law. Together, this gives the final equation for the flow:
˙γB = C1
h
λBp
chain −1
iC2 τB
ˆτB
m
(53)
Where constants ˆC1 ≡C1/ˆτ m
B and m are positive, and C2 is a constant restricted by
reptational dynamics to be negative. In later papers, some modifications are made, giving
the flow equation.
˙γv
B = ˙γ0
 λv
B −1 + ξ
C

R

τ
τbase
−ˆτcut
m
(54)
Where ˙γ0 ≡1s−1 is a reference strain rate introduced for dimensional consistency. The
two modifications that have been made to the original model are:
20
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:29==
• In the undeformed state and in the case of reverse loading, λv
B →1, and since C is
negative, this leads to a singularity in the flow rate of the model where ˙γB →∞as
λv
B →1. The material parameter ξ is introduced as a small number to resolve this.
[26]
• ˆτcut is a normalized cutoff stress, and R(x) = (x + |x|)/2 is the ramp function. This
was introduced to give a minimum flow stress where no flow occurs. This allows
the model to predict true plastic strain and improves the numerical efficiency of FE
solvers in the region where the stress is small.
Dal et al. [27] propose an algorithm for implementing the Bergström­Boyce model in an FE
setting. This causes the equations for the viscous flow to differ from the original article’s
version. The Ansys 2022 R2 documentation specifies the flow rate as follows.
˙γB = ˙γ0
 ¯λp
B −1 + ϵ
C
"
τ/
√
2
τbase
#m
(55)
In general, the Ansys implementation uses the Kirchoff stress τij = Jσij, causing the
overall Kinematic of deformation to take a different form. For the material properties,
Ansys uses the ˆC1 ≡C1/ˆτ m
B parameter directly, and it is specified as fac. See the Ansys
documentation for details [28]. The parameters of the model and their description can be
seen in table 3.
Parameter Name
Description
µ
Shear modulus of network A
λlock
A
Locking stretch of network A
κ
Bulk modulus
µB
Stiffness of network B
λlock
B
Locking stretch of network B
ξ
Strain adjustment factor
C
Strain Exponential
τbase
Flow resistance
m
Stress exponential
τcut
Normalized cutoff stress for flow*
κ
Bulk modulus
Coefficients relationships to Ansys implimentation
λlock =
√
N
fac =
˙γ0
τ m
base
κ = 1/D
Table 3: List of the material parameters in the Bergström­Boyce model. * indicates pa­
rameters not in the Ansys implementation.
The Three Network Model
The Three Network (TN) model can be seen as an extension of the Bergström­Boyce
model as it builds on the same principles and structure. The model was initially devel­
oped to capture the response of ultra­high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE)[29].
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
21
==PAGE:30==
It has since shown excellent results in modeling the constitutive response of many ther­
moplastics. The model is conceptually similar to the Bergström­Boyce model, but as the
name indicates, it has three molecular networks instead of two. Figure 13 shows a rheo­
logical interpretation of the three network models.
Figure 13: Rheological representation of the Three Network model. Reproduced from
[18]
The Three Network and Bergström­Boyce model builds on the same theoretical base:
the relaxation process is an energy­activated process that can be modeled with a power
flow law but excludes the reputation term. While at first glance, the Three Network model
might be simply the Bergström­Boyce model with one extra spring­damper network, there
are some differences between the two models.
• The Three Network model is temperature­dependent. This means the equations
contain a temperature­dependent term.
• Evolution of shear modulus with plastic straining. The model contains an evolution
equation for the shear modulus of network B such that the shear modulus evolves
with the viscous straining of network A.
• The flow rate of the model is not dependent on the strain level.
• Network C includes the I2 depends.
The model consists of three networks. The stress of the model is given by the sum of
stress in each network.
σ = σA + σB + σC
(56)
In the same manner, as for the Bergström­Boyce model, the deformation grad multi­
plicatively decomposed into elastic and viscous components Fi = Fe
iFv
i
i = A, B. The
Cauchy stress in all three networks is given by the Eigth­Chain model (24). For networks
A and B, a temperature­dependent eight­chain model is used.
σi =
µi
Je
i λe∗
i

1 + θ −θ0
ˆθ
 L−1  λe∗
i
λlock

L−1  1
λlock
 dev [Be∗
i ] + κ (Je
i −1) I
i = A, B
(57)
22
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:31==
Where µi, λe∗
i and κ are the elastic constants of the two networks, with κ being the same for
all networks. The temperature­dependent is given by current temperature θ, a reference
temperature θ0, and ˆθ material parameter specifying the temperature response of the
stiffness. The reference temperature can be used as a material parameter but is often
taken as θ0 = 293K. This gives the model a linear response to changes in stiffness as a
function of temperature. Many polymers show a nonlinear relation between temperature
and long­term stiffness. Therefore, this model should only be used for temperatures close
to the temperatures where it was calibrated, where the change in long­term stiffness can
be approximated as linear. The elastic response of network B differs from network A
because the shear modulus µB is taken to evolve with the flow of network A. The shear
modulus evolves from an initial value of µBi to a final value µBf given by the evolution
equation.
˙µB = −β [µB −µBf] · ˙γA
(58)
Where β is a material parameter. The elastic response of network C is given by the eight­
chain model with first­order I2 dependence.
σC =
1
1 + q
(
µC
Jλ∗
C

1 + θ −θ0
ˆθ
 L−1  λ∗
C
λlock

L−1  1
λlock
 dev [B∗]
+ κ(J −1)I + qµC
J

I∗
1B∗−2I∗
2
3 I −(B∗)2
 )
(59)
Where q controls the magnitude of the I2­dependence. It is noted that in the original
article, Bergström et al. [29] introduced the model with the I2 dependence; however, in
Bergström’s book [18], it is introduced without the I2 dependence. Ansys Mechanical
was later used to simulate a high­rate tensile test, and the version implemented in Ansys
documentation also uses the I2­dependent version. Therefore, that is the one presented
here. The I2 independent version can be recovered by setting q = 0. The constitutive
equation for the flow of the two dashpots is needed to complete the model description. The
kinematics are identical to those presented for the Bergström­Boyce model, and therefore,
the kinematics of flow for the two dashpots are given by
˙Fv
i = ˙γv
i Fe−1
i
dev [σi]
∥dev [σi]∥F
Fe
iFv
i
i = A, B
(60)
In contrast to the Bergström­Boyce model, this power­law flow has no dependence on the
strain level, and the part of the equation related to reptation dynamics is omitted from this
model. The flow rate is given as a temperature­dependent power­law equation for both
networks.
˙γv
i = ˙γ0 ·

τi
ˆτi + aR (pi)
mi
·
 θ
θ0
n
i = A, B
(61)
The constant ˙γ0 ≡1s−1 is a reference strainrate introduced for dimensional consistency.
The hydrostatic pressure for the two networks is give as pi = −[(σi)11 + (σi)22 + (σi)33] /3
i =
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
23
==PAGE:32==
A, B and R(x) = (x+|x|)/2 is the ramp function. The parameters ˆτi, a, mi, and n are ma­
terial parameters. It is noted that Ansys uses a slightly different definition of the flow rates
in the two networks.
˙γv
i = ˙γ0 · (¯τi −τc)mi ·
 θ
θ0
n
¯τi =
τi
max (ˆτi + aR(p), 0.001ˆτi)
Where
i = A, B
(62)
According to the documentation, when ¯τA < τc no flow occurs1, where τ is the Kirchhoff
stress. All the constants in the model can be seen in table 4
Symbol
Description
µA
Shear modulus of network A
λlock
Locking stretch
κ
Bulk modulus
ˆτA
Flow resistance of network A
a
Pressure dependence of flow
mA
stress exponential of network A
mB
stress exponential of network B
µBi
Initial shear modulus of network B
µBf
Final shear modulus of network B
β
Evolution rate of µB
ˆτB
Flow resistance of network B
µC
Shear modulus of network C
q
Relative contribution of I2 of network C
ˆθ
Magnitude of the temperature response
θ0
Reference temperature
Table 4: Material constants in the Three Network Model
Model integration and calibration methods
The material models presented here are all highly nonlinear, and finding the model coef­
ficient can be challenging. For some cases, e.g., the Eight Chain Arruda­Boyce, simple
load cases like incompressible uni­ and biaxial have closed­form solutions. However,
more complicated models like the Bergström­Boyce and Three Network models do not.
Therefore, numerical integration of the constitutive equations must be performed, and
then the model predictions can be used to calibrate the material constants. This section
will first introduce a simple algorithm for numerical time integration of constitutive equa­
tions and quantitatively explain how this is used to find the model parameters. Algorithm
1 shows the pseudocode for integrating a nonlinear constitutive in time.
1The case where ¯τA < τc a negative number would be raised to a non­integer power, which gives a com­
plex number. The documentation does not explain this, and it is assumed that it is part of the implementation
method that is not documented
24
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 1 Numerical integration of constitutive equations
1: ϵij = ϵe
ij + ϵv
ij = 0 + 0 = 0
2: for i = 1, n do
3:
ϵi
ij = ϵi
ij = ˙ϵij∆t
4:
σij ←σ

ϵi
ij −ϵv,i−1
ij

5:
˙ϵv
ij ←f

σij, ϵv,i−1
ij

6:
ϵv,i
ij = ϵv,i−1
ij
+ ˙ϵv
ij · ∆t
7: end for
The algorithm is based on displacement control. However, the method can be changed
to load control by changing line 3 of the code. Superscript i is the time increment, and the
total strain is given by ϵij. The superscript e and v indicate the elastic and viscous strain,
respectively. For the case where the deformation is measured using the deformation
gradient F, the decomposition of deformation gradinget would be given as ϵi
ij −ϵp,i−1
ij
→
Fi(Fv,i)−1. The two functions σ and f evaluate the stress state and then the resulting flow
rate of the material as a function of the stat parameters. When a nonlinear elastic relation
is used, the stress state’s solution on line 4 of algorithm 1 must be solved numerically. The
Eight­Chain model in uniaxial loading is used as an example. In this case, the stress in
the loading direction depends on the deformation in the transverse direction. This results
in two nonlinear equations with two unknowns that must be solved to find the stress.
There are two methods of solving this problem: incremental or iterative. The incremental
method takes several small steps and does not correct the error made in each increment.
In contrast, the iterative method iterates until convergence is reached. Here, the iterative
method is introduced first. Then, the incremental method is introduced as it lends itself
well to understanding how implementing a nonlinear material model in FEA works. The
boundary conditions for uniaxial tension are.
F11 = λ1
(63)
Fij = 0
for
i ̸= j
(64)
σij = 0
for
i = j ̸= 1
(65)
If the material is incompressible, the uniaxial loading of this model has a closed­form
solution [18].
σincompress
uniax
= µ
λ∗
L−1 
λ∗
λlock

L−1  1
λlock


λ2 −1
λ

(66)
However, for the compressible case, the model has to be solved numerically. The de­
formation gradient is given by the principal stretches λ =
L0+∆L
L0
. The stress σ11 can
be calculated with the known longitudinal and yet unknown transverse deformation. The
boundary condition in equation (65) gives a nonlinear equation that can be solved to find
the traves deformation. Expressed in terms of principle stretches, the stress in the travers
direction is given as.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
25
==PAGE:34==
F =


λ1
0
0
0
λ2
0
0
0
λ3


B∗=


λ12
(λ1λ2λ3)2/3
0
0
0
λ22
(λ1λ2λ3)2/3
0
0
0
λ32
(λ1λ2λ3)2/3


(67)
σ22 =
µ
Jλ∗
L−1 
λe∗
λlock

L−1  1
λlock


B∗
22 −1
3 Trace(B∗)

+ κ (J −1) = 0
(68)
J = λ1λ2λ3
(69)
λ∗=
q
3λ2
1
J2/3 + 3λ2
2
J2/3 + 3λ2
3
J2/3
3
(70)
The symmetry of the loading imposes that F22 = F33 ⇒λ2 = λ3. Writing the equations in
terms of principle stretches yields.
σ22
µ
λ1λ22λe∗
L−1 
λe∗
λlock

L−1

1
λlock

 λ12 + λ22
(λ1λ22)2/3 −κ
 λ1λ22 −1

= 0
(71)
Equation (71) can be solved numerically. The numerical solution of such an equation can
be done using either an incremental or an iterative method.
Iterative method for solving constitutive equations
A simple and robust method for solving smooth nonlinear numerical problems is the New­
ton method [30]. This method finds the root of the nonlinear equation, e.g., f(x) = 0. For
the case at hand, the Newton method starts with an initial guess for the solution, λ22; the
guess is then iteratively updated using the scheme in equation (72). The i’th approxima­
tion of the solution is found using the i −1 iteration.
λi
22 = λi−1
22 −σ22
 λi−1
22

dσ(λ22)
dλ23
(72)
For the evaluation of the function and its derivative in equation (72), it is common to use
an approximation[19] for the inverse Langevin function like L−1(x) ≈x3−x2
1−x2 which is the
one used by Ansys for the Bergström­Boyce. Or solve it numerically with a sub iteration
of the Newton method. The derivative of the stress in the equation (68) can be expressed
in the closed form by using the inverse differentiation rule

f−1′ (a) =
1
f′(f−1(a)) and the
approximation, however, it is too lengthy to write out in full. In implementation, it can be
convenient to approximate the derivative numerically. For this purpose, the finite differ­
ence method works well. Still, it is worth highlighting the complex step method [31], where
a small step in the complex number plan is used for the approximation. This method has
the advantage of evaluating the derivative to machine precision. Once a satisfactory con­
vergence of the solution has been found, the computed transverse stretch λ22 can be
used to evaluate the stress, recalling that λ22 = λ33. If the load case does not allow the
equations to be reduced to a single equation, the Newton method can also be written in
matrix form, often called the Newton­Raphson method. For details, the reader is referred
to Remani et al.[30]. With the stress state solved, a step in time can be performed, and
algorithm 1 is iterated once more. With a method for solving the constitutive equations,
26
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:35==
the material parameters can be found by solving an optimization problem. This is done
by first formulating a fitness function for the error between experimental data and the
model prediction. This generally leads to rough and nonconvex optimization problems.
During this project, the software Mcalibration was discovered, and this software performs
this exact task. Mcalibration combines gradient­free (random search, genetic algorithm,
CMA­ES, etc.) and gradient descent (NewUOA, Nelder­Mead, etc.) methods to solve
the optimization problem. The report will not detail these methods as this is better and
more accurately described in the Mcalibration documentation[32]. Before discovering the
Mcalibration, work on implementing a 1D solver was performed. The code uses algo­
rithem 1 with the iterative elastic solver to integrate the Mullikin­Boyce model[33, 34, 35].
As the software Mcalibration already had many constitutive models implemented with the
coefficient fitting, this work path was abandoned due to time constraints. However, it now
serves as a good example to illustrate the application outline in the theory. For those
interested, the code can be found in the appendix
Incremental method for solving constitutive equations
The other method of solving the equations is the incremental method, where the tangent
stiffness is evaluated, and a small step in that direction is taken. In contrast to the itera­
tive Newton method, each step will introduce an error that is not corrected, and achieving
the same accuracy as the Newton method will require more steps and will be much more
computationally expensive for the same accuracy. It is included in the report as it serves
as an excellent stepping stone to understanding the concept of tangent stiffness and the
implementation of nonlinear constitutive equations into the Fninte Element framework.
The solution for a Neo­Hookean hyperelastic model using a load­controlled incremental
Euler method is shown as an example. A small part of the total load is applied, tangent
stiffness is evaluated, and the corresponding deformation caused by the load step is cal­
culated. Tangent stiffness can be understood as the material’s stiffness in its current state
such that the infinitesimal change in stress from an infinitesimal change in deformation is
given by.
dσij = dσij
dFkl
dFkl
(73)
When the relation between stress and strain is nonlinear, the tangent stiffness matrix will
depend on the current stress and deformation level. Since taking infinitesimal steps in
calculating would take an infinity, the equation has to be changed to incremental form to
be solved.
∆σij = dσij
dFkl
∆Fkl
(74)
The term dσij
dFkl is the tangent stiffness matrix. In the case of a uniaxial load case, the
following system of equations can be written.
∆σ11 = dσ11
dFkl
∆Fkl
∆σ22 = dσ22
dFkl
∆Fkl = 0
∆σ33 = dσ33
dFkl
∆Fkl = 0
(75)
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
27
==PAGE:36==
This gives a system of equations that can be written in matrix form.


dσ11
dF11
dσ11
dF22
dσ11
dF33
dσ22
dF11
dσ22
dF22
dσ22
dF33
dσ33
dF11
dσ33
dF22
dσ33
dF33


|
{z
}
Kt
·


∆F11
∆F22
∆F33

=


∆σ11
0
0


(76)
Where Kt is the tangent stiffness matrix, the step in deformation ∆F can be found by
solving the system from the step in load ∆σ. This process is repeated until the final load
is reached. This is outlined in algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Uniaxial Tension Euler Integration
1: for i ←1 to n do
2:
σ = σ + ∆σ
3:
Update Kt based on current values of F
4:
∆F = K−1
t
∆σ
5:
F = F + diag(∆F)
▷∆F is the step vector of the diagonals
6: end for
This method can be seen as a linearization of the local elasticity problem that is then
solved. This is shown in figure 14.
(a) different number of increments.
(b) Converges of the Euler method.
Figure 14: Euler method solution of the Neo­Hookean hyperelastic equations. µ = 2MPa
and κ = 99MPa
The figure illustrates that a progressive error is reduced when more steps are taken. It is
also clear that many increments are needed to achieve active accuracy.
Tangent stiffness and connection to FEA
The connection between the preceding section and FEA analysis is the tangent stiffness
matrix dσij
dFkl . Take the linear elastic case; in this case, the system of equations that are
solved for the displacement of an element can be expressed on the form.
Kaibkub
k = F a
i
(77)
28
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:37==
Where the a, b is the number of nodes in the element, i, k is the degree of freedom in a
node. The element stiffness matrix can be obtained by writing equation (77) on matrix
form. For a 2D Q4 element, writing the implied summation of equation (77) out gives.
Kaibkub
k = Kai11u1
1 + Kai12u1
2 + Kai21u2
1 . . . + Kai42u4
2 = F a
i
(78)
Equation (78) is a set of eight equations in the eight degrees of freedom in the element.
Writing equation (78) out in matrix form gives.


K1111
K1112
K1121
· · ·
K1142
K1211
K1212
K2111
...
...
...
K4211
K4242




u11
u21
u12
...
u24


=


F11
F22
F12
...
F24


(79)
The components of the stiffness matrix are given by
Kaibk =
Z
R
Cijkl
∂Na(x)
∂xj
∂Nb(x)
∂xl
dV
(80)
Where Cijkl is the elastic stiffness tensor and ∂Na(x)
∂x
is the derivative of the shape function
with respect to the global coordinate system. For this project, modeling nonlinear material
behavior is of interest. Including nonlinear material behavior gives a new, nonlinear set of
equations. To solve this, the elasticity problem is linearized. This is conceptually the same
as in the previous section, where the tangent stiffness is updated for each increment. The
tangent element stiffness is given by.
Kaibk =
Z
R
∂σij
∂ϵkl
∂Na
∂xj
∂Nb
∂xl
dV
(81)
Here the tangent stiffness appears as ∂σij
∂ϵkl . The difference between this and the one
presented in the incremental integration section is that none of the components are zero
and, therefore, cannot be reduced to a three­by­three matrix, as was done in the incre­
mental solution to uniaxial tension. If a hyperelastic material is used, the effect of finite
deformations must be considered. This gives a tangential stiffness matrix on the form.
Kaibk =
Z
V0
∂τij
∂Fkl
∂Nb
∂xl
∂Na
∂xm
F −1
mj dV0 −
Z
V0
τij
∂Na
∂xm
F −1
mk
∂Nb
∂xp
F −1
pj dV0 −
Z
∂2V0
t∗
i Na ∂η
∂wb
k
dA0
(82)
Where τij is the Kirchhoff stress τ = Jσ and ∂τij
∂Fkl is the tangent stiffness matrix. The
finite deformation introduces two new terms that account for the change in shape. The
second term accounts for the geometric stiffness, e.g., that the change in shape affects
the structure’s stiffness, and the third term accounts for the change in load due to the
change in shape. The equation shows the connection between the uniaxial problem and
a general FEA approach to nonlinear materials. For detail, consult ’Applied Mechanics of
Solids’[14].
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:39==
Method
This section presents the experimental setup and methodology to ensure reproducibility
and provide transparency regarding the data and assumptions made during the tests. The
motivation behind the experimental campaign is to investigate the rate and temperature­
dependent response of the material. After experiments, a datasheet on the material was
found[5], confirming that rate and temperature­dependent data was not readily available
at large strains. Given that the project’s overarching goal is to facilitate the simulation of
high­rate loading scenarios, the experiments are designed to give input data for calibrat­
ing a constitutive material model applicable to these simulations within what was possible
in the lab. Further, it was interesting to test if time­temperature superposition could be
used to attain high­rate data. Throughout the project, three distinct sets of experiments
were conducted. These include a ramp­up test employing a different material, uniaxial,
and relaxation tests with the primary material, Elastollan 1190A.
Ramp­up Testing
A series of ramp­up tests serve as practical exercises for the experiment. These tests
allowed for exploring suitable methods, learning how to run the controls, testing different
approaches to marking the samples, and working with the equipment in general.
Uniaxial Testing of Elastollan 1190A
Elastollan 1190A underwent uniaxial and monotonic loading in these tests, measuring the
material’s response to rate and temperature variations. This experiment aimed to gener­
ate data for calibrating the material model.
Relaxation Test of Elastollan 1190A
The validity of time­temperature superposition was assessed through a series of relax­
ation tests conducted at various temperatures.
Experimental Assumptions
Several assumptions about the material and experimental conditions are made. The as­
sumptions are listed in table 5.
Material
Experimental
Homogeneous and isotropic
sample reaches equilibrium temperature within 10
minutes
Amorphous molecular structure
Inertial forces from crosshead movements are negli­
gible
Negligible thermal expansion/contraction
Uniaxial and homogeneous stress and strain field in
the sample gauge section
Negligible response to humidity levels
Table 5: Experimental assumptions
Experimental Setup
All experiments were conducted at the Structural Lab at DTU in building 118. This section
overviews the available setup and the modifications implemented to facilitate the exper­
iments. In building 118, at the time of writing, there was one setup with the required
temperature controls. This setup comprises a Vötsch VCV7120 climate chamber with a
universal testing machine mounted around the chamber, a 100kN load cell, and a cor­
responding hydraulic actuator. Although other climate chambers are present in the lab,
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
31
==PAGE:40==
they are limited to either heating or cooling using liquid nitrogen. This results in inade­
quate temperature control within the desired range. A camera was employed for strain
measurements, and a background was set up to enhance contrast. Figure 15 provides a
schematic representation of the complete setup.
Figure 15: Sketch of the experimental setup for the tensile tests
Sample geometry
The 1BA ISO 527­2 standard dogbone tensile test geometry is used. The sample geom­
etry can be seen in Figure 16 and is manufactured through injection molding.
32
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:41==
Figure 16: Test sample geometry following the 1BA ISO 527­2 standard with a nominal
thickness of 2.1mm. The geometry has a 1­degree draft angle, and the dimensions are
at the bottom of the face before the applied draft.
While the nominal thickness of the sample is 2.1mm, caliper measurements revealed the
gauge section’s actual thickness to be in the range of 2.10­2.14mm and the gauge width
to be within 5.30­5.35mm. All samples were measured individually before testing, and
this data was used for subsequent data processing. All samples exhibited a slight taper
along their length, with the thicker end positioned towards the injection mold gate. There
is a suspicion that injection molding might impact the material properties, mainly due to
the sample’s slender nature and the one­sided mold­filling process, potentially causing
anisotropy. As the polymer flows through the gauge section of the mold, the predominant
parallel flow may result in significant shear forces aligning the polymer chains with the
flow direction, as illustrated in Figure 17.
Figure 17: Illustration of the processes that could cause the sample to be anisotropic
Biaxial tests could be performed to test whether the manufacturing process has affected
the material. However, such tests are outside this project’s scope and are left as a sug­
gestion for future work. Since the taper in the gauge section is small, 0.01­0.05mm over
the length of the gauge section, it is assumed that the stress and strain field within the
gauge section can be assumed to be homogeneous. The measurement of the width and
thickness of the sample is made at the same point along the gauge section.
Machine modifications
The experimental setup is designed to apply loads up to 100kN, which significantly ex­
ceeds the forces needed to test the polymers of interest, which is expected to apply a max­
imum loading of 0.5­1kN. This poses challenges for obtaining accurate measurements of
the reaction force. A second 10kN load cell is added in series with the existing 100kN
load cell to address this issue. The choice of 10kN over, e.g., 1kN or 2kN, is purely due
to practical constraints in the lab. In other words, this was the smallest load cell available.
The new load cell has a different thread adapter; therefore, the existing extension arm
had to be modified to accommodate these new threads. A new adapter and extension
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
33
==PAGE:42==
arm are manufactured and mounted to the experimental setup. The drawings of the new
parts can be seen in figure 18.
(a) 100kN load cell to 10kN load cell adapter
(b) 10kN to extension arm adapter
(c) extension arm
(d) Assembled system with the extension arm in
red, arm­10kN adapter in blue, 10kN load cell in
gray and 10kN­100kN adapter in yellow
Figure 18: Machine drawings and assembly render for the modification to the experimen­
tal setup. The assembly allows the incorporation of a smaller load cell.
Sample gripping
During testing, it was challenging to maintain grip pressure during large strains. Two
different sets of mechanical jaws were tested, giving varying success levels. The fact
that the jaws are situated inside the climate chamber means they cannot be hydraulic,
as the oil would freeze. The lab’s only set of pneumatic jaws was not operational during
the experimental campaign. The mechanical jaws cannot adapt during testing; therefore,
as the sample is elongated, the sample starts slipping. This process is illustrated in the
figure 19.
34
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:43==
Figure 19: Illustration of the sample slipping during the test.
This means the sample slowly slips during the test until either the sample fractures or
slips out completely. So, while hydraulic or pneumatic jaws would have been the superior
choice, it was impossible. In figure 20, pictures of the two jaws can be seen.
(a) Picture of the small jaws
(b) Picture of the large jaws
Figure 20: Pictures of the two jaws that were used in the experimental campaign
Initially, the large jaws were used; however, they had significant problems with slipping.
The small jaws had better gripping but were difficult to align as the mounting had a slight
slop. This slop also meant that the jaws would align during loading; therefore, it was
assumed that it would not affect the data. Thus, better gripping was prioritized over better
alignment. For some of the later experiments, a method was found for better tightening
the large jaws, giving equal grip to the small jaws. Therefore, the large ones were used
for the relaxation tests. For both jaws, the depth of the jaw is far larger than the gripping
section on the sample. To prevent uneven pressure in the wedge section of the jaws, the
grip section of a sample was cut off and placed in the bottom of the jaws. This removed
any toque induced from gripping the short sample.
Machine Control
The machine is controlled using software named Station Manager from MTS. In Station
manager, the function Multipurpose Testwave was used to program the movement of the
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
35
==PAGE:44==
jaws. Once the testing temperature was reached and the sample was cooled or heated,
the test was performed. The tests are displacement­controlled, and the crosshead is
moved according to a preprogrammed path. The crosshead’s displacement was accel­
erated for the uniaxial test to maintain a constant true strain rate. There is a need to use
the true strain value for the large strains that were expected, as the engineering strain
approximation is no longer accurate. True strain is defined as
ϵ = ln L
L0
(83)
Here, L0 is the initial length between the jaws. Moving at a constant speed would result in
the strain rate dropping as the sample is elongated during the testing. When the sample
is deformed during the test, the strain in the gauge section can be approximated using
the location of the jaws.
ϵ(t) = ln L0 + x(t)
L0
(84)
Where x(t) is the position of the moving jaw as a function of time, differentiating with
respect to time yields an expression for the strain rate.
˙ϵ =
˙x(t)
L0 + x(t)
(85)
Taking ˙ϵ as a constant and solving the resulting differential equation for x(t) with the initial
conditions that x(0) = 0 yields.
x(t) = L0(e˙ϵt −1)
(86)
Using (86), it is possible to prescribe the movement of the crosshead to ensure a constant
strain rate without being able to use the strain rate as an input for the machine controls.
Within the Multipurpose Testwave, there is no native function for an exponential path;
however, there is an option for programming a user­defined name profile command; see
appendix for source code. The exponential path is broken into sequences of linear paths
implemented through the profile command option. For the uniaxial tests, the force mea­
surements were offset to zero before the test but after the sample was mounted. The
mounting of the sample introduces a force and, therefore,d unknown offsets. This was
corrected using the force data after the sample fracture/slip out. In some of the tests, the
system’s cooling introduced thermal contraction in the extension arm that caused preload­
ing of the sample. If there was any doubt about whether the thermal preloading exceeded
the material’s elastic range, the tests were repeated. For the relaxation testing, the mea­
sured force was zeroed before mounting the sample and set to force control mode before
the test was started to eliminate preloading of the sample. This methodology was imple­
mented based on the experiences made during the tensile testing experiments. Main­
taining a constant strain rate for the relaxation testing is less critical, as the relaxation
response was of interest. Therefore, a linear ramp was used for simplicity. As it was cir­
cumstantial to change the control to the 10kN load cell, the 100kN cell was used to control
the force. This caused some problems as the 100kN and 10kN had large differences in
the 0­50N range, which is to be expected due to the large capacity of the 100kN cell and
the fact that the calibration of the 100kN was intended to span the entire load range.
36
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:45==
Camera setup
It proved challenging to capture strains at all strain levels and temperatures. There was a
concern that clip­on extensometers could not handle the low temperatures and had limited
extendability, and given the large strains, they were expected to fail. The use of a laser
extensometer was investigated; however, the focal distance needed for measurement
would put the instrument in conflict with the door of the chamber. Therefore, using a
digital camera to measure strains during the test was settled. The camera was an 800D
Nikon full­frame camera with a 36.2MP sensor and a fixed 135mm Zeiss Minervus lens.
The camera was chosen based on the large resolution it offered. However, the large
picture size limited the capture rate. The maximum capture rate was 2.5Hz. The use of
video recording was briefly considered, but the option was not explored further as it would
reduce the resolution from 7360x4912 to 1080x1920
Camera control
To ensure the camera’s consistent and precise timing, the remote port on the camera is
used to trigger the shutter. The camera’s internal clock only records time with second
precision, so to achieve millisecond precision, the shutter is triggered using the control
software Station Manager, allowing all data to be logged by the same computer. The
camera is triggered by sending a binary signal that controls a relay. The relay is connected
to the remote shutter port on the camera body. The delay between sending the binary
signal and the activated camera shutter is negligible.
Climate chamber
The climate chamber controls the temperature. The camber is a Vötsch VCV7120, with
a range of ­70°C to +180°C. As the temperature does not vary during the test, it is set to
the desired value, and the test starts when everything has reached the desired temper­
ature equilibrium. The chamber can control the temperature with a reported (on­screen)
accuracy of 0.1°C and the humidity with an accuracy of within 1%. Some polymers are
sensitive to relative humidity; for Elastollan 1190A, the material datasheet does not indi­
cate a humidity response. Still, the humidity response is set to 20% for all tests above
room temperature and to 0% below freezing to minimize condensation when the doors
are opened.
Temperature
Relative Humidity
Above 0◦C
20%
Below 0◦C
0%
Measurement and Errors
This section quantifies the measurement errors that the loadcell and camera make in
measuring force and strain, respectively.
Force Measurements
The 10kN load cell records the reaction force during the test. To ensure that the force is
recorded accurately despite the oversized load cell, the cell is calibrated in the 0/+2kN
range. The result of the calibration can be seen in figure 21.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 21: Calibration results of the 10kN load cell
Figure 21 shows only the error related to the gain. This is done by offsetting the first
measured value so that the error of the initial data point is zero and then calculating the
error. This representation of the error is valid because the force measurements are offset
back to zero when post­processed. Extending the range to 2kN did not significantly reduce
the accuracy, and it gave a buffer range where the cell accuracy would be verified if the
material was stronger than expected at low temperatures. A 5kN reference cell validated
by FORCE technology calibrated the cell.
Strain Measuring
The Nikon camera was used to measure the strain during the testing. The camera is
mounted on a tripod with levels. However, there can still be misalignment and optical
distortion from the lens that can introduce artificial strains in the measurements. The
strain of rigid body motion was measured to quantify the size of these error sources. If
the setup is perfect, then no strain should be measured. Rigid body motion consists of
drawing two lines on a piece of metal and moving it across the camera’s field of view. This
can be seen in figure 22.
(a) Initial configuration of the rigid body test.
The distance between lines is 1230 pixels.
(b) Final configuration of the rigid body test.
The distance between lines is 1218.5 pixels.
Figure 22: Rigid body test to quantify the induced artificial strain.
38
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:47==
Since the test is to quantify the artificial strains, there is no need to convert from pixel dis­
tance to real distance. The pixel distance changes from 1230 to 1218.5 pixels, introducing
an artificial strain of ­0.0094. This strain results from the bars’ out­of­plane movement and
the lens distortion. Since the test yields true strains in the range of 1­2, this gives a relative
error of 0.5% at a strain of 2. The temperature of the sample was not measured directly.
Instead, a minimum wait time of 10 minutes was maintained from when the target am­
bient temperature was reached. The temperature of the sample was further inferred by
monitoring the displacement of the crosshead as the chamber cooled. As the chamber
cooled, the extension arm would contract, and to maintain a force of zero, the software
would lower the crosshead to compensate. When the crosshead no longer moved, it was
assumed that the extension arm had reached equilibrium, and by extension, so had the
sample.
Strain Measuring Algorithm
The images are translated to strain values using a Matlab algorithm written specifically for
this purpose. During the project, this algorithm has been through two major revisions. In
the following section, the algorithms are detailed. The reader is referred to the appendix
for the source code developed within this project. The traditional method of converting
image data into a strain field uses Digital Image Correlation (DIC). This method can pro­
vide both 2D and 3D strain fields, and there are many commercial and open­source codes
for performing DIC analysis of images. However, using DIC sets certain requirements for
the resolution of the images. This poses a dilemma, as the author and supervisor team
were uncertain that a satisfactory resolution of the image could be reached with the cam­
era equipment available. The strain field is uniaxial and can be measured by tracking
the dimension change of a marking on the sample. The resolution requirement for this
method is significantly lower. Erring on the side of caution, feature tracking was chosen
as the preferred method. In hindsight, the camera setup would likely have been capable
of performing feature tracking. Unfortunately, DIC requires the application of a speckle
pattern, and feature tracking uses a square painted on the sample. These two methods
are not easy to apply together, and a choice has to be made.
Sample Marking Methods
During the experimentation, three methods for marking the samples were used, each
method being an improvement based on the previous one. The three marking schemes
can be seen below in Figure 23. The first­generation marking was based on detecting
pixel intensities, which were used to track the dimensions of the marking. The second
generation used the same basic concept but took advantage of the color information that
the images provided. The transverse strain is measured using an edge detection algo­
rithm. For the third generation, marking the location of the two dots was used to measure
axial strains. The Poisson ratio of the material obtained from previous experiments is
used to calculate the traverse strains.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
39
==PAGE:48==
(a) 1st gen markings.
(b) 2nd gen markings.
(c) 3rd gen markings.
Figure 23: The three different marking methods used in the experiments.
Structure of the Algorithm
The algorithm consists of three main parts for analyzing strains.
1. Image Cropping
2. Binarization
3. Filtering and Measuring
The images provided by the camera are 7360 by 4912 pixels, and it takes 2­3 seconds
to load an image into memory. Subsequent operations on the image are pretty slow.
However, only a small piece of the image is important. Therefore, the cropping step is
handled by one program, and another handles the binarization and measurement.
Image Cropping Program
The program must locate the Region Of Interest (ROI) to crop the image. To do this, two
red dot markers are placed on the jaws, which are used to find the ROI automatically. The
image is then cropped and saved to a new folder. If it were possible to identify the ROI only
by using the markings, this was preferred as this method would allow for better cropping.
In Figure 24, a flowchart showing the structure of the code can be seen. The core of
the code relies on the image processing toolbox available in Matlab. The creation of the
binary mask is done using the Color Thresholding app [36], the Morphological operations
available in Matlab are described in [37], and the bounding box is located using [38]. For
more details on the algorithm developed within the project, the reader is referred to the
Matlab code in the appendix.
40
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:49==
Figure 24: flowchart showing the algorithm’s structure used to crop the photos from the
experiments.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
41
==PAGE:50==
Image Measuring Algorithm
To measure the strains, the same color thresholding approach is used to locate the size of
the markings. This includes measuring the width and height of the marking as the sample
is deformed. Figure 25 illustrates the core concept of the algorithm.
Figure 25: Illustration of the image measuring algorithm. The left side shows the original
image, and the right side shows a composite image of the original image and binary mask
in false color, with the two dimensions used for strain measurement illustrated.
The color detection is done similarly to the image cropping algorithm, using color thresh­
olding. The threshold values are again determined using the Color Thresholding app in
Matlab. The thresholds are set individually for each experiment to make the detection
as robust as possible. In Figure 26, the flowchart for the measuring algorithm is shown.
Regarding generation 3 markings, the process is qualitatively similar; here, the center of
the two dots is located, and the distance between them gives the axial strains.
Most of the code relates to moving and managing variables and data files. However, the
three core pieces of the code are the rotation to align the marking to the image axes,
the measuring of the elongation, and the measuring of the contraction. These three are
explained in further detail below. See Appendix A for the source code.
Rotation of the Image
The strain measurement of markings for generations 1 and 2 requires the image to be
aligned with the image axes. The markers can be misaligned with the image axis if the
camera is rotated slightly or the sample is not mounted perfectly. To accurately measure
the length and width of the marker, the sample marker must be correctly aligned with the
image axis. Since the rotation of the image does not affect whether or not the image is
in­plane with the camera, the rotation will not introduce any artificial strains. The image
is correctly rotated by measuring the Ferret properties of the binary image. The Ferret
properties of a shape are the angle and distance between two parallel lines tangential to
the shape. This is also commonly referred to as the caliper measurement of a shape.
Such analysis is available within Matlab and can be used with the bwferret command.
Algorithm 3 outlines the process.
42
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:51==
Figure 26: flowchart showing the structure of the strain measuring algorithm.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
43
==PAGE:52==
Algorithm 3 Alignment of marker with image axes
θ = bwferret(BinaryImage)
if θ > 90 then
θ = θ ­ 180
else if θ < ­90 then
θ = θ + 180
else
θ = θ
end if
BinaryImage = ImageRotate(BinaryImage, θ)
Figure 27:
The two edges used
to measure the elongation of the
sample. The blue squares indicate
the part of the edge included in the
measurement.
The minimum ferret distance and corresponding an­
gle for a rectangle will always be between the lines
parallel to the slender direction. However, multiple
solutions exist, which are common with any mathe­
matical problem regarding angles. The logic in Al­
gorithm 3 was implemented to ensure that the rota­
tion function is always fed the correct input.
Elongation Measurement
Once the rotation is performed, the length of the
square can be measured. The performance of the
color thresholding algorithm is degraded close to
the corner where the marking meets the edge of the
sample. Therefore, only the middle 50% of the line
is used for calculation. This is illustrated in Figure
27. The length of the sample is measured by mea­
suring the distance between the max and min hori­
zontal pixels in the rotated binary image. This logic
is presented in Algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 Measure Elongation
1: imtemp = zeros
▷Create empty temporary image
2: index ←Define indices including only the pink square of Figure 27
3: imtemp(index) = BinaryImage(index)
4: LengthMeasure = zeros(Number of columns in imtemp)
5: for i = 1:each column of imtemp do
6:
if any value in the imtemp(:, i) == 1 then
7:
LengthMeasure(j) = Length of the marker in this column
8:
end if
9: end for
10: LengthMeasure = LengthMeasure(LengthMeasure > 0)
11: LengthMeasure
 |LengthMeasure −LengthMeasure| > 2std(LengthMeasure)

= [ ]
12: deformation(i) = mean(LengthMeasure)
In this algorithm, lines 1­4 select the part of the im­
age used for measurement. Lines 5­9 measure the length by calculating the marker length
44
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:53==
in each column. The last lines filter out values more than two times the standard devia­
tions away from the mean, roughly corresponding to the 95% confidence interval. This
filtering was introduced as sometimes there would be noise significantly affecting the data;
this filtering using the standard deviation would remove these outliers.
Contraction and Generation Three Measurements
The measurements of contractions were performed using a slightly different approach. In­
stead of measuring the sample marking using color thresholding, the width of the sample
was measured using the Canny edge detection algorithm available in Matlab. The algo­
rithm also produces a binary image with edges being 1s. This image is then measured
using the logic shown in Algorithm 4. For the generation 3 marking, the color thresh­
olding will find the two blue dots. The center of each dot can be found using Matlab’s
regionprops. The distance is simply the norm of the vector spanning the two points. This
approach does not need the sample marking to be aligned with the image, and detecting
the center blue dots is far less sensitive to the thresholding values and more robust. The
Poisson’s ratio could be estimated from the test performed with the second­generation
markings. The values were all close to the incompressible limiter. In the figure 28 below,
a representative development of the Poisson ration during a test can be seen.
Figure 28: Poisson ratio during the 0.01s−1 strain rate test at 23◦C
The overall average of the Poisson ratio for all the tests was around 0.48. This value was
used to estimate the transverse strain and, by extension, the stress of the test with the
generation 3 markings.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:55==
Results and Discussion
This section presents the results of experiments conducted to characterize the rate and
temperature­dependent response of Elastollan 1190A. As described in the method sec­
tion, two experiments were performed: uniaxial testing and relaxation testing.
Experimetal plan
The uniaxial testing used differed from a traditional monotonic test to extract the most
data from each test. The uniaxial test included an initial monotonic loading segment,
with crosshead acceleration as described in the method section. The initial intent of the
uniaxial testing was twofold. Firstly, to find the uniaxial stress­strain curve under different
temperatures and strain rates to get a quantitative understanding of the material and the
evolution of the yield stress with temperature and strain rate; secondly, the generated
data was to be used for model calibration. At first glance, these two objectives may seem
identical. Still, with the availability of modern computers and the accessibility of software
with advanced optimization capabilities, the monotonic uniaxial test is relatively poor in
information content. With software such as Mcalibration, more complex strain histories
can calibrate complex material models using only a few tests. A compromise between
these two goals was reached by implementing an initial long monotonic load step followed
by strain holds to measure the relaxation properties of the polymer. Figure 29 illustrates
the strain history.
Figure 29: Representative strain profile used for the experiments.
As can be seen from the plot, the first step is significantly larger than the others, pulling
the material well into the large strain. The rationale was that uniaxial data could still be
useful in the case that a material model could not be calibrated from the complex load
case. To identify the optimal choice of temperatures and strain rates, it was assumed that
the material would exhibit distinct yield stress and that the Ree­Eyring theory could be
used to estimate the evolution of yield stress. However, after analyzing the experimental
data, it was found that this assumption was false and that the glass transition temper­
ature was −38◦C. The Ree­Errying model is included here as it was used to plan the
experiments. If the polymer is below the glass transition temperature, it will have a de­
finable yieldpoint[12]. Here, the equivalence between yield stress and strain rate can be
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
47
==PAGE:56==
constructed. A common model for this is the Errying model.
σy
θ = A sinh−1

C ˙ϵ exp
 Q
Rθ

≈A[ln 2C ˙ϵ + (Q/Rθ)]
(87)
Where σy, θ, R are the yield stress, absolute temperature, and universal gas constant,
respectively. The parameters A C are material constants, and Q is the activation energy.
The strength of the theory comes from the Ree­Eyring modification, where the expression
is expanded to account for multiple independent rate­activated processes by summation
of each contribution to the yield stress:
σy
θ =
β
X
i=α
Ai sinh−1

Ci ˙ϵ exp
 Qi
Rθ

(88)
The theory predicts that for glassy polymers, the yield strength will lie on parallel lines in a
σy/θ vs. log(˙ϵ) plot. Bauwens et al. [9, 10] showed that this was the case for polycarbon­
ate. From an experimental planning point of view, it’s interesting to know the combination
of strain rate and temperature where the second process becomes significant. This criti­
cal strain rate can be found by finding the point at which the logarithmic approximation of
the second process becomes positive.
Aβ sinh−1

Cβ ˙ϵ exp
Qβ
Rθ

≈Aβ

ln (2Cβ ˙ϵ) + Qβ
Rθ

Aβ

ln (2Cβ ˙ϵ) + Qβ
Rθ

= 0 ⇒˙ϵcrit =
exp

−Qβ
Rθ

2Cβ
(89)
To find the ratio of strain rates per temperature that would be least sensitive to noise, a
bootstrap analysis of the experiment was performed to understand how noise would affect
the result. Bauwens et al. [9] described yield stress evolution in PC, which is fitted using
the Ree­Eyring model. The Ree­Eyring model parameters they identified were used to
calculate several virtual data points. These virtual data points were then subjected to 5%
relative noise, and Matlab’s curve fitting tool was used to recover the coefficients. The
temperatures and strain rates followed those of the article from which they were taken,
temperatures of [−70◦C, 70◦C] and strain rates of [1e−5s−1, 1e−2s−1]. In the analysis, the
temperatures were spaced linearly such that if there were three temperatures, they were
[−70◦C, 0◦C, 70◦C] and strain rates tested logarithmically. Each bootstrap experiment was
run 50,000 times to calculate convergent statistics. The Matlab script for the analysis can
be found in Appendix A. The analysis calculated the critical strain rate, i.e., the point where
both the Ree­Eyring processes contribute equally to the yield stress. The belief was that
this area would be the most important for model calibration, and if needed, then follow­up
testing could be placed accordingly. Table 6 shows the calculated standard deviation of
the critical strain rate for the different bootstrap experiments.
48
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:57==
Number of Temperatures
3
4
5
6
Strain Rate/Temperature
3
0.96
0.78
0.75
0.73
4
0.9
0.73
0.67
5
0.85
0.69
0.62
6
0.82
Table 6: Calculated standard deviation for the different combinations of strain rate and
temperatures.
Two combinations were identified as offering a good tradeoff between accuracy and the
number of experiments, as highlighted in Table 6. The probability distributions for these
combinations are shown in Figure 30.
Figure 30: Probability distribution of the two selections marked in Table 6.
Not surprisingly, conducting more experiments leads to better predictions, but it requires
more time. The bootstrap analysis results are used quantitatively to show that the best fit
is found by having three strain rates at four temperatures. For Elastollan the experimental
strain rates were adjusted to 0.1s−1, 0.01s−1, 0.001s−1 and the temperatures were adjusted
to −60◦C, −30◦C, 23◦C and 37◦C. At higher strain rates, e.g., 1, vibrations introduced
too much noise into the machine to give meaningful results, and at 0.001s−1, the test took
around 30 minutes. Going lower posed a practical problem.
Experimental validation
The reference data from CAMPUSplastics [39] is compared to the experimentally obtained
data to validate the experimental method. This can be seen in figure 31. No information
is given on the strain rate of the reference data. However, the excellent fit with the 0.01
rate indicates that it is likely that the reference data is obtained with a 0.01 engineering
strain rate.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 31: Comparison between the reference data from CAMPUSplastics[39] and ex­
perimentally obtained data.
The experimental data agrees well with the reference data. From this, it can be concluded
that the experimental data is accurate within a reasonable level. It can be seen that the
experimental data tends to curve upward at the end of the test, where the reference is
more flat. It makes sense as experimental data maintained a constant true strain rate,
whereas the reference data has a constant engineering strain rate.
50
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:59==
Material transition
For the analysis performed with the Ree­Errying model, it was the clear expectation that
the material was in a glassy state and would show a clear yield stress point. However,
when Elastollan was tested at various temperatures, it was found that there was a clear
material transition between −60◦C and −30◦C. Figure 32 shows the stress­strain curve
for the strain rate of 0.01s−1 at the tested temperatures.
Figure 32: Stress­strain curve at the strain rate of 0.01s−1 showing the material transition
with lowering temperature.
As can be seen in the figure, the material transitions from exhibiting a characteristic
rubber­like stress­strain curve at room temperature to that of a glassy polymer at low
temperatures as it develops a clear yielding point followed by softening. This directly con­
tradicted the expected behavior, indicating that the material crosses that glass transition
temperature within the tested temperature span. This led to research into the material
and a datasheet[39] revealed that the glass transition temperature is −38◦C. This di­
rectly contradicts the assumption that the polymer is glassy. As the material is so far
into the rubbery state, there is no longer a well­defined yielding point, and thus, the Ree­
Eyring model used to plan the experiments cannot be used. This necessitated a change
in the approach to modeling the material. Two paths were pursued to model the material’s
high­rate behavior: the Timer Temperature superposition and calibration rate­dependent
constitutive models. While the strains of interest are large, it is possible that a linear vis­
coelastic model with hyperelastic springs could be used to capture the material response
to some degree. If this is the case, then TTS could be used to attain high­rate data. If
that is not possible, calibrating the Bergström­Boyce or Three Network model could allow
for extrapolating the behavior to higher rates. Both of these approaches to modeling the
high rate of behavior are investigated.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
51
==PAGE:60==
Uniaxial results
The uniaxial test results at 23°C can be seen in figure 33.
Figure 33: Full uniaxial test at 23°C, highlighting points where the strain was constant for
1 minute.
The curve for the other temperatures can be seen in the appendix. At a temperature of
37◦C, the curve is quantitatively the same as for Figure 33. The results of the other test
can be seen in the appendix. It can be seen that the hold points don’t all happen at the
same strain level; a combination of slipping and sample placement causes this. Since the
jaws are tightened by hand, each test varies in slipping amount. The samples were also
mounted by hand, causing a slight variation in where the samples were griped. As the
strain of the gauge section is measured directly, this was not considered a problem, but it
is visible in the data. Including hold points makes the data difficult to interpret since they
don’t happen at the same strain. For a clear view of the rate and temperature dependents
of the material, figure 34 shows stress­strain up until the first hold point, referred to as the
first strain step.
Figure 34: Stress­strain response of the first strain step, show for both 23◦C and 37◦C
52
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:61==
Relaxation results
The observation that the material is well within the rubber state and that allows for a differ­
ent Time­Temperature superposition, namely the Williams­Landel­Ferry (WLF) or Arrhe­
nius equations. These equations relate the viscoelastic response of the material to tem­
perature. The shifting factor can be found in DMA, creep, or relaxation testing. However,
DMA testing can only do small strains, and creep testing can be very time­consuming.
With the interest of the project in large strains, the relaxation test was chosen. The re­
laxation curves will indicate if the Time­Temperature Superposition (TTS) is applicable at
this large strain. The relaxation curves at different temperatures between ­10°C and 45°C
are shown in Figure 35. The size of the strain step for the relaxation test was chosen to
be the same as the first strain step in the uniaxial test, as it was then easy to reuse the
control code from the uniaxial tests.
(a) Relaxation test with a hold time of 10 min­
utes, strain step to approximately 0.8 true strain.
(b) Relaxation test with a hold time of 10 minutes
with a small strain step of 0.05 true strain.
Figure 35: Results of the relaxation test with both the large and small strain step. All
curves are lowpass filtered with a normalized passband frequency of 0.2
It appeared that the curves have the same curvature. It is also seen that towards the end
of the relaxation testing, the stress seems to dip downward again. However, this is hard
to tell. Two effects can cause this: it could be that due to the relaxation of the material, the
slipping continues. This slip downward could also be caused by the onset of creep in the
material. Lastly, a large amount of permanent set was seen in these tests. Therefore, a
new test in the elastic range was performed, and a new strain step of 0.05 true strain was
used. For this test, a linear ramp was used for the loading. The results are shown in Figure
35b. Here, the same behavior is observed. This could be because the sample has a short
time to relax during the loading, and the relaxation happens faster at higher temperatures,
resulting in lower stress. However, if this were the case, there would be a difference in
the curvature of the curves as these would correspond to different parts of the relaxation
curve. The relaxation data should resemble the data in Catsiff and Tobolsky [40], where
the curvature changes with different temperatures, representing the other parts of the
relaxation master curve. The creation of a master curve from stress relaxation data is
also well explained by Bergström [41]. Despite these challenges, the two relaxation tests
are shifted using the WLF equation yielding the curve in figure 36
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) Figure 35a shifted using the WLF equation.
Parameters T0 = 265.2, C1 = 17.1, C2 = 58.3
Mastercruve shown for 296K
(b) Figure 35b shifted using the WLF equation.
Parameters T0 = 271.7, C1 = 16.2, C2 = 57.6
Mastercruve shown for 296K
Figure 36: Application of the WLF equation to the relaxation test. The WLF parameters
are found by minimizing the segment length between data points.
As shown in figure 36, the shifting does not look that good, and several effects cause
these results. In figure 35a, it can be seen that each of the curves does not lie in a con­
tinuation of the previous one. Instead, it resembles more that all of the curves in the TTS
plot are repeated. For the test in figure 36a strain relaxation test, multiple assumptions
in table 1 are violated, and it is unclear what effects have what causes. Still, the per­
manent set is likely one of the main effects that causes the theory to break. When the
master curve is created using the smaller strain step, it is expected to give better results,
as no permanent set exists. However, in figure 36b, there are still problems as other as­
sumptions in table 1 are violated. The strain of the test is around 5%, and it is likely that
the Payne effect [21] is present, meaning that there is a dependency of the viscoelastic
properties with applied strain amplitude. The testing of the Payne effect would require
a strain amplitude test using a DMA machine or repeated relaxation testing at varying
strain levels, and due to time limitations, this was not performed. However, the Payne
effect is seen at strain levels as low as 10−4 for some filled elastomers. Elastollans mi­
crostructure, with its hard and soft segments, resembles that of a filled polymer, so the
Payne effects are likely present in the small strain step relaxation test. As all of the tests
are performed at the same strain level, it should, in principle, still be possible to generate
a master curve. However, this curve is only valid for that specific strain level and has
little practical use in modeling. When using the TTS, the material is assumed to have a
long­term modulus independent of the temperature. However, the datasheet provided by
the manufacturer BASF [5] for the Elastollan product line shows a clear temperature de­
pendency on Young’s modulus. Young’s modulus depends on temperature for two similar
products with slightly different hardness (Elastollan 1185A and 1195A). The effect of the
long­term modulus is not directly visible on the master curve, as one still gets something
that resembles like a master curve. However, it introduces a significant error in the model.
If the material is temperature­dependent, and the master curve is generated using TTS,
the resulting master curve will overpredict the relaxation. Depending on the temperature
sensitivity of the material, the overprediction can be significant. Suppose the material
stiffens with lowering the temperature. The material’s instantaneous stress will increase
when the relaxation test is performed at lower temperatures. The long­term stress will
reach a lower level when the relaxation test is made at higher temperatures. When these
curves are shifted, the ends will be shifted away from the true master curve due to the
material’s temperature. This is well shown by Bergström [42] and in the example, he used
a temperature­dependent Neo­Hookean model where the instantaneous modulus varies
54
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:63==
with approximately 0.55MPa/K, and this led to the overprediction of the relaxation 60%.
In his numerical example, the difference between the TTS and true relaxation master
curves can be seen in figure 37
Figure 37: Example of the error when shifting a material with a temperature­dependent
long­term modulus. Reproduced from [42]
As can be seen, the error made can be large when the material is temperature­dependent.
Elastollan varies exponentially with temperature, and between −10◦C and 45◦C the long­
term modulus changes approximately an order of magnitude, and using the master curves
in figure 36 would lead to significant errors in prediction. Fitting a Prony series to the
generated master curve for the small strain strep in figure 36b would lead to a material
model that relaxes around 80%. Looking at figure 35b, it is clear that this is not the case.
Concluding remarks on the Time Temperature superposition
The TTS theory breaks down for the polymer due to the permanent set, the suspected
presence of the Payne effect, and the temperature dependence of Young’s modulus. The
temperature­dependent long­term modulus of the polymer means that the classical shift­
ing of the relaxation will introduce significant errors. However, one option remains for
using TTS. If a Prony series model is made with a long­term modulus that is temperature
dependent, the master curve can be obtained by fitting all material parameters simulta­
neously. This means that the elastic constant, temperature dependence on the long­term
modulus, the coefficient of the Prony terms, and the WLF parameters are fitted simulta­
neously. If this combined fitting is successful, the model master curve can be generated.
This approach has some major limitations; firstly, using the Prony series with temperature­
dependent long­term modulus is not currently available in Mcalibration. Secondly, this ap­
proach would only be valid for the linear viscoelastic domain, and the suspected presence
of the Payn effect means that it is highly likely that this would only not be valid for large
strains. Achieving this simultaneous fitting would require implementing a model using the
algorithms described in section 1. Due to the project’s goal of characterizing the large
strain behavior, no further effort is devoted to this.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:65==
Material model calibration and validation
This section uses the commercial software Mcalibration to calibrate constitutive models
using the experimental data. Some modifications were made to the data to calibrate a
constitutive model. Firstly, getting a satisfactory fit for the full­load case was impossible.
Instead, the first load step for the 23°C and 37°C tests is used, and experimental data
reference is also included. The Mcalibration software had many optimization methods
and fitness functions for calibrating the constitutive models. The fitness function used for
all calibrations is the Normalized Mean Absolute Difference (NMAD). The NMAD is given
by equation (90).
NMAD = 100 ·
⟨|e −p|⟩
max(⟨|e|⟩, ⟨|p|⟩)
(90)
Where e is a vector of experimentally measured stresses and p is a vector of model­
predicted stresses. The || operator is the absolute value of the provided vector and is itself
a vector. The operator <> is the average of the vector. The NMAD fitness is calculated for
each load case, and the total fitness function is the average of all fitness. It was found that
the method that gave the best fits was first to run the CMA­ES[43] optimization algorithem
followed by the Simplex method. The CMA­ES algorithm is an evolutionary algorithm that
converges slowly but is robust. The CMA­ES solution provided an excellent starting guess
for the Simplex method, and running the Simplex method afterward reduced the NMAD
by up to one in some cases. The only drawback to this approach was computation time,
the total time for calibration was around 30­60 minutes.
The Bergström­Boyce Model
The Bergström­Boyce fitted to the data.
The fit for the Bergström­Boyce model can
be seen below in Figure 38 and 39. The Bergström­Boyce model is not temperature­
dependent and was calibrated individually on the 23°C and 37°C temperature data. The
model is calibrated on the first strain step. The reference data from CAMPUSplastic[39]
is included in the dataset as it extends the total strain of the data, which aids in calibrating
the total chain extendability of the Eight­Chain networks.
Figure 38: Calibration results of the Bergström­Boyce model at 23°C. The experimental
data at 0.01s−1 is not shown here for clarity.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 39: Calibration of the Bergström­Boyce model at 37°C.
The Bergström­Boyce model provides an excellent fit with the data. The Ansys version
of the Bergström­Boyce model was used for calibration, and the implementation in Ansys
uses a different set of material parameters compared to the original version. The fitted
martial parameters can be seen in table 7.
Bergström­Boyce model coefficients
Parameters
23°C
37°C
units
µA
2.35
2
MPa
NA
13
26
µB
11.3
9.5
MPa
NB
20
30
fac
9e­10
1.5e­6
s−1
MPa−m
C
­1.5
­0.8
m
8.8
6.3
D
0.006
0.006
1
MPa
Coefficients relationships
λlock =
√
N
fac =
˙γ0
τ m
base
s−1
MPa−m
D = 1/κ
MPa−1
Table 7: Material parameters for the Ansys version of the Bergstöm­Boyce model
The Bergström­Boyce model does not natively have temperature dependence. It can
be made temperature­dependent in two ways: firstly, by linearly interpolating the coeffi­
cient between the calibrated temperatures as done in Ansys with the multi­temperature
materials. The second option is directly adding temperature dependencies to the model
using the temperature­dependent Eight­Chain model and extending the flow laws with the
same temperature dependencies used in the Three Network model. This has not been
implemented in either MCalibration or Ansys. This model extension would be provided to
improve extrapolation properties of the temperature dependency, but for the project, it is
not strictly needed.
58
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:67==
Three Network Model
The Three Network model natively supports temperature dependence, but this is not
strictly needed, as discussed above. However, the temperature dependence is calibrated
as the experimental data is available. The calibration results can be seen in Figure 40.
Figure 40: Three­Network model calibrated against the experimental data. The experi­
mental 0.01 strain rate at 23°C is replaced with the reference data.
The model coefficient can be seen in table 8. The results of both the Bergstöm­Boyce
and Three Network models suggested that the monotonic behavior is well­characterized
by a power­law type flow rule.
Three­Network model coefficients
κ
69
MPa
µA
1.5
MPa
ˆτA
2.32
MPa
mA
3
µBi
8.8
MPa
µBf
2.14203
MPa
β
3.2
ˆτB
30
MPa
mB
4.2
µC
2.6
MPa
q
0
α
0
n
93
λlock
5.75
ˆθ
1e5
K
θ0
292.92
K
Table 8: Material model coefficients for the Three Network model.
It is somewhat surprising that the Three Network model cannot capture the material’s large
strain behavior as well as the Bergstöm­Boyce model, as the Three Network model has
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
59
==PAGE:68==
two viscous networks over the Bergström­Boyce one. Here, it shows a clear difference
between linear and nonlinear viscoelasticity; for the nonlinear case, more ’terms’ do not
necessarily give better predictions. The flow equations in the Three Network model are
pure power law flow and are therefore unable to capture the strain dependents of the flow
that the repetition term in the Bergström­Boyce accounts for.
Relaxation response
The relaxation response at 23°C of the Bergström­Boyce model can be seen in figure 41.
The response at 37°C is very similar and can be seen in the appendix.
Figure 41: Relaxation response of the Bergström­Boyce model at 23°C.
The Bergström­Boyce model, initially created for materials like crosslinked elastomers,
also relates closely to the behavior of Elastollan, a material that shows similar traits. The
connection lies in how Elastollan’s hard segments mimic crosslinks. Soft segments give
Elastollan rubber­like properties, and hard segments function as crosslinks. The Three
Network model, with its two dashpots, might capture the relaxation behavior better as it
can have one to model the soft phase and one for the hard phase. However, as can be
seen in figure 42 also underpredicts the relaxation behavior by up to 50% percent.
The inability of the two models to capture the relaxation behavior suggests that a different
mechanism is the cause of the behavior. The Bergström­Boyce model faces difficulties
when attempting to predict the whole experiment that includes all the hold points, due
to its inability to predict the time­dependent part of the material response. The model
underpredicts the stress considerably after including the hold point. This can be seen in
figure 43. Again, the response of the Three Network model is similar and can be seen in
the appendix.
The material exhibits a great deal of post­relaxation stiffening, where the curve does not
return to the reference curve but increases well beyond the monotonic response. While a
true strain rate that increases the rate at large strains could explain some of this, both the
Bergström­Boyce and Three Networks models should be able to correct for this as they are
integrating the direct strain history as measured in the experiments. The underprediction
is thought to lie in the construction of the models. For example, in the Bergström­Boyce
model, the relaxation of the dashpot allows the elastic deformation in network B to go
down as the material relaxes. When the strain is increased again, the elastic deformation
60
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:69==
Figure 42: Relaxation response of the Three Network model.
Figure 43: Bergström­Boyce model predictions of the full load history
of network B increases again, and the material returns to the monotonic case over time.
This can be seen when comparing the monotonic response with the model prediction in
Figure 43. However, experimental results have shown that the material becomes stiffer
after relaxation as the stress rises to a higher level. Either model cannot capture this
increase in stress after a relaxation segment due to the construction. Prisacariu et al. [44]
observed similar behavior in thermoplastic elastomers with softer and deformable hard
segments, suggesting that the evolution of the microstructure causes this behavior during
deformation. This indicates that Elastollan has a dynamic microstructure evolution where
the hard segments change during deformation. This presents a challenge in predicting
the time­dependent response of the material as the hard segments evolve and affect the
overall response during loading. A study by Bergström et al. [25] showed that adding hard
filler material in the form of carbon black particles acted as a strain amplification factor of
the stretch in the soft segments of the material.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
61
==PAGE:70==
Validation Experiment
Figure 44: FEA model of the ten­
sile test, mesh, and boundary con­
ditions are illustrated.
A key interest of this project was to obtain the ability
to model the high­speed impact response of Elas­
tollan 1190A. It is seldom possible to have a con­
stitutive model that can model every aspect of such
a complex material as Elastollan 1190A. To investi­
gate how the constitutive models performed despite
the shortcomings discussed earlier and the fact that
they are both calibrated on relatively slow experi­
mental data (0.1s−1 −0.001s−1), a fast tensile test
is performed. A sample is mounted at room tem­
perature in one of the desktop tensile test machines
in the structural lab, and the test is then run at the
machine’s maximum speed of 200mm/s. It was im­
possible to capture strain data using the camera
setup. As a validation test, the sample and load­
ing are modeled using Ansys Mechanical 2022R2,
and the measured reaction force is compared with
the simulation. The numerical model can be seen
in Figure 44. The model is meshed with quadratic
brick elements. The dogbone is modeled using the
Bergström­Boyce or Three Network model, and the
grip block is modeled as linear elastic steel. A pres­
sure of 5 MPa is applied at the back of the steel
block,
Figure 45:
Stress field the grips.
Left side shows the time t = 0s,
right side shows the time t = 60s.
and the contact is modeled as rough, so there is
no slipping when the contact pressure is positive.
This represents the behavior of the hydraulic grips
on the machine. This method is preferred over sim­
ply imposing a displacement on the grip section of
the sample, as even with hydraulic grips, the large
strains cause a slight amount of slipping to hap­
pen as the material close to the edge of the grip is
stretched and pulled, causing it to thin and lose con­
tact. The dogbone is modeled with 1/8 symmetry
as shown in Figure 44. The loading is implemented
by prescribing the same displacement to the jaw as
was measured in the experiment. Due to the sym­
metry, the displacement in the model corresponds
to half that of the measured displacement.
The
nominal dogbone geometry has a cross­sectional
area of 11.38mm2.
The dogbone geometry has
draft sections as it is intended for injection mold­
ing. This is implemented by making the dogbone
slightly thinner to match the cross­sectional area in
the gauge section. As long as the cross­sectional
area is the same, this is assumed to have a negli­
gible effect on the solution. The model is loaded in
two steps. First, the grip pressure is applied, and
the sample is allowed to relax for 60 seconds.
62
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:71==
Setting
Grip Preload
Tensile Test
Initial Timestep Size
1s
1e­3s
Minimum Timestep Size
1s
1e­6s
Maximum Timestep Size
60s
5e­3s
App.Based Settings
Low Speed Dynamics
Element Size
0.5mm
Table 9: Analysis settings used for the simulation.
Figure 46: Stress field in the sam­
ple at the start, middle, and end of
the tensile test.
Then, the bottom of the grips is moved along the dis­
placement path measured in the experiment. The
numerical model is integrated using the transient
solver in Ansys Mechanical. This, albeit untradition­
ally, is a dynamic solver that uses an implicit integra­
tion scheme. The choice of Ansys Transient was mo­
tivated by the Three Network and Bergström­Boyce
models being implemented as standard. The follow­
ing setting for the analysis can be seen in table 9.
The preloading by the grips results in some sample
relaxation, which can be seen in figure 45. After the
stress field has relaxed and settled in, the grips are
moved using the data acquired from the test. Fig­
ure 46 plots the stress field during the tensile pull. In
figure 47, this reaction force measure is compared
to that simulated with the two constitutive models.
The measured and simulated force should match if
the model accurately can be extrapolated to higher
strain rates. The spikes in the numerical models are
caused by contact modeling and are related to the
FEA model, not the underlying material model. As
can be seen, the model cannot predict the correct
slope during loading. It generally has good predic­
tions of the material response until the viscous flow
becomes significant, at which point the model de­
viates from the experimental results.
Yielding, for
lack of a better word, in the model and natural rub­
bers is a continuous process with no clear starting
points.
However, the model seems to predict the
onset of large­scale yield with reasonable accuracy.
This indicates that the Bergström­Boyce model over­
predicts the flow rate of the polymer. Given good
prediction for the initial stiffness at a strain rate more
than an order of magnitude outside the calibration
range, it is concluded that the model can predict
high­rate loading cases with some accuracy, as long
as the load does not cause large­scale yielding. In
high­rate simulations like impact, the model will give
a lower bound if yielding occurs. The Three Network
model performs better in this regard.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
63
==PAGE:72==
However, the same problem occurs with the underprediction of the yielding slope, causing
the overall force to be underpredicted. The same conclusion of the high­rate behavior of
the Three Network model can be drawn. However, it shows a better prediction up until
the yield point. This underprediction could be caused by the model’s inability to model
the physical deformation mechanism within the polymer, as discussed earlier, or that the
calibration at the low strain rates is too sensitive to experimental noise and other factors
that the high­rate predictions suffer.
Figure 47: Comparison of the simulated and experimental force­displacement curves.
The initial distance between grips is 58mm
To test this hypothesis, the following estimation for the engineering stress­strain curve is
proposed by comparing the displacement and strain strain of the Three Network simula­
tion.
ϵeng ≈1.55 · Displacement
58mm
,
σeng = Force
A0
=
Force
11.26mm2
(91)
This estimation is not very accurate. However, it will be appropriate to test whether the
high­rate performance suffers from experimental noise or if the model does not capture
the deformation mechanisms correctly. The performance of this estimation is given by
comparing the estimated Engineering strain with the real engineering strain from the Three
Network model simulation; the correlation curve for these two variables can be seen in
figure 48. As can be seen, the approximation method does not give a good approximation
of the real strain expected by the gauge section. However, it will indicate if the constitutive
mod could not extrapolate to high strain rate behavior and is too sensitive to noise.
64
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:73==
Figure 48: Corrolation plot of the estimated and modeled strain.
This approximated engineering stress­strain data was added to Mcalibration and con­
verted to true stress­strain. The two models were refitted with the new data, giving the
following fits that can be seen in Figure 49. The Three Network model has similar results,
which can be seen in the appendix.
Figure 49: Calibration of the Bergström­Boyce model using the approximate high strain
rate data.
It can be seen that both models are capable of capturing the behavior. The Bergström­
Boyce model loses some accuracy in the 0.1 strain rate case. The Three Network model
can capture more observed behavior without losing accuracy at the lower strain rates.
This can be explained by the Three Network model’s two viscous dashpots. It is theo­
rized that the model can better capture the contribution of the material’s hard and soft
phases. The inaccuracy at the higher strains comes from the model’s inability to account
for the evolution of these phases during the deformation of the material. Using these new
calibrations to simulate the tensile test can be seen in Figure 50.
As can be seen, the Bergström­Boyce model captures trends of the experimental data
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 50: Results of the simulated tensile test using the updated calibrations of the
Bergström­Boyce and Three Network model.
better than the Three Network model; however, they both underpredict the slope of the
curve. This is in line with the fundamental differences between the theories of the models
and the material tested. The Bergström­Boyce and Three Network models are developed
for crosslinked elastomers and thermoplastics. The Three Network model is being de­
signed specifically for UHMWPE. Elastollan is structurally different as it is a copolymer
whose hard segments serve the same function as crosslinks in traditional elastomers.
These findings and theory agree with the conclusions from Prisacariu et al.[44], where re­
placing the hard segment of polyurethane with a relatively more flexible and crystallizable
segment led to a change in the relaxation behavior. This change is consistent with the
behavior observed in the tensile test with relaxation holds. After a relaxation segment,
the material increases stiffness, which is not present in a monotonic uniaxial test. This is
consistent with the observation that the uniaxial test with relaxation holds reaches signif­
icantly higher stress than the reference data for the model, which is a single continuous
pull. Qi et al. [45] propose that the hydrogen bonds that hold together the hard segments
break and reform during loading and unloading, causing the microstructure to evolve and
thus affect the macroscopic material properties. Qi et al.[45] propose a constitutive model
based on the work of Bergström and Boyce, combining the theory of filled polymers with
evolution laws for the volume fractions of the hard and soft parts. While not available in
commercial software, a constitutive model capable of modeling the evolution of this mi­
crostructure will be needed to model the relaxation and hysteresis of Elastollan accurately.
Here, the model by Qi et al.[45] would be a good starting point.
66
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:75==
Conclusion
The investigation into the behavior of Elastollan 1190A under varying temperatures and
strain rates reveals a significant dependency on these conditions. An experimental method
was developed to measure the tensile response of the material at temperatures from
−60◦C to 45◦C, and strain rates from 0.1s−1 to 0.001s−1. The experimental data matched
well with the reference data found from CAMPUSplatics [39] despite considerable chal­
lenges with the sample slipping in the jaws during testing. Findings indicate that Elastollan
1190A undergoes permanent deformation, exhibiting non­linear viscoelastic behavior with
a permanent set. The permanent set is suspected to be true plasticity; however, this can­
not be concluded from the experiments conducted. The time­temperature principle was in­
vestigated to measure the time­dependent effect over a large timescale and at high rates.
However, due to a combination of a permanent set, a temperature­dependent Young’s
modulus, and the suspected presence of the Payne effect, it was concluded that the time­
temperature superposition did not apply to the large strain investigated. Non­linear vis­
coelastic constitutive models were explored to model the material response. Specifically,
the Bergström­Boyce and Three Network models were applied and calibrated using exper­
imental and reference data from CAMPUSplastics. These models accurately described
the material’s behavior under continuous loading but were inadequate in predicting its re­
laxation behavior and the increase in stress upon loading after a relaxation segment. To
assess the models’ predictive accuracy at higher strain rates, a tensile test was performed
at a strain rate of 3s−1, and the measured force­displacement response was compared
with the simulation of the test. Both models effectively captured the increase in initial stiff­
ness and the onset of viscous deformation but overestimated the material softening. The
challenge in capturing this ’post­yield’ response is thought to be caused by a change in the
microstructure, causing the effective volume fraction of hard segments to evolve with de­
formation. A modified version of the Bergström­Boyce model [25] or the model proposed
by Qi et al.[45] are seen as the best candidate to depict the relaxation and hysteresis
behaviors of Elastollan 1190A accurately.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:77==
Future Work and Lessons Learned
Further improvement of the constitutive modeling
Future investigations should prioritize the refinement of material models by exploring be­
yond the Bergström­Boyce and Three Network models. The candidate models for inves­
tigation would be the filled elastomer version of Bergström [25] and the microstructural
evolution model of Qi et al. [45]. If incompressibility is assumed, the development of a nu­
merical solver can take advantage of the analytical expression for solving the stress state
to provide a fast and accurate solution. The CMA­ES optimization algorithm could reliably
find the optimal coefficients regardless of the wrong initial guess in Mcalibration. Com­
bining the implementation of these constitutive models with the available open­source
versions of the CMA­ES algorithm[43], the performance of models unavailable in Mcali­
bration could be evaluated. If this search is fruitful, the model could be implemented into
an FEA solver using user material functions like the UMAT and VUMAT in Abaqus.
Validation of the model with high rate and impact experiments
Due to the practical constraints of the lab, only moderate strain rates were tested experi­
mentally. In future work, it would be of great interest to test the material at a high strain rate
using either the drop testing or Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar(SHPB) setup available in the
structural lab when they are operational again. The testing should initially focus on room
temperature conditions as temperature control dramatically increases the experimental
complexity. If the calibrated models can capture the behavior at room temperature, it is a
valid assumption that it will also be confirmed at body temperature.
Combined TTS and long­term calibration method
The Time­Temperature Superposition (TTS) method presents significant potential for pre­
dicting high rate and long­term material behavior. However, the presence of a temperature­
dependent long­term modulus presents challenges. However,d, the combined calibration
of the temperature­dependent pony series and TTS shifting function presents a possibility
of overcoming this limitation. If use cases within the linear viscoelastic range arise, this
approach should be investigated when the material shows long­term temperature depen­
dence.
Lessons Learned
Potential Use of DIC in the Experimental Setup
Given the quality and resolution of the images obtained during the experimental cam­
paign, it is likely that the Use of Digital Image Correlation (DIC) could have been feasible;
in future experiments, this should be used as the preferred method as it Usel provides
more accurate strain measurements. Further, DIC will validate or reject the assumption
of a homogenous strain field. While DIC is far more computationally expensive, the avail­
ability of both commercial and open­source software[46] is expected to lower the overall
workload.
Use of compression instead of tensile testing.
Much of the literature on polymers cited in the report suggests using compression test­
ing instead of tension testing. Compression testing presents challenges that are easier to
overcome when testing at varying temperatures. One of the main challenges of the experi­
mental campaign conducted in the project was the accurate measurement of strains. With
a compression setup, the displacement of the crosshead can be directly used for strain
measurements, making data acquisition more manageable and accurate. This approach
should be further explored for its simplicity and effectiveness in material characterization.
Theoretically, only one tensile test is needed to quantify the difference between tension
and compression.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
69
==PAGE:78==
Use of true strainrate
The investigation highlighted that setting up and measuring accurate strain rates might not
justify the complexity and effort required. Future studies should use engineering strain and
strain rate. it
Optimization of the experimental temperature window
Extending the temperature range of experiments into the negative spectrum was the
cause of many experimental challenges, and it turned out that it did not provide any usable
experimental data. In future studies, the temperature window can be shrunk considerably
and likely be kept above freezing. This will allow for the Use of clip­on extensiometers for
strain measuring and remove the need for a camera entirely. If the clip­on extensometers
elongate, they can instead be used to measure the concentration of the sample, and the
camera could be used to measure the elongation together with the generation 3 marking
for elongation measurement, greatly improving the accuracy of the measurements.
70
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
JD Ferry. “Viscoelastic properties of polymers”. In: (1980). URL: https://books.
google . com / books ? hl = da & lr = &id = 9dqQY3Ujsx4C & oi = fnd & pg = PA1 & ots =
FiF2UIXPFl&sig=9L2yJJGbbmR6UjPdAEOF5YVcHAQ.
[2]
H. H. Le et al. “Time dependent deformation behavior of thermoplastic elastomers”.
In: Polymer 44.16 (July 2003), pp. 4589–4597. ISSN: 0032­3861. DOI: 10.1016/
S0032-3861(03)00409-9.
[3]
Malcolm L. Williams, Robert F. Landel, and John D. Ferry. “The Temperature De­
pendence of Relaxation Mechanisms in Amorphous Polymers and Other Glass­
forming Liquids”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 77.14 (1955), pp. 3701–
3707. ISSN: 15205126. DOI: 10.1021/JA01619A008/ASSET/JA01619A008.FP.
PNG{\_}V03. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ja01619a008.
[4]
D. J.A. Senden et al. “Rate­ and temperature­dependent strain hardening of poly­
carbonate”. In: Journal of Polymer Science, Part B: Polymer Physics 50.24 (Dec.
2012), pp. 1680–1693. ISSN: 10990488. DOI: 10.1002/POLB.23165.
[5]
Basf SE. Thermoplastic Polyurethane Elastomers Elastollan ®­Material Properties.
Tech. rep.
[6]
Marko Bek et al. “Viscoelasticity of new generation thermoplastic polyurethane vi­
bration isolators”. In: Physics of Fluids 29.12 (Dec. 2017), p. 121614. ISSN: 10897666.
DOI: 10.1063/1.5000413/989380. URL: /aip/pof/article/29/12/121614/989380/
Viscoelasticity-of-new-generation-thermoplastic.
[7]
Pouria Hajikarimi and Fereidoon Moghadas Nejad. “Time–temperature superposi­
tion”. In: Applications of Viscoelasticity (Jan. 2021), pp. 83–105. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
0-12-821210-3.00006-1.
[8]
Clive R Siviour and Michael J Kendall. “Rate dependence of poly(vinyl chloride),
the effects of plasticizer and time­temperature superposition”. In: (). DOI: 10.1098/
rspa.2014.0012. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2014.0012orviahttp://rspa.
royalsocietypublishing.org..
[9]
C. Bauwens­Crowet, J. C. Bauwens, and G. Homès. “Tensile yield­stress behavior
of glassy polymers”. In: Journal of Polymer Science Part A­2: Polymer Physics 7.4
(Apr. 1969), pp. 735–742. ISSN: 1542­9377. DOI: 10.1002/POL.1969.160070411.
URL: https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / full / 10 . 1002 / pol . 1969 . 160070411 %
20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pol.1969.160070411%20https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pol.1969.160070411.
[10]
C. Bauwens­Crowet. “The compression yield behaviour of polymethyl methacrylate
over a wide range of temperatures and strain­rates”. In: Journal of Materials Sci­
ence 8.7 (July 1973), pp. 968–979. ISSN: 00222461. DOI: 10.1007/BF00756628/
METRICS. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00756628.
[11]
Taikyue Ree and Henry Eyring. “Theory of Non￿Newtonian Flow. II. Solution Sys­
tem of High Polymers”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 26.7 (July 1955), pp. 800–
809. ISSN: 0021­8979. DOI: 10.1063/1.1722099. URL: /aip/jap/article/26/7/800/
160927/Theory-of-Non-Newtonian-Flow-II-Solution-System-of.
[12]
R.J. Young. “Polymer Glasses, Mechanical Properties of: Yielding”. In: Encyclope­
dia of Materials: Science and Technology. Elsevier, Jan. 2001, pp. 7330–7340. DOI:
10.1016/B0-08-043152-6/01306-1. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
B0080431526013061.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
71
==PAGE:80==
[13]
William D. Callister and David G. Rethwisch. “Materials science and engineering”.
In: (2015), p. 936. URL: https://search.worldcat.org/title/1013820169.
[14]
Allan F. Bower. “Applied mechanics of solids”. In: Applied Mechanics of Solids (Jan.
2009), pp. 1–795. DOI: 10.1201/9781439802489/APPLIED-MECHANICS-SOLIDS-
ALLAN - BOWER. URL: https : / / www . taylorfrancis . com / books / mono / 10 . 1201 /
9781439802489/applied-mechanics-solids-allan-bower.
[15]
M C Boyce, G G Weber, and D M Parks. “ON THE KINEMATICS OF FINITE STRAIN
PLASTICITY”. In: J. Mech. Phw. Solids 31.5 (1989).
[16]
O. H. Yeoh. “Some Forms of the Strain Energy Function for Rubber”. In: Rubber
Chemistry and Technology 66.5 (Nov. 1993), pp. 754–771. ISSN: 0035­9475. DOI:
10.5254/1.3538343. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.5254/1.3538343.
[17]
E Arruda and Mary C Boyce. “A THREE­DIMENSIONAL CONSTITUTIVE MODEL
FOR THE LARGE STRETCH BEHAVIOR OF RUBBER ELASTIC MATERIALS”. In:
().
[18]
Jörgen Bergström. “Mechanics of Solid Polymers: Theory and Computational Mod­
eling”. In: Mechanics of Solid Polymers: Theory and Computational Modeling (June
2015), pp. 1–509. DOI: 10.1016/C2013-0-15493-1.
[19]
Brillouin and Langevin functions ­ Wikipedia. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Brillouin_and_Langevin_functions.
[20]
Jorgen Bergström. Linear Viscoelasticity – Part 6 – Rheological Model ­ Polymer­
FEM.com. URL: https://polymerfem.com/linear-viscoelasticity-part-6-rheological-
model/.
[21]
A. R. Payne. “The dynamic properties of carbon black­loaded natural rubber vulcan­
izates. Part I”. In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science 6.19 (Jan. 1962), pp. 57–63.
ISSN: 1097­4628. DOI: 10.1002/APP.1962.070061906. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/app.1962.070061906%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/app.1962.070061906%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.
1002/app.1962.070061906.
[22]
A. D. Drozdov. “Mechanics of viscoelastic solids”. In: (1998), p. 484. URL: https:
//www.wiley.com/en-us/Mechanics+of+Viscoelastic+Solids-p-9780471975120.
[23]
Jörgen Bergström. WLF or Arrhenius ­ Which is Better? ­ PolymerFEM.com. URL:
https://polymerfem.com/wlf-or-arrhenius-which-is-better/.
[24]
J. S. Bergström and M. C. Boyce. “Constitutive modeling of the large strain time­
dependent behavior of elastomers”. In: Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of
Solids 46.5 (May 1998), pp. 931–954. ISSN: 0022­5096. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S0022 -
5096(97)00075-6.
[25]
J. S. Bergström and M. C. Boyce. “Large strain time­dependent behavior of filled
elastomers”. In: Mechanics of Materials 32.11 (Nov. 2000), pp. 627–644. ISSN:
0167­6636. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-6636(00)00028-4.
[26]
J.S. Bergström and M.C. Boyce. “Constitutive modeling of the time­dependent and
cyclic loading of elastomers and application to soft biological tissues”. In: Mechanics
of Materials 33.9 (Sept. 2001), pp. 523–530. ISSN: 01676636. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-
6636(01)00070-9. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0167663601000709.
[27]
Hüsnü Dal and Michael Kaliske. “Bergström–Boyce model for nonlinear finite rubber
viscoelasticity: theoretical aspects and algorithmic treatment for the FE method”. In:
Computational Mechanics 44.6 (Nov. 2009), pp. 809–823. ISSN: 0178­7675. DOI:
10.1007/s00466-009-0407-2. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00466-009-
0407-2.
72
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:81==
[28]
Ansys Inc. 4.7. Bergstrom­Boyce. URL: https : / / ansyshelp . ansys . com / account /
secured?returnurl=/Views/Secured/corp/v222/en/ans_thry/thy_bb.html?q=
Bergstrom-Boyce.
[29]
Jorgen Bergstrom and Jeffrey Bischoff. “An advanced thermomechanical constitu­
tive model for UHMWPE”. In: International Journal of Structural Changes in Solids
2 (Jan. 2010), pp. 31–39.
[30]
Courtney Remani. “Numerical Methods for Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equa­
tions”. In: ().
[31]
Cleve Moler. Complex Step Differentiation » Cleve’s Corner: Cleve Moler on Math­
ematics and Computing ­ MATLAB & Simulink. URL: https://blogs.mathworks.com/
cleve/2013/10/14/complex-step-differentiation/.
[32]
Jorgen Bergstrom. PolymerFEM LLC (2023). MCalibration version: 7.05. Dover,
MA. Tech. rep. URL: https://polymerfem.com.
[33]
1979­ Mulliken Adam Dustin. “Low to high strain rate deformation of amorphous
polymers : experiments and modeling”. In: (2004). URL: https://dspace.mit.edu/
handle/1721.1/28622.
[34]
A D Mulliken and M C Boyce. “Mechanics of the rate­dependent elastic­plastic de­
formation of glassy polymers from low to high strain rates”. In: (2005). DOI: 10.1016/
j.ijsolstr.2005.04.016. URL: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijsolstr.
[35]
A. D. Mulliken et al. “High­rate thermomechanical behavior of poly(vinyl chloride)
and plasticized poly(vinyl chloride)”. In: Journal De Physique. IV : JP 134 (Aug.
2006), pp. 217–223. ISSN: 11554339. DOI: 10.1051/JP4:2006134033.
[36]
Mathworks. Threshold color image ­ MATLAB ­ MathWorks Nordic. URL: https://
se.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/colorthresholder-app.html.
[37]
Mathworks. Types of Morphological Operations ­ MATLAB & Simulink ­ MathWorks
Nordic. URL: https://se.mathworks.com/help/images/morphological-dilation-and-
erosion.html.
[38]
Mathworks. Measure properties of image regions ­ MATLAB regionprops ­ Math­
Works Nordic. URL: https://se.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/regionprops.html.
[39]
CAMPUSplastics | datasheet Elastollan® 1190 A. URL: https://www.campusplastics.
com/campus/en/datasheet/Elastollan%C2%AE+1190+A/BASF+Polyurethanes+
GmbH/59/e1b2795e.
[40]
E. Catsiff and A. V. Tobolsky. “Stress­relaxation of polyisobutylene in the transition
region (1, 2)”. In: Journal of Colloid Science 10.4 (Aug. 1955), pp. 375–392. ISSN:
0095­8522. DOI: 10.1016/0095-8522(55)90052-0.
[41]
Jorgen Bergström. Convert Stress Relaxation Data to a Linear Viscoelastic Master
Curve ­ PolymerFEM.com. URL: https://polymerfem.com/convert-stress-relaxation-
data-to-a-master-curve-and-a-linear-viscoelastic-model/.
[42]
Jorgen Bergström. One Common Huge Mistake When Creating a TTS Master Curve
­ PolymerFEM.com. URL: https://polymerfem.com/one- common- huge- mistake-
when-creating-a-tts-master-curve/.
[43]
Nikolaus Hansen, Youhei Akimoto, and Petr Baudis. CMA­ES/pycma on Github.
Zenodo, DOI:10.5281/zenodo.2559634. Feb. 2019. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.2559634.
URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2559634.
[44]
Cristina Prisacariu and Elena Scortanu. “A STUDY OF STRESS RELAXATION
PROCESSES IN SELECTED SEGMENTED POLYURETHANE ELASTOMERS”.
In: Rev. Roum. Chim 56.4 (2011), pp. 433–437. URL: http://web.icf.ro/rrch/.
[45]
H J Qi and M C Boyce. “Stress­Strain Behavior of Thermoplastic Polyurethane”. In:
().
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
73
==PAGE:82==
[46]
Justin Blaber. Ncorr ­ Open source 2D digital image correlation MATLAB software.
URL: http://www.ncorr.com/index.php.
74
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:83==
A
Souce code
The matlab source code can be found on GitHub here:
https://github.com/AsgerRiisVienberg/Source­code­for­Master­Thesis.git
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
75
==PAGE:84==
B
Experimental data
The appedix include all of the experimental data generated during the uniaxial test. In
the following figures the stress strain curve for each of tested tempertures[−60 ◦C, −60 ◦
C, 23 ◦C, 37 ◦C] can be found. Data files are avalible on the GitHub
Figure B.1: Stress strain curve at 37◦C
76
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:85==
Figure B.2: Stress strain curves at 23◦C
Figure B.3: stress strain curves at ◦C
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure B.4: Stress strain curves at ­60◦C
78
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
==PAGE:87==
C
Additional plots
Figure C.1: The Three Network Model predictions for the full load history
Figure C.2: Relaxation response of the Bergström­Boyce model at 37°C.
Figure C.3: calibration of the Three Network model using the approximate high strain rate
data.
Rate and temperature dependent mechanics of thermoplastic polyurethane
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://construct.dtu.dk/
