==PAGE:1==
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating
thermosensitive liposomes carrying
crosslinking agents
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslink­
ing agents
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Vasileios Nikolaidis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Stable Diffusion, Opensource
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Health Technology,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Vasileios Nikolaidis ­ s220267
Signature
Date
ii
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
28/02/24
==PAGE:5==
Preface
Vasileios Nikolaidis, MSc. Biomaterials Engineering for Medicine, DTU
This MSc. project was prepared at the Department of Health Technology at the Technical
University of Denmark.
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I want to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors Johan Ulrik
Lind and Andrew Urquhart, whose expert guidance and insightful feedback were instru­
mental in the completion of my thesis, as well as making me a part of their research group.
Thank you for teaching me how to be a better scientist.
I would also like to thank my co­supervisor, Postdoctoral Researcher Marko Mihajlovic,
for his help with the project, especially during the rheometer training and the formulation
of the inks. I would also like to acknowledge the help of Postdoctoral Researcher Philip
Mark Lund in the lab, such as on teaching me how to use liquid nitrogen for the liposome
synthesis, and providing clarification on DLS data.
A big thanks to PhD student Despoina Douka, for her unwavering support, acknowledging
how hard I worked for this project even though I was working independent most of the time,
as well as all the fun times during the lab and outside. Another big thanks to my friend,
Research Assistant Chinmay Khanolkar, for his continuous support during this journey
and the fun times we had during the course of this thesis. I would also like to extend my
gratitude to the students and staff of the 423 building, whom I had so much fun with, and
of course, everyone in the TMAT group for providing a friendly environment.
Special thanks to all my co­workers at the café, who had to listen to me complaining about
my project not working for 6 months. Big shout­out to my co­worker Ronja Christoph who
tried to understand what I was doing in my thesis (and actually did!) and generally making
this semester so much fun.
I am deeply grateful to my friends, for making sure I go out during the weekend and have
a beer (or two), to relax and de­stress about the project.
Last but not least, I want to say thank you to my family who have supported and encour­
aged me through this journey and were always there to listen to all the challenges I faced.
Their belief in me has been invaluable in my life and I wouldn’t have come this far without
them.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Inks consisting of biomaterials have found applications in extrusion three­dimensional
(3D) printing due to their biocompatibility and are used to fabricate structures and devices
that can be used for tissue engineering applications. However, post­extrusion processing
of these bio­inks is required, such as crosslinking, to maintain structural integrity and
create complex designs. Crosslinking methods are even more important in applications
where cells are involved, as there is a need to maintain mild conditions to ensure cell
viability.
It has been proven in literature that thermosensitive liposomes (TSLs) containing crosslink­
ing agents are able to crosslink hydrogels when subjected to temperatures near the lipid
melting temperature (Tm). It has also been shown that alginate hydrogels can be suc­
cessfully printed through micro­extrusion 3D printing. The aim of this project is to in­
corporate TSLs which encapsulate calcium ions (Ca+2), inside alginate bio­inks, and ex­
plore whether printed structures made of these inks can be fabricated and be thermally
crosslinked in a physiological temperature range of 30­40◦C.
First, 1,2­dipalmitoyl­sn­glycero­3­phosphocholine (DPPC)­1,2­dimyristoyl­sn­glycero­3­
phosphocholine (DMPC) (9:1 molar ratio) TSLs encapsulating Ca+2 were prepared us­
ing the interdigitation­fusion (IF) method, exhibiting sizes between 3­7 µm, as revealed
by Dynamic light scattering (DLS). Through the use of Ultraviolet­visible spectroscopy
(UV­VIS) and the Ca+2­binding dye Arsenazo III (AIII), it was revealed that these TSLs
display encapsulation efficiencies between 42­61% and release enough amount of Ca+2
needed for alginate crosslinking when subjected to temperatures between 30­40◦C.
Afterwards, a series of 1%, 2% and 4% (w/v) (final concentration) Alginate/TSLs bio­inks
were formulated. Rheology revealed thermal­crosslinking properties of these inks, with
the storage modulus (G’) remaining stable in room temperature and increasing substan­
tially after they were heated to temperatures above the lipid Tm.
Finally, extrusion 3D printing tests assessed the printability of these bio­inks and revealed
that printed structures using the 1% and 2% (w/v) alginate/TSLs inks exhibited thermal­
crosslinking properties. However, it was unclear if the 4% (w/v) Alginate/TSLs bio­ink
exhibited shear­crosslinking properties or if the ink was unstable, causing premature Ca+2
leakage and crosslinking of alginate before printing.
In an effort to optimize the printability of the thermally­crosslinkable bio­inks, inks con­
sisting of 4% (w/w) Alginate/TSLs/6% (w/v) Carboxymethylated nanofibrillated cellulose
(cNFCs) (final concentrations) were formulated. The incorporation of cNFCs in the bio­
inks significantly enhanced their printability, but whether they displayed thermal crosslink­
ing was unclear.
Future work of the project includes ways to formulate optimized Alginate/TSLs bio­inks,
find more facile synthesis methods for TSLs than the IF, investigating cell­TSLs interac­
tions and formulating inks incorporating shear­sensitive liposomes.
iv
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
2
2.1
Liposomes: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Thermosensitive Liposomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Interdigitation­fusion: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Dynamic light scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Ultraviolet­visible Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Ca2+ detection using Arsenazo III assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Micro­extrusion 3D printing: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.7
Rheological characterization of materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.8
Alginate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.9
Thermally­crosslinked hydrogels incorporating TSLs . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Materials and Methods
17
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Synthesis of thermosensitive liposomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2.1
Interdigitation­fusion method: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.2
Extrusion method: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.3
Sonication method:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.4
Freeze­thaw method:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Determination of minimum crosslinking concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Liposome Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4.1
Particle Size and Zeta­Potential analysis: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4.2
Qualitative alginate crosslinking tests: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4.3
Encapsulation Efficiency:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4.4
Calculation of Ca2+:lipid ratio: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4.5
Temperature Release: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Bio­ink formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5.1
Alginate/Liposome bio­inks: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5.2
Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs bio­inks:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.6
Rheology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.7
Printing and Crosslinking tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.8
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Results
24
4.1
Assay for Quantification of Ca2+
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Preparation and Characterization of TSLs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Encapsulation Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Temperature release . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5
Rheology of the formulated bio­inks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.6
3D printing tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5
Discussion
38
5.1
Preparation and thermal properties of TSLs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
v
==PAGE:8==
5.2
Evaluation of the thermally­modulated crosslinking of bio­inks . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Investigation of the printability of the thermally crosslinked bio­inks . . . . . 42
5.4
Optimization of the proof­of­concept inks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Conclusion
46
Bibliography
47
A Appendix
53
A.1 Thermal release of the IF­synthesized DPPC TSLs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.2 Rheological characterization of the formulated bio­inks . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.3 Printability and Microscopy of the optimized bio­inks . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
vi
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
3D
three­dimensional
AIII
Arsenazo III
Ca+2
calcium ions
CaCO3 calcium carbonate
CAD computer­aided design
CaCl2 calcium chloride
CaSO4 calcium sulfate
cNFCs Carboxymethylated nanofibrillated cellulose
cryoTEM transmission electron cryomicroscopy
DI
de­ionized
drug:lipid drug­to­lipid ratio
DLS
Dynamic light scattering
DMPC 1,2­dimyristoyl­sn­glycero­3­phosphocholine
DMPG 1,2­dimyristoyl­sn­glycero­3­phospho­(1’­rac­glycerol)
DPPC 1,2­dipalmitoyl­sn­glycero­3­phosphocholine
DPPG 1,2­dipalmitoyl­sn­glycero­3­phospho­(1’­rac­glycerol)
DRV
dehydration rehydration vesicle
ECM extracellular matrix
FT
freeze­thaw
G’
storage modulus
G”
loss modulus
GUVs giant unilamellar vesicles
HEPES 2­[4­(2­Hydroxyethyl)piperazin­1­yl]ethane­1­sulfonic acid
IF
interdigitation­fusion
IFVs
interdigitation­fusion vehicles
LCST lower­critical solution temperature
LUVs large unilamellar vesicles
MLVs multilamellar vesicles
MPPC 1­myristoyl­2­palmitoyl­sn­glycero­3­phosphocholine
MQ
Milli­Q
Na+
sodium ions
NaCl sodium chloride
PC
phosphatidylcholine
==PAGE:10==
PCS
photon correlation spectroscopy
PEG
DSPE­PEG2000
PE
phosphatidylethanolamine
PDI
polydispersity index
PG
phosphatidylglycerol
pKca
affinity constant for calcium ions
RGD Arginylglycylaspartic acid
SUVs small unilamellar vesicles
Tm
melting temperature
TSLs thermosensitive liposomes
UV­VIS Ultraviolet­visible spectroscopy
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Multimaterial micro­extrusion 3D printing is an appealing method to manufacture devices
which are made of soft and biocompatible hydrogel materials. It stands as the predomi­
nant approach in 3D bio­printing structures composed of a singular material through a dis­
tinct additive manufacturing process [1]. One of the most important properties of hydrogel
materials is that they provide a highly hydrated environment similar to the extracellular ma­
trix (ECM), rendering them optimal materials to be used for cell encapsulation [2]. Thanks
to their cell­friendly properties, these materials have found applications both in vitro and in
vivo. In vitro applications of hydrogels include microphysiological systems that are used
to model tissues, study diseases and screen pharmaceutical drug formulations. In vivo
applications are in the form of cell­laden biohybrid implants [3, 4]. However, for tissue en­
gineering applications it can be challenging to fabricate complex designs using hydrogels
[5].
An important part of formulating inks for micro­extrusion 3D printing and 3D bio­printing
specifically, is the crosslinking of the material following its extrusion. Micro­extrusion 3D
printing has been observed to affect the rheological properties of bio­inks, such as caus­
ing jamming of polymer chains, [6] which consequently makes crosslinking reactions to
exhibit a more pronounced role. While the method of crosslinking depends on the na­
ture of the polymeric backbone and the functional groups present in the material being
printed, chemicals of mild nature and annealing conditions following the extrusion, are
usually preferred. For inks composed of hydrogels, common methods of crosslinking can
be physical, chemical, enzymatic or a combination of all of them [7]. Other methods of
crosslinking include subjecting the print to ultraviolet radiation to induce couple or photo­
polymerization, or utilizing reactions using visible [8] or near­infrared light [9]. The majority
of crosslinking compounds used, threaten cell viability and need to be removed from the
gels before their application [5]. In bio­printing applications involving cell incorporation
into the inks, it is imperative to identify crosslinking methods that can be induced under
mild conditions and environmental changes, without inducing cell toxicity.
The use of TSLs in crosslinking hydrogels through elevation of temperature has already
been reported in literature [10, 11, 12, 13]. The formulation of hydrogel bio­inks exhibiting
thermal crosslinking properties through the incorporation of TSLs encapsulating crosslink­
ing agents, has not been reported as far as we know. Therefore, the key challenge sought
to be adressed in this project, is whether printed structures of these bio­inks can retain
their thermal crosslinking properties after extrusion 3D printing.
By taking into consideration the challenges of bio­ink crosslinking, in this project, it was
sought to explore the possibility of finding an alternative way of crosslinking that occurs
under cell­friendly conditions. The idea of the cell­friendly crosslinking involved the in­
corporation of TSLs containing encapsulated crosslinker in bio­inks, that would induce
crosslinking by slight elevations in physiological temperatures. Specifically, the aim of this
project was to explore different methods to synthesize TSLs that exhibit thermal sensitivity
in the temperature range of 30­40◦C, and characterize them in terms of size, uniformity,
ability to encapsulate and thermally release Ca+2. Then, to combine these TSLs loaded
with Ca+2 with alginate, formulating a series of bio­inks that possess stability in room tem­
perature and upon extrusion printing, but crosslink when they are subjected to heating at
the desired temperature range of 30­40◦C.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Liposomes:
Lipsomes are one of the most studied nanocarriers for targeted drug delivery applications,
since their discovery by Bengham in the 1960’s [14, 15]. They are spherical vesicles with
a size that ranges from a few nanometers up to a few micrometers. They are composed
of one or multiple lipid bilayers that surrounds an aqueous core. Due to their structure,
liposomes possess the ability to contain both hydrophilic and hydrophobic compounds,
by containing the hydrophilic ones in the aqueous core and the hydrophobic ones in the
bilayer [14, 16, 17]. The general structure of a liposome and the phospholipid which
comprises it can be seen in figure 2.1.
Liposomes are composed of phospholipids which are amphiphilic molecules that contain
a hydrophilic headgroup and hydrophobic acyl chains that are linked to an alcohol. The
amphipathic nature of the phospholipids drives them to spontaneously form membranes
when they are dispersed in aqueous solutions [18]. Phospholipids can be naturally de­
rived from egg yolk or soya bean [19] or be synthesized by chemical modifications to the
headgroup or hydrocarbon tails of natural ones [20]. Some of the natural phospholipids
are the phospholipid groups of phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE)
and phosphatidylglycerol (PG). In this project, the main phospholipids used for liposome
formulation are DPPC and DMPC, with their chemical structure seen in figure 2.2.
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of liposomal and phospholipid structure. The struc­
tural components of the phospholipid include the polar headgroup and the non­polar hy­
drocarbon tail. The liposomal structure is made of multiple phospholipids with their polar
heads facing outwards in the aqueous environment and the non­polar tails facing inwards
and forming bilayers. Image adapted by [21].
2
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Chemical structures of a) DPPC and b) DMPC phospholipids. They belong in
the PC group and they were the lipids chosen for the formulation of the TSLs that were
part of this project. Image adapted by Nsairat et. al. [15].
The formation of membranes occurs due to the preference of the polar headgroups to in­
teract with the aqueous environment, while the non­polar acyl chains to interact with each
other, forming a barrier. The formation of these phospholipid bilayers occurs due to hy­
drophobic interactions, with van der Waals forces keeping the hydrophobic tails together.
Hydrogen bonds and polar interactions that occur between the hydrophilic head groups
and the molecules of water present in the aqueous solution also play an important part in
the stability of the liposome structure [22]. When molecules or ions exist in the aqueous
solution during the liposome formulation process, they will be encapsulated within them
[18].
Various advantages that these drug delivery systems include biocompatibility, lack allergic
or toxic reactions, biodegradability, facile synthesis procedure, as well as having the ability
to reduce toxicity caused by free drugs while providing protection on the loaded drugs [16,
23, 24].
Important parameters of liposomes include the particle size, polydispersity, charge and
also the presence of surface modifications [19]. Liposomes can be classified into cat­
egories based on their size and the number of bilayers they contain. They are mostly
placed into two categories, being multilamellar vesicles (MLVs) and unilamellar vesicles.
Unilamellar vesicles are further categorized into small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs), large
unilamellar vesicles (LUVs) and giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) [25]. For the encap­
sulation of hydrophilic compounds, the number of bilayers and the size play an important
role. More aqueous solution is encapsulated when the size of liposomes is higher and
fewer bilayers are present [26].
There are multiple ways to prepare liposomes, depending on their intended application.
Certain factors influencing the choice of synthesis method can be the size of liposomes
desired, the physical and chemical properties of the chosen phospholipids, as well as
the loaded drug and the concentration and toxicity of the encapsulated compound [18].
The simplest method is hydration of a thin­lipid film, where the chosen phospholipids are
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
3
==PAGE:14==
dissolved in an organic solvent that is afterwards evaporated and then the lipid film remain­
ing is hydrated with an aqueous solution. Hydrophilic compounds can be encapsulated
in liposomes by dissolving them in the aqueous solution used to hydrate, and lipophilic
compounds by dissolving them together with the lipids in the organic solvent and then
hydrating the lipid film [27].
Further processing of liposomes is usually required to modify their size and lamellarity
and homogenize them. One of these methods is extrusion, where liposomes are passed
through membranes of chosen pore­sizes and extruded to obtain lower sizes and more
uniform systems [28]. Another common method is sonication, where cavitation events
reduce larger liposomes into smaller ones [29]. To reduce the lamelarity of liposomes and
increase the encapsulated amount of aqueous compounds, the freeze­thaw (FT) method
is often used. The solution containing the liposomes is frozen using liquid nitrogen (­
196◦C) and then thawed by subjecting the solution to temperatures above the lipid Tm [30].
Additionally, GUVs able to encapsulate large aqueous volumes can be synthesized with
the IF method, which is a more uncommon method than the ones previously mentioned.
The IF method is described in chapter 2.2.
Stimuli­responsive liposomes have been formulated to provide enhanced drug release
when they are subjected to various stimuli such as hyperthermia, ultrasound, electromag­
netic radiation, differences in pH or presence of reactive oxygen species [31]. In this
project, we will focus on the type of stimuli­responsive liposomes called TSLs.
2.1.1
Thermosensitive Liposomes
TSLs are a type of stimuli­responsive liposomes that enable triggered drug release when
exposed to heat. TSLs are synthesized using lipids that undergo a phase transition from
gels to liquids when exposed to temperature above physiological values, typically above
40 C◦[16, 32]. When the membrane of the TSLs is exposed to temperatures above lipid
Tm it transitions from a solid­gel (Lβ phase), to a liquid­crystalline phase (Lα phase), be­
coming more permeable and leaky towards aqueous solutions. The increase in bilayer
permeability occurs from conformational changes in the phospholipids which give them
enhanced mobility [33]. At temperature around the Tm of the lipids, the permeability of
aqueous compounds reaches its maximum. This is due to the formation of grain bound­
aries caused by the areas of the membrane existing in both phases [34]. The phospholipid
composition of the TSLs plays an important role in determining the Tm of the formulation,
with DPPC being of the most common components in TSLs, due to its Tm being above
the body temperature (Tm = 41.4◦C) [35]. The principle of triggered drug release using
TSLs is shown in figure 2.3. TSLs are classified into three categories being traditional,
lysolipid­containing and polymer­modified.
4
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Schematic representation of TSLs and their principle of heat­triggered drug
release. When the temperature of the TSLs is below the Tm of their phospholipid com­
ponents, the encapsulated compound, in this case Ca+2, is kept inside the aqueous core.
Upon elevation in temperatures above the lipid Tm, the bilayers become more fluid and
the encapsulated Ca+2 is released. Image created with BioRender.
2.1.1.1
Traditional Thermosensitive liposomes:
These are the simplest type of TSLs and they were introduced by Yatvin et. al in 1978
[36]. Their working principle is based on ”melting” of the bilayer when heated above the
lipid Tm, which transforms from a compact solid ordered state to a leaky liquid disordered
state, as mentioned earlier [37].
Specifically, when the phospholipids exist in the gel phase they are ordered and their hy­
drocarbon chains are completely extended and they are restricted to the two­dimensional
plane of the lipid membrane [16]. When the lipids are heated to a temperature above the
Tm, the orientation of C­C bonds in the acyl chains shifts from trans to gauche. This shift
in orientation creates leaky interfacial regions between the phospholipid domains which
are still solid and the liquid ones that are melting. The high permeability in these regions
is attributed to big incompatibilities in hydrophobic matching and molecular packing [38,
39]. In temperatures above the Tm the bilayer exists solely in the liquid crystalline phase,
where the phospholipids can move fast and freely [16].
The focus of this project will be on traditional TSLs.
2.1.1.2
Lysolipid­containing Thermosensitive liposomes:
The first lysolipid­containing TSLs were proposed by Anyarambhatla et. al. in 1999, where
they successfully incorporated the 1­myristoyl­2­palmitoyl­sn­glycero­3­phosphocholine
(MPPC) lysolipid to the gel phase of DPPC liposomes [40]. The incorporation of the
lysolipid aimed to increase drug release and lower the phase transition temperature of
the liposome.
Lysolipids contain one acyl chain and they are non­cylindrical as they exhibit a large head
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
5
==PAGE:16==
group compared to their single hydrocarbon tail, which gives them a tendency to form de­
fects in the liposomal bilayer [16]. In lysolipid­based TSLs, the release of the cargo is at­
tributed to the creation of nano­pores, grain boundaries and fenestrations by the lysolipids,
as well as the formaton of micelles. The formation of the defects is based on the idea that
when being near the Tm, melting of the grain boundaries occurs and there is an augment
of lateral mobility of the lipids, allowing the lysolipids to amass [16, 41].
2.1.1.3
Polymer­modified Thermosensitive liposomes:
Another approach to creating TSLs is to use synthetic polymers which are able to disrupt
the liposomal membrane upon heating at a certain temperature. The way these polymer­
TSLs work is that when they are at temperatures below the lower­critical solution temper­
ature (LCST) the polymer is fully hydrated in a coil­shaped form, but when they are above
the LCST, they shrink to a globule­like form and cause destabilization of the liposomal
membrane. These polymers can be used to either enhance the already temperature­
sensitive properties of TSLs or either add such properties to non­thermosensitive lipo­
some formulations [16, 37].
2.2
Interdigitation­fusion:
The IF method is used to synthesize GUVs that are capable of encapsulating large vol­
umes of water­soluble compounds. The idea behind this method, is that SUVs can fuse
together when they are subjected to certain conditions causing interdigitation [42].
Figure 2.4: Schematic representation of bilayer interdigitation. A normal bilayer structure
is visible on the left side and an interdigitated structure on the right. In the interdigitated
domain the thinning of bilayer can be observed, as well as the protrusion of the phospho­
lipid acyl chains beyond the midplane. Image created using BioRender.
6
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:17==
While normally the liposomal bilayer exists in a conformation where two lipid monolayers
are opposing each other with the terminal of the acyl chain in the middplane, it is possible
for the bilayer to also exist in an interdigitated arrangement (LβI phase), where one or both
of the lipid hydrophobic tails protrude beyond the midplane of the bilayer and penetrate
the opposing monolayer. This phenomenon enables segments of individual acyl chains
to occupy different monolayers [43]. A schematic representation of bilayer interdigitation
is shown in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.5: Summary of the interdigitation­fusion method. Briefly, in a solution contain­
ing SUVs, ethanol is added at temperatures below the Tm of the phospholipids, and the
SUVs fuse into interdigitated phospholipid sheets. Afterwards, the solution is heated at
temperatures above the Tm of phospholipids, and the lipid sheets transform into GUVs
capable of encapsulating large aqueous volumes. Note that the IF liposomes do not pos­
sess highly­curved bilayers. Image created using BioRender.
It has been widely established that interdigitated domains can form in in the presence of
short­chain alcohols such as ethanol [44]. Ethanol has also been shown to enhance the
rate of aggregation and/or fusion of SUVs [45]. Phospholipids belonging to the PC group
possess hydrophobic groups that contain water molecules which inhibit aggregation be­
tween the membranes of liposomes. When high concentrations of ethanol are present,
ethanol will displace the water molecules and will distribute into the hydrophobic region
of the bilayer or adsorb on the surface of the membrane [46]. Thus, the lateral separation
between the head groups of the phospholipids will be amplified, causing the two bilayers
to slide past each other, causing interdigitation which results in a decrease in the thickness
of the bilayer. By raising the temperature above the Tm of the phospholipids present, the
interdigitated bilayers will refold, transforming into the non­interdigitated liquid­crystalline
phase (Lα phase), while keeping the reduced bilayer thickness due to the lateral separa­
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
7
==PAGE:18==
tion of the head groups [47].
The ethanol­induced interdigitation of bilayers has been used to create liposomes with
reduced bilayer thickness and large aqueous cores [42]. The steps that must be followed
during this liposome preparation method are:
1. Creation of SUVs (typical concentrations of 20 mg/mL) with a diameter as small as
possible, such as using sonicated SUVs.
2. At a temperature below the phospholipid Tm, ethanol (typical concentration of 4M)
must be added to the SUVs suspension to induce vesicle fusion and in turn, forma­
tion of interdigitated phospholipid sheets.
3. Heating above the Tm of the phospholipids, to induce vesicularization, causing the
interdigitated sheets to bend back to themselves, forming GUVs in the process [48].
A schematic representation of the IF method to produce IF liposomes is presented in
figure 2.5.
However, not all phospholipids are able to fully interdigitate and create interdigitation­
fusion vehicles (IFVs), as a requirement is that the hydrocarbons of the acyl chain exhibit
a predominantly linear conformation in the all­trans state. Phospholipids that are at tem­
peratures above their Tm and exist in the liquid­crystalline phase (Lα phase) cannot form
IFVs as well. The ideal phospholipids used in this method are based on PC with an acyl
chain that is fully saturated and below the phospholipid Tm, such as DPPC [42].
2.3
Dynamic light scattering
DLS, which also is known as photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) and quasi­elastic
light scattering, is a widely used tool to study the diffusion mechanism of macromolecules
and nanometer particles when they are in solution. It can also be used to determine the
size, the size distribution and sometimes the shape of nanoparticles present in liquid solu­
tions. Theoretical relations are used to determine these properties from the translational
and/or the rotational diffusion coefficients of nanoparticles or macromolecules [49]. In
this technique, the intensity fluctuations of scattered light occurring from a monochromatic
beam encountering a nanoparticle or macromolecule solution are used to analyze the dif­
fusion coefficient than is then related to the hydrodynamic size of the macromolecule or
nanoparticle. The Brownian motion of the nanoparticle or macromolecules, (which cause
the intensity fluctuations) is measured and then related to the diffusion coefficient or size
of the particles [50]. The Brownian motion is affected by the temperature, size (with an
upper size limit of 1µm) and solvent viscosity of the macromolecules [51]. The optical
setup of a DLS system is shown in figure 2.6.
8
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: Schematic representation of the optical setup of a DLS system. A laser is shot
through a polarizer and strikes the sample. The scattered light is collected by a detector
that produces an image on the screen, related to the size of particles. Image created from
a template in BioRender.
2.4
Ultraviolet­visible Spectroscopy
UV­VIS is one of the most commonly used and oldest analytical techniques for analyzing
compounds. It is a spectrophotometric technique which measures the intensity of the light
in the ultraviolet (10 ­ 400 nm) and the visible (400 ­ 800 nm) region of the electromagnetic
spectrum, as a function of the wavelength. The working principle of UV­VIS is based on
that the amount of light absorbed is directly proportional to the amount of analyte present
in a sample. The electronic structure of the absorbing species, (e.g. atoms, ions and
molecules) determines how much light is absorbed [52]. The electronic transition states
of radiation­absorbing molecules are the basis of UV­VIS, as they drive electrons from a
lower energy orbital (the highest occupied molecular orbital, or HOMO) to a higher energy
unoccupied orbital (the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, or LUMO) when radiation
hits them [53]. The detection of compounds is based on the Bouguer­Lambert­Beer law
described below:
A = ε × c × d
(2.1)
In the Bouguer­Lambert­Beer law, A is the absorbance, ε is the molar decadic extinction
coefficient, c is the molar concentration of a light­absorbing compound and d the optical
pathlength of the sample in cm. Note that the equation 2.1 is limited for dilute samples,
as in concentrated solutions (c > 0.01 M) the ε is not constant.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.7: Schematic representation of the spectrum of light, as well as a 96­microwell
plate containing a dilution series and a microwell plate reader used to record the spectra.
Image created using BioRender.
10
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:21==
2.5
Ca2+ detection using Arsenazo III assay
AIII is a metallochromic dye that displays high affinity for binding to Ca+2. It is an azo­
derivative of chromotropic acid. It has also been reported to be used in the measurement
of uranium, zirconium, thorium and other rare earth elements, while being in conditions
of low pH and low ionic strength [54]. The chemical structure of AIII is displayed in figure
2.8.
It displays a high and specific affinity constant for calcium ions (pKca) at neutral pH ranges
and its extinction coefficients when it is bound to Ca+2 and while in its calcium­free form
have a large difference. An important advantage of AIII is that it is considered to be
chemically stable. However, it is important to note that while AIII forms a 1:1 complex with
Ca+2, it has also been reported to form 2:1 complexes with Ca+2 when dye concentrations
between 100 ­ 200 µM are used, thus, requiring the dye to be in lower concentrations [55].
Figure 2.8: Chemical structure of Arsenazo III, metallochromic dye which binds with high
affinity to Ca+2. Image adapted by [56].
The method of measuring Ca+2 with AIII, involves the increase in absorbance with the
formation of AIII­Ca+2 complex, from 560 nm for free AIII to 650 nm when bound to Ca+2,
where the absorbance maximum (λmax) of the complex is. The shift in absorbance of AIII
during Ca+2 binding, as well as the color of the dye during the process, can be seen in
figure 2.9.
AIII has found use in measuring concentrations of Ca+2 in the micromolar range in living
cells [54] and has been used in liposome systems to study Ca+2­transport [57, 58, 59].
The interactions between AIII and metal ions has been reported to be strongly dependent
on the pH [60]. Most biological applications of AIII for Ca+2 detection have been done in
buffered systems, and it has been reported that the presence of other ions in the solution
can alter the equilibrium of the AIII­Ca+2 complex, such as in the presence of sodium
ions (Na+) [60]. By taking the pH sensitivity of the dye into account, the quantification of
calcium using AIII has to be conducted at a constant pH, with even minor changes to it
exhibiting changes in the calcium content measured [60].
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.9: a) Spectra of free AIII and Ca+2­bound AIII, with different concentrations of
Ca+2. The λmax of the AIII­Ca+2 complex is located at 650 nm. It can be observed that
the increasing Ca+2 concentrations also cause a shift in this wavelength. Graph created
using Origin. b) Image depicting the colour change of the AIII­Ca+2 complex. Pure AIII
is seen first where it exhibits a red­ish/pink color, then the increasing Ca+2 concentration
turns the color to violet and then deep blue. Image taken using a smartphone camera.
By taking into account the sensitivity of the dye to pH changes, in our project, the de­
tection of Ca+2 using AIII will be conducted in a strongly buffered system using 2­[4­(2­
Hydroxyethyl)piperazin­1­yl]ethane­1­sulfonic acid (HEPES).
2.6
Micro­extrusion 3D printing:
Micro­extrusion 3D printing is a useful method for bioprinting viscous liquids, providing the
possibility to print in an efficient and controllable way structures which can contain cells,
under physiological conditions. It is widely used due to its facile printing mechanism and
also cost­effectiveness [61].
Upon using mechanical force, biomaterials (usually polymers) can be dispensed through
a needle or a nozzle that is connected to a cartridge containing the biomaterial. When the
first layer of the structure has been printed, the build platform will move down, or the extru­
sion head will move up to continue printing additional layers on top of it. Upon extrusion of
the biomaterial, desired structures can be created, with the extruded polymer solidifying
through different mechanisms. These mechanisms include chemical crosslinking, chain
arrangement, crystallization of the material or recovery of non­covalent bonds [1]. For
the 3D bioprinting of cells, the cells are mixed with a bio­ink, which is a material that is
able to provide an environment for encapsulated cells that is similar to the ECM and also
keeps them protected from the stress conditions that occurs during the micro­extrusion
3D printing [62].
Important parameters to adjust before the printing procedure are the speed of the printing,
the pressure used to dispense the bio­ink and the distance between the printing platform,
which all of them depend on the biomaterial used as well as the cell line encapsulated
within the ink. The size and type of nozzle used during 3D printing is also important
to consider. The printed structures are determined by the bio­inks printability, which is
measured by the resolution of the printed structures, the maintenance of the structure
after the extrusion, and the shape fidelity [62].
12
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:23==
Ideally, the biomaterials used during micro­extrusion 3D printing should exhibit a behav­
ior that is non­Newtonian and shear­thinning, with viscosities being from 30 mPas up to
6×107 mPas [63, 64]. Common nature­derived biomaterials used in extrusion printing
include alginate, gelatin, collagen and fibrin [62, 61]. Subtypes of extrusion bioprinting in­
clude piston­driven, screw­driven and pneumatic, all of which can be seen in figure 2.10.
In pneumatic systems compressed air is utilized to extrude the bio­ink, in the piston­driven
a vertical force, and in screw­driven rotational force [65]. In this project, a pneumatic dis­
pensing 3D printer is used.
Figure 2.10: The types of micro­extrusion 3D printing used for the dispensing of bio­inks
are displayed, being a) Pneumatic, b) Piston­driven and, c) Screw­driven. Image adapted
from Zhang et. al. [65].
2.7
Rheological characterization of materials
Rheometry is an experimental technique that is used to characterize the rheology of ma­
terials such as polymers, gels and tissue, by studying how the materials deform when
forces are applied to them [66].
Solid materials and liquid materials deform in a different manner, with ideal solids deform­
ing up to a point and then retaining their deformed shape until the force that is applied to
them is removed. After removal, the shape of ideal solids returns to the one prior to
their deformation, exhibiting elastic behaviour, meaning that the work or energy applied
to deform the material is stored inside it and then recovered completely when the force is
removed [67].
On the other hand, when force is applied to materials that behave as ideal liquids (Newto­
nian fluids), they will deform indefinitely until the force causing the deformation is removed.
The deformation and flow rate of the liquids depend on the extent of the force applied. The
rate of force to the rate of deformation is called viscosity [67]. In rheology, viscosity is the
relation of the shear stress over the shear rate, and it measures the resistance of an ideal
fluid to deformation [68].
However, real materials exhibit a behavior that is a combination of elastic and viscous be­
haviour, with it being named viscoelastic. In materials which exhibit viscoelastic behavior
a part of the deformation applied by shear happens right away, while another part of it
occurs after some time [69].
Rheology is important to investigate the mechanical properties of hydrogels as it is a
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
13
==PAGE:24==
fast method which does not need large sample volumes, is sensitive and can provide
information on the structure of hydrogels, such as the degree of crosslinking and structural
homogeneity [70].
The different rheological tests that can be conducted to characterize hydrogels are flow
curves, strain­sweep test, time­sweep test, temperature sweep, frequency sweep and
creep test [71]. In this project, even though different types of rheological characterization
are performed, the focus will be on the time­sweep test to monitor the gelation process of
the formulated bio­inks.
In time­sweep tests, the changes in material structure are observed over a certain period
of time. These structural changes can be related to gelation, curing, solvent evaporation,
degradation of the polymer, as well as polymer recovery. The time­sweep test is frequently
used to study the gelation of the hydrogel, with the gelation time being the point where
the G’ and loss modulus (G”) crossover. It can also be used to monitor the stability of
the hydrogel over time, by observing the changes in the G’ and G” [71]. In figure 2.11 an
example of a time­sweep graph can be observed.
Figure 2.11: Graph depicting a time­sweep performed by a rheometer to monitor the gela­
tion process of a hydrogel. Notice that after some time, there is a point where the G’
becomes higher than the G”. In the x­axis the time (s) is displayed while on the y­axis the
G’ and G” (Pa). Image adapted by Stojkov et. al. [71].
2.8
Alginate
Alginate is a co­polymer consisting of β­D­mannuronic acid (known as the M block) and
of α­L­guluronic acid (known as the G block), which are connected by β­1,4­glycosidic
bonds. It is one of the major polyanionic polysaccharides found in bacterial bio­films
and seaweed, specifically in bacteria such as pseudomonas and different species of
brown algae, existing in the form of sodium salts [72, 73]. Alginate is considered one
of the most used biopolymers in biomedical applications thanks to its bio­degradable,
14
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:25==
non­immunogenic and non­toxic properties, as well as its low cost [74].
The molecular weight and the physicochemical properties of alginate depend on the ratio
of M/G blocks and the type of ionic crosslinker. Alginate can form hydrogels upon inter­
action with divalent cations such as Ca+2, Ba2+, Zn2+, or Sr2+, by co­operative binding
between the ions and the carboxylic groups present in the G­block, forming a structure
with the shape of an ”egg­box” [75], as seen in figure 2.12. The most common method
to create alginate hydrogels is by using Ca+2 as an ionic­crosslinking agent, with calcium
chloride (CaCl2) being the most commonly used salt. However, CaCl2 has been shown
to cause rapid gelation, while providing little control because of its water­solubility. Other
Ca+2­containing crosslinking agents include calcium carbonate (CaCO3) and calcium sul­
fate (CaSO4) which are used for their slower gelation rates occuring from their lower water
solubility [74].
Figure 2.12:
Schematic representation of the ”Egg­box” structure of alginate when
crosslinked with Ca+2. Image adapted from Lee et. al. [72]
Alginate bio­inks exhibit shear­thinning behavior and the strain rate determines their vis­
cosity. The viscosity is dependent on the concentration of alginate, with inks consisting
of concentrations below 5% (w/v) creating soft hydrogels [76]. While lower concentration
of alginate are better for cell viability, it is difficult to print structures with good resolution
[62]. The printing resolution can be improved by blending alginate with polymers of high
molecular weight such as nano­fibrillated cellulose. It has been reported that bio­inks con­
sisting of alginate and nano­fibrillated cellulose displayed excellent printability utilizing low
pressure conditions to ensure cell viability [77, 78]. Another way to improve the printing
resolution of low concentration alginate inks is by optimizing the printing parameters, be­
ing the pressure used to dispense the ink, the speed of printing and the size of the nozzle
used [62].
Alginate exhibits cell­protective properties, as it can shield cells from stress during the
printing procedure. Despite its shielding abilities, alginate does not possess domains
which can facilitate cell­binding. A way to enhance its cell­adhesion is by blending al­
ginate with different biomaterials that exhibit cell­binding motifs or modification with pep­
tides, such as Arginylglycylaspartic acid (RGD). Blending of alginate with gelatin has been
investigated, which contains RGD motifs and thus inherently possesses cell­binding prop­
erties. Gelatin enhanced the cell viability in alginate bio­inks, in a concentration­depended
manner [79]. Alginate inks that have been modified with RGD motifs have been reported
to exhibit increased cell attachment and cell growth [80].
The method of incorporation of the ionic crosslinker to alginate bio­inks, as well as the
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
15
==PAGE:26==
duration of the exposure to the crosslinking metal ions, influences the printability of inks,
as well as the viability of cells. Such methods include printing directly into an ionic so­
lution (e.g. CaCl2), pre­crosslinking of alginate with metal ions and aerosol spraying of
the nozzle with metal ions [7]. Bath­assisted printing of alginate to a crosslinking solution
provides fast gelation, ensuring structural stability after the printing has finished. The con­
centration of crosslinking metal ions is very important in bath­assisted printing to ensure
the rapid crosslinking of alginate and cell viability, with Ca+2 concentrations greater than
100 mM reported to be optimal [81]. Pre­crosslinking of alginate is done by mixing the ink
with low concentration of crosslinking agent before the printing procedure and then ex­
truding them through the printing nozzle. This approach ensures the structures are fully
crosslinked upon printing [82, 83]. Another approach for pre­crosslinking is incorporating
thermosensitive polymers in the alginate ink. Alginate bio­inks mixed with thermosensitive
gelatin have been investigated, with thermal gelation of gelatin occuring before alginate
crosslinking, exhibiting printed structures with enhanced stability [7]. It has also been re­
ported that spraying the printing nozzle with crosslinking agents that are aerosolized has
shown to facilitate crosslinking of alginate. While this crosslinking method does not hinder
cell viability, it does however, present repeatability issues [7].
2.9
Thermally­crosslinked hydrogels incorporating TSLs
The incorporation of TSLs to hydrogels in order to provide thermally­modulated crosslink­
ing properties has been investigated in literature. Some examples found are reported
below.
Westhaus et. al. investigated the incorporation of IF­synthesized TSLs consisting of
DPPC­DMPC (9:1 molar ratio) phospholipids, for triggered release of Ca+2 and rapid gela­
tion of alginate hydrogels needed for injectable biomaterials. They discovered that these
TSLs were able to release approximately 90% of their encapsulated Ca+2 after being
heated at 37◦C and crosslinked alginate hydrogels of 2% (w/v) final concentration. They
also reported crosslinking of soluble proteins by utilizing the transglutaminase enzyme,
which is activated by the presence of Ca+2 [11].
Thermal crosslinking of alginate by IF­synthesized TSLs has also been reported by Stow­
ers. et. al., where they encapsulated gold nanorods together with Ca+2 or a chelator, to
formulate a dynamically tunable system. This system utilized near­infrared wavelengths
to trigger heat­mediated release caused by the encapsulated gold nanorods inducing lo­
calized heating to the TSLs. When encapsulated Ca+2 was released, the alginate hydro­
gel crosslinked, but when the encapsulated chelator was released, the hydrogel softened
[12].
Incorporation of dehydration rehydration vesicle (DRV)­synthesized TSLs to hyaluronic
acid­tyramine hydrogel has also been reported. Ren et. al. encapsulated horseradish
peroxidase inside TSLs that were then used to crosslink the hyaluronic hydrogel when
subjected to temperatures above the lipid Tm [13].
While the existing literature is scarce in the field of formulating thermally­crosslinkable
hydrogels by incorporating TSLs, it is suggested that GUVs that are able to encapsulate
large aqueous volumes are preferred to be synthesized for such applications, as exhibited
by the use of IF and DRV methods.
In this project, the synthesis of the TSLs is inspired by the literature, while also investiga­
tion on different methods of synthesis was conducted in an attempt to provide liposomes
with smaller size and uniformity.
16
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:27==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Materials
The materials used in the project, together with their CAS number and the company they
were purchased from are described below:
1. 1,2­dipalmitoyl­sn­glycero­3­phospho­(1’­rac­glycerol) (DPPG)(840455P, Avanti Po­
lar Lipids)
2. 1,2­dimyristoyl­sn­glycero­3­phospho­(1’­rac­glycerol) (DMPG) (840445P, Avanti Po­
lar Lipids)
3. DPPC (63­89­8, Avanti Polar Lipids)
4. DMPC (18194­24­6, Avanti Polar Lipids)
5. DSPE­PEG2000 (PEG) (474922­77­5, Avanti Polar Lipids)
6. cholesterol (57­88­5, Avanti Polar Lipids)
7. HEPES (7365­45­9, Sigma Adlrich)
8. AIII (1668­00­4, Sigma Aldrich)
9. Triton X­100 (9002­93­1, Sigma Aldrich)
10. Methanol (67­56­1, VWR Chemicals BDH©)
11. sodium chloride (NaCl) (7647­14­5, Honeywell FlukaTM)
12. Ethanol (64­17­5, Merck Millipore),
13. Low molecular weight Alginate (80 120cP, 196­13325, FUJIFILM Wako)
14. High molecular weight Alginate (300 400cP, 192­09995, FUJIFILM Wako)
15. CaCl2 (10043­52­4, Sigma Aldrich)
3.2
Synthesis of thermosensitive liposomes
3.2.0.1
Lipid film preparation:
Dry lipid films were prepared by weighing the chosen phospholipids on a scale and then
transferring them to a glass vial using a spatula. 5­10 mL of methanol were added to the
glass vial and it was briefly vortexed and heated for 15 minutes to enhance the dissolution
of the phospholipids in the organic solvent. Upon the total dissolution of the phospholipids
in methanol, the solution was transferred to a round­bottom flask of with a volume of 5
or 10 mL and was placed in a rotary evaporator (Hei­VAP Core, Heidolph, Germany)
for the evaporation of methanol. The rotary evaporator was set to spin at 140 rpm and
the round­bottom flask was placed inside a water bath set at 60◦C. The pressure was
gradually lowered from 1000 mbar up to 60 mbar, dropping 50 mbar at a time, to ensure
the formation of a uniform lipid film. Upon total evaporation of the organic solvent, the dry
lipid film was hydrated with 200 mM CaCl2 solution to obtain a lipid concentration of 20
mg/mL, and was kept inside the water bath set at 60◦C while spinning at 280 rpm for 20
minutes, to ensure complete hydration of the film.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
17
==PAGE:28==
3.2.1
Interdigitation­fusion method:
The IF method described by Ahl et. al [48] was used for the synthesis of TSLs with large
internal volumes to encapsulate Ca+2. The chosen phospholipids DPPC or DPPC­DMPC
(9:1 molar ratio) were weighed on a scale and then transferred to a glass vial. A dry lipid
film was prepared using the method described in chapter 3.2.0.1. Following the complete
hydration of the lipid film, the sample was put into an ultra­sonicator (Ultrasonic Cleaning
Bath, VWR©USC) containing a water bath set at 60◦C, and was left for 60 minutes, or
until it appeared to be optically clear, which signified the successful creation of SUVs.
The solution was transferred to a glass vial and then placed for 5 minutes in an ice bath
to quickly bring temperature below the Tm of the lipids. Absolute ethanol was added to
the SUVs with a final concentration of 4M and was immediately followed by vortexing for
1 minute, to create a highly viscous interdigitated phase. The color of the sample quickly
turned from transparent to opaque white, indicating the successful formation of interdigi­
tated phospholipid sheets. The solution was left at room temperature for 20 minutes and
then was placed on a hot plate to be heated for another 20 minutes at 60◦C, with the cap
on to ensure the formation of GUVs and thus, encapsulation of the CaCl2 solution. The
cap was then removed and the sample was left to heat for another 40 minutes at 60◦C,
to ensure ethanol evaporation. The sample was put for dialysis for two days against an
iso­osmotic 300 mM NaCl solution.
3.2.2
Extrusion method:
For the extrusion procedure, a lipid film was prepared using the chosen phospholipids,
and was hydrated with 200 mM CaCl2 to reach a lipid concentration of 20 mM, using
the same procedure described in chapter 3.2.0.1. The sample solution was transferred
to a syringe and extruded using a lipid hand extruder (Avanti Mini Extruder, Avanti polar
lipids, USA) that was heated using hot plate set at 60◦C. It was extruded through different
polycarbonate membranes of 800 nm, 200 nm and 100 nm pore size, depending on the
desired size of the liposome samples. The extruded samples were then dialyzed against
an iso­osmotic 300 mM NaCl solution for two days.
3.2.3
Sonication method:
For the sonication procedure, lipid thin films of the chosen phospholipids were created
and hydrated with 200 mM CaCl2 to reach a lipid concentration of 20 mM, following the
method described in chapter 3.2.0.1. Following complete hydration of the film, the sample
solution was put on a ultra­sonicator containing a heated water bath that was set at 60◦C
and was sonicated for 45 minutes. The sonicated samples were dialyzed against an iso­
osmotic 300 mM NaCl solution for two days.
3.2.4
Freeze­thaw method:
For the freeze­thaw procedure, a modified version of Xu et. al’s work [84] was followed.
First, a lipid film consisting of DPPC was hydrated with 200 mM CaCl2 to reach a final lipid
concentration of 20 mM, as described in chapter 3.2.0.1. Following hydration of the film,
the sample was transferred from a round­bottom flask to a glass vial, and four freeze­thaw
cycles were performed by placing the vial into a liquid nitrogen solution for 1 minute using
tweezers, and then in a water bath set at 60◦C for 1 minute using a floater. The sample
was transferred to a syringe and placed to a lipid hand extruder that was heated using a
hot plate set at 60◦C. It was then extruded through 800 nm and then 200 nm pore size
polycarbonate membranes, to obtain monodisperse liposomes with a size near 200 nm.
The sample was afterwards put for dialysis against an iso­osmotic 300 mM NaCl solution,
for two days.
18
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Determination of minimum crosslinking concentration
A series of CaCl2 concentrations were formulated to test the range in which alginate can
be crosslinked. Briefly, CaCl2 was weighed on a scale and then transferred to a glass
vial, where appropriate volume of Milli­Q (MQ) water was added to create stock solutions
of the following concentrations:
1. 500 mM
2. 200 mM
3. 100 mM
4. 52 mM
5. 33.8 mM
6. 10 mM
7. 1 mM
8. 0.1 mM.
100 µL of these solutions were added drop­wise to glass vials containing 100 µL of 2%
and 4% (w/v) (final concentrations) low­viscosity alginate that was dissolved in 900 mM
NaCl. The glass vials were checked to see if gelation of sodium alginate occurred, with
the help of a spatula.
3.4
Liposome Characterization
3.4.1
Particle Size and Zeta­Potential analysis:
To determine the size and zeta­potential of the synthesized liposomes, DLS was con­
ducted using a zetasizer (Malvern Panalytical, DLS Zetasizer Nano series­ Nano ZS).
For particle size measurements, the liposome samples were diluted 50 times by mixing 20
µL of them with 980 µL of a 300 mM NaCl solution using an eppendorf mechanical pipette
and the solution was then added to a glass cuvette. For zeta­potential measurements,
the liposomal samples were also diluted 50 times by mixing 20 µL of them with 980 µL of
an already­made solution containing 10 mM HEPES/5% Glucose, buffered at pH 7.4 and
then added to a glass cuvette. A zeta­cell was used for the zeta­potential measurements.
Both type of measurements were measured either in triplicate or sextuplicate, depending
on the sample, and conducted at 25◦C.
3.4.2
Qualitative alginate crosslinking tests:
To investigate whether the created liposome samples crosslink upon heat, a small volume
of low viscosity 2% and 4% (w/v) alginate solution that was dissolved in 900 mM NaCl, was
pipetted to a glass vial, and an equal volume of TSLs sample was added afterwards to it.
They were mixed using an eppendorf mechanical pipette and then left for 20­60 minutes,
to check for possible crosslink of alginate at room temperature due to presence of unen­
capsulated Ca+2 in the liposome solution. If gelation did not occur at room temperature,
the glass vial was placed on a heat block that was set at 43◦C. The samples containing
the mixture were continuously assessed to observe any crosslink. Those that exhibited
obvious crosslinking were removed from heat, while the samples that did not were left to
heat for one hour more. The samples that did not exhibit any alginate crosslinking even
after an hour of heating, were not considered as successfull TSLs systems and thus, were
not used in the project.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
19
==PAGE:30==
3.4.3
Encapsulation Efficiency:
The amount of Ca+2 encapsulated within the liposomes was determined using the AIII
calcium­binding dye. The TSLs samples were lysed following the protocol used by West­
haus et. al. [11]. The TSLs were diluted at first a 100 times, by adding 1 µL of them
together with 99 µL of a 300 mM NaCl solution in an eppendorf tube and then briefly vor­
texed. 395 µL of an 0.4 mM AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl solution containing 0.5%
Triton X­100 surfactant and buffered at pH 7, with the pH being monitored using a pH me­
ter (WTWTM inoLabTM 7110 Benchtop pH Meter, Fisher Scientific), were mixed with 5 µL
of the previous diluted TSLs solution, reaching a total dilution of 8000. The solution was
added to an eppendorf tube. The resulting solution was vortexed for 1 minute and then
100 µL of it were carefully transferred to a transparent 96­well plate (NuncTM, Thermo
ScientificTM, Thermo Fisher, Denmark) as to not generate bubbles that would interfere
with Ca+2 detection. The measurements were conducted using a micro­well plate reader
(SPARK© Multimode Microplate Reader, Tecan) that was set at 25◦C and in triplicate.
The encapsulation efficiency of the liposomes was calculated using the concentration
obtained by the standard curve created for the AIII solution, and applying it in the following
equation:
%EE =
C
Cinitial
× 100
(3.1)
Where C stands for the total concentration of Ca+2 in the TSLs after their lysis with Triton
X­100 and Cinitial is the initial concentration added.
3.4.4
Calculation of Ca2+:lipid ratio:
The Ca+2:lipid molar ratio was calculated using the following equation:
Ca2+ : lipid ratio = CCa2+
Clipid
(3.2)
Where CCa2+ refers to the molar concentration of Ca+2 inside the TSLs and Clipid to the
molar concentration of lipids present in the TSLs sample.
3.4.5
Temperature Release:
To determine the amount of Ca+2 released under heating, as well as the temperature
where the TSLs samples release, the protocol used by Westerhaus et. al. was followed
[11]. 399 µL of a solution consisting of 0.4 mM AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl buffered
at 7 pH, were used and mixed with 1 µL of TSLs sample. The solution was added to an
eppendorf tube and briefly vortexed. 100 µL of the resulting solution were transferred to
a transparent 96­well plate. The measurements were conducted using the same plate
reader mentioned in chapter 3.4.3 and in triplicate. The method in the plate reader that
was used consisted of the following steps:
1. Heat samples at target temperature
2. Wait for 5 minutes
3. Absorbance scan at 650 nm
The temperatures chosen were 31◦C, 33◦C, 35◦C, 37◦C, 41◦C and 42◦C. An absorbance
scan at room temperature was also conducted at the beginning before heating of the
samples began. The amount of Ca+2 released from the TSLs was calculated by measuring
20
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:31==
their absorbance intensity at 650 nm as a function of temperature. To quantify the release
of Ca+2, the following equation was used:
%Carel =
A
Atotal −Ai
× 100
(3.3)
Where Atotal refers to the absorbance of at 650 nm that was determined by adding 0.1
µL of an 20% (v/v) Triton X­100/300 mM NaCl solution to each well to lyse the TSLs,
Ai refers to the initial absorbance at room temperature, and A refers to the absorbance
corresponding to a certain temperature of each well of the 96­well plate.
3.5
Bio­ink formulation
3.5.1
Alginate/Liposome bio­inks:
First, low viscosity alginate powder was dissolved overnight in a 900 mM NaCl solution
to create stocks of final concentrations 2% and 4% (w/v). To create a stock with 8% (w/v)
final concentration, high viscosity alginate powder was dissolved using a SpeedMixer
(Hauschild SpeedMixer©DAC 150, Hauschild) and a mixing ball, in a 300mM NaCl solu­
tion. The following day, a volume of those stocks solutions was added to a 3cc syringe
(Optimum Syringe Barrels, Nordson EFD) and an equal volume of IF­synthesized TSLs
(20 mg/mL) was added as well and the resulting solution was mixed using a mechanical
pipette and/or a spatula. This resulted in Alginate/Liposome bio­inks with final alginate
concentrations of 1%, 2% and 4% (w/v) and a final lipid concentration of 10 mg/mL. The
2% (w/v) alginate was transferred to the syringe and mixed with liposomes using an ep­
pendorf mechanical pipette, whereas for the 4% and 8% (w/v) a mechanical pipette for
viscous liquids was used (GilsonTM PIPETMANTM L, Fisher Scientific, Denmark). The
samples were afterwards kept in a fridge set at 5◦C before they were used again.
3.5.2
Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs bio­inks:
An amount of cNFCs was weighed first and then placed in a falcon tube. Appropriate
volume of IF­synthesized TSLs samples was added to the falcon tube, to reach a final
concentration 6% (w/v) of cNFCs and 20 mg/mL of lipids in the solution, and it was left
overnight in a fridge set at 5◦C. Carboxymethylation of microfibrillated cellulose to pro­
duce the cNFCs was performed by Postdoctoral Researcher, Marko Mihajlovic following
a previously described procedure with some modifications [85].
The following day, high viscosity alginate powder was weighed corresponding to 4% (w/w)
final alginate concentration in the bio­ink, and then was transferred to a Speedmixer cup
together with the previously created Liposome/cNFCs mixture. A mixing ball was put
inside the cup and then it was placed into a freezer set at ­18◦C for 3 min. The cup was
placed into a Speedmixer for 1 minute, set at 1000 rpm. It was put for 1 more minute in
the freezer and then placed again in the Speedmixer for 1 minute. Finally, the cup was
then placed in a fridge set at 5◦C before it was used again. The reason that the cup
was put into the freezer between runs to lower the higher temperatures generated by the
SpeedMixer.
3.6
Rheology
Rheological characterization of the formulated bio­inks was performed using a rheometer
(TA Instrument Discovery Hybrid Rheometer 2 (DHR­2), TA Instruments), equipped with
a 20 mm parallel Peltier plate Aluminum (118276).
First, the bio­ink sample was transferred using a pipette or a spatula to the rheometer,
and then the gap was closed between the peltier plate and the sample, to trim the excess
material.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
21
==PAGE:32==
A time sweep was performed at 25◦C with a strain of 1% and a frequency of 1 Hz. The
strain type chosen was continuous oscillation (direct strain). A time sweep was then per­
formed at 40◦C for Alginate/Liposome bio­inks and 45◦C for Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs
bio­inks to investigate hydrogel crosslink after heating, with the rest of the parameters
identical to the one described previously at 25◦C. Afterwards, a frequency sweep was
conducted at 40◦C for Alginate/Liposome bio­inks and 45◦C for Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs
bio­inks, logarithmically, from 100 Hz to 0.01 Hz and a strain of 1%, with 5 points per
decade. Finally, a flow sweep was performed at 40◦C for Alginate/Liposome bio­inks and
45◦C for Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs bio­inks. The shear rate was swept in a logarithmic
manner, from 0.01 (1/s) to 100 (1/s), with 5 points per decade, an equillibration time of 5
s and an averaging time of 10 s. Since the flow sweep is destructive to the materials, it
was chosen to be conducted last.
3.7
Printing and Crosslinking tests
Before being used for micro­extrusion 3D printing, all bio­ink samples were centrifuged
(Centrifuge 5804R, Eppendorf) at 2000 rpm and 17◦C for 3 minutes, and once more at
2000 rpm for 1 minute, to remove bubbles from the ink solutions.
All of the printing tests performed with the formulated bio­inks described at 3.5 were con­
ducted using a bio­printer (R­GEN 200 Bioprinter, REGENHU, Switzerland). The designs
were drawn utilizing the SHAPER computer­aided design (CAD) software (REGENHU,
Switzerland).
A 27G short needle (inner diameter 0.2 mm, needle length 6.35 mm, clear color, CELLINK)
was used to dispense the 1% and 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­inks.
For the 1% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink, the needle offset was set to 0.8 mm, the
robot speed to 4 mm/s, the strand height to 0.16 mm and the strand width to 0.2 mm. A
pressure of 20 kPa was used to dispense the 1% ink.
For the 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­in, the needle offset was set to 0.8 mm, the robot
speed to 5 mm/s, the strand height to 0.16 mm and the strand width to 0.2 mm. The
pressure of 150 kPa was chosen for the 2% ink.
For the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome ink, a 20G nozzle (inner diameter 0.58 mm, conical
nozzle length 32 mm, pink color, CELLINK) was used with a pressure of 70­100 kPa. The
needle offset was set to 0.6 mm, the robot speed to 1 mm/s, the strand height to 0.464
mm and strand width to 0.58 mm. Regarding the shape design, an infill density of 20%
was chosen for all Alginate/Liposome bio­inks, with the perimeter settings chosen on ”out­
side”. For the 1% and 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­inks the designs drawn consisted
of squares, circles, rings, triangles and lines, where as for the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome
bio­ink lines were drawn.
For both versions of Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs bio­inks, a 21G short needle (inner diame­
ter 0.51 mm, needle length 6.35 mm, purple color, CELLINK) was used for the dispensing.
A pressure between 400­450 kPa was chosen, together with needle offset of 0.75 mm,
robot speed of 1.5 mm/s, strand height 0.408 mm and strand width 0.51 mm. An empty
square design was chosen for the Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs bio­inks.
To test whether the printed shapes crosslink, some of the unheated printed designs were
placed in a petri dish and were covered with de­ionized (DI) water, and some were placed
into a furnace that was set at 37◦C, for 10 minutes.
The heated designs were also
placed afterwards in a petri­dish and covered with DI water. They were removed after
22
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:33==
20 minutes to check whether they had retained their shape or they had crumbled and dis­
solved. Those that maintained their structural integrity were considered as crosslinked,
while those that began to break and dissolve were considered as uncrosslinked.
3.8
Data analysis
Data analysis to produce all the graphs was conducted with Origin software (OriginPro
2024, OriginLab).
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
23
==PAGE:34==
4
Results
4.1
Assay for Quantification of Ca2+
To quantify the amount of Ca+2 encapsulated within the TSLs and the amount of Ca+2 re­
leased while the TSLs were subjected to heat, standard curves using the calcium­binding
dye AIII were created. The dye exhibits a signal at 650 nm where the absorbance max­
imum (λmax) of AIII­Ca+2 complex is, and for this reason this wavelength was chosen to
create the standard curves. For the preparation of both version of the solutions (AIII/10
mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl solution containing 0.5% Triton X­100 lipid surfactant and
AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl), HEPES was used to buffer the pH at 7 and NaCl
to provide an iso­osmotic environment.
In order to determine the amount Ca+2 inside the TSLs, the liposomes had to be lysed to
release all the encapsulated crosslinker, which would then bind to the AIII dye. For this
reason, a solution of AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl solution which contained 0.5%
Triton X­100 lipid surfactant was created. A standard curve of this solution was then
created, which possessed an R2 of 0.98941 and was thus, assessed to be reliable for use
in the encapsulation studies. The standard curve of the AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl
solution containing 0.5% Triton X­100 can be seen in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The standard curve of the 0.4 mM AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl solution
containing 0.5% Triton X­100 surfactant used to lyse the TSLs and consequently, calculate
the encapsulated Ca+2. The absorbances of the AIII­Ca+2 complexes were measured at
λ = 650 nm. Created using Origin data analysis software.
24
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:35==
For the determination of the Ca+2 amount released by the TSLs during heating, a solution
of AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl was prepared which the TSLs would be diluted in. A
standard curve was created for this solution, which exhibited an R2 of 0.99986 and was
deemed reliable to use for the quantification of Ca+2 in the temperature release studies.
The standard curve of AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl can be seen in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The standard curve of the AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl solution which
was used to quanitify the [Ca2+] released from the TSLs. The absorbances of the AIII­
Ca+2 complexes were measured at λ = 650 nm. Created using Origin data analysis soft­
ware.
Overall, both the AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl solution containing 0.5% Triton X­100
and the AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl solution produced standard curves that were
deemed reliable for quantification in the encapsulation and temperature release studies,
respectively. It is important to note that there is a deviation in the R2 of the solutions equal
to 0.01045.
4.2
Preparation and Characterization of TSLs
In an effort to prepare the TSLs for alginate crosslinking, the methods extrusion, son­
ication and FT (all described in detail in chapter 3) were tested, together with various
phospholipid compositions utlizing different ratios as well types of phospholipids. The dif­
ferent compositions were inspired by literature. However, none of the samples were able
to crosslink alginate upon heating.
The extrusion method described in 3.2.2 was used with the aim to synthesize liposomes
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
25
==PAGE:36==
of controlled and ideally, small size and low polydispersity. Briefly, dry lipid films (of var­
ious phospholipid compositions) were hydrated with a 200 mM CaCl2 solution, to create
liposomes with a final concentration of 20 mM. The samples were then placed on a lipid
extruder extruded on polycarbonate membranes with pore sizes of 800 nm, 200 nm and
100 nm, while the lipid hand extruder was placed on a hot plate set at 60◦C. The size of
polycarbonate membranes was chosen depending on the desired liposome size. As seen
in table 4.1, the liposomes extruded using a 100 nm pore size polycarbonate membrane
exhibited generally small size and a low polydispersity index (PDI), as revealed by DLS,
resulting in uniform systems.
To qualitatively assess whether the samples could crosslink alginate, they were mixed in a
glass vial with 2% and 4% (w/v) (final concentrations) of low­viscosity alginate. However,
none of the 100 nm extruded liposome samples managed to crosslink alginate, even when
left for an hour to heat.
To test whether this problem could be attributed to the small size of liposomes, a sample
was extruded with a 800 nm pore size membrane, with the intention to provide a larger
inner aqueous core capable of encapsulating a larger volume of Ca+2. In a similar manner
to the 100 nm extruded samples, the 800 nm extruded sample was mixed in a glass vial
with 2% and 4% (w/v) (final concentrations) of low­viscosity alginate, but did not exhibit
any crosslinking of alginate, even when heated for an hour, which suggested that a larger
liposome size was not the only parameter affecting the encapsulation of Ca+2.
Following the inability of the liposomes created by extrusion to crosslink alginate on heat,
regardless of the extruded size, it was investigated whether a change in synthesis method
was necessary. For this reason, the sonication method was used to observe if the loss
of Ca+2 occurring during extrusion could be bypassed. It was used to produce SUVs as
described in 3.2.3. Two samples were synthesized, one which consisted of pure DPPC
and one of DPPC­PEG (95:5 molar ratio).
Similar to the extrusion method, they were mixed in a glass vial with 2% and 4% (w/v)
solutions (final concentrations) of low­viscosity alginate, but neither of them was able to
release enough Ca+2 on heat for crosslinking, indicating that this method was also not
suitable for the intended application.
After determining that the extrusion and sonication methods were unable to successfully
produce TSLs which crosslinked alginate under heat, the FT method was used, to inves­
tigate whether it was possible for liposomes synthesized with this method to encapsulate
enough Ca+2 and be used for crosslinking alginate. The FT method was followed as
described in chapter 3.2.4.
Briefly, a lipid film consisting of pure DPPC was hydrated with 200 mM CaCl2 to prepare li­
posomes with a final concentration of 20 mM, as described in chapter 3.2.0.1. Afterwards,
four freeze­thaw cycles were performed by placing the glass vial containing the solution
in liquid nitrogen for 1 minute and then inside a water bath set at 60◦C for 1 minute as
well. The sample was placed in a lipid extruder that was on a hot plate set at 60◦C and
was extruded through 800 nm and then 200 nm polycarbonate membranes to obtain lipo­
somes with final size near 200 nm. As seen in table 4.1, the FT method failed to produce
monodisperse liposomes with a size close to 200 nm.
To qualitatively assess whether the FT liposomes could crosslink alginate, they were
mixed with 2% and 4% (w/v) (final concentrations) solutions of low­viscosity alginate and
they were heated for an hour. However, they did not manage to crosslink alginate, indi­
cating that this method was also not suitable to produce TSLs that could be used for the
26
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:37==
project.
In table 4.1, the sample composition, method of synthesis, average size and PDI of the
liposome systems made with extrusion, sonication and FT are shown.
Sample composition
Synthesis method
Average size (nm)
Average PDI
DPPC
Extrusion (800 nm)
1412
0.692
DPPC
Extrusion (100 nm)
115.6
0.447
DPPC­PEG (95:5)
Extrusion (100 nm)
103.1
0.068
Stealth (HSPC­PEG­Cholesterol, 3:1:1)
Extrusion (100 nm)
119
0.043
DPPG­DMPG (80:20)
Extrusion (100 nm)
198.1
0.169
DPPG­DMPG­PEG (70:25:5)
Extrusion (100 nm)
133.4
0.183
DPPC­Cholesterol­DMPC­PEG (54:30:3:3)
Extrusion (100 nm)
124.1
0.17
DPPC
Sonication
115.6
0.447
DPPC­PEG (95:5)
Sonication
128.8
0.561
DPPC
Freeze­Thaw
1408
0.58
Table 4.1: Table depicting the sample composition, the synthesis method, the average
size and the PDI of the liposomes synthesized by the extrusion, sonication and FT meth­
ods. Note that only some of the samples created are shown.
Figure 4.3: Picture depicting a glass vial containing thermally crosslinked alginate by
DPPC TSLs, synthesized by the IF method. The crosslinked hydrogel is seen stuck at
the side of the glass, whereas if it was uncrosslinked it would flow like a viscous liquid.
To crosslink the hydrogel, 2% (w/v) low­viscosity alginate was mixed with DPPC TSLs
(20 mg/mL), resulting in final concentrations of 1% (w/v) and 10 mg/mL for alginate and
DPPC TSLs, respectively. Image taken using a smartphone camera.
To overcome the obstacle encountered in the previous methods where liposomes were
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
27
==PAGE:38==
not encapsulating enough Ca+2 to crosslink alginate upon heat, the IF method described
in 3.2.1 was used to investigate if unilamellar liposomes with high internal volume could
be produced. At first, liposomes consisting of DPPC were synthesized by the IF method
and were successfully used in crosslinking alginate upon heating at 43◦C. The glass vial
containing the crosslinked alginate can be seen in figure 4.3. Based on this, the IF method
was chosen as the one to produce the TSLs which would be used in the extrusion printing
part.
Upon qualitative characterization of the thermal release of the DPPC TSLs samples, it
was decided that the Tm of the composition was much higher (42­43◦C) than the desired
temperature range for this project of 30­40◦C. In an effort to lower the Tm of the TSLs
synthesized by the IF method, the phospholipid composition was tailored from pure DPPC
to DPPC­DMPC (9:1 molar ratio) which consistently released the encapsulated Ca+2 in a
temperature range 30­40◦C, based on the qualitative tests described in chapter 3.4.2.
Analysis of the synthesized particles by DLS showed that the IF method yielded GUVs
with a diameter range in the µm scale and high PDI. Specifically, the liposomes consisting
of DPPC­DMPC displayed a hydrodynamic radius between 3­7 µm and an average PDI
of 0.460, while the DPPC ones a radius between 3­5 µm and an average PDI of 0.555.
In table 4.2, a summary of TSLs composition, average size and PDI for IF­synthesized
samples can be seen.
Sample composition
Average size (µm)
Average PDI
DPPC
3­5
0.555
DPPC­DMPC (9:1 molar ratio)
3­7
0.460
Table 4.2: Table depicting the average size and PDI of the DPPC and DPPC­DMPC TSLs
synthesized with the IF method. The average size of the DPPC­DMPC system appears
to be slightly higher than the DPPC one, but with lower PDI.
By taking into account the consistency of the IF method to produce TSLs capable of algi­
nate crosslinking, it was chosen as the synthesis method for the samples that would be
used for the formulation of bio­inks and consequently, the printing tests.
4.3
Encapsulation Efficiency
Following the success of the TSLs that were prepared with the IF method in the qualitative
tests conducted in crosslinkng alginate, further characterization was performed to deter­
mine the amount of Ca+2 encapsulated, as well as the percentage and concentration of
Ca+2 released.
To investigate how much of Ca+2 was encapsulated by the synthesized liposomes, the
samples were lysed using the lipid surfactant Triton X­100 and the detection was done by
the calcium­binding dye AIII (λmax = 560 nm) which changes color upon forming a Ca+2­
AIII complex (λmax = 650 nm). The procedure is described in detail in 3.4.3. Briefly, the
TSLs were diluted at first a 100 times, by adding 1 µL of them together with 99 µL of a 300
mM NaCl solution in an eppendorf tube and then briefly vortexed. 395 µL of an 0.4 mM
AIII/10 mM HEPES/300 mM NaCl solution containing 0.5% Triton X­100 surfactant and
buffered at pH 7, were mixed with 5 µL of the previous diluted TSLs solution, reaching a
total dilution of 8000. The solution was added to an eppendorf tube. The resulting solution
was vortexed for 1 minute and then 100 µL of it were carefully transferred to a transparent
96­well plate as to not generate bubbles that would interfere with Ca+2 detection.
28
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:39==
A standard curve was used for the determination of Ca+2 concentration encapsulated
within the liposomes, which can be seen in figure 4.1.
Sample composition
Encapsulation efficiency %
Bulk [Ca+2] (mM)
Ca+2:Lipid ratio (mM Ca+2 : mM lipids)
DPPC
42­47
76­85
2.79­3.12
DPPC­DMPC (9:1 molar ratio)
42­61
76­111
2.73­4.04
Table 4.3: Table depicting the encapsulation efficiency, the concentration of Ca+2 encap­
sulated and the calcium to lipid ratio by the TSLs synthesized with the IF method. The
encapsulation efficiency and the concentration were calculated after their lysis with lipid
surfactant Triton X­100.
To understand why thermal crosslinking of alginate with extruded, sonicated and FT sam­
ples was not possible, their encapsulation efficiency of Ca+2 was also measured using
the same procedure. As can be seen in table 4.4, all of the samples produced by the
extrusion and sonication methods showed encapsulation of Ca+2 considerably lower than
the liposomes created by the IF method.
However, the anionic compositions of DPPG­DMPG (80:20 molar ratio) and DPPG­DMPG­
PEG (75:20:5 molar ratio) exhibited the highest encapsulation of Ca+2 of all the non­IF
methods, being 31.9% and 33.8%, with the corresponding Ca+2 concentrations being
57.4 and 60.8 mM, respectively.
Using the IF method, synthesis of liposomes with higher encapsulation efficiencies than
the previous methods was made possible, as shown in table 4.3. It is observed that the
phospholipid composition of the liposomes affects their efficiency to encapsulate Ca+2, as
samples made only of DPPC phospholipids exhibit efficiencies between 42­47% and Ca+2
concentrations in the range of 76­85 mM, while samples consisting of DPPC­DMPC show
encapsulation efficiencies between 42­61% and concentrations between 76­111 mM. The
drug­to­lipid ratio (drug:lipid) ratio of the TSLs (which in our case the drug is Ca+2), is also
higher for the DPPC­DMPC samples, exhibiting a 2.73­4.04 Ca+2:lipid ratio, while the
DPPC samples a 2.79­3.12 ratio.
Sample composition (molar ratio)
Synthesis method
Encapsulation efficiency %
Bulk [Ca+2] (mM)
DPPC
Extrusion (800 nm)
14,6
26,4
DPPC
Extrusion (100 nm)
9,8
17,7
DPPC­PEG (95:5)
Extrusion (100 nm)
20,8
37,5
Stealth (HSPC­PEG­Cholesterol, 3:1:1)
Extrusion (100 nm)
14,6
26,3
DPPG­DMPG (80:20)
Extrusion (100 nm)
31,9
57,4
DPPG­DMPG­PEG (70:25:5)
Extrusion (100 nm)
33,8
60,8
DPPC­Cholesterol­DMPC­PEG (54:30:3:3)
Extrusion (100 nm)
14,5
26,2
DPPC
Sonication
8,4
15,2
DPPC­PEG (95:5)
Sonication
8,9
16
DPPC a)
FT
10,6
19,1
DPPC b)
FT
4,5
8,1
Table 4.4: Table depicting the encapsulation efficiency and the concentration of bulk Ca+2
encapsulated, for liposomes synthesized with the extrusion, sonication, IF and FT meth­
ods. The encapsulation efficiency and the bulk Ca+2 concentrations were calculated after
their lysis with lipid surfactant Triton X­100, using the standard curve from figure 4.1. Note
that in sample composition, PEG refers to the phospholipid DSPE­PEG (2000).
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
29
==PAGE:40==
4.4
Temperature release
To investigate the temperature­modulated release properties of the TSLs synthesized with
the IF method, as well as to quantify release, the samples were subjected to heating over
time while­measuring their absorbance at 650 nm, following the procedure mentioned in
3.4.5.
Figure 4.4: Graphs depicting the [Ca2+] released over time from DPPC­DMPC liposomes
while subjected to heat. Four liposome samples are shown. The DPPC­DMPC1 sam­
ple displays the highest concentration of Ca+2 released and the most uniform, while the
DPPC­DMPC4 sample exhibits the lowest and most deviated. However, all samples re­
lease enough Ca+2 to crosslink alginate. Graph created using Origin software.
In figure 4.4, the concentration of Ca+2 released by four DPPC­DMPC (9:1 molar ra­
tio) TSLs is shown. Each graph displays the average concentration of Ca+2 release, as
well as the concentration released from each of the three wells, in which the AIII­TSLs
sample solutions were placed in. All of the samples showed an initial concentration of
Ca+2 present at room temperature although lower than the minimum required for alginate
crosslinking. The concentration of Ca+2 increased over the duration of the heating, with
the DPPC­DMPC1 sample exhibiting the highest amount released overall. Additionally,
all of the DPPC­DMPC TSLs showed released Ca+2 above the minimum needed for algi­
nate crosslinking (33.8 mM), which is in compliance with the qualitative crosslinking tests
performed. The molar concentration of Ca+2 released from the IF TSLs was calculated
30
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:41==
using the standard curve seen in figure 4.2.
The percentage of Ca+2 released from four samples of TSLs consisting of DPPC­DMPC
(9:1 molar ratio) is shown in figure 4.5, with each graph displaying the average release, as
well as the release from each of the three wells in which the AIII­TSLs sample solutions
were placed in. The samples showed a similar release profile, with the release noticeably
increasing around 32◦C, and around 37◦C they starting to display an even bigger increase
in Ca+2 release.
Figure 4.5: Graphs depicting the percentage of Ca+2 released over time from DPPC­
DMPC liposomes while subjected to heat from room temperature up to 42◦C. Four TSLs
samples are shown. The highest percentage of Ca+2 released is displayed by the DPPC­
DMPC1 sample. The DPPC­DMPC4 sample exhibits the largest deviations between each
well. Graph created using Origin software.
By taking into consideration the consistent release profile of the DPPC­DMPC TSLs, it
became clear that they exhibited the temperature­sensitive properties around the desired
range of 30­40◦C and thus, could be used for the formulation of the bio­inks which would
be used in the 3D printing part of the project.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
31
==PAGE:42==
4.5
Rheology of the formulated bio­inks
Following the successful temperature­mediated crosslinking of alginate by the TSLs syn­
thesized with the IF method, it was further sought to validate the thermal crosslinking of
the formulated bio­inks, as well as their mechanical properties by conducting rheological
tests. The time­sweep tests conducted are shown in this section, while the other rheolog­
ical tests are shown in chapter A.2, in the appendix.
Sample name
Alginate concentration %(w/v)
TSLs sample used
1% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome
1
DPPC­DMPC (10 mg/mL)
2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome
2
DPPC­DMPC (10 mg/mL)
4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome
4
DPPC­DMPC (10 mg/mL)
Table 4.5: Table depicting the name of all the Alginate/Liposome bio­ink formulations
tested in the project, as well as their final concentrations of alginate and TSLs samples.
The samples characterized were Alginate/Liposome bio­inks with final concentrations of
alginate being 1%, 2% and 4% (w/v) and the liposomes used were the DPPC­DMPC
(9:1 molar ratio) system, with a final concentration of 10 mg/mL. A time­sweep was per­
formed to validate the temperature­modulated crosslinking properties introduced in the
Alginate/Liposome bio­inks by the DPPC­DMPC TSLs, shown in figure 4.6. For all three
versions of Alginate/Liposome bio­inks, 1%, 2% and 4% (w/v), it was observed that at
25◦C the G’ remained relatively steady, with only the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink
displaying a very small increase over time on the G’ (figure 4.6 c) ). Upon heating at
40◦C, the G’ increased dramatically for all the formulations and then reached a plateau,
indicating that the bio­inks had reached maximum crosslinking capacity.
It should be noted that the gap observed between the G’ at 25◦C and 40◦C, could be
explained by the the crosslinking of alginate already occuring with the elevation of tem­
perature, while the rheometer was waiting to reach the desired temperature to start the
time­sweep.
32
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.6: Graph depicting the change of G’ and G” over time at 25◦C and 40◦C, for
Alginate/DPPC­DMPC bio­inks. The bio­inks shown are: a) 1% (w/v) Alginate/DPPC­
DMPC, b) 2% (w/v) Alginate/DPPC­DMPC and c) 4% (w/v) Alginate/DPPC­DMPC. The
final concentration of the liposomes is the same throughout the three bio­inks (10 mg/mL).
While the heat­mediated crosslinking was visibly present in the Alginate/Liposome bio­
inks (figure 4.6), the G’ values of the inks exhibited some unexpected results. Specifically,
the 1% ink displayed a G’ equal to 1 Pa, which appears to be quite low, while the 4% ink
displayed a lower G’ than the 2% when crosslinked. The above results suggest that there
is notable experimental variation during the rheological characterization of the bio­inks.
Overall, the Alginate/Liposome bio­ink formulations exhibited an increase in the G’ upon
being subjected to heating, validating that the inks exhibited the temperature­mediated
crosslinking properties needed in this project.
4.6
3D printing tests
After validation from the rheological characterization that temperature­mediated crosslink­
ing of alginate bio­inks incorporating TSLs was possible, 3D printing tests were conducted
using an extrusion bio­printer in an effort to test whether the bio­inks would retain their
thermal crosslinking properties after extrusion printing, and also to test the bio­inks print­
ability.
For the first printing experiments, the 1% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink sample was
used to print different shapes that were designed on CAD software. The bio­ink managed
to print the different structures with acceptable resolution, as seen in figure 4.7 a). The
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
33
==PAGE:44==
material also exhibited low viscosity during printing and the printed structures appeared
to dry quickly. The structures were printed on a petri­dish that was then heated inside
a furnace set at 37◦C, while keeping the lid on so the samples did not dry out. After 10
minutes the printed structures were removed from the furnace, becoming more opaque
and less liquidy, as shown in figure 4.7 b). They were then covered with DI water and
left for 30 minutes to test whether they would dissolve. The printed structures were re­
moved from the water and had retained their structure, which can be seen in figure 4.7
c), while the unheated printed structures lost their structural integrity, starting to collapse
and dissolve in the DI water.
After the successful temperature­mediate crosslinking exhibited by the 1% (w/v) Algi­
nate/Liposome bio­ink shapes, similar tests were conducted for the 2% (w/v) Alginate/Li­
posome bio­ink samples. The printed shapes, shown in figure 4.8 a), demonstrated better
resolution than the 1% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome ones. The material also exhibited higher
viscosity and dried quickly as well. The shapes were printed on a petri­dish and then were
placed into a furnace for 10 minutes, set at 37◦C, while keeping the lid on to ensure they
would not dry out. After removal from the furnace they became more opaque as well and
the material’s texture became gelled, as seen in figure 4.8 b). The printed structures re­
tained their structure after being covered with DI water for 30 minutes, figure 4.8 c) and d),
while the unheated ones started to lose their structural integrity, collapsing and dissolving
in the DI water over time.
34
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.7: Images of the shapes printed with the 1% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink, as
well as the procedure conducted to validate their thermal crosslinking properties. The
following are shown: a) a petri­dish containing uncrosslinked printed shapes, b) the
crosslinked shapes after being placed in a furnace set at 37◦C and c) the structure of
crosslinked shapes after 30 minutes of being covered with DI water. The images were
taken using a smartphone camera.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.8: Images showing the printed shapes of 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink,
as well as the procedure conducted to validate their thermal crosslinking properties. a) a
petri­dish containing uncrosslinked printed shapes, b) the crosslinked shapes after being
placed in furnace set at 37◦C, c) a close­up of a crosslinked square held with a spatula
and d) the structure of the crosslinked shapes after 30 minutes of being covered with DI
water. The images were taken using a smartphone camera.
36
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:47==
Printing tests were also conducted to investigate if the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink
formulation could retain the temperature­mediated crosslinking properties after extrusion
printing. The material exhibited considerably higher viscosity than the 1% and 2% (w/v)
Alginate/Liposome bio­inks. Lines were printed on a petri­dish and afterwards they were
placed into a furnace set at 37◦C for 10 minutes, while keeping the lid on to ensure the
material does not dry out. After removal from the furnace, they were then covered in DI
water for 30 minutes. While the printed lines managed to retain their shape, the unheated
lines, which should not display crosslinking, also retained their structure. This indicated
that the crosslinking of the bio­ink did not occur due to the elevation of temperature.
Figure 4.9: Images showing two printed lines of 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink, after
being covered with DI water for 30 minutes and then removed from it. On the left, an
unheated line that was set as control can be seen, and on the right, one placed in a
furnace set at 37◦C for 10 minutes. Both displayed crosslinked properties and did not
dissolve at all. Image taken using a smartphone camera.
From the results obtained by the printing tests, it was concluded that the 1% and 2% (w/v)
Alginate/Liposome bio­inks were the most reliable, clearly exhibiting thermal crosslinking,
while additional tests are needed to validate whether the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome inks
could display thermal crosslinking properties.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
37
==PAGE:48==
5
Discussion
The aim of this project was to investigate whether the use of TSLs loaded with crosslinking
agents such as Ca+2 could generate novel bio­inks which crosslink upon slight elevation in
temperature. Specifically, the project explored if release of Ca+2 by the TSLs was possible
to occur at a specific temperature range of 30­40◦C and most importantly, whether the
TSLs could survive micro­extrusion 3D printing.
5.1
Preparation and thermal properties of TSLs
Over the course of the project, three liposome preparation methods were tested before
the IF, being extrusion, sonication and FT. Additionally, different combinations of phos­
pholipids were tested in an effort to synthesize TSLs. None of the above methods and
combinations of phospholipids managed to successfully create TSLs that crosslink algi­
nate. Some of the phospholipid compositions prepared, can be seen in tables 4.1 and
4.3.
The extrusion method was tested first since it is one of the most common, due to it being
easy and reproducible, and providing a control over size and uniformity of the liposomes
[86]. While the extrusion method mostly produced liposomes with a low size (< 200 nm)
and good PDI (< 0.3), it failed to encapsulate enough Ca+2. The encapsulation efficiencies
and bulk Ca+2 concentrations are considerably lower than the ones exhibited by the IF­
synthesized liposomes. With such low encapsulation efficiencies, the concentrations of
CaCl2 that would need to be added to provide alginate crosslinking would be very high
compared to the ones used in the IF method.
However, a notable exception in the extruded samples are liposome samples consisting
of DPPG­DMPG (80:20 molar ratio) and DPPG­DMPG­PEG (70:25:5 molar ratio), which
exhibited encapsulation efficiencies of 31.9% and 33.8%, respectively. Both of these lipo­
some formulations are anionic, which means they are negatively charged (zeta­potential
data not shown). Since Ca+2 ions exhibit a positive charge, it is suggested that they in­
teracted with the negatively charged bilayer of these liposome formulations, leading to
the increased encapsulation of Ca+2. Despite the increased amounts of Ca+2 present in
these liposomes, they were unable to release enough crosslinker during heating, even
when left for an hour. To explain this phenomenon, it is suggested that the interaction
between Ca+2 and the bilayer was stronger than the leaky environment caused by the
melting bilayer, thus Ca+2 preffering to stay inside the liposomes than be released.
Sonication, also one of the most common and easy methods of preparation [86] was
explored to synthesize unilamellar vesicles. The SUVs created with this method exhibited
a low size (< 200 nm), but the PDI was considered to be high (> 0.3). Regarding their
encapsulation of Ca+2, they demonstrated efficiencies of 8.4% and 8.9% for DPPC and
DPPC­PEG (95:5 molar ratio) samples, respectively. They also exhibited encapsulated
Ca+2 concentrations lower than the minimum crosslinking one, which was found to be in
this project 33.8 mM. Therefore, it is concluded that the liposome samples prepared by
sonication exhibited the lowest encapsulated Ca+2, and were the most inefficient systems.
The FT method was also investigated due to the produced liposomes reported to exhibit
increased encapsulation of water­soluble compounds [25]. The FT­synthesized sample
containing DPPC demonstrated a high size of approximately 1.4 µm and a high PDI of
38
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:49==
0.58 (table 4.1), while also exhibitng an encapsulation of only 10.6%, with a Ca+2 concen­
tration inside equal to 19.1 mM, lower than the minimum of 33.8 mM required for alginate
crosslinking.
By taking the size, PDI and encapsulated Ca+2 into account, the FT method not only
failed to synthesize TSLs capable of alginate crosslinking, but also large liposomes with
little uniformity.
Liposomes synthesized with the IF method typically have sizes between 1­6 µm and are
predominantly unilamellar, which makes them possess very high internal volumes with
high encapsulation efficiency of water soluble compounds [42]. A microscopy image can
be seen in 5.1 c), displaying the large size and unilamellarity of the IF liposomes.
Liposomes used for drug delivery applications usually have sizes between 50­150 nm [15]
and PDI values below 0.3 are considered acceptable, indicating a homogeneous system
[87]. Based on this, it is clear that the size and PDI values of the IF liposomes appear to be
too high for drug delivery applications. However, the IF liposomes can have applications
as crosslinking systems where the purpose is to have as much loading of the crosslinking
agent as possible, and considering their size and unilamellarity, they appear to be efficient
at it.
Based on the existing literature, it is clear that liposome systems with high loading of
crosslinking agents are preferred for hydrogel­crosslinking applications. Crosslinking of
alginate with TSLs has already been explored with usage of IF vesicles to encapsulate
Ca+2 [11, 10, 12], while thermal crosslinking of HA­tyramine hydrogel has occured with
DRV synthesized liposomes [13]. A common theme in both of these methods used to
crosslink hydrogels with TSLs, is that they both produced GUVs with sizes in the µm
range.
Figure 5.1: Freeze­fracture microscopy showing the formation of DPPC IF vesicles. The
images shown contain: a) a depiction of DPPC SUVs, b) the formed interdigitated phos­
pholipid sheets after the addition of 4 M ethanol, and c) the IF vesicles formed by incu­
bation of the lipid sheets. Scale bar represents 1 µm. Image adapted from Ahl et. al.
[48].
During the project, the efficient encapsulation of crosslinker within the IF synthesized TSLs
was made apparent, exhibiting encapsulation efficiencies for Ca+2, ranging between 42­
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
39
==PAGE:50==
47% for the DPPC composition and 42­61% for the DPPC­DMPC one. A critical parameter
affecting the loading of drugs in liposomes is also the drug:lipid ratio, where a high ratio
usually indicates decreased formulation costs and toxicity caused by lipids [88, 89]. The
TSLs synthesized with the IF method exhibited high Ca+2:lipid ratios, as seen in table 4.3.
It is clear from the results obtained in this project, that the choice in literature choosing
GUVs to encapsulate crosslinker is a reliable strategy for such applications.
After determining that the IF method of synthesis was the most successful way to produce
the TSLs for the project, the phospholipid composition of DPPC­DMPC (9:1 molar ratio)
was chosen as the main system of the project. This decision was made after observing
that the system possessed enhanced encapsulation of crosslinker, a higher Ca+2:lipid
ratio, and most importantly, the ability to release enough crosslinker in the range of 30­
40◦C, compared to the DPPC system. The release profile of the DPPC TSLs is shown in
figure A.1 and figure A.2, in the appendix.
Previous work of DPPC­DMPC IF liposomes used for the encapsulation of Ca+2 reported
efficiencies between 60­75% [10, 90], which are generally higher than the values observed
during the experiments of this project (table 4.3).
A possible explanation for the drug loss could be heating of the TSLs by the magnetic
stirring during the dialysis procedure. In figure 4.5 some samples exhibited small leak­
age of Ca+2 at temperatures near, or even below 30◦C, which means that even a slight
increase above room temperature might induce leakage in certain TSLs samples. A way
to bypass this problem could be by dialyzing the samples in an environment with cooler
temperatures. Another explanation could be that the IF produced are not so unilamel­
lar and thus do not encapsulate as much crosslinker as the ones reported. A way to
determine the lamellarity of the liposomes would be to use transmission electron cryomi­
croscopy (cryoTEM) [91].
During the temperature release experiments, the DPPC­DMPC TSLs exhibited obvious
release in the range of 30­40◦C. All of the samples showed very high release of Ca+2
near 37◦C, with the exception of the sample DPPC­DMPC4 where it released most of
its encapsulated Ca+2 around 40◦C. It is also important to mention that deviation was
observed in the amount of Ca+2 released from each well of the well plate. This deviation
could suggest that the liposomes synthesized with the IF method are not as uniform as
expected, with some having encapsulated significantly more crosslinker than others, as
observed for example in the DPPC­DMPC4 sample. This could indicate variations in size,
lamellarity or a combination of both.
Deviations in the Tm between different TSLs samples were also observed. For exam­
ple, the sample DPPC­DMPC2 exhibited noticeable release before 30◦C and the DPPC­
DMPC1 sample a small release at 31◦C. This might indicate that some TSLs samples
contained higher amounts DMPC phospholipid than others, which lowered their Tm and
caused Ca+2 to leak in lower temperatures. To create TSLs with a more consistent Tm,
instead of weighing the phosholipids during their preparation, lipid stocks could be used
instead.
Additionally, all of the DPPC­DMPC samples shown in figure 4.4 exhibited release of Ca+2
above the minimum alginate crosslinking concentration of 33.8 mM during the duration of
the heating. The release profile of the TSLs also appeared to be similar with the one
reported by Westhaus et. al. [11] with the exception that their reported Ca+2 release is
considerably more steep around 37◦C. A noticeable difference is that they used a water
bath to heat the TSLs, which could provide more efficient heat transfer than the furnace­
40
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:51==
type heating induced by the UV­Vis microplate reader during this project.
Another important observation is that all DPPC­DMPC samples showed an existing Ca+2
concentration present before being subjected to heating, although below the minimum
crosslinking concentration of 33.8 mM, exhibited by the tests conducted in this project
(chapter 3.3). Slow release of Ca+2 during storage of the TSLs could explain this phe­
nomenon.
An alternative explanation could be the binding of Ca+2 ions in the outer surface of the
liposomes. It has been reported that Ca+2 can affect the physicochemical properties of
bilayers composed of zwitterionic phospholipids such as PC, by binding to the phosphate
oxygens located in the headgroup of the lipid and carbonyl moieties of the glycerol back­
bone [92, 93]. Based on this, it is possible that the presence of Ca+2 at room temperature,
where no release was supposed to happen, is due to some small amount of Ca+2 bound
to the outer lipid­water interface, which the AIII dye binds to and gives a signal which the
UV­VIS spectrophotometer is able to detect.
5.2
Evaluation of the thermally­modulated crosslinking of
bio­inks
Time sweep experiments are important for rheological characterization of hydrogels, as
they can be used to observe structural changes over time, such as gelation and stability
of the material [71]. All of the Alginate/Liposome bio­inks (figure 4.6) displayed obvi­
ous crosslinking after heating, with the G’ remaining stable at 25◦C and rising quickly at
40◦C and then reaching a plateau. The bio­inks of 1%, 2% and 4% (w/v) Alginate/Li­
posome exhibited an increase of 1453%, 1008% and 570%, respectively in G’ after the
temperature­mediate crosslinking caused by the TSLs.
Interestingly, the 1% ink exhibited a low G’ of approximately 1 Pa at 25◦C, similar to the G’
reported by Westhaus et. al. [11] for 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome uncrosslinked suspen­
sion, that was <3 Pa. The 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome exhibited a higher starting G’ of
approximately 250 Pa at 25◦C, but when thermally crosslinked at 40◦C it reached a value
of approximately 2.9 kPa, similar to the thermally crosslinked Alginate/Liposome suspen­
sion reported by Westhaus et. al. [11]. The 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome ink displayed
a G’ when thermally crosslinked at 40◦C of approximately 1.9 kPa, which appears to be
considerably lower compared to the 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome ink. This might suggest
that there is significant experimental variation in the time­sweep studies. It should also
be noted, that low­viscosity alginate was used to formulate the 1% and 2% (w/v) inks
whereas high­viscosity alginate for the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome ink.
The variation between the G’ values might be attributed to the way the time­sweep was
conducted. The material was first deposited and the first time­sweep at 25◦C was per­
formed, and then the second­time sweep was conducted with the rheometer heated at
40◦C. It might be possible that the way the hydrogel formed while being under the peltier
plate might have affected the measurements. A possible solution would be to first heat
the bio­ink at 40◦C and then conduct the time­sweep experiments to ensure the complete
formation of the hydrogel.
However, a slight increase in G’ can be observed for the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­
ink, suggesting slow release of Ca+2 from the liposomes. This puts the stability of the
bio­ink in question.
It has been observed that alginate can disrupt the lipid bilayer of DPPC liposomes, with
the hypothesis based on that uncrosslinked alginate is free to move and can insert into the
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
41
==PAGE:52==
liposome bilayer, thus causing the leakage of entrapped Ca+2 [94]. Leakage of Ca+2 from
IF synthesized liposomes that were stored with sodium alginate has also been reported
by Westhaus et. al. [11], where they also suggest that increasing alginate concentration
causes higher leakage of drug over time. Since the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink
has a higher concentration than the others, it suggests that higher alginate concentrations
might indeed cause higher leakage of Ca+2 entrapped in liposomes. It is also worth men­
tioning that formulated 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink solutions stored in a fridge set
at 5◦C, displayed full crosslinking after three days (data not shown). It is therefore im­
perative to conduct stability tests for all the Alginate/Liposome bio­inks, as well as finding
ways to enhance it.
5.3
Investigation of the printability of the thermally
crosslinked bio­inks
To investigate whether the proof­of­concept idea of thermally­modulated crosslinkable bio­
inks using TSLs was possible, formulations consisting of Alginate/Liposomes were pre­
pared. The DPPC­DMPC TSLs were chosen for these printing experiments due to their
overall superiority, as mentioned earlier.
During the printing procedure, the 1% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink displayed liquid­like
properties, which made the printing of well­defined shapes somewhat challenging. The
2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink displayed much better printability thanks to its higher
viscosity, thus, creating more defined shapes. The 4% Alginate/Liposome bio­ink exhib­
ited the best printability and easier handling from all of Alginate/Liposome formulations,
again thanks to the more viscous nature of the material.
Regarding the thermal crosslinking, both 1% and 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposomes bio­inks
crosslinked after being placed in a furnace for 10 minutes that was set at 37◦C, and did not
dissolve after being covered with DI water for 30 minutes, instead swelling and retaining
their structure. The unheated samples instead started to crumble and lost their structural
integrity, starting to dissolve.
However, the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink printed lines displayed crosslinking
characteristics regardless of being subjected to heat or not. This was observed by placing
an unheated printed line in DI water as a control, and at the same time a heated printed
line, using the same procedure as in the 1% and 2% inks. Both printed lines retained
their shape and integrity, even a week after being submerged in water. There are two
possible explanations why the 4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome bio­ink displayed crosslinking
behaviour regardless of temperature.
First, as the bio­ink is considerably more viscous than the 1% and 2% (w/v) ones, it is pos­
sible that it crosslinked during the extrusion procedure. It has been observed that shear
stress can trigger release of encapsulated drug [95, 96, 97, 98], and so the crosslinking
phenomenon could be attributed to the liposomes releasing the encapsulated Ca+2 due
to being subjected to high shear stress conditions. A way to investigate if the high shear
could be bypassed, is by using a bigger diameter needle for the printing process, as the
increase in diameter would lead to a reduce in pressure during the extrusion of the ink [99].
A bigger nozzle would mean that pressures lower than 70­100 kPa could be investigated
whether they crosslink the 4% Alginate/Liposome ink.
Generally, as liposomes are considered a shear­deformed system [95], considerations
should be made when deciding on a nozzle size, as smaller diameters can create such
high shear values that are able to release the encapsulated drug or destroy the liposomes.
42
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:53==
The size of the liposomes and whether aggregation is present also plays an important
role, with higher sized and aggregated systems being more affected by the use of smaller
nozzle diameters.
The other possible explanation is based on the hypothesis mentioned earlier, where un­
crosslinked alginate can insert and destabilize the phospholipid bilayer of liposomes [94].
Since the 4% bio­ink contains a higher alginate concentration than the others, the desta­
bilizing process could have occurred much faster than in the other inks, causing the lipo­
somes to release an amount of encapsulated Ca+2 able to crosslink the hydrogel, before
the printing process even began. It should also be noted that the sample was used ap­
proximately an hour after its preparation. By taking this into consideration, as well as the
time sweep (figure 4.6), it is possible that leakage of Ca+2 occured over time. To investi­
gate whether this is true, a time­sweep could be conducted for a longer time period.
The osmolarity of the solution should also be taking into consideration when formulating
bio­inks. Liposomes have been reported to respond to osmotic­stress by shrinking or
swelling, depending in the osmotic conditions. When they are in iso­osmotic conditions,
however, their size and structure remains the same [100]. The osmolarity inside the TSLs
was calculated to be 600 mOsm/L, since they were hydrated with a 200 mM CaCl2 solu­
tion. For the 1% and 2% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome inks, alginate was dissolved in 900 mM
NaCl, which means that the alginate solution has an osmolarity of 1800 mOsm/L. There­
fore, there is an osmolarity difference between the TSLs and alginate in these inks of
1200 mOsm/L. It is possible that this difference affects significantly the inks behavior. On
the other hand, the 4% (w/v) ink was dissolved in a 300 mM NaCl solution, which means
that it should provide iso­osmotic conditions to the TSLs. With this in mind, it would be in­
teresting to observe whether differences in osmolarity could cause premature or delayed
release of Ca+2 from the liposomes, by swelling or shrinking them.
Since the stability of the Alginate/Liposome bio­inks appears to be limited, the formula­
tion procedure should begin just before the 3D printing. This should not be a problem
considering that their preparation is simple and fast.
5.4
Optimization of the proof­of­concept inks
To enhance the printing properties of the Alginate/Liposome inks formulated, liposome­
laden formulations inspired by the work of Radeke et. al. were prepared [78]. These
formulations containing alginate and cNFCs were chosen for their excellent printability,
as well as their cell instructive properties, excellent miscibility with protein biomaterials
and optical transparency.
Indeed, optimized versions of the inks were formulated, one that consisted of 4% (w/w)
Alginate/DPPC/6% (w/v) cNFCs and one of 4% (w/w) Alginate/DPPC­DMPC/6% (w/v)
cNFCs. Both versions displayed excellent shear­thinning properties and printed squares
with good resolution. The printed structures also could withstand up to 6­layers of printed
material without the base layer crumbling, as shown in figure A.12, in the appendix. Both
of the bio­ink formulations however, displayed opaqueness, compared to the optical trans­
parency of the Alginate/cNFCs formulation reported by Radeke et. al.
Despite their excellent properties, the optimized bio­inks consisting of 4% (w/w) Algi­
nate/Liposomes/6% (w/v) cNFCs, did not exhibit any obvious crosslinking due to tem­
perature. To assess this, a qualitative test was performed by collecting a small amount
of 4% (w/w) Alginate/DPPC/6% (w/v) cNFCs bio­ink with a spatula, and placing into a
glass vial containing DI water at room temperature as control. Afterwards, another small
amount was collected and placed to a glass vial with DI water, after being heated at 45◦C
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
43
==PAGE:54==
for 30 minutes. Both samples were checked after 30 minutes and both appeared to have
dissolved, thus, indicating that the bio­ink exhibited no heat­mediated crosslinking prop­
erties. It is important to note that qualitative tests were only performed for the optimized
bio­ink containing DPPC TSLs.
Rheological characterization was conducted to both versions of optimized bio­inks (con­
taining either DPPC or DPPC­DMPC TSLs), to investigate the absence of thermal crosslink­
ing in the formulations. Interestingly, during the time­sweep conducted, both versions of
the bio­ink displayed instability in their structures, with the G’ decreasing over the duration
of the time sweep.
Specifically, the 4% (w/w) Alginate/DPPC/6% (w/v) cNFCs bio­ink displayed a lower G’
when heated at 45◦C than at 25◦C, which suggests that no crosslinking occured from the
TSLs during heating. Interestingly, the 4% (w/w) Alginate/DPPC­DMPC/6% (w/v) cNFCs
bio­ink when heated at 45◦C, also displayed a lower G’ than the one initially observed in
the time­sweep, but over time the G’ rose by 102% and finally, surpassed the G’ at the end
of the time­sweep conducted at 25◦C. This might indicate the possibility of crosslinking of
the bio­ink, although not as obvious as the one exhibited by the Alginate/Liposome bio­ink
formulations. The time­sweep results can be seen in figure A.4, together with additional
rheological characterization conducted, in chapter A.2, in the appendix.
A possible explanation to the absence of heat­mediate crosslinking properties of the 4%
(w/w) Alginate/Liposome/6% (w/v) cNFCs bio­inks, is that the high shear stress caused by
the speedmixer caused the TSLs to release their encapsulated Ca+2 by deforming them,
or they simply did not survive at all the mixing procedure.
An approach to bypass the TSLs being subjected to high shear values from the speed­
mixer, is for them to be added to the alginate/cNFCs mixture with the use of a spatula,
and then left to equilibrate for some time to ensure the homogeneous dispersion of the
TSLs in the bio­ink.
5.5
Future Work
While this project successfully managed to provide proof­of­concept bio­inks exhibiting
thermal self­crosslinkable properties, there is still much optimization and refinement to be
done.
To provide a more controlled crosslinking system, the size of the IF liposomes could be
reduced by extrusion. A polycarbonate membrane with a high pore size of (e.g. 0.8 ­
1 µm) could be chosen so that they maintain a high size and encapsulation efficiency,
while exhibiting a lower PDI. A modified version of the IF method could also be used to
bypass the limitations posed on the phospholipid selection, something which Forbes et.
al. managed to do by synthesizing IF­TSLs that incorporated PEG and MPPC lipids for
enhanced stability and release [101].
Additionally, simple lipid film hydration with CaCl2 could be explored to see if it could
provide with TSLs that crosslink alginate without the need to use the IF method. It should
be noted however, that the prepared TSLs might vary in size, lamellarity and PDI providing
an even less controlled system.
Shear­modulated crosslinkable bio­inks is also an interesting topic to be investigated us­
ing the liposomes synthesized in this project, utilizing high shear stress conditions oc­
curing during extrusion 3D printing. Alternatively, shear­sensitive liposomes could be
explored, such as the lencitular vehicles synthesized by Holme et. al. [98].
44
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:55==
Cells could be incorporated in the bio­ink and the bio­compatibility of the formulations
could be observed. It would be interesting to evaluate whether TSLs­cell interactions
would exist. For example, non­specific uptake of the vesicles could occur by the cells
which could limit the stability of the bio­ink, or cell toxicity caused by the TSLs.
Finally, further investigation could be conducted to the optimized bio­inks consisting of
4% (w/w) Alginate/Liposome/6% (w/v) cNFCs, as they displayed excellent printability but
absence of thermally­modulated crosslinking properties. It would be intriguing to find out
whether the TSLs can survive the speedmixing procedure and exhibit thermal release of
Ca+2, similar to the Alginate/Liposome bio­inks.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
45
==PAGE:56==
6
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to synthesize and characterize TSLs that exhibit thermal
sensitivity over a physiological range of 30­40◦C, releasing the encapsulated Ca+2 and
crosslinking alginate in the process, but also that are able to withstand extrusion and show
stability at room temperature.
Over the course of the project, various methods for synthesizing TSLs were explored, with
the IF being the most successful. Two phospholipid compositions were prepared with the
IF, one composed only of DPPC and one of DPPC­DMPC (9:1 molar ratio), which were
characterized in their size, capacity to encapsulate Ca+2 and ability to thermally release
the encapsulated Ca+2. The optimal composition, being DPPC­DMPC, was chosen to be
the main TSLs incorporated into the formulated bio­inks due to displaying better encap­
sulation efficiency and release in the desired temperature range. Three sets of bio­inks
consisting of Alginate/Liposomes were prepared with 1%, 2% and 4% (w/v) alginate con­
centrations. Rheological characterization revealed that all of them possessed thermal
crossinking properties. However, during extrusion 3D printing only the 1% and 2% (w/v)
Alginate/Liposomes bio­inks exhibited such properties. It remained unclear whether the
4% (w/v) Alginate/Liposome ink displayed crosslinking due to shear stress or was unsta­
ble, with more experiments needed for confirmation.
Lastly, two optimized alginate bio­inks consisting of 4% (w/w) Alginate/DPPC/6% (w/v)
cNFCs and 4% (w/w) Alginate/DPPC­DMPC/6% (w/v) cNFCs were formulated and char­
acterized. Rheology revealed absence of thermal crosslinking in the ink containing DPPC
TSLs, while whether the ink containing DPPC­DMPC exhibited thermal crosslinking prop­
erties was unclear. Data indicated that the TSLs released encapsulated Ca+2 or did not
survive the preparation procedure of these inks. Both however, displayed excellent print­
ability.
The results obtained in this project prove that formulating alginate bio­inks which possess
thermally­modulated crosslinking properties by incorporating TSLs is possible. Thus, a
proof­of­concept has been provided that could be expanded into different materials.
Regarding the future of this project, exploring ways to formulate the optimized inks com­
posed of Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs that displayed excellent printability, while also pos­
sessing thermal crosslinking properties would be interesting. Optimization of the method
to produce TSLs is also needed, to prepare more homogeneous systems. Additionally,
the proof­of­concept provided in this project could be applied to other hydrogels (e.g.
gelatin), to investigate whether a series of heat­crosslinkable bio­inks is possible. Lastly,
the interaction between the cells and TSLs needs to be defined to determine if the formu­
lated TSLs­laden bio­inks are suitable for bio­printing applications.
46
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Zhen Jiang et al. “Extrusion 3D printing of polymeric materials with advanced prop­
erties”. In: Advanced Science 7.17 (2020), p. 2001379.
[2]
MM Stanton, J Samitier, and Samuel Sanchez. “Bioprinting of 3D hydrogels”. In:
Lab on a Chip 15.15 (2015), pp. 3111–3115.
[3]
Nureddin Ashammakhi et al. “In situ three­dimensional printing for reparative and
regenerative therapy”. In: Biomedical microdevices 21 (2019), pp. 1–6.
[4]
Marine Verhulsel et al. “A review of microfabrication and hydrogel engineering for
micro­organs on chips”. In: Biomaterials 35.6 (2014), pp. 1816–1832.
[5]
Wim E Hennink and Cornelus F van Nostrum. “Novel crosslinking methods to de­
sign hydrogels”. In: Advanced drug delivery reviews 64 (2012), pp. 223–236.
[6]
Pejman Heidarian et al. “Dynamic hydrogels and polymers as inks for three­dimensional
printing”. In: ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering 5.6 (2019), pp. 2688–2707.
[7]
Amin GhavamiNejad et al. “Crosslinking strategies for 3D bioprinting of polymeric
hydrogels”. In: Small 16.35 (2020), p. 2002931.
[8]
Cancan Xu et al. “Highly elastic biodegradable single­network hydrogel for cell
printing”. In: ACS applied materials & interfaces 10.12 (2018), pp. 9969–9979.
[9]
Ngoc­Duy Dinh et al. “Effective light directed assembly of building blocks with mi­
croscale control”. In: Small 13.24 (2017), p. 1700684.
[10]
H Cui and PB Messersmith. “Thermally triggered gelation of alginate for controlled
release”. In: ACS Publications, 1998.
[11]
Eric Westhaus and Phillip B Messersmith. “Triggered release of calcium from lipid
vesicles: a bioinspired strategy for rapid gelation of polysaccharide and protein
hydrogels”. In: Biomaterials 22.5 (2001), pp. 453–462.
[12]
Ryan S Stowers, Shane C Allen, and Laura J Suggs. “Dynamic phototuning of 3D
hydrogel stiffness”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112.7
(2015), pp. 1953–1958.
[13]
Cindy D Ren et al. “Liposomal delivery of horseradish peroxidase for thermally
triggered injectable hyaluronic acid–tyramine hydrogel scaffolds”. In: Journal of
Materials Chemistry B 3.23 (2015), pp. 4663–4670.
[14]
Lisa Sercombe et al. “Advances and challenges of liposome assisted drug deliv­
ery”. In: Frontiers in pharmacology 6 (2015), p. 286.
[15]
Hamdi Nsairat et al. “Liposomes: Structure, composition, types, and clinical appli­
cations”. In: Heliyon (2022).
[16]
Terence Ta and Tyrone M Porter. “Thermosensitive liposomes for localized delivery
and triggered release of chemotherapy”. In: Journal of controlled release 169.1­2
(2013), pp. 112–125.
[17]
Maryam Chaudhry et al. “Thermosensitive liposomes: a promising step toward lo­
calised chemotherapy”. In: Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery 19.8 (2022), pp. 899–
912.
[18]
Giuseppina Bozzuto and Agnese Molinari. “Liposomes as nanomedical devices”.
In: International journal of nanomedicine (2015), pp. 975–999.
[19]
Nelson Monteiro et al. “Liposomes in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine”.
In: Journal of the Royal Society Interface 11.101 (2014), p. 20140459.
[20]
Peter Van Hoogevest and Armin Wendel. “The use of natural and synthetic phos­
pholipids as pharmaceutical excipients”. In: European journal of lipid science and
technology 116.9 (2014), pp. 1088–1107.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
47
==PAGE:58==
[21]
Indermal/nanovex Biotechnologies. Precise Delivery of Actives. https : / / www .
cossma.com/ingredients/article/precise-delivery-of-actives-36328.html. Accessed:
February 2024. 2024.
[22]
Vadim A Frolov, Anna V Shnyrova, and Joshua Zimmerberg. “Lipid polymorphisms
and membrane shape”. In: Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 3.11 (2011),
a004747.
[23]
Gavin T Noble et al. “Ligand­targeted liposome design: challenges and fundamen­
tal considerations”. In: Trends in biotechnology 32.1 (2014), pp. 32–45.
[24]
Anita Hafner et al. “Nanotherapeutics in the EU: an overview on current state and
future directions”. In: International journal of nanomedicine (2014), pp. 1005–1023.
[25]
Abolfazl Akbarzadeh et al. “Liposome: classification, preparation, and applica­
tions”. In: Nanoscale research letters 8 (2013), pp. 1–9.
[26]
Sandy Gim Ming Ong et al. “Influence of the encapsulation efficiency and size of
liposome on the oral bioavailability of griseofulvin­loaded liposomes”. In: Pharma­
ceutics 8.3 (2016), p. 25.
[27]
Alec D Bangham, Malcolm M Standish, and Jeff C Watkins. “Diffusion of univalent
ions across the lamellae of swollen phospholipids”. In: Journal of molecular biology
13.1 (1965), 238–IN27.
[28]
MJ Hope et al. “Production of large unilamellar vesicles by a rapid extrusion proce­
dure. Characterization of size distribution, trapped volume and ability to maintain
a membrane potential”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)­Biomembranes
812.1 (1985), pp. 55–65.
[29]
Xiaomeng Huang et al. “Ultrasound­enhanced microfluidic synthesis of liposomes”.
In: Anticancer research 30.2 (2010), pp. 463–466.
[30]
Antonio P Costa, Xiaoming Xu, and Diane J Burgess. “Freeze­anneal­thaw cycling
of unilamellar liposomes: effect on encapsulation efficiency”. In: Pharmaceutical
research 31 (2014), pp. 97–103.
[31]
Vladimir Torchilin. “Multifunctional and stimuli­sensitive pharmaceutical nanocarri­
ers”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 71.3 (2009),
pp. 431–444.
[32]
Milad Ashrafizadeh et al. “Stimuli­responsive liposomal nanoformulations in can­
cer therapy: Pre­clinical & clinical approaches”. In: Journal of Controlled Release
351 (2022), pp. 50–80.
[33]
Tian Yow Tsong. “Kinetics of the crystalline­liquid crystalline phase transition of
dimyristoyl l­α­lecithin bilayers”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences 71.7 (1974), pp. 2684–2688.
[34]
Thomas Kaasgaard et al. “Temperature­controlled structure and kinetics of ripple
phases in one­and two­component supported lipid bilayers”. In: Biophysical journal
85.1 (2003), pp. 350–360.
[35]
Barbara Kneidl et al. “Thermosensitive liposomal drug delivery systems: state of
the art review”. In: International journal of nanomedicine (2014), pp. 4387–4398.
[36]
Milton B Yatvin et al. “Design of liposomes for enhanced local release of drugs by
hyperthermia”. In: Science 202.4374 (1978), pp. 1290–1293.
[37]
Waad H Abuwatfa et al. “Thermosensitive polymers and thermo­responsive lipo­
somal drug delivery systems”. In: Polymers 14.5 (2022), p. 925.
[38]
Kelly Y Kim. “Nanotechnology platforms and physiological challenges for cancer
therapeutics”. In: Nanomedicine in Cancer (2017), pp. 1–19.
[39]
Derek Marsh, Rosa Bartucci, and Luigi Sportelli. “Lipid membranes with grafted
polymers: physicochemical aspects”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)­
Biomembranes 1615.1­2 (2003), pp. 33–59.
48
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:59==
[40]
Gopal R Anyarambhatla and David Needham. “Enhancement of the phase transi­
tion permeability of DPPC liposomes by incorporation of MPPC: a new temperature­
sensitive liposome for use with mild hyperthermia”. In: Journal of liposome re­
search 9.4 (1999), pp. 491–506.
[41]
Chelsea D Landon et al. “Nanoscale drug delivery and hyperthermia: the materials
design and preclinical and clinical testing of low temperature­sensitive liposomes
used in combination with mild hyperthermia in the treatment of local cancer”. In:
The open nanomedicine journal 3 (2011), p. 38.
[42]
Patrick L Ahl and Walter R Perkins. “Interdigitation–fusion liposomes.” In: Methods
in enzymology 367 (2003), pp. 80–98.
[43]
Philip L Yeagle. The structure of biological membranes. CRC press, 2004.
[44]
Hiroaki Komatsu, Peter T Guy, and Elizabeth S Rowe. “Effect of unilamellar vesi­
cle size on ethanol­induced interdigitation in dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine”. In:
Chemistry and physics of lipids 65.1 (1993), pp. 11–21.
[45]
Hiroaki Komatsu and Satoshi Okada. “Ethanol­induced aggregation and fusion of
small phosphatidylcholine liposome: participation of interdigitated membrane for­
mation in their processes”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)­Biomembranes
1235.2 (1995), pp. 270–280.
[46]
Anu Kõiv and Paavo KJ Kinnunen. “Influence of Ca2+ and ethanol on the ag­
gregation and thermal phase behaviour of L­dihexadecylphosphatidylcholine lipo­
somes”. In: Chemistry and physics of lipids 62.3 (1992), pp. 253–261.
[47]
Valeria Nele et al. “Design of lipid­based nanocarriers via cation modulation of
ethanol­interdigitated lipid membranes”. In: Langmuir 37.40 (2021), pp. 11909–
11921.
[48]
Patrick L Ahl et al. “Interdigitation­fusion: a new method for producing lipid vesicles
of high internal volume”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)­Biomembranes
1195.2 (1994), pp. 237–244.
[49]
R Pecora. “Dynamic light scattering measurement of nanometer particles in liq­
uids”. In: Journal of nanoparticle research 2 (2000), pp. 123–131.
[50]
Jörg Stetefeld, Sean A McKenna, and Trushar R Patel. “Dynamic light scattering:
a practical guide and applications in biomedical sciences”. In: Biophysical reviews
8 (2016), pp. 409–427.
[51]
Stephen E Harding and Kornelia Jumel. “Light scattering”. In: Current protocols in
protein science 11.1 (1998), pp. 7–8.
[52]
Muhammad Sajid Hamid Akash et al. “Ultraviolet­visible (UV­VIS) spectroscopy”.
In: Essentials of pharmaceutical analysis (2020), pp. 29–56.
[53]
Fellipy S Rocha et al. “Experimental methods in chemical engineering: Ultraviolet
visible spectroscopy—UV­Vis”. In: The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering
96.12 (2018), pp. 2512–2517.
[54]
Nancy C Kendrick, Ronald W Ratzlaff, and Mordecai P Blaustein. “Arsenazo III
as an indicator for ionized calcium in physiological salt solutions: its use for de­
termination of the CaATP dissociation constant”. In: Analytical Biochemistry 83.2
(1977), pp. 433–450.
[55]
MV Thomas. “Arsenazo III forms 2: 1 complexes with Ca and 1: 1 complexes
with Mg under physiological conditions. Estimates of the apparent dissociation
constants”. In: Biophysical Journal 25.3 (1979), pp. 541–548.
[56]
National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubChem Compound Summary
for CID 135445682, Arsenazo III. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Arsenazo-III. Retrieved February 25, 2024. 2024.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
49
==PAGE:60==
[57]
Gerald Weissmann et al. “A general method, employing arsenazo III in liposomes,
for study of calcium ionophores: results with A23187 and prostaglandins.” In: Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 77.3 (1980), pp. 1506–1510.
[58]
VPS Chauhan and H Brockerhoff. “Ca (phosphatidate) 2 can traverse liposomal
bilayers”. In: Life sciences 35.13 (1984), pp. 1395–1399.
[59]
Abha Chauhan, Ved PS Chauhan, and Hans Brockerhoff. “Phosphatidylcholine
and cholesterol inhibit phosphatidate­mediated calcium traversal of liposomal bi­
layers”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)­Biomembranes 857.2 (1986),
pp. 283–286.
[60]
Kenneth Ogan and Elizabeth R Simons. “The influence of pH on arsenazo III”. In:
Analytical biochemistry 96.1 (1979), pp. 70–76.
[61]
Damian M Kirchmajer, R Gorkin Iii, et al. “An overview of the suitability of hydrogel­
forming polymers for extrusion­based 3D­printing”. In: Journal of Materials Chem­
istry B 3.20 (2015), pp. 4105–4117.
[62]
Amit Panwar and Lay Poh Tan. “Current status of bioinks for micro­extrusion­based
3D bioprinting”. In: Molecules 21.6 (2016), p. 685.
[63]
Matti Kesti et al. “A versatile bioink for three­dimensional printing of cellular scaf­
folds based on thermally and photo­triggered tandem gelation”. In: Acta biomate­
rialia 11 (2015), pp. 162–172.
[64]
Gregory Gillispie et al. “Assessment methodologies for extrusion­based bioink
printability”. In: Biofabrication 12.2 (2020), p. 022003.
[65]
Yu Shrike Zhang et al. “3D extrusion bioprinting”. In: Nature Reviews Methods
Primers 1.1 (2021), p. 75.
[66]
The Analytical Scientist. A Basic Introduction to Rheology. https://theanalyticalscientist.
com/app-notes/a-basic-introduction-to-rheology. 26/02. 2024.
[67]
Paul A Janmey, Penelope C Georges, and Søren Hvidt. “Basic rheology for biolo­
gists”. In: Methods in cell biology 83 (2007), pp. 1–27.
[68]
Sunil Kumar. Biogas. BoD–Books on Demand, 2012.
[69]
Rajalaxmi Dash, Marcus Foston, and Arthur J Ragauskas. “Improving the mechan­
ical and thermal properties of gelatin hydrogels cross­linked by cellulose nanowhiskers”.
In: Carbohydrate polymers 91.2 (2013), pp. 638–645.
[70]
Deepa K Baby. “Rheology of hydrogels”. In: Rheology of Polymer Blends and
Nanocomposites. Elsevier, 2020, pp. 193–204.
[71]
Gorjan Stojkov et al. “Relationship between structure and rheology of hydrogels
for various applications”. In: Gels 7.4 (2021), p. 255.
[72]
Hwa­Rim Lee et al. “Immobilization of planktonic algal spores by inkjet printing”.
In: Scientific reports 9.1 (2019), p. 12357.
[73]
Junyan Tan et al. “Development of alginate­based hydrogels: Crosslinking strate­
gies and biomedical applications”. In: International journal of biological macro­
molecules (2023), p. 124275.
[74]
Kuen Yong Lee and David J Mooney. “Alginate: properties and biomedical appli­
cations”. In: Progress in polymer science 37.1 (2012), pp. 106–126.
[75]
Giulia Remaggi et al. “Alginate Self­Crosslinking Ink for 3D Extrusion­Based Cry­
oprinting and Application for Epirubicin­HCl Delivery on MCF­7 Cells”. In: Molecules
27.3 (2022), p. 882.
[76]
Jia Jia et al. “Engineering alginate as bioink for bioprinting”. In: Acta biomaterialia
10.10 (2014), pp. 4323–4331.
[77]
Kajsa Markstedt et al. “3D bioprinting human chondrocytes with nanocellulose–
alginate bioink for cartilage tissue engineering applications”. In: Biomacromolecules
16.5 (2015), pp. 1489–1496.
50
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:61==
[78]
Carmen Radeke et al. “Transparent and Cell­Guiding Cellulose Nanofiber 3D Print­
ing Bioinks”. In: ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 15.2 (2023), pp. 2564–2577.
[79]
Tobias Zehnder et al. “Evaluation of an alginate–gelatine crosslinked hydrogel for
bioplotting”. In: Biofabrication 7.2 (2015), p. 025001.
[80]
Jiashing Yu et al. “The use of human mesenchymal stem cells encapsulated in
RGD modified alginate microspheres in the repair of myocardial infarction in the
rat”. In: Biomaterials 31.27 (2010), pp. 7012–7020.
[81]
Andrew McCormack et al. “3D printing in suspension baths: keeping the promises
of bioprinting afloat”. In: Trends in biotechnology 38.6 (2020), pp. 584–593.
[82]
Alan Faulkner­Jones et al. “Bioprinting of human pluripotent stem cells and their
directed differentiation into hepatocyte­like cells for the generation of mini­livers in
3D”. In: Biofabrication 7.4 (2015), p. 044102.
[83]
Zhao Li et al. “Tuning alginate­gelatin bioink properties by varying solvent and their
impact on stem cell behavior”. In: Scientific reports 8.1 (2018), p. 8020.
[84]
Xiaoming Xu, Antonio Costa, and Diane J Burgess. “Protein encapsulation in unil­
amellar liposomes: high encapsulation efficiency and a novel technique to assess
lipid­protein interaction”. In: Pharmaceutical research 29 (2012), pp. 1919–1931.
[85]
V Pushpamalar et al. “Optimization of reaction conditions for preparing carboxymethyl
cellulose from sago waste”. In: Carbohydrate polymers 64.2 (2006), pp. 312–318.
[86]
F Olson et al. “Preparation of liposomes of defined size distribution by extrusion
through polycarbonate membranes”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)­
Biomembranes 557.1 (1979), pp. 9–23.
[87]
M Danaei et al. “Impact of particle size and polydispersity index on the clinical
applications of lipidic nanocarrier systems”. In: Pharmaceutics 10.2 (2018), p. 57.
[88]
Maria Chountoulesi et al. “The significance of drug­to­lipid ratio to the development
of optimized liposomal formulation”. In: Journal of liposome research 28.3 (2018),
pp. 249–258.
[89]
SB Kulkarni, GV Betageri, and M Singh. “Factors affecting microencapsulation of
drugs in liposomes”. In: Journal of microencapsulation 12.3 (1995), pp. 229–246.
[90]
Aaron W Pederson, Jeffrey W Ruberti, and Phillip B Messersmith. “Thermal as­
sembly of a biomimetic mineral/collagen composite”. In: Biomaterials 24.26 (2003),
pp. 4881–4890.
[91]
Tang Li et al. “Direct comparison of standard transmission electron microscopy and
cryogenic­TEM in imaging nanocrystals inside liposomes”. In: Molecular Pharma­
ceutics 16.4 (2019), pp. 1775–1781.
[92]
Evelyne Deplazes et al. “Calcium ion binding at the lipid–water interface alters the
ion permeability of phospholipid bilayers”. In: Langmuir 37.48 (2021), pp. 14026–
14033.
[93]
Daniela Uhrı́ková et al. “Structural changes in dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine bi­
layer promoted by Ca2+ ions: a small­angle neutron scattering study”. In: Chem­
istry and physics of lipids 155.2 (2008), pp. 80–89.
[94]
Smadar Cohen et al. “Lipid­alginate interactions render changes in phospholipid
bilayer permeability”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)­Biomembranes 1063.1
(1991), pp. 95–102.
[95]
Selcan Karaz and Erkan Senses. “Liposomes Under Shear: Structure, Dynam­
ics, and Drug Delivery Applications”. In: Advanced NanoBiomed Research (2023),
p. 2200101.
[96]
Nicolas Färber et al. “Shear stress induced lipid order and permeability changes
of giant unilamellar vesicles”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)­General
Subjects 1866.10 (2022), p. 130199.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
51
==PAGE:62==
[97]
Anne­Laure Bernard et al. “Shear­induced permeation and fusion of lipid vesicles”.
In: Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 287.1 (2005), pp. 298–306.
[98]
Margaret N Holme et al. “Shear­stress sensitive lenticular vesicles for targeted
drug delivery”. In: Nature nanotechnology 7.8 (2012), pp. 536–543.
[99]
Selwa Boularaoui et al. “Harnessing shear stress preconditioning to improve cell
viability in 3D post­printed biostructures using extrusion bioprinting”. In: Bioprinting
25 (2022), e00184.
[100]
Masae Ohno et al. “Dynamic behavior of giant liposomes at desired osmotic pres­
sures”. In: Langmuir 25.19 (2009), pp. 11680–11685.
[101]
Natalie Forbes et al. “Inside­outside self­assembly of light­activated fast­release
liposomes”. In: Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 17.24 (2015), pp. 15569–
15578.
52
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
Thermal release of the IF­synthesized DPPC TSLs
Figure A.1: Graphs depicting the percentage of Ca+2 released over time from DPPC­
DMPC liposomes while subjected to heat from room temperature up to 43◦C. Four TSLs
samples are shown. It is easy to notice how the release from these samples during heating
up to 43◦C is very low. Graph created using Origin software.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.2: Graphs depicting the [Ca2+] released over time from DPPC­DMPC liposomes
while subjected to heat. Four liposome samples are shown. It is easy to notice how the
concentration of Ca+2 released from these samples during heating up to 43◦C is very low.
Graph created using Origin software.
54
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:65==
A.2
Rheological characterization of the formulated bio­inks
Figure A.3: Graph depicting the change of G’ and G” over time at 25◦C and 45◦C, for
Alginate/DPPC bio­inks. The bio­inks shown are: a) 1% (w/v) Alginate/DPPC and b) 2%
(w/v) Alginate/DPPC. The final concentration of the liposomes is the same throughout the
three bio­inks (10 mg/mL). Graph created using Origin software.
Figure A.4: Graph depicting the change of G’ and G” over time at 25◦C and 45◦C, for
4% (w/w) Alginate/Liposome/6% (w/v) cNFCs bio­inks. The bioinks shown are: a) %
(w/w) Alginate/DPPC/6% (w/v) cNFCs and b) % (w/w) Alginate/DPPC­DMPC/6% (w/v)
cNFCs. The final concentration of the liposomes is the same throughout the two bio­inks
(10 mg/mL). Graph created using Origin software.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
55
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.5: Frequency sweep represented by the frequency [Hz] as a logarithmic function
of G’ and G” for Alginate/Liposome bio­ink formulations with final alginate concentrations
of: a) 1%, b) 2% and c) 4% (w/v). The TSLs contained in the bio­inks consisted of DPPC­
DMPC (10 mg/mL). The experiments were conducted at 40◦C with the frequency swept
from 100 Hz to 0.01 Hz with a strain of 1% (5 points per decade). Graph created using
Origin software.
Figure A.6: Frequency sweep represented by the frequency [Hz] as a logarithmic function
of G’ and G” for Alginate/Liposome/cNFCs bio­ink formulations containing: a) DPPC and
b) DPPC­DMPC TSLs (20 mg/mL). The final alginate and cNFCs concentrations were
4% (w/w) and 6% (w/v), respectively. The experiments were conducted at 45◦C with the
frequency swept from 100 Hz to 0.01 Hz with a strain of 1%. Graph created using Origin
software.
56
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.7: Flow sweep represented by the stress as a logarithmic function of shear rate
(1/s) for Alginate/Liposome bio­ink formulations with final alginate concentrations of: a)
1%, b) 2% and c) 4% (w/v). The TSLs contained in the bio­inks consisted of DPPC­DMPC
(10 mg/mL). The experiments were conducted at 40◦C, with the shear swept from 0.01
(1/s) to 100 (1/s). Graph created using Origin software.
Figure A.8: Flow sweep represented by the viscosity as a logarithmic function of shear
rate (1/s) for Alginate/Liposome bio­ink formulations with final alginate concentrations of:
a) 1%, b) 2% and c) 4% (w/v). The TSLs contained in the bio­inks consisted of DPPC­
DMPC (10 mg/mL). The experiments were conducted at 40◦C, with the shear swept from
0.01 (1/s) to 100 (1/s). Graph created using Origin software.
Figure A.9: Flow sweep represented by the stress as a logarithmic function of shear rate
(1/s) for Alginate/Liposome bio­ink formulations containing: a) DPPC and b) DPPC­DMPC
TSLs (20 mg/mL). The final alginate and cNFCs concentrations were 4% (w/w) and 6%
(w/v), respectively. The experiments were conducted at 45◦C, with the shear swept from
0.01 (1/s) to 100 (1/s). Graph created using Origin software.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.10: Flow sweep represented by the viscosity as a logarithmic function of shear
rate (1/s) for Alginate/Liposome bio­ink formulations containing: a) DPPC and b) DPPC­
DMPC TSLs (20 mg/mL). The final alginate and cNFCs concentrations were 4% (w/w)
and 6% (w/v), respectively. The experiments were conducted at 45◦C, with the shear
swept from 0.01 (1/s) to 100 (1/s). Graph created using Origin software.
58
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:69==
A.3
Printability and Microscopy of the optimized bio­inks
Figure A.11: Microscopy image depicting the structure of a 6­layered printed square by
the 4% (w/w) Alginate/DPPC/6% (w/v) cNFCs bio­ink sample.
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.12:
Images showing the 6 and 4­layered prints done with the 4% (w/w)
Alginate/DPPC/6% (w/v) cNFCs bio­ink sample. The structures were able to withstand
up to 6 layers before crumbling. Image taken with a smartphone.
60
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
==PAGE:71==
Novel 3D printing materials incorporating thermosensitive liposomes carrying crosslinking agents
61
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
