==PAGE:1==
Energy Requirements and Considerations for
Swimming Pools in The Arctic
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Author:
Rudolph Immanuel Lawardi
s220065
==PAGE:2==
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Rudolph I. Lawardi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Arctic is known for its harsh and cold climate, with temperatures not going more than
10°C even in the summer. Despite this, there are numerous swimming pool in the Arctic
area, both indoors and outdoors. Each type has its own advantages and disadvantages.
By using the now-closed outdoor swimming pool in Sisimiut, Greenland, this thesis aimed
to investigate the difference in energy use of an outdoor and an indoor swimming pool
by modelling a simple building envelope around the swimming pool. IDA-ICE and its Ice
Rinks and Pools software was chosen to simulate these. To heat and keep the swimming
pool at 28°C, the outdoor swimming pool was found to use 155,666 kWh and 840,048 kWh
of energy during the summer and the whole year, respectively. An indoor swimming pool
needed ventilation to ensure good indoor air quality, with various categories of comfort.
The indoor swimming pool, simulated to being open for the whole year, was found to
need less energy than an outdoor swimming pool. This difference was caused by the
difference in heat loss, of which the indoor swimming pool experienced less heat loss
than its outdoor counterpart, due to the building envelope of the indoor swimming pool
creating a protected environment surrounding the swimming pool.
ii
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:4==
Table of Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Arctic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Greenland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Swimming Pools in the Arctic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
4
2.1
Interviews and Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Simulation Using IDA-ICE Software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Sisimiut Swimming Pool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Results and Discussions
16
3.1
Validation Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2
Sisimiut Swimming Pool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2.1
Outdoor Swimming Pool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2.2
Indoor Swimming Pool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.3
Improvement Ideas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Conclusions
39
Bibliography
41
A Sisimiut Swimming Pool Schematics
43
B Schedules
45
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
The Arctic
The Arctic is the region encompassing the northernmost part of the Earth, including the
north pole. With various definitions of the Arctic [1] [2], it is characterized with a cold
climate throughout the whole year, with temperatures not going above 10°C even in the
summer, little to no sunlight during the winter, and long daylight times during the summer.
As there are various ways to define/mark the boundary line for the Arctic region, in this
thesis, the Arctic region is defined as the area north of the Arctic circle (66°33’N). The
Arctic circle serves as a boundary line of which the area just north of the line does not
experience sunset on the summer solstice and does not experience sunrise on the winter
solstice [2].
Figure 1.1: Map of The Arctic. U.S. Department of State.
1.2
Greenland
Greenland is a country geographically located in North America, situated northeast of
Canada and west of Iceland, and is a part of Kingdom of Denmark. Greenland is also
the largest non-continental island on the Earth. With 2/3 of the island lies in the Arctic
area, Greenland has become synonymous with the cold climate of the arctic. The country
has been inhabited by the Inuit people from as early as 2500 BC [3], of which they have
adapted in living and surviving in the harsh cold condition. Nowadays, the people living
in Greenland has been living with a culture of Inuit mixed with Danish influence. For
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
1
==PAGE:6==
example, traditional Inuit houses would have been situated on a flat, low altitude land,
and near the open water to help spotting animals to hunt and protect against the wind
[4]. Nowadays, with the mix of Danish influence, houses in Greenland can consist of both
single houses and apartments; buildings can and preferred to be built on top of rocky hills
for an easier and more stable foundation.
Figure 1.2: Skyline of Sisimiut, Greenland
1.3
Swimming Pools in the Arctic
Throughout the Arctic, there are numerous swimming pool open to the public. Some
examples, not including those in Greenland, are Holiday Club Saariselkä in Northern La-
pland, Finland; Tromsøbadet in Tromsø, Norway; and Sundlaug Akureyrar in Akureyri,
Iceland. Based on e-mail correspondents with representatives of the aforementioned
swimming pools, the swimming pools are indeed popular and enjoyed by the public. In
an indoor swimming pool such as the one in Finland, it was mentioned that avoiding
condensation can be a challenge. As such, in the coldest months when the problem is
apparent, they keep the relative humidity under 60% and set the supply air temperature
to 6-8°C above the water temperature. In Iceland—famous for their geothermal energy
sources—people can enjoy comfortable outdoor swimming pool by utilizing the geother-
mal energy. However in Akureyri, having two heated outdoor swimming pools and five
hot tubs, only one hot tub is heated directly by the geothermal energy. This is due to
two reasons: geothermal energy sources are scarce in the area compared to other areas
such as Reykjavik and because by not using geothermal water, they avoid having silica
and other minerals in the water (the cold water having almost no minerals), making the
entire water system cleaner and needing less maintenance.
In total, there are three functional swimming pools in Greenland, all indoors: one in Nuuk,
the nation’s capital, one in Kangerlussuaq, and one in Pituffik Space Base. There was one
outdoor swimming pool in Sisimiut, which was closed in 2019. At first glance, it wouldn’t
have made sense, traditionally, to have a swimming pool in Greenland, considering the
cold climate and the amount of energy required to operate it so that it can be enjoyed
comfortably by the people. However, the Greenlandic people now enjoy going to the
swimming pool as a recreational and sport activity. Considering the harsh, cold climate
in the arctic, every building that is build has to ensure that it can be used/operated with
as much efficiency as possible, to save precious energy, heat, and ensure comfort for the
people.
As of January 1st 2024, Greenland has a population of 56,699 people. 4,343 of them
work in the fishing or other related industries, with the fishing industry exporting more
than 138,000 tons of fish products in 2023 [5]. With fishing as an important industry for
2
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:7==
Greenland and Greenlanders, it makes sense for cities in Greenland to have a swimming
pool for the public as it can teach them how to swim. Although people wear a life vest
while on a boat as a standard, knowing how to swim properly can increase the chance of
survival of a person if they went overboard.
From the examples of existing swimming pools in Greenland, all but one are indoors. An
indoor and outdoor swimming pool both have its advantages and drawbacks. An indoor
swimming pool is expected to have less energy use during its operation because of the
insulating envelope keeping the heat inside, while an equal sized outdoor swimming pool
is expected to have more energy use to keep the water temperature at a comfortable
level. An indoor swimming pool will also be more beneficial for the public since it can be
operational all year long, while an outdoor swimming pool can only be operational during
the warmer months. However, an indoor swimming pool will require substantially more
initial investment to build the building envelope, compared to an outdoor swimming pool.
This thesis is written to study and identify the difference in energy use of an indoor swim-
ming pool and an outdoor swimming pool, using an existing swimming pool in Greenland,
namely the outdoor swimming pool in Sisimiut, as the study case. It is hoped that from this
thesis, future related stakeholders can make an informed decision regarding the energy
consumption of having a swimming pool in the arctic.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
3
==PAGE:8==
2
Methodology
2.1
Interviews and Observations
For this thesis, I spent two months in Greenland to collect relevant data and conduct
interviews with the relevant people, such as the people working for the municipality and
the locals. In those two months, I spent most of my time in Sisimiut and two days in
Kangerlussuaq (both of which are part of Qeqqata Kommunia municipality). In Sisimiut, I
gained insights on the city and its population. Combining it with the interviews I conducted
with several people, it made me understood the dynamics in Sisimiut regarding the now-
closed outdoor swimming pool.
Figure 2.1: Map of Sisimiut. Google Earth.
The outdoor swimming pool is located near Taseralik Cultural Center, where most of
events happening in Sisimiut are located. The swimming pool was built in 1990 and closed
in the summer of 2020 due to a report that came out in the autumn of 2019 stating that the
swimming pool in Sisimiut was not up to standard (such as having an outdated cleaning
system). Unfortunately, I wasn’t allowed a copy of this report; however I was allowed to
read it during one of my interviews. Based on the available schematics, the swimming
pool in Sisimiut has a dimension of 13 × 9 m, with a gradient depth of 1.2 - 2.1 m.
The Sisimiut swimming pool, being an outdoor swimming pool, was only opened to the
public during the warmer months, because otherwise it would have required tremendous
energy to heat the water during the winter. The swimming pool was owned and operated
by the municipality, where they did maintenance work annually.
Currently, the pool area is covered by a makeshift roof as shown in Figure 2.2b and the
changing room building is used by Microgreens Sisimiut where they grow various vegeta-
bles to be sold around Greenland.
4
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:9==
(a) Then: Still Opened to the Public. [6].
(b) Now: Closed to the Public.
(c) Outdoor View of the Swimming Pool.
(d) The Inside of the Changing Room Now.
Figure 2.2: The Outdoor Swimming Pool in Sisimiut
I also spent two days in Kangerlussuaq mainly to visit the indoor swimming pool facility
there. During this time, I was guided by Fritz Baumann Petersen of Qeqqata Kommunia.
The indoor swimming pool is still open for public use, contingent on having an available
lifeguard. The swimming pool (and the shower/changing room) is part of the town’s sports
facility, which also provides a fitness center and an indoor sport field.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
5
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.3: Map of Kangerlussuaq. Google Earth.
Based on the schematics I obtained, the swimming pool was built some time in the 1970s
by the Americans back when Kangerlussuaq was still a location of an American military
air base. The pool itself has a dimension of 12.192 × 6.096 m (40 × 20 ft), with depths of
0.9 m (3 ft) at its shallowest and 2.4 m (8 ft) at its deepest point. The water temperature
is set to between 24 and 28°C while the air temperature inside the room is set to 27.5°C.
(a) Inside The Swimming Pool.
(b) Shower Facility.
Figure 2.4: Kangerlussuaq Swimming Pool
2.2
Simulation Using IDA-ICE Software
IDA-ICE (Indoor Climate and Energy) is a software used to simulate, as its name suggest,
indoor climate in buildings, such as air temperature, air quality (humidity, CO2 levels), and
its energy consumption. Moreover, with its Ice Rinks and Pools extension, users are able
to also include swimming pools in the simulations, which is advantageous for this thesis.
Crucial data such as the pool’s water temperature and heat loss can be retrieved with
this extension. In this thesis, both the IDA-ICE software and the Ice Rinks and Pools
extension’s versions are the 4.8 SP2. Even though the latest version of IDA-ICE that is
6
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:11==
available on the market is the version 5.0, the Ice Rinks and Pools extension is currently
only supported up to version 4.8.
During the course of this research, it is worthy to note that the Ice Rinks and Pools exten-
sion is not used by many people. The extension has been in a beta state for 20+ years
and there is no user manual for it. As such, Jörgen Eriksson from EQUA Simulation AB—
the maker of the IDA-ICE software—has generously set aside the time to introduce me on
how to use the extension, and considerable time has been spent on familiarizing myself
on using the extension. Some known limitations on this extension are:
• No support for gradient depth in a swimming pool; if a swimming pool has different
depths, they have to be averaged and entered as the model’s depth.
• The default HC (convection heat transfer coefficient) value of the pool’s bottom wall
is too low (=1). EQUA recommended the number to be changed manually to 200-
300.
• Although the evaporation rate of the pool’s water over time can be obtained, the
volume of the water in the pool doesn’t change over time.
• The convection heat loss on the pool’s walls (denoted as QWALLS in IDA-ICE) is
always 0.
2.2.0.1
Validation Case
As the Ice Rinks and Pools extension is technically still in its beta state, and its rela-
tive newness to the writer, a validation case was needed to be created/replicated in the
software. An indoor swimming pool identical to the one in [7] was created in IDA-ICE
(Figure 2.5).
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: The Indoor Pool and Its Room from [7] in IDA-ICE
The case that was used in [7] is a summerhouse located in Saltum Strand, Denmark that
is listed in NOVASOL (novasol.dk). To replicate the outdoor condition as close as the
exact location, the nearest location available in IDA-ICE, Aalborg Airport, was chosen as
the simulated location and climate. The pool’s dimensions are described in the paper
and from the pictures in NOVASOL of the summerhouse, the dimensions of the room
can be approximated. The indoor swimming pool is in a room measuring approximately
5.6 x 7.5 m, a roof with a slope of 30° with the short side measuring 1.3 m tall; the pool
itself measuring 3.5 x 4.8 m and a depth of 1.3 m. Other configurations such as the pool
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
7
==PAGE:12==
temperature, room temperature, etc. were used according to the ones specified in [7]
section 3.2.1 and 3.2.2, which were:
• The swimming pool water temperature was set to 29°C.
• The heating design power of the pool was set to 1 kW.
• The surrounding air temperature was set to 31°C.
• The pool walls have a U-value of 0.55 W/m2·K.
• The walls of the building envelope have a U-value of 0.34 W/m2·K.
• The pool is occupied for 4 hours per day at 12PM - 4 PM.
• The ground temperature was set to 10°C.
• The greywater massflow was set to 0.9% per day.
• The room of the pool has a maximum heating power of 3.5 kW.
As there are several variations simulated in the paper, the base case where the swimming
pool and the room are heated only by electricity is the only one replicated on IDA-ICE.
2.2.1
Sisimiut Swimming Pool
Based on the available information of the swimming pool in Sisimiut, a model was created
on IDA-ICE. Nuuk was chosen as the simulated location as it is believed to simulate the
weather and climate condition most closely out of the other available locations. To simu-
late an outdoor swimming pool, the pool is modeled to have windows occupying the entire
walls with a height of 10 m, and was set to be ”Always open”: this is due to the software
requiring having walls with a height of >0 m. Since the software doesn’t support varying
depths in a swimming pool, the average depth of the pool, 1.65 m, was entered as the
swimming pool’s depth. Since it is an outdoor swimming pool, an AHU was not needed
and so the ventilation rate was set to 0 l/s. Two time periods were simulated: the pool
being open only in the summer as it was when it was still open and the pool being open
all year round.
8
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.6: 3D View of Simulated Outdoor Swimming Pool in Sisimiut
In the software, the greywater flow rate from the pool was set to 0.022 kg/s, which is 1%
of the pool volume per day. In the simulations, the water temperature was set to 28°C.
The heating power for the pool water only was set to 1.5 kW/m2. The water was set to
be heated by the default standard boiler in the software with unlimited heating capacity.
Figure 2.7: Swimming Pool Settings In IDA-ICE
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
9
==PAGE:14==
The water was set to be heated by the default standard boiler in the software with unlimited
heating capacity with an efficiency of 0.9.
Figure 2.8: Boiler Settings In IDA-ICE
The second part of this was to simulate the swimming pool as an indoor swimming pool.
A simple building envelope was created: walls having U-value of 0.1477 W/(m2·K) and
a height of 2 m on the east and west sides, a 1:2 slanted roof having U-value of 0.119
W/(m2·K), and 10 2x1 m triple-glazed windows with a U-value of 0.62 W/(m2·K). It is
assumed that there is no thermal bridge on the building.
Figure 2.9: 3D View of Simulated Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool
The heating temperature heating and cooling setpoint was set to 27.5°C and 28°C, respec-
tively. Inside the building, it is heated by the default ”Ideal heater” with a heating power
of 20 kW, which is equal to 83.86 W/m2 of heating power. As it is an indoor swimming
pool, it’s able to be open all year long, hence it was simulated that the pool is used all year
10
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:15==
long. The windows of the building were set to be ”PI temperature control”, meaning the
windows will be opened automatically to help maintain the desired indoor air temperature
from overheating according to the temperature setpoints.
Being an indoor swimming pool, having ventilation is important to avoid condensation and
to ensure proper air circulation. The ventilation rate is important to determine since it con-
tributes greatly to the energy consumption. The ventilation rate was calculated based on
several standards, namely [8], [9], [10], and [11]. Based on [9] Section NA.3.1.2 where it
is divided into four categories with category I having the least expected dissatisfied per-
centage (15%) and category IV having the most expected dissatisfied percentage (40%).
In Section NA.3.1.2, it is described that to calculate ventilation rates on a non-residential
buildings, one must sum the ventilation rate for diluting bio effluents (Figure 2.10) and for
diluting emissions from buildings (Figure 2.11).
To calculate the ventilation rates for the four categories, the following equation, based on
[8] Section 6.3.2.2, was used:
qtot = n · qp + AR · qB
(2.1)
where
qtot is the total ventilation rate (l/s)
n is the number of persons in the room; in this case is 26
qp is the ventilation rate based on Table NA.6
AR is the floor area (m2); in this case is 238.5 m2
qB is the ventilation rate based on Table NA.7
Figure 2.10: Table NA.6 of [9]
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
11
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.11: Table NA.7 of [9]
As the numbers on Table NA.6 depend on the occupancy of the building, it can be calcu-
lated based on [10] using the figures shown in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Table 4.1 of [10]
As the pool’s depth is 1.65 m, the minimum occupied area per person is 4.5 m2, making
the maximum occupancy of the swimming pool to 26 people.
The activity factor of the swimming pool was set in a way that during occupied hours, the
activity factor is 1 while during unoccupied hours, the activity factor is 0.5 based on [12],
as seen in Figure 2.13.
12
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.13: Swimming Pool Activity Factor [12]
During unoccupied hours, the ventilation rate was set to 0.15 l/s per m2 of floor area,
based on [9] Section NA.3.3.1. Furthermore, the following assumptions were also used:
• As there is no information regarding the opening hours of Sisimiut swimming pool,
the swimming pool’s opening hours follow the opening hours of Svømmehallen
MALIK—the indoor swimming pool in Nuuk shown in Figure 2.14.
• Throughout the pool’s opening hours, the pool has an occupancy of 26 people.
• The activity rate of each person is 8 MET .
MET (Metabolic Equivalent of Task) is a ratio of how much a person uses energy relative
to the person’s weight per a set amount of time, with 1 MET is equal to 1 kcal/kg · h. [13]
together with its website [14] published a standardized measurements of MET levels for
various activities. The list listed, among other things, various swimming activities with
MET levels ranging from 3.5 to 14.5. For the sake of simplicity, the value of 8 MET was
taken as the activity rate for one person.
Figure 2.14: Opening Hours of MALIK Indoor Swimming Pool in Nuuk [15]
The calculated ventilation rates are presented in Table 2.1. The numbers highlighted in
yellow are the ones used for the simulations.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
13
==PAGE:18==
In keeping with [9] Section NA.3.1.1, the minimum ventilation rate during occupancy was
4 l/s · person, seen used in category IV.
qp
qb
qtot
Category
Floor area (m2)/pers
l/s · m2
l/s · pers
l/s · m2
l/s · m2
l/s · pers
I
4.5
2.222
10
1
3.222
14.5
II
4.5
1.556
7
0.7
2.256
10.15
III
4.5
0.889
4
0.4
1.289
5.8
IV
4.5
0.556
2.5
(0.3) 0.333
(0.856) 0.889
(3.85) 4
Table 2.1: Calculated Ventilation Rates For Non-Adapted Person
It can be noticed that Tables NA.6 and NA.7 are showing values for a non-adapted person.
Contrary to a non-adapted person, an adapted person is a person that is in a room longer
than a set of time so that they can adapt to the surrounding environment, making them
have an acceptable perceived air quality with lower ventilation rates [16]. Since most, if not
all people will spend more than 30 minutes in or around a swimming pool, the ventilation
rates for adapted persons are also used in the simulations, based on [9] but for adapted
persons [16]. The ventilation rates for adapted persons are presented in Table 2.2
qp
qb
qtot
Category
Floor area (m2)/pers
l/s · m2
l/s · pers
l/s · m2
l/s · m2
l/s · pers
I
4.5
0.778
3.5
1
1.778
8
II
4.5
0.556
2.5
0.7
1.256
5.65
III
4.5
0.333
1.5
(0.4) 0.556
(0.733) 0.889
(3.3) 4
IV
4.5
0.222
1
(0.333) 0.667
(0.556) 0.889
(2.5) 4
Table 2.2: Calculated Ventilation Rates For Adapted Person
These ventilations were carried out by an air to air heat exchanger, since it is the one
typically used in a cold climate area [17], with an effectiveness of 0.6. The schematics for
the AHU in the simulations is shown in Figure 2.15. The schematics for the AHU used in
the simulations is similar to the default AHU schematics of IDA-ICE.
14
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.15: AHU Schematics in IDA-ICE
The results from these simulations were then analysed. Since there are numerous data
that are produced from a single simulation, relevant data were picked and analysed in
the next chapter. Since the main topic of this thesis is about energy use, the energy
consumption data are analysed. In comparing an indoor and an outdoor swimming pool,
the temperature data are also analysed, namely the surrounding air temperature and
the pool water temperature. Furthermore, since there are a total of eight categories in
determining the minimum ventilation rates for an indoor facility, the resulting indoor air
quality (IAQ) using the different ventilation rates were also analysed. Logically, to ensure
low operating cost, the lowest minimum ventilation rate will be used since it uses the least
energy. However, by analysing the IAQ, the effect in IAQ of different ventilation rates can
be understood, especially in an indoor environment with a water body.
The heat loss data from the swimming pool were also obtained and analysed. The objec-
tive in this is to analyse the difference in the heat loss between an indoor and an outdoor
swimming pool since it contributes to the heating needs of the pool: greater heat loss
requires more heating, requiring more energy use. Moreover, the effect(s) of different
ventilation rates on the swimming pool’s heat loss is investigated to see if there is a con-
nection and how the ventilation rates affect the amount of heat loss by a swimming pool.
From the analyses, two ideas to improve the energy usage and the indoor air quality were
also simulated. These ideas were implemented on the case of the indoor swimming pool
with a category I ventilation rate for non-adapted person. These improvements were:
• Increasing the ventilation rate during unoccupied hours to improve the IAQ of the
building.
• The use of heat pump instead of a standard boiler for water heating. A heat pump
has a higher efficiency than a standard boiler but has a higher initial investment cost.
The results of implementing these ideas were then also analysed
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
15
==PAGE:20==
3
Results and Discussions
3.1
Validation Case
The closest results resembling to the ones in [7] were found by using the HC value of
350. In [7], it was found that the swimming pool needed 3,600 kWh of energy (Table 2
of [7]) and the room needed 7,200 kWh of energy (Table 3 of [7]). With IDA-ICE, it was
found that the swimming pool and the room needed 3,519 kWh and 7,701 kWh of energy,
respectively.
Figure 3.1: Simulation Results of [7] on IDA-ICE
As such, IDA-ICE can be expected to give accurate results in simulation involving swim-
ming pools. The HC value of 350 was also used for other simulations in this thesis.
3.2
Sisimiut Swimming Pool
3.2.1
Outdoor Swimming Pool
The energy used to operate the outdoor swimming pool in Sisimiut during summer and
the whole year were simulated and was found to use 155,666 kWh and 840,048 kWh of
energy to heat the swimming pool, respectively. These values are shown in Figure 3.2 in
the ”Fuel heating” row.
16
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:21==
(a) Summer
(b) All Year Long
Figure 3.2: Required Heating Energy of Sisimiut Outdoor Swimming Pool
The detailed amount of used energy per month for the whole year by the outdoor swim-
ming pool is shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Monthly Energy Use of Sisimiut Outdoor Swimming Pool
It can be seen that the swimming pool used the most energy during the month of February.
This is because the surrounding air temperature, seen in Figure 3.5, is the coldest in
February.
The amount of energy managed to keep the water temperature relatively stable at 28°C
(Figure 3.4), despite the surrounding air temperature remaining below 18.333°C and going
as cold as -24.027°C in February, as shown in Figure 3.5.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Water Temperature of Sisimiut Outdoor Swimming Pool
Figure 3.5: Surrounding Air Temperature of Sisimiut Outdoor Swimming Pool
3.2.2
Indoor Swimming Pool
In the case of indoor swimming pool, six variations of the model were simulated that
differ in the ventilation rate: four categories for non-adapted person and two categories,
category I and II for adapted person, since the ventilation rates for category III and IV are
identical with the ventilation rate for category IV for non-adapted person. The amount of
energy that is needed to operate the swimming pool water at 28°C are shown in Table 3.1,
18
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:23==
encompassing the energy needed to heat the swimming pool water and the room.
For non-adapted person
Energy
For adapted person
Category
Swimming Pool
Room
Energy
(kWh)
(kWh)
Category
Swimming Pool
Room
I
132,027
9,170
(kWh)
(kWh)
II
103,615
9,083
I
86,751
8,526
III
53,932
7,361
II
57,866
7,978
IV
46,080
7,742
III & IV
46,080
7,742
Table 3.1: Required Heating Energy of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool
These numbers were proven enough to maintain comfortable temperature both for the
water and the room. Figure 3.6 and 3.7 show the water temperature of the swimming
pool all year long, hovering on 28°C with deviations not more than 0.022°C. Figure 3.8
and 3.9 show the air temperature inside the building all year long, with the coldest recorded
temperature was 27.176°C in Category I for non-adapted person (Figure 3.8a). As the
ventilation rates go down (category I →category IV), the lowest recorded temperature
became higher—closer to the heating temperature setpoint. This is because as there
is less air circulated, less heat is lost during ventilation (ventilation heat loss). Because
the windows were set to be PI temperature control, the air temperature only went up to
28.025°C during its warmest conditions.
(a) Category I
(b) Category II
(c) Category III
(d) Category IV
Figure 3.6: Water Temperature of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool (Non-Adapted Person
Scenarios)
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
19
==PAGE:24==
(a) Category I
(b) Category II
Figure 3.7: Water Temperature of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool (Adapted Person Sce-
narios)
(a) Category I
(b) Category II
(c) Category III
(d) Category IV
Figure 3.8: Air Temperature Inside Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool (Non-Adapted Person
Scenarios)
20
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:25==
(a) Category I
(b) Category II
Figure 3.9: Air Temperature Inside Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool (Adapted Person Sce-
narios)
One crucial advantage of an indoor swimming pool is its ability to be open all year long
regardless of the weather and temperature on the outside. By comparing the surrounding
air temperature in an outdoor setting (Figure 3.5) with the surrounding air temperature in
an indoor setting (Figure 3.9), it can be seen that in an indoor setting, air temperature
went ”only” as low as 27.126°C. This is enormously advantageous to the public as they
can enjoy the facility even in the colder months.
As an indoor swimming pool in the Arctic, condensation on the walls, among other things,
is a challenge that has to be solved to ensure a good indoor air quality (IAQ). One aspect
of it is the relative humidity. Ideally, the relative humidity levels in a natatorium should
be in the range of 50%-60% [12]. This is higher than the standard/recommendation for
most buildings [18]. The simulation results showed that all ventilation rates didn’t manage
to overcome this challenge. In fact, even in category I for non-adapted person with the
highest ventilation rate, the relative humidity levels reached 100%. Based on this, it is
concluded that in all simulated situations, condensation occurred inside the building.
Another aspect of IAQ is the CO2 level, measured in ppm (parts per million). A normal
range of CO2 level is 350-450 ppm, with concentration level above 1,000 ppm can cause
significant effects on the human body, such as lack of concentration [19]. As such, it is
important to monitor the CO2 levels in an indoor environment. The CO2 levels inside the
indoor swimming pool are presented in Figure 3.10.
The figures show that with more ventilation (higher ventilation rate), a better IAQ is achieved.
However, it is shown that even in category I for non-adapted person, the CO2 levels
reached up to 1715 ppm, while the CO2 levels in category IV for non-adapted reached up
to 5111.6 ppm. These results showed alarming figures: even with the highes ventilation
rate, the CO2 levels are still below the reliable IAQ standard. This is caused by the com-
bination of high activity levels of the occupants (8 MET) and ventilation rates that were
not high enough to circulate the air.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
21
==PAGE:26==
(a) Category I (Non-Adapted Person)
(b) Category II (Non-Adapted Person)
(c) Category III (Non-Adapted Person)
(d) Category IV (Non-Adapted Person)
(e) Category I (Adapted Person)
(f) Category II (Adapted Person)
Figure 3.10: CO2 Levels Inside Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool
A trend is observed in Figure 3.10: an increasing difference in CO2 levels during the
warmer months as the ventilation rates decrease, even though the occupancy and the
activity level were set to not deviate from the schedule during the whole year, let alone
the warmer months. This trend can be explained by looking at the code of which IDA-
ICE measures the CO2 levels. Figure 3.11 shows that the software measures CO2 levels
(denoted as XCO2Vol) by calculating the variable XCO2.
22
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.11: IDA-ICE Code in Measuring CO2 Levels
When the details of XCO2 is investigated as shown in Figure 3.12, it is seen that it’s
connected to the windows when they are opened. Since the windows are set to PI tem-
perature control, the windows are set to automatically open when the air temperature
inside the building exceeds the cooling temperature setpoint of 28°C. During the warmer
months, if the windows are set to be never opened, it can be expected that the inside
air temperature will be higher than in the colder months. Hence it can be expected that
during this period, the PI temperature controlled windows will be opened more frequently,
supplying fresh outside air and flushing the CO2 from the inside more often.
Figure 3.12: XCO2 in IDA-ICE
The heat loss values from the swimming pool were also obtained. In general, heat loss
from a swimming pool can come from four different ways: conduction, convection, radia-
tion, and evaporation, with evaporation and convection heat loss on the surface combined
making up the majority of the total heat loss from a swimming pool (>82%), radiation mak-
ing up 17% of the total heat loss, and conduction heat loss making up 0.6% [20]. By using
the Ice Rinks and Pool extension of IDA-ICE, the heat losses from the pool are given as
the variables QMoist, QZone, QBottom, QWalls, and HumF; QZone and QMoist together
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
23
==PAGE:28==
add up to what is called QSurf. The descriptions of these variables, shown in Figure 3.13,
don’t explicitly mention if a variable is a conduction, convection, radiation, or an evapora-
tion type heat loss.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: Descriptions of The Heat Loss Variables in IDA-ICE
From the available descriptions and calculation formulas in IDA-ICE, it is concluded that
the heat loss variables correspond to the following heat loss type:
• QMoist is the heat loss by convection from the evaporated water
• HumF is the evaporation rate of the pool water in kg/s
• QZone is the heat loss by radiation to/from the pool surface
• QBottom is the heat loss by convection from the pool water to the pool floor
• QWalls is the heat loss by convection from the pool water to the pool walls
It seems that the heat loss by conduction is not given explicitly by the software specific
to the swimming pool. Instead, the software gives the conduction heat loss for the whole
building as like in a normal building simulation without a swimming pool.
The first heat loss variable to be analysed is the QBottom, shown in Figure 3.14. The
negative numbers in the graphs mean that the swimming pool is losing heat as much as
the numbers shown. To investigate the effect of different ventilation rates, the heat loss
figures for the indoor simulations are only from the four ventilation rates for non-adapted
person.
24
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:29==
(a) Indoor - Category I
(b) Indoor - Category II
(c) Indoor - Category III
(d) Indoor - Category IV
(e) Outdoor
Figure 3.14: Bottom-side Convection Heat Loss of Sisimiut Swimming Pool
Between the indoor and the outdoor simulation, the outdoor swimming pool experienced
more heat loss. In the indoor simulations with different ventilation rates, it is observed
that as the ventilation rate goes down, the daily heat loss becomes more ”stable”. This
resulted in category IV with the lowest ventilation rate having the least amount of heat
loss by convection to the bottom of the pool.
IDA-ICE calculates QBottom using the following equation:
QBottom = HC · ABottom · (TBottom −TWater)
(3.1)
where
QBottom is the convection heat loss on the pool’s floor, W
HC is the convection heat transfer constant, set as 350
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
25
==PAGE:30==
ABottom is the pool’s floor area, in this case is 117 m2
TBottom is the temperature of the surface of the pool’s floor, °C
TWater is the pool’s water temperature, °C
From Equation 3.1 and Figure 3.7 it can be seen that because the water temperature
becomes more stable with less ventilation rate—having the least deviations in tempera-
ture to the set temperature—the heat loss becomes more stable in a day-to-day setting,
resulting in having less heat loss.
Similarly, as seen in Figure 3.13b, the convection heat loss on the pool walls QWalls is
calculated using an equation similar to Equation 3.1, presented below:
QWalls = HC · AWalls · (TWalls −TWater)
(3.2)
where
QWalls is the convection heat loss on the pool’s walls, W
HC is the convection heat transfer constant, set as 350
AWalls is the pool’s walls area, in this case is 72.6 m2
TWalls is the temperature of the surface of the pool’s walls, °C
TWater is the pool’s water temperature, °C
In the software, the temperature of the pool’s walls TWalls and the temperature of the
water TWater are always the same, resulting in the variable QWalls to be always 0.
Next, the heat losses on the pool surface are examined. As time goes, the water from
the pool evaporates. The rate of which the water evaporates is denoted as HumF. In the
software, the HumF is calculated following an equation from [12]:
wp = 4 · 10−5 · A · (pw −pa) · Fa
(3.3)
where
wp is the evaporation rate (kg/s)
A is area of pool surface (m2)
pw is the saturation vapor pressure taken at surface water temperature (kPa)
pa is the saturation pressure at room air dew point (kPa)
Fa is the activity factor, shown in Figure 2.13
Figure 3.15 shows the water evaporation rate from the swimming pool.
26
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:31==
(a) Indoor - Category I
(b) Indoor - Category II
(c) Indoor - Category III
(d) Indoor - Category IV
(e) Outdoor
Figure 3.15: Water Evaporation Rate of Sisimiut Swimming Pool
The negative numbers in the graphs mean that the swimming pool is losing water as much
as the numbers shown. The outdoor swimming pool experienced the highest evaporation
rate than an indoor swimming pool, averaging at 0.00975 kg/s. For the indoor swim-
ming pool, a lower ventilation rate lowers the evaporation rate: in category I, the highest
recorded evaporation rate was 0.0074 kg/s while category IV has the highest recorded
evaporation rate of 0.0024 kg/s and 0 kg/s in some instances. These differences can be
explained by examining Equation 3.3, Figure 3.16, and Figure 3.17.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
27
==PAGE:32==
(a) Indoor - Category I
(b) Indoor - Category II
(c) Indoor - Category III
(d) Indoor - Category IV
(e) Outdoor
Figure 3.16: Saturation Vapor Pressures pw (Pa) of Sisimiut Swimming Pool
The saturation vapor pressures pw in both an indoor and outdoor swimming pool are rel-
atively similar, averaging at 3825.6 Pa. This is because the water temperature of the
indoor and outdoor swimming pool are kept at 28 °C. The deviations on the water temper-
atures, shown in Figure 3.4 and Figure 3.7 are congruent with the deviations in saturation
vapor pressures shown in Figure 3.16. As the water temperature goes up, so does the
saturation vapor pressure.
28
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:33==
(a) Indoor - Category I
(b) Indoor - Category II
(c) Indoor - Category III
(d) Indoor - Category IV
(e) Outdoor
Figure 3.17: Saturation Pressures pa (Pa) of Sisimiut Swimming Pool
The saturation pressure pa is the surrounding air pressure on the swimming pool. The
saturation pressure for an outdoor swimming pool is much lower than in an indoor swim-
ming pool. In an indoor swimming pool, less ventilation rate resulted in the building having
higher saturation pressure on average. This difference, more apparent when comparing
the indoor with the outdoor setting, is because more air movement causes lower air pres-
sure. Moreover, in an outdoor condition, there is no building envelope that can ”contain”
the surrounding air. Similar to the vapor saturation pressure, the saturation pressure goes
down as the temperature goes down.
Water evaporates when the saturation pressure is lower than the saturation vapor pres-
sure. Because of the much lower saturation pressure in an outdoor swimming pool com-
pared to its saturation vapor pressure, the outdoor swimming pool experienced a much
higher evaporation rate of water. This also explains the occurrences of 0 kg/s evaporation
rate or no evaporation as seen in Figure 3.15c and Figure 3.15d. Because the saturation
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
29
==PAGE:34==
pressure value became so high that it matched the saturation vapor pressure, no evapo-
ration occurred. Although the differences in the evaporation rate between the conditions
as seen in Figure 3.15 look small, when the evaporation rate is adjusted for a day, it can
mean the swimming pool loses a significant amount of water every day due to evapora-
tion rate. As an example, on a weekend when the pool is unoccupied for 15 hours and
20 minutes, with an average evaporation rate of 0.002 kg/s during unoccupied hours, the
pool lost 110.4 kg of water only during the unoccupied hours.
When the water evaporates, heat is lost from the pool. The heat loss from this evaporation
is denoted as QMoist.
The QMoist is then calculated using the calculated water evaporation rate with the follow-
ing calculation in IDA-ICE:
QMoist = HumF · (HF_V AP + (CP_V AP · TAir))
(3.4)
where
QMoist is the convection heat loss (W)
HumF is the evaporation rate (kg/s)
HF_V AP is the specific heat capacity of water vapor. In IDA-ICE, it is 2.501 · 106
J/kg
CP_V AP is the enthalpy of vaporization for water. IDA-ICE uses 1805 J/kg · K
TSurf is the surface water temperature of the swimming pool
Figure 3.18 shows the convection heat loss QMoist.
30
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:35==
(a) Indoor - Category I
(b) Indoor - Category II
(c) Indoor - Category III
(d) Indoor - Category IV
(e) Outdoor
Figure 3.18: Heat Loss From Evaporation of Sisimiut Swimming Pool
It can be seen that the outdoor swimming pool experienced more heat loss than the indoor
swimming pool. In an indoor setting, the lower the ventilation rate is, the lower the heat
loss, even reaching 0 W of heat loss. These conditions are congruent with Equation 3.4
that shows QMoist is dependent on the evaporation rate and with Figure 3.15 that shows
the evaporation rate in the different settings.
The next heat loss variable to be analysed is QZone. Figure 3.19 shows the heat loss/gain
on the swimming pool. The negative numbers indicate heat loss while positive numbers
indicate heat gain.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
31
==PAGE:36==
(a) Indoor - Category I
(b) Indoor - Category II
(c) Indoor - Category III
(d) Indoor - Category IV
(e) Outdoor
Figure 3.19: Radiation Heat Loss/Gain of Sisimiut Swimming Pool
From the graphs, it can be seen that the outdoor swimming pool experienced only heat
loss while the indoor swimming pool experienced both heat loss and heat gain. Unfortu-
nately, the formula for the calculation of QZone in IDA-ICE couldn’t be found. Judging by
the graph in Figure 3.19e, the heat loss is influenced by the surrounding air temperature
of the swimming pool, as the graph resembles the one in Figure 3.5. However, the QZone
heat loss cannot be influenced only by the surrounding air temperature, as the graphs for
the indoor swimming pool don’t resemble the graphs in Figure 3.9, as the air temperature
of the indoor swimming pool was set to a maximum 28 °C.
Based on the available data, the indoor swimming pool experienced significant radiation
heat loss throughout the year while the indoor swimming pool not only lost a lot less than
the outdoor swimming pool, it experienced heat gains throughout the year.
In IDA-ICE, QZone and QMoist combined make up the surface heat loss, called QSurf in
32
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:37==
the software, defined in the software as ”Dry (QZONE) and moist (QMOIST) heat transfer
to a surface”. Figure 3.20 shows the total heat transfer of the pool’s water surface for
the indoor and outdoor swimming pool respectively. The negative numbers indicate heat
loss.
(a) Category I
(b) Category II
(c) Category III
(d) Category IV
(e) Outdoor
Figure 3.20: Surface Heat Loss/Gain of Sisimiut Swimming Pool
Between the indoor and outdoor swimming pool, the outdoor swimming pool experienced
significantly more heat loss compared to the indoor swimming pool. The outdoor swim-
ming pool experienced up to 168 kW of heat loss while the lowest recorded point was
21 kW of heat loss. Compared to the indoor swimming pool, the highest recorded heat
loss on the surface was 19.2 kW in category I, while category IV experienced heat gain
of up to 1.9 kW. This difference can be attributed to several reasons, such as the ones
discussed before: the outdoor swimming pool experienced significantly more heat loss by
both convection and radiation on the surface, ultimately caused by the fact that the outdoor
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
33
==PAGE:38==
swimming pool doesn’t have the protective building envelope that the indoor swimming
pool has.
In the indoor swimming pool with different categories, the one with the least ventilation
rate (category IV) experienced the least surface heat loss and actually experiencing heat
gain, compared to the ones with higher ventilation rates. As the ventilation rates go lower,
so does the surface heat loss.
3.2.3
Improvement Ideas
From the previous simulations, it was found that condensation occurred even when the
ventilation rate was set to category I. To try to combat that, the ventilation rate was in-
creased. From trial and error, it was discovered that a favorable result in terms of IAQ
was achieved by increasing the ventilation rate during unoccupied hours to 15× that of
the required minimum of 0.15 l/s · m2 to 2.25 l/s · m2, and increasing the ventilation rate
during occupied hours from 3.222 l/s · m2 to 6.556 l/s · m2.
The relative humidity levels inside the building decreased and condensation never oc-
curred throughout the year. The highest recorded relative humidity level was 73.486% in
August, while the relative humidity levels in the colder months were always below 61%,
as shown in Figure 3.21.
Figure 3.21: Relative Humidity Levels of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool Using Increased
Ventilation Rate
To check if there is condensation on the walls and on the windows, the following equation
[21] was used:
td =
B1 · [ln( RH
100 ) + A1·t
B1+t]
A1 −ln( RH
100 ) −A1·t
B1+t
(3.5)
where
34
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:39==
td is the dew point temperature in °C
B1 is a coefficient equal to 243.04°C [22]
RH is the relative humidity level, in %
A1 is a coefficient equal to 17.625 [22]
t is the air temperature in °C
Using Equation 3.5, the dew point temperature can be calculated for every recorded time
in all simulations. The calculated dew point temperatures were then compared to the
surface temperatures of the inside walls and the inside windows of the building. It was
found that no condensation occurred.
The CO2 levels were also seen to be significantly decreased, with the highest recorded
level of 1046.4 ppm, compared to 1715 ppm using the category I ventilation rate for non-
adapted person.
Figure 3.22: CO2 Levels of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool Using Increased Ventilation
Rate
With increased ventilation rate, the energy required also increased. Figure 3.23 shows
the required energy of the swimming pool.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
35
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.23: Energy Use of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool Using Increased Ventilation
Rate
Both the energy required to heat the room and the pool increased: the room now required
18,790 kWh of energy to be heated compared to 9,170 kWh and the pool now required
278,656 kWh of energy to be heated compared to 132,027 kWh. This increased required
energy is still lower compared to operating an outdoor swimming pool, which required
840,048 of energy just to heat the pool water.
As learned from the results of previous simulations, an increased ventilation rate also
increased the heat loss of the swimming pool. This is also true in this case as both the
surface heat loss QSurf of the pool was increased, also evident in the increase of required
energy to heat the swimming pool. The average surface heat loss with the increased
ventilation rate was 15.36 kW, compared to 11.5 kW using the category I ventilation rate
for non-adapted person.
36
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.24: Surface Heat Loss of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool Using Increased Ven-
tilation Rate
A heat pump was then incorporated into the simulation model, replacing the use of the
default standard boiler as the water heater for the swimming pool. The heat pump used
was an idealized air to water heat pump that, like the simulated standard boiler, has an
unlimited heating capacity. The heat pump also has a COP (coefficient of performance)
value of 3.8.
It was found that the heat pump required considerably less energy than when using a
standard boiler, requiring less than half: the energy required when using the heat pump
was 120,868 kWh to heat the pool water while the standard boiler required 278,656 kWh
of energy.
Figure 3.25: Energy Use of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool Using A Heat Pump
This amount of energy was enough to keep the water temperature of the swimming pool
relatively stable at 28°C. From Figure 3.26, it can be seen that the biggest deviation hap-
pened in the month of July where the water temperature went as cold as 27.35°C.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
37
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.26: Water Temperature of Sisimiut Indoor Swimming Pool Using A Heat Pump
38
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:43==
4
Conclusions
Several simulations regarding swimming pools were done using IDA-ICE v4.8 with the Ice
Rinks and Pools extension. These simulations were done with the aim of comparing the
difference in energy use of an indoor and an outdoor swimming pool. The simulations were
set up using information that I have gathered during my time in Sisimiut, Greenland, and
from other sources on the internet. The results of these simulations were then presented
and analyzed to further explain the factors and causes that contributed to the difference
in energy use between an indoor and an outdoor swimming pool.
The first simulation done was the validation case, where an indoor swimming pool identical
with the one used in [7] was modeled on IDA-ICE. The conditions in the simulation in
[7] was replicated as close as possible in IDA-ICE. In [7], it was found that the indoor
swimming pool needed 3,600 kWh of energy in a year to heat the swimming pool to 29°C
and 7,200 kWh of energy in a year to heat the room to 31°C. In IDA-ICE, the same indoor
swimming pool was found to need 3,519 kWh of energy in a year to heat the swimming
pool and 7,701 kWh of energy to heat the room, using a convection heat transfer constant
HC value of 350. Having a relatively close results with the ones in [7], it can be said that
IDA-ICE can give accurate results in simulating the indoor climate and energy use of a
swimming pool.
By using the now-closed outdoor swimming pool in Sisimiut, Greenland as a study case,
the swimming pool was modeled in IDA-ICE. A simulation mimicking the time when the
pool was still open was done, using the months of June-August as its simulation period,
as the swimming pool in Sisimiut was only open during the warmer months. It was found
that the swimming pool needed 155,666 kWh of energy just to keep the swimming pool
at 28°C during its opening period. A second simulation using the same model was done
with the difference of the swimming pool being open all year long. This model was found
to need 840,048 kWh of energy to heat the swimming pool. This second simulation was
also done so that it can be compared to the next simulations involving an indoor swimming
pool, as an indoor swimming pool can be open all year long.
Based on the outdoor swimming pool in Sisimiut, the model was modified to have a simple
building envelope, making it an indoor swimming pool. Being an indoor swimming pool,
now it needed to have ventilation to ensure a good indoor air quality (IAQ). Based on
standards regarding ventilation and indoor air quality of buildings, there were four ventila-
tion rates calculated and used for the simulations, as there are four categories of comfort.
Generally, the results showed that an indoor swimming pool needed significantly less en-
ergy than an outdoor swimming pool. This was mainly because the indoor swimming
pool has a building envelope that ”protects” the surrounding air of the swimming pool.
This building envelope created a controlled indoor air environment that helped lessen the
heat loss by the swimming pool.
For the indoor swimming pool, a total of six variations of the model were simulated. These
variations differ in the ventilation rates according to [9]. The results showed that as the
ventilation rates decreased, so does the energy usage of the swimming pool. This is
because as the ventilation rates decreased, there was less air movement in the building
which in turn decreased the heat loss by the swimming pool. It was found that even by
using the highest minimum ventilation rate required, problems in terms of IAQ, such as
high relative humidity levels and high CO2 levels were not overcome.
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
39
==PAGE:44==
The resulting heat losses from both the indoor and outdoor swimming pool were also
presented and analysed. It was found that in all categories of heat losses, the outdoor
swimming pool experienced higher heat loss than the indoor swimming pool.
The IAQ of the indoor swimming pool was also analysed. The results showed that as
predicted, as the ventilation rates decreased, so does the indoor air quality of the build-
ing. A major problem that was found was condensation: even with the highest minimum
ventilation rate (category I for non-adapted person), condensation still occurred inside the
building which can lead to problems.
Two improvements were implemented in a simulation with the category I ventilation rate
for non-adapted person. The first improvement, increasing the ventilation rate during un-
occupied hours, proved to be successful in overcoming the condensation challenge, albeit
requiring more energy to both heat the pool and the room. The second improvement, im-
plementing the use of an idealized air to water heat pump instead of a standard boiler,
proved to be effective in reducing the overall required energy. By using the heat pump,
the required energy to heat the pool water decreased from 222,277 kWh to 100,714 kWh.
Based on the findings of this thesis, it is recommended that when one is looking to build a
swimming pool in the Arctic, to build an indoor swimming pool since it has been proven to
be more advantageous in energy use, comfortability, and usability (an indoor swimming
pool is able to be used all year long). Moreover, in designing an indoor swimming pool,
special attention is required in certain aspects, such as: building material quality since the
recommended indoor relative humidity levels are higher than most recommended levels,
ventilation rates to ensure a good IAQ in terms of CO2 levels and relative humidity levels
since a swimming pool and swimming activity generate a lot more CO2 and water vapors
than other activities, and the use of energy efficient equipments to help decrease the
energy usage of the swimming pool.
40
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
ARCTIC CENTRE - University of Lapland. Arctic Region. URL: https : / / www .
arcticcentre.org/EN/arcticregion.
[2]
Neloy Khare and Rajni Khare. The Arctic: A Barometer of Global Climate Variability.
Elsevier, 2021. ISBN: 9780128237359. DOI: 10.1016/C2020-0-00373-7.
[3]
Bjarne Grønnow. “Prehistory in Permafrost”. In: Journal of Danish Archaeology 7.1
(Jan. 1988), pp. 24–39. ISSN: 0108-464X. DOI: 10.1080/0108464X.1988.10589995.
[4]
Alison K. Hoagland. “Eskimo Architecture: Dwelling and Structure in the Early His-
toric Period (review)”. In: The Canadian Historical Review 85.2 (2004), pp. 375–
376. ISSN: 1710-1093. DOI: 10.1353/can.2004.0068.
[5]
Statbank Greenland. Exports of fishproducts by unit, product, time and month. URL:
bank.stat.gl.
[6]
Tupilak Gaming. Sisimiut City - Naluttarfik.
[7]
Mark Dannemand et al. “Heating of indoor swimming pools by solar thermal collec-
tors in summerhouses in Denmark”. In: DTU Byg Sagsrapport R-366 (2017). URL:
www.byg.dtu.dk.
[8]
European Standard. DS/EN 16798-1:2019 Energy performance of buildings – Ven-
tilation for buildings. 2019.
[9]
European Standard. “DS/EN 16798-1:2019 NA:2020 Energy performance of build-
ings – Ventilation for buildings”. In: Dansk Standard (2020).
[10]
Dansk Standard. DS 477:2013 Svømmebadsanlæg. 2013.
[11]
Ineqarnermut Attaveqarnermullu Pisortaqarfik - Direktoratet for Boliger og Infras-
truktur. Bygningsreglement 2006. 2006.
[12]
ASHRAE. 2011 ASHRAE Handbook – HVAC Applications. Atlanta: American Soci-
ety of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 2011, p. 5.6.
[13]
Stephen D. Herrmann, Erik A. Willis, and Barbara E. Ainsworth. “The 2024 Com-
pendium of Physical Activities and its expansion”. In: Journal of Sport and Health
Science 13.1 (Jan. 2024), pp. 1–2. ISSN: 20952546. DOI: 10.1016/j.jshs.2023.09.
008.
[14]
Compendium of Physical Activities. Water Activities. Jan. 2024. URL: https : / /
pacompendium.com/water-activities/.
[15]
Svømmehallen MALIK. Svømmehallen MALIK Åbningstider. 2024. URL: https://
malik-nuuk.gl/aabningstider/.
[16]
Bjarne W. Olesen. “Indoor environmental input parameters for the design and as-
sessment of energy performance of buildings”. In: REHVA Journal (Jan. 2015).
[17]
Guillem Richard Naudó and Thomas Ducreux. “Optimization of HVAC systems in
the Arctic, Study of Apisseq dormitory”. PhD thesis. Kongens Lyngby: DTU, June
2019.
[18]
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Mold Course Chapter 2. 2024. URL: https:
//www.epa.gov/mold/mold-course-chapter-2.
[19]
Özgür Küçükhüseyin. “CO￿monitoring and indoor air quality”. In: REHVA Journal
(Feb. 2021), pp. 54–59.
[20]
Douglass E. Root. Designing and Installing Commercial Solar Pool Heating Sys-
tems. Tech. rep. Cape Canaveral: Florida Solar Energy Center, 1983.
[21]
Mark G. Lawrence. “The Relationship between Relative Humidity and the Dewpoint
Temperature in Moist Air: A Simple Conversion and Applications”. In: Bulletin of the
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
41
==PAGE:46==
American Meteorological Society 86.2 (Feb. 2005), pp. 225–234. ISSN: 0003-0007.
DOI: 10.1175/BAMS-86-2-225.
[22]
Oleg A. Alduchov and Robert E. Eskridge. “Improved Magnus Form Approximation
of Saturation Vapor Pressure”. In: Journal of Applied Meteorology 35.4 (Apr. 1996),
pp. 601–609. ISSN: 0894-8763. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0450(1996)035<0601:IMFAOS>
2.0.CO;2.
42
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:47==
A
Sisimiut Swimming Pool Schematics
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
43
==PAGE:48==
44
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:49==
B
Schedules
Figure B.1: Category I (Non-Adapted Person) AHU Schedule
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
45
==PAGE:50==
Figure B.2: Category II (Non-Adapted Person) AHU Schedule
46
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:51==
Figure B.3: Category III (Non-Adapted Person) AHU Schedule
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
47
==PAGE:52==
Figure B.4: Category IV (Non-Adapted Person) AHU Schedule
48
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:53==
Figure B.5: Category I (Adapted Person) AHU Schedule
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
49
==PAGE:54==
Figure B.6: Category II (Adapted Person) AHU Schedule
50
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:55==
Figure B.7: Pool Occupant Schedule
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
51
==PAGE:56==
Figure B.8: Pool Activity Factor Schedule
52
Energy Requirements and Considerations for Swimming Pools in The Arctic
==PAGE:57==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
