==PAGE:1==
Adapting the Argo Technology and 
Strategy for Shelf Observations
Master’s thesis
DTU Aqua
National Institute of Aquatic Resource 
Student: Bodil Toftegård
Supervisor: Colin Stedmon
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
MASTER’S THESIS
Adapting the Argo Technology and Strategy for Shelf
Observations
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
Supervised by: Prof. Colin Stedmon
Co-supervisors: Patrizio Mariani and Fletcher Thompson
ECTS:35
(Received February 2024;)
Abstract
Argo floats are currently delivering the world’s largest ocean data set. The technology was made for the
open ocean but is adapting to marginal seas. This opens up the potential to mitigate the data gaps; for
instance in the Arctic. The Arctic is changing rapidly and to understand what is going on, the impact,
and potential consequences more data is needed. It is especially the shelves regions and areas with sea ice
that lack observations.
In this project, the challenges and potential of using Argo floats for shelf observation have been
investigated. The focus has been on the Northeast Greenland Shelf, where two floats have been deployed
and the Southern Baltic Sea, where one float was deployed.
The identified major challenge for the NEGS is the sea ice. Argo floats can have an ice-sensing
algorithm evaluating the chance of ice at the surface and deciding to abort the ascent. This algorithm has
been analysed to find the best parameterisation for the NEGS, which is a collection zone from 30-5dbar
and a temperature threshold of -1.15◦C. A small design study for a mechanical protection feature has been
conducted as well.
For the deployment in the Baltic Sea, the major concern is drifting ashore. It has therefore been tested
if the float can be remotely piloted with the ocean currents. This proved feasible, but the procedure for
a remote piloting mission should be updated from the one used in the project. The last section in the
rapport discusses recommendations for the next steps in using Argo floats for shelf observation in the areas
of interest.
Signature
Date
© Copyright: Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic citation, including author
attribution, report title, etc.
==PAGE:4==
2
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Contents
Acronyms
4
1
Introduction
5
2
Background
6
2.1
The Areas of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
The Arctic and Northeast Greenland shelf
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Southern Baltic sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
The Argo technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Data processing pipeline for Argo floats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
The Three Oceanographic Revolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
The history of the Argo program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.4
Ice avoidance feature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.5
Ice avoidance ideas and tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.6
Under the ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Challenges and potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Deployments and configurations
22
3.1
Northeast Greenland shelf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Southern Baltic sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Data handling
24
5
Validation
25
5.1
Comparison with ship-borne CTD: Location and time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Sensor accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Absolute error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3.1
Argo 001 - Northeast Greenland Shelf
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3.2
Argo 002 - Northeast Greenland Shelf
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.3
Argo 003 - Baltic Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Conclusion of Argo performance compared with ship-borne CTD . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Analysis of the Ice-Sensing-Algorithm
38
6.1
Conclusion on the Ice-Sensing-Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Design improvements
43
7.1
Specifications and criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Three Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
Concept evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:5==
3
8
Selected results from the Northeast Greenland Shelf
47
8.1
Water layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.2
Chlorophyll-a on the shelf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.3
Backscatter on the shelf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.4
Freshwater content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9
Baltic Sea Float
55
9.1
Bottom-parking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
9.2
Test: Remote piloting part 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
9.2.1
Conclusion of first remote piloting mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
9.3
Test: Remote piloting part 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9.3.1
Conclusion of remote piloting missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
10 Discussion
61
11 Recommendations
63
Acknowledgement
64
References
65
Appendices
68
A
Appendix: Matlab code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B
Appendix: Oxygen conversion and compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C
Appendix: NEGS deployments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
D
Appendix: Images for ice detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
E
Appendix: Design of mechanical protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
F
Appendix: ECO sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Backscatter and Chl-a
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
CDOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
G
Appendix: Remote Piloting - Test 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
H
Appendix: Remote Piloting - Test 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
==PAGE:6==
4
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Acronyms
AMOC Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
APMT Automated Multi-Task Profiler
ARC Argo Regional Center
AW Atlantic Water
CDOM Colored Dissolved Organic Matter
Chl-a Chlorophyll-α
CLS Collecte Localisation Satellite
CTD Conductivity Temperature and Depth profiler
DAC Data Assembly Center
DO Dissolved Oxygen
ECO Environmental Characterization Optics
EGC East Greenland Current
FW Freshwater
FWC Freshwater content
HC Polar Halocline Water
HDPE High-Density Polyethylene
ISA Ice Sensing Algorithm
NEGS Northeast Greenland Shelf
NKE nke instruments (float manufacturers)
NOAS Novel Argo Observing System (French project)
GDAC Global Data Assembly Center
GPS Global Positioning System
OCR Ocean Color Radiometer
RAW Recirculating/Return Atlantic Water
ROFAS (SOFAR backwards) SOund Fixing And Ranging
PW Polar Water
PSW Polar Surface Water
SBE SeaBird CTD sensor
sFTP Secure File Transfer Protocol
SW Surface Water
TS Temperature Salinity
UTC Universal Time Coordinated
==PAGE:7==
5
1.
Introduction
Is the state-of-the art Argo technology ready for the second oceanographic revolution in the Arctic?
Le Traon [2013] defines three revolutions in oceanography; firstly the development and introduction
of high-resolution satellite altimetry, secondly the fleet of Argo floats, thirdly the development of
global operational oceanography, which is closely linked to the first two revolutions. Most of the
global open oceans have been through the second revolution; The Argo-Time. The Argo program
collects data from almost 4000 units around the world yielding a global resolution of oceanographic
observations in real-time [Roemmich et al., 2019]. Nevertheless, researchers are still struggling to
bring marginal and polar oceans into the Argo-Time [Roemmich et al., 2019].
Walczowski et al. [2020] have through a 3-year innovative project overcome some of the issues
of deploying Argo floats in the Baltic Sea. Their efforts have proved the capability of Argo floats is
much larger than just open oceans. The recent focus of Argo technology is to bring them to the
polar regions. An Argo fleet is profiling in the Southern Ocean already, but the Arctic is associated
with greater challenges.
The Arctic region is changing rapidly due to global warming and increasing human activity [Bates
et al., 2010]. A recent study shows that the Arctic is warming almost four times faster than the
rest of the world [Rantanen et al., 2022]. This has a significant effect on the region because it is
based on its cold conditions. The Arctic is hard to monitor due to its remoteness and harsh seasonal
conditions. This causes a data gap, which limits our understanding of the changes and our ability to
make forecasting models [Smith et al., 2019].
Most data in the Arctic is collected on research cruises, by moorings, or through satellite data
[Smith et al., 2019]. Cruises only give one synoptic picture of the state of the ocean during the specific
time of the cruise. The mooring gives good resolution data all year round, but not in real-time, and
they usually have the shallowest sensors at 50m of depth to avoid contact with ice. Properties of the
surface water must therefore be estimated by extrapolation, which introduces large uncertainties.
Satellite data is limited to the surface layers and even more by clouds in the winter period [Le Traon,
2013]. Therefore, there is a great potential for introducing Argo floats in the Arctic.
Argo floats give high-resolution observations in the water column from the bottom of the sea to
the surface. When ice-free they transmit the data and the data can be received in real-time. They
do have a major disadvantage which is caused by the sea ice. If the surface is covered by ice, the
float is not able to transmit data. The float also risks damaging the antenna and the sensors if it
ascents into ice. Argo floats in icy conditions save themselves from colliding with sea ice by an
ice-sensing-algorithm, but this feature needs fine-tuning for the Arctic to be efficient [Roemmich
et al., 2019]. Despite the risk of destroying or losing the Argo floats due to sea ice, many researchers
find it worth it to try and fill the massive data gap in the area.
==PAGE:8==
6
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
This project will evaluate the float operation feasibility on continental shelves. The focus is on the
Northeast Greenland Shelf, where two floats were deployed, and the Baltic Sea, where one float was
deployed. The challenges and potential of using Argo floats in those areas will be investigated. This
will lead to analysis and tests for solutions to the major concerns of deploying Argo floats on those
continental shelves. The problem statement for the project is:
Adapting the Argo Technology and Strategy for Shelf Observations
Figure 1. Argo float deployment in the Fram Strait September 2023
2.
Background
This section will dive deeper into the oceanographic condition of the Northeast Greenland Shelf
and the Southern Baltic Sea, the Argo history and development, and lastly, a section clarifying the
challenges and possibilities of Argo floats on the Northeast Greenland Shelf and the Baltic Sea.
2.1
The Areas of Interest
The project focuses on continental shelf areas. A shelf is an underwater plateau extended from the
coast ranging in depth but significantly shallower than the ocean interior. During this project, three
Argo float have been deployed, two on the Northeast Greenland shelf and one in the Baltic Sea.
These specific areas are therefore in focus. Firstly I’ll focus on the Northeast Greenland shelf and to
understand the importance of this area we need to understand some aspects of the Arctic.
==PAGE:9==
7
2.1.1
The Arctic and Northeast Greenland shelf
The Arctic is in rapid change due to climate change. One of the major changes is the hydrological
cycle and the freshwater budget [Carmack et al., 2016]. Increased precipitation and melting of
ice increase the liquid freshwater content in the Arctic. The consequences of the increased liquid
freshwater may also have an impact on the subpolar regions. One of the major concerns nowadays is
the coupling between the Arctic and the subpolar region where the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC) forms deep water [Haine et al., 2023]. The process of deep water formation is
sensitive to freshwater because the freshwater lowers the surface density and might, as a consequence,
hinder water from sinking. The increasing freshwater content of the Arctic has therefore fueled
much speculation on the future of the AMOC. To fully understand what is going on and to have an
idea of which speed and severity these impacts occur we need to collect more data. The models we
have tend to underestimate the the freshwater content, so to be able to better quantify the freshwater
content and flux we need more observations [Hoffman et al., 2023].
(a) Schematic of surface circulation in the Arctic with
a close-up of the Fram Strait. The red arrows indicate
Atlantic water (AW) and the purple indicates pathways
of freshwater, where the Beaufort Gyre (BG), Canadian
Basin (CB), Eurasian Basin (EB), and Canadian Arctic
Archipelago (CAA) are marked on the map. The dashed
purple line on the NEGS indicates a potential freshwater
transport there. [Karpouzoglou et al., 2022].
(b) Schematic of surface circulation in the Fram Strait and
Northeast Greenland Shelf. The main circulation features are
the East Greenland Current system (EGC) shown in purple, the
Norwegian Atlantic Current (NAC), and the West Spitsbergen
Current (WSC). The WSC and NAC merge while going north, but
also form the Recirculating Atlantic Water (RAW). On the shelf
there is also the south-going Polar Surface water jet (PSW jet)
[Gjelstrup et al., 2022].
Figure 2. The ocean currents in the Arctic and a close-up on the Fram Strait and the Northeast Greenland Shelf
==PAGE:10==
8
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
The Arctic has two main gateways of polar water, namely the Davis Strait and the Fram Strait [Haine
et al., 2023]. The Fram Strait is the largest and the only one with deep water exchange [Gjelstrup
et al., 2022], it is also where 90% of the sea-ice export from the Arctic occurs [Serreze et al., 2006].
The flow of polar water is marked with purple arrows and the outflow from the Arctic is around
Greenland as shown in figure 2.
Two factors of the freshwater budget that need to be understood are the storage in the Arctic,
which mostly happens in the Beaufort Gyre (BG) [Haine et al., 2015], and the flux between the
Arctic and the subpolar region.
Freshwater content
To understand the freshwater budget in the Arctic many quantifications are applied, to mention a
few; the freshwater content (FWC), and the freshwater flux/transport (FWT). The FWC can be
estimated by eq. (1) giving the content in m:
FWC =
Z Z1
Z0
Sref – S(z)
Sref
dz
(1)
Where S is the salinity and Sref is the reference salinity typically set to 34.8 for the Arctic Ocean
[Aagaard and Carmack, 1989]. Z0 is the surface and Z1 is the polar water depth, characterized by
T < 0◦C [Karpouzoglou et al., 2022]. The FWC can also be integrated over a transect adding one
more dimension. The freshwater flux is the transport of freshwater typically measured in volume
per time unit.
A study by Hoffman et al. [2023] evaluates models and observations and concludes that most models
underestimated the FWC in the Arctic. Figure 3 displays different estimations of FWC in the Arctic
in 2017 by observation, models, and reanalysis products. Due to the focus of the project, I want to
highlight the Fram Strait and Northeast Greenland region. The estimations range from close to 0 up
to 10m of FWC which is quite a large interval. With the eq. (1) the same estimate will be made
with the data collected in this project for a small comparison. All models build on data and formulas.
A way to improve them is to collect more data, especially in regions with sparse amounts of data.
The Arctic in general and the Northeast Greenland shelf in particular are such regions mainly due to
their remoteness and harsh seasonal conditions, with sea ice many months of the year.
==PAGE:11==
9
Figure 3. Average FWC [m] of the Arctic Ocean in 2017. Contours are every 2 m [Hoffman et al., 2023]. (a) EN41 is a data set
based on in-situ measurements spanning from 1900 to the present. (b) Estimating the Circulation and Climate of the Ocean
(ECCO)2 is an American ocean circulation model that uses global ocean data sets. (c) Nucleus for European Modelling of the
Ocean (NEMO)3 is a European modeling framework. (d) Marginal Ice Zone Modeling and Assimilation System (MIZMAS)4 is
a model for the transition region from open water to pack ice. (e) Ocean Reanalysis System 5 (ORAS5)5 is a global eddy-
permitting ocean-sea ice ensemble reanalysis analysis system. (f) Global Ocean Physics Reanalysis (GLORYS12)6 is a global
eddy-resolving physical ocean and sea ice reanalysis that builds on NEMO. (g) Simple Ocean Data Assimilation (SODA)7 is an
ocean reanalysis data set based solely on observations or numerical simulations.
Fram Strait
One major initiative for monitoring the freshwater flux through the Fram Strait is the Fram Strait
Arctic Outflow Observatory (FSAOO). The program has run since 1997 and is still active with
annual cruises. The core of the program is moorings on the western side of the Fram Strait and
CTD station across the Fram Strait and on the Northeast Greenland Shelf. The moorings collect
data all year round and are recovered once a year around August/September. In figure 4 the different
activities for Fram Strait Cruise 2023 are shown.
1https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climate-data/en4-subsurface-temperature-and-salinity-global-oceans
2https://ecco-group.org/
3https://www.nemo-ocean.eu/
4https://psc.apl.uw.edu/research/projects/mizmas/
5https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/dataset/ocean-reanalysis-system-5
6https://data.marine.copernicus.eu/product/GLOBAL_MULTIYEAR_PHY_001_030
7http://www.soda.umd.edu/
==PAGE:12==
10
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Figure 4. Map of the cruise plan for Fram Strait 2023. Mooring locations are shown as red dots, CTD stations as yellow dots,
targeted sea ice stations as blue, and Argo float deployments are shown as green dots. The planned Argo float deployments
are on 9W and 11W and approximately 79N. A CTD cast will be made together with the float deployments for comparison of
sensor data. Source: Cruise plan for Fram Strait 2023
The Fram Strait is characterized by a northward flow of Atlantic water (AW) on the eastern side of
the basin facilitated by the Norwegian Atlantic Current (NAC) combined with the West Spitsbergen
Current (WSC), as well as a southward flow of Polar water (PW) on the western part of the strait
with the East Greenland Current (EGC) [Gjelstrup et al., 2022] (visualised in figure 2b). The AW
can be defined as S > 34.4 and T > 0◦C and PW as S < 34.4 and T < 0 deg C [Gjelstrup et al.,
2022]. PW has various sources where the freshest version is influenced by meteoric water, meaning
everything that came from the atmosphere; precipitation and river run-off, and sea ice melt [Dodd
et al., 2012]. Polar water can also be denser, where it is more influenced by brine-rejection and
Pacific water that has traveled across the Arctic, in this case, the water will be cold and more saline.
The amount of Pacific water found in the outflow through the Fram Strait varies a lot from year to
year [Dodd et al., 2012]. A study by Karpouzoglou et al. [2022] uses the data from the FSAOO from
2015-2019 and shows that the salinity stratification has increased by 0.63 psu between 155 and 55m,
the PW layer has become thinner by 40-50m and the Polar-Atlantic front has moved ∼10km west
in 2015. Overall the Polar outflow has decreased and the effects are pointing to an Atlantification of
the western part of the Fram Strait. Karpouzoglou et al. [2022] links the uncertainties of the results
to the amount of instruments they have and highlights the lack of observation on the shelf.
==PAGE:13==
11
Northeast Greenland Shelf
The Northeast Greenland continental shelf (NEGS) is the western boundary of the Fram Strait. It
spans from 20°W–5°W and 74°N–81°N and extends more than 300 km from the coastline and the
depth ranges from 50-300m [Arndt et al., 2015]. On the NEGS there are typically three layers of
water; the surface mixed layer, a polar water layer, and at the bottom Atlantic water. The coastline
consists of fjords and marine-terminating glaciers leading to freshwater supply. Arndt et al. [2015]
study on the bathymetry shows the many troughs on the seabed which can lead Atlantic water to the
glaciers causing basal melting. The shelf is covered by sea ice most of the year with large seasonal
and annual variations [Hansen et al., 2015]. During the summer the sea ice melts and the month
with the least ice is typically August and September. There tends to be a belt of ice along the shelf
slope transported with the cold polar water in the EGC. On the central part of the shelf, ice-free
water tends to show for some months. Closer to the coast the land-fast ice covers part of the sea all
year round [Hvidegaard et al., 2008]. The sea ice is the one major concern for deploying Argo floats
on the shelf.
2.1.2
Southern Baltic sea
Moving to a different part of the globe is the Baltic Sea. It can also be considered a shelf area due to
its proximity to land and shallow depths. The Baltic Sea is a unique ocean that is semi-enclosed and
highly influenced by its surroundings. The catchment area is very large compared to the size of the
reservoir and supplies the Baltic Sea with fresh water and nutrients [Szymczycha et al., 2019]. This
causes stratification and eutrophication. The ecological state of the Baltic Sea is bad and there is a great
interest in monitoring the sea [HELCOM, 2023]. The sea is surrounded by 9 nations and is highly
affected by marine activities such as shipping and fishing [HELCOM, 2023]. The eutrophication
tends to cause hypoxia [Conley et al., 2009] in the bottom water and the stratification limits the
mixing of newly oxygenated surface water [Szymczycha et al., 2019]. The typical water layering in
the Southern Baltic Sea is a low-salinity (6-8 psu) surface layer reaching around 50dbar and a more
saline (10-16psu) and warm layer at the bottom influenced by the Atlantic water [Szymczycha et al.,
2019]. The difference in salinity creates a very strong halocline. The typical supply of oxygen to the
bottom water comes with occasional inflow from the North Sea.
The Baltic Sea is being monitored in many different ways, to mention a few; regular research
cruises to specific stations, surface buoys, and Argo floats. Poland and Finland are the leading
investigators in using Argo floats in the Baltic Sea and have tested many aspects of using them
[Merchel et al., 2024]. Figure 5 shows a map of Argo floats in the Baltic Sea. All dots are float
deployments and only the yellows are still active. We have deployed an Argo float on the green star
and will test the feasibility of using the Argo technology there. The biggest concerns are marine
traffic and drifting. We want to keep the float in the Arkona basin and away from the coast.
==PAGE:14==
12
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Figure 5. Map of the Baltic Sea and its surroundings. The gray dots represent locations where Argo floats have been
deployed. The yellow dots are Argo float deployments where the float is still active [Merchel et al., 2024]. The green star is
the deployment location of DTU’s float, which has been deployed as part of this project.
2.2
The Argo technology
Argo floats are autonomous profiling devices that collect oceanographic data. They can move up and
down in the water column by inflating or deflating a bladder with oil. A typical profile for an Argo
float is shown in figure 6. The float descends to a drifting depth of normally 1000m, drifts for ∼10
days, then descends to 2000m or near the bottom and ascent straight after, measuring parameters
such as depth, salinity, and temperature on the way. Newer floats can be equipped with additional
sensors or a camera and can measure oxygen content, chlorophyll-a, CDOM, backscatter, irradiance,
nutrients, and pH. These types of floats are referred to as biogeochemical (BGC) Argo. Other floats
are specialized to go deeper than 2000m meters and these are called Deep Argo. The standard float
is called the Core Argo.
==PAGE:15==
13
Figure 6. On a typical float profile, it will descend to a drifting depth of normally 1000m, drift for ∼10 days, then descend to
2000m or near the bottom and ascent straight after, measuring parameters such as depth, salinity, and temperature on the
way. At the surface, it will acquire a GPS coordinate and transmit the data. It will then be receptive to new commands or
continue on the pre-planned mission. Source: https://www.euro-argo.eu/
2.2.1
Data processing pipeline for Argo floats
Argo float data is available for everyone for free, which was part of the concept from the beginning.
The Argo data goes through several steps from when it is transmitted at the ocean surface to when it
reaches scientists and operational centers. The flowchart in figure 7 shows the primary steps. Orange
boxes are data centers, orange arrows and wireless icons are data transfers, and blue arrows show the
flow to scientists and operational centers. The purple box represents my local computer, the green
box is the connection users can make to access raw data.
The data generated by the Argo floats are transmitted via satellite connection to a CLS data
center (CLS: Collecte Localisation Satellite). This data center can be accessed with an sFTP client
and the raw data can be withdrawn and new configurations can be sent (green box). This is an
unconventional way of getting the data. The normal flow of data is through the Data Assembly
Centers (DACs), where the data is available within 12h. Here the data goes through an automatic
Real-Time Quality Control (RTQC) and within 24h the data is available on the Global Data Assembly
Centers GDAC for everybody. It is also from the GDAC that OceanOps.org collects the data and
makes it available. A second Delayed-Mode Quality-Control (DMQC) happens within 12 months
where experts validate the data and it gets updated on the DACs, GDACs, and becomes available on
Argo Regional Centers (ARC).
Scientists and operational centers normally use the data from GDAC, OceanOps, and ARC. The
reason we used it directly from the CLS database is to be able to alter the mission immediately
depending on real-time data.
==PAGE:16==
14
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Figure 7. A flowchart of the data pipeline for Argo float data from the transmission at sea to the users. The orange boxes
represent data centers, orange arrows and wireless icons are data transfers, and blue arrows show the flow to scientists
and operational centers. The purple box represents my local computer, the green box is the connection users can make to
access raw data. The data goes through automatic Real-Time Quality Control within 24h at the DACs. Within 12 months the
data goes through a Delayed Mode Quality Control and gets updated on the DACs, GDACs and ARCs.
2.2.2
The Three Oceanographic Revolutions
The Argo program has revolutionized the oceanographic research sector [Le Traon, 2013]. They,
along with satellite altimetry, have made 3D mesoscale observation possible. Le Traon [2013] have
defined three revolutions in oceanography; firstly the satellite altimetry which allowed researchers to
gain insight into large-scale sea levels and ocean circulation dynamics. The first dedicated ocean
observation satellite was deployed in 1992, mission Topex/Poseidon. The altimetry observation
was significantly improved with the array of Argo floats allowing in situ observation of the water
column down to 2000m, leading to an understanding of the global ocean circulation and heat budget.
The second revolution, by Le Traon, is therefore "The Argo Time", starting in 1999. The third
revolution is the possibility of global operational oceanography, by gaining near-real-time data from
satellites and Argo floats on a global scale and at a high resolution [Le Traon, 2013].
==PAGE:17==
15
2.2.3
The history of the Argo program
The concept of Argo was initiated by Dean Roemmich and Ray Schmitt in 1998. They had two
independent projects called "A Proposal for Global Ocean Observations for Climate: the Array
for Real-time Geostrophic Oceanography" (ARGO), and "A program for Global Ocean SAlinity
MonitORing" (GOSAMOR) which was very positively received by the oceanographic community
[Boebel et al., 1998]. The Upper Ocean Panel of Climate Variability and Predictability (CLIVAR)
declared that such an initiative must be given high priority in the CLIVAR Implementation plans.
CLIVAR and Global Ocean Data Assimilation Experiment (GODAE) started the Argo Science Team
at a workshop in Tokyo in July 1998, their role was to make the initial design and an implementation
plan, they were later known as the Argo Steering Team [Roemmich et al., 2022]. The data assembly
was organized by Global Data Assembly Centers (GDACs) and all data was made available and free to
everybody [Wong et al., 2020]. The Argo Science Team outlined the scientific and technical require-
ments for Argo, which is listed in the document "On The Design and Implementation of Argo - A
Global Array of Profiling Floats" [Boebel et al., 1998]; The main scientific design requirement was to
cover the upper 2000m of the global ocean with a focus on salinity and temperature. They should also
work in connection with altimetric data to enhance the modeling potential of climate-relevant signals
seen by the present altimeter data. They are viewed as a great potential for constraints on ocean
models, determining temperature and salinity covariances, and model initialisation. A simulation
study showed that 3300 units would be desired for global coverage when dividing the ocean into
3◦× 3◦squares [Boebel et al., 1998]. As for technical requirements, there were five focus areas. The
deployment technique, the deployment strategy, the communication, the parking/profiling depths,
and the data assembly and quality control [Boebel et al., 1998]. These focus areas will be kept in mind
in this project as well. The first float was deployed in 1999 and by 2007 the program reached the goal
of 3300 units. Now more than 2 million profiles have been made and the international initiative is
thriving [Roemmich et al., 2022]. Many improvements have been made to the technology since the
beginning and the potential of the Argo floats has significantly increased [Roemmich et al., 2019].
Currently, the array of Argos is just under 4000 units. Argos come in a lot of different varieties
and are divided into three groups, Core Argo, Deep Argo, and Biogeochemical (BGC) Argo. The
technology has become much more efficient over the years. Batteries are better and sensors use
less power, which allows longer battery life, more frequent profiles, and additional sensors. The
communication has improved from needing a day at the surface for transmission to around 30 minutes.
All these improvements have made it possible to adapt the Argo program from mainly open ocean to
marginal seas as well.
Walczowski et al. [2020] made a three-year project to adapt the Argo technology to the Baltic
Sea. He saw great potential for monitoring the state of the Baltic Sea with Argo floats. Walczowski
and his team made many important discoveries as part of the project [Walczowski et al., 2020]. One
problem was the strong halocline in the Baltic Sea, which they solved by using NKE’s profiling
floats since they had a significantly larger bladder and were therefore able to control a much wider
==PAGE:18==
16
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Figure 8. The operational Argo floats January 2024. The current fleet is 3879 units. Colours indicated the type of float in
regards to sensors. Source: https://www.ocean-ops.org/board
buoyancy interval. They also discovered that bottom parking was fairly safe and it mitigated the the
floats from drifting away too fast and potentially towards shore [Merchel et al., 2024].
2.2.4
Ice avoidance feature
The recent focus of improvement in the Argo community is the Ice Avoidance feature because
the areas that most lack observation nowadays are the polar ones, specifically the ones with sea ice.
Modern Argo float has the option of being equipped with an ice detection feature. It consists of three
trigger points ("flags"), if one is detected the float will dive again and make a new cycle as illustrated
in figure 9. The first trigger is an ice-sensing algorithm (ISA), that evaluates the temperature in a
pre-selection collection zone in the surface water and alarms if the temperature is below a pre-set
threshold, this is called the ISA flag. The second trigger is if the float is trying to ascend, but does not
move shallower even though not at the surface, hence it is stuck under ice, this is called the collision
flag. The last trigger is if the float is trying to gain a satellite connection at the surface, but is not
able to, hence an ice cover might be there, this is called the cover flag.
==PAGE:19==
17
Figure 9. Argo float ice detection. The ISA flag is when the Ice-Sensing-Algorithm detects a temperature lower than the
pre-set threshold within the collection zone. The Collision flag is when the float is trying to ascend, but does not move
shallower. The Cover flag is when the float is trying to gain satellite connection, but is not successful. Source: NKE manual
for APMT Under Ice Capabilities
ISA has been proven successful in the Antarctic, but less mature for the Arctic, and more dedicated
work is necessary to adapt the floats for sea ice zones in the Arctic [Roemmich et al., 2022]. When
the ISA does not flag, floats risk collision with the ice, which puts the antenna and sensors at risk.
The time it takes for the float to detect either collision or cover will let the float drag under the ice.
To decrease the risk of damage to the antenna and sensors few early-stage protection solutions have
been designed and tested.
2.2.5
Ice avoidance ideas and tests
Upward-looking acoustic altimeter + metal frame
In 2010, the 10-year French project, Novel Argo Observing System (NOAS), started. They had a
focus on improving the Argo floats and expanding their possibilities [André et al., 2020]. One of the
areas to improve was the ice avoidance strategy. They focused on both improving the Ice-Sensing-
Algorithm and developing a hardware-based solution.
They attached an acoustic altimeter facing upward on the float as shown in figure 10a. The altimeter
had a range of 100m and a resolution of 1cm. It was tested on 14 floats in Baffin Bay and the altimeter
data along with the float pressure measurements was used to measure the draught. The results
showed that the altimeter itself would not have stopped the floats because the measurements are
highly variable within one profile. The risk of a false detection of ice is too high compared to the
risk of encountering an iceberg. They do state that with a more precise pressure gauge, it could be
possible to estimate ice thickness with the altimeter. Figure 10a also shows the metal frame that is
mounted to physically protect the antenna and sensors. The overall evaluation of the metal cage and
altimeter is an overconsumption of 6 kJ pr profile due to additional oil volume needed to emerge at
the surface. The metal cage also increases the risk of being stuck to the ice in case of collision.
==PAGE:20==
18
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
(a) One of NOAS ice avoidance methods is an acoustic
altimeter and a metal cage for physical protection. Left
isthefieldtrialattheGreenEdgeicecamp(courtesyofC.
Marec). Right is s Pro-Ice float design with a metal cage
to protect the antenna and upward-looking altimeter
(PSA-916, acoustic beam in red) [André et al., 2020].
(b) Four scenarios of sea ice and ISA detection. NoIce_NoISA is
the probability of having no sea ice and negative ISA, NoIce_ISA
isnoicebutpositiveISAdetection, Ice_ISAisseaiceandpositive
ISA, and Ice_NoISA is when there is ice sea but no detection
by ISA. Two collection zones were tested; from 50 to 20 dbars
(dashed lines), and from 30 to 10 dbars (solid lines). The chosen
thresholdBaffinBayis–1.3◦C(graydashedline)andacollection
zone from 30-10 dbars [André et al., 2020].
Figure 10. Project NOAS’s take on sea ice avoidance
In figure 10b a test of the ISA parameters was conducted. The original algorithm set-up, which is
well tested in the southern ocean, has a measuring zone from 50-30 dbar and a temperature threshold
of -1.79◦C. This was not considered suitable for Baffin Bay, or the Arctic Ocean in general, due to
the large amount of freshwater inlets and cold polar water [Curry et al., 2014]. NOAS investigated
the ISA detections and sea ice concentrations to evaluate how often the float detection was correct
according to the real scenario. They used satellite images of sea ice concentrations with a threshold
of 10%. Four outcomes were possible; positive ISA detection and sea ice (=Ice_ISA), positive ISA
detection and no sea ice (=NoIce_ISA), no ISA detection but sea ice (=Ice_NoISA), and lastly no ISA
detection and also no sea ice (=NoIce_NoISA). They tested for both a sample zone from 50-20dbars
(dashed lines) and from 30-10dbars (solid lines). The conclusion of André et al. [2020] was to use a
temperature threshold of -1.3◦C and a measuring range of 30-10 dbar. In this case, the probability
of the most dangerous scenario, sea ice but no ISA detection (Ice_NoISA), was only 3.5% and the
probability of no sea ice but positive ISA detection (NoIce_ISA) was 8.4%. The probabilities of the
same scenarios with the measuring range from 50-20dbars would give 3.5% for Ice_NoISA and 45%
for NoIce_ISA.
Optical sensor
Another feature tested during NOAS, was an optical detection based on laser reflection in the ice
[Lagunas-Morales et al., 2018].
==PAGE:21==
19
Figure 11. Left: shows the optics and electronics of the detector. Center: shows the pressure housings in Titanium and
the HDPE mounting collar. Right: shows the sea-ice detection system mounted on a BGC-Argo float deployed in the Arctic
Ocean [Lagunas-Morales et al., 2018].
Lagunas-Morales et al. [2018] designed a system able to detect ice from a 12m distance. They
specifically took energy consumption, hydrodynamics, and buoyancy into account. The design
is shown in figure 11. It was mounted on one float and deployed in the period 10th of July 2016
to 31st of October 2016. The period was ice-free and the float was unfortunately lost during the
overwintering, so no data on the sensor performance as an ice-detection method is available. The
Euro-Argo Rise report from 2022 states that they planned new deployments in 2018 and 2019, but
no updates on the project seem to be available.
Internal shock sensor
During the NAOS project, an internal shock sensor based on acceleration was tested on one float
[André et al., 2020]. The sensor results were too difficult to interpret and the design did not fulfill
the main goal of detecting ice before contact.
2.2.6
Under the ice
Argo floats made for spending time under sea ice are normally equipped with an extra memory
card to store data during the overwintering. In this period the float will not transmit data or get
a GPS location. Once the float gets in contact with a satellite again it will transmit all the sensor
data, but will not have the location of the profiles under the ice. To estimate the subsurface locations,
many different methods have been tested. The default and simplest is a linear interpolation from
the last surface location to the next. It is not very accurate, but is easy to apply. In the Southern
Ocean, almost 31000 profiles with no measured position have been produced [Oke et al., 2022].
This has given a great motivation for finding a way to estimate the trajectories of the floats under
the ice. Oke et al. [2022] have developed a method that combines several other studies. They use
multiple constraints: potential vorticity (f/H: f=Coriolis parameter, H=bottom depth), sea-level, and
density at 1000m, and choose the shortest path estimated by these factors. This method requires
adequate data on the parameters in the area and the less accuracy of the data the more error in the
trajectory estimates. Figure 12a shows a test of the method where the actual surface locations are
shown with green, the linear trajectory with cyan, and the estimated with black. It is clear that the
multiple-constraint method is better than linear interpolation.
==PAGE:22==
20
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
(a) Examples of the use of the multiple-constraint method
(black) for trajectory estimations compared with actual GPS
locations (green) and linear interpolation (cyan). The starting
position is marked with a green circle and the end with a green
diamond. Each position gap is 180 days (except panel (h),
which is 90 days). The average position error between the GPS
and the estimated positions is shown at the top of each panel,
and in the parentheses is for the linear approach [Oke et al.,
2022].
(b) One example of the bathymetry-constraint method
where red is linear interpolation, yellow is depth-
constraint, and green and depth- and iceberg drift-
constraint. The top figure shows the estimated trajecto-
ries and the bottom shows the depths for the profiles,
where black is the actual recorded depth [Wallace et al.,
2020].
Figure 12. Examples of the multiple-constraint and bathymetry-constraint methods for estimation trajectories under the
ice. Both methods clearly give more accurate estimates than the linear interpolation approach.
Another method is the bathymetry-constraint, which is tested by Wallace et al. [2020]. It builds on
high-resolution bathymetry maps and floats that "park" on the sea bed. This method was tested with
floats on the Adélie Land Shelf in Antarctica and proved very sufficient in predicting the trajectory. It
is limited by cases of constant water depths but can be combined with other estimation methods which
could increase the accuracy. Figure 12b shows one example of the use of the method there the red line
is linear interpolation, yellow is bathymetry-constrained, and green is bathymetry-constrained and
ice-berg drifting constrained. The bottom plot shows the depth of the profiles and it is clear that the
linear interpolation does not fit well and the bathymetry-constrained method gives a better estimation.
A study by Klatt et al. [2007] tested acoustic tracking of floats. They had deployed three moored
sound sources and the test Argo floats were equipped with receivers, referred to as ROFAS Argos. In
figure 13a the sound sources are marked as red dots and five ROFAS floats’ trajectories are shown in
different colors. With the three sound transmitters, they could triangulate the location of the floats
during drifting. This was tested before floats were improved with larger memory for storing data
during under ice period, but the estimated trajectories between known surface locations show that
the method was successful (shown in figure 13b). They estimated the range of the method to be at
least 500km showing a great potential for utilization [Klatt et al., 2007].
==PAGE:23==
21
(a) The estimated trajectories of five ROFAS floats in the
Weddell Sea in 2002-2004. The tracks are found based
on triangulation with sound sources and receivers on
the floats. The red dots, W1-W3, indicate the position of
the sound sources. The estimated range is found to be
at least 500km [Klatt et al., 2007].
(b) The trajectory of a ROFAS float from 21/4-2004
to 30/5-2005. The red dots are the estimated subsur-
face locations. The black dots are the surface GPS
location with profile no. The float was not equipped
with extra internal memory so data collected under
the ice was not saved and transmitted, hence the
gap from profile 4 to 19 [Klatt et al., 2007].
Figure 13. Experimentation with acoustic tracking of Argo floats for positioning on the subsurface trajectory in the Weddell
Gyre [Klatt et al., 2007]. The estimated trajectory seems to fit fairly well with the surface position.
This shows that acoustic tracking could be used for estimating the location of floats under sea ice.
The other methods require high-resolution data on the parameters used as constraints whereas
the acoustic tracking does not rely on that. It will require more thorough planning before the
deployment and a larger investment in instruments because the floats need hydrophones and an
adequate amount of sound sources have to be deployed.
2.3
Challenges and potential
To sum up this section, we have demonstrated a great need for more observations in the Arctic.
Especially the NEGS is undersampled and models tend to underestimate the fresh water content.
More observation will make it possible to better understand what is going on in the Arctic and also
what consequences the changes can have both in the Arctic and the sub-polar region and potentially
on the global climate.
Argo floats are currently delivering the largest ocean dataset and are evolving and becoming
more suitable for marginal seas. The major challenges in the Baltic Sea are the strong halocline,
the proximity to land, and the marine traffic. Bottom parking is an important feature for Baltic Sea
deployments to try and keep the float from drifting too far. For Arctic float deployments, sea ice is the
major concern. Different ice protection means have been tested, but none have been efficient enough
to be implemented as a standard feature. Individual users still make and test their own mechanical
protection features when they deploy in the Arctic. The ISA is the only current ice protection feature
floats have per default, and it is well-tested in the Southern Ocean but still needs fine-tuning for the
Arctic.
==PAGE:24==
22
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
In this project, I will first assess the Argo float’s sensor performance compared with ship-borne CTDs.
Then for the NEGS floats the biggest concern is sea ice, so I will evaluate the ISA and make a small
design study of mechanical protection. Some selected results from the NEGS will be presented. In
the Baltic Sea, the major concern is the float drifting ashore. So this float will be used to test the
feasibility of remotely piloting the float away from the coast with the help of ocean currents. In that
way, I assess the potential of Argo float observations and the major concerns of shelf deployments in
the areas of interest.
3.
Deployments and configurations
Argo floats are configured with a mission before deployment. The configuration can be changed
remotely after deployment by uploading _command.txt files to the CLS server. For each deployment,
we have pre-planned three different patterns to switch between. First, a quick profiling mode to
check if everything works as it should. Second, a 5-hour pattern while still in the area. Last, is a 5-day
pattern which is the long-term configuration. It is shorter than the normal Argo configurations
(∼10days), but our floats are in much shallower waters.
3.1
Northeast Greenland shelf
Figure 14 shows the AMPT GUI software, made by NKE, to design a mission. In this picture, all
three patterns are activated to visualize them better. During the mission, only one of them is active
at the time.
Figure 14. The configuration patterns for the NEGS deployments. Three patterns were prepared; first a quick profiling
pattern to the bottom and straight back up, P1, then a 5-hour pattern, making profiles with a short bottom-parking interval,
P2, and lastly a long-term configuration with bottom parking and a cycle of 5 days, P3. The figure visualises all three patterns,
but only one will be active at the time on the float. The ISA was activated on P2, with a collection zone from 30-5dbar and a
temperature threshold of -1.7◦C.
==PAGE:25==
23
The first pattern, P1, is set to a depth much deeper than on the shelf and a duration of 0h. It is
configured to ascent as soon as it detects the bottom. This setup didn’t work as desired because the
float did not descend to the bottom on all profiles. Therefore, we quickly swift to pattern 2, P2,
where the float is forced to use 5 hours on a profile. That means the float will bottom-park for a short
period before ascending. When activating pattern 2, we also activated the Ice-Sensing-Algorithm
with a collection zone from 30-5dbar and a threshold of -1.7◦C. Float 001 was covered with ice
short after the activation to P2, so we did not have a chance to change to P3. Float 002 was changed
to P3 after a few days. A logbook of the deployment is attached in Appendix C.
3.2
Southern Baltic sea
The same idea of pre-planning three patterns was applied to the Baltic Sea deployment.
Figure 15. The configuration patterns for the Baltic Sea deployments. Three patterns were prepared; first, a quick 3h pattern
going to bottom and back up, P1, second, a 1-day pattern where the float ascents at 12UTC, P2, and lastly a 5 days pattern
also ascending at 12UTC, P3. The figure visualises all three patterns, but only one will be active at the time on the float.
The patterns are more shallow, going to 100dbar, which is still deeper than the actual depth. Pattern
1, P1, was set to 3h, which made the float make quick profiles. For the first profiles, the float was
not able to reach the bottom because the strong density gradient activated the bottom detection.
After a few alterations in the configuration the float started to reach the bottom and the mission was
changed to pattern 2, P2, where the float ascents once a day at 12UTC. This float is equipped with a
light sensor so it was important to make profiles in daylight. For the duration of the cruise (∼8days),
the float kept profiling once a day and after the cruise, we changed to configuration to surfacing
every 5 days at 12UTC.
==PAGE:26==
24
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
4.
Data handling
The float transmits the data every time it’s at the surface. The raw data are downloaded from the
CLS server (see flowchart figure 7) and decoded to *.csv files. The sensor files and the technical files,
that contain surface location and time, are imported into MatLab. In Matlab, the data is processed in
four major steps and the result is one matrix containing all relevant information for all profiles made
by one float. The process is done individually for the three floats.
Figure 16. A flowchart of the data handling and processing. The raw files are converted from .hex to .csv with the NKE
decoder software. The sensor and technical files are then imported into Matlab. In Matlab four major data processing steps
are conducted; first, the data is interpolated to every 0.2dbar, then all sensors data, time, and locations are merged into one
matrix. Thirdly, the oxygen data is converted from phase angle to concentrations and compensated for salinity, temperature,
and depth. Lastly, other relevant parameters and unit-formats are derived.
The data acquisition is set to 0.2dbar, but is not exact. The first step in the data processing is to
interpolate the SBE (CTD) data to be exactly every 0.2dbar. These depths are then used to interpolate
the data from the other sensors. When all data points are at the same depths the sensors’ data is
merged into one matrix, the second step. The merged matrix also contains the surface location and
time and the mode/stage the float is operating (descent, parking, ascent). The oxygen sensor output
is in phase angles, so to convert it into engineering units a procedure made by the manufacturer is
used, see Appendix B. This converts the data to concentrations and compensates for depth, salinity,
and temperature. The last step is to derive other relevant parameters that are based on the original
parameters and to change the units for some parameters for instance the density (ρ), absolute salinity
==PAGE:27==
25
(SA), conservative temperature (CT), and oxygen concentrations in µmol/kg. With the big matrix
containing all the relevant information, the data is now ready for analysis. All Matlab files and data
used for the analysis and plots are attached in Bodil_Matlab_Thesis.zip, a table of content for
the folder is found in Appendix A.
5.
Validation
When an Argo float is deployed it is good practice to do a CTD cast. This is done to compare the
Argo’s sensor performance with the CTD data. For each deployment, a CTD cast was done and in
this section, the results will be shown, analysed, and discussed.
5.1
Comparison with ship-borne CTD: Location and time
Argo 001 - Northeast Greenland Shelf
The first deployment was Argo 001 on the Northeast Greenland shelf. The target location was 78N
and 09W. Figure 17a shows the surface locations of the float and the CTD cast, as a red star. Figure
17b shows the depth and time of the CTD cast and the first few profiles.
(a) Argo deployment and CTD location. The CTD location is marked
with a red star.
(b) First profiles and CTD profile in time.
Figure 17. Deployment and initial data from float 001.
As seen in figure 17b on the first 6 profiles the float does not descend deeper than around 20m. This
was due to the configuration. The profile duration time was set to 0h and the descent depth to 500m.
The float makes a calculation based on depth and bladder volume and estimates when to return. This
unfortunately resulted in very shallow profiles. On the 7th profile, we corrected the profile duration
to force the float to use 5 hours on a profile, which resulted in a deeper profile. To compare the float
data with the CTD the first deep profile is used. In this case, the two profiles are approximately 19
hours and 3.7km apart.
==PAGE:28==
26
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Argo 002 - Northeast Greenland Shelf
The second Argo float was also deployed on the Northeast Greenland shelf. The target location was
78N and 11W. The figure below shows the location of the CTD and the surfacing positions of the
float as well as the depth and time of the CTD and the first Argo profile.
(a) Argo locations and CTD location (red star).
(b) First profiles and CTD profile in time.
Figure 18. Deployment and initial data from float 002.
On this deployment, the float was able the descent to the bottom on the first profile. The profile
started 2h15m after the CTD and the Argo surfaced 7h5m after the CTD. The descent location was
900m away and the ascent location was 2.6km away from the CTD. The increased distance between
descent and ascent could be due to drifting in the surface water during the very slow ascent on the
last 10m. The descent and ascent profiles are expected to be very similar to the CTD data because
the profiles are fairly close in time and space.
Argo 003 - Baltic sea
The third Argo float was deployed in the Southern Baltic Sea. The figures below show the location
and time for the CTD profile and the first Argo profile.
(a) Argo locations and CTD location (red star).
(b) First Argo profile and CTD profile in time.
Figure 19. Deployment and initial data from float 003.
==PAGE:29==
27
On the deployment, the Argo float was not able to descent through the strong pycnocline in the
Baltic Sea. The float "parks" on the pycnocline, and reaches a depth of 37dbar whereas the CTD
went to 45dbar. The Argo float descent is 0.3km and 32 min apart from the CTD and the ascent is
0.5km and 58 min. They are therefore very close in space and time and the first profile of the Argo
is chosen for further investigation even though the Argo does not reach the seabed.
5.2
Sensor accuracy
All sensors have limitations in their measurements. In table 1 the initial sensor accuracies for the
salinity, temperature, and oxygen sensors for the Argo and CTD are shown. Sensors tend to drift
over time and that is why the listed accuracies are the initial ones.
Table 1. Initial accuracy for sensors based on datasheets
Varible
Argo
CTD
Salinity
0.0035 psu8
0.0035 psu9
Temperature
0.002 ◦C10
0.001 ◦C11
Oxygen
> 1.5% saturation12
> 2% saturation13
For the following investigations, a satisfactory result when comparing a sensor with a calculation is
within one sensor accuracy and when comparing sensor measurements with other sensor measure-
ments it should be within two sensor accuracies. This is a conservative comparison because of the
drift in the sensors and that the Argos’ and CTDs’ sensors are not on the same physical platform and
the time and space deviation also will affect the measurements.
5.3
Absolute error
Firstly we will look at the absolute error between the CTD data and the Argo float data for salinity,
temperature, and oxygen for all three floats. The first two columns of figures in Figure 20 show the
density and change in density to illustrate the different water layers. When the density gradient
is small (≈0) we expect small errors (≈0) between the CTD and Argos because they should be
in well-mixed water. The errors are calculated by binning the Argo data to the same depth as the
CTD measurements and subtracting the Argo values from the CTD. That means negative errors are
when the CTD is lower than the Argo and vice versa.
8SBE 41 Argo
9SeaBird 4C
10SBE 41 Argo
11SeaBird 3plus
12Aanderaa 4330
13SBE 43 Dissovled Oxygen
==PAGE:30==
28
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Figure 20. To first panels are the density and derivative of density, which indicate the water layers and depth intervals with
well-mixed water, hence the derived density close to 0. The absolute error for the descent Argo profile and the CTD data,
and the ascent and the CTD for temperature, salinity, and oxygen are shown for each float.
For float 001 and 002 there are three stable water layers; the surface water, the polar water (30-
90dbar), and the bottom water. On the density gradient, these sections are also visible as values close
to 0. The errors for temperature and salinity for float 001 and 002 fluctuate around 0 and have higher
deviations in the surface and lower around the low density gradient areas. For oxygen, the ascent
(red) fluctuates closer to 0 and the descent (blue) has slightly lower values and fluctuates around
–10µmol/kg. That means the Argo descent has larger values for oxygen than the CTD. This can be
because the sensor has just been in the air and takes some time to climatize in the water.
For Argo float 003 there are large deviations below 30dbar. This might be because the Argo and
CTD reach the pycnocline at different depths, leading to large differences in the observations at the
same depth. In the mixed layer for float 003, the temperature fluctuates around 1◦C, the salinity
around 0.5 psu, and oxygen around -25 µmol/kg. The stability in the offset indicates that there might
be a systematic error between Argo 003 and the CTD. Because all variables show an offset it can
also be because the instruments are in different watermasses.
We will now dive deeper into the data for each Argo. We will look at the surface layer, where we
expect that oxygen will be fully saturated with the atmosphere. The homogeneous layers for each
profile will be identified and each variable will be compared with the CTD data by an ANOVA test.
==PAGE:31==
29
5.3.1
Argo 001 - Northeast Greenland Shelf
For Argo 001 we will investigate the 7th profile with the CTD because the Argo did not dive
very deep before that. This has some pros and cons; the sensors have had time to climatize to the
conditions, but the profiles are further apart in time and space.
Figure 21. The first deep profiles for Argo 001 is plotted along with the ship-borne CTD. Temperature, salinity, oxygen
concentration, and change in density are plotted together respectively. The vertical lines highlighted sections for further
investigation. The surface will be evaluated based on oxygen concentration and the other sections are defined by a low-
density gradient, meaning well-mixed water.
Figure 21 shows respectively the temperature, salinity, and oxygen concentration of the Argo float’s
descent and ascent and the CTD cast as well as the density gradient. The density gradient is used
to identify the homogeneous water layers, there we expect the sensor to measure the same values.
Firstly we will look at the surface 10 m. The variables are not very aligned, but for the oxygen
concentration, we expect it to be close to full saturation.
Oxygen in the surface
The theoretical oxygen concentration at equilibrium with the atmosphere is calculated based on
salinity and temperature. In figure 22 the measurements of oxygen concentration by the Argo float
on the descent and ascent and the CTD’s primary and secondary sensors are shown as filled dots.
The circles represent the calculated oxygen concentration at equilibrium based on the respective
sensor measurements of salinity and temperature.
==PAGE:32==
30
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Figure 22. Theoretical oxygen concentration when fully saturated based on temperature and salinity measurements for the
Argo float descent, Argo float ascent, CTD primary sensors, and CTD secondary sensors. The differences for the Argo are in
the range of 1 – 3µmol/kg and for the CTD the differences are less than 1.5µmol/kg.
Figure 22 shows that the differences for the Argo data and calculations are in the range of 1–3µmol/kg
and for the CTD the differences are less than 1.5µmol/kg. The oxygen sensor on the Argo float has
an accuracy of 1.5% of saturation. The average saturation for descent and ascent is ∼366.5µM/kg
leading to an accuracy of 5.5µM/kg based on 1.5% of saturation. The measured data is therefore
within the sensor limitation and the oxygen data in the surface layer is at a satisfactory level. The
initial accuracy for the CTD oxygen sensor is 2% of saturation which the data falls within.
Homogeneous layers
For float 001 two homogeneous layers are identified. One from 62 to 72 dbar and one from 158
to 168 dbar. In the second layer, there is only data from the ascent of the Argo float and not the descent.
Table 2 shows the mean, the standard deviation, the difference between the mean for each profile,
and if the means are significantly different with a confidence interval of 95% from the CTD’s
primary sensors. The CTD’s primary and secondary sensors are on the same platform and we would
therefore expect them to not be significantly different, which is true for all measurements except
the oxygen concentration in the layer between 62-72 dbar, where the difference is 0.94µmol/kg.
This value is though within the sensor’s accuracy and the difference is therefore neglectable. For the
Argo float compared with the CTD’s primary sensors, we do see a significant difference in the first
water layer for all variables, but in the second layer temperature and salinity are not significantly
different. The differences in oxygen measurements on the ascent are respectively 1.7µmol/kg and
2.6µmol/kg and on the descent 6.6µmol/kg. All these values are within two sensor accuracies, so
the oxygen measurements are acceptable. Looking at both water layers there is a trend of salinity
measurements being on average –0.017 ± 0.001 psu lower and temperature measurements being on
average –0.042 ± 0.01 degrees lower. This could be due to the time and space difference in the CTD
==PAGE:33==
31
and Argo, but since the trend is in both water layers it could also be a sensor offset.
Table 2. Statistical analysis of Argo 001
Varible
Platform
Water layer
Mean
Std Dev
Difference from CTD 1
Significance from CTD 1
S
Argo Ascent
62-72
31.6098
0.0101
-0.017
Yes
S
Argo Descent
62-72
31.6100
0.0081
-0.017
Yes
S
CTD 1
62-72
31.6270
0.0122
S
CTD 2
62-72
31.6258
0.0121
-0.001
No
T
ARGO Ascent
62-72
-1.6582
0.0043
-0.043
Yes
T
ARGO Decent
62-72
-1.6646
0.0019
-0.050
Yes
T
CTD 1
62-72
-1.6150
0.0029
T
CTD 2
62-72
-1.6149
0.0029
0.0001
No
Oxy
ARGO Ascent
62-72
375.0
0.3
1.674
Yes
Oxy
ARGO Decent
62-72
379.9
0.7
6.562
Yes
Oxy
CTD 1
62-72
373.4
0.4
Oxy
CTD 2
62-72
374.3
0.2
0.940
Yes
S
ARGO Ascent
158-168
34.1021
0.0352
-0.018
No
S
CTD 1
158-168
34.1198
0.0331
S
CTD 2
158-168
34.1155
0.0331
-0.004
No
T
ARGO Ascent
158-168
-0.5697
0.0762
-0.032
No
T
CTD 1
158-168
-0.5376
0.0731
T
CTD 2
158-168
-0.5385
0.0732
-0.001
No
Oxy
ARGO Ascent
158-168
308.6
1.0
2.589
Yes
Oxy
CTD 1
158-168
306.1
2.0
Oxy
CTD 2
158-168
306.0
2.0
-0.043
No
5.3.2
Argo 002 - Northeast Greenland Shelf
A likewise investigation for float 002 is made. Based on the density gradient in figure 23 four areas of
interest are identified; The surface for oxygen concentrations, and three homogeneous water layers
between 75-85dbar, 195-205dbar, and 305-315dbar.
Figure 23 shows the descent and ascent data from the Argo float together with the CTD data for
temperature, salinity, and oxygen concentration. At first glance, the ascent and CTD (red and
yellow) seem to follow each other closer than the descent (blue). The Argo descent profile is the
first time the Argo float is submerged in the Arctic water and it is expected that the sensors need
some time to climatize, which might be what we see in the surface for salinity and temperature. The
CTD also has some fluctuations in the surface, this might be due to the presence of the ship causing
turbulence and mixing. These fluctuations might affect the calculations of the oxygen concentrations
at equilibrium in the surface because they are based on temperature and salinity observations.
==PAGE:34==
32
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Figure 23. The first deep profile for Argo 002 is plotted along with the ship-borne CTD. Temperature, salinity, oxygen
concentration, and change in density are plotted together respectively. The vertical lines highlighted sections for further
investigation. The surface will be evaluated based on oxygen concentration and the other sections are defined by a low-
density gradient, meaning well-mixed water.
Oxygen in the surface
Figure 24 shows the measurement and calculated concentration of oxygen at equilibrium based on
temperature and salinity measurements.
The differences for the Argo data and calculations are in the range of 1.5 – 7µmol/kg and for the
CTD the differences are less than 2.5µmol/kg. The oxygen sensor on the Argo float has an accuracy
of 1.5% of saturation. The average saturation for descent and ascent is ∼369µM/kg leading to an
accuracy of 5.5µM/kg based on 1.5% of saturation. The measured data from the CTD and the Argo
ascent is within the sensor limitation, but the descent has a slightly higher difference of ≈6.5µmol/kg.
This is very close to the threshold and taking into account that the sensor comes straight from the air
into the water and needs some time to climatize and that the salinity and temperature measurements
also are a little off in the surface for the descent, this yields a fairly satisfactory result for the oxygen
sensor.
==PAGE:35==
33
Figure 24. Theoretical oxygen concentration when fully saturated based on temperature and salinity measurements for the
Argo float descent, Argo float ascent, CTD primary sensors, and CTD secondary sensors. The differences for the Argo are in
the range of 1.5 – 7µmol/kg and for the CTD the differences are less than 2.5µmol/kg. The oxygen concentration on descent
and ascent is ≈369µM/kg leading to an accuracy of 5.5µM/kg based on 1.5% of saturation.
Homogeneous layers
To dive deeper into the sensor performance of the Argo float versus the CTD, we will look at
measurements within the same well-mixed water layers as described above. Table 3 shows the mean,
standard deviation, difference, and if the data is significantly different from CTD 1 for the Argo on
descent, ascent, and the CTD’s primary and secondary sensors for all three water layers.
The CTD’s primary and secondary sensors are not significantly different for salinity and temperature,
but they are for oxygen in the water layers from 75-85dbar and 305-315dbar. The difference is max
1.2µmol/kg, so this is neglectable due to the sensor limitations. The salinity measurements of the
Argo float have very low standard deviations and 4 of the 6 means are not significantly different from
the CTD. The differences in means vary from 0.0037 to 0.0096 with an average of 0.006 psu. The
initial sensor accuracy of the salinity sensor is 0.0035 psu, and having a difference of less than two
sensor limitations is considered to be satisfactory. The temperature measurements from the Argo
float compared to CTD 1 have a slight systematic error of being a bit warmer. The average difference
is 0.018, ranging from 0.0096 to 0.0345. This might indicate that the temperature sensor has a slight
offset. The salinity measurement matches the CTD well indicating the two platforms are in very
similar waters. The oxygen concentration does not have any systematic deviations and the absolute
value of the differences ranges from 1 to 9.4, which is within two sensor accuracies (11µmol/kg).
This is also considered satisfactory. Over all the Argo 002 matches the CTD data nicely.
==PAGE:36==
34
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Table 3. Statistical analysis of Argo 002
Varible
Platform
Water layer
Mean
Std Dev
Difference from CTD 1
Significant from CTD 1
S
ARGO Ascent
75-85
31.6187
0.0089
-0.0037
No
S
ARGO Decent
75-85
31.6128
0.0079
-0.0096
Yes
S
CTD 1
75-85
31.6224
0.0099
S
CTD 2
75-85
31.6212
0.0098
-0.0012
No
T
ARGO Ascent
75-85
-1.6518
0.0064
0.0098
Yes
T
ARGO Decent
75-85
-1.6520
0.0044
0.0096
Yes
T
CTD 1
75-85
-1.6616
0.0028
T
CTD 2
75-85
-1.6617
0.0027
-0.0001
No
Oxy
ARGO Ascent
75-85
367.0
0.8
-6.7
Yes
Oxy
ARGO Decent
75-85
377.5
0.9
3.7
Yes
Oxy
CTD 1
75-85
373.8
0.4
Oxy
CTD 2
75-85
375.0
0.3
1.2
Yes
S
ARGO Ascent
195-205
34.3010
0.0068
-0.0052
No
S
ARGO Decent
195-205
34.2996
0.0079
-0.0066
No
S
CTD 1
195-205
34.3062
0.0163
S
CTD 2
195-205
34.3006
0.0164
-0.0056
No
T
ARGO Ascent
195-205
-0.0707
0.0110
0.0218
Yes
T
ARGO Decent
195-205
-0.0722
0.0131
0.0203
Yes
T
CTD 1
195-205
-0.0925
0.0310
T
CTD 2
195-205
-0.0924
0.0309
0.0001
No
Oxy
ARGO Ascent
195-205
291.0
0.1
-1.0
Yes
Oxy
ARGO Decent
195-205
301.4
1.1
9.4
Yes
Oxy
CTD 1
195-205
292.0
0.6
Oxy
CTD 2
195-205
292.6
0.6
0.6
No
S
ARGO Ascent
305-315
34.7389
0.0086
0.0067
Yes
S
ARGO Decent
305-315
34.7283
0.0012
-0.0039
No
S
CTD 1
305-315
34.7322
0.0043
S
CTD 2
305-315
34.7258
0.0041
-0.0064
No
T
ARGO Ascent
305-315
0.8000
0.0184
0.0345
Yes
T
ARGO Decent
305-315
0.7776
0.0033
0.0121
CTD 1:Yes / CTD 2: No
T
CTD 1
305-315
0.7655
0.0085
T
CTD 2
305-315
0.7660
0.0084
0.0004
No
Oxy
ARGO Ascent
305-315
290.3
0.1
3.3
Yes
Oxy
ARGO Decent
305-315
290.7
0.1
3.7
Yes
Oxy
CTD 1
305-315
287.0
0.1
Oxy
CTD 2
305-315
287.6
0.1
0.6
Yes
==PAGE:37==
35
5.3.3
Argo 003 - Baltic Sea
Lastly, float 003 is investigated. The first profile and the CTD cast are plotted together in figure
25 along with the density gradient to show sections with well-mixed waters. In this case, we will
investigate the surface layer for oxygen concentration close to equilibrium and one layer from 20-30
dbar.
Figure 25. The first deep profile for Argo 003 is plotted along with the ship-borne CTD. Temperature, salinity, oxygen
concentration, and change in density are plotted together respectively. The vertical lines highlighted sections for further
investigation. The surface will be evaluated based on oxygen concentration and the other section (20-30dbar) is defined by
a low-density gradient, meaning well-mixed water.
Figure 25 shows a mixed layer down to 32 dbar for the CTD, but for the Argo we see a little smaller
layer in the surface down to 10 dbar. The sensor performance investigation in a homogeneous layer
is from 20-30dbar to avoid the differences in the surface layer. But firstly we will look at the oxygen
concentrations in the surface 10 dbar.
Oxygen in the surface
Figure 26 shows the measured oxygen concentrations as filled dots for the Argo on the descent, ascent,
and the primary, and secondary CTD sensors. The theoretical oxygen concentration at equilibrium
with the atmosphere is calculated based on the measurements of salinity and temperature for the Argo
on the descent, and ascent, and the primary, and secondary CTD sensors shown as circles. The sensor
accuracy is around 1.5% of saturation ≈5µmol/kg. The theoretical concentrations at equilibrium
==PAGE:38==
36
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
and the Argo measurement all fall within 335-340µmol/kg, which is within sensor limitations and
yields a satisfactory performance. The CTD measurements are approximately 25µmol/kg lower for
both sensors. When measuring oxygen in the surface a lot of factors can influence the values. For a
CTD cast especially the ship’s presence can affect the concentrations of oxygen, but normally the
ship will over-saturate the surface waters by mixing and causing air bubbles. These values are around
7.5% lower than expected, which is more likely to be a sensor calibration error.
Figure 26. Theoretical oxygen concentration when fully saturated based on temperature and salinity measurements for the
Argo float descent, Argo float ascent, CTD primary sensors, and CTD secondary sensors. The differences for the Argo are less
than 5µmol/kg and for the CTD the differences are around 25µmol/kg. This is odd and indicates there might be a calibration
error of the oxygen sensor on the CTD.
Homogeneous water layer
Looking at the well-mixed water from 20-30dbar, the mean, standard deviation, difference, and if
they are significantly different are shown in the table below.
Table 4. Statistical analysis of Argo 003
Varible
Platform
Water layer
Mean
Std Dev
Difference from CTD 1
Significant from CTD 1
S
ARGO Ascent
20-30
8.0087
0.00359
-0.0173
Yes
S
ARGO Decent
20-30
8.0081
0.00028
-0.0179
Yes
S
CTD 1
20-30
8.0260
0.00015
S
CTD 2
20-30
8.0260
0.00030
0.00002
No
T
ARGO Ascent
20-30
9.7047
0.0080
-0.0234
Yes
T
ARGO Decent
20-30
9.7141
0.0011
-0.0140
Yes
T
CTD 1
20-30
9.7281
0.0007
T
CTD 2
20-30
9.7259
0.0008
-0.0022
No
Oxy
ARGO Ascent
20-30
332.8
1.76
23.0
Yes
Oxy
ARGO Decent
20-30
336.7
0.12
27.0
Yes
Oxy
CTD 1
20-30
298.0
22.57
-11.7
Yes
Oxy
CTD 2
20-30
309.7
0.41
==PAGE:39==
37
The Argo float data is compared with the primary sensors on the CTD, except for the oxygen,
because the oxygen measurements have a large deviation in this water layer. The standard deviation
for CTD 1 for oxygen is 22.6µmol/kg which must be an error or a physical disturbance in the water.
The Argo data is therefore compared with the secondary sensor for the oxygen measurements.
The differences are 23 and 27 µmol/kg, but if we assume the CTD oxygen sensor has an offset of
∼25µmol/kg based on the investigation in the surface water, then the differences are with one sensor
limitation. For salinity and temperature, CTD 1 and CTD 2 are not significantly different. The
Argo measurements are significantly different from the CTD and the salinity measurements are
≈0.017 lower than the CTD and the temperature is on average ≈0.019 colder than the CTD.
These are values outside the sensors’ accuracy. So either the Argo float descents in a slightly different
water column or the calibration is a little off either for the Argo or the CTD. We only investigate
one water layer and it is therefore hard to make any conclusions on why there are deviations and if
they are systematical.
5.4
Conclusion of Argo performance compared with ship-borne CTD
When comparing the Argo floats’ first deep profiles with the ship-borne CTD we get an idea of
how well the Argo float performs. In this investigation, we assume that CTD is a good indication of
reality. The absolute error plot (Figure 20) showed that the error in most cases fluctuates around 0
for float 001 and 002. The oxygen errors are a bit smaller for the ascent compared to the descent for
all floats. Float 003 seems to have an off-set for all parameters of 1◦C, 0.5 psu, and 25 µmol/kg which
indicates that the issues could be with the CTD instead of the Argo or that they are in different
waters.
Float 001 is a bit further apart in time and space due to its configurations and the profiles we
compare at approximately 19h and 3.7km apart. In the surface layer, the Argo performs well, but in
the water layers there is a systematical difference of ≈–0.017 psu and ≈–0.042 degrees, which can
be due to the difference in time and space leading the float to be in slightly different waters or it
could be a sensor calibration error.
Float 002 is only 2-7h and 0.9-2.6km apart and overall performs very well. The oxygen and
salinity measurements are almost all within two sensor accuracies. The temperature shows a tendency
of measuring on average 0.018 degrees warmer than the CTD, which could be a calibration error.
The analysis of Float 003 shows a bit more variation. In the surface, the Argo seems to perform
very well, but the CTD measurements are ≈25µmol/kg lower than expected. Assuming this is an
offset in the CTD sensor, then the Argo performs well in the water layer, as the differences are 23
and 27 yielding a difference of 2µmol/kg with the offset. The salinity and temperature seem to have
an offset of ≈–0.017psu and ≈–0.019◦C on average, which could be a sensor calibration error.
==PAGE:40==
38
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
6.
Analysis of the Ice-Sensing-Algorithm
When working in the arctic environment sea ice is a big issue for the Argo floats. The float now has
an ice avoidance feature based on the median temperature in a certain depth interval. André et al.
[2020] evaluated the Ice-Sensing-Algorithm (ISA) for Baffin Bay, and a similar analysis will be done
with our data for the Northeast Greenland Shelf. The ISA only has a few parameters to adjust, the
collections interval and the median temperature threshold. The parameters and their limitations are
shown in table 5.
Table 5. Parameters for the Ice-Sensing-Algorithm (ISA) and their limitations.
No.
Description
Limitation
0
Enable/disable ISA detection
[True/False]
1
Collection starting depth [dbar]
[30-50]
2
Collection stopping depth [dbar]
[5-20]
3
Median temperature threshold [◦C]
[-1.9,-1.0]
André et al. [2020] argued that a shallower collection interval is better for the Arctic because there are
larger variations in the surface waters than in the Antarctic. The typical values to use in Antarctica is a
collection zone from 50-20 dbar and a temperature threshold of -1.79 whereas André et al. [2020] de-
cided on a collection interval from 30-10dbar and a threshold of -1.3 for their Baffin Bay deployments.
On the Northeast Greenland Shelf there is more ice and more influence by polar water, so the
parameters should be customised for the specific area. This analysis will be based on the data collected
on the Fram Strait cruise 2023. We have data from 17 CTD stations across the shelf and images taken
on the ship to evaluate the sea ice presence (If ice: yes/no). The stations and the data are shown in
figure 27 and examples of the images used to determine if there is ice or not are shown in figure 28.
Figure 27a shows the location of the CTD stations. Our deployment area is the shelf and the chosen
boundaries are from the coast of Greenland to the shelf slope where the depth is less than 500dbar. In
figure 27b the data is interpolated between the stations. The stations are shown as black vertical lines.
We clearly see the warmer bottom waters, the cold polar water between 50-180dbar, and some local
variations in the surface waters. In the surface layer, the water close to the Greenland coast is more
influenced by cold meltwater, fjords, and ice, and towards the east, the water is influenced by the
cold East Greenland Current that transports polar water and sea ice southward and follows the shelf
slope. See figure 2b for further explanation. In the center of the shelf the surface water is warmer
and it is also here we have ice-free surfaces. Figure 27b is a close-up on the top 50dbar and the ice
data from the images are added above each station as "Ice" or "NoIce". The tendency of ice matches
what was expected; ice-free in the center and sea ice both towards the east and west.
==PAGE:41==
39
(a) Map of the Fram Strait. To the right is
Svalbard and to the left is Northeast Green-
land. ThebluedotsareCTDstationsonthe
FS cruise 2023. The red square highlights
the section of stations on NEGS used for
this analysis.
(b) The CTD temperature data on the NEGS interpolated (red square
on (a)). The black vertical lines show the CTD casts. The graph shows
the cold polar water between 50-180 dbar. Warmer bottom water and a
warmer area in the surface in the center of the shelf.
(c) The temperature data zoomed in the surface layer from 0-50dbar. Black virtical dots are CTD stations. Label Ice/NoIce
indicates sea surface ice duing the CTD based on images from a camera on the ship (See fig 28). There tends to be less sea
ice in the center of the shelf, which matches the increased temperatures. The common measurement interval used for the
ISA is 30-10dbar. The warm water extends shallower than 10dbar, indicating an advantage of collecting data for the ISA
shallower than 10dbar.
Figure 27. CTD data from the Fram Strait cruise September 2023 focused on the Northeast Greenland Shelf
The increased surface temperatures from around 12◦W to 8◦W are highest from around 10-15dbar
to the surface. So for the ISA to detect warm temperatures when ice-free is it important to measure
in this zone.
The sea ice camera takes a photo every minute. The timestamp is UTC+2 and the pictures are
matched with the timestamp from the CTD casts. On a few stations, the resolution was very poor
due to rain, in those cases multiple pictures within a reasonable time from the cast were evaluated.
See Appendix D for the full list. Figure 28 shows two stations, one with ice and one without.
==PAGE:42==
40
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
(a) Ship camera images from station 0232 the 2nd of
September 2023. This is a station with sea ice.
(b) Ship camera images from station 0235 the 3rd of Septem-
ber 2023. This is a station with no sea ice.
Figure 28. Examples of the images used to determine if there was sea ice or not during the CTD casts in the context of the
Argo float. A "yes" means the float will most likely not be able to surface, and "no" ice means the float most likely will be
able the surface in the conditions even though some ice is present.
Based on the data from the 17 CTD stations on the shelf and the sea ice images an analysis of the
probability of four cases is made. The four scenarios are;
1. There is ice and the ISA is triggered = Ice ISA
2. There is ice, but the ISA is not triggered = Ice NoISA
3. There is no ice, but the ISA is triggered = NoIce ISA
4. There is no ice and the ISA is not triggered = NoIce NoISA
The scenarios to be avoided are numbers 2 and 3 (Ice NoIsa and NoIce ISA), because the float
will either ascent into the ice, or stay down due to a falsely triggered ISA and the data will not be
transmitted. The perfect cases are 1 and 4 (Ice ISA and NoIce NoISA), here the float detects ice
correctly and does not make false detections. The probabilities for each case are plotted in figure
29 as a function of the temperature threshold for ISA trigger. Two scenarios are investigated; a
measuring interval from 30-10dbar (solid lines) and a measuring interval from 30-5dbar (dashed
lines) which is the shallowest settings we can apply (see table 5).
In this analysis, we want the Ice ISA (Blue) and NoIce NoISA (Green) to be as high as possible and
the Ice NoISA (red) and NoIce ISA (yellow) to be as low as possible. The dashed lines (30-5dbar)
show a better performance for the ISA in the cases of no ice than the interval from 30-10dbar. The
threshold for ISA based on this analysis should be around -1.15◦C, in this case, there is 0% chance of
NoIce ISA and Ice NoISA and 100% chance of Ice ISA, and NoIce NoISA. With the same threshold
but a measuring interval from 30-10dbar the chances of NoIce NoIsa is 75% and NoIce ISA is 25%.
Using the shallower measuring interval therefore gives a higher chance of detecting correctly, which
also is indicated in figure 27c where there are higher temperatures above 10dbar in the area with no
sea ice. Bare in mind the dataset is small and only from September.
==PAGE:43==
41
Figure 29. Analysis of the Ice-sensing-Algorithm (ISA). Four cases are set up and the probability for each is calculated based
on the ISA threshold. The analysis is done for two different collection intervals 30-10dbar (solid lines) and 30-5dbar (dashed
lines).
Float 002 collected data until the 29th of September. Below is the median temperature for each
ascent calculated and plotted along with the suggested ISA threshold of -1.15◦C.
Figure 30. The median temperature between 30-10 dbar in blue and 30-5 dbar in green for each profile. The gray dotted line
indicates the suggested ISA threshold, meaning a value lower than this will trigger the ISA and the float will act as if there is
ice on the surface.
The ISA is only trigged on the last profile, and for a collection interval of 30-10 dbar also on profile
11. This indicates the suggested threshold and collection zone of 30-5 dbar is reasonable. It is later
learned that the float probably encountered ice on the last profile (see figure 36) so if the ISA was
triggered it would be safer for the float on the last profile.
==PAGE:44==
42
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
6.1
Conclusion on the Ice-Sensing-Algorithm
This analysis shows that with certain values the ISA will be very useful and that the values are area-
specific. The parameterisation used in Antarctica, and even the one from Baffin Bay, are not suitable
for the NEGS. The data we have from September shows that the most beneficial parameter values
would be a collection interval from 30-5 dbar and a temperature threshold of -1.15◦C. The lower
limit of the collection zone cannot be shallower than 30dbar though it could potentially improve
the performance of the ISA in this area if the collection zone was shallower. The presence of cold
polar water in the shallow ocean complicates the parameterisation, but could potentially be resolved
by lowering the collection starting depth. Figure 27c shows large variations in the temperature
in the top 20 dbar, which also correlates to the sea ice stage at the surface. The CTD data is only
from September, so we do not know how the threshold will affect the float for the rest of the year.
The suggested set-up will most likely protect the float throughout the winter because the surface
temperature most likely will be colder than -1.15◦C, but the concern rises for when the sea ice
breaks up again. When this happens is it important for the float to surface to transmit data. For
further evaluation, it would be relevant to gather data from when the sea ice opens up again and the
temperatures at that time.
==PAGE:45==
43
7.
Design improvements
Based on the findings of the literature study of floats deployed in icy conditions a small design study
has been conducted. The major concern when deploying a float in polar water is the sea ice. Collision
with the ice can damage the antenna and sensor. The ice-sensing algorithm is meant to limit the
collision risk, but will not fully prevent it. Many sensor-based protection features have been tested,
but none have been sufficient yet. All sensor-based solutions will require a significant increase in
battery usage, but the scope of this project is to limit battery usage. Looking at mechanical protection
features would therefore be beneficial to design and implement.
7.1
Specifications and criteria
When implementing a new feature on a float it is important to note the specifications and criteria for
the feature. Based on the original technical requirements listed in Section 2.2.5 and the criteria for
the new feature, the following requirements and criteria for a mechanical protection feature have
been determined:
• The float should be protected against collision with sea ice
• Communication performance should not be compromised
• Deployment strategy and technique should not be affected
• Parking, profiling, and surfacing ability should not be affected
• A potential increase in the risk of the float getting stuck on sea ice should be negligible.
• Visibility at the surface should be enhanced
• Extra time and cost should not be significant
• Complexity of manufacturing and implementation should be significant
7.2
Three Concepts
Three concepts have been developed based on the above requirements. Appendix E shows some
examples of what others have done, which have been used as inspiration.
The metal cage:
A metal structure reaching higher than the antenna, inspired by the attachment on the float in figure
10a from the NOAS project. The cage is rigid and strong and will provide good protection in case
of collision. It will protect the antenna, CTD, DO, but not the ECO and OCR. A redesign could be
made to include the ECO and OCR sensors, but it’s important to limit the material usage due to the
increased weight of the float and thus decreased battery life.
Material and manufacturing:
The material chosen would be aluminum due to less density than steel or iron (∼7.8g/cm3), but
still fairly cheap and easy to work with. The density of aluminum is 2.7g/cm3 and some alloys like
6061-T6 are both very strong as well as corrosive resistant, making it suitable for marine usage. The
==PAGE:46==
44
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
(a) The Metal Cage
(b) The Whisk
(c) The Rod
Figure 31. The three design concepts
structure can fairly easily be manufactured in a local workshop and will require metal bending tools
and welding.
The whisk:
This solution is inspired by the NASA project. Plastic bars are attached at the base of the sensors and
bend over the top to form two arches. With a fixation at the top, the two arches hold the shape and
would bounce if ascending into ice, limiting the impact.
Material and manufacturing:
The material could be High-density polyethylene (HDPE) which is frequently used for marine
purposes. The density is 0.93 to 0.97g/cm3 which is fairly close to seawater and in that way it would
not impact the float buoyancy much. Manufacturing of the structure is very simple and can be done
on the ship before the deployment. It requires HDPE bars and large cable ties.
==PAGE:47==
45
The rod:
One rod ejected from the base to reach above the antenna. The rod could be made of HDPE. The
round top could be a softer plastic/rubber material limiting the impact during collision. The round
shape also minimizes the risk of getting stuck on sea ice.
Material and manufacturing:
The material could be High-density polyethylene (HDPE) which is frequently used for marine
purposes. The density is 0.93 to 0.97g/cm3 which is fairly close to seawater in that way it would not
impact the float buoyancy much. Manufacturing of the structure will be done at a workshop and the
top could be 3D-printed. The final product can be transported with the float and attached on the
location of the deployment.
Table 6. Pugh matrix for the three concepts.
Criteria
Weighting
Baseline
The Metal Cage
The Whisk
The Rod
Ice protection
5
0
Good protection
3 (15)
Will add protection,
but unknown how long
it will last and
how efficient it is
1 (5)
Good protection,
only in vertical direction
2 (10)
Communication
5
0
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Transportation
and Deployment
5
0
Does not fit in
the same case
-1 (-5)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Profiling ability
5
0
The structure will
increase the weight.
Increase battery usage
at the surface
-1 (-5)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Limit risk
of hanging
4
0
Edges increase risk
-2 (-8)
Edges increase risk
-2 (-8)
0 (0)
Visibility at
the surface
2
0
Option to color structure
2 (4)
Option to color structure
2 (4)
Option to color structure
2 (4)
Cost and time
3
0
Materials, design, and
manufacturing time
-1 (-3)
No significant time
or price (cheap materials)
0 (0)
Materials, design,
and manufacturing time
-1 (-3)
Manufacturing
and Implementation
2
0
Workshop and
mounting
-3 (-6)
Simple implementaiton
-1 (-2)
Simple implementation,
some time for manufacturing
-2 (-4)
Score (total)
0
-8
-1
7
==PAGE:48==
46
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
7.3
Concept evaluation
To evaluate the concepts and choose one to continue with the Pugh matrix method [Pugh, 1981] is
used. The aforementioned specifications and criteria are weighted on importance and the baseline
is the current Argo design without any attachments. Each concept is then rated in relation to the
baseline if it improves (+), stays the same (0), or negatively impacts the criteria (-).
Based on the decision matrix (Table 6) the concept to move forward with is The Rod. It will deliver
good protection in the vertical direction and will last a long time. The Metal Cage would also protect
the antenna from sideways force, but if the float were to be squeezed between to ice sheet, it might
not be enough anyway. So for the focus being protection against ascent into the ice, The Rod could
work well. The Whisk would potentially also work, but it’s hard to estimate how well it would
damper the collisions and if the set-up with cable ties can withstand the impact of ice for a long time.
Both the Metal Cage and the Whisk would have a risk of getting stuck on the ice due to edges and
corners. The Rod needs more refining in regards to the connection from the rod to the top, but the
price and manufacturing time would be in between the very simple design of the Whisk and the
more complex and workshop-heavy Metal Cage.
The next phase in the design process would be an iterative process of making prototypes and
conducting tests. The different concepts could be tested in a water tank, where a simulation of ice
and ascent speed could show their effectiveness. The concepts’ effect on the buoyancy should also be
estimated and tested. Ideally, the concept performing best during the test could be implemented on a
float that could be picked up or just visually accessed a year later to see if the structure has lasted and
protected to float.
==PAGE:49==
47
8.
Selected results from the Northeast Greenland Shelf
The two floats on the Northeast Greenland Shelf were able to collect some data after the cruise and
until the surface was covered with sea ice. Float 001 was unfortunately quickly covered, but float 002
collected data until the 29th of September. This allows us to follow trends across time. The floats we
deployed are equipped with a Seabird CTD sensor, Aanderaa oxygen sensor, and an Environmental
Characterization Optics (ECO) sensor, that measures CDOM, backscatter, and Chl-a. The CTD
and oxygen sensors perform well and give reliable measurements. The ECO sensor unfortunately
has some flaws that mean the CDOM data is almost useless due to too much rounding of the data.
The backscatter and Chl-a measurements are not calibrated to give numeric reliable values but can
be used for relative comparisons. The backscatter and chl-a data have been corrected for an offset of
0.00018 and 0.3 respectively. See appendix F for examples and corrections in the ECO sensor data.
In this section, we will now dive into some of the new data gathered by the floats.
Figure 32a shows the trajectory of the two floats with date and time for each surfacing. Float 001
was deployed on the 3rd of September and unfortunately, a big ice sheet covered the areas on the 4th
of September. Float 002 was deployed early 4th of September and did quick profiles every 5h until
the 8th when we switched the pattern to every 5 days. It continued until the 29th of September.
(a) Trajectory of the two floats on the Northeast Greenland
Shelf. The date and time of surfacing are shown with the col-
orbar. Float 001 was deployed on the 3rd and unfortunately,
an ice sheet drifted over the area on the 4th and covered it.
Float 002 delivered data until the 29th of September. The first
4 days (4-8th) it profiled every 5h and after the 8th we switch
to profiling every 5days.
(b) All salinity profiles from float 002 color coded
for ascent and descent. The sensors on the float
are located on the top, which means the ascent
data would be least affected by the float’s move-
ment. Furthermore, we see a clear delay in the
surface measurements on the descent. For the
further analysis only the ascent profiles are used.
Figure 32. The two floats on the Northeast Greenland shelf and the salinity profiles of float 002.
Figure 32b shows all profiles collected by float 002 color-coded for descent and ascent profiles. The
sensors on the float are located at the top of the instruments which means the ascent profiles are
considered to be most accurate because the mixing caused by the float will be below the sensors.
Furthermore, we see that in the surface water, all the descent profiles seem to have a significant delay.
This is probably due to air or meltwater in the tubes of the CTD sensor. One descent profile seems
==PAGE:50==
48
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
to be completely off by reaching salinities of less than 32 psu below 125 dbar. It is not clear what
has happened here, maybe something got stuck in the tubes. For further analysis, only the ascent
profiles will be used unless otherwise is stated.
8.1
Water layers
Water layers are interesting to look at because they tell us a great deal about the properties and
dynamics of the areas. The Fram Strait (and Northeast Greenland Shelf ) is characterized by three
distinct water layers; cold fresh surface water, influenced by the atmosphere and the sea ice, polar
water, which is fresh and cold, and the Atlantic water at the bottom being much more saline and
warmer.
Figure 33. T-S diagram from the NEGS. Four water masses are found. The surface water (SW) ranges from 0 to -1.5 degrees
and below 31psu. The polar surface water (PSW) is very well defined as salinities from 31.5 to 32 and colder than -1.5. Below
that is a less defined layer of polar halocline water (HC), still cold but more saline. The bottom water consists of Atlantic
water which is warmer and more saline.
Figure 33 shows a TS-diagram of the data collected by float 002. Highlighted are the identified
water layers; the surface water (SW) ranges from 0 to -1.5 degrees due the seasonal changes. The
polar intermediate layer consists of two water masses. A very clearly-defined layer of Polar Surface
Water (PSW) with properties of 31.5-32 psu and colder than -1.5 degrees. Deeper comes another
polar water mass which is still fairly cold, but more saline, this is named the Polar Halocline (HC).
It is formed by a mix of saline Pacific Water being cooled on its journey over the Arctic and brine
rejection and possibly other factors as well. The higher salinity makes it denser and it lays below the
PSW. The water mass is less clearly defined and spans over a wider range of salinities, temperatures,
==PAGE:51==
49
and depths. In figure 32b the long gradient from around 120dbar to 200dbar seems to be the Polar
Halocline Water. At the bottom, we have the Atlantic Water, which is much more saline and warmer.
To look at the properties over time in each water layer, the focus is only on SW, PSW, and AW
because they are more stable in their properties. The pycnoclines are found automatically by finding
the depth where the density gradient exceeds 0.2, the next layer is then located after the first water
layer boundary plus 10dbar to avoid the gradient. The bottom water is found by the second water
layer boundary plus 100dbar to avoid the gradient caused by the HC. The left plot in figure 34 shows
one of the profiles with the identified pycnoclines. The solid lines are the water layer boundary
found by the density gradient and the dashed lines are the chosen interval to the beginning of the
next water layer.
Figure 34. The identification of water layers. The left plots show one of the profiles with the identified water layers. The
gray profile lines are the other profiles and one is highlighted in orange as an example. The first water layer boundary
indicates the surfaced mixed water layer depth, it is found by the density gradient change. If the gradient is more than 0.2
the pycnocline is considered to start. This value is found by testing and evaluating the result on the data. The water layer
boundaries found with the density gradient are marked with a solid line. The pynoclines are estimated to be 10dbar deep
and 100dbar and the end of the pycnoclines are marked with the dashed lines. In this way, the thresholds for the SW, PSW,
and AW are found for each profile. The first and second water layer boundary (solid lines) for each profile is shown in the
center and right plot. The first water layer boundary indicated the surface mixed layer depth and is ∼12 ± 4dbar and the
second is at ∼110 ± 10dbar.
The center and right plot in figure 34 shows the water layer boundaries over time for all profiles.
The first water layer boundary indicated the surface mixed layer depth and is ∼12 ± 4dbar. The
second water layer boundary is the bottom of the PSW and is ∼110 ± 10dbar.
==PAGE:52==
50
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
When the SW, PSW, and AW are identified, we can look at how the properties change over time.
Below, in figure 35, the salinity, temperature, and oxygen are plotted for each water layer over time.
Blue is the surface water going from 0 to ∼12 ± 4dbar, purple is the PSW going from ∼22 ± 4dbar
to ∼110 ± 10dbar, and red in the AW going from ∼210 ± 10dbar to the bottom.
Figure 35. The three plots show the mean values in the three identified water layers for respectively salinity, temperature,
and oxygen. The means are calculated without the gradients, so the surface water (blue) is from 0 to ∼10 dbar, the polar
water (purple) is from ∼20 dbar to ∼110 dbar and the bottom water (red) is from ∼210 dbar to the bottom. All parameters
are fairly stable except the surface temperature, which drops significantly over time. The deviations within the water layer
are small for the surface water and bottom water and much larger for the polar water. This might be due to the uncertainties
of the automated location of the gradients and the polar therefore might contain more of the pycnoclines than the others.
The salinity stays very stable over time. The temperature changes a lot in the surface with a significant
cooling of almost -1.5 degrees. The oxygen does not change a lot, both the surface water and polar
water are close to fully saturated. Full saturation is approx 375µmol/kg as found in figure 24.
8.2
Chlorophyll-a on the shelf
The chlorophyll concentrations do not make sense to look at in the same way as the previous
parameters because the high concentration tends to be around the pycnoclines. Figure 36 shows a
contour plot of the temperature and the chl-a in the surface 50dbar. The dark red lines indicated the
water layer boundaries found in the previous section.
==PAGE:53==
51
(a) Interpolated temperature data from both Argo floats
on NEGS from 0-50 dbar. The dashed red lines show the
pycnoclinedefinedinfigure34. Aclearcoolingofthesurface
water appears over time.
(b) Interpolated chlorophyll data from both Argo floats on
NEGS from 0-50 dbar. The dashed red lines show the pycno-
cline defined in figure 34. A late autumn bloom appear and
have peaks on the 13th and 24th of Sep.
Figure 36. Changes in temperature and chl-a in the surface over time. Looking at the temperature around 25dbar on the
13th and 24th of September there seems to be either mixing caused by the cooling of the surface water or an intruding
watermass, which can supply nutrients to allow a bloom. Another event noticed on these plots is that on the last day, the
29th of September, the measurements stop at 2dbar. This is speculated to be because of sea ice. The float thought it was at
the surface due to lack of descent so it stopped measuring. Somehow it has been able to transmit data anyway, maybe by
drifting to an area with no ice after the detection of the surface.
There is a clear cooling of the surface mixed layer over time. The chl-a concentrations over time
show increasing values and a late autumn bloom. The blooms seem to coincide with two colder
water blubs around 25dbar on the 13th and 24th of September. This might be more nutrient-rich
water shallowing and allowing a bloom or it can be caused by mixing, which can happen when
the surface cools down and sinks. The bloom is rarely spotted on CTD data, but with the small
times series, we do catch it. It also seems like the overall concentration of chl-a increases with time.
To investigate the bloom further we first look at the overall increase over time by integrating the
concentration for each profile between 0-50dbar. Secondly, we look at a TS-diagram with the two
peak profiles to look for trends.
Figure 37. The chl-a concentrations integrated from 0-50 dbar for each profile on the ascent and descent that are deeper
than 20dbar. The ascent and descent data match fine. There is a trend of increasing values in the first two week of Sep and
there does seem to be a peak around the 13th and 24th of September. The increase from before the 7th (∼10) to after the
13th (∼17) is in the size of 70%.
==PAGE:54==
52
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Figure 37 shows the integrated chl-a for both ascent and descent. There do seem to be two peaks in
the concentrations around the 13th and the 24th of Sep. Within the first two weeks of September,
we see an increase in the concentrations of around 70%. The increased chl-a concentrations seem
to persist for the rest of the time series. Together with figure 36b we see the bloom forms in
the pycnocline as the surface temperatures cool down, the bloom deepens and persists below the
pycnocline at around 30dbar. Below we look at the TS-diagram of the profiles, with the profiles
from the 13th and the 24th of Sep color-coded for chl-a.
Figure 38. A T-S diagram with all profiles in black and the two chl-a peaks color-coded for chl-a concentrations. The
highlighted profiles are on the 13th and 24th of September.
Figure 38 shows all profiles in black and has highlighted the two profiles with the peak chl-a
concentrations. What they have in common is the intrusion of some colder fresher water around
31psu and -1.5C, whereas the other profiles more smoothly blend with the surface water. There
might actually be another water mass finding its way and delivering more nutrients to the surface
layer allowing a bloom.
8.3
Backscatter on the shelf
The Argo float also collected backscatter data. The backscatter indicates the turbidity of the water
and the presence of particle-sized matter. The floats’ measurements cover the whole water column
in one profile and park on the bottom recording ocean parameters there as well. Figure 39 shows all
ascent and bottom parking profiles for float 002 color-coded for backscatter.
==PAGE:55==
53
Figure 39. Backscatter data from float 001 and 002 on NEGS. High values are recorded in the bottom 50-90dbar.
The surface water and polar water have low backscatter values, but the bottom water has very high
values as seen in figure 39. The high backscatter shows from the seabed and almost 50-90 dbar up.
This indicates a strong bottom current causing resuspension of the sediments higher than 50m off
the sea bed. The phenomenon is called a Nephloid (greek for "cloud") layer, which can be seen on
continental shelves [McCave, 2009]. The Argo data are over time and for all the deeper profiles the
nephloid layer thrives. In the last two profiles, the float has moved to a slightly shallower area, but
there is still increased backscatter in the bottom 50dbar. When looking at CTD data from a transect
the phenomenon is not as clear. Figure 40 shows the backscatter data on the NEGS from the Fram
Strait Cruise 2023.
Figure 40. The backscatter data from the CTD data from the Fram Strait Cruise 2023. The section is defined as shown in
figure 27a.
==PAGE:56==
54
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
On the transect only two profiles around 10◦W to 11◦W record high backscatter in the bottom
waters, making it hard to draw any conclusions. It is not obvious if it is a constant phenomenon or
the CTD hitting the bottom (though that should not create a cloud reaching more than 50dbar in
height). Our floats were deployed on 9◦W and 11◦W which are right in the valley on the transect
so they record measurements right where we also see the Nephloid layer in the CTD data.
Another observation in the Argo backscatter data in figure 39 is the increased values during the
chl-a bloom we see around 25 dbar on the 13th and 24th of September. The increase in suspended
particles is also recorded with the backscatter data.
8.4
Freshwater content
Lastly, we want to calculate the freshwater content (FWC) based on the Argo float data on the
NEGS. The freshwater content is calculated with eq (1), where the reference salinity is 34.8psu and
the integral is from the surface to the bottom of the polar water (T<0◦). Only profiles deeper than
190dbar are used, to make sure the whole polar water layer is included. The average FWC for the
profiles is found as:
¯
FWC = 1
n
n
X
i=1
Z Z1i
Z0
Sref – Si(z)
Sref
= 14.6m
(2)
Where n is the number of profiles, Sref is 34.8psu, Z0 is the surface 0dbar and Z1 is the bottom of
the polar water ranging from 192-212dbar.
The mean freshwater content is 14.6m and the range is from 13.14m to 15.7m for all the profiles. The
FWC is stable in the data for September. Comparing these values to the model predictions presented
in figure 3 it does show an underestimation by the models. The models are an average of a year, so
no direct conclusion can be drawn. Our data shows that the FWC in early September persisted to
the end of the month. This calculation just shows some of the possibilities of the Argo data. When
the same calculation is made with mooring data they first need to interpolate the measurements from
the shallowest sensor (typically 50m) to the surface, which introduces large uncertainties, whereas
the Argo makes actual observations in the whole water column.
==PAGE:57==
55
9.
Baltic Sea Float
The two floats on the Northeast Greenland shelf are under the ice and we have no chance of getting
in contact with them before the ice breaks up again. The float in the Baltic Sea surfaces regularly
and that allows us to communicate back. Argo float lives their own life and follows the ocean after
deployment. This can be a concern, especially if the float is deployed close to the coast. Our missions
use bottom parking where the float makes itself heavier once at the bottom to try to stay in the same
place. This limits the drifting, but we still see some significant jumps in the position, indicating that
sometimes the bottom currents are so strong that the float cannot stay in place.
9.1
Bottom-parking
Bottom-parking is important in the Baltic Sea, so to have a closer look at what happens on the
bottom, we have plotted the backscatter on a depth and time plot in figure 41b and a map of the
trajectory in figure 41a
(a)MapofthetrajectoryofthefloatintheBaltic
Sea. Two profiles’ drifts are highlighted, which
are the longest drifts during parking and they
also correlate to changes in the depth during
parking.
(b) Plot of the depth and time of the float in the Baltic Sea color-coded
for backscatter. There seems to be a correlation between profiles
where the float has changed in depth during parking and high levels
of backscatter. Most profiles in 2023 are calm and the float stays on
the bottom, but in 2024 there is a lot more movement, during this
time there have also been many storms in the area.
Figure 41. The bottom parking of the Baltic Sea float
Figure 41b reveals a correlation between bottom-parking, where the float has changed in depth and
high levels of backscatter. Almost all profiles until the end of December are very stable on the bottom
and have no significant change in backscatter except one profile around the 21st Nov. Beyond the
20th of December there are many incidents of unstable bottom-parking (change in depths) and these
incidents also show high backscatter. Two cases are highlighted on the map in figure 41a from the
31st of Dec to the 5th of Jan and the 22nd to the 27th of Jan. The cases have large changes in the
depth during parking and the float drifts more than 10km in 5 days. We can conclude that there
must be some extra strong bottom currents sometimes that affect the bottom-parking ability.
Since the deployment, we have changed the parameter for detecting the bottom multiple times.
The bottom detection is based on volume displacement and change in depth. The threshold is set
==PAGE:58==
56
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
to how much the float can decrease the volume of the bladder without sinking further. The initial
value was 150cm3 and we quickly increased to 300cm3 to get through the helocline. After the remote
piloting tests, we increased the threshold to 500cm3 and decreased the time the float used to make
itself heavy, to make it ground faster. The reason we have increased the value in increments is to not
make the float too heavy and risk getting stuck in the bottom sediments. The current settings seem
promising.
9.2
Test: Remote piloting part 1
The Baltic Sea float has been used to test if it’s possible to remotely pilot the float away from the coast
and back to the planned location. This will be done by watching the current forecasts and changing
the pattern of the float regarding depth and duration. Two tests were conducted, the first was to
design the best configuration for drifting with the surface currents and make a standardized procedure.
For this test, we have watched the weather forecasts in the area around Bornholm. The float is
deployed west of Bornholm there the wind mostly is going east pushing the float towards the
coast. On the weekend of 5th to 8th of January, there was a storm causing west-going currents
as seen in figure 42. This opportunity was used to attempt to move the float away from the coast again.
Figure 42. A snapshot of the surface currents on Sunday the 7th at 19:00. The approximate location of the float is marked
with the pink x. The current will drag the float southwest, which is the perfect direction to get away from the coast and
closer to the center of the Arkona basin. The mission was based on weather forecasts and remote commands altering the
configuration of the float when it surfaces. For a logbog of the mission view Appendix G
The aim of the test: Is to assess the possibility of remotely piloting the float with the currents based
on forecasts. Focus on designing the best configuration for drifting with the currents.
The procedure: When the float is at the surface it can receive a command file altering the configu-
ration. We need to test how to configure the float to best make it follow the surface currents. First,
==PAGE:59==
57
we tried a pattern where the float dived to 15dbar and was drifting for 6h. The float has limitations
on depth and it went to 25dbar for the parking then descended to the bottom and back to the surface.
This was not what we wanted. We tried the same set-up with a slightly deeper drifting depth of
20dbar hoping that could force the float to stay there, but we got the same output. We then tried
another way, where we forced the float to only use 2h on the pattern. In that way the float did not
have time to descend very far and ended up making a yo-yo pattern from the surface to around
25dbar, thereby spending most of its time in the surface waters. This was considered successful. We
continued the 2h pattern and regularly checked the forecast at the surfacing times and positions.
When the float started to move slightly north, we changed back to the normal operation of a 5-day
cycle with bottom-parking. For a logbook of the mission see Appendix G. Figure 43 shows the
trajectory and depth profiles during the mission.
(a) The map of the surface positions during the
mission. In total, we moved the float 20km from
the 5th to the 8th of January.
(b) The time and depth of the profiles during the mission. The mission
started on the 5th of Jan and ran until the 8th. We tested different
configurations. And had to bottom-park the float on the evening of the
5th until the 7th due to the forecast.
Figure 43. The remote piloting mission 1. First, we tried the 6h drift at 15dbar, which didn’t work as expected. On the 7th we
tried the 6h drift at 20dbar instead. The first drift didn’t seem promising so we changed the procedure to quick 2h profiles,
which was successful. Looking at the data for the 2nd 6h drift on the 7th of Jan, the float followed the current nicely and
stayed around 15dbar, but the configuration change to the 2h yo-yo was already uploaded when the data was received and
the 2h pattern was more reliable, so we continued with that until the float started to move slightly north, and the normal
operational pattern of 5-days cycles was re-activated.
9.2.1
Conclusion of first remote piloting mission
In the end, we successfully move the float 20km in the desired direction. It took a few tries to find
the configuration making the float behave as desired. This is due to some pre-set settings on the float
that do not allow for shallow depths. Based on this test we have designed two configuration files to
be used in the future if we want to follow the surface currents. One file changes the configuration to
pattern 1, which is prepared with depth and time to make the float yo-yo in the surface waters and
turn off the unnecessary sensors, and a second file switches back to pattern 3, with the 5-day cycle,
and turns on the sensors again. During a new mission, it is still necessary to watch the float while
surfacing because it is important to see how fast it moves with the current and if it stays on track.
There can be local divisions in the forecast and the forecast is only a prediction and not the truth.
==PAGE:60==
58
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
9.3
Test: Remote piloting part 2
Between the 6th and 11th of February, the currents had shifted to southwest, and since the last test
the float had moved far north, so it was time to make a second test of remote piloting. The same
procedure and prepared configuration files were applied and the remote piloting mission pt. 2 started.
Appendix H is a logbook of the test. The surface current had a perfect direction for almost the whole
mission, with two short periods where we parked the float on the bottom and resumed the mission
approximately 12 hours and 34 hours later. Figure 44 shows the current forecasts for the period of
the mission.
(a) The forecast for surface currents on the 7th of February where
we started the mission. The white dot in the approximate location
of the Argo.
(b) The forecast for surface currents on the 11th of
February late in the mission, where we soon after
ended the mission due to the float moving east. The
white dot in the approximate location of the Argo.
Figure 44. The surface current forecast for the 2nd remote piloting mission 7th and 11th of February.
The float moved south but not so much west. The trajectory of the float is shown in figure 45a
where the beginning of the mission is the northernmost point marked with the date 7th of February
and the end is marked with the 11th of February. The float has a setback twice which is during the
bottom parking events as seen in figure 45b.
(a) The map of the surface positions during the
mission from the 7th to the 11th of February.
(b) The time and depth of the profiles during the mission. The mission
started on the 7th of Feb and ran until the 11th. We had to bottom-park
the float twice due to the forecast.
Figure 45. The remote piloting mission 2. The float was moved a lot south and only slightly west, even though the surface
current was going southwest during the whole mission. The 2h yo-yo pattern did not perform as well as for the first mission
because the float descents so deep on every profile. For the last few profiles, the 2h duration was changed to 1.5h to avoid
going too deep, but the float still managed to reach (near) the bottom.
==PAGE:61==
59
The trajectory shown in figure 45a does not match what was expected by the surface current direc-
tions. On the last surface positions, the float starts to move east even though the surface currents go
southwest. We also learned that the 2h yo-yo pattern was not as efficient this time because the float
dives pretty deep anyway as seen in figure 45b.
A script estimating the trajectory based on data on the current in the water column and the float
position and depth is used to evaluate the journey. The water column data is extracted from
Copernicus: Baltic Sea Physics Analysis and Forecast14 with the data on eastward velocity, northward
velocity, and upward velocity only for the area of the float and from 6th to 12th of Feb from 0.5-60
dbar. The script predicts the movement based on the currents from the last position the float has
surfaced and it takes the depth profiles of the float into account.
Figure 46. A simulation of the trajectory based on ocean velocity data and the float’s position and profiling depths. The blue
stars are the surface locations of the float, the thin black line is the trajectory, and the thick colored lines are the simulated
trajectory based on velocity data. The simulations show that it is not enough to look at the surface currents to pilot the
floats. Looking closely at the predicted location (end of thick colored lines) and the actual locations (stars), we see that all
locations are south and/or west of the predictions. This indicates that part of the drifting happens at the surface.
The result is shown in figure 46, the stars are the surface locations of the float, the thin black line
is the trajectory, and the thick colored lines are the simulated trajectory based on velocity data.
Looking at the simulation it makes sense that the float did not move as southwest as the surface
14https://data.marine.copernicus.eu/product/BALTICSEA_ANALYSISFORECAST_PHY_003_006/description
==PAGE:62==
60
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
current showed us on Windy.com. With a closer look, one might notice that all the actual locations
of the float are south and/or west of the prediction. This indicates that part of the float movement
happens while at the surface. The surface currents and wind have been going southwest and the
water column velocities have been going mostly south. So the water column velocities themselves
do not only account for the movement of the float but combined with what we observed on the
forecast for surface currents and wind the movement makes more sense.
The long purple track in the middle is the prediction during the 12h parking, luckily the float
does not move that far, which proves some benefits of the bottom-parking feature because it has
limited the drifting.
9.3.1
Conclusion of remote piloting missions
Overall, these tests have shown that it is possible to deliberately move the float based on current
forecasts. The configuration for making the float drift can be tuned even more to stay shallow. The
second test taught us, that a remote piloting mission can not be based solely on the surface currents,
but need to take the whole profiling depth into account. The data on Copernicus makes a forecast
for 5 days into the future which can be extracted and used to plan a remote piloting mission. The
simulation script has some uncertainties and with the inclusion of the surface current and winds, a
more precise estimate might be possible to make. The possibility of predicting the trajectory based
on modeled data also opens up the possibility of automatizing the process.
==PAGE:63==
61
10.
Discussion
This project has illustrated the importance of conducting more samples in the Arctic and also the
potential of Argo floats. Argo floats already produce the world’s largest ocean data set and has started
to include marginal seas. Many initiatives to include the Arctic have been made and so far only the
Ice-Sensing-Algorithm is an off-the-shelf feature for ice avoidance. The Arctic is in rapid change
and the freshwater content and flux are important to monitor to be able to understand the changes
and their impact. One major concern of the increased amount of freshwater is its potential impact
on the AMOC. The AMOC forms deep water in the sub-polar region and that formation is sensitive
to the freshwater content because more freshwater will lower the density and potentially hinder the
sinking of water.
The current ways of collecting data in the Arctic are research cruises, satellite data, and moorings.
They all have their limitations and the use of new ways to collect data is important to test. Using
Argo float in the Arctic has started, but in the most icy areas, often close the the coast on shelves,
the amount of Argos is very limited. This project tries to map the challenges and potential of using
Argo float on shelves, with a focus on the Northeast Greenland Shelf. The major challenge is the sea
ice. The ice puts the float at risk of damaging the sensors and antenna if the floats ascent into the ice
and the ice prevents the transmission of data and getting a GPS location for the profiles. Floats with
the ice avoidance feature, use the Ice-sensing-Algorithm (ISA) to estimate if there is ice at the surface
and can decide to abort the ascent and make a new cycle. In the project, an analysis of the ISA was
performed and it shows that the algorithm with area-specific parameterisation can decrease the risk
of collision a lot. The analysis was only made with data from September, where the best values were
a collection zone from 30-5dbar and a temperature threshold of -1.15◦C. The ISA could perform
even better if the starting depth of the collection zone was shallower, but the float has limitations on
the parameter. To further evaluate the ISA a larger dataset of temperatures in the surface 50m and
the sea ice stage from the rest of the year should be analysed. Most important, is data from when the
ice breaks, because we need to choose parameter values that will allow the float to ascent under those
conditions to get all the data from under the ice.
As a contribution to the ice protection a small design study has been conducted, where three
concepts were developed. The concepts were rated with a decision matrix (Pugh diagram), and The
Rod design gave the best result. However, it would be best to make prototypes and test all concepts
before choosing one. Tests should include the ability to protect the antenna and sensors and limit
the risk of getting stuck on the ice, the effects on the buoyancy of the float, and if the concept can
withhold the impact of the ice and marine conditions.
When Argo floats are deployed it’s best-practice to make a CTD cast to have profiles to compare
the sensor performance with. We did that for all three deployments. The configuration of float 001
resulted in the first profiles being too shallow, so the Argo profiles used for comparison were further
away in space and time, introducing some uncertainties. The configuration of float 003 resulted in
==PAGE:64==
62
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
the float not being able to reach the seabed due to the strong halocline in the Baltic Sea, so only one
section of stable parameters could be used for comparison. Overall the Sensor validation analysis
showed that the oxygen sensor performed well and the differences were within two sensor limitations.
For the float 003 analysis, the oxygen sensor on the CTD seems to have a wrong calibration because
it was measuring 25µmol/kg lower than the expected full saturation would be at the surface. It was
possible to find small systematic errors in the salinity and temperature which could mean that sensors
have an offset, but it could also be that the water masses measured were just slightly different. It is
hard to conclude from only one profile. It is assumed that the CTD is the ground truth but in reality,
the sensors on the CTD drift as well and need calibration. Taking into account that the Argo floats
and CTDs were not in the exact same locations the performance of the Argo sensors seems good.
The temperature, salinity, and oxygen sensors all perform well and give reliable numeric values.
Whereas the ECO sensor has some flaws. The CDOM data is rounded off too much before
transmission so the output lacks resolution. The Chl-a and Backscatter data have an adequate
resolution but are not calibrated to give numeric reliable values, so their data is used for relative
comparisons only.
Analysing the data from NEGS for September, four water masses were identified, the Surface
water, the Surface Polar water, the Polar Halocline, and the Atlantic water at the bottom. The data
showed an intense cooling in the surface water during September and also a small chl-a bloom with
peaks on the 13th and 24th of September. Diving into the data the peak might be caused by an
intruding watermass either carrying the chl-a or supplying nutrients to shallower waters allowing the
bloom. The backscatter data also showed a small peak during the chl-a bloom. The backscatter data
also reveal and Nephloid layer at the bottom. Significantly high backscatter values dominated the
bottom 50-90dbar and were constant over time. This is something hard to conclude from CTD data
because it does not track over time and only a few profiles show the Nephloid layer on the transect.
The floats were deployed right in the valley where the CTD data also showed high backscatter values.
This indicated that the Nephloid currents move around in the underwater valleys and troughs. Lastly,
a calculation of the freshwater content was made and showed an average of 14.8m, which was higher
than the models estimated. The dataset from the NEGS was small and the selected result was only a
demonstration of what the Argo data can be used for. If all the data from the overwintering period is
transmitted next summer a very high-resolution dataset from a very undersampled area will become
available. With the data the spring bloom can be investigated, the yearly freshwater content can be
calculated to improve models, and local dynamics and trends under the sea ice will be revealed.
Moving to the Baltic Sea the float, the major concern was drifting ashore or away from the area of
interest. The strong halocline also caused some issues for the float. The initial configuration was
too sensitive so the float parked on the halocline instead of the sea bed. It was considered a concern
to make the float too heavy during bottom parking because of the risk of getting stuck in the soft
sea bed. But the float needs to be heavy enough to descend through the halocline and also heavy
enough to withstand the bottom currents. The threshold for the bottom detection was initially set to
150cm3 and quickly increased to 300cm3. During the second remote poling mission it was decided
==PAGE:65==
63
the increase it further to 500cm3. This value seems reasonable.
The Baltic Sea float was also used to test if it’s possible to remotely pilot the float based on ocean
currents and configurations. The test proved that it was possible, but more fine-tuning on the
configuration to stay shallow was needed and a procedure including the velocity in the water column
should be set up. The data on Copernicus delivers a forecast of the velocities 5 days into the future,
which would make it possible to plan the remote piloting mission a lot more thoroughly and thereby
get a better result. Being able the use forecasts and remote commands opens up the possibility of
making the process automatic. There is a potential of developing a procedure where a program
checks the location and forecast before the surfacing and evaluates if the float is off track and can be
moved with the current on track and thereby decides to switch pattern or stay on normal cycle.
11.
Recommendations
Overall this project has found that Argo floats can be used on shelves. They need area-specific
configurations and for deployments in icy conditions, a pre-analysis of the ISA parameters should be
made and a mechanical protection feature should be developed. Suitable parameterize for the ISA on
NEGS is found to be a collection zone 30-5dbar and a temperature threshold of -1.15◦C, though if
data is available for when the ice breaks up that could be included in the analysis as well.
The next step for gaining high-quality data under the sea ice is to be able to track where the float
was to have a location of the profiles under the ice. Two methods that could be implemented on
the NEGS are the bathymetry-contained approach because the NEGS has a fairly hilly terrain or
acoustic tracking. The acoustic tracking requires more planning and instruments, but the size of
the shelf makes it possible to fairly easily cover the shelf. The bathymetry-contained approach can
be implemented after the data is collected so for the dataset arriving when the ice breaks up, this
approach is recommended.
In the Baltic Sea, the bottom detection threshold can be set to 500cm3 to make sure the float
descents through the halocline and park firmly on the sea bed. For the remote piloting mission the
configuration for drifting in the surface water needs some more fine tuning. One way to work
around the pre-set limitations is to overwrite them with a special access code. In that way, we can
make a configuration forcing the float to stay at a certain shallow depth e.g. 15dbar, checking more
often if the depth is kept and lowering the parking depth threshold. This can help with a more exact
positioning underwater. The script estimating the trajectory based on ocean velocities should be
updated to include the surface wind/currents as well. The 2nd remote piloting test showed that the
surface velocity affects the movement. An updated procedure (script) can already be made and tested
with the data we have from the conducted tests. The second step for the script is to start predicting.
The ocean data is available on Copernicus 5 days into the future. To predict the trajectory efficiently
we need to have a good estimation of the profiling depths, hence the importance of finding a good
configuration first.
==PAGE:66==
64
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
Acknowledgement
I want to thank my supervisor Colin Stedmon for making this project possible and being very
supportive throughout the process. I also want to thank Caroline Gjelstrup for insightful conversations.
My co-supervisor Patrizio also deserved a thank you for the help and guidance. Thanks to the Fram
Strait Cruise crew and scientists for making it possible to deploy Argo floats on the Northeast
Greenland Shelf. Thanks to the crew and scientists on RV Dana for the collaboration on the short
notice of the Argo deployment in the Baltic Sea. I want to acknowledge my fellow students writing
their thesis and sharing the office. Especially Dirk, who has helped multiple times with practical
Argo stuff. Last a massive thanks to Christophe from NKE, who has helped many times with the
float, both in stressful situations and also just teaching me how the whole thing works. Thanks for
your quick responses and patience with a very unconventional way of using Argo floats. Finally
thanks to friends, family, and my boyfriend, Troels, for supporting me in the processes and listening
to my buoy adventures.
==PAGE:67==
65
References
K. Aagaard and E. C. Carmack. The role of sea ice and other fresh water in the arctic circulation. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans, 94(C10):14485–14498, 1989. https://doi.org/10.1029/JC094iC10p14485. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1029/JC094iC10p14485.
X. André, P.-Y. Le Traon, S. Le Reste, V. Dutreuil, E. Leymarie, D. Malardé, C. Marec, J. Sagot, M. Amice, M. Babin, H. Claus-
tre, A. David, F. D’Ortenzio, N. Kolodziejczyk, J. L. Lagunas, M. Le Menn, B. Moreau, D. Nogré, C. Penkerc’h, A. Poteau,
C. Renaut, C. Schaeffer, V. Taillandier, and V. Thierry. Preparing the new phase of argo: Technological developments on
profiling floats in the naos project. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7, 2020. ISSN 2296-7745. 10.3389/fmars.2020.577446. URL
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmars.2020.577446.
J. E. Arndt, W. Jokat, B. Dorschel, R. Myklebust, J. A. Dowdeswell, and J. Evans. A new bathymetry of the northeast greenland
continental shelf: Constraints on glacial and other processes. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 16(10):3733–3753, 2015.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2015GC005931. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/2015GC005931.
Bates, Peter, Alverson, Keith, and Ioc. Intergovernmental oceanographic commission why monitor the arctic ocean? services
to society from a sustained ocean observing system united nations educational, scientific and cultural organization. 2010.
O. Boebel, H. Freeland, B. King, P.-Y. LeTraon, R. Molinari, W. B. Owens, S. Riser, U. Send, K. Takeuchi, S. Wijffels, and
D. c. Roemmich. On the design and implementation of argo a global array of profiling floats. 12 1998.
E. C. Carmack, M. Yamamoto-Kawai, T. W. N. Haine, S. Bacon, B. A. Bluhm, C. Lique, H. Melling, I. V. Polyakov,
F. Straneo, M.-L. Timmermans, and W. J. Williams. Freshwater and its role in the arctic marine system: Sources, disposition,
storage, export, and physical and biogeochemical consequences in the arctic and global oceans. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Biogeosciences, 121(3):675–717, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015JG003140. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/2015JG003140.
D. J. Conley, S. Björck, E. Bonsdorff, J. Carstensen, G. Destouni, B. G. Gustafsson, S. Hietanen, M. Kortekaas, H. Kuosa, H. E.
Markus Meier, B. Müller-Karulis, K. Nordberg, A. Norkko, G. Nürnberg, H. Pitkänen, N. N. Rabalais, R. Rosenberg,
O. P. Savchuk, C. P. Slomp, M. Voss, F. Wulff, and L. Zillén. Hypoxia-related processes in the baltic sea. Environmental
Science & Technology, 43(10):3412–3420, 2009. 10.1021/es802762a. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/es802762a. PMID:
19544833.
B. Curry, C. M. Lee, B. Petrie, R. E. Moritz, and R. Kwok. Multiyear volume, liquid freshwater, and sea ice transports through
davis strait, 2004–10. Journal of Physical Oceanography, 44(4):1244 – 1266, 2014. https://doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-13-0177.1.
URL https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/phoc/44/4/jpo-d-13-0177.1.xml.
P. A. Dodd, B. Rabe, E. Hansen, E. Falck, A. Mackensen, E. Rohling, C. Stedmon, and S. Kristiansen. The freshwater
composition of the fram strait outflow derived from a decade of tracer measurements. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans, 117(C11), 2012. https://doi.org/10.1029/2012JC008011. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1029/2012JC008011.
C. V. Gjelstrup, M. K. Sejr, L. de Steur, J. S. Christiansen, M. A. Granskog, B. P. Koch, E. F. Møller, M. H. Winding, and
C. A. Stedmon. Vertical redistribution of principle water masses on the northeast greenland shelf. Nature Communications,
13, 12 2022. ISSN 20411723. 10.1038/s41467-022-35413-z.
T. W. Haine, B. Curry, R. Gerdes, E. Hansen, M. Karcher, C. Lee, B. Rudels, G. Spreen, L. de Steur, K. D. Stewart, and
R. Woodgate. Arctic freshwater export: Status, mechanisms, and prospects. Global and Planetary Change, 125:13–35, 2015.
ISSN 0921-8181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2014.11.013. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921818114003129.
T. W. N. Haine, A. H. Siddiqui, and W. Jiang. Arctic freshwater impact on the atlantic meridional overturning circulation:
status and prospects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 381
(2262):20220185, 2023. 10.1098/rsta.2022.0185. URL https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rsta.2022.0185.
==PAGE:68==
66
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
E. Hansen, S. Gerland, G. Spreen, and K. Høyland. The Seasonal Cycle of Sea Ice Thickness on the North East Greenland
Shelf. All Days:OTC–25572–MS, 03 2015. 10.4043/25572-MS. URL https://doi.org/10.4043/25572-MS.
HELCOM. State of the baltic sea 2023. HOLAS 3, 3, 2023. URL https://helcom.fi/baltic-sea-trends/holistic-assessments/
state-of-the-baltic-sea-2023/.
E. L. Hoffman, B. Subrahmanyam, C. B. Trott, and S. B. Hall. Comparison of freshwater content and variability in the arctic
ocean using observations and model simulations. Remote Sensing, 15(15), 2023. ISSN 2072-4292. 10.3390/rs15153715.
URL https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/15/15/3715.
S. M. Hvidegaard, R. Forsberg, S. Hanson, H. Skourup, and L. T. Pedersen. Sea ice conditions off nw and ne greenland
from satellite measurements, airborne and in-situ data. National Space Institute (DTU-Space) Technical University of Denmark
Center for Oceans and Ice Danish Meteorological Institute, 2008.
T. Karpouzoglou, L. de Steur, L. H. Smedsrud, and H. Sumata. Observed changes in the arctic freshwater outflow in fram
strait. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 127, 3 2022. ISSN 21699291. 10.1029/2021JC018122.
O. Klatt, O. Boebel, and E. Fahrbach. A profiling float’s sense of ice. Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 24(7):1301
– 1308, 2007. 10.1175/JTECH2026.1. URL https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/atot/24/7/jtech2026_1.xml.
J. Lagunas-Morales, E. Leymarie, C. Marec, M. Babin, C. Penkerc’h, P. Desaulniers, D. Brousseau, P. Larochelle, S. Thibault,
G. Roy, G. Fournier, and E. Rehm. Sea-ice detection for autonomous underwater vehicles and oceanographic lagrangian
platforms by continuous-wave laser polarimetry. page 34, 05 2018. 10.1117/12.2309571.
P.-Y. Le Traon. From satellite altimetry to argo and operational oceanography: Three revolutions in oceanography. Ocean
Science, 9:901–915, 2013. ISSN 18120784. 10.5194/os-9-901-2013.
I. McCave. Nepheloid layers. In J. H. Steele, editor, Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences (Second Edition), pages 8–18. Academic Press,
Oxford, second edition edition, 2009. ISBN 978-0-12-374473-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012374473-9.00671-8.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123744739006718.
M. Merchel, W. Walczowski, D. Rak, and P. Wieczorek. The use of argo floats as virtual moorings for monitoring
the south baltic sea. Oceanologia, 2024. ISSN 0078-3234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceano.2024.01.002. URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0078323424000034.
P. R. Oke, T. Rykova, G. S. Pilo, and J. L. Lovell. Estimating argo float trajectories under ice. Earth and Space Science, 9(7):
e2022EA002312, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1029/2022EA002312. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1029/2022EA002312. e2022EA002312 2022EA002312.
S. Pugh. Concept selection: a method that works. In V. Hubka, editor, Review of design methodology, page 497 – 506, Zürich,
1981. Heurista.
M. Rantanen, A. Karpechko, A. Lipponen, K. Nordling, O. Hyvarinen, K. Ruosteenoja, T. Vihma, and A. Laaksonen. The
arctic has warmed nearly four times faster than the globe since 1979. Communications Earth Environment, 3:168, 08 2022.
10.1038/s43247-022-00498-3.
D. Roemmich, M. H. Alford, H. Claustre, K. Johnson, B. King, J. Moum, P. Oke, W. B. Owens, S. Pouliquen, S. Purkey,
M. Scanderbeg, T. Suga, S. Wijffels, N. Zilberman, D. Bakker, M. Baringer, M. Belbeoch, H. C. Bittig, E. Boss, P. Calil,
F. Carse, T. Carval, F. Chai, D. Conchubhair, F. d’Ortenzio, G. Dall’Olmo, D. Desbruyeres, K. Fennel, I. Fer, R. Ferrari,
G. Forget, H. Freeland, T. Fujiki, M. Gehlen, B. Greenan, R. Hallberg, T. Hibiya, S. Hosoda, S. Jayne, M. Jochum,
G. C. Johnson, K. Kang, N. Kolodziejczyk, A. Körtzinger, P.-Y. L. Traon, Y.-D. Lenn, G. Maze, K. A. Mork, T. Morris,
T. Nagai, J. Nash, A. N. Garabato, A. Olsen, R. R. Pattabhi, S. Prakash, S. Riser, C. Schmechtig, C. Schmid, E. Shroyer,
A. Sterl, P. Sutton, L. Talley, T. Tanhua, V. Thierry, S. Thomalla, J. Toole, A. Troisi, T. W. Trull, J. Turton, P. J. Velez-
Belchi, W. Walczowski, H. Wang, R. Wanninkhof, A. F. Waterhouse, S. Waterman, A. Watson, C. Wilson, A. P. S. Wong,
J. Xu, and I. Yasuda. On the future of argo: A global, full-depth, multi-disciplinary array. Frontiers in Marine Science, 6,
2019. ISSN 2296-7745. 10.3389/fmars.2019.00439. URL https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmars.2019.00439.
==PAGE:69==
67
D. Roemmich, W. S. Wilson, W. J. Gould, W. B. Owens, P. Y. L. Traon, H. J. Freeland, B. A. King, S. Wijffels, P. J. Sutton,
and N. Zilberman. The argo program. Partnerships in Marine Research: Case Studies, Lessons Learned, and Policy Implications,
pages 53–69, 1 2022. 10.1016/B978-0-323-90427-8.00004-6.
M. C. Serreze, A. P. Barrett, A. G. Slater, R. A. Woodgate, K. Aagaard, R. B. Lammers, M. Steele, R. Moritz, M. Meredith,
and C. M. Lee. The large-scale freshwater cycle of the arctic. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 111(C11), 2006.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2005JC003424. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2005JC003424.
G. C. Smith, R. Allard, M. Babin, L. Bertino, M. Chevallier, G. K. Corlett, J. Crout, F. Davidson, B. Delille, S. T. Gille,
D. Hebert, P. Hyder, J. Intrieri, J. Lagunas, G. Larnicol, T. Kaminski, B. J. Kater, F. Kauker, C. Marec, M. Mazloff, E. J.
Metzger, C. Mordy, A. G. O’Carroll, S. M. Olsen, M. Phelps, P. Posey, P. Prandi, E. Rehm, P. Reid, I. Rigor, S. Sandven,
S. Swart, O. M. Smedstad, A. Solomon, A. Storto, P. Thibaut, J. Toole, K. Wood, J. Xie, and Q. Yang. Polar ocean
observations: A critical gap in the observing system and its effect on environmental predictions from hours to a season.
Frontiers in Marine Science, 6, 2019. ISSN 22967745. 10.3389/fmars.2019.00429.
B. Szymczycha, A. Zaborska, J. Bełdowski, K. Kuliński, A. Beszczyńska-Möller, M. Kędra, and J. Pempkowiak. Chapter 4 -
the baltic sea. In C. Sheppard, editor, World Seas: an Environmental Evaluation (Second Edition), pages 85–111. Academic
Press, second edition edition, 2019. ISBN 978-0-12-805068-2. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805068-2.00005-X.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012805068200005X.
W. Walczowski, M. Merchel, D. Rak, P. Wieczorek, and I. Goszczko. Argo floats in the southern baltic sea. Oceanologia, 62:
478–488, 10 2020. ISSN 23007370. 10.1016/j.oceano.2020.07.001.
L. O. Wallace, E. M. van Wijk, S. R. Rintoul, and B. Hally.
Bathymetry-constrained navigation of argo floats
under sea ice on the antarctic continental shelf.
Geophysical Research Letters, 47(11):e2020GL087019, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL087019. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2020GL087019.
e2020GL087019 2020GL087019.
A. P. S. Wong, S. E. Wijffels, S. C. Riser, S. Pouliquen, S. Hosoda, D. Roemmich, J. Gilson, G. C. Johnson, K. Martini, D. J.
Murphy, M. Scanderbeg, T. V. S. U. Bhaskar, J. J. H. Buck, F. Merceur, T. Carval, G. Maze, C. Cabanes, X. André,
N. Poffa, I. Yashayaev, P. M. Barker, S. Guinehut, M. Belbéoch, M. Ignaszewski, M. O. Baringer, C. Schmid, J. M.
Lyman, K. E. McTaggart, S. G. Purkey, N. Zilberman, M. B. Alkire, D. Swift, W. B. Owens, S. R. Jayne, C. Hersh,
P. Robbins, D. West-Mack, F. Bahr, S. Yoshida, P. J. H. Sutton, R. Cancouët, C. Coatanoan, D. Dobbler, A. G. Juan,
J. Gourrion, N. Kolodziejczyk, V. Bernard, B. Bourlès, H. Claustre, F. D’Ortenzio, S. Le Reste, P.-Y. Le Traon, J.-P.
Rannou, C. Saout-Grit, S. Speich, V. Thierry, N. Verbrugge, I. M. Angel-Benavides, B. Klein, G. Notarstefano, P.-M.
Poulain, P. Vélez-Belchí, T. Suga, K. Ando, N. Iwasaska, T. Kobayashi, S. Masuda, E. Oka, K. Sato, T. Nakamura, K. Sato,
Y. Takatsuki, T. Yoshida, R. Cowley, J. L. Lovell, P. R. Oke, E. M. van Wijk, F. Carse, M. Donnelly, W. J. Gould,
K. Gowers, B. A. King, S. G. Loch, M. Mowat, J. Turton, E. P. Rama Rao, M. Ravichandran, H. J. Freeland, I. Gaboury,
D. Gilbert, B. J. W. Greenan, M. Ouellet, T. Ross, A. Tran, M. Dong, Z. Liu, J. Xu, K. Kang, H. Jo, S.-D. Kim, and
H.-M. Park. Argo data 1999–2019: Two million temperature-salinity profiles and subsurface velocity observations from a
global array of profiling floats. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7, 2020. ISSN 2296-7745. 10.3389/fmars.2020.00700. URL
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmars.2020.00700.
==PAGE:70==
68
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
A
Appendix: Matlab code
All Matlab code and files are attached as a zip file: Bodil_Matlab_Thesis.zip. Below is a table
with the files, their use, and a description of the content.
Procedure:
1. Open Run_data and choose the float number in line 8
2. Make the plots and ANOVA analysis for float 1, 2, or 3 with Plot_float1, Plot_float3, or
Plot_float3
3. Run_abs_error for the absolute error plot
4. Run_ISA for the plots in the ISA analysis
5. Run_NEGS for the plots in the NEGS selected result analysis
==PAGE:71==
69
File name
Type
Use
Desciption
Ana_float1.mat
Data
Used in Run_abs_error
Data for the absolute error analysis
Ana_float2.mat
Data
Used in Run_abs_error
Data for the absolute error analysis
Ana_float3.mat
Data
Used in Run_abs_error
Data for the absolute error analysis
Data_float1.mat
Data
Used in Run_NEGS and Run_ISA
The_data matrix for float 1
Data_float2.mat
Data
Used in Run_NEGS and Run_ISA
The_data matrix for float 2
Data_float3.mat
Data
The_data matrix for float 3
floatid
Function
Used in Run_data
Contains float specific information
interpolate_eco
Code
Used in Run_data
Interpolates the ECO sensor data to match SBE
interpolate_ocr
Code
Used in Run_data
Interpolates the OCR sensor data to match SBE
interpolate_oxygen
Code
Used in Run_data
Interpolates the DO sensor data to match SBE
interpolate_sbe
Code
Used in Run_data
Interpolates the SBE sensor data to 0.2dbar
Loc_float1
Data
Used in Run_NEGS
Location data for float 1
Loc_float2
Data
Used in Run_NEGS
Location data for float 2
Loc_float3
Data
mapdata
Data
Used in plot_float3
High resolution map for Baltic Sea plots
Plot_float1
Code
Use after Run_data for float 1
Plots for the Validation Section
Plot_float2
Code
Use after Run_data for float 2
Plots for the Validation Section
Plot_float3
Code
Use after Run_data for float 3
Plots for the Validation Section and Baltic sea test
Read_sensor_load_data
Function
Used in Run_data
Read and load all raw sensor data
Read_technical
Function
Used in Run_data
Read and load all technical files
readCnv
Function
Used in Run_data
Read CTD files
Run_abs_error
Code
Run by itself
Plots the absolute error plot for Validation Section
Run_data
Code
Run by itself
Run for each float. Change float number in line 8.
Run_ISA
Code
Run by itself
Plot and analysis for ISA Section
Run_NEGS
Code
Run by itself
Plot and analysis for Selected results in NEGS
Drifting_simulation
Folder
Used for the trajectory simulation
Run the file float3_plots
Float_1
Folder
Used in Run_data
Contains raw data, initial configuration
and mission updates
Float_2
Folder
Used in Run_data
Contains raw data, initial configuration
and mission updates
Float_3
Folder
Used in Run_data
Contains raw data
FS_CTD
Folder
Used in Run_ISA
Contains CTD station on the NEGS
from Fram Strait Cruise 2023
==PAGE:72==
70
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
B
Appendix: Oxygen conversion and compensation
Oxygen data conversion and compensation for dept and salinity. Document made by Aanderaa and
used formulas are implemented in my MatLab script.
==PAGE:73==
 
NEGS deployments 
On the 3rd of September 2023 float 001 was deployed (left sheet). It was configured as (file: 
560a_014_00_ampt.ini).  
On the 4th of September 2023 float 002 was deployed (right sheet). It was configured as (file: 
560b_022_00_ampt.ini). 
The deployment sheet made by NKE was used: 
     
 
The ship location and time are also noted. The Argo sends a file containing the time and location right before 
it dives. 
Float 001: 
560a_014_autotest_00001.txt: 
[GPS] UTC=23-09-03 15:17:22 Lat=7849.99643N Long=00900.06674W 
 
Float 002: 
560b_022_autotest_00001.txt: 
[GPS] UTC=23-09-04 00:28:21 Lat=7849.90645N Long=01101.74168W 
 
 
 
71
C
Appendix: NEGS deployments
==PAGE:74==
The configuration plan 
Three patterns were pre-planned. The picture below visualizes the patterns, only one is active on the float at 
once.  
The first pattern, P1, is set to a depth much deeper than on the shelf and a duration of 0h. It is configured to 
ascent as soon as it detects the bottom. This setup didn't work as desired because the float did not descend 
to the bottom on all profiles. Therefore, we quickly swift to pattern 2, P2, where the float is forced to use 5 
hours on a profile. Float 001 was covered with ice short after the activation to P2, so we did not have a 
chance to change to P3. Float 002 was changed to P3 after a few days.  
 
Configuration history for float 001: 
4th September 2023 at 4:24 AM (Norway time) (2:24AM UTC) 
Upload command file. Content: 
!param-pattern_01-0:False 
!param-pattern_02-0:True 
!param-security-0:2 (static bottom detection strategy) 
!param-alarm-9:200 (Volume threshold for bottom detection) 
!param-isa-0:True (Turn on ISA) 
!param-isa-3:-1.7 (Temp threshold for ISA) 
 
6th September 2023 at 15:53 (Norway time) (13:53 UTC) 
!param-pattern_02-3:21600 (6h) 
OBS: never read. Overwrite by new command file the 8th. 
 
8th September 2023 at 15:57 (Norway time) uploaded (never read): 
!param-pattern_02-0:False 
!param-pattern_03-0:True 
!param-technical-21:1 (less deceleration at the surface) 
 
==PAGE:75==
Sea Ice 3rd and 4th: 
Left: Sea ice on the 4th Sep and ship route. Argo deployment on red stars. Yellow stars are Argo location. 
Right: Sea ice on the 9th Sep:  
 
Configuration history for Float 002:
4th September 2023 at 4:24 AM (Norway time) (2:24 AM UTC) 
Upload command file. Content: 
!param-pattern_01-0:False 
!param-pattern_02-0:True 
!param-security-0:2 (static bottom detection strategy) 
!param-alarm-9:200 (Volume threshold for bottom detection) 
!param-isa-0:True (Turn on ISA) 
!param-isa-3:-1.7 (Temp threshold for ISA) 
 
5th September 2023 at 21:13 (Norway time) (19:13 UTC) 
!param-pattern_02-3:21600 (6h) 
 
8th September 2023 at 15:57 (Norway time) 
!param-pattern_02-0:False 
!param-pattern_03-0:True 
!param-technical-21:1 (less deceleration at the surface) 
Sea Ice 14th and 18th : 
 
Argo 001 location has been covered all the time. Argo 002 location (yellow stars 79N 11W) is ice-free, but the 
ice-free surface is decreasing for every image.  
==PAGE:76==
Station
CTD date
CTD time
Ship date
Ship time
pic no.
Image
Ice?
median (30-
10dbar)
median (30-
5dbar)
long 
lat
230 Sep 02 2023
12:49:40
2023-09-02
14:49:40
889
yes/little
1
-1.21
-1.28
006 
00.96 
W
78 
50.32 
N
231 Sep 02 2023
14:47:03
2023-09-02
16:47:03
1008
no
0
-1.13
-1.095
006 
29.88 
W
78 
50.46 
N
232 Sep 02 2023
19:26:24
2023-09-02
21:26:24
1287
yes
1
-1.172
-1.154
007 
00.95 
W
78 
49.88 
N
233 Sep 02 2023
21:02:45
2023-09-02
23:02:45
1383
no
0
-1.006
-1.023
007 
30.01 
W
78 
49.92 
N
234 Sep 02 2023
22:26:35
2023-09-03
0:26:35
27
no
0
-0.928
-0.922
008 
00.00 
W
78 
50.01 
N
235 Sep 03 2023
13:00:51
2023-09-03
15:00:51
901
no /little
0
-0.962
-0.944
008 
29.56 
W
78 
49.78 
N
236 Sep 03 2023
14:39:48
2023-09-03
16:39:48
1009
no
0
-1.191
-1.12
009 
00.02 
W
78 
50.00 
N
237 Sep 03 2023
16:15:48
2023-09-03
18:15:48
1095
no
0
-1.392
-0.952
009 
29.68 
W
78 
49.97 
N
74
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
D
Appendix: Images for ice detection
==PAGE:77==
238 Sep 03 2023
20:15:12
2023-09-03
22:15:12
1335
no
0
-1.051
-0.877
009 
59.99 
W
78 
49.99 
N
239 Sep 03 2023
21:54:52
2023-09-03
23:54:52
1434
no
0
-0.499
-0.372
010 
30.02 
W
78 
49.99 
N
240 Sep 03 2023
23:43:43
2023-09-04
1:43:43
104
no/little
0
-0.818
-0.693
011 
00.61 
W
78 
49.87 
N
241 Sep 04 2023
1:45:21
2023-09-04
3:45:21
226
no
0
-1.176
-1.006
011 
30.10 
W
78 
50.01 
N
242 Sep 04 2023
3:38:16
2023-09-04
5:38:16
339
no
0
-0.894
-0.786
011 
59.95 
W
78 
50.04 
N
243 Sep 04 2023
5:26:46
2023-09-04
7:26:46
447
no
0
-0.964
-0.962
012 
29.99 
W
78 
50.05 
N
244 Sep 04 2023
6:58:56
2023-09-04
8:58:56
539
yes
1
-1.187
-1.168
013 
00.27 
W
78 
49.94 
N
245 Sep 04 2023
8:43:08
2023-09-04
10:43:08
644
yes/little
1
-1.374
-1.325
013 
31.26 
W
78 
49.95 
N
246 Sep 04 2023
14:52:41
2023-09-04
16:52:41
1013
yes
1
-1.519
-1.515
014 
05.54 
W
78 
46.59 
N
==PAGE:78==
76
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
E
Appendix: Design of mechanical protection
Background study on what others have done. No feedback on the effectiveness has been found except
for the metal structure in figure 47 that states an increased battery usage of 6kJ pr profiles (for metal
structure and altimeter) [André et al., 2020]
Figure 47. Metal structure and altimeter
(a) Metal structure
(b) Tall metal structure
Figure 48. Wide metal structure
Figure 49. Eggs beater - used by NASA on floats on Greenlandic fjords.
==PAGE:79==
77
F
Appendix: ECO sensor
Backscatter and Chl-a
Backscatter and Chl-a have been plotted together in figure 50 to check for offset/background noise
in the data. There is a clear offset/background noise from 0 for both parameters. Chl-a has been
corrected with -0.3 and backscatter with -0.00018.
(a) Chlorophyll-a and backscatter plotted to-
gether. Both parameters have an offset from zero
and no values are below 0.00018 for backscatter
and no are below 0.3 for chl-a
(b) The corrected chl-a and backscatter values.
The chl-a observations align better with zero for
the deep measurement and backscatter observa-
tions align with zero in the shallow water.
Figure 50. Correction of offset for chlorophyll-a and backscatter observation. Chl-a data have been offset by -0.3 and
backscatter by -0.00018. The figure to the right shows the corrected values.
CDOM
All CDOM profiles for the ascent on NEGS for float 002 are plotted in figure 51. The data is rounded
off within the sensor, so the received raw does not have a high enough resolution for tracking
dynamics, and the data forms vertical lines with equal CDOM due to the rounding of the data.
Figure 51. CDOM profiles
==PAGE:80==
Page 1 of 5 
 
Mission: Move float with weather forecast and 
configurations  
 
There is a west-going wind over Bornholm causing the currents to move westward. We will use this opportunity to 
attempt to get the float further away from the coast of Bornholm. The float will surface Friday the 5th around 12UTC 
and we prepared a 6-hour pattern there the float should only descend to 15m, hoping for it to surf the surface 
current. 
 
 We set this up by turning pattern 3 off and altering pattern 1 with the following command: 
!param-pattern_01-0:True 
!param-pattern_01-1:15 
!param-pattern_01-2:15 
!param-pattern_01-3:21600 
!param-pattern_03-0:False 
!param-alarm-9:300 
 
The float had unfortunately moved a lot the past 5 days and surfaced 2 hours late way more north than expected.  
 
78
Bodil Toftegård - S173872
G
Appendix: Remote Piloting - Test 1
==PAGE:81==
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
From the 31st of Dec to the 5th of Jan the float has not been stable on the seabed and the long drift might have 
happened due to this. We therefore decided to increase Alarm.P9->400 from 300, to make sure the float has a 
higher chance of descending through the pycnocline.  
 
The _command.txt was read, but the float did not accept !param-pattern_01-2:15 and changed it to 
100dbar. This was considered okay, since most of the drifting would be in shallow water anyway. This configuration 
somehow caused the float not the make measurements on the ascent, so we don’t know what pattern it actually 
took. The SBE data shows the float parked at 25dbar and not 15dbar, which might have caused the float the drift on 
the pycnocline and not move with the surface currents.  
 
 
We did not know the new location of the float when we uploaded the 6h pattern. The forecast showed northwest-
going currents Saturday which would move the float closer to Sweden. The forecast showed southwest-going 
currents Sunday morning, so we decided to make a new command sending the float to the seabed until Sunday 
morning (32hours).  
!param-pattern_01-1:100 
!param-pattern_01-3:115200 
!param-alarm-9:400 
 
Saturday at 11 and 19. Currents near Bornholm’s west coast going northwest all day: 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Page 3 of 5 
 
Sunday at 06 and 19. Currents near Bornholm’s west coast going southwest all day: 
 
 
 
A new 6h pattern to 20dbar was uploaded for surfacing at 06 on Sunday morning. Again the float did not accept the 
shallow measurement depth and changed it to 100dbar.  
 
!param-pattern_01-1:20 
!param-pattern_01-2:20 
!param-pattern_01-3:21600 
 
Same issues as last time we ran the 6h pattern. The Float actually goes to 25dbar and does not measure on the 
ascent. The pattern was activated at 06 in the morning and when we got the new data at 12 we decided the change 
the plan, which was implemented at 18 (next time the float surfaced). 
 
 
The profiles of the 7th: the float has moved a bit south but also a bit east. So we had to change something. 
 
Instead of letting the float drift for 6h at a depth we could not really control we decided to make quick profiles to 
the bottom or whatever depth the float had time to reach. That would mean it would spend a lot of time in the 
shallow water and the surface. We made a configuration for 2h to the bottom which was uploaded for 17 o’clock 
Sunday.  
 
!param-pattern_01-1:100 
!param-pattern_01-3:7200  
==PAGE:83==
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
In 2 hours the float was able to reach around 25dbar, so it made a yo-yo pattern to 25dbar and the surface every 2 
hours – spending all its time the “shallow” water. The forecast predicted southwest-going currents until Monday 
morning, but with very local deviations, so depending on how fast the float moved south the pattern could be run 
for longer. 
 
Monday early morning at 00 and 05: 
 
 
We kept track of the movement and the forecast during the night and the float followed the currents nicely until 
Monday morning around 7 when the current was too weak and the float stopped moving south but still west. 
 
Monday at 11: 
 
At midday Monday the forecast showed very shifty weak currents. So we decided to go back the pattern 3 (5-day 
cycle). The float ended up moving around 20km from Friday afternoon to Monday morning.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
Mission procedure: 
1) Watch the forecast the day before surfacing. How is the current direction regarding the last position 
and the desired location? Assuming good: 
2) Upload _command.txt change to pattern 1 and set the time for the start of the mission from the 
surface time. Float surfaced approx. 13 o’clock. Calculate how many hours until the good forecast 
starts. 
!param-pattern_03-0:False 
!param-pattern_01-0:True 
!param-pattern_01-3:54000 (e.g. 15 hours) 
3) Prepare the 2h yoyo and turn off all other sensors than SBE. Upload as soon as the float has read the 
previous command 
!param-pattern_01-3:7200 
!param-sensor_02-0:False 
!param-sensor_03-0:False 
!param-sensor_04-0:False 
4) Watch the location of the float regularly. 
5) When ending the mission turn back to pattern 3 and turn on the sensors: 
!param-pattern_01-0:False 
!param-pattern_03-0:True 
!param-sensor_02-0:True 
!param-sensor_03-0:True 
!param-sensor_04-0:True 
==PAGE:85==
Page 1 of 4 
 
Remote piloting pt 2 
 
7th to the 11th February 2024.  
The result: 
 
The profiles for the mission: 
 
 
 
The float was surfacing on the 6th of Feb and the weather forecast predicted southwest-going 
currents on the 7th of Feb: 
83
H
Appendix: Remote Piloting - Test 2
==PAGE:86==
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
The wind is going southeast:  
 
 
I uploaded a command file changing away from the normal operation pattern and made the float 
surface on the 7th at noon (first bottom parking on the figure on the first page). 
06-02-2024, 13ish 
!param-pattern_01-0:True 
!param-pattern_01-3:54000 
!param-pattern_03-0:False 
 
At the surface time on the 7th I changed the pattern to a 2h yo-yo (as we learned from the last 
mission): 
07-02-2024, 05ish 
!param-pattern_01-3:7200 
 
This was continued all day. At night the currents changed and we parked the float on the seabed 
for 11.5h (second bottom-parking on the last figure): 
07-02-2024, 24ish 
!param-pattern_01-3:41400  
 
The float came back midday on the 8th where the currents were southwest again and the 2h yoyo-
pattern was resumed: 
08-02-2024, 12ish 
!param-pattern_01-3:7200 
 
The 2h pattern didn’t work as well as last time because the float descended deeper than expected 
(lower than 35dbar on many profiles). I continued anyway. The direction was still south even 
though not so west. I was in contact with Christophe and we updated a few things for the sensors 
and turned them off (which is the plan during these kinds of missions – Always keep the SBE 
sensor on!) 
08-02-2024, 18ish 
==PAGE:87==
Page 3 of 4 
 
!param-sensor_01-48:200 
!param-sensor_01-49:300 
!param-sensor_02-2:21600 
!param-sensor_02-11:21600 
!param-sensor_02-48:200 
!param-sensor_02-49:300 
!param-sensor_03-2:86400 
!param-sensor_03-11:86400 
!param-sensor_03-48:200 
!param-sensor_03-49:300 
!param-sensor_04-2:21600 
!param-sensor_04-11:21600 
!param-sensor_04-48:200 
!param-sensor_04-49:300 
!param-sensor_02-0:False 
!param-sensor_03-0:False 
!param-sensor_04-0:False 
!param-alarm-9:500.0 
!param-technical-8:120 
!param-technical-11:30.0 
 
The last three lines need special access which was applied in the next _command file: 
On the 9th the currents didn’t look promising but it did again on Sunday the 11th. So I decided to 
give the float a last chance to move west. I send it to the bottom for 34 hours. 
09-02-2024, 18ish 
!param-pattern_01-3:122400 
!system-unlock:25011979 
!param-technical-8:120 
!system-unlock:25011979 
!param-technical-11:30.0 
 
 
 
Upon ascent, we resumed 2h yoyo: 
11-02-2024, 05ish 
!param-pattern_01-3:7200 
 
==PAGE:88==
Page 4 of 4 
 
But the float did not move much. I changed to 1.5h yoyo: 
11-02-2024, 10ish 
!param-pattern_01-3:5400 
 
At 6 pm Sunday I decided to abort the mission. The float started to move slightly east. All over we 
did manage to move a lot south, but not much west even though the currents on windy showed 
southwest the whole period of the mission. The pattern is switched back to pattern 3 and the 
sensors are turned on again.  
11-02-2024, 19ish 
!param-pattern_01-0:False 
!param-pattern_03-0:True 
!param-sensor_02-0:True 
!param-sensor_03-0:True 
!param-sensor_04-0:True 
 
Conclusion: 
The mission was less of a success because the float did not move as expected by the currents. We 
still moved it in a good direction. For further work, I will look into the currents in the whole water 
column as it might explain the movement of the float. Patrizio has made a script to simulate 
movement based on velocity data and positions. I will apply the script for this mission (areas and 
time).  
 
Mission procedure edited: 
1) Watch the forecast the day before surfacing. How is the current direction regarding the last 
position and the desired location? Download Copernicus data and check the whole water 
column. 
https://data.marine.copernicus.eu/product/BALTICSEA_ANALYSISFORECAST_PHY_003_006/descriptio
n 
2) Upload _command.txt change to pattern 1 and set the time for the start of the mission from the 
surface time. Float surfaced approx. 13 o’clock. Calculate how many hours until the good forecast 
starts. 
!param-pattern_03-0:False 
!param-pattern_01-0:True 
!param-pattern_01-3:54000 (e.g. 15 hours) 
3) Prepare the 2h yoyo and turn off all other sensors than SBE. Upload as soon as the float has read 
the previous command 
!param-pattern_01-3:7200 
!param-sensor_02-0:False 
!param-sensor_03-0:False 
!param-sensor_04-0:False 
4) Watch the location of the float regularly. 
5) When ending the mission turn back to pattern 3 and turn on the sensors: 
!param-pattern_01-0:False 
!param-pattern_03-0:True 
!param-sensor_02-0:True 
!param-sensor_03-0:True 
!param-sensor_04-0:True 
OBS: consider improving the drifting by unconventional depth settings or change in descent and 
ascent speed. 
==PAGE:89==
==PAGE:90==
Technical 
University of 
Denmark
aqua@aqua.dtu.dk
Henrik Dams Allé, Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 35 88 33 00
