==PAGE:1==
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles
in a soft­robot arm
Master Thesis
DTU Automation and Control Engineering
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Thorbjorn Pihl
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the section for Automation and Con­
trol, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Thorbjorn Pihl ­ s173851
Signature
Date
ii
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As soft robotics become increasingly market ready due to advances in materials, new
methods of control must be developed to handle their non­linear and changing dynamics.
Adaptive control holds the answer to this, and its application to soft robots still needs to
be explored. This thesis applies spiking neural networks to a type of adaptive controller
known as the cerebellar adaptive filter. Inspired by motor control in mammalian brains,
this controller lends itself to be used in soft robotics, and has been the focus of several
recent papers.
Implementing a control architecture based on these papers, the cerebellar adaptive filter is
modified to using spiking signals. Combining bio­inspired robotics, control, and process­
ing, an algorithm is presented to control the isometric force output of a McKibben based
soft manipulator. The results, though limited in their scope, show that spiking implemen­
tations can perform basic control of isometric force, and that there is much potential to be
explored in their application to soft robotics.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Thorbjorn Pihl, MSc Autonomous Systems, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
[Silvia Tolu], [Associate Professor, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering],
[Supervisor]
[Adria Alepuz], [Phd Student], [Co­Supervisor]
iv
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
0.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
Background
4
1.1
Soft robotics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Adaptive Cerebellar Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Spiking Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
System Description
11
2.1
The Wilson Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
The Soft Manipulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Design and Implementation
15
3.1
Simulation development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Spiking Cerebellar Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Implementing on for control of soft manipulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Results
25
4.1
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Tests with soft manipulator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Discussion
29
5.1
The Spiking Cerebellar Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Encoding signals to spikes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
Implementation on the Robot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Conclusion
31
Bibliography
33
A Title
35
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:9==
0.1
Introduction
Soft robotics is an emerging field that provides solutions to certain gaps in the robotics
market where rigid robots are insufficient. These are typically applications that involve
human interaction or deployment near humans, as they are easier to build for inherently
safe interactions. Soft and compliant materials and lower maximum output forces/accel­
erations allow this inherent safety, which is important in applications like hospice care,
medical devices, and co­bots among other areas. Another feature of soft robots is that
their movement is typically based on deformation of their bodies, giving them distinct
movement patterns that are hard to achieve with rigid robots. This makes them attractive
to use in areas where robots are used to deal with uncertain environments like search
and rescue operations, or soft grippers used to sort objects with different geometries, as
they can deform to fit their environment as necessary[1].
The same properties that create these opportunities also introduce new difficulties in con­
trol. Since soft robots deform based on both their actuation and the environment around
them, setting up precise models for forward control is unfeasible. Feedback based control
is therefore needed when controlling them, but simple solutions like PID controllers also
face problems due to the changing geometries and forces, making finding single optimal
values for all cases impossible, so adaptive control techniques should be used[2].
Soft robotics often draws inspiration from biology as many organisms exhibit similar prop­
erties of deformation, material compliance, and heavy reliance on feedback control. Bio­
inspired control algorithms are therefore an obvious candidate to apply to the control prob­
lem [3]. In humans, the cerebellum and brainstem are associated with motor control. The
cerebellum contains around 80 percent of the neurons in the brain, highlighting it’s impor­
tance[4]. Several control schemes inspired by the cerebellum exist, mainly based on the
Albus­Marr and Ito models of the cerebellum. These models have been implemented and
shown to produce good results in adaptive control when used with soft robotic actuators
[5]. A popular model is the Adaptive Cerebellar Filter, a neural network based on Fujita’s
model of the cerebellum as an adaptive filter, which will be used in this project.
To better mimic biological cerebellar control, new research is focused on implementing
spike­based information processing in Artificial Neural Networks(ANNs) [6]. Spiking Neu­
ral Networks are a type of ANN that mimics this behavior, encoding information over time
in spikes modeled as Dirac functions. This makes SNNs more bio­plausible, and they
have been shown to have advantages over regular ANNs for several applications [7] [8].
Applying SNNs to bio­inspired control like Adaptive Cerebellar Filters are a natural next
step, and several studies have looked at spiking cerebellar filters in path control of rigid
robotic arms[9]. Other studies have looked at position and force control using Adaptive
Cerebellar filters, though not with SNNs[10]. There is therefore novelty worth exploring
in applying Spiking Adaptive Cerebellar control to a soft robot arm, as achieving precise
force control is an important step in developing applications within soft robotics, and bio­
inspired SNN based Adaptive Cerebellar Filters could provide a robust and lightweight
solution to this control problem.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:11==
0.1.1
Thesis Organization
This thesis is split into five chapters. Background gives a summary of the literature search
done before and during the development of the algorithms. Design and Implementation
discusses the process of developing and refining the algorithms in both simulation and on
the robot. Results presents the data obtained from several tests of these implementations.
The discussion is the authors interpretation of the results and their significance, and the
conclusion provides an overview of the most important takeaways from the project. The
flow of the thesis is however not fully representative of the structure of the project. The
design process of the algorithms was iterative, and shortcomings in the implementation
and results led back to further research, which in turn led to new approaches to the control
problem.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
3
==PAGE:12==
1
Background
This section will provide a review of the literature on Soft Robotics, Cerebellar Algorithms,
and Spiking Neural Networks relevant to this project. It starts with a holistic view of soft
robotics to set the stage for the problems addressed by this work. A brief history of the de­
velopment of cerebellar models is given, and their function as used in this work described.
Spiking Neural Networks are then set in contrast to their non­spiking counterparts, and
motivated for use in control algorithms. A model for spiking neurons is also described.
1.1
Soft robotics
Soft robotics is an emerging field within robotics that shows promise in areas where tradi­
tional rigid robots are limited due to their rigidity and materials. This is especially seen in
safety considerations and adaptation to the environment [1]. These advantages are im­
portant in areas like Co­bots, medical and surgical applications, hospice care, exploration,
and handling of fragile goods.
There exists a range of definitions of soft robotics, but the core of soft robotics is their ‘soft­
ness’, or in other words the compliance of their materials that cause plastic deformations
in them based on their environment and actuation[1][11]. As a long­term goal of the robot
used for the project is interaction with humans, the essential features of soft robotics for
this project are ‘robots whose materials have a degree of compliance to their environment
such that they are unable to produce forces that can damage human tissue’. To comply
with this, material stiffness between 104 ­ 109 Pa is common in soft robotics[3].
The choice of material for soft robotics is important to meet this requirement. Fabrics, rub­
bers, foams, and soft plastics are all common as they are both compliant and robust[2].
Many options within these are also inexpensive to produce and easy to manipulate, so
components for the body of soft robotics do not provide any major challenges in the con­
struction of the robot. Sensors and actuators are more difficult as are often reliant on rigid
parts for their function, and options for soft alternatives are sparse[1]. Electric motors es­
pecially are so fundamental to the construction of traditional robotics that it can be hard to
imagine building a robot without them. Some designs overcome the lack of available soft
actuators by using rigid parts and shielding them from direct contact with the environment.
Options for soft actuators often use pneumatics for power. This includes the Mckibben
artificial muscle used in this project. Others include dielectrics that deform when a voltage
is applied to them, and mechanical actuators that transfer forces through their construc­
tion[10]. With the exception of the Mckibben muscle, used since the 1950’s, soft actuators
have not been available for widespread in the industry, so their use and control is not as
developed as their rigid counterparts[1].
As mentioned earlier, a soft robot’s compliance and ability to deform causes issues in
control as kinematic modeling can’t be used, and their dynamics become very hard to
model accurately. The materials often display properties like hysteresis and non­linear
dynamics. Furthermore, as the deformation is in part caused by the robots environment,
the control must be sense based[10][11]. Feedback control methods face difficulties due
to slow response in actuation and ‘creep’, where the properties change as the material
slowly deforms. Different techniques are therefore needed to create models and control
schemes for soft robotics.
4
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:13==
Different approaches have been proposed to deal with these issues, namely a variety
of methods of adaptive control. In this project a type of adaptive control, the Adaptive
Cerebellar Filter(ACF), will be explored as a solution to the control problem.
1.2
Adaptive Cerebellar Algorithms
The cerebellum is a part of the brain just above the brainstem which contains around
80% of the brain’s neurons, despite only making up 10% of the brains mass, speaking to
it’s importance in information processing[10]. It is associated with motor control and has
been studied extensively since the 1960’s where it was first mapped out by John Eccles
et al. Based on this wiring the computational structure of the cerebellum was attempted
modeled, one of the most prominent models being the Albus­Marr model. This model
has been expanded on in a number of ways, among these the model of the cerebellar
circuit as an adaptive filter by M. Fujita[12]. It has been further explored and developed in
engineering for tasks like learning models and inverse models for control, predicting self­
generated noise, implementing smith­predictors, and trajectory predictionFilter[13][9][5].
This section will give a brief overview of the Adaptive Cerebellar.
A simplified view of the cerebellar microcircuit can be seen in figure 1.1 In this view, there
Figure 1.1: A simple model of the cerebellum from [14]
are five types of cells providing function in the circuit. Two of them provide input into
the circuit, the Mossy Fibers (MF) and Climbing Fibers (CF). The MFs provide input for
processing by the cerebellum. This could be different signals depending on the external
connections, for example motor or sensory signals. The CFs provide a teaching signal to
the synapses between the parallel fibers and the Purkinje cell, regulating the strength of
their connection. From the MFs the information signal flows forwards to the parallel fibers
(PFs) through the granule cells (GCs). The GCs provide a recoding of the of the signal to
extract features. The signal is then carried through the PFs synapsing on Purkinje Cells
(PC). The strength of these synaptic connections determine the impact each parallel fiber
has on the firing of the PC. The synaptic strength is modeled as a weight (wi on the
figure) amplifying the PF signal. The PC fires in response to the signals from the PFs,
providing the output of the cerebellar circuit. The function of this output again depends on
the external connections, but they can play a part in many different systems like sensory
processing and motor control[14][13].
The PC fires in two different ways. It fires simple spikes at about 40 Hz, which are modu­
lated in response to inputs from the parallel fibers, imbuing the spike train with information.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
5
==PAGE:14==
These simple spikes, or action potentials, are the same found throughout the nervous sys­
tem. At about 1 Hz the PC will also fire complex spikes, a rapid succession of spikes or
after­discharges. Complex spikes induce long term depression at PF­PC synapses that
fire at the same time as the complex spike. This long term depression is the learning
mechanism by which the cerebellar circuit changes its output, with the CF functioning as
a teaching signal[14].
A feature of the cerebellum is that it is highly monotonous, and the circuit shown above is
repeated throughout, differing only in the external connections. This, combined with the
wide range of tasks the cerebellum is implicated in, implies that the circuit implements
a general learning algorithm. In Fujita, this algorithm is modeled computationally as an
adaptive filter[15]. Figure 1.2 shows an adaptive filter, with the different parts labeled with
their equivalents from the cerebellar circuit.
Figure 1.2: Cerebellum as an adaptive filter from [14]
The MFs are the input to the algorithm, splitting the signal u(t) into different filters, repre­
senting the GCs, which provide a temporal recoding of the signal. The output from this,
the PFs, are weighted and recombined in the PC, creating the output of the algorithm. A
teaching signal is carried through the climbing fibers to adjust the weights between the
PFs and PC. These parts together form a simple version of a Cerebellar adaptive filter, and
many advanced variations and architectures are based on this basic setup. An overview
of the function of the most relevant parts to this project is provided here.
1.2.1
Recoding of input signal
In the cerebellum, the signal provided by the MFs are passed through granule cells that,
together with another type of cell called the golgi cell, provides a recoding of the signal
and passes the signal on to multiple PFs. The recoding in the biological system is not
well understood, but research indicates that the signals are not heavily transformed. In
adaptive filters used in control engineering, the signal is often temporally recoded to pro­
vide an insight into a systems dynamics. The most basic version of this is done through
tapped delay lines, where the signal is simply delayed by different amounts. This usually
requires tens to hundreds of delays to cover the relevant period, depending on the pro­
cess it is applied to. Other filters are therefore used to cover the same amount of time
with fewer functions, for example alpha filters or Laguerre functions[16]. This reduces the
computational cost as there are fewer weights involved when recombining the signal and
updating them based on the teaching signal.
Alpha filters will be used for parts of this project. Their Laplace domain transfer function
is given by
6
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:15==
G(s) =
1
(T ∗s + 1)2
Where T is a time constant that determines the filter’s response time[10] By running the
input in parallel through multiple filters with different time constants, the signal is delayed
so each PF covers a different time period. The resulting coverage of five filters can be
seen in figure 1.3
Figure 1.3: Impulse response of five alpha filters time time constants between 0.009 and
0.2
1.2.2
Decorrelation Learning rule
The learning mechanism of the ACF comes from updating the weights that the PF signals
are weighted by before the recombination. The weights are updated according to the
Least Mean Squares learning rule, also known as the decorrelation learning rule. It takes
the signal from the PFs and multiplies it by a learning signal carried by the CF, which in
control is the error from the system that is being learned. This value is then scaled by a
learning rate Beta and subtracted from the current weights, so the learning rule looks as
follows;
∆w(t) = −β ∗PF(t) ∗e(t)
This means that ∆w, the change in the weights, is large when the error signal and PF
signal are correlated, decorrelating the two. The change can clearly both increase and
decrease the weight, depending on the sign of the error. Though the CF in the biological
cerebellum only causes long term depression, the decorrelation learning rule is shown to
be biologically plausible, as learning in the cerebellum also has mechanisms for long term
potentiation.
1.2.3
Algorithm Output
The Purkinje cell takes the weighted signals from the PFs and recombines them typically
through a simple summing function. The weights can therefore be seen as the strength
of the synapse between the PF and PC. The signal obtained in the PC is then the output
of the algorithm. The input/output relationship can, for a linear summation activation, be
written as follows;
z(t) = Σwi(t) ∗Gi(u(t))
The transformation from input to output can represent many different things depending on
the external wiring of the cerebellar microcircuit. For a simple forward architecture where
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
7
==PAGE:16==
the ACF turns a desired signal into a control signal, and the CF input is the error between
the plant output and desired output, the transformation of the cerebellar algorithm would
be the plant inverse[14].
1.3
Spiking Neural Networks
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are artificial neural networks (ANNs) where the signals
passed between neurons are in the form of sequences of spikes rather than valued sig­
nals, visualized in figure 1.4. These spikes are stereotyped impulses that carry no in­
formation on their own, eg. one spike is indistinguishable from another, but the timing
between the spikes encodes the information being transmitted. This has the implication
that SNNs are inherently temporal in nature[14].
SNNs are inspired by communication between biological neurons. As a neuron receives
input from its dendrites a voltage builds up across its cell membrane, and when it reaches
a certain threshold fires an electrochemical impulse through its axon to neurons down­
stream. The contribution of that impulse is determined by the strength of the synaptic
connection between the axon and the dendrites of the postsynaptic neuron. Changing
synaptic strength is one of the drivers of neuroplasticity, the ability of our brains to learn
and change[17].
Figure 1.4: Visualization of spiking neural network by [18]
SNNs inherent differences carry certain advantages over ANNs. As the artificial neurons
in SNNs are only activated when receiving or sending impulses, the number of signals be­
ing sent through the network is sparser than in ANNs. This means the power consumption
of SNNs is significantly lower than for ANNs when using neuromorphic hardware. SNNs
have also been shown to be more robust to noise[8].
However, SNNs can’t be readily applied in many of the areas where ANNs are commonly
used. This is partially due to their temporal nature. ANNs are the industry standard for
applications like image recognition. The information being processed here, digital images,
is not temporal in nature, so sending it through a SNN requires encoding each pixel as a
time­varying spiking signal. Another challenge is that the learning rules used for ANNs,
namely backpropagation, are not directly compatible with SNNs. This means the large
amounts of research and experience with ANNs is unfortunately not directly applicable to
SNNs, and the areas where SNNs would have an advantage over ANNs, swapping them
out is not trivial[6].
Since control deals with time dependent signals, SNNs are more obvious of a choice here.
The signals used still need to be encoded as spikes, but the temporal nature of the signal
doesn’t change. How exactly information is encoded in the brain is a heavily debated topic
in the literature[17], but for engineering purposes there are some different approaches,
8
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:17==
the most common ones being rate coding and population coding. For this project rate
coding will be the main method used, mainly due to its simplicity.
A simple implementation of rate coding functions by taking the average rate of spikes
received over a specified period. This average can then be scaled to the interval the
values should fall in. Though simple to use, it has some drawbacks including delay and
resolution issues.
1.3.1
Leaky Integrate­and­fire neuron model
The LIF neuron model is commonly used for simulating neural dynamics, due to it’s sim­
plicity and computational effectiveness compared to more complex neuronal models. It
functions by integrating the input to form a potential energy level g(t), representing the
membrane potential of a biological neuron. This energy level slowly decreases towards
a baseline in the absence of input. When the potential reaches a certain threshold the
neuron outputs a spike in the form of a Dirac signal and the potential is reset. Given a
baseline potential of 0, the model is governed by the following equation[10];
Tli ∗g’(t) + g(t) = u(t)
And the output determined by
v(t) = 0ifg(t) < thresh
v(t) = 1/dtifg(t) > thresh
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:19==
2
System Description
This chapter will give an overview of a state­of­the­art implementation that this project will
work from, as well as describing the software and hardware used to implement and test
the developed algorithms.
2.1
The Wilson Architecture
The architecture used in Wilson [10] is shown in figure 2.1. As this project starts with this
architecture and expands on it, an explanation of the different components and overall
function will be given here.
Figure 2.1: Layout of control architecture
The article set out to test cerebellar control for a biological muscle model taking spiking
input. The muscle model, called the plant, is a simplified hill muscle model taking spiking
inputs and outputting an isometric force. The model parameters are based on measure­
ments from stimulations of a locust hind leg. The desired force is generated by sending
spike trains through the muscle model as show in the figure above. The resulting sig­
nal is sent into the brainstem controller. The brainstem controller is an approximation of
the plant inverse, providing basic under­gained inverse control. As the plant is strictly
proper, the inverse would be an improper transfer function, so to obtain a proper inverse
a reference model was used, giving the brainstem controller as
Figure 2.2
Where A=7.4, t1=0.13, and tc=0.071 are the plant parameters and t=0.1 is the reference
model time constant. The reference model is based off MRAC control, described later.
The motor command generated by the controller is turned into a spike train by sending it
through a leaky LIF neuron model with Tli=1. The plant produces an isometric force based
on the input, and this force output is measured against the desired force filtered through
a reference model to find the sensory error. A copy of the motor command is sent to the
cerebellar controller which processes it and outputs a correction to the desired force. As
it provides corrections, the teaching signal modifies the weights of the cerebellar filter,
which gradually adapts to minimize the sensory error measure at the plant output.
Notably the adaptive cerebellar filter is implemented in a recurrent architecture. This ar­
chitecture provides corrections to the desired signal before it goes through the brainstem
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
11
==PAGE:20==
controller. This is important as it allows the use of the sensory error, the difference be­
tween the desired and measured output. A forwards architecture is also common, taking
an efference copy of the desired signal and providing corrections to the motor signal, but
this, according to [insert paper here], requires the teaching signal to be the motor error,
which is unobservable and must be estimated based on the sensory error and prior knowl­
edge of the plant. Despite this, the forward architecture has been implemented in systems
with good results, even using very rough estimations of the plant. The case remains for
using the recurrent architecture as it avoids this estimation entirely. The recurrent ar­
chitecture remains biologically plausible, having been observed as an important part in
the vestibular­ocular reflex. The control system also uses a reference model inspired by
Model Reference Adaptive Control (MRAC). The use of this reference model allows the
cerebellar algorithm to learn inverses of higher order plants which have otherwise im­
proper inverses, which are common in robotics. It requires some previous knowledge or
estimate of the controller plant. The reference model is given by
Figure 2.3
Where m is the amount of zeros of the plant and n the amount of poles. Tau is a time
constant that should define a realistic response of the plant. Using this with the inverse of
the plant, a static controller can be defined as the brainstem, given in 2.2. The adaptive
part of MRAC is then replace with the ACF, which can now learn the corrections needed
to the approximate brainstem controller, and is therefore not subject to the order of the
plant. The application of MRAC to cerebellar control can be read about in the article [19].
2.2
The Soft Manipulator
The physical plant to be controlled in this project is a soft manipulator actuated by Mck­
ibben pneumatic artificial muscles (PAMs). There are three pairs of McKibben muscles
evenly spaced out in the manipulator. Each pair is controlled independently by valves
connected to an Arduino microcontroller. The manipulator also has wires running through
it that can be used to contract the manipulator by pulling on them with servo motors, but
these are not used for this project. The full soft arm can be seen in figure 2.5a.
Mckibben PAMs function by having a sheath of fabric around an airtight bladder. The
fabric is weaved around the bladder so the fibers run around it in a helix with a specified
angle compared to the axis running along the bladder. This angle determines the behavior
of the actuation, as the angle will tend towards 54 degrees when fluid is pumped into the
bladder. Initial angles below this neutral angle will therefore contract the muscle, while
angles above will extend the muscle along its axis.
The valves controlling the airflow to the PAMs are connected to a 4 bar air supply, and
regulates the pressure delivered to between 0 and 1.42 bar, but it’s recommended to
operate below 1.3 bar. The cage containing the soft manipulator seen in figure above is
800mm tall with a 550x550 base. The manipulator weights around 5kg, and can deliver
around 4 kg of force without exceeding the 1.30 bars safety.
The end manipulator has been equipped for this project with a 3D printed mount designed
to attach a force sensor to, seen in figure 2.5b. The sensor used is a 0­2 kg resistive
module, connected to the same arduino that controls the valves. The arduino can interface
12
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:21==
(a) Full setup
(b) End effector of the soft manipulator
Figure 2.4
through a USB connection and is set up to send information and receive commands live
through MatLab. The entire setup can be seen in figure 2.6
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) Weave of a McKibben actuator
(b) Weave angle
Figure 2.5: From [20]
Figure 2.6: The full experimental setup
14
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:23==
3
Design and Implementation
This section will describe the development process and methodology, design consider­
ations, and provide a description of the implementations used to produce the obtained
results.
The aim of the project is to create a spiking adaptive cerebellar filter algorithm that controls
the isometric force output of the soft manipulator described earlier. To achieve this, several
steps were identified. First, to learn about the use of an adaptive cerebellar filter in a
control circuit and LIF neurons, the code and results from the article Wilson E.D. were
analyzed and reproduced. This gave a solid foundation for further development. The next
step was to find an appropriate way to implement spiking signals in the adaptive cerebellar
filter in simulation. Once this had been achieved, the final step was to implement the
algorithm to work with the soft manipulator. Though these steps are presented in a linear
fashion the project was done in an iterative manner, circling back to earlier steps as new
insights were gained. Simulations were used for quick prototyping throughout the process.
3.1
Simulation development
The simulations were made in Python and MatLab. Since the code from Wilson E.D. was
in Matlab, using the same software made comparison between the implementations easy.
MatLabs Simulink also helped gain an intuitive understanding of how the setup was wired
together. The python implementation was created parallel to the one in Matlab with the
main goal of using it for developing the spiking algorithm, as python has many libraries
and support readily available, among other things the spiking­neuron library Nengo. In
python, the algorithm was developed in an object oriented fashion to allow the same
overall framework to have its different elements quickly swapped out for different tests.
3.1.1
Early tests
The first simulations were implemented in MatLab Simulink using simple setups with a
sine­wave input and first order plants, so the effects of the hyperparameters and architec­
ture on the adaptive cerebellar filter could be easily observed. The main hyperparameters
were the learning rate and amount and time constants of filters. The filters used were all
alpha filters. Using Simulink allowed for quick prototyping as dynamic systems could be
readily implemented as Laplace domain transfer functions, and many tools for generating
signals and visualizing results are available. This way concepts from the literature could
be explored in a relatively short amount of time. The first order system seen below was
implemented as the plant.
f(x) = A ∗(x(t) + k ∗f′(x))
The coefficients were taken from the Wilson article as A=7.4 and k=0.05, though the exact
nature of the plant wasn’t important, it just had to disturb the reference signal enough that
the control loop had a noticeable effect. This plant has a sharp rise time and a large static
error, which worked well for the tests.
Three architectures were identified as good candidates for the control problem. The recur­
rent architecture with an approximate static controller from Wilson, a forward version with
the static controller, and a forward architecture where the only controller was the ACF.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
15
==PAGE:24==
The brainstem was implemented as the inverse of the plant with a small offset added to
the parameters to make its control imperfect;
f −1(x) = 1/A ∗x(t) −k ∗x′(t)
Increasingly irregular reference signals were tried out with the systems. Learning rate
and amount of filters were varied, though once above 4 filters extending the delay to one
second, improvements were minimal. Higher learning rates meant faster convergence
but higher resting error. With this resting error the weights would also oscillate around a
steady state. If the learning rate was too high, weights would either oscillate undamped or
approach infinity. Low learning rates meant slower convergence but lower resting error,
though the gain from going lower quickly diminished compared to how long training took.
To find a good learning rate, a low value was chosen and increased by powers of ten until
it became unstable, and then slowly brought back down to a desirable setting. The plant
used here didn’t change over time, but as adaptive control systems in application are often
used to address processes that have changing dynamics, slow convergence could cause
control issues. Once appropriate learning rates were found for each architecture they
were tested with two sine waves with a 2.3;3 ratio to create a constantly varying signal.
(a) Recurrent architecture
(b) Forward Architecture
Figure 3.1
Figure 3.2
All architectures achieved decent control of the system, with RMS errors around 0.01,
around 0.2Opposed to the expected results based on the literature, the forward architec­
ture with static controller performed better than the reverse architecture with an RMS error
at 0.004, despite using the same sensory error signal and not an estimated motor signal.
The ACF only setup performed similar to the reverse architecture with a 0.01 RMS error.
The brainstem controllers were also tested as simplified versions by only having a gain,
which counter­intuitively caused both of them to perform better, the forward architecture
dropping from RMS error of 0.004 to 0.003 after training, and the reverse architecture
dropping from and RMS error of 0.01 to 0.002, outperforming the forward architecture.
This result is quite interesting, and though the cause was not located it could be to do with
the small offsets in the inverse plant creating problems for the cerebellar element.
Another part of early testing was to implement an adaptive cerebellar filter using spiking
signals in the cerebellar element. The aim was to explore different methods to do this for
16
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:25==
informing the choice of implementation further into the project. The spiking dynamics were
implemented using Nengo, which handled the encoding and decoding of spiking signals,
and sending them between neurons in the cerebellar algorithm. The filters in the algorithm
were set up as populations of neurons trained on alpha filters. The signals were passed
through these filters, weighted, and decoded back into valued signals that were then fed
through the rest of the control loop. Results showed that while the weights converged
faster for the spiking algorithm, they were more unstable resulting in the error oscillating
around 0, where the non­spiking algorithm was slower to converge but was stable at 0
once it reached it, seen in figure 3.3. One of the advantages of spiking neurons is to
lower calculation cost, and a low amount of neurons approximating an alpha filter was
faster than using the alpha filters. The approximations were not good enough though,
and the amount of neurons needed for comparable results were so high, in the thousands
per filter, that the cost ended up being about the same.
(a) Weights of Valued­Signal ACF
(b) Weights of Spike­Signal ACF
Figure 3.3
While these results showed the plausibility of implementing a spiking cerebellum, using
Nengo for the implementation became a black­box for how the neurons were behaving,
so it was decided to implement LIF neurons for the simulations instead. Though this takes
longer time to implement, much greater insight could be gained.
3.1.2
Analysis and Recreation of Simulation
The MatLab code and training data from Wilson was made available online, so the exact
data from the article could be used for the comparison. The first implementation of the al­
gorithm was made by expanding the earlier made test algorithms to match the description
from the wilson article. The simulink models quickly became large and unmanageable,
so the system was implemented in python instead. Several systems of equations de­
scribing the muscle model and LIF neuron, as well as Laplace domain transfer functions
describing the Brainstem and Reference model, form the basis of the Wilson setup (their
descriptions can be found in the System Description section of Background). These were
implemented in their own python classes as discrete­time differential equations, with the
Laplace domain transfer functions being converted to time domain. The classes for the
muscle simulation, the brainstem controller, reference model, LIF neuron, and Alpha fil­
ters had the same basic structure using the following methods
1
--Init(dt, length)-- - Standard python constructor method. dt is the step time
of the simulation and length is the number of steps in the simulation.
2
3
StepForward(input) - This function is called from the simulation loop to bring
an object one time step forward with the new input
4
5
PlotHist() - Debugging tool, plots the response of the object to input for the
time the simulation has been running
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
17
==PAGE:26==
The Adaptive Cerebellar Filter was also implemented as its own class with the methods
1
--Init(dt, length, tc, numFilters , learningRate)-- Constructor , dt and length
are the step time and simulation length, tc is the filter time constants ,
numFilters is the amount of filters that the algorithm will use, and the
learningRate is the modifier for updating the weights. It also initializes
an array of zeros as the weights.
2
3
initFilters/initRefmodel(numFilters) - Initializes object arrays containing
instances of the alpha filter and reference model classes.
4
5
runPrediction(mf) - This method steps the AF forward by running the input
through the arrays of filters and weights , summing the results and
returning the output.
6
7
UpdateWeights(error) - This method takes the input as the CF signal and
updates the weights. The PF signals , which are the latest filtered signals
from the runPrediction method, is filtered through the reference model
and used for the learning rule.
8
9
setWeights(w) - takes an array and sets the weights equal to it. Useful for
transferring weights between runs or models.
Using these classes the control loop was set up like in the pseudocode below;
1
Setup
2
Generate and filter reference signal
3
y = M(r)
4
Instantiate simulation elements
5
6
For each time step
7
Run motor command y through ACF and add to reference signal u
8
m = r+C(u)
9
Send signal through brainstem controller
10
u = B(m)
11
Run new motor command through LIF neuron
12
v = L(u)
13
Send spiking signal through plant
14
F = P(s)
15
Get error from filtered reference signal
16
e = F-y
17
Update weights
18
w = w-p*e*Beta
Implementing the algorithm as described in the article wasn’t obtaining the expected re­
sults, so extensive debugging was done, and an analysis of the code provided with the
article was performed using flowcharts and a pseudo code representation. This revealed
that the implementation of the reference model functioned slightly differently than could
be seen in the overview given in the article. The main difference was the implementation
of the bio­hybrid scheme, as the reference signal being passed to the brainstem controller
was reverse filtered through the reference model, instead of the reference model being
used to filter the copy of the signal used to find the sensory error. The signal going into
the algorithm was therefore the reference signal run through the system
18
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:27==
s = tli ∗∗2 ∗r′′ + 2 ∗tli ∗r′ + r
Figure 3.4 shows the reference signal reversed through the reference model.
(a) reference signal from muscle simulation
(b) Signal passed through reverse reference
model
Figure 3.4
The controller part was also split into two instances of the brainstem and cerebellar circuit
sharing the same weights but their response being slightly delayed from each other. This
setup was due to the implementation having certain delays in the learning rule. Figure
3.5 shows the setup of the revised code. The element D is a 1­timestep delay.
Figure 3.5: Connection of control loop based on analysis code from [10]
Figure 3.6: The ACF successfully controlling plant to follow reference signal
The two ACF setup was simplified to only using one AF in the python implementation by
keeping a copy of the previous AF output. The revised algorithm accurately reproduced
the results from the article, a test run is shown in figure 3.6. The algorithm was modified
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
19
==PAGE:28==
to run with the forward architecture used in the earlier tests, which achieved comparable
results.
Additionally, the biohybrid MRAC implementation was removed to see it’s effect on the
system. As expected from the literature, the output error became higher and the learning
became very unstable. As the estimated transfer function for the soft robot arm is a strictly
proper system, these results could indicate the need to use a reference model when
designing a control scheme for it. With the ACF functioning, it could now be extended
to a spiking ACF.
3.2
Spiking Cerebellar Algorithm
The next step is to convert the algorithm to have a spiking cerebellar element. The con­
version requires four main changes. The signal coming from the brainstem controller had
to be encoded as a spike train, a filtering process compatible with spike signals had to be
implemented, the PC had to have an activation function compatible with spiking, and the
output signal then decoded after going through the cerebellum.
3.2.1
Encoding/Decoding
The encoding was done through a LIF neuron similar to the one used in Wilson, but
modified to be able to accept negative input and produce negative spikes. This was done
to allow the encoding of signals with both negative and positive values. The potential of
the neuron would integrate all inputs, and the threshold for firing was mirrored across the
baseline potential, so it would fire at +­Threshold, as seen in figure 3.7a. This modification
of the neuron is not biologically plausible, but the resulting encoding and decoding of
signals was good for it’s purpose, and the implementation simple.
(a) spiking both positive and negative
(b) encoded and decoded sine wave
Figure 3.7
To decode the signal again, a decoding element takes the average rate within a short time
frame and scales it to fit the range of values encoded by the modified LIF neuron. The
scaling factor for the decoder is equal to the threshold for the encoding neuron. If the
scaling factor is set to the maximum values of the converted signal, the encoding neuron
will fire at every timestep that the signal is at it’s max. When the signal is decoded again,
having a spike at every timestep will set the average incoming spikes to one, which is
then scaled by the scaling factor to match the original signal. If the maximum value of the
signal is unknown, the scaling factor should be set above the expected range. This will
ensure the signal is encoded correctly, though at a slightly lower resolution, seen in figure
3.7b.
The decoder stores a short time frame of past values and takes the average of these.
This causes a small delay from the original encoded signal. The delay becomes longer
20
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:29==
as the time frame increases, while the resolution of the encoder increases. The figure
above shows a sine wave being encoded and decoded, where the delay is visible. It also
acts as a lowpass filter with the cutoff frequency being inversely proportional to the length
of the time frame. Choosing the scaling factor and time frame are therefore the main
parameters for the encoding/decoding, and should be chosen based on the signal’s value
range and how fast the signal changes. For controlling the plant from wilson, the motor
command was inspected, seen in figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Motor control signal
From the plot it can be seen that the maximum value is just over 50 and the time response
is very fast at about 0.01 seconds where it changes fastest. As the control signal will likely
increase in amplitude when the ACF signal is added to it, the scaling is set to 200.The
timeframe to 0.01 seconds. As the sample rate of the simulation is 2173 Hz this timeframe
still allowed a good resolution.
3.2.2
Filtering
The filtering process for the valued signal system used alpha filters, a type of second or­
der lowpass filter, with varying time constants. These would not be directly applicable to a
spiking cerebellum as a spike, modeled as a dirac signal, passing through the filter would
be stretched out to a longer, lower amplitude wave, disrupting the spike train communica­
tion between neurons. The most straightforward solution was to use tapped delay lines
(TDLs) instead. They function by delaying each one time step per time step, keeping a
trace of a specified length. So with a TDL length of 10, the signal received the last 10
timesteps would be stored, functioning as the parallel fibers. Each stored signal is then
weighed and passed to the PC. As the spikes received are dirac functions 1 time step
long, the spiking nature of the signal is preserved, and each spike is scaled by the weight
for that PF, representing the synaptic strength.
The downside to using TDL is the amount of delays needed. To cover the same time
frame as the 5 alpha filters, around 3000 delays are needed, one for each timestep. This
greatly increases both the space used and the amount of calculations performed when
the signal is weighed. The implementation of the TDL was simply a numpy array where
the elements were pushed one position over each timestep, with the newest signal in­
serted in position 0. The implementation of weights and updating them could therefore
remain largely the same as the valued signal implementation. The learning rate had to be
scaled with the sample time, as the discrete time Dirac signal for low time steps causes
large instantaneous values, which can make the learning unstable. Using TDL provided
a straightforward approach, but it meant that the algorithm could not be applied directly
to the control loop from Wilson, as the use of the reference model when updating the
weights had too large computational and space requirements. Each delay requires its
own instance, causing an exponential time space complexity and linear time complexity.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
21
==PAGE:30==
A design to cover the timespan with fewer filters was constructed by using an alpha filter
followed by a LIF neuron. The idea is that the alpha filter functions as a ‘hold’ for the
incoming signal, continuously increasing the neuron’s membrane potential until the filter
has decayed.
Figure 3.9: Spiking Alpha filter combination
As can be seen in the figure 3.9, although the membrane potential for the LIF neurons will
reset after spiking, new input will continue to arrive in the more delayed filters, even in the
absence of new spike inputs to the algorithm. The alpha filter output is amplified by the
normalization factor to their impulse response, that is Anout(x)=An(x)/max(An(￿￿))
Anout(x) = An(x)/max(An(δ))
This encodes all the outputs equally as they are sent through to the LIF neurons.
3.2.3
Purkinje Cell Activation
The output from the cerebellar filter happens through the purkinje cell. In the valued signal
version it performed a linear summation of the weighted PF signals. With spiking signals,
a linear summation would send varying spike heights into the decoder, which has been
designed to receive dirac spikes. A LIF neuron is therefore used as the PC, integrating
the signals and firing a series of monotonous spikes to the decoder. The threshold is set
to unity, as this would pass the signal from the encoding neuron unchanged through if the
signal was unfiltered.
3.3
Implementing on for control of soft manipulator
The control algorithm was implemented in MatLab as this was the default language the ar­
duino was set to interface with. Having tested all software elements involved in simulation
made the process swift, and as the MatLab is quite similar to python the implementation
closely matches the one described above. The main difference was the plant being a
physical system, exposing it to noise and meaning the system model was not well known.
The plant was estimated with experimental data as a first order system with a transfer
function
9.368/s + 11.11
The inverse of this estimate was used for the brainstem controller, however since the
plant is strictly proper the inverse becomes improper and unstable. To be able to use
the approximate controller, and for the ACF to not have to learn an improper inverse, the
biohybrid MRAC scheme used in the wilson article can be applied, as described in the
background section.
For the estimated plant this would be a=11.11 and b=9.368. The system was simulated
in matlab where a tau of 1.5 was best, giving the approximate inverse controller as
11.11 ∗s + 1/14.052 ∗s + 9.368
22
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:31==
The reference signal r should then be reversed through the reference model, so the signal
y sent to the controller becomes y=r’+r The system, using the 2 brainstem setup from the
simulations, can be seen in figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Testing architecture
As the forward architecture functioned well in simulations, this was also implemented for
testing.
The algorithms were implemented with both the valued signal and spiking signal ACF
so results could be compared. While implementing them, it was noted that the spiking
algorithm has substantially more data processing and memory usage than the valued
signal implementation. This was partly due to the specific implementation, and partly due
to the necessity of encoding and decoding spiking signals. In the simulations this wasn’t
an issue, but it may have an impact on the real time system. A PID controller was also
implemented as a baseline comparison. It was not heavily optimized, but hand tuned to
a decent performance to give a ballpark estimate of system performance using traditional
control techniques.
To combat noisy readings from the sensor a lowpass filter was used on the incoming data.
This helped stabilize learning but the output was still noisy, making it difficult to analyze
and optimize parameters.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:33==
4
Results
This section provides an overview of the performance of the described algorithms. A va­
riety of architectures were set up to compare strengths and weaknesses of them when
combined with spiking vs valued signals. Their performance on a range of input signals
are summed up and compared. The main comparison of their performance is the RMS
error after training. Learning speed will also be looked at, though not weighed heavily as
there exists methods to increase learning speed independent of architecture. Computa­
tion time was measured to compare as a way to evaluate power consumption, under the
assumption that higher computation time means more power consumed.
4.1
Simulation
4.1.1
Recreating a simulated experiment
As one of the learning goals of the project is to recreate a simulated experiment, in this
case the results from the Wilson article, the outcome is presented here. The article evalu­
ates the designed controller using the RMS error of the plant output compared to reference
signal. It also uses two other parameters relating to the spikes fire by the LIF neuron into
the plant, but as this is not relevant to this project, it is omitted here. Three data sets
were used in the article; A physiologically plausible kicking signal, an increasing and de­
creasing spike frequency signal, and a pseudorandom spike train signal. The table below
shows the results compared to the article.
Data Set
RMSE ­ recreated
RMSE ­ original
Physiological kick
0.027
0.017
Increasing/Decreasing
0.040
0.027
Random spike train
0.096
0.018
The recreation performed slightly worse than the original implementation, however it still
managed to follow the reference signal decently, as seen in the figure 4.1. The perfor­
mance on the random spike train was substantially worse, with an error of 0.096 compared
to 0.018 in the article.
Figure 4.1: Control of plant with test signal
The reason for the difference in performance wasn’t uncovered. The discussion briefly
highlight some possible reasons. While implementing the algorithm, testing with different
data sets and at different training times was important, as despite some mistakes in the
code, it would at time still converge. Other times it would seem to converge, but if it was
trained for too long the RMS error would start increasing again. The best way to tell if
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
25
==PAGE:34==
it was on the right track was to look at if the weights were stabilizing. Figure 4.2 shows
stabilized weights vs slowly growing weights.
(a) Stabilized weights indicate learning is done
(b) Weights continuously growing suggesting
fault in implementation or too low learning rate
Figure 4.2
4.1.2
Spiking Adaptive Cerebellar Filter
The data sets from the Wilson article were used to evaluate the performance of the spiking
ACF and alternative architectures. Having the results from the article to compare to gives
a good idea of performance. Each algorithm was shown the training data eight times, as
learning was slowing in the spiking algorithms than in the valued­signal algorithm. The test
data was run without providing additional learning. The table belows gives an overview
of the results.
Controller
Data Set
RMSE
Spiking Recurrent
Physiological kick
0.05253
increasing/Decreasing
0.0684
Random spike train
0.05397
Spiking Forward
Physiological kick
0.0321
increasing/Decreasing
0.0353
Random spike train
0.06271
Forward
Physiological kick
0.0269
Increasing/Decreasing
0.0359
Random spike train
0.0863
PID
Physiological kick
0.0212
Increasing/Decreasing
0.0262
Random spike train
0.0246
Though not as good as the Wilson implementation, the spiking ACFs compete with the
valued­signal impementation made for this project. The non­spiking forward implementa­
tion was the over all best controller, though still did not outperform the baseline PID.
4.2
Tests with soft manipulator
The algorithms were implemented to run with the soft manipulator, but readings from the
sensor were sporadic and noisy, making precise interpretations difficult. Looking at plots
from the test runs can however provide some insight into their performance.
26
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:35==
(a) Valued­signal ACF controlling the robot, ref­
erence at 800
(b) Spiking ACF controlling the robot, reference
at 800
Figure 4.3
Both the non spiking 4.3a and spiking 4.3b implementations manage to keep the noisy
sensor close to the set reference. Compare this to the PID controller in figure 4.4, where
it simply fluctuated too wildly to get the reading steady. Even with extensive tuning and a
slow controller it would always end up fluctuating from the noise. The ACFs also needed
low learning rates to obtain any level of control, and there would still be fluctuations, but
overall they kept the reading more steady than the PID.
Figure 4.4: Control of Robot with PID, reference at 800
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:37==
5
Discussion
This section will discuss the results provided above, along with an elaboration of some
critical points in the process. Possibilities for future work to further the use case of this
project will be discussed.
The results obtained aim to answer the four research questions;
• How does spiking signals influence the performance of the ACF
• Are benefits like robustness and lower power consumption observed
• Does the system from the simulation translate well to a physical system
• Does the spiking ACF control the robot accurately and safely
5.1
The Spiking Cerebellar Algorithm
The spiking algorithm, while not performing as well as the Wilson valued­signal imple­
mentation, learnt an appropriate inverse for the simulated muscle plant to provide decent
control. The forward architecture spiking implementation managed to perform on par with
the valued­signal implementation made for this project for tests 2 and 3, though not for
test 1 with physiological kick­type signals.
The forward architectures both performed better than the recurrent ones, despite the lit­
erature suggesting otherwise3.1a. Part of this was likely that the recurrent architecture
could cause a positive feedback loop, overflowing the values. This could be kept down
with lower learning rates, with the obvious side effect of the controller adapting slower to
change. A positive feedback loop in a real system could however cause damage to the
surroundings, which would be taken into account in the design process.
As it is, this implementation is not overly impressive, partly due to its lack of fine tuning, but
also as it doesn’t exploit the use of neural dynamics to a far extent. It does show the po­
tential of SNNs to be applied to ACFs when using neurons to implement commonly used
functions like alpha filters and TDLs. Other areas using SNNs to replace ANNs, like in
image classification tasks, find that the dynamics between spiking neurons as opposed to
valued­signal neurons can be quite different, giving them advantages in certain scenarios
[7]. Finding filtering mechanisms unique to spiking could be a way to use spiking ACFs to
their full potential. Developing a spiking ACF algorithm is also attractive as the develop­
ment of neuromorphic hardware progresses. Applying the algorithm with this hardware
could provide very low power usage adaptive control for mobile robots with limited battery
life.
The spiking algorithm had slower learning times than the valued­signal implementation.
This is caused by the weights only updating when there is a signal running through the
corresponding PF, and spiking signals have ‘downtime’ between spikes. This was less
prevalent with the alpha filter­neuron implementation, as the neurons had higher activity
per neuron. On top of this the spiking meant that the weight update was more reliant on
having many repetitions, since the spikes are always the same value. In the valued­signal
ACF, a large change in weight is proportionally big, whereas in the spiking algorithm the
weight change only scales with the size of the error. In the simulation, both spiking ACF
architectures performed better on the randomly generated signal than the valued­signal
ACF.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
29
==PAGE:38==
So while much further comparison is needed, implementing the ACF with spikes did not
influenced it to a point of uselessness, though slightly degraded it’s performance.
5.2
Encoding signals to spikes
One of the biggest challenges faced in this project has been the encoding and decoding
of spikes. Encoding a signal and decoding without manipulating it in the encoded state
is not an issue. However when the signal is transformed in the encoded state, decod­
ing in the correct scale becomes difficult, and fidelity is quickly lost. This was largely
due to the choice of rate coding for the project. Rate coding is simple to implement, but
when converted quickly degrades. A different choice of coding that would have served
the project better is population coding, which measures the firing rate of a population of
neurons instead of a single spike train. This makes the delay much shorter, and signals
can be decoded again with higher fidelity. As it requires multiple output neurons on the
decoding side it is not directly applicable to the ACF used here, but has been used in other
studies for encoding for spiking cerebellar models. As mentioned earlier, bio­plausibility
can serve as a guide for choosing elements for bio­inspired robotics. Choice of coding
is not so straightforward in this respect though, as the exact way our brain uses spikes
to encode information has not been uncovered yet. Rate and population coding are both
rate­based, but another view is that information is spike­time dependent, and cannot be
reduced to rates, as argued in Brette [17]. For engineering purposes, different types of
rate coding remain useful, so long as one chooses the right type for the application.
5.3
Implementation on the Robot
Though the implementation was mostly unsuccessful, a few insights could be gained from
it. Despite being incredibly noisy, the algorithm managed to stay close to the reference
signal for periods of time. It also outperformed the PID control, which couldn’t handle the
amount of noise for adjustments as fine as were needed with the sensor. This was not
due to the spiking element, as the valued­signal controller also managed to converge on
the signal, but further test could be able to distinguish the differences between the two
implementations. In the simulations, where there was no noise, the PID greatly outper­
formed all spiking ACFs. The question of how well the spiking ACF algorithm transfers
when first implemented in simulation remains unanswered though, as the data gather was
of too low a quality to draw any strong conclusions.
In general, cerebellar models for control is being explored frequently in the literature,
with different extensions for non­linear modeling, multiple ACFs [5], and spiking [9]. Soft
robotics is an exciting area to explore with cerebellar models as control of soft robots
requires adapting to the forces the robot is being exposed to.
5.3.1
Notes on Bioplausability
Bio­plausibility is often discussed in the literature surrounding SNNs and bio­inspired
learning. Nature has evolved incredible control of non­linear and highly compliant sys­
tems, and models and designs taking inspiration from them aim to recreate that control,
so analyzing the possibility of a model to take place in nature can, as mentioned above,
act as a guiding hand for a design. The cerebellum as an adaptive filter has been shown
to be a highly plausible computational model. The implementation made here stays within
the scope of that plausibility computationally. Parts of it are not supported by biology, as
with the spike encoding mentioned above. The filtering process is also one taken from
engineering rather than biology, as the recoding in the granule layer is not well under­
stood.
30
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:39==
6
Conclusion
This thesis has looked at the implementation of an adaptive cerebellar filter algorithm for
control of soft robotic devices. It started in simulation by recreating an experiment to con­
trol a simulated biological muscle. Based on results and learning from this process, the
algorithm was modified to use spiking signals internally in the ACF. Different implemen­
tations were explored and, combining several approaches, a design using alpha filters
in conjunction with LIF neurons was created. This was implemented in the control loop
from the simulated experiments, and evaluated compared to the valued­signal implemen­
tations The spiking algorithm managed to get within the same accuracy of the re­created
experiment, though it had several issues, including slower learning and loss of fidelity in
cerebellar signals. The algorithm was tested on a soft manipulator. It managed some
control, but due to noisy measurements the it was far from optimal. It could be seen that
learning was achieved towards a correct estimation of the plant, but no other conclusions
could be drawn from these tests.
The designed algorithm shows that using SNNs to implement an adaptive cerebellar fil­
ter has potential, and even a rudimentary implementation can adapt to different systems.
Based on these results and current literature regarding soft robotics, spiking networks,
and advanced cerebellar control, further research and experimentation with spiking im­
plementations of ACFs look to be worth pursuing.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[1]
Panagiotis Polygerinos et. al. “Soft Robotics: Review of Fluid­Driven Intrinsically
Soft Devices; Manufacturing, Sensing, Control, and Applications in Human­Robot
Interaction”. In: Advanced Engineering Materials (2017). DOI: 10.1002/adem.201700016.
[2]
Sangbae Kim, Cecilia Laschi, and Barry Trimmer. “Soft robotics: a bioinspired evo­
lution in robotics”. In: Trends in Biotechnology 31.5 (2013), pp. 287–294. ISSN:
0167­7799. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibtech . 2013 . 03 . 002. URL: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167779913000632.
[3]
C. et al. Lee. “Soft robot review.” In: Int. J. Control Autom. Syst. (2017). DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s12555-016-0462-3.
[4]
Herculano­Houzel S. “The human brain in numbers: a linearly scaled­up primate
brain”. In: Front Hum Neurosci. (2009). DOI: 10.3389/neuro.09.031.2009.
[5]
Emma Wilson et. al. ““A Multizone Cerebellar Chip for Bioinspired Adaptive Robot
Control and Sensorimotor Processing””. In: J. R. Soc. Interface (2021). DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.0750.
[6]
O. Zahra. ““A Fully Spiking Neural Control System Based on Cerebellar Predic­
tive Learning for Sensor­Guided Robots””. In: IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (2021).
[7]
Lei Deng et al. “Rethinking the performance comparison between SNNS and ANNS”.
In: Neural Networks 121 (2020), pp. 294–307. ISSN: 0893­6080. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neunet.2019.09.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0893608019302667.
[8]
Saima Sharmin et al. “A Comprehensive Analysis on Adversarial Robustness of
Spiking Neural Networks”. In: (2019), pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/IJCNN.2019.8851732.
[9]
Omar Zahra, David Navarro­Alarcon, and Silvia Tolu. “A Fully Spiking Neural Control
System Based on Cerebellar Predictive Learning for Sensor­Guided Robots”. In:
(May 2021), pp. 4423–4429. DOI: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9561127.
[10]
Emma. Wilson. ““Adaptive Filter Model of Cerebellum for Biological Muscle Control
with Spike Train Inputs””. In: ().
[11]
M. Mazare. ““Adaptive variable impedance control for a modular soft robot manip­
ulator in configuration space””. In: Meccanica (2022).
[12]
Masaki Fujita. ““Adaptive Filter Model of the Cerebellum.”” In: Biological Cybernetics
(1982).
[13]
Paul Dean. ““The Cerebellar Microcircuit as an Adaptive Filter: Experimental and
Computational Evidence.”” In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience (2010).
[14]
et al Porrill John. ““Adaptive Filters and Internal Models: Multilevel Description of
Cerebellar Function.”” In: Neural Networks (2013).
[15]
Fujita M. “Adaptive filter model of the cerebellum.” In: Biol Cybern. (1982). DOI:
10.1007/BF00336192.
[16]
A. Lenz. ““Cerebellar­Inspired Adaptive Control of a Robot Eye Actuated by Pneu­
matic Artificial Muscles.”” In: IEEE Transactions on Systems (2009).
[17]
Romain Brette. “Philosophy of the Spike: Rate­Based vs. Spike­Based Theories of
the Brain”. In: Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 9 (2015). ISSN: 1662­5137. DOI:
10.3389/fnsys.2015.00151. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnsys.
2015.00151.
[18]
Wenzhe Guo et al. “Towards Efficient Neuromorphic Hardware: Unsupervised Adap­
tive Neuron Pruning”. In: Electronics 9 (June 2020), p. 1059. DOI: 10.3390/electronics9071059.
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
33
==PAGE:42==
[19]
Emma D. et al Wilson. “Biohybrid Control of General Linear Systems Using the
Adaptive Filter Model of Cerebellum”. In: Frontiers in Neurorobotics 9 (2015). ISSN:
1662­5218. DOI: 10.3389/fnbot.2015.00005. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/
articles/10.3389/fnbot.2015.00005.
[20]
Tondu B. “Modelling of the McKibben artificial muscle: A review. Journal of Intel­
ligent Material Systems and Structures”. In: Biol Cybern. (2012). DOI: 10.1177/
1045389X11435435.
34
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
==PAGE:43==
A
Title
Along with this thesis is a great deal of python and MatLab scripts, classes, and simulink
setups. They will have been attached with this report on handin, and can otherwise be
requested at leonpihl@yahoo.com.sg
Spiking control of McKibben artificial muscles in a soft­robot arm
35
==PAGE:44==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
