==PAGE:1==
GlacierStrataNet
Ice core line-scan analysis using Computer Vision
and Deep Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
GlacierStrataNet
Ice core line-scan analysis using Computer Vision and Deep Learning
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Alejandro Valverde Mahou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Aningaaq Rosing Carlsen, 2019
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five and a half months (from 02/10/2023 to 17/03/2024)
in collaboration with DTU Compute, at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science and DTU Space, at the Department of Space Research and Technology,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of computer vision and
deep learning. The topics of the thesis revolve around glaciology, but the reader is not
expected to have any previous knowledge.
Alejandro Valverde Mahou - s212728
Signature
Date
ii
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This study focuses on analyzing climatic patterns during the last glacial period and devel-
oping a methodology for detecting sub-annual layer boundaries within ice core line scan
images. Leveraging expertise from glaciology, climatology, computer vision, and deep
learning, the research aims to uncover historical shifts in atmospheric circulation patterns
and their implications for future climate scenarios.
The primary objective is to identify variations in storminess and precipitation levels over
time by quantifying the number and thickness of sub-annual layers per year. Traditional
techniques for layer detection primarily focus on annual layers, relying on chemical records
that cannot detect sub-annual variations. Line scan images offer a unique opportunity to
discern sub-annual layers, presenting a significant challenge in glacier stratigraphy re-
search. The study hypothesizes that differences in atmospheric circulation patterns be-
tween warm and cold periods during the last glacial period will manifest as distinct sub-
annual layers.
To address this, two primary methodologies are pursued: classical computer vision tech-
niques for edge detection and modern deep learning approaches trained on synthetic
data. Among the approaches examined, the most promising involves utilizing the Image
Quilting technique for synthetic data generation, which is then employed by a segmenta-
tion model for training purposes. The primary challenge addressed is developing effective
segmentation methods for a complex, unlabeled problem. Despite rigorous testing of vari-
ous methods aimed at detecting sub-annual layers in ice core line scan images, none have
achieved satisfactory accuracy. Insights from this study highlight the interdisciplinary po-
tential in advancing sub-annual layer detection, offering new avenues for understanding
climatological signals in ice core imagery.
GlacierStrataNet
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Dimitrios Papadopoulos, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, Visual Computing.
Many thanks to my main supervisor for his immense help during my master’s thesis. With-
out his expertise in computer vision and deep learning, and constant flow of new ideas,
this master’s thesis would not have been possible.
Mai Winstrup, Postdoc, Department of Space Research and Technology, Geodesy and
Earth Observation.
I am also very grateful to my co-supervisor for all the help and both theoretical and prac-
tical knowledge in the field of glaciology. Thanks to her expertise, the research benefited
greatly from insights into the theory behind the ice cores analysis. Her guidance and
support were invaluable throughout this journey.
I would like to extend my heartfelt gratitude to all my friends and colleagues who pro-
vided support, encouragement, and understanding throughout this journey. Your help
and words of encouragement during challenging times were immensely uplifting and kept
me motivated to persevere.
iv
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Ice Cores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Glacial Climatology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Line Scan Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Data
9
3.1
Annual Layering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Previous steps to Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Method
16
4.1
Edge and Layer Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Segmentation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Synthetic Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5
Results and Experiments
25
5.1
Evaluation Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Edge and Layer Detection method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Perlin Noise method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.4
Image Quilting method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.5
Latent Diffusion method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.6
Methods Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
Conclusion
41
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Bibliography
43
A Edge detection preprocessing
47
B Results: Edge and layer detection
48
C Results: Perlin Noise Model
49
D Results: Image Quilting Model
50
E
Results: Latent Diffusion Model
51
GlacierStrataNet
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
When snowfall accumulates on the surface of the Greenlandic ice sheet, it gradually trans-
forms into ice, which then drifts towards the ice sheet edges, forming distinct layers of
preserved snowfall within the ice sheet. From ice cores retrieved by drilled deep into the
ice sheet, these stratified layers provide valuable insights into the glacier’s history and
past environmental conditions, offering a window into the past with high accuracy.
This master’s thesis operates at the convergence of multiple disciplines, including glaciol-
ogy, climatology, computer vision, and deep learning. Its primary objective is to detect
sub-annual layers within ice-core line scan images, which showcase the high-resolution
stratigraphy of the ice core. This facilitates the analysis and investigation of changes in
atmospheric circulation under a changing climate, spanning from 28kyr b2k (thousand of
years before year 2000) to 53 kyr b2k, focusing specifically on line-scan data from the
North Greenland Ice Core Project (NorthGRIP or NGRIP) during the last glacial period.
Currently, the state-of-the-art techniques for layer detection in ice cores primarily focus
on identifying annual layers [1, 2], providing a chronological framework for the ice core.
However, these methods rely on chemical records, which are unable to detect sub-annual
variations. Line scan images present a unique opportunity in this regard, as they reveal
discernible sub-annual layers, offering a comprehensive ice core record showcasing each
snowfall event on the ice sheet.
By identifying the number and thickness of sub-annual layers per year, reflecting the fre-
quency and intensity of precipitation-bearing storms, we can gain valuable insights into
historical shifts in atmospheric circulation patterns. This knowledge allows us to make
informed inferences about the potential consequences of future temperature fluctuations,
enhancing our understanding of Earth’s climatic history and its implications for address-
ing contemporary climate change challenges. The pursuit of sub-annual layers, marking
shorter time intervals within a year, presents an unprecedented challenge and an unex-
plored frontier in glacier stratigraphy research.
The primary aim of this thesis is to detect sub-annual layers in the NorthGRIP ice core,
representing the number of precipitation events during a year. This analysis aims to un-
cover variations in storminess and precipitation levels over time, shedding light on how
these patterns evolved with changing climates. These findings are particularly signifi-
cant during periods of rapid temperature change, providing insights into the potential evo-
lution of atmospheric circulation patterns under climate change conditions. During the
last glacial period, the climate oscillated between warm and cold phases, with the warm
periods serving as analogues to preindustrial climates. It is well-documented that aver-
age annual precipitation during warm periods was significantly higher than during cold
phases, indicating notable variations in precipitation levels across different climatic con-
ditions within the glacial period. What we aim to observe is how the storminess changed
either in the number of storms or intensity of these storms, or both, during these warm
and cold phases, offering insights into past atmospheric circulation dynamics and their
potential implications for future climate scenarios.
GlacierStrataNet
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Hypothesis
There is a noticeable difference in the atmospheric circulation patterns between warm
and cold periods during the last glacial. As a result, our initial hypothesis presuppose that
sub-annual layers formed by precipitation-bearing storms during these periods will exhibit
visual differences. Our goal is to identify these distinctions by quantifying the number and
thickness of layers per year
Additionally, we seek to investigate whether the increase in temperature when going from
cold to warm phases of the last glacial leads to longer or more intense storm events. By
correlating these findings with existing climate data, we aim to contribute valuable insights
into the intricate relationship between climate dynamics and glacier stratigraphy, ultimately
advancing our understanding of past climatic variations and their implications for future
environmental changes.
Attempting manual inspection for this task is deemed unfeasible due to the sheer vol-
ume of data and the inherently subjective nature of the detection process. The manual
inspection of such vast datasets not only poses practical challenges but also introduces
a significant risk of viewer bias, thereby compromising the integrity and reliability of the
results. Therefore, our endeavor focuses on developing automatic methods to address
these challenges and ensure more accurate and objective analyses of the data.
2
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
2.1
Ice Cores
Glaciers consist of multiple layers of snow that have been compressed under pressure to
form ice. Ice cores are cylindrical samples of ice extracted from ice sheets and glaciers,
as the one shown in fig. 2.1. By examining these ice layers, we can glean valuable in-
formation about the snow and ice. Winter and summer ice exhibit distinct characteristics,
enabling us to discern and analyze them to identify individual years. Additionally, dust
particles and air bubbles become trapped within the ice layers, which change the visual
aspect of the layers.
Figure 2.1: Ice core from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Divide (WAIS Divide). The dark
band shows a layer of volcanic ash that settled on the ice sheet approximately 21,000
years ago. Image taken by Heidi Roop [3].
These layers serve as a historical record of past climatic conditions, providing crucial
data such as snow accumulation, evidence of volcanic activity, or chemical composition,
among other indicators.
The layers within ice cores correspond to different years and seasons, with the youngest
ice found at the top and the oldest at the bottom. Due to their high temporal resolution,
the nature of their proxy records, and their ability to preserve historical greenhouse gas
concentrations, ice cores have become a cornerstone of paleoclimate research [4].
The analysis of ice cores has provided invaluable insights into past climatic history and
weather patterns, with numerous projects conducted worldwide, primarily in Greenland
and Antarctica. Greenlandic projects are of special interest due to their superior data
resolution and the rich insights they offer into past climates. This study focuses on a
Greenlandic project, the NorthGRIP, renowned for its exceptional high resolution during
the last glacial period. This emphasis is justified by Greenland’s higher precipitation rates
GlacierStrataNet
3
==PAGE:12==
compared to Antarctica. However, it’s essential to note that Greenland ice cores do not
extend as far back in time, approximately 200k years, compared to Antarctic ice cores,
which span approximately 1 million years.
Thanks to these records, numerous studies have been conducted, including analyses of
recent climate changes and their rapidity [5], as well as broader investigations into abrupt
changes during the last glacial period [6]. These studies provide detailed insights into the
chemical composition of the ice cores and accurately identify stadial (cold periods) and
interstadial (warm periods) events.
2.1.1
NorthGRIP
NorthGRIP [7] is a deep ice-core drilling initiative situated in the northern region of central
Greenland, at geographic coordinates 75.10°N, 42.32°W, as shown in fig. 2.2. The drilling
site was located in an area with an ice thickness of 3080 meters and was operational from
1999 to 2003.
Figure 2.2: Geographic locations of the different Greenlandic ice cores drilling projects
[1].
The project retrieved ice covering a segment of time covering the Holocene, the current
geological epoch. Our focus will be on the ice core section from the last glacial period.
The data we are utilizing spans from depths of 1866.155 meters to 2128.494 meters at the
NorthGRIP2 drilling site, located approximately 20 meters away from the original North-
GRIP drilling site. This depth range corresponds to the time period between 27691 b2k
and 41761 b2k.
In addition to high-resolution images, various chemical measurements were conducted
using continuous flow analysis (CFA) for substances like Calcium, Sodium, Ammonium,
Sulfate, and Nitrate, although at a lower resolution than the images [8], which were utilized
to produce an annual timescale for the ice core.
2.1.2
Oxygen Isotope Analysis
A crucial measurement, useful in ice core analysis, is the δ18O, denoting the ratio between
the oxygen isotopes 18O and 16O in precipitation. This isotopic composition serves as
a valuable indicator of past precipitation temperature. The δ18O values, obtained from
4
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:13==
studies such as those conducted by Gkinis et al. [9] and Andersen et al. [10], are recorded
at 5 cm intervals.
In ice core research, the δ18O proxy is widely recognized for its utility in reconstructing past
temperatures. The relationship between δ18O and temperature is established through em-
pirical formulas. Notably, the formula derived by Gkinis et al. [9], as depicted in Equation
2.1, offers a means to infer past temperatures from δ18O measurements into Celsius. This
relationship provides valuable observations into historical temperature variations, essen-
tial for understanding past climate dynamics.
δ18O = 0.67 · T −13.7
(2.1)
By using δ18O data along with other proxies, researchers can understand how temper-
ature, precipitation, and atmospheric conditions interact, revealing insights into climate
phenomena like storms and long-term climate patterns.
2.2
Glacial Climatology
A glacial period refers to a prolonged cyclic period characterized by low global tempera-
tures and advances of glaciers. In contrast, interglacial periods denote the time intervals
between glacial periods. The alternation between glacial and interglacial periods consti-
tutes what is known as a glacial cycle. It is worth noting that the last glacial period featured
brief intervals of warmer climate conditions, akin to current climate, but too short to qualify
as full interglacial periods. For further exploration of the cyclical nature of glacial periods,
interested readers may refer to the work of Fairbridge, titled “Climatology of a glacial cy-
cle”, for more in-depth insights [11].
These brief warm periods, in the last glacial period, are characterized by sudden increases
in temperature followed by gradual cooling. These abrupt shifts are known as Dansgaard–
Oeschger events (D-O events) [12]. Dansgaard–Oeschger events are particularly promi-
nent in ice core records from Greenland, due to the region’s sensitivity to changes in North
Atlantic circulation patterns.
One of the relevant questions that this project seeks to answer is: What was the climate
like during the warm and cold phases of the last glacial period? Additionally, it aims to
explore the level of storminess during that period and investigate the effects of climate
change on precipitation. The ultimate goal is to infer how climate and precipitation levels
might change due to the current climate change using historical data. The study con-
ducted by Li et al. sheds light on this subject. According to Li et al., during the last glacial
maximum (21k years before the present day), climatic simulations suggest a reduction in
the frequency of storms compared to contemporary climatic records [13]. However, it is
important to note that while this study provides valuable insights, our approach to investi-
gating these phenomena differs, particularly our emphasis is on researching sub-annual
deposition.
2.3
Line Scan Data
Line scan images are images captured during ice core drilling expeditions and provide
high-resolution visual representations of ice core stratigraphy. Although they are an un-
derutilized data source in ice core analysis, they hold potential for enhancing the accu-
racy and efficiency of annual layer detection. Unlike traditional methods that rely solely
on chemical and physical measurements, line scan images offer a direct visual depiction
GlacierStrataNet
5
==PAGE:14==
of the ice core layers, allowing researchers to observe subtle variations in layer thickness,
density, and composition.
Utilizing line scan images in ice core analysis offers several advantages. These images
provide a detailed visual representation of ice core layers, helping to identify and analyze
sub- annual layers with greater precision. Additionally, line scan images serve as addi-
tional information to supplement existing chemical and physical measurements, offering
additional insights into ice core stratigraphy and facilitating cross-validation of results.
Moreover, the use of advanced image processing and machine learning techniques en-
ables the detection and analysis of sub-annual layers in line scan images.
Despite their potential benefits, the utilization of line scan images in ice core analysis
presents several challenges and considerations. Firstly, line scan images may suffer
from distortion and artifacts caused by drilling processes, ice deformation, and instrument
limitations, which can complicate the analysis [8]. Secondly, analyzing line scan images
require sophisticated image processing algorithms and computational resources to extract
meaningful information from the raw data, adding to the complexity of data processing.
Finally, interpreting line scan images and identifying sub-annual layers can be subjec-
tive, leading to uncertainties in the analysis results and a need for careful validation and
verification of interpretations.
2.4
Computer Vision
Computer vision encompasses a wide range of techniques aimed at enabling computers
to analyze, classify, and generate visual data, including images, videos, and 3D repre-
sentations. In this thesis, our focus lies specifically on the classification, generation, and
analysis of ice core line scans images. This section will delve into existing techniques
and related work that address similar challenges to the one we aim to tackle. Our primary
objective revolves around segmenting layers within images, a complicated task due to the
absence of ground truth data and the impracticality of manual labeling.
2.4.1
Texture Synthesis
Texture synthesis is a fundamental task in computer vision, encompassing techniques
to generate textures either parametrically or non-parametrically. Parametric synthesis
relies on predefined mathematical models and parameters to create textures, often em-
ploying functions like fractals or noise patterns. In contrast, non-parametric synthesis
analyzes and synthesizes textures based on exemplar or sample-based methods, using
small source samples as references to generate larger, high-fidelity textures while pre-
serving the original visual characteristics [14, 15, 16, 17, 18].
Early non-parametric approaches, like the neighbor-based method introduced by Efros
and Leung, lacked a global understanding of image structure. Instead, they relied on lo-
cal pixel probabilities derived from the original image, leading to computationally intensive
synthesis processes [14]. Advancements to patch-level decision-making aimed to accel-
erate synthesis by considering larger patches but introduced challenges such as visible
patch frontiers and discontinuities in synthesized textures [15, 16].
The Wave Function Collapse algorithm (WFC) presents a unique approach, borrowing
concepts from quantum mechanics to iteratively collapse a wave function into a resolved
state, generating coherent textures while respecting input sample constraints [19]. This
innovative algorithm offers a promising avenue for texture synthesis, providing a means
to generate complex textures efficiently and effectively.
Pioneering deep learning work in texture synthesis is exemplified by Gatys et al. [20].
6
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:15==
This approach, followed by subsequent deep learning-based methods, involves the model
learning underlying features of the input texture, capable of creating new content based
on this understanding.
A recent method involves Diffusion and Latent Diffusion Models, capable of performing
various tasks, including outpainting, which effectively performs texture synthesis without
limitations to image types [21]. This outpainting can be conditioned on a wide variety of
inputs and outperforms most other approaches.
2.4.2
Segmentation Models
Segmentation in computer vision refers to the process of partitioning an image into mul-
tiple segments to simplify its representation and make it more meaningful and easier to
analyze. This technique plays a crucial role in various computer vision tasks, including
object detection, image recognition, and scene understanding. The primary objective of
segmentation is to identify and delineate distinct objects or regions within an image based
on their visual characteristics, such as color, texture, or shape.
Traditionally, segmentation problems are solved using either supervised or unsupervised
learning methods. In supervised learning, segmentation models are trained on labeled
datasets where each pixel or region in the image is annotated with its corresponding
class label. Supervised segmentation algorithms, such as Fully Convolutional Networks
(FCNs) and U-Net [22], learn to predict the class labels of pixels or regions based on their
features extracted from the input image.
In recent years, deep learning-based segmentation approaches have gained prominence
due to their ability to automatically learn hierarchical features from raw image data, lead-
ing to improved segmentation accuracy and robustness. These models leverage convo-
lutional neural networks (CNNs) to extract features from the input image and generate
pixel-wise segmentation masks directly. The development of advanced architectures,
such as DeepLab [23] and Mask R-CNN [24], has significantly advanced the state-of-the-
art in semantic and instance segmentation tasks.
Exploring unsupervised segmentation, researchers have devised innovative methods to
tackle the lack of ground truth examples. One notable endeavor by Voynov et al. [25]
stands out, leveraging latent space manipulation within a pretrained Generative Adver-
sarial Network (GAN) [26]. This pioneering work effectively detects background and fore-
ground elements, enabling the creation of masks for generated objects, thereby sidestep-
ping the need for manual classification. However, this approach’s viability is not useful
when applied to the task at hand, given the unique characteristics of ice core stratigraphy
images. Unlike traditional object segmentation, these images lack discernible background-
foreground dynamics and the problem is more focus on differentiating layers rather than
delineating singular objects, rendering this solution unsuitable.
In segmentation problems that use unsupervised approaches, Class Activation Maps
(CAMs) [27] stand out as a commonly used tool. CAMs help visualize key areas in an
image that strongly affect predictions made by a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN).
While CAMs offers meaningfull observations into the decision-making process of the net-
work, its applicability to the current problem is limited due to its inability to accurately
segment regions, focusing instead on explaining the behavior of the model.
Noteworthy advancements in addressing segmentation challenges in unsupervised and
weakly supervised scenarios include novel improvements over classical CAM approaches.
These innovations enable more precise label detection, even within self-supervised frame-
works [28]. Nevertheless, they still do not guarantee strong segmentation, but only identify
GlacierStrataNet
7
==PAGE:16==
the relevant area of the image for segmentation.
Analogous problems in medical image analysis offer insights applicable to the current
context. Tasks such as skin layer segmentation [29, 30] and retinal layer segmentation
[31, 32, 33] display similarities with the detection of different layers across images. While
techniques from medical image analysis can be adapted to our application, they have sev-
eral advantages over our scenario, such as having extensive manually annotated ground
truth images and prior knowledge about layer count and general characteristics. These
factors enable the utilization of more sophisticated post-processing techniques, enhanc-
ing segmentation accuracy and robustness compare to our scenario.
2.4.3
Deep Learning applied to Glaciology
In recent years, the application of machine learning and deep learning techniques has
emerged as a valuable tool across various scientific disciplines, including glaciology.
Within this field, there exist numerous questions and challenges that can benefit from
computer vision approaches [34]. For instance, researchers are interested in extracting
meaningful features from ice core images to glean insights about past climatic conditions.
Such features may include the number and size of bubbles trapped within the ice core,
which can vary with depth and provide valuable information about paleoclimatic periods
[35].
Moreover, numerous studies have focused on analyzing and predicting changes in land-
masses within glacier and polar regions [36, 37, 38]. These projects primarily aim to as-
sess the impact of climate change on polar environments and develop predictive models
to detect and quantify landmass changes over time.
Despite the potential benefits, line scan images from ice cores remain an underutilized
data source in glaciology research. Leveraging deep learning and modern computer vi-
sion technologies presents an opportunity to unlock valuable insights from these images
and enhance our understanding of glacier dynamics and environmental changes.
8
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:17==
3
Data
The data utilized in the thesis is a combination of various types of data from the North-
GRIP2 drilling site. The primary source consists of the line scan images, supplemented
by records of previously calculated annual layers and δ18O measurements.
The ice from NorthGRIP2 was recovered in slabs of 1.65 meters of length, which was
later divided in bags of 55 cm. Afterward, these bags were scanned. The images were
acquired via a line scan instrument on the ice core slabs, resulting in remarkably high-
quality images with a resolution of 118 pixels per centimeter of image. The images were
obtained by processing ice cores from slabs that are similar to the one shown in fig. 2.1.
A camera was positioned on trolleys both below and above the ice. As the camera moves
along the ice, it captures scattered light. The result is an image where transparent or clear
ice is represented with darker colors, and any impurity of the ice such as dust, air bubbles,
or ash appears in lighter colors [8]. Figure 3.1 illustrates the machinery employed and the
operation of the lights.
Figure 3.1: Line scan instrument in operation, scanning the ice core slabs [8].
High-quality glacier images serve as valuable resources for analyzing glacier stratigraphy
patterns. Numerous studies concentrate on analyzing and detecting annual layers within
GlacierStrataNet
9
==PAGE:18==
glacier stratigraphy. In the NorthGRIP, the analyzed images span from 1866 meters to
2128 meters in depth, covering the time period from 27691 b2k to 41762 b2k. Additional
images from newer ice are available, but their lower quality complicates their analysis and
utilization. Figure 3.2 show samples of the real raw data of the line scan images.
Figure 3.2: Examples of line scan images from various depths. Each column correspond
to a different ice core. (a) Holocene ice, 1354.65–1356.30 m depth. (b) Ice from the
Younger Dryas, 1504.80–1506.45 m depth. (c) Transition from ice drilled during the 1999
field season and that from the 2000 season in cold glacial ice, 1750.65–1752.30 m depth.
(d) Ice from around Last Glacial Maximum, 1836.45–1838.10 m depth. (e) Ice from the
sharp climatic transition into the mild glacial interstadial 19 (IS19) at 2534.40–2536.05
m depth. (f) Ice from the cold period preceding IS19 at 2537.70–2539.35 m depth. (g)
Example from 2651.55–2653.20 m depth. (h) 2899.05–2900.70 m depth. (i) 3017.30–
3018.95 m depth [8].
The images are in grayscale and have undergone a preprocessing process where the
brightness and contrast have been fixed to eliminate or reduce an error that occurred
during the generation of these images, causing one of the 8-bit pixels of the camera to
malfunction. Furthermore, a process of cropping and aligning the image has been previ-
ously done by Winstrup, as well as a manual masking to indicate where the ice broke and
created unusable data [39].
10
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:19==
3.1
Annual Layering
The analysis of ice cores involves identifying and analyzing annual layers, which serve
as chronological markers for dating past events and interpreting climate changes over
time. Traditionally, automated layer detection methods have been developed to assist in
ice core stratigraphy analysis [1, 2, 6, 8]. However, these methods often require human
supervision and decision-making due to the complexity of the task and the absence of
definitive ground truth data for comparison against the results.
Marking annual intervals in a glacier is a crucial task necessary for accurately analyz-
ing and detecting historical events. This process is performed through chemistry mea-
surements using Continuous Flow Analysis (CFA) on the ice. The detection of annual
layers is possible through chemistry measurements owing to their seasonality. For exam-
ple, sodium (Na+) has a strong winter peak because of increased transport of marine air
masses [40]. For a more detailed exploration of their detection, the work by Sinnl et al.
delves into annual layers in NorthGRIP [1].
Chemistry-based methods for detecting annual layers, supplemented by corroborating
evidence such as volcanic eruptions and other historical climatic events [1], have enabled
the creation of highly precise and accurate timescales for ice cores. This is achieved by
dividing the data into annual increments based on depth.
Therefore, the original images are segmented into individual annual layers for easier
processing. This segmentation divides the images into distinct sections corresponding
to each annual layer, facilitating focused analysis aimed at detecting sub-annual layers
within each segment. Some examples of these images divided by annual layers are
shown in fig. 3.3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.3: Example from the original data divided into years. Figure 3.3a: 27752 years
b2k; fig. 3.3b: 36868 years b2k; fig. 3.3c: 35797 years b2k; fig. 3.3d: 40598 years b2k.
3.1.1
Annual Thickness correction
Since each layer exerts pressure on those below it, the thickness of annual layers de-
creases as depth increases. Therefore, corrections must be applied to both annual and
sub-annual layer thicknesses as a function of depth. These corrections are provided by
Johnson and are based on ice flow model of the site [41]. A simple interpolation function is
GlacierStrataNet
11
==PAGE:20==
applied to the data to obtain the thickness correction at any given depth. The comparison
between the original annual thickness and the corrected one is displayed in fig. 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Annual layer thickness of the NorthGRIP data before and after applying the
correction based on depth.
3.2
Data Analysis
The data analysis process involves several exploratory steps. Initially, we experimented
with naive unsupervised classification methods like K-means and Random Forest. These
methods provided insights into the similarity of each row of pixels and allowed us to clus-
ter them. The goal was to group similar layers together, distinguishing between winter
and summer sub-annual layers. However, we encountered several limitations with this
approach. We had to determine the appropriate number of clusters, and some layers
ended up belonging to multiple clusters, which made the approaches unusable for the
layer detection problem. Nevertheless, it was successful in exploring the similarities or
differences in the images.
Therefore, as the primary focus of the project is to correlate temperature with storminess,
our efforts are directed towards integrating various data sources to uncover relationships
within the data.
Initial comparisons between annual layer thickness, δ18O, and average annual pixel value
revealed the known correlations among these variables, as illustrated in fig. 3.5 and sum-
marized in table 3.1. The strong positive correlation between δ18O and annual layer thick-
ness suggests a direct relationship between oxygen isotope ratios and the accumulation
of ice layers over time. This correlation aligns with established principles in paleoclima-
tology, and reflects an increase in precipitation during warmer periods.
Furthermore, the negative correlation between annual layer thickness and average color
intensity indicates a potential relationship between the amount of precipitation and the
amount of deposit in the ice, which may indicate that the thicker an annual layer is, the
more clear ice it has, and fewer deposits in the ice are found.
This information and the relationships observed in the data play a crucial role in analyzing
sub-annual layers in the images. They serve as a ground truth or reference against which
our findings can be evaluated and interpreted.
12
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.5: Comparative of the δ18O, the annual layer thickness (λ) and the layer average
color from the grayscale images.
Table 3.1: Pearson Correlation Coefficients ((ρ) between δ18O, the annual layer thickness
(λ) and the layer average color.
Variables
Correlation Coefficient (ρ)(%)
δ18O
λ
Average color
δ18O
100.0
63.4
-48.9
λ
100.0
-54.5
Average color
100.0
3.3
Previous steps to Data Generation
Our approach to sub-annual detection needs labeled data, which unfortunately is not avail-
able for our dataset, due to the lack of annotated data sources. Consequently, we need to
generate a synthetic labeled dataset to train the model, allowing it to learn the necessary
patterns. Subsequently, we can assess the performance of the model on real data.
3.3.1
Patch Classification
In this thesis, we use methods that require an initial small sample to generate larger im-
ages. Therefore, we must carefully select which images are suitable for this purpose.
This task is challenging because providing entire images to the models might inadver-
tently make them reproduce specific layer changes observed in the original images. This
outcome would not be advantageous for our models, as it could introduce additional unla-
beled layers. The primary objective of generating our own data is to accurately label the
boundaries. To mitigate this issue, a preprocessing step is essential, involving the careful
selection of small image patches. Expanding an image containing multiple layers could
result in uncontrolled and unlabeled boundaries, thereby introducing further noise into the
images.
Initially, our aim was to develop automated techniques for classifying these patches, en-
abling us to automatically find which ones would be most useful for subsequent processing
GlacierStrataNet
13
==PAGE:22==
steps. However, the complexity involved in creating such methods without undergoing a
meticulous manual selection and annotation process proved challenging. Consequently,
we opted to utilize patches that had been manually classified for the subsequent stages of
our work. These selected patches are then expanded using texture synthesis methods.
To streamline and expedite the patch selection process, we developed a visualization
tool. This tool not only simplifies the task but also accelerates it, allowing us to efficiently
identify and designate patches manually. Figure 3.6 showcases this tool, with an example
where the selected patch is not a good patch, even when it looks like it in the original
image.It hides a boundary that can be observed when the image goes through an image
processing to equalize its histogram.
Histogram equalization is a technique used in image processing to adjust the contrast of
an image. It redistributes the intensity values of the pixels in an image to improve the
overall contrast and make the details more visible. In the context of our tool, histogram
equalization helps reveal hidden boundaries and enhance the visibility of features that
may not be apparent in the original image.
Figure 3.6: Patch selection tool, showcasing the difficulty of selecting correct patches that
will not generate further noise in the texture synthesis process.
3.3.2
Boundary Label Generation
Various methods were explored to generate the boundary position and labels for synthetic
data generation models. Initially, a simple random walk algorithm was considered to de-
lineate layer boundaries. Although not perfect, this method effectively produced pseudo-
random boundaries that closely resembled those in real data. The random walk algorithm
generates boundaries by iteratively moving up and down randomly, creating a sequence
of connected points. Example boundaries created using this algorithm are illustrated in
fig. 3.7a.
However, a significant challenge emerged concerning the relationship between these
boundaries. In real data, layers follow each other in the direction of their deformations, a
14
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:23==
characteristic that could not be captured using a random walk algorithm alone.
(a) Randomly generated boundary using the
random walk algorithm.
(b) Randomly generated boundary using the
prior knowledge labeling algorithm.
Figure 3.7: Example of both labeling methods.
To address this limitation, we explored an alternative approach based on the prior knowl-
edge that layers, when stacked, exert pressure and thus exhibit similar patterns and de-
formations. The concept was to ensure that each generated curve followed the trajectory
of the previous one, while allowing for slight offsets to introduce randomness. The layer
creation process is outlined in algorithm 3.1, where each new layer follows the trajectory
of the preceding one. An example of labels generated using this method is depicted in
fig. 3.7b. In these labels, each boundary closely follows the trajectory of the preceding
one while maintaining differentiation through random offsets.
Algorithm 3.1 Create labels using prior knowledge.
Require: Size of the output label W × H
Require: Minimum and maximum size for each layer minSize and maxSize
Require: Maximum vertical offset for each layer O
Require: Curve deformation probability Pdeformation
Ensure: Resulting labels L
1: L ←zeros(W × H)
2: Thickness of the first layer H0 ←random(minSize, maxSize)
3: Total height Ht ←H0
4: Initial curve c0 ←randomCurve(W, O, Pdeformation)
5: c0 ←c0 + H0
6: Average initial curve ¯c0 ←averageCurve(c0)
7: Layer counter i ←0
8: L ←curveToLabel(c0, i)
9: i ←i + 1
10: while Ht < H do
11:
Hi ←random(minSize, maxSize)
12:
Ht ←Ht + Hi
13:
ci ←randomCurveFollowing(¯ci−1, W, O, Pdeformation)
14:
ci ←ci + Hi
15:
¯ci ←averageCurve(ci)
16:
L ←curveToLabel(ci, i)
17:
i ←i + 1
18: end while
GlacierStrataNet
15
==PAGE:24==
4
Method
The segmentation of the different layers of an ice core image is a non-trivial task, requiring
decisions on where to draw the division between two layers. Manual inspection and la-
beling for this data come with inherent drawbacks, such as the impracticality of accurately
labeling vast quantities of datasets and the subjectivity involved in the labeling process,
as shown in fig. 4.1. It is challenging for a human to discern which layers are genuine and
which might be artifacts in some cases, leading to subjective decisions.
One potential solution could involve seeking input from a significant number of human
labelers to independently determine what constitutes a layer and what does not. The
data could then be aggregated, using only those with high confidence. Unfortunately, this
approach is not feasible for the current research due to the limitation in time and people
working on it. Therefore, alternative methods, independent of annotated data, must be
employed.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1: Addressing the manual annotation challenge: The original image (fig. 4.1a)
corresponds to the year 41117 b2k, presenting a significant difficulty in distinguishing lay-
ers. Upon applying a contrast increase (fig. 4.1b), subtle layer distinctions become more
apparent. A conservative layer segmentation approach is illustrated in fig. 4.1c, highlight-
ing only the most noticeable layers. Conversely, fig. 4.1d demonstrates a more aggressive
layer boundary delineation.
With the aim of achieving successful sub-annual layer annotation, this thesis proposes
a series of methods that span from traditional image analysis and computer vision tech-
niques to more modern generative methods.
The detection of sub-annual layer segmentation is akin to a boundary segmentation prob-
lem, where the segmentation must adhere to specific conditions. This additional constraint
16
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:25==
arises from the necessity to precisely identify and distinguish the boundaries between
consecutive layers in a given ice core line scan image.
To address this segmentation challenge, the thesis is anchored in the notion of accurately
capturing the boundaries between layers. This involves developing methodologies that
not only discern these boundaries but also do so with as much precision as possible.
Achieving successful sub-annual layer annotation requires a comprehensive understand-
ing of how to effectively identify and separate these layers along the vertical plane.
In order to solve this problem, we have pursued two primary methodologies. The first
approach relies exclusively on classical computer vision and image analysis techniques
for edge detection.
The second approach takes a more modern stance by incorporating synthetic data gen-
eration and deep learning. In this approach, the focus is on utilizing artificially generated
data and transforming the problem into a supervised approach. This transformation aims
to use the capabilities of deep learning algorithms to address the segmentation problem
effectively.
4.1
Edge and Layer Detection
The initial approach to detect the boundaries between ice core sub-annual layers is rooted
in classical computer vision and image analysis techniques. This section provides an in-
depth exploration of the methods employed.
The objective is to detect different layers, and therefore, we can use the horizontal na-
ture of this data to approximate these layers to straight lines, and detect them using the
Hough Line Transforms [42]. The preprocessing step before reaching the layer detection
is not the common edge detection pipeline. To enhance the interpretability and analysis
of the entire dataset, a preprocessing pipeline was developed and applied to each image.
Figure 4.2 showcases the different steps of the preprocessing pipeline.
The process begins with a contrast increase, aiming to amplify features and improve the
overall visibility of layers within the ice core images. This step was deemed necessary
due to the relatively low differences in pixel values in the original images, which posed
challenges to the segmentation process by blending noisy data with relevant information.
Subsequently, a Gaussian blur was employed to mitigate noise and create a smoother
image, facilitating subsequent analysis.
In an effort to achieve an effective edge detection technique, various methods were ex-
plored, including the Canny Edge detector and the use of the Laplacian filter. However,
the most useful approach proved to be computing the Sobel filter exclusively in the y-
direction, which corresponds to the direction with the most significant pixel value changes.
The x-axis Sobel operation was disregarded due to the additional noise it introduced to
the final image.
Then, a binary threshold was introduced to delineate features more distinctly, separating
the layers and highlighting their boundaries. Lastly, an Opening operator was used to re-
duce the amount of noise specks that were still prevalent in the image. This preprocessing
step proved to be a crucial edge detector that aided in the detection of sub-annual layers
in the images. For further explanation and implementation details, refer to appendix A.
After obtaining the edges highlighted, applying the Hough Line Transform is a trivial task.
Using the prior knowledge, we discard any non-horizontal line by using a fixed angle
GlacierStrataNet
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: Preprocessing steps applied to a segment of the image that corresponds to
year 36576 b2k, starting at 2516.25 m. depth. From left to right: original image, image
after contrast enhancement and Gaussian blur, and the final result after thresholding the
y-direction Sobel filter and applying an Opening operation to remove noise.
threshold limit. To avoid illogical layer detection, we limit how much rotation can the seg-
mentation have to 180
π
radians, and to avoid too small layers that do not represent the
reality of the data, we set a minimum separation between layers of 15 pixels, or ≈0.13
cm.
By combining classical computer vision techniques with domain-specific knowledge, our
methodology provides a robust framework for detecting sub-annual layer boundaries in
ice core images.
4.2
Segmentation Model
The second approach involves the utilization of a basic segmentation model, specifically
a U-Net architecture [22]. This model is trained on synthetic data generated to mimic the
characteristics of ice core images, aiming to learn the underlying patterns and features
indicative of sub-annual layers. Subsequently, the trained model is evaluated on real ice
core data to assess its performance and effectiveness in accurately detecting sub-annual
layer boundaries.
The output of the segmentation model is a binary mask that delineates the boundaries
of the detected sub-annual layers within the ice core images. Each pixel in the mask is
assigned a value indicating whether it belongs to a layer boundary or not. By overlaying
this binary mask onto the original ice core images, the segmented boundaries can be
visualized and analyzed.
4.2.1
Model Post-Processing
Due to the nature of the segmentation model, the resulting images may lack connectivity,
as the model classifies pixel-wise, without necessary creating connected components. To
address this issue, multiple post-processing techniques are employed to connect discon-
nected regions.
18
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:27==
The basic approach involves iteratively identifying the point in the image with the highest
predicted value from the network output. From this point, a search is conducted to the left
and right within a window of size 5 pixels, selecting the point with the highest value at each
step. Aftwerward, the line created by these points is assigned a value representing the
model’s confidence in its correctness, calculated as the average predicted value of all pix-
els along the line. Finally, points within or close to the line are excluded from subsequent
iterations to prevent redundancy. The pseudocode implementation of the post-processing
algorithm is shown in algorithm 4.1, and fig. 4.3 displays some results of the method.
Algorithm 4.1 Post-processing to connect disconnected regions in the output image.
Require: Output image I with width Ix
Require: Window size w
Ensure: List of lines L
Ensure: List of values V
1: pbest ←arg max(I)
2: L ←{}
3: V ←{}
4: while pbest > 0.5 do
5:
Line l ←{pbest}
6:
current ←pbest
7:
for i ←currentx to Ix do
8:
current ←FindNeighbour(current, I, i ”right”, w)
9:
l ←l ∪{current}
10:
end for
11:
current ←pbest
12:
for i ←currentx to 0 do
13:
current ←FindNeighbour(current, I, i ”left”, w)
14:
l ←l ∪{current}
15:
end for
16:
Update I by setting pixels in and close to l to 0
17:
L ←L ∪{l}
18:
Value v ←average(l)
19:
V ←V {v}
20:
pbest ←arg max(I)
21: end while
This initial post-processing technique had several shortcomings. Foremost among them
is its lack of utilization of prior knowledge from the data, resulting in the generation of
multiple not realistic layer boundaries. These boundaries often intersected or exhibited
significant vertical changes. Additionally, the method’s reliance on local information with-
out considering the global context of the entire image or path led to a prioritization of
immediate gains over overall value.
The technique proved effective in refining output predictions that were already of suffi-
cient quality. However, when the output exhibited disconnected components or a looser
prediction, the technique often generated blatantly incorrect and nonsensical results.
Hence, a more sophisticated iteration of the post-processing technique was devised. The
key distinctions lie in its approach: firstly, it begins by identifying the largest connected
component within the output and employs it as the starting point for the algorithm. Next,
it leverages prior knowledge regarding the ice core layer boundaries, which typically exist
GlacierStrataNet
19
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.3: Post-processing results from the original (fig. 4.3a), using the deep learning
boundary model to predict the boundary (fig. 4.3b), to the utilization of the post-processing
of the algorithm (fig. 4.3c), and lastly filtering the predicted boundaries above a fixed
threshold of 0.5 in this case (fig. 4.3d). The color bar at the bottom right provides a refer-
ence for the color values of the boundaries.
within a narrow height range and do not vertically traverse the image. This insight allows
the technique to restrict the maximum height of the boundary by a predetermined amount.
Lastly, instead of focusing solely on immediate rewards, the refined version explores all
potential paths and selects the one with the highest cumulative value. Figure 4.4 displays
some results of the method, with all the intermediate necessary steps.
4.3
Synthetic Data Generation
Before using a segmentation deep learning model to find the boundaries between layers,
it is necessary to create training data that the model can use to learn. The overarching
concept across all the data generation approaches developed involves generating a set
of boundaries and subsequently populating the space between boundaries using various
synthetic data creation techniques.
Understanding the details of sub-annual layer boundaries in ice core line scans images
is a task that demands not only advanced modeling but also thoughtful consideration of
the data labeling challenges inherent in training such models.
The complexity of training models for sub-annual layer boundary detection does not lie
in the inherent complexity of the data, which is comparatively less challenging than other
state-of-the-art problems. Rather, the primary challenge arises from the process of data
labeling. Without accurately labeled ground-truth data, these models encounter difficulties
in achieving optimal performance.
Hence, the main challenge addressed in this thesis revolves around obtaining sufficient
labeled data to train the model segmentation effectively. The objective is to acquire data
20
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.4: Post-processing results from the original image (fig. 4.4a) using a method that
takes into account the prior knowledge and a global reward. Figure 4.4b shows an exam-
ple of the output of a segmentation model. The first step in the post-processing is finding
the largest connected component, and finding the biggest value (fig. 4.4c). Afterward, all
the possible paths that start from that point and have a maximum fixed height are calcu-
lated, and the one with the greatest certainty is selected (fig. 4.4d). This is done iteratively
until no more paths can be found (fig. 4.4e). Each path has an assigned value depending
on the network confidence, but if the path crosses other paths, then it is penalized. The
last step is to filter all the path that have at least more than a certain confidence from the
network (fig. 4.4f). The color bars at the bottom right side of the figure serve as reference
for the values.
that closely mirrors the characteristics of the original dataset to ensure robust performance
on real-world data.
Therefore, we have decided to address the problem using various approaches of data
generation of increasing complexity.
4.3.1
Perlin Noise
The first approach within data generation stems from the oversimplified assumption that
the texture of ice core layers closely resembles random Perlin noise with varying param-
eters.
While this assumption may not hold entirely true in reality, the underlying concept is that
the textures generated by these parametric models are sufficiently similar to real ice core
layers to yield promising results when applied to actual data. This approach is based on
the premise that by controlling the parameters of the mathematical model, textures can
be synthesized to mimic the characteristics of ice core layers.
However, it’s important to note that this classical parametric approach may oversimplify
the complexity of ice core textures, leading to limitations in accurately capturing the intri-
cate details and variability present in real-world data. Despite these limitations, paramet-
ric models offer a structured and controlled framework for texture synthesis, making them
valuable tools in the exploration of ice core data.
One significant advantage of this approach is, as shown in the data pipeline in fig. 4.5,
its independence from input data for creating the training dataset, which accelerates the
GlacierStrataNet
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.5: Data pipeline for the Perlin noise data generation. Random Perlin noise im-
ages are created, and then combined with the labels to create the output image.
process. However, we anticipate that this method may yield inferior results compared to
other approaches due to its simplistic nature and potential limitations in representing the
complexities of real ice core textures.
4.3.2
Image Quilting
Image Quilting, a technique commonly used in texture synthesis tasks [43], involves stitch-
ing together small patches of an input image to create a larger output image while main-
taining spatial and visual coherence and consistency. The method works by selecting
patches from the input image and placing them in the output image seamlessly, aiming to
ensure smooth transitions between adjacent patches.
The decision to employ this approach stems from its ability to generate images that closely
resemble the original input, especially if the input is a texture image. However, its main
drawback is the extensive processing time required and the potential for poor results if
strong matches cannot be found in the input image to augment and extend it correctly,
leading to possible artifacts in the image.
We use a Python implementation of the image Quilting algorithm [44] to generate the
expanded textures from sample patches, that are afterward mixed to generate the final
training images. An illustration of the data pipeline utilizing this technique is depicted in
fig. 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Data pipeline for the Image Quilting data generation.
Manually selected
patches are used as input for the Image Quilting algorithm, which expands them. Later,
they are combined with the labels to create the output image.
4.3.3
Latent Diffusion
Latent diffusion models are a type of generative model designed to understand and repli-
cate the underlying structure of complex, high-dimensional data. They achieve this by
22
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:31==
learning a probabilistic representation, known as the latent space, which captures the
essential features of the data in a lower-dimensional format.
These models employ a diffusion process during training, gradually reducing the level of
noise in the data to progressively approximate the original training samples. This iterative
denoising step enables latent diffusion models to generate intricate and high-quality data
samples that closely mirror the distribution of the training data.
In traditional diffusion models, the denoising process occurs directly on the images them-
selves. However, in latent diffusion models, this iterative denoising occurs within the latent
representation of the images. At the end of the model, a Decoder structure transforms
the denoised latent space back into an image, completing the generation process.
We use the popular model Stable Diffusion [21], and we fine tune its weights to adjust
to our problem requirements, using as input for the training process all the 500 manually
classified patches. Figure 4.7 displays the different steps required to generate the output
using this method.
Figure 4.7: Data pipeline for the Latent Diffusion data generation. Manually selected
patches are used as training data for a Stable Diffusion model. After fine-tuning, data is
created using the model. Later, they are combined with the labels to create the output
image.
GlacierStrataNet
23
==PAGE:32==
24
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:33==
5
Results and Experiments
The section is organized based on the chronological steps taken during this thesis. It
starts with the baseline computer vision approach, highlighting the results obtained, and
subsequently, it delineates the progression of the experiments using the different data
generation methods. Before going into detail with the experiments and result, it is impor-
tant to detail how the evaluation of the results is performed.
5.1
Evaluation Methods
Given the unsupervised nature of our problem, evaluating results and comparing differ-
ent approaches poses a challenge due to the absence of a ground truth for sub-annual
boundary segmentation.
To overcome this challenge, three distinct evaluation approaches will be pursued. The first
approach involves directly comparing results with manually obtained evaluations over a
small subset of the real data. The second approach entails a subjective visual inspection
of the results, where even without a real ground truth, judgments can be made regarding
the quality of the segmentation. Lastly, the third approach relies on the assumption that
the obtained results should exhibit correlation with existing measures of the ice cores.
5.1.1
Comparison with Manually Labeled Data
The basic evaluation method relies on the accuracy of 10 randomly sampled images from
the dataset, each representing a different year within an ice core. These images corre-
spond to the years 28146 b2k, 29274 b2k, 29762 b2k, 30179 b2k, 31684 b2k, 32600 b2k,
34324 b2k, 38963 b2k, 40716 b2k, and 40806 b2k. The images, along with their corre-
sponding labels, are displayed in fig. 5.1. It is important to emphasize that these labels
do not represent the ground truth or correct segmentation; rather, they are the result of
our manual labeling with the “Toronto Annotation Suite” [45], and therefore may contain
biases or inaccuracies.
Several metrics can be obtained from the data. We will utilize state-of-the-art metrics for
the segmentation problem such as Intersection over Union (IoU), Precision, Recall, and
F-score.
5.1.2
Visual Inspection
To ensure that the models are performing as expected, a visual inspection is conducted.
This process involves determining whether a boundary classification has performed cor-
rectly, and then averaging the results over an extended set of images. The possible values
we assigned to the output are 0% if the model lacks any logic and is completely wrong,
100% if it is entirely accurate, and 50% if it produces somewhat satisfactory results.
The objective is to manually assess this for a set of 100 randomly selected images, which
remains consistent across all the models. Although this metric is valuable, it holds less
quantitative importance compared to others, as it is more subjective in nature.
5.1.3
Correlation Evaluation
In the initial exploration of the data, certain insights emerged. The primary hypothesis is
that discernible visual distinctions exist between warm and cold periods in the ice cores,
likely attributed to variations in storminess and subsequent alterations in deposition com-
position.
GlacierStrataNet
25
==PAGE:34==
(a) Image of year 28146 b2k
(b) Label of year 28146 b2k
(c) Image of year 29274 b2k
(d) Label of year 29274 b2k
(e) Image of year 29762 b2k
(f) of year 29762 b2k
(g) Image of year 30179 b2k
(h) Label of year 30179 b2k
(i) Image of year 31684 b2k
(j) Label of year 31684 b2k
(k) Image of year 32600 b2k
(l) Label of year 32600 b2k
(m) Image of year 34324 b2k
(n) Label of year 34324 b2k
(o) Image of year 38963 b2k
(p) Label of year 38963 b2k
(q) Image of year 40716 b2k
(r) Label of year 40716 b2k
(s) Image of year 40806 b2k
(t) Label of year 40806 b2k
Figure 5.1: The different manually labeled evaluation images.
26
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:35==
Upon applying straightforward data analysis over the extracted parameters from the data,
such as the annual layer thickness or the year average color, a clear relationship has
surfaced. This relationship is shown and depicted in fig. 3.5 and table 3.1, showcasing
the correlation between these image-derived values.
After this discovery, a logical inference can be drawn regarding the plausible correlation
between the number of sub-annual layers and their thickness, and the variables of tem-
perature and storminess. It is crucial to acknowledge the possibility that such relationships
may not hold universally true. This acknowledgment comes from the understanding that
these metrics serve as a complementary tool to the previously discussed evaluation meth-
ods, to avoid a possible bias that a model may display where the correlation is high by
chance.
Despite these considerations, employing this approach provides a valuable means to test
the proposed theory, specially if clear patterns can be spotted. Additionally, it could prove
a useful tool for comparing different approaches to solve the problem.
5.2
Edge and Layer Detection method
The outcome derived from applying the Edge and Layer Detection (ELD) method to the
original dataset serves as a fundamental benchmark for evaluating subsequent approaches.
While initially simplistic, this method offers valuable insights of its own, and it can serve
as a starting point for further analysis and exploration.
The visual results comparing with the hand labeled images, show that the model is ef-
fective when selecting the obvious boundaries, but creates a lot of false positives bound-
aries. Figure 5.2 shows some examples of the comparison between the output of the
model and the labels that are treated as ground truth. The model is effective at finding
out most boundaries, but it also predicts some non-existing boundaries.
Figure 5.2: Comparative of ground truth labels with the results of the Edge and Layer
Detection (ELD) method over cropped images of labeled data.
In general, after the visual evaluation is done, we find out that the method works quite well
with some specific examples, but performs very poorly with others. The primary limita-
tion of this approach lies in its reliance on hard-coded thresholds and parameters, which
are tailored to specific scenarios. While this design choice benefits the performance of
the algorithm when the input closely resembles the data used to set these parameters,
its efficacy decays when applied to the complete dataset. When there is a distinct con-
trast between layers, the model successfully identifies boundaries with high accuracy.
However, in cases where the boundaries are less defined, the model tends to produce
numerous false positives.
GlacierStrataNet
27
==PAGE:36==
Exploring the relationship between previously analyzed variables such as δ18O and annual
layer thickness, and the predicted number of sub-annual layers in fig. 5.3 reveals intriguing
insights. Notably, at a depth of approximately 1950 meters, a warm period is evident in
the data, coinciding with a significant decrease in the number of sub-annual layers within
the annual data segments. A similar pattern emerges around a depth of 2100 meters.
This trend suggests that the model may effectively capture variations in the ice during
these years, accurately detecting fewer and thicker sub-annual layers.
Additionally, it is noteworthy to evaluate the spikes in sub-annual layer thickness. These
spikes primarily occur during warm periods, suggesting that the model may be predicting
the increase in precipitation in warm periods as arising from stronger or longer storms,
rather than an increase in the frequency of storms per year.
However, it is essential to consider the possibility that the model’s performance varies at
different depths. Contrary examples to the previously mentioned are also evident in the
plot. For instance, around a depth of 2070, another warm period is identified, yet there is
a spike in the number of sub-annual layers. To validate or refute these findings, further
investigation is needed, such as evaluating other models’ performance or conducting a
detailed visual inspection of the model’s behavior at these specific locations.
Figure 5.3: Comparative of the output of number of sub-annual layers and sub-annual
layer thickness from the Edge and Layer Detection method against ground truth data of
δ18O, annual layer thickness (λ) and the average grayscale value.
28
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:37==
In summary, while our edge and layer detection algorithm shows promise in specific
cases, its reliance on fixed thresholds and parameters limits its overall effectiveness.
Nevertheless, this model, in combination with the rest of the developed approaches, could
prove useful for comparing and supporting the results obtained through those approaches.
More details regarding the results obtained with the ELD method can be found in ap-
pendix B.
5.3
Perlin Noise method
The Perlin Noise (PN) method does not rely on real line scan data, it utilizes prior knowl-
edge to create data using random samples from a Perlin noise function with various pa-
rameters. This approach represents the first attempt to incorporate prior knowledge into
the segmentation problem.
The U-Net model trained with data generated using the PN method demonstrates the ca-
pability to correctly segment most instances of the training data where the binary segmen-
tation is clear and accurate. It also shows the ability to identify divisions in the real ground
truth data and performs decently in boundary detection. However, it lacks the capability
to capture fine details, resulting in a simplified representation of the real boundaries. For
example, as depicted in the last column of fig. 5.4, while it can predict the presence of
a boundary, in reality, there may be at least four distinct boundaries. Although the out-
put of the segmentation is already well-defined, the post-processing method manages to
identify an additional boundary that is also found in the ground-truth.
Figure 5.4: Results of using the Perlin Noise (PN) method on test data (first and second
columns) and real labeled data (third column). The images are cropped to ease the anal-
ysis and visualization.
There is a relationship found between the number of sub-annual layers and the δ18O val-
ues, as shown in fig. 5.5. If the model is accurate, it could confirm a significant correlation
between temperature and the number of precipitation events. However, it is essential to
recognize that these results may be influenced by a bias produced by the input images.
Additionally, there is a strong direct relationship between the annual layer thickness and
the number of sub-annual layers. Furthermore, the thickness of the layers seems to re-
main stable. These two factors could indicate that the model creates a number of layers
exclusively dependent on the thickness of the input image, creating a strong correlation
with temperature by chance.
GlacierStrataNet
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.5: Comparison of the output of the number of sub-annual layers and sub-annual
layer thickness of the Perlin Noise method against ground truth data of δ18O, annual layer
thickness (λ), and the average grayscale value.
The PN method posses our first approach using prior knowledge and synthetic data gen-
eration methods to solve the task, and it has proven to be a substantial improvement
compared to the ELD method. More details regarding the results obtained with the PN
method can be found in appendix C.
5.4
Image Quilting method
The Image Quilting (IQ) method involves expanding manually selected patches, resulting
in these patches being expanded to form each of the different layers.
Compared to the PN method, the output of the segmentation model is worse. The model
exhibits lower confidence in its predictions, as evident in the IQ logits row of fig. 5.6.
However, post-processing aids in accurately predicting both synthetic images and real
data with equal or even higher accuracy than the PN method. Nonetheless, the overall
confidence of the model in real images is notably low, and it struggles to discern details
and boundaries that are close to each other.
The model has special difficulty, as expected, when trying to find out the limits between two
similar layers, like in the first synthetic example of fig. 5.6. But, although the confidence
of the model is lower, after post-processing there is a significant improvement over the
30
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.6: Results of employing the Image Quilting (IQ) method on test data (first and
second column) and real labeled data (third column). The images are cropped to facilitate
analysis and visualization.
raw output. This suggests that refining the segmentation results through post-processing
techniques could be crucial in enhancing the performance, especially in scenarios with
complex image structures or ambiguous boundaries. Further investigation and optimiza-
tion of post-processing methods, combined with more accurate segmentation models,
may lead to even more substantial improvements in segmentation accuracy.
Similar to the PN method, there appears to be a direct relationship between δ18O and the
number of sub-annual layers; however, further exploration is needed to understand this
relationship more comprehensively. Figure 5.7 shows the comparison of the output of the
method.
It is important to mention that, similarly to the PN method, the sub-annual layer thickness
remains stable, with not much variation. There are some outliers to this, such as close
to depth 1880 meters or between depth 1950 and 1975 meters. These examples do not
seem to correlate to any variation in temperature or annual layer thickness, which could be
an indicative that either the strength of precipitation is not related to those values, or that
the model is not correct in those instances. More details regarding the results obtained
with the IQ method can be found in appendix D.
5.5
Latent Diffusion method
The last approach tested involved training a Latent Diffusion (LD) method to generate the
training data subsequently used by the segmentation model. Specifically, we employed
a trained version of Stable Diffusion [21], fine-tuned without conditioning, using the 500
hand-selected patches. Unfortunately, all the experiments conducted suffered from model
collapse, resulting in samples with very little distinction between one another. This issue
could potentially be resolved with either an increase in manually selected patches or the
utilization of conditioning to instruct the model to generate specific results. However, these
potential solutions were left for future work.
To mitigate the issue of model collapse observed during the experiments, we devised a
strategy to inject diversity into the generated samples. Initially, we utilized the 10 manually
labeled samples employed in the evaluation process. From these samples, we extracted
GlacierStrataNet
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.7: Comparison of the output of the number of sub-annual layers and sub-annual
layer thickness obtained using the Image Quilting method against ground truth data of
δ18O, annual layer thickness (λ), and the average grayscale value.
the histogram of each layer, capturing the distribution of pixel intensities within the sub-
annual layers.
Next, for each output generated by the latent diffusion model, we aimed to ensure that
it exhibited characteristics similar to those observed in the real data. To achieve this,
we randomly selected one of the manually labeled samples and used its corresponding
histogram as a reference. Subsequently, we adjusted the pixel intensities of the generated
output to align more closely with the selected histogram, making the generated samples
have realistic variations in pixel intensity.
Furthermore, to enhance the diversity of the generated samples, we introduced slight
variations in contrast and brightness. By incorporating these modifications, we aimed to
create a more diverse set of synthetic data that better captured the variations found in the
original data. Some results from this process, alongside the segmentation model results
and the post-processing, can be seen in fig. 5.8.
When evaluating real images, we encountered some limitations. Due to the model col-
lapse problem, the segmentation model has trouble detecting some specific layers that
are not present in the training data, like the thin white layer displayed in the third column of
fig. 5.8. Nonetheless, post-processing helps in detecting boundaries with more accuracy,
32
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.8: Results of employing the Latent Diffusion (LD) method on test data (first and
second column) and real labeled data (third column). The images are cropped to facilitate
analysis and visualization.
resulting in an overall correct detection. Like the other segmentation methods, it lacks
the capacity to detect different nearby boundaries, making it not very efficient at detecting
thin layers.
To elaborate further on the observed relationship in fig. 5.9, we discern a pattern similar to
those seen in the previous segmentation approaches. This consistent trend underscores
the significance of the identified correlation between the number of sub-annual layers and
the δ18O values. It reaffirms the potential linkage between temperature variations and
precipitation events, as hinted at in our previous analyses. But it is crucial to interpret these
results with caution, considering the possibility of inherent biases or limitations within the
segmentation methods employed.
The thickness of the layers seems to be stable, and what changes the most is the number
of sub-annual layers. It displays the same disturbances in the sub-annual layer thickness,
which could either reinforce that there is something in those images that changes the
thickness, which is not related to the image size or the temperature, or that the problems
of the methods are shared between all the different approaches. More details regarding
the results obtained with the LD method can be found in appendix E.
5.6
Methods Comparison
The purpose of this comparative analysis is to evaluate the performance of different seg-
mentation methods and identify areas for further improvement in future research endeav-
ors.
We first compared the ELD method and the segmentation results obtained from the PN,
IQ, and LD methods using manually labeled data, as shown in Table 5.1. Both rounded
output and post-processed output were evaluated to assess the impact of the developed
post-processing technique.
The results reveal interesting insights. While the post-processing has minimal effect on
the PN method’s performance, it significantly improves the segmentation accuracy of the
IQ method. Surprisingly, the LD method, despite utilizing advanced data generation tech-
niques, performs worse than the baseline ELD method in both the F-score and the IoU.
GlacierStrataNet
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.9: Comparative of the output of number of sub-annual layers and sub-annual
layer thickness of the Latent Diffusion against ground truth data of δ18O, annual layer
thickness (λ) and the average grayscale value.
This discrepancy suggests a potential trade-off between the complexity of data generation
methods and segmentation performance.
By examining the metrics across different segmentation methods, we can gain insights
into their respective strengths and weaknesses. The PN method demonstrates high pre-
cision and recall, indicating accurate delineation of target objects. Interestingly, the post-
processing technique has minimal impact on its performance, suggesting that the initial
segmentation results are already robust. This implies that the PN method may inherently
possess a high level of accuracy in identifying target objects without requiring extensive
refinement through post-processing.
On the other hand, the IQ method exhibits high precision and very low recall values ini-
tially. However, post-processing significantly improves its segmentation accuracy, which
affects the recall by increasing its value from 6.8% to 23.2%. This suggests that the initial
segmentation results from the IQ method may contain noise or inaccuracies, which are
effectively corrected by the post-processing technique. This highlights the importance of
post-processing in enhancing the accuracy of segmentation methods that may produce
suboptimal results initially.
In contrast, despite employing advanced data generation methods, the LD method demon-
34
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:43==
Table 5.1: Comparison of segmentation model performance metrics across various meth-
ods, including Edge and Layer Detection (ELD), Perlin Noise (PN), Image Quilting (IQ),
and Latent Diffusion (LD).
Method
Metric (%)
Precision
Recall
IoU
F-score
ELD
14.9
22.1
9.6
17.4
PN rounded
32.3
26.6
15.6
26.5
PN post-processing
24.8
30.5
15.6
26.6
IQ rounded
30.6
6.8
5.7
10.4
IQ post-processing
25.6
23.2
13.7
23.3
LD rounded
17.9
22.3
10.9
19.2
LD post-processing
13.4
19.8
8.7
15.7
strates lower precision compared to the other methods. The post-processing technique
even worsens its performance, indicating potential issues with the segmentation approach
or data generation process. This underscores the complexity of the LD method and in-
dicates that further investigation into its underlying mechanisms may be necessary to
improve its segmentation accuracy.
In addition to the PN, IQ, and LD methods, we also evaluated the ELD method to provide
a comprehensive comparison. The ELD method demonstrates moderate precision and
recall, indicating reasonable performance in identifying target boundaries. However it
exhibits lower precision and recall values than the PN and IQ method.
Before drawing any conclusions, it is crucial to consider additional metrics, particularly vi-
sual evaluation. As depicted in table 5.2, all models outperform the baseline ELD method,
indicating the effectiveness of the adopted approach. Notably, the IQ method demon-
strates the highest performance in visual evaluation, achieving a correct prediction rate of
54.5% across 100 randomly selected real samples, which accounts for 7.6% of the total
sample set.
Table 5.2: Visual evaluation scores expressed as percentages for different methods, in-
cluding Edge and Layer Detection (ELD), Perlin Noise (PN), Image Quilting (IQ), and
Latent Diffusion (LD).
Method
Visual Evaluation Value (%)
ELD
39.5
PN
52.5
IQ
54.5
LD
46.5
To further compare and evaluate the methods, fig. 5.10 displays each method’s perfor-
mance on a random subset of manually labeled data. The results showcase diverse
outcomes, indicating varied behaviors among the methods. For instance, there are con-
sistent findings, such as the identification of boundaries between clear and dark layers,
across all methods. While the ELD method effectively discerns layer boundaries, it tends
to detect numerous non-existent layers, reducing its reliability.
GlacierStrataNet
35
==PAGE:44==
Turning attention to the segmentation methods, the PN method demonstrates accurate
segmentation in specific scenarios but often makes erroneous detections that are obvious
to humans. Particularly in thin layers, segmentation tends to oscillate between bound-
aries, as evident in the last column of fig. 5.10. Similarly, the LD method performs poorly
among the segmentation methods, producing peculiar detections where the model incor-
rectly identifies boundaries within layers, as seen in the first column.
In conclusion, the IQ method emerges as the most promising approach, demonstrating
proficiency in identifying straightforward boundaries. However, it still lacks a robust de-
tection mechanism for more complex boundaries, such as those found in thin layers (as
observed in the last column of fig. 5.10) or in the dark layer from both the first and sec-
ond column. Despite this limitation, the IQ model exhibits a conservative approach in its
detections, minimizing the occurrence of false layer identifications.
Figure 5.10: Comparison of the different methods over three samples of labeled data.
The comparison is made between the ground truth, the Edge and Layer Detection (ELD)
method, the Perlin Noise (PN) method, the Image Quilting (IQ) method and the Latent
Diffusion (LD) method. The images are cropped to facilitate the analysis.
After evaluating the methods visually, we aim to compare the correlation of the sub-annual
layer thickness and number of sub-annual layers with the temperature, which is not a
straightforward task. Given the high correlation found between the number of sub-annual
layers and temperature, the analysis will focus primarily on this aspect. The three meth-
ods employing a segmentation model yield very similar numbers of layers. However, a
key question arises: are these results genuinely reflective of the underlying temperature
patterns, or are they merely artifacts of a model that indiscriminately creates boundaries
between layers based on arbitrary criteria, such as pixel count?
To discern between these possibilities, we examine the disparities between temperature
and annual layer thickness and observe how the models respond in these scenarios to
discern which distribution they follow.
36
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:45==
In pursuit of this comparative analysis, three distinct events are identified in fig. 5.11. In
event (a), the annual layer thickness exhibits significant variability, whereas temperature
changes remain relatively stable. All methods, except the IQ method, appear to align
more closely with the distribution of annual layer thickness. This observation suggests
that these methods may not effectively capture subtle temperature variations and instead
may be more influenced by fluctuations in layer thickness. This could indicate limitations in
their ability to accurately represent temperature changes, particularly in scenarios where
layer thickness varies independently of temperature.
The second event, denoted as (b), presents a reversed situation. In this scenario, annual
layer thickness remains stable, while temperature data display sporadic peaks and val-
leys. Remarkably, the PN and IQ methods appear to track the temperature trend more
closely. This suggests that these methods are able to discern temperature fluctuations
better, even when layer thickness remains constant, indicating a higher sensitivity to tem-
perature changes.
Finally, the event (c), illustrates a pronounced change in annual layer thickness, which
is not mirrored in the temperature data. Strikingly, all methods seem to adhere to the
temperature trend. This suggests that the models may be effectively capturing tempera-
ture variations even in instances where layer thickness fluctuates without corresponding
changes in temperature. This could imply that the models are able to discern temperature
patterns beyond simple layer thickness variations, indicating a deeper understanding of
the underlying temperature dynamics.
Throughout the analysis, the primary focus has been on examining the relationship be-
tween the number of sub-annual layers and temperature, rather than on sub-annual layer
thickness. This emphasis comes from the observation that while variations in layer thick-
ness were evident, no discernible patterns or correlations with temperature were identi-
fied. Consequently, the investigation centered on the number of layers, which exhibited
a clearer and more consistent association with temperature fluctuations.
Table 5.3 provides a comprehensive overview of the evaluation results obtained for each
method across various metrics. Despite thorough evaluation, it becomes apparent that
none of the models perform optimally, highlighting the complexities inherent in accurately
detecting sub-annual layers within ice core line scan images. The Image Quilting method
emerges as the most promising approach among those tested, outperforming the Latent
Diffusion method, which was initially anticipated to excel due to its utilization of a more
modern and sophisticated approach.
While none of the models achieved the desired level of precision in detecting sub-annual
layer boundaries, the exploration of different methodologies, encompassing deep learn-
ing, computer vision, and synthetic data generation techniques, has provided valuable
insights and paved the way for future research avenues. One prominent area of focus is
the development of more effective strategies for generating boundaries between layers
within synthetic ice core data.
A key realization is the discrepancy between the idealized layer disposition assumed dur-
ing model training and the complex characteristics exhibited by real-world data. Current
approaches, including rule-based or entirely random label generation, may fall short in
accurately replicating the intricate layer structures observed in actual ice core images.
Addressing this challenge may involve adopting a physics-based approach, leveraging
knowledge of the physical processes governing layer formation to inform synthetic data
generation algorithms. Alternatively, exploring methods for augmenting training data through
GlacierStrataNet
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.11: Comparison of δ18O (temperature), annual layer width, and number of sub-
annual layers across all methods.
38
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:47==
Table 5.3: Summary of the evaluation of the different model over the diverse metrics. The
different models are the Edge and Layer Detection (ELD) method, the Perlin Noise (PN)
method, the Image Quilting (IQ) method and the Latent Diffusion (LD) method.
Metric
Model Results (%)
ELD
PN
IQ
LD
Average IoU
9.6
15.6
13.7
15.7
Average F-score
17.4
26.6
23.3
8.7
Visual Evaluation
39.5
52.5
54.4
46.5
ρ: δ18O vs. # Sub-Annual
14.7
53.1
51.4
56.6
ρ: Avg. color vs. # Sub-Annual
01.4
-32.4
-46.1
-49.5
ρ: δ18O vs. Sub-Annual Thickness
36.8
16.4
19.7
32.3
ρ: Avg. color vs. Sub-Annual Thickness
-40.4
-27.3
-12.6
-26.0
manual labeling of diverse layer configurations could enhance model robustness and gen-
eralization capabilities.
GlacierStrataNet
39
==PAGE:48==
40
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
In summary, our work thoroughly explores the analysis of climatic patterns during the
last glacial period and devises a methodology for detecting sub-annual layer boundaries
within each annual layer. We have identified a significant positive correlation between the
number of sub-annual layers and the temperature of the ice core.
Given the unsupervised nature of the project, we have developed a range of evaluation
techniques to assess the quality of the output from each of the tested methods. From
traditional edge detection techniques to leveraging state-of-the-art generative models for
synthetic data creation and subsequent training of segmentation deep learning models.
Alongside, various auxiliary tools were developed, including a patch classification inter-
face and a visual evaluation tool.
Our findings shed light on the Dansgaard–Oeschger events, revealing a consistent storm
intensity but an increase in the frequency of the storms during these periods. However,
none of the identified models exhibited sufficient confidence or accuracy, thereby limiting
the reliability of our findings.
Among the models assessed, the Image Quilting technique stands out, demonstrating the
best performance across several evaluation metrics. Using this method to generate syn-
thetic data from manually selected patches of real data, and then training a U-Net model
with the processed synthetic data, showed promising outcomes. Notably, the model ac-
curately detected sub-annual layer boundaries in real data approximately 55% of the time.
While this suggests a promising initial approach, it underscores the necessity for further
work to achieve useful and reliable solutions.
The primary challenge addressed in this thesis centers on developing effective segmenta-
tion methods for detecting boundaries within a complex, unlabeled problem. We explored
various strategies, including leveraging prior knowledge in synthetic data generation and
employing post-processing techniques, to make informed decisions.
Given that the results are not reliable, any inference we make regarding future climatic
conditions would be precarious. Nonetheless, our initial findings suggest that in climate
change scenarios where the global average temperature rises, there may be an increase
in the number of precipitation-bearing storms, which does not necessarily imply a corre-
sponding increase in storm intensity.
In conclusion, while the quest for an ideal model continues, the insights gleaned from
this thesis underscore the potential of interdisciplinary approaches in advancing our un-
derstanding of sub-annual layer detection in ice core imagery. By persistently innovating
and refining modeling techniques, we can unlock new avenues for uncovering climatolog-
ical signals embedded within these invaluable geological records.
6.1
Future Work
In this thesis, our aim is to introduce the application of modern computer vision techniques
to the problem of sub-annual layer detection. However, our exploration has been limited,
providing initial ideas rather than conducting an exhaustive investigation of all potential
solutions. In this section, we will discuss the current limitations of the developed work and
outline avenues for future research, including additional ideas we consider to be worthy
of exploration.
GlacierStrataNet
41
==PAGE:50==
While our exploration has covered several synthetic data generation methods, including
Perlin noise and latent diffusion models, there remains room for improvement. One direc-
tion for future work could consist in exploring novel approaches that combine the strengths
of existing methods while addressing their limitations. For instance, integrating Genera-
tive Adversarial Networks [26] or Variational Autoencoders [46] into the data generation
pipeline could offer more flexibility and control over the synthesized data’s realism and di-
versity. Additionally, revisiting latent diffusion models with different architectures or using
text prompts to guide and control the output could also prove a useful avenue to pursue
While U-Nets provided a straightforward solution for segmentation, future research could
benefit from exploring more advanced segmentation architectures. Models such as DeepLab
V3+ [23] offer state-of-the-art performance in semantic segmentation tasks by incorporat-
ing features like atrous convolution and spatial pyramid pooling. By leveraging these
advancements, we can potentially achieve more accurate and detailed segmentation of
ice core images, leading to improved sub-annual layer detection.
Future work could involve dedicating specific attention to Dansgaard–Oeschger events,
conducting in-depth analyses to uncover patterns and relationships unique to warm and
cold phases. This focused approach may reveal insights into the underlying mechanisms
driving these climate fluctuations and their implications for current climate change dynam-
ics.
In addition to image data, ice core datasets often contain supplementary information such
as δ18O values and chemical compositions. Integrating these additional data sources into
the analysis pipeline could enrich the model’s understanding of the underlying climate pro-
cesses. Future research could explore methodologies for incorporating multi-modal data
into deep learning models, enabling the analysis and interpretation of ice core records.
However, it’s crucial to note that to successfully implement this approach, synthetic data
generation methods would also need to accommodate the generation of multi-modal data.
While this may introduce additional complexity, it would ultimately empower the model to
make more informed decisions based on a comprehensive understanding of the data.
42
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
G. Sinnl et al. “A multi-ice-core, annual-layer-counted Greenland ice-core chronol-
ogy for the last 3800 years: GICC21”. In: Climate of the Past 18.5 (2022), pp. 1125–
1150. DOI: 10.5194/cp-18-1125-2022. URL: https://cp.copernicus.org/articles/18/
1125/2022/.
[2]
M. Winstrup et al. “An automated approach for annual layer counting in ice cores”.
In: Climate of the Past 8.6 (2012), pp. 1881–1895. DOI: 10.5194/cp-8-1881-2012.
URL: https://cp.copernicus.org/articles/8/1881/2012/.
[3]
NSF Heidi Roop. WAIS Ice Core. Accessed: 4-Jan-2023. 2010. URL: https://phot
olibrary.usap.gov/PhotoDetails.aspx?filename=WAIS_ICECORE.JPG.
[4]
National Science Foundation Ice Core Facility. About Ice Cores. Accessed: 4-Jan-
2024. 2023. URL: https://icecores.org/about-ice-cores.
[5]
Jørgen Peder Steffensen et al. “High-Resolution Greenland Ice Core Data Show
Abrupt Climate Change Happens in Few Years”. In: Science 321.5889 (2008), pp. 680–
684. DOI: 10.1126/science.1157707. eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.
1126/science.1157707. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.
1157707.
[6]
Sune O. Rasmussen et al. “A stratigraphic framework for abrupt climatic changes
during the Last Glacial period based on three synchronized Greenland ice-core
records: refining and extending the INTIMATE event stratigraphy”. In: Quaternary
Science Reviews 106 (2014). Dating, Synthesis, and Interpretation of Palaeocli-
matic Records and Model-data Integration: Advances of the INTIMATE project(INTegration
of Ice core, Marine and TErrestrial records, COST Action ES0907), pp. 14–28.
ISSN: 0277-3791. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2014.09.007. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277379114003485.
[7]
Dorthe Dahl-Jensen et al. “The NorthGRIP deep drilling programme”. In: Annals of
Glaciology 35 (2002), pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.3189/172756402781817275.
[8]
Anders Svensson et al. “Visual stratigraphy of the North Greenland Ice Core Project
(NorthGRIP) ice core during the last glacial period”. In: Journal of Geophysical Re-
search: Atmospheres 110.D2 (2005). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1029/2004JD005134.
eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2004JD005134.
URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2004JD005134.
[9]
V. Gkinis et al. “Water isotope diffusion rates from the NorthGRIP ice core for the last
16,000 years – Glaciological and paleoclimatic implications”. In: Earth and Planetary
Science Letters 405 (2014), pp. 132–141. ISSN: 0012-821X. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.epsl.2014.08.022. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0012821X14005287.
[10]
Katrine Andersen et al. “High-resolution record of Northern Hemisphere climate ex-
tending into the last interglacial period”. In: Nature 431 (Oct. 2004), pp. 147–51.
DOI: 10.1038/nature02805.
[11]
Rhodes W. Fairbridge. “Climatology of a glacial cycle”. In: Quaternary Research
2.3 (1972), pp. 283–302. ISSN: 0033-5894. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0033-
5894(72)90049-X. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/00335894
7290049X.
[12]
Dansgaard WS et al. “Evidence of general instability of past climate from a 250-kyr
ice-core record”. In: Nature 364 (July 1993), pp. 218–220. DOI: 10.1038/364218a0.
GlacierStrataNet
43
==PAGE:52==
[13]
Camille Li and David S. Battisti. “Reduced Atlantic Storminess during Last Glacial
Maximum: Evidence from a Coupled Climate Model”. In: Journal of Climate 21.14
(2008), pp. 3561–3579. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1175/2007JCLI2166.1. URL: https:
//journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/clim/21/14/2007jcli2166.1.xml.
[14]
Alexei A. Efros and T.K. Leung. “Texture synthesis by non-parametric sampling”. In:
Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision.
Vol. 2. 1999, 1033–1038 vol.2. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.1999.790383.
[15]
Alexei A. Efros and William T. Freeman. “Image Quilting for Texture Synthesis and
Transfer”. In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques. SIGGRAPH ’01. New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2001, pp. 341–346. ISBN: 158113374X. DOI: 10.1145/3832
59.383296. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/383259.383296.
[16]
Vivek Kwatra et al. “Graphcut Textures: Image and Video Synthesis Using Graph
Cuts”. In: ACM Trans. Graph. 22.3 (July 2003), pp. 277–286. ISSN: 0730-0301.
DOI: 10.1145/882262.882264. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/882262.882264.
[17]
Michael Ashikhmin. “Synthesizing Natural Textures”. In: Symposium on Interactive
3D Graphics (Dec. 2000). DOI: 10.1145/364338.364405.
[18]
Paul Francis Harrison. “Image Texture Tools”. Available at https://logarithmic.net/
pfh/thesis. PhD thesis. Monash University, 2005.
[19]
Maxim Gumin. Wave Function Collapse Algorithm. Available at https://github.com/
mxgmn/WaveFunctionCollapse. Version 1.0. Sept. 2016.
[20]
Leon A. Gatys, Alexander S. Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Texture Synthesis Using
Convolutional Neural Networks. 2015. arXiv: 1505.07376 [cs.CV].
[21]
Robin Rombach et al. “High-Resolution Image Synthesis With Latent Diffusion Mod-
els”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). June 2022, pp. 10684–10695.
[22]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Net-
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation. 2015. arXiv: 1505.04597 [cs.CV].
[23]
Liang-Chieh Chen et al. Rethinking Atrous Convolution for Semantic Image Seg-
mentation. 2017. arXiv: 1706.05587 [cs.CV].
[24]
Kaiming He et al. Mask R-CNN. 2018. arXiv: 1703.06870 [cs.CV].
[25]
Andrey Voynov, Stanislav Morozov, and Artem Babenko. Object Segmentation With-
out Labels with Large-Scale Generative Models. 2021. arXiv: 2006.04988 [cs.LG].
[26]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. Generative Adversarial Networks. 2014. arXiv: 1406.2661
[stat.ML].
[27]
Bolei Zhou et al. Learning Deep Features for Discriminative Localization. 2015.
arXiv: 1512.04150 [cs.CV].
[28]
Yude Wang et al. Self-supervised Equivariant Attention Mechanism for Weakly Su-
pervised Semantic Segmentation. 2020. arXiv: 2004.04581 [cs.CV].
[29]
Joanna Czajkowska et al. “Deep learning approach to skin layers segmentation in
inflammatory dermatoses”. In: Ultrasonics 114 (2021), p. 106412. ISSN: 0041-624X.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultras.2021.106412. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0041624X21000536.
[30]
Prashant Kumar et al. Deep Learning based Skin-layer Segmentation for Charac-
terizing Cutaneous Wounds from Optical Coherence Tomography Images. 2023.
arXiv: 2306.01252 [eess.IV].
[31]
Bo Wang et al. “Boundary Aware U-Net for Retinal Layers Segmentation in Opti-
cal Coherence Tomography Images”. In: IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
Informatics 25.8 (2021), pp. 3029–3040. DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2021.3066208.
44
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:53==
[32]
Qiaoliang Li et al. “DeepRetina: Layer Segmentation of Retina in OCT Images Using
Deep Learning”. In: Translational Vision Science & Technology 9.2 (Dec. 2020),
pp. 61–61. ISSN: 2164-2591. DOI: 10.1167/tvst.9.2.61. eprint: https://arvojournals.
org/arvo/content\_public/journal/tvst/938366/i2164-2591-9-2-61\_1607511436.
37786.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1167/tvst.9.2.61.
[33]
Zubin Mishra et al. “Automated retinal layer segmentation using graph-based algo-
rithm incorporating deep-learning-derived information”. In: Scientific Reports 10.1
(June 2020). DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-66355-5.
[34]
Pascal Bohleber et al. “Ice Core Science Meets Computer Vision: Challenges and
Perspectives”. In: Frontiers in Computer Science 3 (2021). ISSN: 2624-9898. DOI:
10.3389/fcomp.2021.690276. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fcomp.2021.690276.
[35]
Gonzalo Morcillo, Sérgio Henrique Faria, and Sepp Kipfstuhl. “Unravelling Antarc-
tica’s past through the stratigraphy of a deep ice core: an image-analysis study of the
EPICA-DML line-scan images”. In: Quaternary International 566-567 (2020). Qua-
ternary Research in Spain: Environmental Changes and Human Footprint, pp. 6–
15. ISSN: 1040-6182. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quaint.2020.07.011. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1040618220303815.
[36]
Rafael Siqueira et al. “Evaluation of machine learning algorithms to classify and
map landforms in Antarctica”. In: Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 47 (Feb.
2022), pp. 367–382. DOI: 10.1002/esp.5253.
[37]
J. Bolibar et al. “Deep learning applied to glacier evolution modelling”. In: The Cryosphere
14.2 (2020), pp. 565–584. DOI: 10.5194/tc-14-565-2020. URL: https://tc.copernicus.
org/articles/14/565/2020/.
[38]
J. Bolibar et al. “A deep learning reconstruction of mass balance series for all glaciers
in the French Alps: 1967–2015”. In: Earth System Science Data 12.3 (2020), pp. 1973–
1983. DOI: 10.5194/essd-12-1973-2020. URL: https://essd.copernicus.org/articles/
12/1973/2020/.
[39]
Mai Winstrup. “An automated method for annual layer counting in ice cores: and an
application to visual stratigraphy data from the ngrip ice core”. PhD thesis. Køben-
havns Universitet. Niels Bohr Institutet, 2011.
[40]
Michael Herron. “Impurity sources of F/-/, Cl/-/, NO3/-/ and SO4/2-/ in Greenland
and Antarctic Precipitation”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 87 (Jan. 1982),
pp. 3052–3060. DOI: 10.1029/JC087iC04p03052.
[41]
Sigfus Johnson. personal communication. Feb. 29, 2024.
[42]
Richard O Duda and Peter E Hart. “Use of the Hough transformation to detect lines
and curves in pictures”. In: Communications of the ACM 15.1 (1972), pp. 11–15.
[43]
Alexei A. Efros and William T. Freeman. “Image Quilting for Texture Synthesis and
Transfer”. In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques. SIGGRAPH ’01. New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2001, pp. 341–346. ISBN: 158113374X. DOI: 10.1145/3832
59.383296. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/383259.383296.
[44]
Rohit Jena. Image-Quilting-for-Texture-Synthesis. 2020. URL: https://github.com/
rohitrango/Image-Quilting-for-Texture-Synthesis?tab=readme-ov-file.
[45]
Amlan Kar et al. Toronto Annotation Suite. https://aidemos.cs.toronto.edu/toras.
2021.
[46]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. 2022. arXiv:
1312.6114 [stat.ML].
GlacierStrataNet
45
==PAGE:54==
46
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:55==
A
Edge detection preprocessing
Implementation showcase details (fig. A.1) and code snipped (listing A.1) for the edge
detecting computer vision preprocessing task.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.1: Preprocessing steps. In order, the steps are: fig. A.1a shows the original
image before any preprocessing step; fig. A.1b is the result of applying a x4 contrast
increase; fig. A.1c shows the resulting image from applying Gaussian smoothing with a
kernels size of 7x7; fig. A.1d is the result of applying the y-direction Sobel filter with a
kernel size of 5x5; fig. A.1e is the thresholded result, using a threshold of 150; fig. A.1f is
the final result, after using an Opening filter with size 4x4.
1
import numpy as np
2
import cv2
3
# 'image' is expected to be a np.ndarray 2-dimensiona image
4
image = ...
5
contrast_image = cv2.convertScaleAbs(image, alpha=4, beta=0)
6
blur_image = cv2.GaussianBlur(contrast_image , (7, 7), 0, 0)
7
gy = cv2.Sobel(blur_image , cv2.CV_32F, 0, 1, ksize=5)
8
magnitude = cv2.convertScaleAbs(gy)
9
_, threshold_image = cv2.threshold(magnitude , 150, 255, cv2.THRESH_BINARY)
10
opening = cv2.morphologyEx(threshold_image , cv2.MORPH_OPEN , np.ones((4, 4), np
.uint8))
Listing A.1: Implementation code for the preprocessing and edge detection
GlacierStrataNet
47
==PAGE:56==
B
Results: Edge and layer detection
Table B.1: Evaluation with manually labeled data of the Edge and Layer Detection model.
Year
Metric (%)
Precision
Recall
IoU
F-score
28146 b2k
21.4
20.8
11.8
21.1
29274 b2k
20.8
25.8
13.0
23.0
29762 b2k
20.1
24.3
12.4
22.0
30179 b2k
5.8
8.8
3.6
7.0
31684 b2k
11.3
27.4
8.7
16.0
32600 b2k
11.0
23.6
8.1
15.0
34324 b2k
6.9
20.0
5.4
10.2
38963 b2k
22.1
28.5
14.2
24.9
40716 b2k
13.4
22.3
9.2
16.8
40806 b2k
16.4
19.3
9.7
17.7
Average
14.9
22.1
9.6
17.4
Table B.2: Visual inspection results of the edge and layer detection model.
Value
Frequency
Wrong (0%)
44
Acceptable (50%)
33
Good (100%)
23
Average Score (%)
39.5
Table B.3: Pearson Correlation between δ18O, annual layer thickness (λ), layer average
color, and sub-annual (SA) count and thickness in the edge and layer detection model.
Variables
Correlation Coefficient (ρ)
δ18O
λ
Average color
# SA
SA Thickness
δ18O
1.000
0.634
-0.489
0.147
0.368
λ
1.000
-0.545
0.267
0.381
Average color
1.000
0.014
-0.404
# SA
1.000
-0.341
SA Thickness
1.000
48
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:57==
C
Results: Perlin Noise Model
Table C.1: Evaluation with manually labeled data of the Perlin Noise model.
Year
Rounded Output Metric (%)
Post-processed Output Metric (%)
Precision
Recall
IoU
F-score
Precision
Recall
IoU
F-score
28146 b2k
27.9
15.6
11.1
20.0
34.4
20.7
25.8
14.8
29274 b2k
37.6
14.0
11.4
20.4
19.3
18.9
19.1
10.5
29762 b2k
34.0
56.0
26.8
42.3
35.6
43.7
39.3
24.4
30179 b2k
36.8
17.6
13.6
23.9
28.5
39.3
33.0
19.8
31684 b2k
24.0
5.0
4.3
8.3
13.7
16.9
15.2
8.2
32600 b2k
26.0
4.1
18.8
31.6
25.7
55.2
32.4
19.4
34324 b2k
15.0
34.9
11.7
21.0
11.3
27.3
16.0
8.7
38963 b2k
39.4
19.2
14.8
25.8
17.9
21.9
19.7
10.9
40716 b2k
41.6
31.1
21.7
35.6
29.1
43.0
34.7
21.0
40806 b2k
40.2
32.7
22.0
36.1
32.9
39.2
30.9
18.3
Average
32.3
26.6
15.6
26.5
24.8
30.5
15.6
26.6
Table C.2: Visual inspection results of the Perlin noise model.
Value
Frequency
Wrong (0%)
27
Acceptable (50%)
41
Good (100%)
32
Average Score (%)
52.5
Table C.3: Pearson Correlation between δ18O, annual layer thickness (λ), layer average
color, and sub-annual (SA) count and thickness in the Perlin noise model.
Variables
Correlation Coefficient (ρ)
δ18O
λ
Average color
# SA
SA Thickness
δ18O
100.0
63.4
-48.9
53.1
16.4
λ
100.0
-54.5
66.2
17.9
Average color
100.0
-32.4
-27.3
# SA
100.0
-16.8
SA Thickness
100.0
GlacierStrataNet
49
==PAGE:58==
D
Results: Image Quilting Model
Table D.1: Evaluation with manually labeled data of the Image Quilting model.
Year
Rounded Output Metric(%)
Post-processed Output Metric(%)
Precision
Recall
IoU
F-score
Precision
Recall
IoU
F-score
28146 b2k
26.8
6.3
5.3
10.1
32.7
40.0
21.9
36.0
29274 b2k
27.7
2.4
2.2
4.4
34.2
18.0
13.4
23.6
29762 b2k
37.1
23.0
16.5
28.4
41.7
47.6
44.5
44.5
30179 b2k
58.9
9.2
8.6
15.9
50.1
21.3
17.5
29.9
31684 b2k
39.8
4.5
4.2
8.0
20.8
23.9
12.5
22.3
32600 b2k
34.6
10.2
8.5
15.7
25.1
32.6
16.5
28.4
34324 b2k
19.6
1.9
1.8
3.4
7.3
9.2
4.2
8.2
38963 b2k
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
40716 b2k
32.8
6.4
5.6
10.7
22.1
26.4
13.7
24.1
40806 b2k
28.3
4.0
3.7
7.1
21.8
13.1
8.9
16.4
Average
30.6
6.8
5.7
10.4
25.6
23.2
13.7
23.3
Table D.2: Visual inspection results of the Latent Diffusion model.
Value
Frequency
Wrong (0%)
23
Acceptable (50%)
45
Good (100%)
32
Average Score (%)
54.5
Table D.3: Pearson Correlation between δ18O, annual layer thickness (λ), layer average
color, and sub-annual (SA) count and thickness in the Image Quilting model.
Variables
Correlation Coefficient (ρ)
δ18O
λ
Average color
# SA
SA Thickness
δ18O
100.0
63.4
-48.9
51.4
19.7
λ
100.0
-54.5
64.1
22.5
Average color
100.0
-46.1
-12.6
# SA
100.0
-13.4
SA Thickness
100.0
50
GlacierStrataNet
==PAGE:59==
E
Results: Latent Diffusion Model
Table E.1: Evaluation with manually labeled data of the Latent Diffusion model.
Year
Rounded Output Metric(%)
Post-processed Output Metric(%)
Precision
Recall
IoU
F-score
Precision
Recall
IoU
F-score
28146 b2k
8.6
9.4
4.7
9.0
5.4
6.8
3.1
6.0
29274 b2k
35.2
20.8
15.1
26.2
16.8
15.1
8.6
15.9
29762 b2k
30.0
37.9
20.1
33.5
26.2
38.3
18.4
31.1
30179 b2k
24.0
31.7
15.8
27.3
16.6
32.4
12.3
21.9
31684 b2k
10.0
14.6
6.3
11.8
4.8
11.7
3.5
6.8
32600 b2k
21.1
42.7
16.4
28.2
20.1
26.2
12.9
22.8
34324 b2k
8.7
17.8
6.2
11.7
9.5
24.1
7.3
13.6
38963 b2k
4.9
4.2
2.3
4.5
5.0
4.1
2.3
4.5
40716 b2k
14.6
18.9
9.0
16.5
10.2
15.5
6.5
12.3
40806 b2k
21.5
24.8
13.0
23.0
19.5
24.1
12.1
21.6
Average
17.9
22.3
10.9
19.2
13.4
19.8
8.7
15.7
Table E.2: Visual inspection results of the Latent Diffusion model.
Value
Frequency
Wrong (0%)
32
Acceptable (50%)
43
Good (100%)
25
Average Score (%)
46.5
Table E.3: Pearson Correlation between δ18O, annual layer thickness (λ), layer average
color, and sub-annual (SA) count and thickness in the Latent Diffusion model.
Variables
Correlation Coefficient (ρ) (%)
δ18O
λ
Average color
# SA
SA Thickness
δ18O
100.0
63.4
-48.9
56.6
32.3
λ
100.0
-54.5
72.1
32.0
Average color
100.0
-49.5
-26.0
# SA
100.0
1.5
SA Thickness
100.0
GlacierStrataNet
51
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.compute.dtu.dk
