==PAGE:1==
Additives and their influence on thermal
and mechanical properties of bacterial
polyesters (PHAs)
Sara Soledad Abarca de las Muelas
s212531
March 1, 2024
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Preface
I will like to thank for this thesis first of all to Jesper Bøgelund for letting me have this
collaboration and being so welcoming. Also I have to thank Anders Egede for being my
supervisor and Jeppe. Also thanks to all the department specially to Liyun and Arianna.
To be honest coming to DTU in the first moment was never hard, I was super excited to
have new experiences. Now, that this stage is coming to an end I cannot held myself in
remembering everything that I have lived in this country. I have to thank all the people that
have been meaningful to me and that have made these years the best time with the best
experiences of my life. Thanks to all my neighbors in U2 for being my friends and making
this gray and rainy place so far away feel like my home and for being my family here. The
moments I have lived in this dorm have been the best and I already miss living there.
Also to all my ”children” from DTU intro week which have been a big part of my life here.
Keeping the contact with you and consider you all my friends makes me so happy. Also, I
want to thank all the buddys and coordinators which are also my big family in DTU.
Also I am so happy to have met friends that I will keep forever like fra cagnolino and also
all the people who already have left the country and I am still in contact.
It is going to be strange not to come to DTU anymore, no more coffees, library, massage
chairs, S-huset, 101, KB, saxen and saunas. And over all no more walking thorough a mini
community of friends full of kindness and fun. I am really going to miss it.
Denmark has helped me to be independent and starting to find my way into the world, all
the jobs that I have had here have helped me into becoming the person that I am right now.
Special thanks to Karina and DTU cafe, I have been the happiest person working here and
also thanks to Esben and my team and students in FUJI for giving me the chance to learn
in the best work environment.
To all, these two years and a half have been the best years of my life and it is sad to close
this stage but I know deep inside my heart that this is not an END it is a BEGINNING.
And I am sure the new chapter is going to be full of great adventures.
Sara Abarca
ii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
Project Formulation
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are linear thermoplastic biopolymers produced by bacteria.
Besides being biodegradable, the semicrystalline variants are known for their slow crystalli-
sation and explicit secondary crystallisation during aging, generally during storage, which
alters the material’s properties. This phenomenon is attributed to the slow nucleation and
growth rate of crystalls in the material. The primary objective of this master thesis project is
to explore various types of additives capable of augmenting the number of crystalline nuclei
within the polymer matrix as well as speed up the crystall growth rate.
By introducing different nucleating additives, the aim is to mitigate the re-crystallization
issue inherent in semicrystalline PHAs. The hypothesis is that these additives will enhance
the nuclei density within the material and accelerate their growth, thereby potentially im-
proving the material’s mechanical and thermal characteristics.
To achieve these objectives, various additives at different concentrations will be incorpo-
rated into PHA samples on a small scale using the solvent casting method. Subsequently,
the thermal properties of the new materials will be analyzed through Differential Scanning
Calorimetry (DSC). Additionally, the materials will be processed into tensile bars via injec-
tion molding to assess their mechanical properties in a tensile machine. The properties will
also be monitored over time to evaluate if there has been a re-crystallization effect.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
Abstract
This master thesis focuses on enhancing the mechanical and thermal properties through
the addition of additives to a PHA blend comprising 60% PHBV (poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-
co-3-hydroxyvalerate)) and 40% PHB4B (poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate)),
supplemented with an additional 10% of talc.
The initial phase of the project involves an extensive literature review aimed at identifying
appropriate additives and establishing their ideal proportions for integration into the PHA
matrix. Among the selected additives are various clays such as cloisite 10A (C10A), cloisite
30B (C30B) and septiolite (Sep). Also, it was used a conventional nucleating agent that is
cyanuric acid (CA), and two cellulosic nanocomposites: crystalline nanocellulose (CNC) and
cellulose nanofibers (CNF). These additives are evaluated across different concentrations of
0.5, 1, and 3 %.
Following formulation, the materials were prepared via solvent casting, where the PHA was
dissolved and the additives were added in powder form and then, dispersed within the poly-
mer matrix. Cellulosic additives underwent a freeze-drying process to obtain a powdered
form as they were stored dissolved in water. Visual inspection revealed that films containing
CNC, CNF, and CA exhibited visible additives, indicating incomplete dispersion within the
polymer matrix. Thermal properties were analyzed via TGA and DSC. Additionally, more
material was fabricated for making tensile bars via injection molding, which needed a pro-
gram optimization. Samples were subjected to tensile testing immediately after production
and one month later to assess if there have been re-crystallization effects over time.
The research findings indicate that all additives increase the Tmax of the PHA while reducing
the Tm, thus widening the processing window.
Moreover, the additives enhance the Tc,
facilitating sample crystallization. Additionally, mechanical properties appear to improve
compared to pure PHA. However, it is observed that over time, these mechanical properties
undergo changes, suggesting that the re-crystallization effect may not have been mitigated.
Consequently, future directions involve exploring alternative additives or optimizing the
dispersion of current additives to address this issue effectively.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Classification of bioplastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Market size of bioplastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Bio-based bioplastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
PHA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Synthesis and structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
Industrial production of PHA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.3
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Properties of PHA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.1
Thermal properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.2
Mechanical properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Additives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.1
Nucleating agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.2
Nanocomposites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.3
Fibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.4
Plasticizers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Experimental plan
23
4
Materials and methods
25
4.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Preparation of the samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Removing additives from commercial mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Preparation of films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Preparation of films with non-cellulosic additives
. . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.2
Preparation of materials with cellulosic additives
. . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Preparation of materials for mechanical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4.1
Preparation of tensile bars trough injection molding . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.1
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.2
Thermogravimetrical analysis (TGA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.3
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.4
Crystallization kinetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.5
Tensile testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Results and discussion
36
5.1
Removal of additives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Preparation of samples with additives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Appearance of all the films prepared
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
vi
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
Contents
5.5
Crystallization kinetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.6
Spherulites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.7
Injection molding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.8
Mechanical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6
Conclusion and future lines
78
List of Figures
80
List of Tables
84
Nomenclature
85
References
88
7
Appendix A
i
7.1
Summary of additives for PHB blends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
7.2
Summary of additives for PHBV blends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
7.3
Summary of additives for other PHA blends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
7.4
Summary of plasticizers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
8
Appendix B
vi
9
Appendix C
ix
9.1
FTIR spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
9.2
TGA samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xiv
9.3
DSC analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxv
9.3.1
DSC after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxvi
9.4
Mechanical testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xliv
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xlviii
vii
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
Plastics exhibit remarkable versatility and attractive properties at a low cost which makes
the production to rise annually, primarily driven by single-use items such as food packaging
and disposable products [1]. In Europe, for instance, 40% of plastics produced fall into this
category [2].
A notable drawback from plastics lies on their non-biodegradability. Most of the plastic
waste generated ends up in the environment and oceans. In 2020, 86 million tons of plastic
waste were deposited in landfills, where it accumulates as it takes from 10 to 600 years to
breakdown.[3] The presence of these materials disrupts the ecosystems as animals can ingest
them or become entangled in them. Additionally, UV light breaks down plastic polymers,
forming microplastics [4]. These tiny particles contaminate the environment and can tra-
verse the food chain. They have been found in animals, tap water [5], foods like honey,
and even the human body [6]. Furthermore, plastics may contain hazardous components
like phthalates and poly-fluorinated chemicals. These substances have the potential to leach
into groundwater, contaminate it, or be absorbed by plants and marine organisms, thereby
entering the food chain [5]. The health consequences of microplastic presence in our bodies
remain incompletely understood, as they were only discovered less than two decades ago. [3]
The challenges linked to traditional plastics result from their dependence on non-renewable
petroleum sources, their slow bio-degradation, and recycling difficulties. As a result, there
is a rising demand for alternatives.
Bio-based bioplastics offer several advantages over petroleum-derived plastics. Firstly, they
are made from renewable raw materials, which regenerate over time, eliminating the need
for finite fossil resources. This shift towards bio-based sources helps reduce carbon dioxide
emissions significantly, as the production of one metric ton of bio- based plastics generates
between 0.8 and 3.2 metric tons less of CO2 compared to traditional plastics [7]. Further-
more, if these plastics are also biodegradable, they have the added benefit of not leaving
persistent waste in the environment [1].
However, bio-based and degradable plastic production is generally more expensive and
energy-intensive compared to traditional plastics. Besides, mixing them with common plas-
tics can complicate recycling processes. Improper disposal of bioplastics can also lead to
the release of pollutants such as CO2 or CH4 [7]. Additionally, using plant-based resources
for bioplastic production may reduce the reserves of this materials, potentially driving up
costs, particularly in developing countries [8]. Furthermore, bioplastics often exhibit infe-
rior properties compared to conventional plastics, needing ongoing research for improvement.
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) represent a group of biodegradable polymers synthesized by
specific microorganisms through the fermentation of renewable resources. These bioplastics
offer an environmentally friendly alternative to conventional petroleum-based plastics. PHA
Page 1 of 93
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
comprises a diverse family of materials with varying properties, including well-known vari-
ants like PHB, PHV, and PHBV. They are known for their biodegradability, making them
suitable for various applications in industries such as packaging, agriculture, and medicine,
thanks to their biocompatibility and sustainability [9].
Given the current limitations in bioplastics properties compared to conventional plastics, it
is essential to invest in research and development to enhance their mechanical and thermal
attributes. This study focuses on improving these properties in PHA materials by incor-
porating various additives, with the ultimate goal of enabling their use in packaging the
pharmaceutical industry.
Page 2 of 93
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
2
Literature Review
Conventional plastics are now part of our daily life, they have an intensive demand due to
their properties. These have a huge worldwide annual production that in 2021 was 390.7
millions of tons, which expects to grow 4% every year. Their huge production is accelerating
climate change due to their CO2 emissions and the fact that 44% of their application is for
packaging, this solid waste ends up disposed in the landfilds and oceans. [3]
Figure 1 illustrates the cumulative trend in global plastic waste generation and disposal up
to 2015, along with projections for the future. Notably, a significant proportion of gener-
ated plastics find their way into the environment, while only a small fraction is recycled or
incinerated. Between 22% and 43% of polymer waste is disposed of in landfills, leading to
contamination due to the leaching of harmful additives. Besides, polymer waste persists in
the natural environment, where it can endure for up to 2000 years. [10]
Figure 1: Plastic generation and disposal tendency [10]
In pursuit of a sustainable and environmentally friendly future bioplastics come up as an
alternative to common petroleum-based plastics. Bioplastics generally do not own better
properties than the general fuel-based polymers, like thermal or mechanical properties which
allow them to have very diverse applications. On the other hand, the bioplastics have a great
potential because improving their properties with the use of different additives or blendings
can make them a substitute of conventional plastics. [3]
Besides, this type of biobased and biodegradable could be essential in the near future as they
can help to reduce the carbon foot-print when produced in a large scale.
Page 3 of 93
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
2.1
Classification of bioplastics
2.1
Classification of bioplastics
European Bioplastics Organization (EBO) describes bioplastics as a term used to describe
the plastic materials that are bio-based or biodegradable materials or posses both features [1].
It is crucial to emphasize that not all bio-based plastics exhibit biodegradability. Similarly,
not all biodegradable plastics are derived from bio-based sources. The term "bio-based"
within the context of bioplastics refers to the origin of the material. In contrast, bioplastics
are classified as "biodegradable" when they are degraded under specific environmental condi-
tions due to microbial activity that consumes them as a food source to produce CO2, biomass
and water [3]. Furthermore, if a bioplastic undergoes complete microbial assimilation within
180 days in a composting environment, it qualifies as "compostable". [10] The European
stardards and regulation regarding bioplastic characteristics, like compostability, are estab-
lished by the International Organization for Standarization (ISO), the European Committee
for Standarization and the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)[3]
The bioplastics classification can be seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Classification of plastics [1]
Page 4 of 93
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
2.2
Market size of bioplastics
The division of bioplastics is:
1. Bio-based and not degradable like bio-based PE, PP and PET. These materials
are similar to the fossil-based, but are made from renewable feedstocks like sugarcane
and plant oil waste. The applications of bio-based PE, include packaging bio-PP is also
used in packaging and in the same applications as the non bio-based and the PET is
used generally in the textile industry. The advantages of these materials include their
mechanical recycling and reducing the carbon footprint. [1]
2. Fossil-based and degradable include PCL nad PBAT. These bioplastics generally
are not produced alone but they are mixed with PLA or other biodegradable plastics
to reinforce the mechanical properties. [1]
3. Bio-based and biodegradable are the materials of interest like polylactic acid (PLA)
that is the most used bio-plastic, polyhydroxyalkanaotaes (PHA) and polybutylene
succinate (PBS). They are generally used for single-use applications like packaging.
These materials offer features that include composting and increasing other properties
like the barrier properties.[1]
2.2
Market size of bioplastics
Due to the non-sustainability of petrol-derived plastics and the new plastics regulations, the
bioplastics markets [11] is in growth of around 8-10% per year. As the production of these
materials grow, their production price will decrease making them more affordable which will
also increase the demand. The growth tendency can be seen in Figure 3
Figure 3: Annual expected growth of bioplastics [11]
Page 5 of 93
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
2.3
Bio-based bioplastics
In Figure 4 it is represented the production growth between 2022 and 2027 of the different
bioplastics materials. Biodegradable bioplastics show the most growth among these kind of
materials. Specially PHA and PLA have the highest growth rates.[11] Regarding the appli-
cations, packaging is the sector that uses the highest number of bioplastics, but also other
industries like electronic, biomedical and automotive. [3]
Figure 4: Growth of bioplastics by material type [11]
Even though the properties of these materials are not yet to the standards of the common
used plastics, they have a big potential in growth and of improvement of these properties
which can make them more viable to be used in the future substituting petrol- based plastics.
2.3
Bio-based bioplastics
The biobased and biodegradable bioplastic category includes biobased polyesters like PLA
and PHAs, biopolymers, and natural fibers. Their production of bio-based polymers from
renewable resources can be achieved in several ways. These include using natural bio-based
polymers with slight modifications, such as starch; producing bio-based polymers from mi-
crobial production, such as PHA and creating bio-based monomers through fermentation
and traditional chemistry followed by polymerization, such as PLA. [10]
Bio-based and compostable plastics are recognized for their superior sustainability.
The
carbon dioxide emissions released during bioplastic production, usage, and recycling are ef-
fectively offset by the carbon dioxide absorbed during the growth of the plants used to create
them, resulting in a significantly improved overall carbon dioxide balance. Remarkably re-
placing all synthetic plastics with biobased and compostable bioplastics and recycling their
waste could help reducing up to 800 million tons per year of greenhouse gases. [3]
The ability of a material to biodegrade depends on the types of chemical bonds within its
polymeric chains, particularly in synthetic or semi-synthetic polymers. Polymers containing
Page 6 of 93
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
2.3
Bio-based bioplastics
hydrolyzable ester bonds, like some polyesters, are more prone to biodegradation than those
with carbon chain backbones such as polyolefins. Among bioplastics, aliphatic polyesters like
PLA and PHAs, derived from renewable sources, exemplify this property. However, the rate
of biodegradation and the environmental conditions required for these polymers differ. For
example, PLA requires an industrial composting environment, while PHAs can biodegrade
naturally in environments like marine and natural settings. [3]
Figure 5: Circular economy of biobased and biodegradable bioplastics[12]
Biobased and biodegradable plastics are a good examples of circular economy. As to pro-
duce them the starch-rich raw materials are cultivated like starch and sugarcane. Following
this, the starch is extracted from the plants. These extracted starches are then purified
and processed with the use or enzymes or fermentation to produce the materials. These
plastics are then transformed into pellets that are used to manufacture depending on their
application.
Once the material arrived to the consumer and its working life is finished,
they can be collected in organic waste bins. To close the circle, their compostability makes
them be able to return to the soil and help them grow new materials to repeat the circle. [10]
However, these bioplastics have limited mechanical properties compared to petrol based plas-
tics, that limit their applications. Despite the limitations, ongoing research aims to improve
their technical and mechanical properties, while maintaining their renewable nature.
Page 7 of 93
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
2.4
PHA
2.4
PHA
PHAs, or polyhydroxyalkanoates, represent a class of biobased and biodegradable polymers
that are produced during bacterial fermentation. These polymers offer numerous advan-
tages, such as their biodegradability, high biocompatibility, and their sustainable source.
PHAs are synthesized under conditions of low nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen, or magnesium
concentrations and an excess of carbon. Common applications of PHAs in the market, in-
clude packaging, medical bioimplants, food-friendly films, agriculture biofuel, drug delivery,
and tissue engineering. [13]
PHA polymers have been known since the 1920s, and an increasing number of scientific
documents have been published yearly ever since, expanding the available knowledge on
these biopolymers. The trend in research has been exponential, as indicated by the number
of articles published per year between 1988 and 2018 (Figure 6), as identified by Web Science
Core Collections. [14]
Figure 6: Reseach tendency of PHAs during the years[14]
Literature reviews are important for understanding this field of study, but can be limited to
narrow topics due to their labor intensity. Over the years, research on PHAs has evolved
from understanding their production to exploring organic and inorganic composites that en-
hance their properties to exploit the material to the maximum(Figure 7.
When PHA materials were first discovered, scientists focused on understanding the genetics
and biochemistry behind their synthesis to identify key enzymes responsible for production
and create better production strains, which has been further enhanced by genetic engineering
techniques. Later on, around 2002, PHAs started to be studied for medical applications due
to their biocompatibility. Additionally, around 2005, research began to focus on processing
and modifying PHA, leading to the development of renewable paths for producing smart
composites that have potential to substitute petrochemical polymers. Sustainable production
of biopolymers from renewable and cheap substrates has also being studied to reduce their
Page 8 of 93
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
2.4
PHA
high production costs. Since 2010, attention has shifted towards PHA composites to improve
their properties and make them attractive substitutes for regular polymers.
The trend
towards developing PHA composites and improving their properties is expected to continue
in the future, driven by the need for sustainable and eco-friendly alternatives to traditional
plastics. [14]
Figure 7: Trends in PHA research[14]
2.4.1
Synthesis and structure
PHA is produced inside cells which can belong to both plants and bacteria, although the
production of high levels of PHAs via plant cells is currently not practical due to the adverse
effects of high polymer levels on plant growth. In contrast, bacteria can produce high levels
of PHAs and both Gram-positive and negative bacteria can produce them [10].
Microorganisms synthesize PHAs in scenarios with an abundance of carbon and a scarcity
of nutrients like magnesium, nitrogen, sulphur, and phosphorus utilizing them for energy
and carbon storage [9]. The generation of PHAs is performed by enzymes referred to as
PHA polymerases, which produce PHA as water-insoluble granules within the cytoplasm
of cells which serve as energy and carbon storage [15]. These granules perform a crucial
function in the microorganism’s resilience under environmental stress conditions [9] and in
some prokaryotic organisms these granules can constitute up to the 90% of their cellular dry
weight.[10]
Figure 8: PHA granules [12]
Page 9 of 93
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
2.4
PHA
PHA granules shield vital cellular elements like RNA and proteins during periods of nutrient
deprivation. Apart from this, PHAs exhibit a range of protective mechanisms that contribute
to the survival of bacterial cells under diverse stress conditions. These include freeze-thaw
cycles, osmotic shocks, oxidative stress, desiccation, exposure to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2),
presence of heavy metals, and ultraviolet (UV) radiation [15]. In essence, PHAs serve as a
versatile line of defense for microorganisms against a variety of harsh environmental condi-
tions.
Within the microbial cell, the synthesis PHA is influenced by a multitude of factors, including
the ratio of Carbon to Nitrogen, the feedstock used, and fermentation operation parameters
such as pH, stirring rate, and temperature. The choice of carbon source depends on the
specific microorganism used that include sugars, fatty acids, or organic acids. Similarly,
the nitrogen source is strain-dependent, with ammonia and urea being commonly utilized
across various microbial strains.
The operational parameters of fermentation, which are
strain-specific, play an important role in optimizing PHA production.[16]
Figure 9: Chemical structure of PHA [9]
The production of PHA polymers depends on the specific bacterial strain used. As PHA
is a stereoregular polymer, all the co-polymers have the same stereochemical configuration
which consist of an asymmetrical carbon configuration in their primary chain. The struc-
ture consist of three groups. PHA, is a linear polyester, comprises 3-hydroxy fatty acid
monomers. One monomer’s hydroxyl group forms an ester bond with another monomer’s
carboxyl group, resulting in a semi-crystalline polymer due to the identical configuration of
all repeating units. The structure includes an ’R’ group, representing an alkyl group. The
nature of the ’R’ group determines the polymer’s nomenclature [15].
Figure 9 depicts the generic formula for PHAs, where ’x’ has a value of 1 or more, and ’R’
symbolizes either hydrogen or hydrocarbon chains of up to 16 carbons. Table 1 provide an
overview of the primary structures and nomenclatures of PHAs. In Table 2 it can be found
the full abbreviations for the most industrially relevant PHA homopolymers and copolymers.
Depending on the substrate and the bacterial strain used for synthesis, various types of
PHAs with different side chain lengths can be produced. These can be categorized into
three types[9]:
1. Short-chain length-PHAs (scl-PHAs) feature 1 to 3 carbon atoms in their side chains.
2. Medium-chain length-PHAs (mcl-PHAs) have an ’R’ group composed of 4 to 9 carbon
atoms.
Page 10 of 93
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
2.4
PHA
3. Long-chain length-PHAs (lcl-PHAs) with an ’R’ group with 10 to 14 carbon atoms.
Table 1: Main PHA structures[9]
Chemical name
Abbreviation
x
R
Poly(3-hydroxypropionate)
P(3HP)
1
Hydrogen
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)
P(3HB)
1
Methyl
Poly(3-hydroxyvalerate)
P(3HV)
1
Ethyl
Poly(3-hydroxyhexanoate)
P(3HHx)
1
Propyl
Poly(3-hydroxyhexanoate)
P(3HH)
1
Butyl
Poly (3-hydroxyoctanoate)
P(3HO)
1
Pentyl
Poly (3-hydroxynonanoate)
P(3HN)
1
Hexyl
Poly(3-hydroxydecanoate)
P(3HD)
1
Heptyl
Poly(3-hydroxyundecanoate)
P(3HUD)
1
Octyl
Poly(3-hydroxydodecanoate)
P(3HDD)
1
Nonyl
Poly(3-hydroxyoctadecanoate)
P(3HOD)
1
Pentadecanoyl
Poly(4-hydroxybutyrate)
P(4HB)
2
Hydrogen
Poly(5-hydroxybutyrate)
P(5HB)
2
Methyl
Poly(5-hydroxyvalerate)
P(5HV)
3
Hydrogen
Table 2: Short abbreviations of the most common PHA structures[9]
Short abbreviation
Full abbreviations
Structure
PHB
P(3HB)
Homopolymer
PHV
P(3HV)
Homopolymer
PHBV
P(3HB-co-3HV)
Copolymer
PHBHx
P(3HB-co-3HHx)
Copolymer
PHBO
P(3HB-co-3HO)
Copolymer
PHBD P(3HB-co-3HD)
P(3HB-co-3HD
Copolymer
PHBOd P(3HB-co-3HOd)
P(3HB-co-3HOd)
Copolymer
Since PHA was discovered in 1925, over 150 distinct structures have been discovered, and
this count continues to grow[17]. There has been a big progress in the sustainable produc-
tion of PHAs, promoting the utilization of cost-effective carbon sources, the use of genetic
engineering, and an effective downstream process [15].
The most used and known polymers in the PHA family are polyhydroxybutyrate homopoly-
mer (PHB), and polyhydroxyvalerate (PHV). Also different copolyesters exist as a mix-
ture of different homopolymers of PHAs such as poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate)
(PHBV) and poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyhexanoate) (PHBHx). Copolymers of PHAs
exhibit variations in the type and proportion of monomers which affect their properties.
Page 11 of 93
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
2.4
PHA
2.4.2
Industrial production of PHA
The production of PHAs dates back to the 1950s, and in the 1970s, Zeneca successfully
manufactured several tons of PHA copolymers marketed as Biopol.[9] Since then the indus-
trial production have been expanded. The current research on PHA production has focused
on using both normal and engineered bacteria, like Alcaligenes latus, Ralstonia eutropha,
Aeromonas hydrophila, Pseudomonas spp., and recombinant Escherichia coli. Pseudomonas
spp. can produce PHA homopolymers, random or block copolymers, and functional poly-
mers by knocking out various key genes in the β -oxidation pathway. Once the PHA pellet
is produced, the purification process takes place to purify the polymer. [18]
The industrial production begins with the upstream processing, a stage that includes the
inoculation step. In this phase, the selected microorganism is cultivated and allowed to
multiply in a liquid medium, provided with the necessary nutrients and air under optimal
conditions. This inoculated bacteria then undergoes a process of scaling up, involving in-
crementally larger containers and proportional increases in the medium and nutrients, until
the ideal cell count is achieved.[10]
PHAs typically exhibit molecular weights ranging from 100,000 to 500,000 g/mol. However,
under specific conditions, it’s feasible to attain higher molecular weights exceeding 1,000,000
g/mol. It is important to note that the molecular weight of the PHA can influence its phys-
ical properties and therefore its suitability for different applications.[10]
Figure 10: Schematic industrial process [16]
The downstream processing of Polyhydroxyalkanoates is critical due to the high costs and
low recovery, which makes the PHAs one of the most expensive bioplastics [10]. The critical
Page 12 of 93
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
2.4
PHA
parameters to decide the DS include cell wall strength, the type and amount of PHA gener-
ated and the final purity required.[16]
Harvest can be performed with centrifugation, filtration, or sedimentation. To facilitate the
extraction and maximize the recovery of PHA a pre-treatment is generally used to weaken
the cellular wall. To extract the polymer diferent methods can be conducted like the di-
gestion of non-PHA cellular mass or solvent extraction. While the solvent method can lead
to a more purified product, chemical digestion can also deliver high purity for cells rich in
PHA. DSP increment the cost of purification of PHAs as they can be energy-demanding,
expensive, and potentially harmful to the environment, emphasizing the need for greener
alternatives.[16]
The use of these PHA super producers has led to successful industrial-scale production, but
there are several limitations to this technology. First of all the production process is complex
and requires high quantities of energy and water. Additionally, the process is discontinuous
and produces non-homogeneous product quality with high biological and chemical oxygen
demand in wastewater. The production process also requires full sterilization and compli-
cated contamination prevention procedures, high cost of the feedstock and low yield, high
cost of wastewater treatment, batch or fed-batch cultivation with low productivity, high
aeration, unstable processes and PHA quality, and complex and expensive downstream pro-
cesses. The high production costs associated with these limitations result in a high price of
PHAs, which is five to six times that of petroleum-based plastics [18]. To overcome these
limitations, other methods are being explored to improve PHA production, including using
renewable substrates dissolved in aqueous solutions. However, there is still a need for more
sustainable and cost-effective production processes to make PHAs more competitive with
petroleum-based plastics.
The production scheme of PHAs can be seen in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Industrial production of PHAs [18]
Page 13 of 93
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
2.5
Properties of PHA
2.4.3
Applications
Polyhydroxyalkanoates are being looked upon as potential substitutes for synthetic, non-
biodegradable polymers. They possess environmentally friendly characteristics and can be
utilized in a variety of applications such as packaging, medical purposes, biomedical equip-
ment, and agricultural uses.[10]
Due to their biodegradability, PHAs are an optimal choice for short-term packaging solu-
tions, so if disposed in the soil or in the waters they can degrade without harming the
environment[9]. Besides, gas barrier property makes them suitable for manufacturing pack-
aging [12].
Moreover, their non-toxicity and bio-compatible nature makes them safe for
interaction with living tissues, thus making them viable in biomedical applications where
there is contact with biological organisms like drug delivery, cosmetics, nanobiothechnology
and tissue engineering[16]. As they’re malleable and can easily be processed through injec-
tion molding, expanding their potential for use for printing implants .[10]
In agriculture, PHAs are used for encapsulation of seeds and fertilizers[12]. In addition, it
is used to remove the nitrogen in wastewater treatment and as coatings for urea fertilizers.
Technical challenges for sustainable PHA production include the selection of appropriate bac-
teria and the isolation of these bacteria under optimal conditions for PHA accumulation.[16]
Despite their potential, the industrial production of PHAs faces significant challenges that
are are limiting their commercialization, due to high production costs, unstable composition
and molecular weights, and inferior thermal and mechanical properties than conventional
plastics. Thus, an improvement in their properties could increment the quantities of PHA
production which will result in an optimization of the process, making it more affordable.
2.5
Properties of PHA
PHAs are a diverse family of polymers consisting of over 150 structures. The properties of
PHAs are influenced by various factors, including the structure of the polymer, bacterial
strains or fermentation conditions. Due to the complex nature of these factors, it is difficult
to generalize the properties of PHAs as a whole.
2.5.1
Thermal properties
PHAs are semi-crystalline materials that have both amorphous and crystalline regions. Due
to the different range is properties it is important to address the thermal properties of the
most important PHAs in the market, PHB and PHBV, and contrast them with traditional
plastics.
PHB is a very crystalline polymer that stands out among biopolymers due to its high melting
point (Tm), which falls between 173-180 oC. This attribute, coupled with a glass transition
Page 14 of 93
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
2.5
Properties of PHA
temperature of 5 oC, indicates a very tight operating processing temperature range. One
significant challenge with PHB is its proximity of degradation temperature to its melting
point. If PHB is heated beyond its melting point, it could experience a substantial weight
loss, which is problematic in processing.[10]
On the other hand, PHBV presents a lower melting point compared to PHB, thereby pro-
viding a more extensive temperature range before degradation. This characteristic makes
PHBV easier to process than PHB.[10]
An essential factor affecting PHBV’s properties is the percentage of the 3HV monomer.
When this percentage increases, the melting point decreases, this phenomenon supported by
various bibliographic references collected in the Appendix (subsection 7.2). Additionally, the
crystallinity decreases along with an increase in the 3HV percentage, while the degradation
rate escalates.[10]
When processing PHAs using a temperature beyond 180 oC is considered hazardous, as
the typical degradation temperatures are around 200 oC. Therefore, when processing at
this temperatures can induce thermal degradation of the material producing olefinic and
caboxylic acid compound.[19] Thus, regulating the processing temperature when processing
is important to avoid reaching these limits.[10]
In summary, an increasing percentage of HV content in a PHBV copolymer results in a
reduction in the melting temperature (Tm). This outcome effectively expands the processing
temperature window while maintaining the degradation rates within acceptable limits. [10]
Although englobing the diverse thermal properties of PHAs can be challenging, a summary
of all these properties can be found in Table 3.
Table 3: Average thermal and mechanical properties of PHAs [19]
Property (units)
Value
Tg(oC)
2
Tm(oC)
160-175
Xc (%)
40-60
E(Gpa)
1-2
TS (Mpa)
15-40
EB (%)
1-15
When compared to traditional plastics, both PHB and PHBV offer more environmentally
friendly options due to their biodegradable nature. However, their processing needs careful
temperature control to avoid degradation, which is less of a concern with conventional plastics
as they have a wider procesing range. Further research is needed to improve the thermal
stability to broaden their applicability in various industries.[19]
Page 15 of 93
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
2.5
Properties of PHA
2.5.2
Mechanical properties
Regarding the mechanical properties PHB and PHBV have distinct mechanical characteris-
tics that depend on their crystallinity and composition.
PHB is a highly crystalline polymer, characterized by its brittleness, low elongation point,
and stiffness. Conversely, PHBV, it is copolymer of PHB with a percentage of HV which
makes the material semi-crystalline, leading to a reduction in its crystal structure. This
makes PHBV more flexible than its counterpart, PHB.[10]
When comparing their mechanical properties, PHB has a higher elongation to break (EB
between 5.2%-8.4%), so it can withstand more strain before breaking. On the other hand,
PHBV has a lower elongation to break (1.4%), but a higher Young’s modulus (E of 2.38
Gpa), indicating it exhibits more rigidity or stiffness in response to deformation.[10]
Despite having a shorter elongation to break, PHBV has higher toughness, impact resistance,
flexibility, and manufacturability than PHB. These superior mechanical are attributed to
the valerate content (3HV) monomer, which can be adjusted to modify the properties of the
polymer. Increasing the HV content enhances the impact strength while reducing tensile
strength, crystallinity, degradation, and water permeability. When the HV percentage is
increased, the copolymer exhibits more rubber-like characteristics, which leads to a decrease
in Young’s modulus and yield strength. However, an HV percentage between 30-60 softens
the material excessively.[10]
PHAs has a very slow crystalization with low nucleation density rate as materials gets more
brittle while aging during storage where it suffers a second crystalization after initial crys-
talliztion from the melt, this re-crystalization is driven by the reorganization of lamellar
crystals produced during the initial crystallization. The brittleness of PHB is caused by
the formation of large spherulites and the secondary re-crystallization at room tempera-
ture, which results in lamellar-shaped crystals. These crystals restrict the movement of the
amorphous chains within the material, thereby increasing its brittleness. The crystallinity
of PHBV decreases with the increase in HV percentage. This is attributed to the presence
of the ethyl group in the hydroxyvalerate monomer, which restricts the formation of crys-
talline polymers.[10] Additionally, the mechanical properties of PHAs change over time due
to the recrystallization process that occurs during aging at room temperature. This leads to
alterations in mechanical properties over time. For instance, as demonstrated in the study
by Bugnicourt, the elongation break of PHB decreases after 60 days compared to its initial
levels [19]. A summary of the mechanical properties of PHAs its collected in Table 3.
Compared to traditional plastics, the mechanical properties of PHAs, especially their brit-
tleness and stiffness, limit their application. Therefore, further research should focus on
additives for improving these properties to expand their potential use in various sectors.[19]
Page 16 of 93
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
2.6
Additives
2.6
Additives
PHAs have a great future potential. However, their utility is currently limited by their in-
herent poor thermal and mechanical properties. It becomes essential, therefore, to enhance
them by incorporating different types of additives. The addition of different kind of additives
can help not only to improve the mechanical and thermal properties, but also to optimize
their cost.
In this section, it was studied the different kind of additives that have been used in PHA
blends and what has been their effect on the properties. All the information presented in
the text is a summary from the full study that can be seen in Appendix A(section 7).
2.6.1
Nucleating agents
The crystallization has two steps which consist of nucleation and crystal growth. Crystal
growth can be controlled with the temperature, but in the case of PHAs, their crystal-
lization is very slow due to the lack of nuclei to grow[20]. Due to this phenomena, PHAs
re-crystallizes with time in storage rooms altering the properties with time. The addition
of nucleating agents will solve this problem resulting in a controlled crystallization of the
material, which will improve the thermal and mechanical properties of the polymer.
Nucleating agents are impurities that when added in the polymer matrix act as new nuclei
for crystal growth. When added, nucleating agents increment the crystallinity of the mate-
rial as they reduce the free energy to form the crystal [20].
Many nucleating agents for polymers and specially for PHA have been studied during the
years. Their effect changes depending on the specific PHA used. Examples of nucleating
agents that have been used are talc, boron nitride and carbon black. The most popular
among them is boron nitride as it has been shown in most of the studies that increase the
number of nuclei, offering generally the best thermal properties. Other agents like thyamine
and melatine has been studied to have a similar effect than BN. Generally nucleating agents
are added in low quantities (less than 5%w/w) because when added in excess they tend to
cluster together [20]. Other molecules like orotic acid and cyanuric acid have shown a big
potential in increasing the crystallinity of PHAs. For instance, as it can be seen in Table 4,
1% of nucleating agents increases the crystallization temperature by 38.4oC.
To reach these conclusions, it was done an extensive research. To find the full study along
with the references please refer to Appendix A(section 7). A summary of the most effective
and important nucleating agents can be found in Table 4.
Page 17 of 93
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
2.6
Additives
Table 4: Summary of the best nucleating agents from Appendix A(section 7)
Additive
%
Tg
Inc Tg
Tm
Inc Tm
Xc
Inc Xc
Tc
Inc Tc
PHB
BN
1
110,3
31,7
Thymine
1
168,9-173,6
19,4
65,8
23,5
106,1
27,5
Melamine
1
94,4
15,8
Saccharin
1
96,9
18,3
KBr
1
96,8
13,8
Talc
1
102,7
19,7
Orotic Acid
1
121,4
38,4
Cyanuric Acid
1
175,5
-1,5
59,2
3,2
PHBV 10%
Orotic Acid
1
143,1-154,1
2,3
55
2,7
Uracil
1
141,9-153,5
2,3
53,9
1,6
Cyanuric Acid
1
143,6-154,4
3,2
56,5
4,2
PHBV 9%
BN
1
172,7
-3,5
89,6
-12,6
120,2
46,1
PHBV 8%
Thymine
1
92,3
40,1
Melamine
1
73,5
21,3
Saccharin
1
59,3
7,1
PHBV 13%
TiO2
2
147-457
2
98
2
PHBH 10%HH
Orotic Acid
1
-11,3
-8,8
Cyanuric Acid
1
27,9
4,7
BN
1
-5,4
-2,9
52,7
-26
PHB 7,63%4HB
BN
1
-3,1
-0,4
121,2-133,5
5,6
73,4
20,4
Even though the thermal properties are improved with the addition of the nucleating agents,
the mechanical properties are not much improved.
2.6.2
Nanocomposites
Organic and inorganic nanocomposites can also be used to improve the mechanical and ther-
mal properties of PHAs. Nanocomposites are small particles, with dimensions up to 100 nm.
They can act as nucleating agents, inducing the crystallization in PHAs, while also acting
as reinforcements to the polymer chain, thereby enhancing their mechanical properties [21].
These nanocomposites can be classified into two categories: organic and inorganic.
Organic nanocomposites primarily consist of cellulose components. Nanocrystalline cellu-
lose, cubic nanocellulose, and cellulose nanowhiskers, are noted for their effective interaction
with the polymer matrix. This interaction significantly enhances the mechanical properties
of the matrices [22]. These materials are generally known to boost the formation of nuclei
in PHAs [23]. To increase the dispersion of nanocomposites within the polymer, surfac-
tants or stabilizers can be incorporated. These additives aid in reducing the surface polarity
of nanocellulose materials by reducing the number of hydroxyl groups.
This process, in
turn, weakens the hydrogen bonds, leading to better dispersion of nanocomposites in the
polymer.[23]
In contrast, inorganic nanocomposites comprise a variety of materials such as ceramics, clays,
or graphene components. These inorganic components introduce different properties to the
polymer. They often enhance thermal stability and mechanical strength, while improving
Page 18 of 93
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
2.6
Additives
the barrier properties [21]. Clays, such as montmorillonites or cloisites are two-dimensional
structures that consist of sandwich-like layers of silicate and aluminate, connected by weak
Van der Waals forces, resulting in a small nanometric gap [24, 25].
When integrated into polymers, these layers undergo delamination due to the diffusion of
the polymer within these layers, causing them to separate further. This process enhances
the interaction between the polymer and nanoclay, potentially improving the composite’s
properties. Also the clays can be modified to have a better interaction with the polymer.
[24, 25]
One significant advantage of nanoclays is their ability to enhance properties with only a
small amount of the material, thanks to the large surface area in contact with the polymer.
Moreover, their layered structure can also enhance barrier properties, making nanoclays a
valuable additive for PHAs [26].
The clay affects the thermal properties of PHAs as they aid in lowering the melting temper-
ature (Tm). This adjustment stabilizes the thermal processing of the polymer and widens
the gap to the temperature at which thermal degradation occurs [10]. Nanoclays also impact
the crystallization of the polymer, but this effect depends on the specific type of clay and
the PHA employed.
Table 5:
Summary of the best organic and inorganic nanocomposites from Appendix
A(section 7)
Aditive
%
Tg
Increment Tg
Tm
Increment Tm
Xc
Increment Xc
Tc
Increment Tc
PHB
Cubic nanocellulose
2
16,9
-0,4
1606-170,8
3,2
56,6
1,5
BC (bacterial cellulose)
1
163,3-170,5
0
58,3
0,4
PHB
Graphene Oxide Nanocomposites
0,5
167,2
4,4
44,3
2,9
106,6
0,2
PHBV 1%
Nanocrystalline cellulose
0,5
166,4-173
0,9
92,3
7,5
PHBV 8%
Nanocrystalline cellulose
1
57,8
5,6
PHBV 8%
Cloisite 30B organoclay
1
156,4
-2,7
114,4
5,2
PHBV 8%
Cloisite 30B organoclay
2
154,7
-4,4
113,1
3,9
PHBH
Microfibrillated cellulose
10
6,4
0,5
143,5
2,3
32,3
2,3
PHB 12%4HB
Montmorillonite
5
-7
0
120
-6
58
-10
PHB 12%4HB
Septiolite
5
-4
3
134
8
60
-8
In essence, the use of nanocomposites, whether organic or inorganic, offers a promising ap-
proach to improve the overall performance of PHAs. The amount that needs to be added is
typically less than 5% of the total weight. If the concentration of these components is too
high, their interaction with the matrix may be compromised.
For further details on the impact of these additives, please refer to Table 5. This table
provide a summarized view of the effect of these additives from Appendix A(section 7).
2.6.3
Fibers
Another additive that is used to enhance the properties of polymers are fibers or fillers which
are long and thin strands of a material that can be either natural or synthetic. The main
Page 19 of 93
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
2.6
Additives
fibers used are natural primarily composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. Besides,
the fillers can simultaneously impact the PHA enhancing biodegradability and sustainability.
Moreover, they can be derived from agricultural waste which gives a sustainable alternative
to agricultural and industrial waste. Examples of natural fibers are lignin, wood fibers, bam-
boo and coconut fibers [27].
Fibers, generally have better mechanical properties than the polymer material, thereby they
reinforce the polymer matrix when incorporated. To achieve a significant mechanical effect,
quantities larger than 10% are typically added. The use of fibers not only enhances material
capabilities, but also decreases the overall price due to their cost-effectiveness. [28]
In the study carried out by Meereboer [27] it was observed the effect of fibers in the me-
chanical properties of PHA. The study shows that the two fibers that they used (lignin and
DDGS) increase the flexural modulus.
The mechanical properties are determined not only by the type of fiber used, but also by
its adhesion to the matrix, particularly at the interface between the fiber surface and the
matrix. The tensile strength of the composite is the property most influenced by this in-
teraction as for achieving an optimal tensile strength there should be a strong fiber-matrix
adhesion. Contrarily, the Young’s modulus, the stiffness of the material, is less influenced by
the fiber-matrix interaction and depends more on the inherent properties of the individual
materials in the composite. [29]
Aside from the type of fiber and its adhesion to the matrix, other factors can influence the
mechanical properties of composites like the percentage of fiber incorporated, the orientation
of the fibers within the matrix, and the quality of the fiber-matrix adhesion.[29]
Effective interaction between the fiber and the polymer matrix is essential as it is the point
where stress transmission occurs.
Hydrophilic fibers typically do not adhere well to hy-
drophobic polymers due to their propensity to agglomerate during processing. Additionally,
these hydrophilic fibers tend to absorb moisture, which often leads to the formation of porous
materials with lower mechanical properties.[29]
The adhesion between the fiber and the polymer is crucial to obtain the best properties.
Some coupling agents can be added to improve this interaction like silane, thiodiphenol,
and maleic anhydride which have been used to enhance the mechanical properties and the
crystallization of PHB. [28]
Some fillers serve a distinct role in the polymer matrix. They can function as nucleating
agents to a certain extent, reducing the size of the spherulites and thereby reducing the
brightness of PHAs. These fillers significantly alter the morphology of the crystalline phase,
which is a critical factor in modifying the mechanical properties of PHB [28]. In general,
these additives result in an acceleration of the crystallization process due to heterogeneous
nucleation occurring on the fiber surface. [28]
Page 20 of 93
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
2.6
Additives
The table below provides a summary of how various additives influence the thermal prop-
erties of the material, even though their primary impact is on improving the mechanical
properties.
The information presented in the table has been derived from the literature
study from Appendix A(section 7), showcasing the effects of different additives on the prop-
erties of various PHAs.
Table 6: Summary of the best fibers from Appendix A(section 7)
Aditive
%
Tg
Inc Tg
Tm
Inc Tm
Xc
Inc Xc
PHB
Wood Fiber
30
-2
-3,1
172,8
-5,6
Lignin
30
3,8
-0,1
171,4
-3,6
Starch
30
170,8
-2,3
PHBV
Lignin
15
174,66
68,86
Distillers dried grains with solubles
15
174,07
71,49
PHBV 12%
Argarve flour
20
17
0,3
142-152,5
3,8
42
-2,3
2.6.4
Plasticizers
Plasticizers are low-volatility molecules that are added into polymer chains without produc-
ing a chemical reaction.[30] Their objective as additives in PHAs is to reduce the brittleness
and the improve their mechanical properties. [31]
The intermolecular forces that occur between the plasticizer molecules themselves, and be-
tween a plasticizer and a polymer, are crucial in this interaction. These forces can include
dispersion forces, induction forces, dipole-dipole interactions, and hydrogen bonds.[30]
The introduction of plasticizers into a polymer often results in a decreased glass transition
temperature (Tg), which leads to reducing the tensile strength (TS) and Young’s Modulus
(E), while increasing the elongation point [28].
Blending plasticizers with polymers, specifically PHB, is viewed as one of the best strate-
gies to counter PHB’s thermal limitations. The use of natural or synthetic plasticizers can
lower the glass transition and melting temperatures by promoting macromolecular move-
ment. This adjustment allows for the processing of the polymer at reduced temperatures,
thus minimizing the risk of thermal degradation. It is crucial to carefully select plasticizers
that align with the desired properties and application needs of the PHB in order to optimize
its functionality and performance.[30]
While plasticizers are known to decrease mechanical properties, they typically do not influ-
ence the crystallinity of the material. Thus, their combined use with other nucleating agents
and nanocomposites can have scientific interest.
Nucleating agents can help control the
crystallization process of polymers, enhancing their physical properties. On the other hand,
nanocomposites can significantly improve the mechanical, thermal and barrier properties of
Page 21 of 93
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
2.6
Additives
the material. The use of plasticizers with another additive can enhance properties of the
material to meet the requirements of their use.[30]
The Danish Polymer Center has conducted an internal research study examining oligoesters
which are additives which also exhibit nucleating effect. This nucleating effect can potentially
aid in controlling the crystallization process of polymers, thereby influencing the physical
properties of the final product. The application of such plasticizers can besides, impact the
flexibility, durability, and processability of polymers, making the study of oligoesters inter-
esting as an additive for PHAs.
A summary of additives that are used with PHAs can be found in the Appendix A (Table 30)
comparing their thermal and mechanical properties to raw PHB.
Page 22 of 93
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
3
Experimental plan
The primary objective of this project is to assess various additives with different proportions
to enhance both the mechanical and thermal properties of a PHA mix. The composition of
this mix consists of 40% commercial PHBV and 60% PHB4B, with the additional inclusion
of 10% talc.
Prior to start testing additives, it is needed to comprehend the impact of the additives that
are already present in the material. Once obtained a reference material without any additives
it can be determined how the talc affects the mixture and the other additives present in the
blend. Also, by examining the material without any additives facilitates the understanding
of the raw material and the contribution of the addition of each additive.
The initial step involves preparation of blends incorporating different proportions of ad-
ditives.
The additives that are going to be studied are various types of clays, cellulosic
materials, and a commonly used commercial additive. Subsequently, these blends are going
to be tested to obtain their thermal properties. After determining the optimal proportion of
each additive that exhibits the most favorable thermal properties, a larger quantity of mate-
rial will be prepared at that specific percentage. This expanded batch will provide a sufficient
supply for injection into dog bones for mechanical testing. Besides, the different materials
will undergo testing after a one-month period to assess whether the mechanical behavior is
affected by any recrystallization processes that may occur over time. This additional step is
crucial for understanding the long-term stability and performance of the materials.
The block diagram of the experimental plan is illustrated in Figure 12, where there are shown
the main steps involved in the experimental part of this project.
Page 23 of 93
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
Figure 12: Block diagram of the experimental plan
Page 24 of 93
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
4
Materials and methods
This section of the project compresses the details concerning the materials and analytical
methods employed in the experimental execution. Additionally, this section provides the
optimized procedure for conducting the experiments of this project. The following subsec-
tions consist of the materials utilized, the analytical methods used, and the step-by-step
methodology followed to ensure the reproducibility of the experimental processes.
4.1
Materials
The PHA blend of 60% PHBV 40% PHB4B with 10% talc was provided by Novo Nordisk
as well as the PHBV with 1-2% HV and PHB4B with 30-35% of 4HB that compose the
commercial mix.
All the additives used in the thesis: Cyanuric Acid provided by TCI, Cellulose Nanocrys-
tals (CNC) in solution of 6.2% in water provided by the Process Development Center of
the University of Maine , Cellulose Nanofibers (CNF) provided by Borregards, Cloisite 30B
from Sigma-Aldrich, Cloisite 10A provided from Southern Clay Products and Septiolite by
Aldrich Chemistry.
As solvent it was used chloroform from Sigma-Aldrich. It was taken in consideration the
safety data for using this material which can be found in the Appendix B (section 8).
4.2
Preparation of the samples
The commercial polymer used in the project, which served as the base for incorporating
additives to improve the mechanical and thermal properties, consists of a blend comprising
of 60% PHBV and 40% PHB4B with the addition of 10% talc. Hence, from this section
forwards, this polymer will be denoted as PHA. All the materials where prepared by solvent
casting using chloroform as solvent.
All the materials prepared are described in Table 7.
Page 25 of 93
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
4.2
Preparation of the samples
Table 7: All materials prepared
Description
PHA
PHBV and P3HB4HB with 10% talc
PHA_NT
PHBV and P3HB4HB without talc
PHA_NA
PHBV and P3HB4HB without additives
PHA_C10A0,5
PHA with 0,5% C10A
PHA_C10A1
PHA with 1% C10A
PHA_C10A3
PHA with 3% C10A
PHA_C30B0,5
PHA with 0,5% C30B
PHA_C30B1
PHA with 1% C30B
PHA_C30B3
PHA with 3% C30B
PHA_Sep0,5
PHA with 0,5% Sep
PHA_Sep1
PHA with 1% Sep
PHA_Sep3
PHA with 3% Sep
PHA_CA0,5
PHA with 0,5% CA
PHA_CA1
PHA with 1% CA
PHA_CA3
PHA with 3% CA
PHA_CNC0,5
PHA with 0,5% CNC
PHA_CNC1
PHA with 1% CNC
PHA_CNC3
PHA with 3% CNC
PHA_CNF0,5
PHA with 0,5% CNF
PHA_CNF1
PHA with 1% CNF
PHA_CNF3
PHA with 3% CNF
4.2.1
Removing additives from commercial mix
The PHA utilized in this thesis comprises a 10% of talc, along with a small quantity of ad-
ditives selected by the manufacturer. To obtain the reference materials the PHA undergoes
a removal of the additives and talc.
The procedure employed for removing the additives from PHA involves dissolving 15 g of
PHA in 350 ml of chloroform for one hour at 60 oC under magnetic stirring and water
reflux to prevent solvent loss. If the material is not fully dissolved after this period, the
temperature is risen to 70 oC and it is left under agitation for an additional hour. Once
the material is completely dissolved, it undergoes a two-step gravitation filtration. These
filtrations target the removal of talc, a larger particle within the solution. Subsequently, 100
ml of the solution is carefully dispensed, using a pipette, into 300 mL of methanol. During
this step, the polymer precipitates at the bottom, indicating its non-solubility, while the
remaining additives dissolve in the methanol. This process is represented in Figure 13 [32].
Page 26 of 93
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
4.3
Preparation of films
Figure 13: Solvent non solvent explanation [32]
The samples prepared in this step are collected in Table 8.
Table 8: Reference materials
g of PHA
ml of solvent
ml anti-solvent
Filtrations
Observation
Comment
PHA
15
350
Base material provided
PHA_NT
1,2 PHBV 0,8 PHB4B
40
Accepted
Dissolving took over 3 h
PHA_NA_1
100 ml PHA dissolved
300
Gravitational
Rejected
Slow filtration
PHA_NA_2
100 ml PHA dissolved
300
Gravitational and vacuum
Rejected
Talc was not removed
PHA_NA_3
100 ml PHA dissolved
50 ml more
450
Gravitational(3)
Accepted
Talc was removed
4.3
Preparation of films
The different films that were prepared consist of the raw material with different kind of
additives. These additives include some inorganic nanoclays, organic nanocomposites and
a common nucleating agent each at three different percentages: 0.5%, 1% and 3% selected
based on the literature studies (subsection 7.1) as higher percentages than 3% have shown
bad performances in enhancing thermal and mechanical properties. Additionally, some films
of the commercial mix were prepared as a reference material which include: the commercial
mix alone, as well as with the materials obtained earlier, without talc and with no additives.
Firstly, for the nanoclays, two modifications of Montmorillonite (MMT) will be investigated:
Cloisite 10A and 30B. The general formula for MMT is Nax(Al4xMgx)Si8O20(OH)4. Typ-
ically, clays undergo modification before being added to polymers to enhance compatibility
by reducing the surface energy of the nanocomposites [33]. Specifically, longer compounds
increase the space between clay layers, providing more opportunities for interaction with the
polymer [33].
When substituting N + with the molecule on the left of Figure 14, Cloisite C10A is obtained
[33]. Conversely, substitution with the molecule on the right of Figure 14 results in Cloisite
30B [34]. Literature suggests that these substitutions will behave better than non modified
MMT, due to the larger cation size which will promote the exfoliation of clay within the
polymer matrix [33].
Page 27 of 93
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
4.3
Preparation of films
Figure 14: Chemical structure of the cations of C10A(left) and C30B(right), where T is
tallow [34]
The last clay that is going to be used is Sepiolite (Sep), which is another type of clay with a
porous structure represented as Mg4Si6O15(OH2)·6H2O. Sepiolite differs from MMT as the
latter is a two-dimensional clay, while Sepiolite has only one dimension [35]. Unlike MMT,
Sepiolite will remain unmodified for this study.
Among the conventional nucleating agents, cyanuric acid (CA) was selected from the avail-
able options in the laboratory. This decision was made after careful consideration of the
literature studies, and the knowledge of the presence of BN in the raw material. Finally,
two types of cellulosic materials were introduced as additives. One variant was crystalline
nano-cellulose (CNC), characterized by its crystalline structure, while the other was a fibrous
material, cellulose nanofibers (CNF).
All the materials which have been produced can be seen in Table 7.
4.3.1
Preparation of films with non-cellulosic additives
To prepare the films with the CA and the clay additives, first 4.5 g of PHA is dissolved
in 90 ml of chloroform. Then this quantity is subdivided in three smaller containers of 30
ml each to prepare the three different concentrations of the additives which are 0.5, 1 and
3%. Simultaneously, the nanoparticles are dissolved in 10 ml of the solvent under magnetic
agitation for 30 minutes. To enhance dispersion of the nanoparticles, a sonicator probe is
introduced into the solution for 20 minutes [36]. This step aims to make the particle distribu-
tion uniform within the solution. Then, the nanoparticles are added into the PHA solution
where they are mixed and sonicated again for 20 minutes. After this second sonication with
the probe, the solution is transferred into glass molds where they are left overnight to ensure
the evaporation of the solvent. The day after the materials are kept for one hour in the
vacuum oven at room temperature to ensure the complete solvent removal.
The quantity of additive needed to prepare 4.5g of material in the three different concentra-
tions are presented in Table 9.
Page 28 of 93
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
4.4
Preparation of materials for mechanical testing
Table 9: Quantity of additives for each percentage
%
g of additive
0.5
0.0075
1
0.015
3
0.04635
4.3.2
Preparation of materials with cellulosic additives
The film production process for cellulose additives which are CNC and CNF has a different
procedure as these nanoparticles are stored in a dissolved state in water and not in powder
form like the rest. To obtain dried particles, a fraction of the material was frozen and subse-
quently subjected to freeze-drying for two days. Following the procedure, when the particles
are dried, they are emulsified in chloroform using an Ultra Turrax operating at 8000 min−1
for 3 minutes. This emulsion was then introduced into the PHA solution where it was mixed
and then processed in the Ultra Turrax. Subsequently, the resulting blend was cast into
molds and left to dry overnight.
All the samples produced for thermal testing are compressed in Table 10.
Table 10: Materials with additives
Additive
%
g PHA
ml solvent
Observation
Comment
PHA_C10A0,5
C10A
0,5
4,5
90
Accepted
PHA_C10A1
1
Accepted
PHA_C10A3
3
Accepted
PHA_C30B0,5
C30B
0,5
Accepted
PHA_C30B1
1
Rejected
Calculations were incorrect
PHA_C30B1_R
1
Accepted
PHA_C30B3
3
Accepted
PHA_Sep0,5
Sep
0,5
Rejected
Calculations were incorrect
PHA_Sep1
1
Accepted
Calculations were incorrect, it has 0,5%
PHA_Sep1_R
1
Accepted
PHA_Sep3
3
Rejected
Calculations were incorrect
PHA_Sep3_R
3
Accepted
PHA_CA0,5
CA
0,5
Accepted
Additive can be seen
PHA_CA1
1
Accepted
Additive can be seen
PHA_CA3
3
Accepted
Additive can be seen
PHA_CNC0,5
CNC
0,5
Accepted
Additive can be seen
PHA_CNC1
1
Accepted
Additive can be seen
PHA_CNC3
3
Accepted
Additive can be seen
PHA_CNF0,5
CNF
0,5
Accepted
Additive can be seen
PHA_CNF1
1
Accepted
Additive can be seen
PHA_CNF3
3
Accepted
Additive can be seen
4.4
Preparation of materials for mechanical testing
To execute mechanical testing on the materials, a larger amount is required to fabricate the
tensile bars. Consequently, 4.5 g of the samples specified in Table 11 were prepared following
Page 29 of 93
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
4.4
Preparation of materials for mechanical testing
the same procedure as in subsubsection 4.3.1 and subsubsection 4.3.2.
Table 11: All materials prepared for mechanical testing
g PHA
ml solvent
% additive
kind of additive
Observation
Comment
Mec_PHA
4,5
90
Accepted
Mec_PHA_NT_1
2,7 PHBV +1,8 PHB4B
Accepted
Dissolving took over 3 h
Mec_PHA_NT_2
2,7 PHBV +1,8 PHB4B
Accepted
Dissolving took over 3 h
Mec_C10A
4,5
1
C10A
Accepted
Mec_C30B
C30B
Accepted
Mec_Sep
Sep
Accepted
Mec_CA
CA
Accepted
Additive not dissolved
Mec_CNC
CNC
Accepted
Additive not dissolved
Mec_CNF
CNF
Accepted
Additive not dissolved
4.4.1
Preparation of tensile bars trough injection molding
To evaluate the mechanical attributes of the materials, it’s crucial to mold them into tensile
bars. Therefore, these materials must undergo an injection molding process to achieve a
dog-bone shape, suitable for tensile testing.
Figure 15: Parts of the injection machine
The injection machine used is the Thermo Scientific HAAKE MiniJet Pro and comprises
several components: the barrel, the mold, the piston, and the nozzle. Initially, the material
pieces are placed into the barrel, where they are heated until they reach a molten state. Once
Page 30 of 93
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
4.4
Preparation of materials for mechanical testing
in this state, the barrel is moved on top of the mold, which features an aperture for the nozzle.
Subsequently, a piston exerts pressure on the barrel, according to the preset parameters on
the machine. This action forces the molten material through the nozzle and into the mold.
The mold, set at a lower temperature, gives shape to the material. Upon solidification, the
barrel is removed, the mold is extracted, opened, and the newly formed material is obtained.
Once all the material in the barrel has been used, the injection machine requires a thorough
cleaning. This involves using brass to remove any remnants or degraded material, ensuring
the machine is ready for the next round of molding.
For the preparation of 4 samples for the mechanical testing 4.5 g of material of 1% of every
kind of additive is prepared following the procedure above. Then the material prepared by
solvent casting is cut into small pieces to fit the barrel of the injection molding machine
Table 11. The program used to obtain a DMA bar of 60*10*1 mm is :
• Barrel temperature: 190 oC
• Resident time: 10 minutes
• Mold temperature: 65 oC
• Injection pressure :start with 300 bar and go down to 200 bar after the first injection
• Injection time: 6 seconds
This process helped to reproduce and repeat the process for several samples (Figure 16).
Figure 16: Test bar result
Page 31 of 93
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
4.4
Preparation of materials for mechanical testing
Table 12: Injection bars prepared
Material used
Number of bars
Barrel temperature (ÂşC)
Mold temperature (ÂşC)
Injection Pressure (bar)
Injection time (s)
Tensile test after production
Aging
Observation
Comment
PHA
4
190
65
300-200
6
1 day
3 weeks and 2 days
Accepted
0
170
65
200
6
Rejected
Material did not leave nozzle
180
65
250
6
Rejected
Material did not leave nozzle
180
65
300
6
Rejected
Little material left the nozzle
190
65
300
6
Rejected
Little material left the nozzle
190
65
500
6
Rejected
Half full tensile bar
190
65
550
6
Rejected
Mold stuck
180
65
550
6
Rejected
Material did not leave nozzle
183
65
500
6
Rejected
Over-injected tensile bar
183
65
500
5
Rejected
Mold stuck
3
185
65
400
6
Rejected
Material not melted, half bar
185
65
400
6
Rejected
Over-injected tensile bar
185
65
300
6
Rejected
Mold stuck
4
180
65
300
6
Rejected
Material not melted
400
Rejected
The first two samples are not melted
4
185
65
200
6
Rejected
Material not melted
400
6
Rejected
Material not melted
350
6
Rejected
Accepted but process not optimised
250
6
Rejected
Accepted but process not optimised
4
190
65
300
6
Accepted
Pressure was lowered due to over-injection
240
6
Accepted
Pressure was lowered due to over-injection
150
6
Accepted
Two samples
6
190
65
280
6
Accepted
These samples have after pressure of 20 bar 3sec
260
6
Accepted
These samples have after pressure of 20 bar 3sec
220
6
Accepted
These samples have after pressure of 20 bar 3sec
180
6
Accepted
These samples have after pressure of 20 bar 3sec
150
6
Accepted
These samples have after pressure of 20 bar 3sec. Two samples
6
190
65
350
6
Accepted
Pressure was lowered due to over-injection
300
6
Accepted
Pressure was lowered due to over-injection
200
6
Accepted
Pressure was lowered due to over-injection
190
6
Accepted
Pressure was lowered due to over-injection
150
6
Accepted
Pressure was lowered due to over-injection
120
6
Accepted
Pressure was lowered due to over-injection
Mec_PHA_NT_1
4
190
65
300
6
0 days
3 weeks and 1 day
Accepted
Took more time to melt the material, and more P could not go down 300 bar
Mec_PHA_NT_2
4
190
65
300
6
5 days
Accepted
Took more time to melt the material, and more P coul not go down 300 bar
Mec_C10A
4
190
65
300-200
6
1 day
3 weeks and 2 days
Accepted
Mec_C30B
4
190
65
300-200
6
4 days
4 weeks
Accepted
Mec_Sep
4
190
65
300-200
6
4 days
4 weeks
Accepted
Mec_CA
4
190
65
300-200
6
4 days
4 weeks
Accepted
Mec_CNC
4
190
65
300-200
6
4 days
4 weeks
Accepted
Mec_CNF
4
190
65
300-200
6
0 days
3 weeks and 1 day
Accepted
Page 32 of 93
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
4.5
Methods
4.5
Methods
4.5.1
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy
The spectrometer used is Nicolet iS10, equipped with a ATR accessory featuring a diamond
crystal. The spectra was taken with 32 scans.
4.5.2
Thermogravimetrical analysis (TGA)
The TGA was preformed using samples with a mass ranging from 10 to 20 mg with the
equipment of TA Instruments Discovery series. The equipment is set with a balance where
the sample is placed. Then this thermobalance is heated at a speed of 10 oC/min from 40
until 900 oC under a nitrogen atmosphere.
4.5.3
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
To preform the DSC analysis it was used TA Instrumnets Discovery series under a nitrogen
atmosphere. For obtaining the regular thermal properties a samples of a weight between
2-5mg is used and placed inside aluminium capsules, which were subsequently sealed.
The equipment measures the difference in heat flows passing through the capsule containing
the sample and another empty reference capsule. The DSC protocol used is using a 5 min
isothermal stage between steps.:
- From room temperature to 190 oC at 10 oC/min.
- From 190 oC to -50oC at 10oC/min.
- From -50oC to 190 oC at 10 oC/min.
- From 190 oC to -50 oC at 30 oC/min.
- From -50 oC to 190 oC at 30 oC/min.
4.5.4
Crystallization kinetics
To obtain the crystallization kinetics of the PHA blends using the Avrami model, certain
equations come into play. Primarily, the degree of crystallinity X(t) is a function of time
and follows to the next equations [37]:
X = ∆Hm
∆H∞
(1)
X =
R t
0(dHc/dt)dt
R ∞
0 (dHc/dt)dt =
R t
0(dHc/dt)dt
∆Hc
(2)
Page 33 of 93
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
4.5
Methods
From Equation 2, the integral
R t
0
  dHc
dt

dt represents the heat measured during the isother-
mal crystallization process in the DSC, while ∆Hc denotes the heat of crystallization. [37]
The function X(t) measures the variation in crystallinity over time, as described by the
following equation. The parameters k and na, known as Avrami parameters, are inherent to
each material. These parameters are influenced by variables such as temperature [38].
X(t) = 1 −exp(−ktna)
(3)
The equation Equation 3 can be reformulated using logarithms, as shown in Equation 5 [37]:
ln(1 −X(t))) = −ktna
(4)
By representing the equation Equation 4 in a logarithmic scale Equation 5, the Avrami
parameter na can be identified with the slope of the curve. Moreover, the crystallization half
time, denoted as t 1
2, can be identified in the isothermal scanning from the DSC, and with
both values k is obtained [37].
log(−ln(1 −X(t))) = log−k +na log t
(5)
t 1
2 =
ln 2
k
 1
na
(6)
To obtain this parameter it is also needed to preform a DSC scanning with the following
program with 5 mins of isothermal stage between steps:
- From room temperature to 190 oC at 10 oC/min.
- From 190 oC to Tc at 10 oC/min.
4.5.5
Tensile testing
Mechanical testing was performed using two different tensile machine which are Lloyd In-
struments LR5K plus and with automatic grip from the brand Instron. There was used in
both of them a 500 N load cell, with a maximum load set at 450 N for safety purposes. The
tensile bars were positioned in the machine, creating a testing area (Lo) of 41 mm. The
key mechanical properties to be extracted include E (Young Modulus), elongation at break
(EB), and tensile strength (TS). The relevant formulas for these properties are as follows [39]:
Page 34 of 93
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
4.5
Methods
1. Young Modulus:
E = Max Stress
Strain
(7)
2. Elongation at Break:
Elongation at Break = Change in Length
Original Length × 100%
(8)
3. Tensile Strength:
Tensile Strength =
Maximum Load
Cross-Sectional Area
(9)
The cross-sectional area is given by 40 × 1 mm, as it represents the area over which stress is
applied.
Page 35 of 93
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
5
Results and discussion
In this section it is going to be presented and developed the results and discussion of the
project. The primary graphs and results will be highlighted within this section, additional
details and graphs are available in the Appendix C (section 9). Besides, all the description
of the process as well as the materials and methods employed are stated in section 4.
5.1
Removal of additives
The first phase of the experimental procedure consists on the extraction of all additives to
obtain the base material. This step was crucial for comparative analysis, which allows the
study of the impact of the talc in the polymer and to understand the effects of the other
additives that are present in the polymers that constitute the commercial mix. By removing
all these additives through the solvent and non-solvent method, it can be obtained some
materials without talc, so only remaining the commercial additives and with no additives at
all.
In Table 8 it can be seen all the attempts to remove the additives from the PHA. In the first
sample, the PHA was dissolved in chloroform at 6% w/w. This resulted in slow filtration
via gravity. Consequently, as the first filtration was too slow, vacuum filtration was tried
out which was effective as the filtration speed was increased and managed to filtered the
solution. Following the removal, after the drying of the solvent, a subsequent FT-IR analysis
was performed to determine if the talc was eliminated.
It can be seen in Figure 17, Figure 18 and Figure 19, the FT-IR spectra of the PHA and
PHA_NA_2. The spectres show that the attempt to eliminate talc was unsuccessful as
they reveal distinct peaks associated with talc, specifically the ones at 3675, 668, and 449
cm−1. These peaks correspond to the MgO and MgOH octahedral layers [40]. Additionally,
a significant peak at 1015 cm−1 indicates the presence of the Si-O tetrahedral layer within
the talc structure [40]. Notably, these peaks overlap with similar amplitudes in both spectra,
which denotes the presence of the talc has not been fully removed.
Page 36 of 93
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
5.1
Removal of additives
Figure 17: Comparison of the FT-IR spectra of the commercial mix and the material after
the removal of additives
Figure 18: Zoom peak 3675 cm−1
Figure 19:
Zoom peaks 1015, 668 and 449
cm−1
Additional steps are needed in the removal process to eliminate the additives from the mate-
rial. The presence of talc, which has a large particle size, indicates that the filtration did not
succeed. As a solution to this issue, an increased amount of chloroform was introduced to
the mixture to reduce its viscosity and facilitate smoother passage through the filter. This
adjustment made the filtration process more smooth, resulting in the successful filtration of
100 ml within a couple of hours. Subsequently, a second and third filtration was performed
Page 37 of 93
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
5.1
Removal of additives
to ensure the removal of any remaining larger particles from the solution.
The FT-IR spectra of the second removal shows the correct removal of the additives, spe-
cially of the talc which is clearly seen in the spectra as the peaks inherent of the talc of
FT-IR disappeared or decreased in size (Figure 20 Figure 21 Figure 22). For these reasons
the removal of additives was determined successful.
Figure 20: FT-IR spectra second removal of additives
Figure 21: Second removal Zoom 1
Figure 22: Second removal Zoom 2
Page 38 of 93
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis
5.2
Preparation of samples with additives
Additionally, when the PHA was dissolved in chloroform, before filtering, some material was
poured in the casting mold to prepare a film of the PHA material. Besides, a portion of
the materials that constitute the blend was obtained so a film of PHA without talc can be
obtained for conducting thermal analysis. Specifically, 1.2 g of PHBV and 0.8 g of PHB4B
were dissolved in 40 ml of chloroform. This solution was deposited into the mold and let
dry to evaporate the solvent to obtain the sample of PHA_NT. It is noteworthy that the
dissolution of these materials in chloroform required significantly more time compared to the
commercial PHA, taking approximately 3 hours. Besides, the PHB4B when dissolving was
more sticky.
As it was managed to obtain the reference material, now the preparation of the films with
PHA and the different additives can be done.
5.2
Preparation of samples with additives
The production process of the samples together with the samples prepared are stated in
subsection 4.2 in:Table 10, Table 11 and Table 12. The film preparation process faced chal-
lenges regarding efficiency due to the dissolving time, the drying required overnight and the
limited manufacturing space in the lab. To address these issues and optimize the prepara-
tion of films with varying percentages of additives, instead to preparing every percentage of
additive separately, a base solution of 20 ml of chloroform containing 0.1 g of the additive
was used. From this solution it was extracted different volumes were poured into the 30 ml
portions of the polymer solution dissolved in chloroform. This little adjustment made the
film preparation process faster and helped to minimize potential errors, as some film samples
had to be remade due to miscalculations Table 7.
%
mL of base solution
0.5
1.5
1
3
3
9.27
Table 13: Quantity of base solution for each percentage
The film production process for cellulose additives which are CNC and CNF has a different
procedure as these nanoparticles are stored in a dissolved state in water and not in powder
form like the rest. As the water does not dissolve in chloroform, it was required to obtain
the dried particles. Thus, a fraction of the material was frozen and subsequently subjected
to lyophilization, or freeze-drying for two days.
In the case of CNC, the particles were stored in water at a concentration of 6%. After an
initial attempt of lyophilization, the dried particles were successfully obtained. However, the
concentration of CNF in water was not known, making the first attempt at freeze-drying
a trial. The result was a thick layer of compacted material, which was difficult to break
Page 39 of 93
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis
5.3
Appearance of all the films prepared
down into smaller particles for dispersion in chloroform as CNF also does not dissolve in
chloroform.
Thus, the next step involved adding 50 ml of water and attempting freeze-
drying again. However, this time, an excessive amount of water was added, resulting in a
partially frozen sample even after two days of freeze-drying. A small sample from the first
freeze-drying round was preserved, and the precise amount of particles needed to prepare
the CNF films was measured. This quantity was placed in containers with some water and
then freeze-dried for three days to prevent ice formation within the sample. The resulting
material resembled an airy sponge-like layer, which, unlike the previous attempt, could be
broken down with the help of an Ultra Turrax.
Figure 23: CNC after freeze drying
Figure 24: CNF after the first freeze drying
In this particular scenario, the Ultra Turrax was employed instead of the sonication probe
due to the insolubility of cellulose in chloroform. As it is much more powerful it can help to
breakdown the cellulose into smaller pieces reducing the particle size and making them more
dispersed in the solvent [41]. Following the procedure, when the particles are dried, they are
emulsified in chloroform using an Ultra Turrax operating at 8000 min−1 for 3 minutes. This
emulsion was then introduced into the PHA solution where it was mixed and then processed
again in the Ultra Turrax. Subsequently, the resulting blend was cast into molds and left to
dry overnight.
5.3
Appearance of all the films prepared
In the Figure 26 there are collected all the pictures of the materials that compress the the-
sis, highlighting the differences across films with varying concentrations of additives. The
images on the left represent samples with 0.5% additive, the central images correspond to
1% additive samples, while the images on the right are for samples with 3% additive. It is
noteworthy that some materials, such as PHA_C10A_05, PHA_C30B_3, PHA_Sep_05,
PHA_Sep_1, and PHA_Sep_3, exhibited white areas throughout the material. Initially, it
was thought that there was an uneven distribution of the talc. However, upon microscopic
examination, it was revealed that the irregular appearance was due to inconsistent thickness
resulting from the material’s drying process (Figure 25a), rather than an unequal dispersion
of talc. This unevenness in thickness was palpable by hand, and this phenomenon was not
Page 40 of 93
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis
5.3
Appearance of all the films prepared
observed when preparing thinner films, such as PHA_C10A_3 and PHA_C30B_1.
(a) Film of PHA_C30B_3 in the microscope
(b) Film of PHA_C30B_3 in the microscope
(c) PHA_CNC_1 film in the microscope
Figure 25: Comparison of microscope images of the films
In relation to additives that are not soluble in chloroform, it is evident through simple visual
inspection that the additives have not been incorporated inside the polymer. Also, these
particles appear well-dispersed throughout the film, rather than being concentrated in a
single area. For CNC, the issue is similar to that of CA, but a majority of the particles are
not visible, with only a small number being noticeable. The visible particles, are dispersed
and larger, suggesting potential agglomerations. CNF materials present a unique case as
the particles are very airy and occupy more space than the others. The sample with a 0.5%
concentration appears mostly white, while those with 1% and 3% concentrations seem to be
overloaded with the additive. This observation also suggests a poor dispersion of the CNF
within the material.
The image of the raw materials shows the PHA pellet, which served as the foundation for
all the materials. It also includes PHA_NT and PHA_NA. The last one, appears small and
thick due to their production with the solvent non-solvent approach. This method involved
Page 41 of 93
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
the use of a significant amount of methanol, which caused the sample to shrink considerably
upon drying.
Figure 26: Material matrix
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
After the production of all films with the different additives and the reference materials,
various tests such as DSC and TGA are conducted to assess the impact of the additives on
the thermal properties of the PHA.
Thermogravimetric analysis is used to obtain information regarding the thermal degrada-
tion of materials. It determines the weight loss of a substance with temperature. Table 14
contains the data obtained from this test which includes Tmax, T10, and T5. The maximum
degradation temperature (Tmax) is obtained from the maximum temperature from derivative
curve of the TGA (DTG). T5 and T10 are the temperatures at which 5% and 10% of the
mass have been lost, respectively.
Page 42 of 93
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
Table 14: Summary of the TGA results
%
T5 (oC)
T10 (oC)
Tmax (oC)
PHA
Base material
262,571
269,642
289,71
NT
285,31
290,38
309,02
NA
286,73
291,89
309,28
PHA_C10A
0,5
286,57
292,31
308,04
1
281,99
288,98
306,95
3
280,55
287,96
307,18
PHA_C30B
0,5
287,51
291,92
307,31
1
285,68
290,75
304,15
3
285,2
290,52
309,33
PHA_Sep
0,5
285,53
291,26
307,16
1
281,89
290,29
308,1
3
275,88
284,2
303,42
PHA_CA
0,5
281,9
288,31
305,45
1
284,77
289,76
305,4
3
282,43
287,67
305,06
PHA_CNC
0,5
279,94
285,42
301,82
1
279,84
285,33
304,47
3
281,69
287,26
305,65
PHA_CNF
0,5
280,93
284,84
301,32
1
277,86
283,1
299,65
3
273,01
278,84
295,73
The TGA analysis reveals the influence of the additives and talc in the raw material. Fig-
ure 27 and Figure 28 show the TGA and DGT of all reference materials, illustrating their
thermal characteristics.
The curve of (Figure 27), shows that the PHA that contains 10% talc has a weight loss curve
against temperature that does not reach zero. This trend can also be seen in all the TGA
graphs from the films with the different percentages of additives (subsection 9.2). This is
attributed to the presence of talc that does not disintegrate within the specified temperature
range. The curve concludes at 8.5%, indicating that the percentage of talc presence in the
PHA is less than expected. This variation could have happened as when they prepare the
materials in large quantities it is probable this differences from the expected values.
Additionally, the presence of talc accelerates the degradation process. However, upon closer
inspection, it can be seen that the PHA sample initiates the disintegration earlier than the
other reference materials. Notably, the PHA_NA shows similar degradation temperature,
suggesting that the inherent additives in the commercial base polymer, composing the com-
mercial mix, do not significantly influence in the degradation of the polymer.
Page 43 of 93
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
Figure 27: TGA comparison of raw materials
Figure 28: DGT comparison of raw materials
Page 44 of 93
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
The derivative curve of the TGA curve (Figure 28) makes it evident that the maximum
degradation temperature of PHA is lower than the ones of PHA_NT and PHA_NA. These
effects of the TGA denote that the talc reduces the Tmax as well as the T5 and T10 and
the additives present in the reference materials have a minimal impact on the degradation
temperature of the PHA.
Furthermore, from the results of Table 14 it can be seen that that the addition of additives
leads to an increase in the Tmax of the PHA being the maximum increase of 22.3 oC for
the PHA_C30B_05. Overall all the additives increase the Tmax of PHA by more than 15
degrees, being the general range of 305.06 - 309.33 oC. The films containing 3% of clay C30B
exhibit the highest Tmax. The effect of the quantity of additive depends on the additive itself
as in some cases like with C30B, CNC the Tmax increases with the additive percentage and
in other cases it decrease like in CNF, and in the rest there is not a trend followed.
Although the Tmax trend may not be consistent across all samples, both T5 and T10 gen-
erally reach their highest values in films with the lowest additive percentage, decreasing
as the additive quantity in the polymer is increased. This implies that the addition of a
small quantity of particles facilitates delayed degradation of the material, with the excep-
tion of CA at 0,5%, which exhibits the latest degradation temperatures of the films with CA.
After conducting the TGA, the temperatures at which the degradation of these materials
occurs have been identified. Consequently, a DSC program has been established, incorpo-
rating a safety margin from the beginning of degradation.
The main challenge associated with PHA materials lies in their low crystallization nuclei
and a slow crystallization range. This characteristic leads to re-crystallization over time,
causing changes in material properties during storage. The objective of this project is to
investigate the impact of varying additives on these properties, with the goal of enhancing
crystallization stability. Through the DSC study, the crystallization temperatures can be
determined, providing valuable knowledge into the effectiveness of the different additives
chosen in promoting the crystallization of this PHA blend.
All DSC scan data is compiled in the Appendix C in subsection 9.3. The DSC scans are used
to extract the thermal properties of the materials under investigation. The scan consist of a
first heating that melts the sample to erase the thermal history of the material followed by
a cooling at a constant rate of 10◦C. Then, a second heating follows as phase is particularly
significant, as it allows to determinate the melting temperatures (Tm) and glass transition
temperatures (Tg). The summarized results from the graphs in the Appendix C (9.3) are
provided in Table 15.
The Tg is presented in the DSC as a change of slope in the second heating curve and the
value is calculated finding the point that has the half height. The identification of Tg is
challenging, especially in highly crystalline materials like PHA, where the change associated
with Tg is diffuse and hard to observe. However, the increase in the cooling rate enhances
Page 45 of 93
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
the visibility of this slope, which is within the temperature range of -30 to 20 ◦C (Figure 29).
Remarkably, almost all materials exhibit a low Tg, below 0 degrees except for PHA_CNC_1
and PHA_CNF_3, which makes the material soft and deformable even at low temperatures.
The exceptions of PHA_CNC_1 and PHA_CNF_3 are caused as all the samples with cel-
lulose additives had a change of slope almost invisible which can make these values incorrect.
Notably, in some of the materials such as PHA_C10A, PHA_C30B, and PHA_CA and
PHA_CNF the Tg PHA_C10A, the Tg has the biggest impact with the addition of the ad-
ditive as the temperature shifts from lowest to highest values like in PHA_C10A that shifts
from -19.64 ◦C (0.5%) to -8.54 ◦C (3%). It is important to consider for the material storage
and applications, as temperatures below Tg can lead to polymer fracture.
Figure 29: Zooming in the DSC scanning of the PHA_NT
The second heating phase also provides information on melting temperatures (Tm), which is
the minimum value of the endothermic peak in the second heating and the ∆Hm is calcu-
lated by measuring the area under the melting curve. Lowering Tm creates a larger window
between the melting and degradation temperatures, enhancing procesability of the polymer.
Despite a T5 around 280 degrees in the TGA graphs, gradual degradation initiates at around
200 degrees in most cases. The results reveal lower melting temperatures (Tm) compared to
the raw material, indicating that the presence of the additive widens the processing window.
The overall trend suggests that higher concentrations of additives generally lead to a bigger
reduction in Tm. PHA_CNC and PHA_C10A materials exhibit a double endothermic peak
Page 46 of 93
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
in the melting. This occurs due to a first melting of the small chains of the polymer followed
by a re-structurization of the material what melts again at a higher temperature. This phe-
nomena is typical in materials like PHA ([42]). These materials show a lower decrease in Tm
compared to those who have not this double peak.
Figure 30: DSC scanning for PHA_Sep_05
The cooling curves provide the crystallization temperatures of the samples which is the max-
imum value in the endothermic peak of the cooling. When checking the impact of additives
on the crystallinity in the raw material, all samples exhibit temperatures at least 4 degrees
higher than the raw material. This implies that, to some extent, all additives contribute to
enhancing the crystallization processes of the material. However, the effect on the crystal-
lization temperature (Tc) is different across all the materials. In the case of C10A, the Tc
decreases with increasing additive percentage, while for C30B, it shows an increasing trend.
Conversely, both CA and Sep demonstrate a peak in Tc at 1%. Upon analyzing the thermal
results, the clay with C10A stands out with the highest Tc, indicating superior crystalliza-
tion. Overall, all materials exhibit favorable crystallization temperatures at 1%, leading to
the decision to use this percentage for injection samples. This choice aims to achieve unifor-
mity in additive proportions for subsequent mechanical testing.
Furthermore, the second heating in the DSC shows the impact of the additives and talc in the
raw material. Notably, the high talc content in the PHA leads to a higher Tg. However,even
though talc is a nucleating agent, it does not increment the crystallization temperature.
Page 47 of 93
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
This can be due to the large quantities that are present in the mix (10%) which add a high
amount of crystal nuclei which can overload the polymer mix which cannot grow, resulting
in a decreased crystallization temperature. Additionally, the presence of talc induces a slight
decrease in the melting temperature (Tm), although the impact is not considerable. Surpris-
ingly, the material without additives exhibit a higher Tc than the raw material with inherent
additives in the blend materials. This observation suggests that the role of additives in the
mix may not be primarily aimed at increasing crystallization, but may serve other functions.
It can also be seen from the DSC scanning that the Xc all the samples with additive con-
tent present a higher crystallinity than the PHA. Also it can be observed that there is not
correlation between having a higher Tc and a higher Xc.
The Xc is obtained using equation Equation 1 used as the ∆Href of melting enthalpy of a
sample 100% crystalline which is 87,6Jg.
Table 15: Summary of the results of the second heating of the DSC at 10 o/min
%
Tg
Tc
∆Hc
Tm1
Tm2
∆Hm
Xc
Base material
-7.01
110,69
46,54
166,78
174,85
50,14
0,57
NT
-11.41
115,26
49,81
168,67
175,17
51,71
0,59
PHA
NA
-8.02
106,44
52,11
165,07
173,98
60,02
0,69
0,5
-19.64
117,7
49,27
167,28
173,52
54,8
0,63
1
-10.72
117,67
48,23
166,77
173,21
53,23
0,61
PHA_C10A
3
-8.54
117,2
50,57
163,43
169,66
52,23
0,6
0,5
-17.24
116,28
55,43
169,44
59,31
0,68
1
-13.85
116,46
50,34
169,27
54,92
0,63
PHA_C30B
3
-13.15
116,53
52,80
169,11
57,63
0,66
0,5
-13.79
116,61
48,69
169,42
51,49
0,59
1
-10.89
117,25
49,89
168,64
53,93
0,62
PHA_Sep
3
-15.97
116,75
52,19
168,95
55,73
0,64
0,5
-12.53
116,37
48,53
169,32
53,37
0,61
1
-11.89
116,68
50,36
168,73
58,23
0,66
PHA_CA
3
-8.4
116,44
51,71
168,79
57,12
0,65
0,5
-13,07
116
55,09
167,15
173,61
58,13
0,66
1
4,08
115,5
49,78
169,88
57,11
0,65
PHA_CNC
3
-15,03
115,81
55,67
170,08
57,93
0,66
0,5
-16,26
116,26
55,40
168,69
58,39
0,67
1
-13,16
116,05
52,07
169,02
58,79
0,67
PHA_CNF
3
7,41
116,24
51,97
168,89
54,9
0,6
The results from the first heating (Table 16) alone are not particularly informative as they
do not provide information into crystallinity and it also shows the thermal history and the
influence of solvents. However, these curves and results can be used to find if there has been
Page 48 of 93
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
a re-crystallization effect overtime and how affects in the first heating curve. However, as
this scanning starts on a temperature that is higher than the Tg the scanning overtime is
not going to provide valuable insights as only seen the the change of the Tm, ∆Hm and Xc.
It can be seen comparing Table 16 and Table 17 that the difference in the values are not
sufficient, suggesting that either there is not re-crystallization effect and if there is, then it
does not affect the thermal properties.
Table 16: Summary of the results of the first heating DSC
%
Tm1
Tm2
∆Hm
Xc
PHA
Base material
159,53
176,39
50,97
0,58
NT
164,7
175,31
50,69
0,58
NA
175,85
67,02
0,77
PHA_C10A
0,5
151,4
174,3
54,42
0,62
1
157,93
174,51
52,73
0,6
3
158,83
174,54
50,73
0,58
PHA_C30B
0,5
159,21
175,83
60,34
0,69
1
158,84
174,98
55,13
0,63
3
158,54
175,06
59,75
0,68
PHA_Sep
0,5
165,73
175,98
51,16
0,58
1
173,89
53,52
0,61
3
158,84
175,36
56,85
0,65
PHA_CA
0,5
159,48
175,57
53,57
0,61
1
158,89
175,27
57,49
0,66
3
158,77
174,48
58,54
0,67
PHA_CNC
0,5
173,76
58,69
0,67
1
159,34
174,31
56,47
0,64
3
159,41
175,68
58,44
0,67
PHA_CNF
0,5
159,48
174,85
58,54
0,67
1
165,35
176,36
56,84
0,65
3
159,06
168,89
54,9
0,63
Page 49 of 93
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
Table 17: Summary of the results of the first heating DSC one month after
%
Tm1
Tm2
∆Hm
Xc
PHA
Base material
159,93
176,71
58,91
0,67
NT
163,92
175,24
55,8
0,64
NA
162,13
175,41
64,21
0,73
PHA_C10A
0,5
168,68
174,06
56,79
0,65
1
165,81
176,33
51,25
0,61
3
159,81
174,09
53,72
0,61
PHA_C30B
0,5
165,24
174,44
57,96
0,66
1
164,48
174,7
55,7
0,64
3
165,82
175,97
51,21
0,58
PHA_Sep
0,5
158,81
175,95
54,32
0,62
1
165,24
175,75
47.34
0,54
3
157,98
174,18
59,69
0,68
PHA_CA
0,5
165,77
174,51
57,44
0,66
1
164,75
174,9
56,10
0,64
3
159,36
175,43
55,7
0,64
PHA_CNC
0,5
163,46
174,49
55,92
0,64
1
165,13
174,94
56,21
0,64
3
174,56
55,89
0,64
PHA_CNF
0,5
159,85
174,95
55,59
0,63
1
158,35
175,2
56,78
0,65
3
159
174,58
56,68
0,65
The DSC scanning was also performed at a higher cooling rate of 30 oC/min. This variation
in the cooling rate, reveals the impact that they have on the test and in the thermal prop-
erties. Across all figures, it is evident that the cooling peak occurs at lower temperatures
compared to the 10 oC/min rate. Additionally, the width of this peak size increases with
the heating rate and the height decreases. In the context of crystallinity, higher peaks at
lower temperatures suggest rapid, cooling, whereas slower cooling rates facilitate slow inter-
nal restructuring of the material.
Furthermore, the heating values exhibit a similar pattern of higher melting enthalpy and
lower melting temperature at the elevated cooling rate. This trend is not only observable
in graphics in Appendix C (section 9), but is also reflected in the values collected in Table 18.
These phenomena correlate with the literature across various cooling rates [43, 44]. How-
ever, it is noteworthy that the distinctive effects of the cooling rates on the DSC can be
appreciated only testing at 10 and 30 oC/min cooling rates. The samples containing CNC
and CNF were intentionally excluded from testing at a heating rate of 30 oC/min. This
decision was made as the rest of samples already show the trend of the heating rate.
Page 50 of 93
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis
5.4
Thermal properties of the materials
Table 18: Summary of the results of the DSC with cooling rate of 30 oC/min
%
Tg
Tc
∆Hc
Tm1
Tm2
∆Hm
Xc
PHA
Base material
-5.84
98,21
43,97
159,26
161,41
52,47
0,6
NT
-11.38
105,32
46,78
163,65
172
53,41
0,61
NA
-6.57
90,92
48,87
158,56
170,06
63,5
0,72
PHA_C10A
0,5
-15.96
108,21
46,22
162,75
170,03
54,82
0,63
1
-18.33
108,12
47,8
162,01
169,28
54,52
0,62
3
-19.66
106,01
45,06
156,85
164,29
48,54
0,55
PHA_C30B
0,5
-8.56
106,52
51,3
165,97
60,88
0,69
1
-9.48
106,69
47,91
165,28
55,77
0,64
3
-8.19
106,81
49,3
164,89
171,48
58,17
0,66
PHA_Sep
0,5
-7.26
107,39
45,68
165,78
53,22
0,61
1
-8.42
108,65
46,74
157,87
164,14
56,8
0,65
3
-10.34
107,37
47,92
165,13
55,47
0,63
PHA_CA
0,5
-8.61
107,2
46,921
164,89
56,32
0,64
1
-8.4
107,71
48,62
164,04
170,43
57,97
0,66
3
-8.86
107,28
48,95
164,49
170,9
57,98
0,66
In Figure 31, it can be seen the impact of a bigger range of heating rates on Tc, Tm, ∆Hc and
∆Hm. Confirming the assumed trend with a heating rate of 30 oC/min, it is evident that
higher rates correspond to a lower crystallization peak and a higher crystallization temper-
ature. This phenomenon arises from the hindered and disorganized nature of crystallization
at elevated rates, preventing a significant portion of the material from undergoing a slow
and organized crystallization process.
The same trend is observed in the Tm and ∆Hm. Additionally, this behavior is attributed to
the machinery’s ability to detect changes more slowly at higher rates, particularly when the
temperature is elevated. Consequently, results obtained at lower heating rates are considered
more accurate due to the machinery’s improved responsiveness, especially in capturing the
intricacies of thermal transitions.
It is noteworthy that the observed trend may vary depending on whether the temperatures
exhibit a double endothermic peak or not. The complexity of the thermal behavior, especially
in cases of multiple peaks, adds another layer of consideration to the interpretation of results.
Moreover, it is generally recommended to use different samples for each heating and cooling
rate. Prolonged exposure to temperatures over 190 oC can potentially alter the behavior and
properties of the PHA. However, for the purpose of showing the overall trend in the graph,
the accuracy of individual results is less crucial, as the primary focus was on capturing the
tendency in the data.
Page 51 of 93
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
Figure 31: Effect of different heating rates in the DSC of PHA with CNC 1%
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
The Avrami equation serves as a tool to identify the crystallization kinetics equation of a
specific material at a given temperature. To extract the Avrami parameters k and na, a spe-
cific DSC called isothermal crystallization is employed. This involves subjecting the sample
to heating above its melting temperature, followed by rapid cooling until the desired crys-
tallization temperature. Subsequently, the sample is held at this temperature for a specific
duration until the complete crystallization is achieved.
In this study, the primary objective was to find the kinetics of crystallization at various
temperatures. To ensure consistency, all samples were uniformly cooled to a temperature
close to their respective Tc. However, when the sample reaches temperatures close to Tc the
crystallization is very fast. In Figure 32, Figure 33 and Figure 34 there are all the graphs of
this isothermal crystallization. It is clear that in all of the graphs the crystallization curve
does not start from 0 heat flow. That is caused from the rapid cooling stage at 60 oC/min
where the sample started to crystallise before reaching the Tc. This phenomenon needs to be
considered when determining the crystallization halftime as the sample has already started
to crystallize before the isothermal crystallization begins.
Page 52 of 93
==PAGE:61==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
Figure 32: Comparison of the t1/2 of materials with 0.5% additive
Figure 33: Comparison of the t1/2 of materials with 1% additive
Page 53 of 93
==PAGE:62==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
Figure 34: Comparison of the t1/2 of materials with 3% additive
The t1/2 is the time that is needed for the sample to reach 50% of the crystallization [45]. And
it can be calculated using the Avrami number using the formula in Equation 6. Graphically
it can be calculated using the time to reach the peak of the crystallization curve. Generally
the half time is calculated using the first half part of the curve. But, as the sample has
already started the crystallization, it was thought to use the time from the crystallization
peak until the heat flow reached 0 (second half part). This time compared to the t1/2 from
the first part of the graph seems too high as the sample has a narrow peak, but it takes a
lot of time for it to reach 0 (Figure 35). Thus, it was decided to use the first part of the
graphic while knowing that it is not accurate and the real time should be slightly higher.
Figure 35: Calculation of t1/2
Page 54 of 93
==PAGE:63==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
The isothermal crystallization graphs provide information into how each additive impacts
the speed of crystallization at different concentrations. At 0.5% additive concentration, the
fastest crystallization occurs with C10A, C30B, and CNF, while CNC exhibits the slowest
rate (Figure 32). With a 1% additive concentration, the fastest additives remain the same
as at 0.5%, except now CNC also demonstrates a high crystallization speed (Figure 33).
Lastly, at a 3% concentration, the fastest additives are CNC, C10A, and Sep (Figure 34).
This data suggests that some additives alter their crystallization speed depending on their
concentration, while others maintain a stable speed across all three percentages. To enhance
the visualization of this effect, it may be more beneficial to categorize the isothermal crys-
tallization data by additive rather than by percentage.
(a) Comparison of t1/2 of C10A
(b) Comparison of t1/2 of C30B
(c) Comparison of t1/2 of Sep
Figure 36: Comparison of t1/2 of C10A,C30B and Sep
Page 55 of 93
==PAGE:64==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
(a) Comparison of t1/2 of CA
(b) Comparison of t1/2 of CNC
(c) Comparison of t1/2 of CNF
Figure 37: Comparison of t1/2 of CA, CNC and CNF
Figure 36 and Figure 37 display the isothermal crystallization behavior influenced by varying
amounts of additives. Certain additives such as C10A and CA exhibit a consistent effect, re-
gardless of the percentage of additive used. This suggests that at low concentrations tested,
these materials maintain similar crystallization kinetics.
Conversely, additives such as C30B and CNF demonstrate a dependency on the quantity
of the additive mixed in. Here, crystallization occurs faster with smaller amounts of these
additives. Sep exhibits an unusual trend with 0.5% and 3% concentrations exhibiting faster
crystallization than 1%. One possible explanation for this anomaly could be that the Sep at
1% has been heated to a temperature of 116 oC, which is slightly lower than its crystalliza-
tion temperature at that concentration. Moreover, CNF displays a unique behavior at very
low concentrations, where it exhibits slower crystallization kinetics.
Figure 38 presents the isothermal crystallization of the reference materials. It is evident
Page 56 of 93
==PAGE:65==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
that the crystallization rate of PHA is slightly slower than that of PHA_NT, which aligns
with the thermal data, indicating that a high concentration of talc slightly decelerates the
crystallization process.
On the other hand, the DSC scanning temperatures for PHA_NA were mistyped when pre-
forming the DSC. Instead of setting the temperature to 106.5 oC, it was increased to 116.5
oC, a full 10 oC above the crystallization temperature. This adjustment eliminated the issue
encountered with other samples and the isothermal crystallization curve of these sample does
not start with partially crystallized material, as evidenced by the heat flow being zero at the
start of the curve. This outcome is logical given that material crystallization takes longer
at temperatures exceeding the Tc. This experiment led to the realization that conducting
the same analysis at temperatures 10-15 oC higher than the Tc allows for the extraction of
a curve without the presence of partially crystallized material, thereby providing reliable
crystallization kinetics data.
Figure 38: Comparison of the t1/2 of the raw materials
This information highlights the role of additive concentration at influencing the crystalliza-
tion process. It is important to consider the amount of additive when there is a necessity
to minimize the crystallization time. In Table 19, it can be seen all the t1/2 from the mate-
rials tested. This data suggests that inclusion of additives reduces the crystallization time
from PHA, with CNF_0.5 crystallizing the quickest, closely followed by C30B_3. Thus, the
strategic use of additives can effectively increase the crystallization of a polymer.
Page 57 of 93
==PAGE:66==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
Table 19: t1/2 of all samples
T (oC)
t1/2 (min)
PHA
111
0,5
PHA_NT
115,5
0,44
PHA_NA
116,5
1,47
PHA_C10A0,5
117,5
0,4
PHA_C10A1
117,5
0,41
PHA_C10A3
117,5
0,44
PHA_C30B0,5
116,5
0,39
PHA_C30B1
116,5
0,41
PHA_C30B3
116,5
0,38
PHA_Sep0,5
116,5
0,4
PHA_Sep1
117,5
0,42
PHA_Sep3
116,5
0,42
PHA_CA0,5
116,5
0,42
PHA_CA1
116,5
0,46
PHA_CA3
116,5
0,43
PHA_CNC0,5
116
0,45
PHA_CNC1
115,5
0,39
PHA_CNC3
116
0,4
PHA_CNF0,5
116
0,37
PHA_CNF1
115,5
0,39
PHA_CNF3
116
0,42
In order to obtain the kinetics equation with the Avrami numbers, it is needed to determine
the crystallization fraction, X(t). However, since all spectra were conducted at Tc, using
these equations directly would provide inaccurate results, offering no additional informa-
tion beyond t1/2, already calculated. To address this limitation, it was decided to conduct
isothermal crystallization runs at temperatures higher than Tc, where the graphs did not
start with partially crystallized material.
Given the time constraints during the final stages of the experimental section, it was im-
practical to repeat all 21 samples at varying temperatures. Therefore, two materials were
selected for obtaining the Avrami equations: the base material, PHA, and PHA_CA1, mo-
tivated by an internal interest. The DSC was performed at different temperatures to explore
their impact on crystallinity kinetics. Additionally, the equations were tested using CA and
reference material samples at Tc to observe if there are any discrepancies.
The isothermal crystallization of CA was conducted at two new temperatures, 125 oC and
126.5 oC, representing 9.5 oC and 10 oC above Tc respectively. The PHA crystallization
was executed at 128oC and 129.5 oC, 17 oC and 18.5 oC above Tc respectively. Despite an
internal confusion in setting the DSC parameters for the latter, the data was analyzed to
glean insights into crystallization kinetics at elevated temperatures.
Page 58 of 93
==PAGE:67==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
To obtain the Avrami data, first of all it is needed to calculate the fraction crystallized of the
material over time following the Equation 2. These parameters are identified from the DSC
scan by performing a cumulative integral (Figure 39) and dividing the result by the total
area. Once these values are established, they can be used to see how crystallinity evolves
over time at various temperatures (Figure 40 and Figure 41).
The analysis of these two graphs indicates a predictable trend: the crystallization process
occurs more rapidly at the critical temperature, Tc, compared to higher temperatures. Specif-
ically, the crystallization rate of CA at 125 oC is faster than at 126.5 oC. Additionally, when
observing the crystallization behavior of PHA, it becomes apparent that temperatures such
as 128oC and 129.5 oC require a longer duration for complete crystallization compared to
the Tc and than the samples of CA.
Figure 39: Running integral example
Figure 40: X(t) at different Temp PHA
Figure 41: X(t) at different Temp CA
Page 59 of 93
==PAGE:68==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
After gathering all the crystallization data during the isothermal crystallization process,
the next step involves constructing Avrami plots, using Equation 5. Thus, it is ploted vs
log(−ln(1 −X(t))) vs log(t). When representing these values it can be seen in Figure 42
and Figure 43 that the graphs are not linear in all the domain. It is worth noting that this
deviation from linearity is a common observation reported in the literature, with suggested
acceptable ranges typically falling between X (0.1, 0.8) [37]. However, even when adhering to
these suggested ranges, linearity was not achieved in our specific cases. Consequently, adjust-
ments were manually made to the limits for all graphs, restricting the analysis to X (0.3, 0.8).
Despite these adjustments, the plots remain imperfectly linear. For example, a closer ex-
amination of Figure 44a, which illustrates the Avrami fit for PHA at the crystallization
temperature, reveals a stair-like pattern in the line composition. This pattern arises due to
the inherent limitations of the DSC software, which lacks precision and produces multiple
heat values at the same units of time. Such inaccuracies may contribute to the non-linearity
of the equations. On the other hand, some literature reveals that the domain of this Avrami
linearity it is adjustable and can be chosen to be smaller [46].
Furthermore, taking a look to the six graphs Figure 44 and Figure 45, while not entirely
linear, an assumption of linearity within the X (0.3, 0.8) range is made to facilitate the
extraction of Avrami parameters.
Figure 42: Avrami graph for PHA
Figure 43: Avrami graph for CA
Page 60 of 93
==PAGE:69==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
(a) Avrami fit for PHA at 111.5oC
(b) Avrami fit for PHA at 125oC
(c) Avrami fit for PHA at 129.5oC
Figure 44: Comparison of Avrami adjustment for PHA at different temperatures
(a) Avrami fit for CA at 116.5oC
(b) Avrami fit for CA at 125oC
(c) Avrami fit for CA at 126.5oC
Figure 45: Comparison of Avrami adjustment for CA at different temperatures zoom
Page 61 of 93
==PAGE:70==
Master Thesis
5.5
Crystallization kinetics
The Avrami equation involves constants k and na that are specific to each system. The coeffi-
cient k is influenced by nucleation and growth rates, while na depends on growth dimensions
and nucleation type [38]. The slope of these curves gives the na number, which is specific
to the type of growth of the spherulites. In our case, it is observed that the growth varies
from 2 to 3, which are normal values [45]. Additionally, these values change depending on
the growth rate of the crystals. When na is higher than 1, it means that the crystallization
rate increases over time. A na value of 3 indicates a three-dimensional growth, while a value
of 2 suggests two-dimensional growth or the crystals[47].
Once the na is obtained, with the t1/2 (Figure 46 Figure 47) it can be calculated the rest of
the Avrami parameters that compose the kinetic equation of the crystal growth using the
Equation 6. These values are comprised in Table 20.
X(t) = 1 −exp(−ktna)
Examining the equation, it becomes evident that higher values of k correspond to faster
crystallization rates. Consequently, temperatures above the critical temperature (Tc) ex-
hibit decreasing k values. This observation aligns with the faster kinetics of the sample
without talc compared to PHA, where k is notably higher. The comparison of k values for
CA further supports this trend, with samples containing 0.5 and 3 showing lower t1/2 values.
Moreover, the influence of temperature on crystallization half-time (t1/2) is apparent. As
depicted in Figures Figure 46 and Figure 47, higher temperatures near Tc correspond to
slower crystallization rates and reduced maximum heat production during crystallization.
This trend highlights the temperature sensitivity of crystallization kinetics and its impact
on the crystallization process.
Figure 46: t1/2 of CA at different temp.
Figure 47: t1/2 of PHA at different temp.
The Table 20 presents the calculated t1/2 and the Avrami values for all tested samples:
Page 62 of 93
==PAGE:71==
Master Thesis
5.6
Spherulites
Table 20: Avrami parameters
T
t1/2
K
na
H (J/g)
PHA
111
0,5
3,03
2,13
35,51
PHA_T1
129,5
6,3
0,003
2,93
57,61
PHA_T2
128
4,79
0,0059
3,04
58,37
PHA_NT
115,5
0,44
5,27
2,47
38,01
PHA_NA
116,5
1,47
0,25
2,65
52,92
PHA_CA0,5
116,5
0,42
5,81
2,45
39,03
PHA_CA1
116,5
0,46
4,57
2,43
38,95
PHA_CA_T1
125
1,47
0,24
2,76
56,64
PHA_CA_T2
126,5
2
0,69
2,82
55,43
PHA_CA3
116,5
0,43
5,91
2,54
38,10
Understanding crystallization kinetics is complicated as they encompass multiple factors
that require a much deeper investigation. This study offers insights into the kinetics of the
crystallization process of the materials under examination. Nonetheless, further research is
needed to obtain the kinetics by maybe investigating other equations that offer better fits
to the system [37]. Also according to literature the Avrami equations is reported to be too
simplified to express a complicated crystallization process [38].
5.6
Spherulites
After determining the crystallization kinetics, it was decided to observe the crystal formation
under a microscope. To observe spherulite growth, small pieces of the raw material were
placed on microscope glasses and heated to 190 oC. Once melted, the samples were com-
pressed with another glass and cooled down to the crystallization temperature, maintained
for one hour, and then allowed to cool to room temperature. This process was carried out
for all reference samples to facilitate crystal observation.
Prior to subjecting the materials to this process, crystalline nuclei were not visible under
the microscope. The material appeared homogeneous, with no discernible spherulite nu-
clei before heating. The initiation of spherulite growth made the material more crystalline.
Therefore, a material with fewer spherulites should exhibit less amorphous characteristics.
PHA is recognized for its crystallinity, and with time, spherulites grow, particularly at room
temperature. Thus, the heat treatment likely accelerated the growth of existing nuclei within
the materials.
The following images have been obtained using a polarized filter in the microscope.
A
representative image (Figure 48), illustrates spherulites in PHA magnified at x300 under the
microscope. This higher magnification provides a clearer view of the spherulite structures.
Page 63 of 93
==PAGE:72==
Master Thesis
5.6
Spherulites
Figure 48: Spherulites in PHA microscope x300
The set of microscope images show the views of PHA, PHA_NT, and PHA_NA at a mag-
nification of x50. Upon closer inspection, it becomes evident that spherulites are present
across all materials, predominantly within the thinner layers of the samples that have melted
onto the surface of the glass.
Distinct differences in spherulite size and distribution are observable among the three sam-
ples. The PHA sample exhibits larger spherulites in diameter compared to the other two
variants (Figure 49a). In PHA_NT, numerous smaller spherulites are observable along the
edges; however, some remain hidden due to the thicker layers present compared to the PHA
sample (Figure 49b). On the other hand, the presence of these crystals in PHA_NA indicate
that the raw material without additives possesses a crystalline nature (Figure 49c). Such
crystallization tendencies will change over time if it does not follow a heat treatment as the
material may undergo recrystallization, thereby altering its properties.
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that if spherulites grow excessively, as shown in Figure 49a,
the material will become more brittle [10]. This observation highlights the importance of
using nucleating agents. Increasing the nuclei density in the material reduces the risk of
growing too big spherulites over time, as they will increase its brittleness.
Page 64 of 93
==PAGE:73==
Master Thesis
5.6
Spherulites
(a) PHA microscope x50
(b) PHA_NT microscope x50
(c) PHA_NA microscope x50
Figure 49: Spherulites in microscope x50
When zooming more with the microscope to x50 the difference in spherulite size can be
appreciated due to the presence of different additives in the materials.
The variance between PHA_NT and PHA_NA lies in the small quantity of nucleating agents
within the material components. Microscopic examination reveals that Figure 50b contains
more numerous smaller nuclei compared to Figure 50c, likely attributed to the presence of
these additional nucleating agents. As evidenced by thermal properties, those of PHA_NT
outperform the PHA mixture, suggesting that talc was probably included for cost reduction.
From the images, it is apparent that the PHA sample has talc, has larger spherulite size
which should exhibit greater brittleness. On the other hand, the talc-free variant appears to
be the least brittle among the three materials.
Overall this attempt aimed to observe the spherulites on the microscope but it can not be
representative. The variations in temperature distribution across the stove surface and the
placement of the temperature sensor in a heat-conducting metal could have made the Tc not
be accurate. Future experiments could be conducted with a microscope equipped with an
Page 65 of 93
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis
5.6
Spherulites
integrated heating system that would show the spherulite growth over time.
(a) PHA microscope x100
(b) PHA_NT microscope x100
(c) PHA_NA microscope x100
Figure 50: Spherulites in microscope x100
The experiment was repeated using a sample containing nucleating agents, specifically 1%
of cloisite C10A. Surprisingly, no spherulite growth was observed in Figure 51. Upon closer
examination, crystalline shine and shapes were discernible in both the thin (Figure 51b)
and thick (Figure 51c) parts of the sample, that could indicate the presence of numerous
small nuclei that remained invisible under the microscope. However, in Figure 51a, larger
spots were evident, which could be attributed to the bad dispersion of the additive itself or
impurities on the glass substrate where the sample was positioned.
Page 66 of 93
==PAGE:75==
Master Thesis
5.7
Injection molding
(a) PHA_C10A_1 microscope x150
(b) PHA_C10A_1 thin side microscope
x700
(c) PHA_C10A_1 thick side microscope
x700
Figure 51: Spherulites growth in C10A_1 microscope
5.7
Injection molding
In order to test the mechanical properties of the materials, they must be shaped to fit the
tensile machine. Thus, they need to go through injection molding to create a dog-bone to
perform the tensile tests. However, the drawback of injection molding is the need to identify
and optimize the program for each specific material, which is generally time-consuming.
The initial attempt involved using an injection program which has been implemented at
an industrial level after an extrusion of the materials that pre-heated them, so they were
easy to inject. However, when replicated these parameters on a smaller lab scale without
prior extrusion, the material remained in the barrel without reaching the desired softness,
impeding its entry into the mold.
This issue might have been caused due to the low injection pressure at this scale, so it was
increased 50 bar, yet the material failed to enter the mold. As a result, the temperature was
Page 67 of 93
==PAGE:76==
Master Thesis
5.7
Injection molding
raised to 180 oC, but the material still did not leave the nozzle, remaining within the bar-
rel. As the temperature was already above the melting point, the pressure was significantly
increased to 500 bar as recommended, resulting in partial success, with the mold half-filled.
Then, the temperature and pressure were increased to 190 oC and 550 bar. However these
parameters made the mold stuck inside the machine due to an overshoot of the polymer.
There were tried out several ways to remove the mold of the machine, at the end, the mold
was heated to 190 oC to release it as at that temperature the material is melted Figure 52.
As a consequence, the machine needed to cool down for approximately 2 hours to arrive to
the normal mold temperature. It was time-consuming due to the lack of a cooling system in
the machine.
Figure 52: Flash mold (over-injected)
After solving the issue and cleaning, new adjustments were made to prevent the over-
injection.
The material was left in the barrel for 5 minutes, maintaining a temperature
of 180 oC to try arrive to the molten state and was injected at a pressure of 550 bar. With
this method the material still did not leave the nozzle. When the temperature was increased
to 185 oC with 6 s of injection, a dog-bone was eventually obtained, though mold removal
was not smooth as it should be.
As the extraction of the mold was getting harder, the temperature, pressure and injection
were decreased in several modifications to prevent the mold from getting stuck. However
with 183 oC, 500 bar and 5 s of injection the same problem occurred requiring additional
heating and cooling cycles.
Page 68 of 93
==PAGE:77==
Master Thesis
5.7
Injection molding
Figure 53: Ruined bars from injection molding
It was learned that high pressure contributed to difficulties, so the process shifted to lower
pressures of 350 bar and 180 oC of temperature. Further experimentation revealed that
400 bar allowed material flow, but the mold was still a bit over-injected. When shifting to
slightly lower pressures the material still was able to be injected. During the cleaning of the
machine it was observed that at this temperature the material inside the barrel is still solid
and not melted.
As it is important a more melted material, subsequent trials involved higher temperatures
at 185 oC and 190 oC and lower pressures to facilitate the polymer flow inside the mold
without causing machine blockages. An stable process was finally achieved which helped to
reproduce and repeat the process for several samples.
The fabrication process for the tensile bars varied slightly for the rest of the materials as
instead of being in pellet form, they were produced via solvent casting. Consequently, the
films of each material were manually cut and placed inside the barrel. As this step took
some time, it was not needed to wait extra time for the material to melt inside the barrel.
For the PHA_NT it was necessary to wait extra time as the material took longer to melt
than the rest of the samples. Also when injected, this sample required extra pressure and
all the samples needed at least 300 bar to reach all the mold.
Overall, the final injected bars exhibited uniformity and lacked defects, indicating a suc-
cessful injection molding process. Moreover, in the case of all samples containing additives
unable to dissolve in the solvent, and where the films appeared white or exhibited visible ad-
ditives, these discrepancies vanished upon molding into tensile bars. Such uniformity could
be attributed to either the thickness of the bars or the possible integration of the additive
into the polymer due to the temperature and pressure during the injection process. The
Page 69 of 93
==PAGE:78==
Master Thesis
5.8
Mechanical properties
Figure 54 shows one tensile bar for each material produced via solvent casting.
Figure 54: All tensile bars produced from solvent casted materials
5.8
Mechanical properties
One of the main objectives of this projects is to identify additives that improve the mechani-
cal properties of PHA. This approach involved testing two dog-bones initially and repeating
the test with other two dog-bones four weeks later. Additionally, priority was given to pro-
ducing more material in all the samples at a 1% in concentration to gain an overview of
the mechanical performance of the different additives, rather than conducting an exhaustive
mechanical study using all the proportion. This was decided as it was necessary to make
larger quantities of materials to make the dog-bones. Specifically 4.5 g were prepared for
each additive at 1% concentration which when injected into tensile bars resulted in 4 units
which were separated into two for testing after being produced and 2 were stored for 3/4
weeks for aging. This decision was taken due to time and space limitations.
Originally, the aging process was planned for a duration of 4 weeks for all the samples. How-
ever, complications made the the injection molding stage longer, reducing this aging phase
in some samples. As a result, some samples were only stored for three weeks. Despite the
shortened duration, it was expected that this time frame would be enough to discern any
indicators of re-crystallization over time. The amount of time aged as well as the injection
conditions are showed in Table 12.
Table 21 includes the mechanical test values for the two first tensile bars tested. The average
of those tests are collected in Table 22. In the cases where the machine failed to detect a
break, such as with PHA, CA_1, CNC_1, and C10A_1 samples, the break point recorded
was that of the bar where breakage was detected. Overall, it is observed that the maximum
load and elongation at fracture are similar across samples, indicating that the average values
can be considered representative. As those values are similar also the E, TS and EB are also
taken as the average of those samples.
Page 70 of 93
==PAGE:79==
Master Thesis
5.8
Mechanical properties
Table 21: Raw data mechanical testing
E (MPa)
TS (MPa)
EB(%)
Elongation
at fracture (mm)
Maximum load (N)
PHA_1
225,24
29,02
12,89
5,28
290,24
PHA_2
257,69
29,59
11,48
4,71
295,93
PHA_NT1_1
15,87
15,76
99,28
40,70
157,59
PHA_NT1_2
6,05
15,44
255,35
104,69
154,40
PHA_NT2_1
183,17
25,04
13,67
9,24
252,90
PHA_NT2_2
168,63
25
255,35
12,85
252,20
PHA_NT2_3
200,89
24,95
12,42
7,51
253,90
C10A_1
132,15
26,17
19,80
8,12
261,66
C10A_2
26,30
0,00
262,95
C30B_1
243,24
26,75
11,00
4,51
267,49
C30B_2
199,14
27,24
13,68
5,61
272,41
Sep_1
202,41
28,55
14,10
5,78
285,48
Sep_2
224,95
29,09
12,93
5,30
290,86
CA_1
259,77
28,25
10,88
4,46
282,51
CA_2
29,35
0,00
293,48
CNC_1
417,61
26,88
6,44
2,64
268,80
CNC_2
28,13
0,00
281,26
CNF_1
76,67
21,89
28,55
11,70
218,89
CNF_2
69,15
23,96
34,65
14,21
239,60
Table 22: Average data and deviation from mechanical testing
E (MPa)
TS (MPa)
EB(%)
Elongation at fracture (mm)
Maximun load (N)
Mec_PHA
241,47
29,31
12,18
5,00
293,09
Mec_PHA_NT1
10,96
15,60
177,31
72,70
156,00
Mec_PHA_NT2
184,22±16, 11
25±0, 05
13,64±1, 20
9,87±2, 72
253±0, 85
Mec_C10A
132,15
26,23
19,80
8,12
262,31
Mec_C30B
221,19
26,99
12,34
5,06
269,95
Mec_Sep
213,68
28,82
13,52
5,54
288,17
Mec_CA
259,77
28,80
10,88
4,46
288,00
Mec_CNC
417,61
27,50
6,44
2,64
275,03
Mec_CNF
72,91
22,92
31,60
12,96
229,24
Generally mechanical testing is performed in three or more samples to obtain the standard
deviation of the samples and compare and confirm the reliability of the results.
As the
material for mechanical testing was limited of 4.5 g per sample which consisted of 4 ten-
sile bars it was decided that it was more relevant to obtain an idea of the properties after
time to check if there has been the re-crystallization effect characteristic from PHA materials.
All samples exhibit a similar shape in the tensile graph, as illustrated in Figure 55. Each
graph follows a linear trend initially, indicating the elastic phase where the material regains
Page 71 of 93
==PAGE:80==
Master Thesis
5.8
Mechanical properties
its original shape upon deformation. Beyond the peak of maximum load, the material en-
ters a plastic deformation phase, where deformation becomes permanent upon failure, and
the material does not revert to its original shape. In all the materials tested, this plastic
phase is brief, with the material breaking shortly after reaching maximum load, resulting
in a short plastic deformation. In Figure 56, the blue line represents a sample where the
machine fails to record the sample’s breakage, resulting in a graph with a distinct shape com-
pared to the others. The rest of the graphs can be found in the Appendix C (subsection 9.4).
Figure 55: Tensile testing C30B 1%
Figure 56: Tensile testing CA 1%
The PHA_NT sample had a different behavior than the rest. Figure 57 shows this first
test of the mechanical testing. In the graph it can be seen that the plastic stage was longer
than in the other samples, as it had a larger plastic deformation that can be seen in the
sample tested (Figure 58) [39]. Also it can be appreciated that the blue line of the graph
was an inflexion point were the load decreased, but after reaching a point the load starts
increasing again. This peak is caused as a side of the material broke but not completely
so the sample was still able to deform. In both tests of the tensile experiment, the materi-
als detached from the grip before reaching the break point, leaving the experiment unfinished.
During the performance of this mechanical testing, it was used a manual grip. When testing
the PHA sample without talc, the machine did not record the break of the bar as this mate-
rial was very elastic and extended, therefore at some point the material detach from the grip
instead of breaking. Thus, it was decided to make more material and do the test in another
tensile machine with automatic grip. As in this batch there were 4 new tensile bars, in this
sample it was possible to obtain the statistics and more reliable results.
Page 72 of 93
==PAGE:81==
Master Thesis
5.8
Mechanical properties
Figure 57: Tensile testing Raw material with no talc
Figure 58: First tensile testing in PHA_NT
During the second round of the tensile test on the new machine with automatic grip, the re-
curring issue emerged where the samples were too elastic and failed to break. However, after
adjusting the test speed, the samples were successfully broken. Logically, higher speeds are
correlated with faster sample breakage. Initially the test was conducted with some smaller
bars from failed tests in injection molding at 10 mm/min and after, at 20 mm/min due to
prolonged breaking times for the first two samples. Subsequently, the speed was further
increased to 50 mm/min for the third sample, which could have been excessive as the bars
Page 73 of 93
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis
5.8
Mechanical properties
broke near the edge within seconds. Despite this, to maintain consistency, all subsequent
samples were tested at the same speed. These tests, can be seen in the Appendix C, subsec-
tion 9.4 in Figure 149. The last three samples in the tensile tests, exhibit a similar trend to
the general shape observed across all samples tested, despite variations in testing conditions.
As mentioned before, it can be seen that the PHA raw material feels stable as the talc
acts as nucleating agent that gives elasticity and more elongation. The samples seem to
slightly improve the properties of the PHA. For a complete understanding of this mechanical
properties the selected materials should be produced in bigger quantities to be able to do
a statistic analysis of the values obtained to verify the reliability. Also it is important that
before the mechanical testing the tensile speed is optimized, so all the materials are broken
in the center of the sample. In addition, it is important to state that the tensile bars used
are DMA bars. Which are not the best specimen as they do not have a specific testing area
and a grabbing area (Figure 59) making them harder to break.
Figure 59: Usual dog-bone shape [48]
Mechanical testing involves numerous tests that require a substantial amount of material
and samples to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the mechanical properties and
analyze them statistically. Given that the material produced was intended for 3 or 4 dog-
bones, depending on the sample, a decision was made to prioritize certain aspects. Instead
of conducting a thorough mechanical testing using all the samples, emphasis was placed on
observing the aging of the material and assessing whether the additives effectively prevented
re-crystallization in the PHA blend, thereby maintaining consistent properties over time.
Page 74 of 93
==PAGE:83==
Master Thesis
5.8
Mechanical properties
Table 23: Raw data mechanical testing after time
E (MPa)
TS (MPa)
EB(%)
Elongation
at fracture (mm)
Maximun load (N)
PHA_1
301,44
30,90
10,25
4,20
309,03
PHA_2
230,28
32,72
14,21
5,83
327,23
PHA_NT_1
144,61
21,45
14,83
13,78
216,70
PHA_NT_2
129,72
20,49
15,77
11,34
209,4
C10A_1
290,83
29,76
10,23
4,20
297,60
C10A_2
578,35
30,30
5,24
2,15
303,03
C30B_1
481,78
29,24
6,07
2,49
292,37
C30B_2
501,50
28,27
5,64
2,31
282,67
Sep_1
376,55
28,79
7,65
3,13
287,92
Sep_2
463,94
30,35
6,54
2,68
303,46
CA_1
423,29
29,43
6,95
2,85
294,29
CA_2
322,35
30,01
9,31
3,82
300,14
CNC_1
355,54
30,19
8,49
3,48
301,86
CNC_2
254,52
31,13
12,23
5,01
311,27
CNF_1
344,71
30,24
8,77
3,60
302,35
CNF_2
318,27
29,84
9,37
3,84
298,35
Table 24: Average data and deviation from mechanical testing after one month
E (MPa)
TS (MPa)
EB(%)
Elongation at fracture (mm)
Maximun load (N)
Mec_PHA
265,86
31,81
12,23
5,01
318,13
Mec_PHA_NT
137,16
20,97
15,31
12,56
213,05
Mec_C10A
434,59
30,03
7,74
3,17
300,32
Mec_C30B
491,64
28,75
5,85
2,40
287,52
Mec_Sep
420,25
29,57
7,09
2,91
295,69
Mec_CA
372,82
29,72
8,13
3,33
297,22
Mec_CNC
305,03
30,66
10,36
4,25
306,57
Mec_CNF
331,49
30,04
9,07
3,72
300,35
The bar diagrams show the variation of TS (Figure 60), EB Figure 61), and E (Figure 62) over
time. Concerning the PHA_NT, it is evident that the addition of talc enhances the TS and
the E while slightly reducing the EB, indicating an improvement in mechanical properties.
This outcome aligns with the feeling received while touching the materials, as the talc-free
sample feels more elastic compared to the talc-added PHA, which feels more brittle. Be-
sides, this behaviour was also guessed with the microscope image evaluated in subsection 5.6.
In the case of samples containing additives, TS variations are minimal compared to PHA,
indicating relative stability over time.
However, EB and E display notable fluctuations,
probably due to potential re-crystallization. The inconclusiveness of the results, particularly
regarding E, may be attributed to the testing conditions and the limited number of bars
Page 75 of 93
==PAGE:84==
Master Thesis
5.8
Mechanical properties
tested. Notably, the machine initially failed to detect breaks in some bars during the initial
values, leading to a situation where one sample had to represent the entire set of results.
Figure 60: Change in the TS over a month
Figure 61: Change in the EB over a month
Page 76 of 93
==PAGE:85==
Master Thesis
5.8
Mechanical properties
Figure 62: Change in the E over a month
Also using the proper shape for tensing would have ensured better tensing and different
data, but time and the machinery available made this test the optimal choice for the study.
Overall it can be identified that most additives have not been successful in avoiding the
re-crystallization over time so new studies or tests need to be evaluated in how to improve
it.
In conclusion, the study could have been enhanced by increasing the sample size and opti-
mizing tensile testing parameters, including the tensile speed to ensure consistent breaking.
Using the appropriate tensile specimen shape would have probably increased the reliability
of results as it is more easy for grabbing in the machine and stabilising the testing distance
L0.
Nonetheless, the reduced time and machinery availability led to the current testing
methodology being the preferred choice. Despite the limitations, it is evident that most ad-
ditives have not effectively mitigated re-crystallization over time. Thus, further exploration
or experimentation need to be explored to enhance the effectiveness of the additives.
Page 77 of 93
==PAGE:86==
Master Thesis
6
Conclusion and future lines
In conclusion, all additives enhance the thermal properties of the materials by elevating the
Tc and expanding the processing window, indicating a greater difference between the degra-
dation temperature and the melting temperature compared to the PHA. The most effective
additive in widening the thermal processing window is cloisite 30B at 3%, while cloisite C10A
demonstrates the greatest increase in Tc. However, the thermal properties are influenced by
the heating rates during scanning, with lower temperatures and higher enthalpies observed
at higher cooling rates.
The kinetics of crystallization reveal that the Avrami fit is not entirely linear, suggesting the
potential applicability of other equations that may better suit PHA systems. The simplic-
ity of these equations in this context indicates the complexity of the materials, which also
experience re-crystallization phenomena. Avrami half-times indicate that the quantity of
certain materials, such as C10A and CA, have a discernible impact, while the effect of other
additives on crystallization depends on the percentage utilized. Furthermore, the Avrami
parameter na suggests that crystalline growth follows a 2D /3D pattern.
Also, to conclude, the dispersion of the additives may not have been optimal, particularly
with the samples that are not soluble in the PHA. That is why in future projects, there
is potential to optimize the dispersion of additives by changing the parameters in the son-
icator/Ultra Turrax or even by doing pre-treatments to the additives. Exploring different
proportions of the additives could reveal if the optimal proportion range is outside the one
tested. Additionally, investigating combinations of various additives, such as plasticizers
with nucleating agents or fibers.
Moreover, future studies should consider performing the preparations of materials through
extrusion rather than solvent casting. Extrusion may enhance the incorporation of additives
into the polymer matrix, leading to improved thermal and mechanical properties, especially
for samples that are insoluble in solvents. From an environmental point, avoiding the use
of solvents makes the process more sustainable, and also, extrusion aligns with industrial
practices. In addition, extruding materials before the injection process can simplify the pro-
cedure as the materials are already warm.
It was also concluded that none of the additives succeed in avoiding the re-crystallization
effect as the materials get more brittle and fragile with time. Thus, as part of future research,
a more robust assessment of mechanical properties is crucial. Using typical shapes in tensile
bars allows samples to break in the center, providing a more comprehensive understanding
of the test. It is essential to optimize tensile speed to assess whether materials recrystal-
lize over time. This approach ensures a thorough evaluation of the materials’ mechanical
properties, contributing to a more comprehensive understanding of their performance. Also
when sufficient material is prepared it would be interesting to test if the material has facility
to adapt to simple shapes like bottles for packaging to see if there is a possibility for their
Page 78 of 93
==PAGE:87==
Master Thesis
commercial use in the packaging of substances.
In conclusion, optimizing PHA based materials for industrial use presents a sustainable so-
lution, particularly in the pharmaceutical industry. By employing these materials, we can
reduce reliance on traditional plastics, contributing to environmental sustainability. Addi-
tionally, companies can use a waste generated during production for packaging purposes,
mitigating disposal concerns. Besides, even if disposed of in landfills, these biodegradable
materials pose minimal environmental risk compared to petroleum based plastics. This whole
concept approach is a base of the circular economy which contributes to a more environmen-
tally conscious approach to production and waste management.
Page 79 of 93
==PAGE:88==
List of Figures
1
Plastic generation and disposal tendency [10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Classification of plastics [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Annual expected growth of bioplastics [11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Growth of bioplastics by material type [11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5
Circular economy of biobased and biodegradable bioplastics[12] . . . . . . . .
7
6
Reseach tendency of PHAs during the years[14]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
7
Trends in PHA research[14]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
8
PHA granules [12] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
9
Chemical structure of PHA [9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
10
Schematic industrial process [16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
11
Industrial production of PHAs [18]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
12
Block diagram of the experimental plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
13
Solvent non solvent explanation [32] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
14
Chemical structure of the cations of C10A(left) and C30B(right), where T is
tallow [34] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
15
Parts of the injection machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
16
Test bar result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
17
Comparison of the FT-IR spectra of the commercial mix and the material
after the removal of additives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
18
Zoom peak 3675 cm−1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
19
Zoom peaks 1015, 668 and 449 cm−1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
20
FT-IR spectra second removal of additives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
21
Second removal Zoom 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
22
Second removal Zoom 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
23
CNC after freeze drying
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
24
CNF after the first freeze drying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
25
Comparison of microscope images of the films
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
26
Material matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
27
TGA comparison of raw materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
28
DGT comparison of raw materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
29
Zooming in the DSC scanning of the PHA_NT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
30
DSC scanning for PHA_Sep_05 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
31
Effect of different heating rates in the DSC of PHA with CNC 1% . . . . . .
52
32
Comparison of the t1/2 of materials with 0.5% additive
. . . . . . . . . . . .
53
33
Comparison of the t1/2 of materials with 1% additive
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
34
Comparison of the t1/2 of materials with 3% additive
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
35
Calculation of t1/2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
36
Comparison of t1/2 of C10A,C30B and Sep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
37
Comparison of t1/2 of CA, CNC and CNF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
38
Comparison of the t1/2 of the raw materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
39
Running integral example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
40
X(t) at different Temp PHA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
80
==PAGE:89==
Master Thesis
List of Figures
41
X(t) at different Temp CA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
42
Avrami graph for PHA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
43
Avrami graph for CA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
44
Comparison of Avrami adjustment for PHA at different temperatures . . . .
61
45
Comparison of Avrami adjustment for CA at different temperatures zoom . .
61
46
t1/2 of CA at different temp. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
47
t1/2 of PHA at different temp. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
48
Spherulites in PHA microscope x300
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
49
Spherulites in microscope x50 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
50
Spherulites in microscope x100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
51
Spherulites growth in C10A_1 microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
52
Flash mold (over-injected) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
53
Ruined bars from injection molding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
54
All tensile bars produced from solvent casted materials . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
55
Tensile testing C30B 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
56
Tensile testing CA 1%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
57
Tensile testing Raw material with no talc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
58
First tensile testing in PHA_NT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
59
Usual dog-bone shape [48] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
60
Change in the TS over a month . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
61
Change in the EB over a month . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
62
Change in the E over a month . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
63
FTIR Commercial mix 10% talc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
64
FTIR first attempt of removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
65
FTIR second attempt of removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
66
Clay additives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
67
Cyanuric acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
68
Cellulose additives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
69
PHA_C10A films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xii
70
PHA_C30B films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xii
71
PHA_Sep films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xii
72
PHA_CA films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xiii
73
PHA_CNC films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xiii
74
PHA_CNF films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xiii
75
TGA PHA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xiv
76
TGA PHA_NT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xv
77
TGA PHA_NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xv
78
TGA from PHA_C10A 0.5%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xvi
79
TGA from PHA_C10A 1%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xvi
80
TGA from PHA_C10A 3%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvii
81
TGA from PHA_C30B 0.5%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvii
82
TGA from PHA_C30B 1%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xviii
83
TGA from PHA_C30B 3%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xviii
84
TGA from PHA_Sep 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xix
Page 81 of 93
==PAGE:90==
Master Thesis
List of Figures
85
TGA from PHA_Sep 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xix
86
TGA from PHA_Sep 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xx
87
TGA from PHA_CA 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xx
88
TGA from PHA_CA 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xxi
89
TGA from PHA_CA 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xxi
90
TGA from PHA_CNC 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxii
91
TGA from PHA_CNC 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxii
92
TGA from PHA_CNC 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiii
93
TGA from PHA_CNF 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiii
94
TGA from PHA_CNF 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiv
95
TGA from PHA_CNF 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiv
96
DSC PHA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxv
97
DSC PHA_NT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxvi
98
DSC PHA_NA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxvi
99
DSC PHA_C10A 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxvii
100 DSC PHA_C10A 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxvii
101 DSC PHA_C10A 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxviii
102 DSC PHA_C30B 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxviii
103 DSC PHA_C30B 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxix
104 DSC PHA_C30B 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxix
105 DSC PHA_Sep 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxx
106 DSC PHA_Sep 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxx
107 DSC PHA_Sep 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxi
108 DSC PHA_CA 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxi
109 DSC PHA_CA 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxii
110 DSC PHA_CA 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxii
111 DSC PHA_CNC 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxiii
112 DSC PHA_CNC 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxiii
113 DSC PHA_CNC 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxiv
114 DSC PHA_CNF 0.5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxiv
115 DSC PHA_CNF 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxv
116 DSC PHA_CNF 3% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxv
117 DSC PHA after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxvi
118 DSC PHA_NT after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxvi
119 DSC PHA_NA after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxvii
120 DSC PHA_C10A 0.5% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxvii
121 DSC PHA_C10A 1% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxvii
122 DSC PHA_C10A 3% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxviii
123 DSC PHA_C30B 0.5% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxviii
124 DSC PHA_C30B 1% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxviii
125 DSC PHA_C30B 3% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxix
126 DSC PHA_Sep 0.5% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxix
127 DSC PHA_Sep 1% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxix
128 DSC PHA_Sep 3% after aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xl
Page 82 of 93
==PAGE:91==
Master Thesis
List of Figures
129 DSC PHA_CA 0.5% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xl
130 DSC PHA_CA 1% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xl
131 DSC PHA_CA 3% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xli
132 DSC PHA_CNC 0.5% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xli
133 DSC PHA_CNC 1% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xli
134 DSC PHA_CNC 3% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xlii
135 DSC PHA_CNF 0.5% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xlii
136 DSC PHA_CNF 1% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xlii
137 DSC PHA_CNF 3% after aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xliii
138 Tensile testing PHA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xliv
139 Tensile testing PHA_NT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xliv
140 Tensile testing PHA_NT, five samples with 1 week of aging. Sample 1 and 2
were a trial with other dimensions. Only samples 3, 4 and 5 were used in the
study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xlv
141 Tensile testing PHA_C10A 1%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xlv
142 Tensile testing PHA_C30B 1%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xlvi
143 Tensile testing PHA_Sep 1%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xlvi
144 Tensile testing PHA_CA 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xlvii
145 Tensile testing PHA_CNC 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xlvii
146 Tensile testing PHA_CNF 1% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xlviii
147 Tensile testing PHA sample 1 with 1 month of aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . xlviii
148 Tensile testing PHA sample 2 with 1 month of aging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . xlix
149 Tensile testing PHA_NT three samples with 1 month of aging. Sample one
was a trial with other dimensions. Only samples 2 and 3 were used in the studyxlix
150 Tensile testing PHA_C10A 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging . . . . . . .
l
151 Tensile testing PHA_C10A 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging . . . . . . .
l
152 Tensile testing PHA_C30B 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
. . . . . . .
li
153 Tensile testing PHA_C30B 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
. . . . . . .
li
154 Tensile testing PHA_Sep 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
. . . . . . . .
lii
155 Tensile testing PHA_Sep 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
. . . . . . . .
lii
156 Tensile testing PHA_CA 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
. . . . . . . .
liii
157 Tensile testing PHA_CA 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
. . . . . . . .
liii
158 Tensile testing PHA_CNC 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging . . . . . . . .
liv
159 Tensile testing PHA_CNC 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging . . . . . . . .
liv
160 Tensile testing PHA_CNF 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging . . . . . . . .
lv
161 Tensile testing PHA_CNF 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging . . . . . . . .
lv
Page 83 of 93
==PAGE:92==
Master Thesis
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Main PHA structures[9]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Short abbreviations of the most common PHA structures[9] . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Average thermal and mechanical properties of PHAs [19] . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Summary of the best nucleating agents from Appendix A(section 7) . . . . .
18
5
Summary of the best organic and inorganic nanocomposites from Appendix
A(section 7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Summary of the best fibers from Appendix A(section 7) . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7
All materials prepared
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
8
Reference materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
9
Quantity of additives for each percentage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
10
Materials with additives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
11
All materials prepared for mechanical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
12
Injection bars prepared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
13
Quantity of base solution for each percentage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
14
Summary of the TGA results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
15
Summary of the results of the second heating of the DSC at 10 o/min
. . .
48
16
Summary of the results of the first heating DSC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
17
Summary of the results of the first heating DSC one month after . . . . . . .
50
18
Summary of the results of the DSC with cooling rate of 30 oC/min
. . . . .
51
19
t1/2 of all samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
20
Avrami parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
21
Raw data mechanical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
22
Average data and deviation from mechanical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
23
Raw data mechanical testing after time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
24
Average data and deviation from mechanical testing after one month
. . . .
75
25
Summary of different nucleating agents with 1% w/w in the crystallization of
PHB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
26
Summary of different proportions of additives in PHB . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
27
Summary of different proportions of additives in PHBV . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
28
Summary of the effect of different additives in PHBV . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
29
Summary of different proportions of additives in different PHAs . . . . . . .
iv
30
Summary of plasticizers used with PHB [30] and their increase or decrease of
properties comparing to raw PHB [28]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Page 84 of 93
==PAGE:93==
Master Thesis
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
∆Hc
Crystallization enthalpy
∆Hm Melting enthalpy
∆Href
Melting enthalpy of a sample 100% crystalline
CH4
Methane
CO2
Carbon dioxide
H2O2 Hydrogen peroxide
Hc
Enthalpy of crystallization
na
Avrami parameter
Tc
Crystallization Temperature
Tg
Glass Transition Temperature
Tm
Melting Temperature
Xc
Degree of crystallinity
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
BC
Bacterial Cellulose
BN
Boron Nitride
C10A Cloisite 10A
C30B Cloisite 30B
CA
Cyanuric Acid
CB
Carbon Black
CNC Cellulose Nanocrystals
CNF Cellulose Nanofibers
CNW Cellulose Nanowhiskers
DDGS Distiller’s Dried Grains with Solubles
Page 85 of 93
==PAGE:94==
Master Thesis
Nomenclature
DS
Downstream
DSC
Differential Scanning Calorimetry
DSP
Downstream Processing
E
Young Modulus
EB
Elongation Break
EBO European Bioplastics Organization
FT-IR Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
HV
Hydroxyvalerate
ISO
International Organization for Standarization
k
Avrami parameter
Lo
Initial length of tensile bar
lcl-PHAs Lonh-chain length-PHAs
mcl-PHAs Medium-chain length-PHAs
MMT Montmorillonite
NCC nanocrystalline Cellulose
NGIB New Generation of Industrial Biotechnology
PBAT Polybutylene Adipate Terephthalate
PBS
Polybutylene Succinate
PCL
Polycaprolactone
PE
Polyethylene
PET
Insulated-gate Bipolar Transistor
PHA Polyhydroxyalamides
PHA_C10A PHA with C10A
PHA_C30B PHA with C30B
PHA_CA PHA with CA
PHA_CNC PHA with CNC
Page 86 of 93
==PAGE:95==
Master Thesis
Nomenclature
PHA_CNF PHA with CNF
PHA_NA PHBV and P3HB4HB without additives
PHA_NT PHBV and P3HB4HB without talc
PHA_Sep PHA with Sep
PHB Polyhydroxybutyrate
PHB4B Poly (3-hydroxybutyrateco-4hydroxybutyrate)
PHBHx Poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyhexanoate)
PHBV Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)
PHV Polyhydroxyvalerate
PLA
Poly Lactic Acid
PP
Polypropilene
RNA Ribonucleic Acid
scl-PHAs Short-chain length-PHAs
T10
Temperature of degradation of 10% of the material
T5
Temperature of degradation of 5% of the material
Tmax Maximum degradation temperature
t1/2
Crystallization half time
TGA Thermogravimetrical Analysis
TS
Tensile Strength
Page 87 of 93
==PAGE:96==
Master Thesis
References
References
[1] E. Bioplasctics, “Fact sheet. what are bioplastics? material types, terminology, and
labels- an introduction,” European bioplastics, 2022.
[2] K. Kaiser, M. Schmid, and M. Schlummer, “Recycling of polymer-based multilayer
packaging: A review,” Recycling, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 1, 2017.
[3] S. Abang, F. Wong, R. Sarbatly, J. Sariau, R. Baini, and N. A. Besar, “Bioplastic clas-
sifications and innovations in antibacterial, antifungal, and antioxidant applications,”
Journal of Bioresources and Bioproducts, 2023.
[4] E. Yousif and R. Haddad, “Photodegradation and photostabilization of polymers, espe-
cially polystyrene,” SpringerPlus, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–32, 2013.
[5] M. Kosuth, S. A. Mason, and E. V. Wattenberg, “Anthropogenic contamination of tap
water, beer, and sea salt,” PloS one, vol. 13, no. 4, p. e0194970, 2018.
[6] G. Liebezeit and E. Liebezeit, “Non-pollen particulates in honey and sugar,” Food Ad-
ditives & Contaminants: Part A, vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 2136–2140, 2013.
[7] R. L. Reddy, V. S. Reddy, and G. A. Gupta, “Study of bio-plastics as green and sus-
tainable alternative to plastics,” International Journal of Emerging Technology and Ad-
vanced Engineering, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 76–81, 2013.
[8] F. R. Beltrán, E. Climent-Pascual, M. U. de la Orden, and J. M. Urreaga, “Effect of
solid-state polymerization on the structure and properties of mechanically recycled poly
(lactic acid),” Polymer Degradation and Stability, vol. 171, p. 109045, 2020.
[9] L. Avérous and E. Pollet, Environmental silicate nano-biocomposites, vol. 1. Springer,
2012.
[10] A. Z. Naser, I. Deiab, and B. M. Darras, “Poly (lactic acid)(pla) and polyhydroxyalka-
noates (phas), green alternatives to petroleum-based plastics: A review,” RSC advances,
vol. 11, no. 28, pp. 17151–17196, 2021.
[11] E. bioplastics, “Bioplastics market data,” 2022. Access the 5 of November 2023.
[12] M. Kuddus et al., Bioplastics for sustainable development. Springer, 2021.
[13] M. Mehrpouya, H. Vahabi, M. Barletta, P. Laheurte, and V. Langlois, “Additive manu-
facturing of polyhydroxyalkanoates (phas) biopolymers: Materials, printing techniques,
and applications,” Materials Science and Engineering: C, vol. 127, p. 112216, 2021.
[14] M. Guzik, T. Witko, A. Steinbüchel, M. Wojnarowska, M. Sołtysik, and S. Wawak,
“What has been trending in the research of polyhydroxyalkanoates? a systematic re-
view,” Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, vol. 8, p. 959, 2020.
Page 88 of 93
==PAGE:97==
Master Thesis
References
[15] R. Sehgal and R. Gupta, “Polyhydroxyalkanoate and its efficient production: an eco-
friendly approach towards development,” 3 Biotech, vol. 10, no. 12, p. 549, 2020.
[16] S. Chavan, B. Yadav, R. D. Tyagi, and P. Drogui, “A review on production of polyhy-
droxyalkanoate (pha) biopolyesters by thermophilic microbes using waste feedstocks,”
Bioresource Technology, vol. 341, p. 125900, 2021.
[17] K. Saravanan, M. Umesh, and P. Kathirvel, “Microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates (phas):
a review on biosynthesis, properties, fermentation strategies and its prospective applica-
tions for sustainable future,” Journal of Polymers and the Environment, vol. 30, no. 12,
pp. 4903–4935, 2022.
[18] D. Tan, Y. Wang, Y. Tong, and G.-Q. Chen, “Grand challenges for industrializing
polyhydroxyalkanoates (phas),” Trends in biotechnology, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 953–963,
2021.
[19] E. Bugnicourt, P. Cinelli, A. Lazzeri, P. V. MARTINEZ ALVAREZ, et al., “The
main characteristics, properties, improvements, and market data of polyhydroxyalka-
noates,” in Chapter 24th in Handbook of sustainable polymers processing and applica-
tions, pp. 899–928, Pan Stanford Published, 2015.
[20] Q. Wang, Y. Xu, P. Xu, W. Yang, M. Chen, W. Dong, and P. Ma, “Crystallization of
microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates: A review,” International Journal of Biological Macro-
molecules, vol. 209, pp. 330–343, 2022.
[21] I. Khan, K. Saeed, and I. Khan, “Nanoparticles: Properties, applications and toxicities,”
Arabian journal of chemistry, vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 908–931, 2019.
[22] E. Ten, J. Turtle, D. Bahr, L. Jiang, and M. Wolcott, “Thermal and mechanical proper-
ties of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose nanowhiskers compos-
ites,” Polymer, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 2652–2660, 2010.
[23] H. Haham, M.-Y. Shen, S. L. Billington, and C. W. Frank, “Comparison of nanocrys-
talline cellulose dispersion versus surface nucleation in poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) crystallization,” SPE Polymers, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 15–25, 2020.
[24] M. Eesaee, P. Ghassemi, D. D. Nguyen, S. Thomas, S. Elkoun, and P. Nguyen-Tri,
“Morphology and crystallization behaviour of polyhydroxyalkanoates-based blends and
composites: a review,” Biochemical Engineering Journal, vol. 187, p. 108588, 2022.
[25] D. Khandal, E. Pollet, and L. Averous, “Elaboration and behavior of poly (3-
hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate)-nano-biocomposites based on montmorillonite
or sepiolite nanoclays,” European Polymer Journal, vol. 81, pp. 64–76, 2016.
[26] W. Mook Choi, T. Wan Kim, O. Ok Park, Y. Keun Chang, and J. Woo Lee, “Prepa-
ration and characterization of poly (hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate)–organoclay
nanocomposites,” Journal of Applied Polymer Science, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 525–529, 2003.
Page 89 of 93
==PAGE:98==
Master Thesis
References
[27] K. W. Meereboer, A. K. Pal, E. O. Cisneros-López, M. Misra, and A. K. Mohanty,
“The effect of natural fillers on the marine biodegradation behaviour of poly (3-
hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)(phbv),” Scientific reports, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 911,
2021.
[28] L. V. Scalioni, M. C. Gutiérrez, and M. I. Felisberti, “Green composites of poly (3-
hydroxybutyrate) and curaua fibers: Morphology and physical, thermal, and mechanical
properties,” Journal of Applied Polymer Science, vol. 134, no. 14, 2017.
[29] M. C. Righetti, P. Cinelli, N. Mallegni, A. Stäbler, and A. Lazzeri, “Thermal
and mechanical properties of biocomposites made of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) and potato pulp powder,” Polymers, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 308, 2019.
[30] R. Turco, G. Santagata, I. Corrado, C. Pezzella, and M. Di Serio, “In vivo and post-
synthesis strategies to enhance the properties of phb-based materials: A review,” Fron-
tiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, vol. 8, 2021.
[31] A. M. Gamba, J. S. Fonseca, D. A. Méndez, A. Viloria, D. Fajardo, N. C. Moreno,
and I. C. Rojas, “Assessment of different plasticizer–polyhydroxyalkanoate mixtures
to obtain biodegradable polymeric films,” Chemical Engineering Transactions, vol. 57,
pp. 1363–1368, 2017.
[32] S. Ügdüler, K. M. Van Geem, M. Roosen, E. I. Delbeke, and S. De Meester, “Challenges
and opportunities of solvent-based additive extraction methods for plastic recycling,”
Waste management, vol. 104, pp. 148–182, 2020.
[33] S. Snigdha, K. Nandakumar, T. Sabu, and E. Radhakrishnan, “Cloisite 10a as an effec-
tive antibacterial agent in polymer matrices: role of nanoscale roughness and interfacial
interactions,” Clays and Clay Minerals, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 289–298, 2021.
[34] T. T. Santos, T. G. Almeida, D. D. Morais, F. D. Magalhães, R. M. Guedes, E. L.
Canedo, and L. H. Carvalho, “Effect of filler type on properties of pbat/organoclay
nanocomposites,” Polymer Bulletin, vol. 77, pp. 901–917, 2020.
[35] L. Pardo, J. A. Cecilia, C. López-Moreno, V. Hernández, M. Pozo, M. J. Bentabol, and
F. Franco, “Influence of the structure and experimental surfaces modifications of 2: 1
clay minerals on the adsorption properties of methylene blue,” Minerals, vol. 8, no. 8,
p. 359, 2018.
[36] N. B. Hartmann, K. A. Jensen, A. Baun, K. Rasmussen, H. Rauscher, R. Tantra,
D. Cupi, D. Gilliland, F. Pianella, and J. M. Riego Sintes, “Techniques and protocols
for dispersing nanoparticle powders in aqueous mediaâis there a rationale for harmo-
nization?,” Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part B, vol. 18, no. 6,
pp. 299–326, 2015.
[37] T. Instruments, Applying the Avrami and Malkin Macrokinetic Models for Evaluating
Isothermal Crystallization Kinetics of Polypropylene with and without a Chemical Nu-
cleator.
Page 90 of 93
==PAGE:99==
Master Thesis
References
[38] A. Fenghui, L. Bo, Z. Deqin, L. Jinlong, and S. Yuhui, “Recrystallization kinetics of fe-
3% si after deformation at high strain rate and high temperature,” Materials Research,
vol. 22, 2019.
[39] J. Pelleg, Mechanical properties of materials, vol. 190. Springer, 2013.
[40] P. Marzbani, H. Resalati, A. Ghasemian, A. Shakeri, et al., “Surface modification of talc
particles with phthalimide: study of composite structure and consequences on physi-
cal, mechanical, and optical properties of deinked pulp,” BioResources, vol. 11, no. 4,
pp. 8720–8738, 2016.
[41] A. R. A. Melo, J. C. Dutra Filho, R. P. C. Neto, W. S. Ferreira, B. S. Archanjo, R. V.
Curti, M. I. B. Tavares, et al., “Effect of ultra-turrax on nanocellulose produced by
acid hydrolysis and modified by nano zno by sol-gel method,” Materials Sciences and
Applications, vol. 11, no. 02, p. 150, 2020.
[42] B. Sauer, W. Kampert, E. N. Blanchard, S. Threefoot, and B. Hsiao, “Temperature
modulated dsc studies of melting and recrystallization in polymers exhibiting multiple
endotherms,” Polymer, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1099–1108, 2000.
[43] R. M. R. Wellen, M. S. Rabello, I. C. Araujo Júnior, G. J. M. Fechine, and E. L. Canedo,
“Melting and crystallization of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate): effect of heating/cooling rates
on phase transformation,” Polímeros, vol. 25, pp. 296–304, 2015.
[44] L. Goebel and C. Bonten, “Crystallization behavior of polyhydroxybutyrate (phb),” in
AIP conference proceedings, vol. 1779, AIP Publishing, 2016.
[45] H. Chen, C. Ma, W. Bai, D. Chen, and C. Xiong, “Isothermal crystallization and melting
behavior of composites composed of poly (l-lactic acid) and poly (glycolic acid) fibers,”
Journal of Macromolecular Science, Part B, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 1715–1725, 2014.
[46] A. T. Lorenzo, M. L. Arnal, J. Albuerne, and A. J. Müller, “Dsc isothermal polymer
crystallization kinetics measurements and the use of the avrami equation to fit the data:
Guidelines to avoid common problems,” Polymer testing, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 222–231,
2007.
[47] K. Shirzad and C. Viney, “A critical review on applications of the avrami equation
beyond materials science,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface, vol. 20, no. 203,
p. 20230242, 2023.
[48] J. Martínez, J. Diéguez, J. Ares, A. Pereira, and J. Pérez, “Modelization and structural
analysis of fdm parts,” in AIP Conference Proceedings, vol. 1431, pp. 842–848, American
Institute of Physics, 2012.
[49] J.
Qian,
Investigation
of
Crystallization
of
Poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyvalerates) and their Bamboo Fiber Reinforced Composites.
PhD thesis,
Washington State University, 2006.
Page 91 of 93
==PAGE:100==
Master Thesis
References
[50] N. Jacquel, K. Tajima, N. Nakamura, H. Kawachi, P. Pan, and Y. Inoue, “Nucleation
mechanism of polyhydroxybutyrate and poly (hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyhexanoate)
crystallized by orotic acid as a nucleating agent,” Journal of applied polymer science,
vol. 115, no. 2, pp. 709–715, 2010.
[51] P. Pan, G. Shan, Y. Bao, and Z. Weng, “Crystallization kinetics of bacterial poly (3-
hydroxylbutyrate) copolyesters with cyanuric acid as a nucleating agent,” Journal of
applied polymer science, vol. 129, no. 3, pp. 1374–1382, 2013.
[52] J. Tian, R. Zhang, Y. Wu, and P. Xue, “Additive manufacturing of wood flour/poly-
hydroxyalkanoates (pha) fully bio-based composites based on micro-screw extrusion
system,” Materials & Design, vol. 199, p. 109418, 2021.
[53] J. Chen, D. Wu, and K. Pan, “Effects of ethyl cellulose on the crystallization and
mechanical properties of poly (β-hydroxybutyrate),” International journal of biological
macromolecules, vol. 88, pp. 120–129, 2016.
[54] J. Bian, H. L. Lin, G. Wang, Q. Zhou, Z. J. Wang, X. Zhou, Y. Lu, and X. W. Zhao,
“Morphological, mechanical and thermal properties of chemically bonded graphene oxide
nanocomposites with biodegradable poly (3-hydroxybutyrate) by solution intercalation,”
Polymers and Polymer Composites, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 133–141, 2016.
[55] L. Zhang, X. Deng, S. Zhao, and Z. Huang, “Biodegradable polymer blends of poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate) and hydroxyethyl cellulose acetate,” Polymer, vol. 38, no. 24,
pp. 6001–6007, 1997.
[56] H.-T. Liao and C.-S. Wu, “Performance of an acrylic-acid-grafted poly (3-hydroxybutyric
acid)/starch bio-blend: characterization and physical properties,” Designed monomers
and polymers, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2007.
[57] Y. Miao, C. Fang, D. Shi, Y. Li, and Z. Wang, “Coupling effects of boron nitride and
heat treatment on crystallization, mechanical properties of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-
3-hydroxyvalerate)(phbv),” Polymer, vol. 252, p. 124967, 2022.
[58] A. Buzarovska,
A. Grozdanov,
M. Avella,
G. Gentile,
and M. Errico,
“Poly
(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate)/titanium dioxide nanocomposites: a degradation
study,” Journal of applied polymer science, vol. 114, no. 5, pp. 3118–3124, 2009.
[59] F. Valentini, A. Dorigato, D. Rigotti, and A. Pegoretti, “Polyhydroxyalkanoates/fibril-
lated nanocellulose composites for additive manufacturing,” Journal of Polymers and
the Environment, vol. 27, pp. 1333–1341, 2019.
[60] N. Jacquel, K. Tajima, N. Nakamura, T. Miyagawa, P. Pan, and Y. Inoue, “Ef-
fect of orotic acid as a nucleating agent on the crystallization of bacterial poly (3-
hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) copolymers,” Journal of applied polymer sci-
ence, vol. 114, no. 2, pp. 1287–1294, 2009.
Page 92 of 93
==PAGE:101==
Master Thesis
References
[61] L. Wang, X. Wang, W. Zhu, Z. Chen, J. Pan, and K. Xu, “Effect of nucleation agents on
the crystallization of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate)(p3/4hb),” Journal
of applied polymer science, vol. 116, no. 2, pp. 1116–1123, 2010.
Page 93 of 93
==PAGE:102==
Master Thesis
7
Appendix A
7.1
Summary of additives for PHB blends
Cite
Aditive
Tc
∆Hm c (J/g)
[49]
PHB
78,6
66,8
BN
110,3
74,4
Thymine
106,1
73,3
Melamine
94,2
70,4
Saccharin
96,9
68
Abeitic acid
83,6
67,1
Trithiocyanuric acid
86,2
53,9
NCC
86,9
60,6
[50]
KBr
96,8
Talc
102,7
Orotic acid
121,4
Table 25: Summary of different nucleating agents with 1% w/w in the crystallization of PHB
Page i of lv
==PAGE:103==
Master Thesis
7.1
Summary of additives for PHB blends
Cite
Nucleating agent
Proportion
Tg
Tc
Tm
∆Hm (J/g)
Xc
[51]
Cyanuric acid
0
173,4
86,5
59,2
1
175,4
87,3
59,8
[24]
Thymine
0
135.5-154.2
43.2
0,2
171.8-177-7
60,3
0,5
164,7-173,5
63
1
168,9-173,6
65,8
[24]
CNC
0
17,3
153-167,6
55,1
2
16,9
160,6-170,8
56,6
4
15,3
160,5-170,4
53,7
5
15,6
161-170,4
52,9
[24]
Bacterial Cellulose Nanofibers
0
14,2
163,8-170,5
57,9
0,5
164,2-169
57,4
1
163,3-170,5
58,3
[26]
BC
2
17,1
163,6-170,5
58
5
14,9
164,4-169
57
[52]
Wood Fiber
0
1,1
178,4
68,7
30
-2
172,2
59,9
[24]
Coconut Fiber
0
168,1
52,8
10
177,9
34,4
20
167,6
33,8
[24]
Lignin
0
3,9
175
59,8
5
2,6
174,4
60
15
4,8
173,3
57,7
30
3,8
171,4
60,1
[24]
Agave fiber
0
10,2
152,7-162,6
44,1
10
11,2
151,2-161,7
46,2
20
10,8
151,7-161,8
46,1
30
11,1
150,8-161,8
44,9
[53]
Ethyl cellulose (EC)
0
92,6
167,1-175,7
97,5
66,8
1
80,7
167,8-175,9
84,5
58,5
5
71,1
173,6-173,1
87,5
63,1
20
69,5
167,5-175,4
72,1
91,7
[54]
Graphene Oxide nanocomposites
0
106,4
162,8
26,1
41,4
0,25
103,1
165,2
17,7
40,4
0,5
106,6
167,2
14,2
44,3
1
108
165,5
22,2
51,1
2
108,1
166,5
14,9
39,9
4
107,6
166,2
16,1
44,8
[55]
HECA hydroxyetthyl cellulose acetate
0
84
169,8
73,1
20
8,5
61,8
173,4
62,4
40
9,92
67,4
172,6
46
60
8,06
66,9
172,4
32,2
[56]
Starch
0
173,1
78,5
10
172,2
50,6
20
171,3
40,2
30
170,8
35,6
40
170,6
31,3
50
170,3
26,9
Table 26: Summary of different proportions of additives in PHB
Page ii of lv
==PAGE:104==
Master Thesis
7.2
Summary of additives for PHBV blends
7.2
Summary of additives for PHBV blends
Cite
HV proportion
Aditive
Proportion
Tg
Tc
Tm
∆Hm1 (J/g)
Xc1 (%)
[27]
Miscanthus (lignin)
15
176.19
75.06
68,86
25
174.66
63.61
68,65
Distillersâ dried grains with solubles
15
171.13
57.74
70,62
25
174.07
66.24
71,49
[23]
1% HV
NCC
0
84,8
163,7 - 172,1
0,25
85,1
166,3 - 173,1
0,5
92,3
166,4 - 173
1
87,8
167,1 -172,7
[51]
10% HV
CA
1
143,6-154,4
56,5
38,7
BN
1
141,7-153,4
54,6
37,4
URACIL
1
141,9-153,5
53,9
36,9
OA
1
143,1-154,1
55
37,7
[57]
9% HV
BN
1
120,2
172,7
89,6
62
2
120,9
172,2
86,4
60,4
3
122
173,1
83,4
58,8
[58]
13 % HV
TiO2
0
96
145-155
48
0,5
97
147-157
46
1
98
148-157
46
2
98-101
147-157
46
5
94-102
147-157
47
10
102
148-157
47
[24]
12 % HV
Argave fiber
0
16,7
135,7-148,7
45,3
10
15,4
142,6-152,5
45,3
20
17
142-152,5
43
30
16
142-15,9
40,9
[24]
PHBV
0
-1,3
161,6
9,6
Nanocellulose
15
0,1
169,1
12,7
Walnut shells flour
15
0
167,1
12,1
Egg shell flour
15
-0,7
163,8
12,2
Volcanic tuff
15
0,4
168,6
13
[24]
12% HV
CNC
0
37
136
37
1
47,6
149
47,6
3
50,7
154
50,7
5
38,4
138
38,4
CNC/Al2O3
01:01
45,2
137
45,2
03:03
57
155
57
5.5
52
139
52
Table 27: Summary of different proportions of additives in PHBV
Page iii of lv
==PAGE:105==
Master Thesis
7.3
Summary of additives for other PHA blends
Cite
HV proportion
Aditive
Proportion
Tg
Tc
∆Hm c (J/g)
Tm
Youngâs modulus (MPa)
Tensile strenght (MPa)
Elongation to break (%)
[49]
8% HV
PHBV
8,6
52,2
20,7
BN
1
8,6
99,7
53,6
Thymine
1
92,3
51,5
melamine
1
73,5
50
saccharin
1
59,3
36,3
abeitic acid
1
61,1
21,7
trithiocyanuric acid
1
63,4
16,1
NCC
1
57,8
17,5
BPF
20
10,2
75,2
53,3
BPF/BN
20/1
10,2
104,5
57,1
[49]
12 % HV
PHBV
51,6
19,8
BN
1
88,3
46,7
Thymine
1
80,5
45,6
melamine
1
57,3
26,5
saccharin
1
50,8
27,3
[49]
21 % HV
BN
1
65,5
26,2
Thymine
1
59,5
24
[26]
6% HV
PHBV
109,2
159,1
481
31
8,5
Cloisite 30B organoclay
1
111,4
156,4
555
32
7,6
2
113,1
154,7
730
35
7,7
3
115,2
154,3
795
33
5,6
Table 28: Summary of the effect of different additives in PHBV
7.3
Summary of additives for other PHA blends
Cite
Aditive
Proportion
Tg
Tc
Tm
∆Hm1 (J/g)
Youngâs modulus (MPa)
Tensile strenght (MPa)
Elongation to break (%)
[59]
PHBH
3,8
44,6
139,4
897
21.6
7.3
NC
0,5
-0,2
47,4
138,6
1259
23.1
8.0
1
0,1
43,8
139,7
1051
21.7
8.6
3
2
46,1
137,7
1014
19.6
8.1
[51]
10%HH
PHBH
64,8
111,6
33,8
CA
1
40,8
[60]
10%HH
PHBH
1
-2,5
78,7
23
BN
1
-5,4
52,2
43,7
OA
1
-11,3
[60]
18%HH
PHBH
1
-5,3
BN
1
-1,5
76,9
13
OA
1
-6,8
57,1
5,8
[24]
PHBH
5,9
141,2
1715 +/- 71
23,1 +/-1,6
3,7 +/-0,4
Microfibrillated cellulose
10
6,4
143,5
42,4
1812+/-133
26,1 +/-0,6
2,7 +/-0,4
[25]
12% 4HB
P(3HB-co-4HB)
-7
68
126
520 +/- 18
16 +/- 0,5
10,2 +/-1,8
P(3HB-co-4HB)/MMT
3
-7
58
122
486 +/- 16
14,5 +/- 0,6
11,4 +/- 4,3
5
-7
58
120
584 +/- 4
15,4 +/ 0,6
10,9 +/- 1,9
P(3HB-co-4HB)/Sep
3
-4
60
133
544 +/- 14
15,5 +/-0,5
7,7 +/-0,5
5
-4
60
134
658 +/- 14
15,6 +/- 1,9
7 +/- 1,1
[61]
7,63 % 4HB
P(3HB-co-4HB)/BN
0
-3,5
53
113,2-127,9
39,69
0,1
-3
56
114,9-128,6
37,27
0,3
-2,8
64,3
118,3-131
38,74
0,5
-3
74,7
121,7-133,8
37,05
1
-3,1
73,4
121,2-133,5
32,3
1,5
-3,6
77,7
122,6-134,6
34,16
2
-3,4
78,8
123,1-134,7
33,91
5
-3,2
79,7
123,6-135,1
29,03
Table 29: Summary of different proportions of additives in different PHAs
7.4
Summary of plasticizers
Page iv of lv
==PAGE:106==
Master Thesis
7.4
Summary of plasticizers
Difference between PHB
Name
% w/w
Tg
Tm
EB (%)
TS (MPa)
YM (MPa)
Tg
Tm
EB
TS
YM
PHB
Glycerol
13
170
0,9
24,8
2835
-7
-7
-12,1
-8,2
2605
Triacetyl glycerol
20
-16,7
161
10,3
14,1
238,4
-23,7
-16
-2,7
-18,9
8,4
Dioctyl phthalate
20
-9,4
164,5
10,5
18
448
-16,4
-12,5
-2,5
-15
218
Dioctyl adipate
30
-6,9
165,3
6,2
16,1
576
-13,9
-11,7
-6,8
-16,9
346
Dioctyl secabate
30
-3,6
163,5
4,3
6
374
-10,6
-13,5
-8,7
-27
144
Propylene glycol
17
171
0,9
24,9
3360
-6
-12,1
-8,1
3130
Triethyl acetate
20
-30
164
2,3
15,8
1135
-37
-13
-10,7
-17,2
905
Soybean oil
20
-3,4
161
15
-10,4
-16
-13
-18
Epoxidized soybean oil
13-20
-19
160
1
30
2729
-26
-17
-12
-3
2499
Castor oil
13
171
0,9
27,1
3089
-6
-12,1
-5,9
2859
Triethyl citrate
30
-24
21
18,6
960
-31
8
-14,4
730
Tributyl citrate
30
-23
32
9,4
800
-30
19
-23,6
570
Acetylbutyrytrihexyl citrate
30
-30,7
156,8
9,7
6,1
192,7
-37,7
-20,2
-3,3
-26,9
-37,3
Salicylic acid decylester
30
-28
104
11,8
850
-35
91
-21,2
620
Salicylic acid 2-butyloctyl decylester
30
-28
22
13,5
910
-35
9
-19,5
680
Acetylsalicylic and hexylester
30
-14
126
11,8
680
-21
113
-21,2
450
Ketoprofenethylester
30
-14
58
11,8
600
-21
45
-21,2
370
polyhydroxy-butyrate-hexanoate
PHB -1/6
-10
102
9,8
25
-17
-75
-3,2
-8
-230
Polyethylene glycol
50
170
1
23
2700
-7
-12
-10
2470
Linalool
20
-11
174
5,2
20
560
-18
-3
-7,8
-13
330
Geraniol
20
-9
179
5,9
21
760
-16
2
-7,1
-12
530
Geranyl acetate
20
-13
170
13,8
15
395
-20
-7
0,8
-18
165
Dodecanol
10
7
155
0
-22
Lauric acid
10
4
171
-3
-6
Tributyrin
10
1
172
-6
-5
Trilaurin
10
-4
173
-11
-4
Table 30: Summary of plasticizers used with PHB [30] and their increase or decrease of properties comparing to raw PHB
[28]
Page v of lv
==PAGE:107==
Master Thesis
8
Appendix B
In the next two pages it can be found the Chemical Risk Assessment of the chloroform.
Page vi of lv
==PAGE:108==
Chemical Risk Assessment at DTU Chemical Engineering 
By AKJER april 2018 
 
Chemical Risk Assessment  
Fill out open fields (delete/replace existing guiding text). Information can be found at https://www.kemibrug.dk. 
Short title 
Chloroform CRS 
Full title 
Chemical Risk Assessment of Chloroform for the use in Master Thesis experiments 
Limits of usage  (Relevant issues from  KBA) 
 
Research center 
Risø 
Lyngby 
Building, room 
Set-up, if any 
DPC 
 
x 
227, 925 
 
Classification of chemicals (Kemibrug KBA, directory section) 
Name and CAS no. 
H- and P-sentences 
Pictogram, if any 
Chloroform  
 
 67-66-3 
H331: Toxic if inhaled. 
H302: Harmful if swallowed. 
H319: Causes serious eye irritation. 
H315: Causes skin irritation. 
H336: May cause drowsiness or 
dizziness. 
H351: Suspected of causing cancer. 
H361d: Suspected of damaging the 
unborn child. 
H372: Causes damage to organs 
through prolonged or repeated 
exposure. 
H412: Harmful to aquatic life with 
long lasting effects. 
P261: Avoid breathing vapours and 
aerosol 
P280: Wear protective gloves/eye 
protection. 
P304+340: IF INHALED: Remove 
person to fresh air and keep 
comfortable for breathing. 
P305+351+338: IF IN EYES: 
Rinse cautiously with water for 
several minutes. Remove contact 
lenses, if present and easy to do. 
Continue rinsing. 
P308+313: IF exposed or 
concerned: Get medical 
advice/attention. 
 
==PAGE:109==
Chemical Risk Assessment at DTU Chemical Engineering 
By AKJER april 2018 
P273: Avoid release to the 
environment. 
Is the chemical covered by 
executive order 1795, §47-50? 
(SDS section A) 
No 
Yes 
If “Yes”: Has the use been approved by the Danish 
Working Environment Authority? 
x 
 
 
Description of chemicals/products (Relevant issues from  KBA, section D) 
Colorless liquid miscible with ethanol, benzene, diethyl ether, petroleum ether, carbon disulfide and oils. Soluble in 
acetone, carbon tetrachloride. It has incompatibility with a.o. strong oxidizing agents, strong bases, some metals. 
Rubber, some plastics. Light, moisture.  
Besides, it evaporates quickly . 
Description of safe work process  
Necessary precautions and safety arrangements (Relevant issues from KBA, section C) 
The chemical should be used in a ventilated fume cupboard to avoid contact with globes to protect the skin of the hands. 
In the room of use there should also be emergency showers, eye wash bottles and a sink with soap. The gloves used have 
to be collected and treated as chemical trash. The fume cupboard must be rinsed after the use. 
 
Frequency of use 
Weekly 
Precautions regarding accidental spill and waste handling  (Relevant issues from KBA, section F) 
Evacuate room and ventilate. Avoid contact with the substance and use gloves and breathing equipment with filter to 
soak the spill with sand or vermiculite. The waste has to be collected and disposed as a chemical waste. 
 
Collection of waste  
Waste group 
UN no. 
 
B 
1888 
Safety instructions for storage  (Relevant issues from KBA, section H) 
Must be stored in a sealed in a well-ventilated chemical cabinet. 
 The storage should be under lock in cupboards or rooms which are fitted with warning boards (toxic substances). 
Substitution analysis  (SDS, section I) 
 
Name 
Date 
Signature 
Risk assessment completed by 
Sara Abarca 
16/11/23 
SADLM 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Leader/supervisor * 
 
 
 
Technician ** 
 
 
 
Work environment representative*** 
 
 
 
Leader representative*** 
 
 
 
 
*) Must be approved by leader/supervisor to ensure that the content of the CRA complies with the current work with the 
chemical. This provides the basis for the following approvals 
**) The technician (who helps you) can approve, if the CRA is not covered be scenario 2 – see *** 
***) Chemical Risk Assessment according to scenario 2 must be approved by the local Work Environmental Group (AMG). 
A copy of the CRA is uploaded to P:\Arbejdsmiljø og Sikkerhed\3. Kemiteknik\3.2 CRA, into the appropriate sub folders. 
The AMU secretary is advised for the CRA to be presented for the Work Environment Organization. 
==PAGE:110==
Master Thesis
9
Appendix C
This appendix will contain the test results performed in the thesis.
9.1
FTIR spectra
Figure 63: FTIR Commercial mix 10% talc
Page ix of lv
==PAGE:111==
Master Thesis
9.1
FTIR spectra
Figure 64: FTIR first attempt of removal
Figure 65: FTIR second attempt of removal
Page x of lv
==PAGE:112==
Master Thesis
9.1
FTIR spectra
Figure 66: Clay additives
Figure 67: Cyanuric acid
Figure 68: Cellulose additives
Page xi of lv
==PAGE:113==
Master Thesis
9.1
FTIR spectra
Figure 69: PHA_C10A films
Figure 70: PHA_C30B films
Figure 71: PHA_Sep films
Page xii of lv
==PAGE:114==
Master Thesis
9.1
FTIR spectra
Figure 72: PHA_CA films
Figure 73: PHA_CNC films
Figure 74: PHA_CNF films
Page xiii of lv
==PAGE:115==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 75: TGA PHA
Page xiv of lv
==PAGE:116==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 76: TGA PHA_NT
Figure 77: TGA PHA_NA
Page xv of lv
==PAGE:117==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 78: TGA from PHA_C10A 0.5%
Figure 79: TGA from PHA_C10A 1%
Page xvi of lv
==PAGE:118==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 80: TGA from PHA_C10A 3%
Figure 81: TGA from PHA_C30B 0.5%
Page xvii of lv
==PAGE:119==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 82: TGA from PHA_C30B 1%
Figure 83: TGA from PHA_C30B 3%
Page xviii of lv
==PAGE:120==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 84: TGA from PHA_Sep 0.5%
Figure 85: TGA from PHA_Sep 1%
Page xix of lv
==PAGE:121==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 86: TGA from PHA_Sep 3%
Figure 87: TGA from PHA_CA 0.5%
Page xx of lv
==PAGE:122==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 88: TGA from PHA_CA 1%
Figure 89: TGA from PHA_CA 3%
Page xxi of lv
==PAGE:123==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 90: TGA from PHA_CNC 0.5%
Figure 91: TGA from PHA_CNC 1%
Page xxii of lv
==PAGE:124==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 92: TGA from PHA_CNC 3%
Figure 93: TGA from PHA_CNF 0.5%
Page xxiii of lv
==PAGE:125==
Master Thesis
9.2
TGA samples
Figure 94: TGA from PHA_CNF 1%
Figure 95: TGA from PHA_CNF 3%
Page xxiv of lv
==PAGE:126==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
9.3
DSC analysis
These DSC analysis consist of two samples per each material with aging. The first samples
are:
Figure 96: DSC PHA
Page xxv of lv
==PAGE:127==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 97: DSC PHA_NT
Figure 98: DSC PHA_NA
Page xxvi of lv
==PAGE:128==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 99: DSC PHA_C10A 0.5%
Figure 100: DSC PHA_C10A 1%
Page xxvii of lv
==PAGE:129==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 101: DSC PHA_C10A 3%
Figure 102: DSC PHA_C30B 0.5%
Page xxviii of lv
==PAGE:130==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 103: DSC PHA_C30B 1%
Figure 104: DSC PHA_C30B 3%
Page xxix of lv
==PAGE:131==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 105: DSC PHA_Sep 0.5%
Figure 106: DSC PHA_Sep 1%
Page xxx of lv
==PAGE:132==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 107: DSC PHA_Sep 3%
Figure 108: DSC PHA_CA 0.5%
Page xxxi of lv
==PAGE:133==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 109: DSC PHA_CA 1%
Figure 110: DSC PHA_CA 3%
Page xxxii of lv
==PAGE:134==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 111: DSC PHA_CNC 0.5%
Figure 112: DSC PHA_CNC 1%
Page xxxiii of lv
==PAGE:135==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 113: DSC PHA_CNC 3%
Figure 114: DSC PHA_CNF 0.5%
Page xxxiv of lv
==PAGE:136==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 115: DSC PHA_CNF 1%
Figure 116: DSC PHA_CNF 3%
Page xxxv of lv
==PAGE:137==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
9.3.1
DSC after aging
In this section it can be seen the graphs with the first heating of the material with aging
time.
Figure 117: DSC PHA after aging
Figure 118: DSC PHA_NT after aging
Page xxxvi of lv
==PAGE:138==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 119: DSC PHA_NA after aging
Figure 120: DSC PHA_C10A 0.5% after aging
Figure 121: DSC PHA_C10A 1% after aging
Page xxxvii of lv
==PAGE:139==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 122: DSC PHA_C10A 3% after aging
Figure 123: DSC PHA_C30B 0.5% after aging
Figure 124: DSC PHA_C30B 1% after aging
Page xxxviii of lv
==PAGE:140==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 125: DSC PHA_C30B 3% after aging
Figure 126: DSC PHA_Sep 0.5% after aging
Figure 127: DSC PHA_Sep 1% after aging
Page xxxix of lv
==PAGE:141==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 128: DSC PHA_Sep 3% after aging
Figure 129: DSC PHA_CA 0.5% after aging
Figure 130: DSC PHA_CA 1% after aging
Page xl of lv
==PAGE:142==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 131: DSC PHA_CA 3% after aging
Figure 132: DSC PHA_CNC 0.5% after aging
Figure 133: DSC PHA_CNC 1% after aging
Page xli of lv
==PAGE:143==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 134: DSC PHA_CNC 3% after aging
Figure 135: DSC PHA_CNF 0.5% after aging
Figure 136: DSC PHA_CNF 1% after aging
Page xlii of lv
==PAGE:144==
Master Thesis
9.3
DSC analysis
Figure 137: DSC PHA_CNF 3% after aging
Page xliii of lv
==PAGE:145==
Master Thesis
9.4
Mechanical testing
9.4
Mechanical testing
Figure 138: Tensile testing PHA
Figure 139: Tensile testing PHA_NT
Page xliv of lv
==PAGE:146==
Master Thesis
9.4
Mechanical testing
Figure 140: Tensile testing PHA_NT, five samples with 1 week of aging. Sample 1 and 2
were a trial with other dimensions. Only samples 3, 4 and 5 were used in the study
Figure 141: Tensile testing PHA_C10A 1%
Page xlv of lv
==PAGE:147==
Master Thesis
9.4
Mechanical testing
Figure 142: Tensile testing PHA_C30B 1%
Figure 143: Tensile testing PHA_Sep 1%
Page xlvi of lv
==PAGE:148==
Master Thesis
9.4
Mechanical testing
Figure 144: Tensile testing PHA_CA 1%
Figure 145: Tensile testing PHA_CNC 1%
Page xlvii of lv
==PAGE:149==
Master Thesis
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 146: Tensile testing PHA_CNF 1%
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 147: Tensile testing PHA sample 1 with 1 month of aging
Page xlviii of lv
==PAGE:150==
Master Thesis
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 148: Tensile testing PHA sample 2 with 1 month of aging
Figure 149: Tensile testing PHA_NT three samples with 1 month of aging. Sample one was
a trial with other dimensions. Only samples 2 and 3 were used in the study
Page xlix of lv
==PAGE:151==
Master Thesis
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 150: Tensile testing PHA_C10A 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
Figure 151: Tensile testing PHA_C10A 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
Page l of lv
==PAGE:152==
Master Thesis
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 152: Tensile testing PHA_C30B 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
Figure 153: Tensile testing PHA_C30B 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
Page li of lv
==PAGE:153==
Master Thesis
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 154: Tensile testing PHA_Sep 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
Figure 155: Tensile testing PHA_Sep 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
Page lii of lv
==PAGE:154==
Master Thesis
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 156: Tensile testing PHA_CA 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
Figure 157: Tensile testing PHA_CA 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
Page liii of lv
==PAGE:155==
Master Thesis
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 158: Tensile testing PHA_CNC 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
Figure 159: Tensile testing PHA_CNC 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
Page liv of lv
==PAGE:156==
Master Thesis
9.5
Mechanical testing one month after
Figure 160: Tensile testing PHA_CNF 1% sample 1 with 1 month of aging
Figure 161: Tensile testing PHA_CNF 1% sample 2 with 1 month of aging
Page lv of lv
