==PAGE:1==
Defending
Face
Impersonation
Detectors
against Adversarial Attacks
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Muhammad Haseeb Kamal
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Computer Science, De­
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science (DTU Compute), at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, and at the German National Research Center for Applied
Cybersecurity (ATHENE) in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engi­
neering, MSc Eng.
It was supervised by Associate Professor Christian Damsgaard Jensen (DTU Compute),
Professor Christoph Busch (da/sec ATHENE), Mathias Ibsen (da/sec ATHENE), and Dr.
Lazaro Janier Gonzalez­Soler (da/sec ATHENE).
Muhammad Haseeb Kamal ­ s205563
Signature
Date
ii
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
08/03/24
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Face recognition systems are a popular choice for biometric authentication. However,
they are known to be vulnerable to presentation and morphing attacks. To mitigate security
risks of these attacks, face impersonation detectors for detecting presentation or morphing
attacks are deployed in conjunction with face recognition systems. However, since these
detectors are based on deep neural networks they are prone to another class of attacks
known as adversarial attacks. The vulnerability of face impersonation detectors against
adversarial attacks is not well­researched. This thesis aimed to assess this vulnerability
through a variety of black­box adversarial attacks. The thesis also investigated the impact
of the impersonation attacks on multiple face recognition systems before and after the
adversarial attacks were applied to fool the impersonation detectors. A secondary aim
was to evaluate defence mechanisms to mitigate the risk of adversarial attacks.
It has been shown through experimental results that both presentation attack detectors
and morphing attack detectors are vulnerable to query­based black­box attacks. In this
regard, morphing attack detectors have been shown to be more vulnerable to adversarial
attacks than the tested presentation attack detectors. The vulnerability of face recognition
systems against attacks has also been shown. These vulnerabilities have been shown
through analysis of various standardised metrics such as detection equal error rates and
impostor attack presentation accept rates. Following this, it has been shown that both
detector types can be defended against the attacks with varying success rates. To this
end, defensive distillation was used on the presentation attack detectors while adversarial
training was used on the morphing attack detectors. The former in this case led to a
greater increase in model robustness.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all my supervisors and especially Christoph Busch for the opportunity
to write the thesis with the da/sec group. I am grateful for the scholarship that sponsored
my short stay in Darmstadt. I would like also to express immense gratitude to Mathias
and Janier for their guidance and support throughout the project phase.
My family and cousins have been very supportive of all my efforts and been by my side
during my highs and lows. To them I extend my deepest gratitude.
iv
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Biometric Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Face Recognition Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Impersonation Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Impersonation Attack Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Adversarial Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6
Defence Mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Foundations
17
3.1
PAD Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
MAD Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Face Recognition Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Query­Based Black Box Adversarial Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Methodology
25
4.1
Databases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Data Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Impersonation Detector Model Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Attack Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.5
General Evaluation Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.6
Defence Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.7
Defence Evaluation Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Vulnerability Analysis
33
5.1
Adversarial Attacks Applied on Presentation Attack Samples
. . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Adversarial Attacks Applied on Morphing Attack Samples . . . . . . . . . . 41
6
Defence Analysis
53
6.1
Impact of Defensive Distillation on PAD Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.2
Impact of Adversarial Training on MAD Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7
Discussion on Defence
59
7.1
High attack performance for U →D protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.2
Low attack performance for D →D protocol for the HSJA and SignOpt attacks 60
7.3
High attack performance for D →D protocol for the SA attack . . . . . . . . 60
8
Conclusion
63
8.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Bibliography
67
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
v
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
73
A.1 Pseudocode for Implemented Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.2 Data Preprocessing Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.3 Norm tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.4 T­EER plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
vi
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
A biometric system is a system that carries out biometric recognition of individuals based
on their behavioural and biological characteristics [1]. Biometrics concerns itself firstly
with the security domain in the form of access control. Access control may be defined as
selective restriction to a place or a resource which may be physical or digital. This can
for example be, access to a smartphone, or border control at immigration checkpoints.
Biometrics is also used in the forensics domain for law enforcement. Camera surveillance
in shops, identifying suspects involved in a crime and maintaining a criminal database are
just a few examples.
For access control there exist many forms with which authentication can be achieved
[2]. The first category is something an individual knows, e.g.: a password or PIN. The
main drawbacks here are that passwords and PINs are hard to remember especially if
they are numerous which is often the case. Furthermore, there exist many techniques to
hack passwords especially if they are weak. The most common are brute­force attacks,
dictionary attacks, and rainbow attacks [3]. Brute­force attacks involve trying a variety of
possible passwords through permutations of characters in a sequence. Dictionary attacks
are similar but they work on the assumption that passwords are chosen using certain
patterns. Likely passwords are collected in dictionaries and an attack is launched by trying
out every entry in the dictionary. Stored passwords are also augmented with numbers,
letters or characters. Lastly, rainbow attacks involve compiling a list of passwords and
their corresponding hashed values. Once a data breach occurs, the hashes obtained are
compared to the stored ones. If they match the plain­text password can be retrieved. The
second category is something an individual owns, e.g.: an access card, or a key. Here,
there is a risk of losing the token or having it stolen. Some individuals require several
tokens granting access to several resources. And although there is nothing to remember
it becomes cumbersome to safeguard and manage this list of ever­growing tokens.
The last category is something an individual is, e.g.: body characteristics. This is es­
sentially biometrics and comprises everything from facial features, to fingerprints and iris
patterns of an individual. The advantages of this form of authentication are obvious. With
the previous two categories there were risks of loosing or forwarding the token or forget­
ting the password. With biometrics this is more challenging. It follows that it is also a lot
more convenient as a result.
When compared to PINs, biometrics are superior as biometric characteristics contain
more entropy than a corresponding 4 or 6­digit PIN. For reference, a 6­digit PIN has less
than 20bit entropy, whereas fingerprints, and iris have 84bit and 249 bit respectively [4],
[5]. Face and voice have 56bit and 127bit respectively [6], [7]. This higher entropy makes
biometrics less vulnerable to hacks than short PINs and objectively offer more security.
Finally, biometric authentication offers non­repudiation of transactions which is not offered
in case of token based access, e.g. with PINs and passwords. This is so because au­
thentication is tied directly to the user’s unique biological characteristic. This characteristic
cannot be lent or stolen in the traditional sense.
Face recognition is one of the most popular form of biometric recognition. Ease of cap­
turing the face with inexpensive hardware and the non­intrusive nature of data capture
makes face recognition the preferred mode in many scenarios. The market size for face
recognition was valued at USD 5.15 billion in 2022 with an expected compound annual
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
1
==PAGE:10==
growth rate of 14.9% from 2023 to 2030 [8]. Face recognition systems are also being
increasingly used for access control and for security & surveillance. In fact, in 2020 84%
of U.S. Customs and Border Protection airport biometrics were from facial recognition
systems [9]. Furthermore, face recognition models have surpassed humans in terms of
accuracy on certain benchmarks (e.g. “GaussianFace” model on LFW dataset) [10].
Traditionally, face recognition was done using hand­crafted feature extractors and later
using machine learning techniques. However, they have since been replaced with deep
learning techniques based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [11] which achieve
both high accuracy and good generalizability [12]. DeepFace released in 2014, was the
first breakthrough in deep learning based face recognition and has since been superseded
by state­of­the art models such as ArcFace and more recently FaceNet, [13], [14]. Deep
neural networks have propelled the use of face recognition systems and led to signifi­
cant performance improvements over time. High recognition accuracy achieved by these
models has meant a sustained interest in the use of this technology moving forward.
However, the inherent complexity of the black­box nature of deep neural networks makes
them prone to attacks. This not only has the effect of undermining the security and trust­
worthiness of the systems but also the security of the areas and domains in which they
are deployed (border control, airports etc.).
Specifically, these models are vulnerable to presentation attacks (PA) and morphing at­
tacks (MA) [15] (explained in chapter 2 below).
In this thesis, we focus on a categorization of PAs and MAs known as impostor attacks
(explained in more detail in chapter 2 below) where an adversary attempts to gain unau­
thorized access by impersonating another individual.
To defend against these attacks, deep learning based presentation attack detectors (PAD)
and morphing attacks detectors (MAD) are employed. We use a general term: face im­
personation attack detectors to refer to both of these types. A typical integration of the
detectors and face recognition systems is where these detectors filter the input. They
catch any image samples that may be impersonation attacks and pass the rest onto the
face recognition system.
However, since the detectors are also deep learning based they are vulnerable to a gen­
eral set of attacks known as adversarial attacks [16] [15].
Adversarial attacks involve making small pixel­level changes to an input image with the
aim of causing a misclassification in a detection model. The changes would be made to
a PA or MA image. The aim is then to cause the detectors to classify the image as a
genuine (bona fide) one and thus fool not only the detectors but also the face recognition
system by resulting in a successful biometric match. If the impersonation detectors (PAD
and MAD) are easily fooled with these attacks, they give a false sense of security. It is
therefore imperative to defend impersonation detectors against adversarial attacks.
Face recognition systems have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In
[17] the authors provide a taxonomy of various adversarial attacks against face recog­
nition systems and possible defence mechanisms. However, the vulnerability of face
impersonation attack detectors against adversarial attacks is not well­researched.
In this thesis the aim is thus to assess the vulnerability of existing face impersonation
attack detectors against adversarial attacks. Following that, a secondary aim is to explore
and implement defence mechanisms to defend against the attacks.
2
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:11==
The goal is that the results of the thesis will contribute to the development of secure and
reliable face biometric systems.
1.1
Research Questions
The thesis aims to answer the following research questions:
1. What is the impact of adversarial attacks on the performance of face impersonation
detectors?
2. Which adversarial attacks have the greatest impact on the performance of face im­
personation detectors?
3. Is it possible to fool the impersonation detectors and simultaneously fool face recog­
nition model(s), such that a perturbed facial image is authenticated in the face recog­
nition system?
4. Can proactive defence mechanisms help protect face impersonation detectors against
adversarial attacks?
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
In this chapter we provide an overview of key concepts related to the thesis including
biometric systems, face recognition systems, impersonation attacks, impersonation attack
detectors, adversarial attacks and defence mechanisms.
2.1
Biometric Systems
A biometric system consists of a combination of components that work together to achieve
the goal of recognition of individuals. We now briefly describe the components and work­
flow of a biometric system. The components are as follows: Data Capture Subsystem,
Data Storage Subsystem, Signal Processing Subsystem, Comparison Subsystem, Deci­
sion Subsystem. The workflow and interconnection with the components are shown in
fig. 2.1 [18]. We now give a brief description:
1. Enrolment: The biometric characteristic of the data subject is presented before the
Data Capture Subsystem and a digital representation of it is recorded and trans­
mitted to the Signal Processing Subsystem. Here a variety of things may occur
depending on the mode of capture but in general features are extracted from the
image to create a biometric reference which is then stored in the Data Storage Sub­
system. The biometric reference represents the ground­truth and is used during
both two forms of biometric recognition (verification and identification).
2. Verification: In verification, the user presents their biometric data to the Data Capture
Subsystem along with his/her claimed identity. The data is passed onto the Signal
Processing Subsystem where again features are extracted known as the biometric
probe. At the same time, the stored biometric reference is retrieved from the Data
Storage Subsystem based on the provided claimed identity and both the features
from the reference and probe are sent to the Comparison Subsystem. Here, the
features are compared against each other and a comparison score is sent onward
to the Decision Subsystem. Finally, based on a predetermined threshold it is decided
whether the user really is who he/she claims to be. For similarity scores it is checked
whether the score is greater than the decision threshold.
3. Identification: In identification, the user presents their biometric data to the Data
Capture Subsystem. No identity is provided in this case. The procedure works in
much the same way as above except that all references from the Data Storage Sub­
system are retrieved and one by one are compared to the biometric probe. A series
of comparison scores are then obtained and again based on a specific decision
threshold a decision is made as to the identity of the user.
In all of the above three procedures, impersonation attack detectors may also be em­
ployed that reject samples if they are classified as an attack thereby stopping the current
procedure.
2.2
Face Recognition Systems
State of the art face recognition systems are based on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [19]. Pre­trained weights for a majority of the most popular ones are available
online and these models can therefore be used in a straightforward manner. The following
three steps are commonly involved in face recognition [20]:
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Components of a General Biometric System. From [18].
1. Face detection: This refers to the detection of faces amongst other objects in an
image. Variations in lighting and illumination can present challenges in detection.
There exist many techniques to accomplish this. Traditional methods are based
on handcrafted features and machine learning methods. These include techniques
such as local binary pattern (LBP), Viola–Jones detector and principle component
analysis (PCA) [20]. However, recently deep learning based approaches are more
common. Multi­Task Cascaded Convolutional Neural Networks (MTCNN) [21] and
RetinaFace [22] are popular choices in this category.
2. Feature extraction: This is the next step and it involves encoding the features of a
face in a feature vector. The vector comprises all the information for a distinct face
and the features encoded are discriminative so that the similarity of two faces can
be quantified by comparing their corresponding vectors. Again, traditional methods
like Eigenface [23], linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [24] and local binary pattern
(LBP) [25] are a combination of handcrafted feature based and machine learning
approaches. More recently we have seen the rise of deep neural network based
techniques such as ArcFace [26], MagFace [27] and AdaFace [28].
3. Face recognition: This final step has two modes of operation depending on the use
case: 1) Verification and 2) Identification. In verification, a probe image is matched
against a specific reference image. The goal here is to affirm that the individual is
who he/she claims to be. The two feature vectors obtained from the previous step
are compared and a similarity score is obtained (typically using cosine similarity). If
the score is above a specified predetermined threshold the verification passes. In
identification the entire database of reference images is scanned and an attempt is
made to identify the individual by matching the probe to a stored reference image. If
a match is found the probe is identified as a particular identity in the stored database.
Here again, the feature vectors of each of the reference images is compared to
the vector for the probe and the similarity scores are stored. The highest score is
retrieved and compared to the threshold like before.
It must be noted here that for the deep learning based approaches images are prepro­
6
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:15==
cessed before the detection and feature extraction phases.
Images are aligned and
cropped to reduce the impact of variations in pose, illumination facial geometry of the
different faces. In general this helps improve model robustness and accuracy.
2.3
Impersonation Attacks
The vulnerability of face recognition systems is well­researched. Face recognition sys­
tems have in particular been shown to be vulnerable to physical and digital attacks. In
[15], the authors offer an overview of various physical and digital attacks. A physical at­
tack involves altering the physical aspects of the environment. This can for example be
wearing physical masks, printing out a photo of an individual with the objective of fool­
ing the face recognition system. A digital attack involves making alterations directly to
the digital representation of images. This could be via the use of editing software, post
processing programs, or programming scripts.
We now provide a brief overview of each of these.
2.3.1
Physical Attacks
A face presentation attack is defined as “presentation to the biometric data capture sub­
system with the goal of interfering with the operation of the biometric system” [29]. This
type of attack exists in the physical domain.
fig. 2.2 below shows four examples of physical attacks.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.2: Examples of physical face manipulation: Adv Hat [30] (a), Adv Glasses [31]
(b), Adv Makeup [32] (c), Adv Sticker (d) [33]. From [15]
A PA can be further subdivided into two types: 1) an impostor attack or 2) concealment
attack. An impostor is defined as: ”subversive biometric capture subject who attempts
to being matched to someone else’s biometric reference” [1] [29] whereas an identity
concealer is defined as: ”subversive biometric capture subject who attempts to avoid
being matched to their own biometric reference” [1] [29].
Biometric impostors have further two choice of attack: in the first sub­type the attacker
intends to be recognized as a specific individual known to the face recognition system.
In the second sub­type the attacker intends to be recognized as any individual known to
the system [29]. The two sub­types correspond to biometric verification and identification
modes of operation of a face recognition system which have been described previously.
In this thesis, the focus is on the first sub­type: impersonation attacks.
The following are some popular types of impostor face presentation attacks [15] as seen
in fig. 2.3 as well:
• Print attack: the adversary prints out an image of the target person he/she wishes
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of various impostor face presentation attacks. From: [34]
to impersonate. The printed image is presented in front of the Data Capture Sub­
system.
• Replay attack: the adversary obtains a recording of the target person to imperson­
ate. This recording is played on a phone, tablet or computer in front of the Data
Capture Subsystem.
• 3D mask attack: the adversary manufactures a 3D face mask of the target person
he/she wishes to impersonate. This can include a silicon mask, resin mask, plastic
mask or the like.
fig. 2.4 below shows the working procedure of an impostor attack. The adversary in this
case presents a printed image of the target subject he/she wishes to impersonate. The
probe/presentation image is matched against the stored reference image by the face
recognition system. In case of a successful attack, the similarity score is high and the
face recognition system authenticates the impostor.
The illustration shows the print attack specifically, but it can be any PA sub­type.
Figure 2.4: Impostor attack. Illustration adapted from [35].
2.3.2
Digital Attacks
Digital attacks exist in the digital domain and are created using digital manipulation tech­
niques. There exist many classifications of this attack type.
fig. 2.5 below shows some examples of images altered with face manipulation techniques.
Face morphing seen in fig. 2.6 is another example of digital manipulation.
Some of them are listed below [16]:
8
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:17==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.5: Examples of digital face manipulation: original face image (a), a slightly re­
touched face image with increased eye size, slimmed nose, and cheeks (b), and face
image with a cat filter (c). From [16]
.
• Entire face synthesis: In this technique fake facial images can be generated using
generative networks (a class of deep neural networks). This can be used to generate
fake profiles on social media platforms for instance.
• Identity swap: This is similar to the entire face swap technique above. However,
here the focus is on swapping the face from one individual from a source to a video
of the target individual. This can also be used for malicious purposes to spread
misinformation on the web for instance by swapping faces of high­profile individuals
on any video of choice.
• Face morphing: In this technique face images of two or more identities are combined
to create a single artificial identity. This technique is particularly impactful for face
recognition systems. A criminal could create a morphed image with a look­alike
accomplice and the accomplice can attempt to get it enrolled in a border control
face recognition system. If successfully done, the criminal can use the passport
freely and pass through face recognition based security checkpoints. In this case
both the accomplice and the criminal would be able to share the passport. This
is illustrated in fig. 2.6 in an airport context. It is important to note that morphed
face images can be realistic enough to fool human examiners [36], [37] as well as
commercial face recognition systems [38].
In this thesis, we consider the face morphing attack.
2.4
Impersonation Attack Detectors
Next we look at impersonation attack detection techniques.
2.4.1
Presentation Attack Detection Techniques
There are several techniques to carry out automated detection of presentation attacks. In
this thesis, we focus exclusively on deep learning based software detection techniques.
Nevertheless we provide a brief categorisation of all techniques for completeness. They
are as follows [40]:
Hardware Based
There are further three categorisations of this:
• Sensor Characteristics: This includes using specialised sensors to aid in detecting
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.6: Morphing attack at airport. Illustration adapted from [39].
spoofing attempts. An example here is using a light­field camera that captures in­
formation on the incoming light rays to obtain depth information (related to focus).
This depth information can then be used to discriminate between a live image and a
print attack for instance. Bona fide images will exhibit more depth information than
their attack counterparts.
• Blink Detection: In this technique the spontaneous blinking of an eye during cap­
ture is continuously tracked. A print attack is very easy to detect in this case [40].
However, replay attacks are shown to fool blink detectors. The detection itself may
be done using specialised hardware or even software.
• Challenge Response: In this technique a challenge is presented to the user and the
response is then recorded and analyzed. This could be done by providing a stimulus
such as looking at a specific spot and following the gaze of the user. Obviously, the
response would be successful if a real user is involved whereas for a replay­attack
the response may be incorrect given the specific stimulus.
Software Based
The challenge with hardware based techniques is computational complexity and cost as­
sociated with the specialised hardware. Software based techniques are more readily
available and also easier to deploy. Moreover they have achieved high accuracy in recent
years. There exist many different categorisations of software based techniques because
they are so numerous. Here we provide a brief overview [15]:
• Hand­crafted methods: Local binary pattern (LBP) is a popular technique in this
subcategory. LBP captures textural changes in the spoofed sample that results
from the presentation mode, e.g. a print attack using a laser printer, display attack
using an iPad etc. Pigment print defects in laser printed photos are observed quite
clearly after a LBP operation on the printed photo [40]. Similarly, in a display attack,
unwanted frequencies emitted by the display and display reflections are highlighted
quite clearly following a LBP operation[40]. These artefacts will obviously not be
visible on a bona fide image and can thus be used to detect spoofing samples. The
reader is referred to [40] for illustrations. There exist also other techniques based
on frequency analysis using the Fourier transform.
• Learning­based methods: This includes deep learning based methods and have
proved very popular in recent years. Generally, presentation attack detection is con­
10
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:19==
sidered a binary classification problem therefore earlier works employed a simple
CNN based architecture to extract features then combined this with a SVM based
classifier to detect spoofing samples [41]. Since then there have been many vari­
ations. Another early work used transfer learning on a pretrained VGG16 network
with only slight modifications to the architecture [42]. The biggest challenge of CNN
based methods using solely binary supervision is the lack of generalisation to un­
seen datasets and cross­database evaluation. To battle this, auxiliary supervision
is included in recent techniques during training. Specifically, use of binary masks
and depth masks. Mask methods assign a 0/1 to each pixel in bona fide/fake re­
gions. While depth maps aim to encode depth information where a live image (3D)
would have more depth information than a spoofed image (2D). In addition to this
some works seek to use geometric information such as reflection maps which are
particularly discriminative in display attacks.
• Hybrid: Here, a combination of hand­crafted features and deep neural networks
are used. Either the features are extracted using hand­crafted methods and subse­
quently fed to fedforward neural networks or deep features are extracted first using
neural networks upon which hand­crafted features are then extracted. The last op­
tion is that both techniques are used separately and then features are fused towards
the end.
In general, there also exists another categorisation, namely static or dynamic [40]. In the
former a single image is used to detect a spoofing attempt whereas the second involves
a video presentation where temporal information and motion capture are used to detect
a spoofing attempt. In this thesis, the focus is on the static approach using deep neural
networks.
2.4.2
Morphing Attack Detection Techniques
There exist two major categorizations of morphing attack detection. They are as follows:
Single Image MAD (no­reference or S­MAD)
Here, the morph detection is done using information available from only a single provided
probe image. Like before, there exist many techniques [39].
• Texture­feature based: This includes general purpose image descriptors such as
LBP or Binarized Statistical Image Features (BSIF). In some cases these are used
in conjunction with machine learning based classifiers such as Support Vector Ma­
chines (SVMs). In this case, hand­crafted features are extracted and then fed to
an SVM for the classification task. The main limitation of these techniques are their
generalisability to different image qualities, sensors and print­scan processes.
• Quality­based: A second set of techniques is where image degradation resulting
from morphing is quantified. Photo Response Non­Uniformity (PRNU) is a popu­
lar technique in this subcategory that looks at changes in noise­like patterns at the
camera sensor. These patterns originate from variations in pixels during conver­
sion of photons to electrons in digital image sensors [38]. Spectral alterations are
introduced during the morphing procedure which can be exploited using PRNU to
discriminate between a bona fide and morphed image. A discrete fourier transform
can be used on the PRNU to obtain a spectra which quantifies spectral differences
between bona fide and morphed images. This can be analyzed using statistical
techniques. In general quality­based techniques have shown good performance on
digital data but subpar performance on print­scan data [39].
• Deep learning based: Finally, we have deep learning based techniques. A lot of
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
11
==PAGE:20==
these approaches are based on transfer learning on pretrained networks which are
modified to carry out the classification task. Popular architectures such as AlexNet,
VGG19, ResNet and OpenFace have been explored in this category.
Differential MAD (reference­based or D­MAD)
Here, the probe image is compared to the stored reference image and a comparison is
made between the two before a decision is made. This approach has the advantage
that additional information present in the probe image can be used to make a decision.
However in practical scenarios, the probe is obtained in semi­supervised environments
and potentially may be low quality leading to higher variance compared to the suspected
morph image [16].
Largely there are two subtypes here [39]:
• Feature­difference based: The feature based approach involves extracting features
from both the trusted bona fide image and the probe and then taking the difference
between the two. The feature extraction is typically done using a CNN. Specific
patterns in the morphed image will show up when the difference is computed which
can be used to detect the morph.
• Demorphing: In the demorphing approach, morphing procedure is inverted in order
to obtain the components that were used to generate the morphed image. In this
case the probe image (attacker) is used to demorph the morphed image and re­
generate the image of the accomplice. In the case that the morphed image was an
actual morph (constructed from two identities) it would be apparent that the regen­
erated accomplice image and the attack image (probe) are two different identities
(detected through face recognition) and the morphing would have been detected.
In case the stored reference image was not a morph the image resulting from the
demorphing procedure would be similar to the probe and the face comparison would
be successful. Here again, most recent techniques are based on CNNs [16].
In this thesis, the focus is on deep neural networks based S­MAD approach.
2.5
Adversarial Attacks
There also exist other types of attacks in the digital domain that aim to compromise deep
learning models in particular CNNs. These are known as adversarial attacks. An adver­
sarial attack in the digital domain adds perturbations to an input image by changing pixel
values in the digital representation of the image, with the aim of causing a misclassification
in a face recognition system [43]. The perturbation should however still be small enough
to be imperceptible to the human eye. The resulting image is known as an adversarial
image.
Generating an adversarial sample x′ can generally be described as a box­constrained
optimisation problem [44]:
minx′||x′ −x||
s.t.
f(x′) = l′,
f(x) = l,
l ̸= l′
x′ ∈[0, 1]
In this case the perturbation added to x′ may be defined as n = x′ −x. We wish to
minimize the perturbation n such that the neural network f classifies x as an impostor (l)
and misclassifies x′ as a bona fide (l′).
12
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:21==
These attacks also exist in the physical domain (e.g. by adding graffiti to a stop sign) but
we are concerned only with attacks in the digital domain.
Presentation attack and morphing attack images can be perturbed using adversarial at­
tacks in order to fool the respective detectors. This can render the detectors useless and
cause the spoofed images to go directly to the face recognition system. fig. 2.7 below
illustrates the use of adversarial attacks in a PAD setting. The procedure is the same in
a MAD setting where the morphing attack detector gets spoofed after adversarial pertur­
bations are applied to the morphed image.
Figure 2.7: Presentation attack detectors can effectively discriminate bona fides from PAs.
However, the detection model can be fooled by an adversarial attack. Illustration adapted
from [15].
2.5.1
White­Box Attacks
White­box attacks are generally gradient­based [45]. The key idea behind gradient­based
attacks is to increase the loss on a particular input image by taking into account the gra­
dient of the model. The fast gradient sign method (FGSM) [46] was one of the earliest
works in this category. Here, the gradient is computed with respect to a particular input
image. A perturbation is then added by multiplying a small constant ϵ with the sign of the
gradient so as to move in the direction of the gradient that increases the loss instead of
minimizing it. This way, the addition of the perturbation causes the model to misclassify
the input.
Several enhancements have been done on top of FGSM resulting in a number of separate
attacks. Since FGSM uses only a single gradient update to craft perturbations sometimes
it is not enough for a successful attack. The basic iterative method [47] (BIM) solves this
by applying FGSM iteratively over a specified number of iterations so as to achieve good
attack success through several gradient updates. In this attack, the resulting perturbation
is also clipped to ensure the value of the perturbation falls below a certain threshold. Simi­
larly, the projected gradient descent [48] (PGD) attack aims to improve BIM by introducing
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
13
==PAGE:22==
random restarts of the algorithm and also initializing to a random point (clip norms of the
gradient within a confined threshold) instead of, to the original input image. Yet another
improvement over FGSM is the DeepFool [49] attack where the idea is to find the minimal
perturbation of the original input which still causes a misclassification.
fig. 2.8 below shows some perturbed image samples from the Replay­Mobile RM dataset
[50] using the FGSM and DeepFool white­box attack methods.
(a) FGSM ϵ = 0.01
(b) DeepFool l∞norm
Figure 2.8: White­box attack image samples
2.5.2
Black­Box Attacks
Black­box attacks can be broadly classified into query­based and transfer based attacks
[51].
In query­based attacks, the model is invoked and based on the response, a decision is
made as to how perturbations should be created. In transfer­based attacks a surrogate
model is created to resemble as closely as possible the target model. Attacks are made
on this surrogate model with the hope that they will transfer to the target model.
Within the realm of query­based attacks there exist two subcategories namely, score­
based attacks and decision­based attacks [52]. In score­based attacks, the output of the
model needs to be a score vector (typically probabilities or pre­softmax logits). Decision­
based attacks are the most restricted as even a score vector is not required. Here, only
the hard labels from the model are required.
The zeroth­order optimization (ZOO) [53] was one of the first score based attacks where
a derivative­free optimization method is used to compute the gradient. Since then, there
have been several other attacks in this category such as TREMBA [54] and Square Attack
(SA) [55].
In terms of decision­based attacks the boundary attack [56] was one of the first [52]. The
attack starts from a point that is already adversarial and moves along the decision bound­
ary of the model such that the perturbation is minimized and the adversarial classification
is maintained. The perturbations are chosen by using rejection sampling to sample from
a given proposal distribution. In this subcategory also, there have been many advances
with attacks such as the HopSkipJumpAttack (HSJA) [57], qFool [58] and Surrogate Free
Attack (SurFree) [59] improving upon the basic boundary attack.
In fig. 2.9 below, some sample perturbed images are shown using black box attacks.
2.6
Defence Mechanisms
Defence techniques can be broadly classified into either (1) reactive where one seeks
to detect adversarial examples or (2) proactive where one makes the model itself more
robust [60].
14
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:23==
(a) HSJA
(b) Square Attack
Figure 2.9: Black­box attack image samples
Three further classifications are offered in [51]:
• Proactive: Modifying the input data
• Proactive: Modifying the model
• Reactive: Adding external models to intercept and act as detectors
We will now briefly discuss each of these in turn.
2.6.1
Proactive Defence Approaches
Modifying the Input Data
There exist many techniques on modifying input data.
Classical works include JPEG based compression techniques [61] [62] and also some
works involve combining several input transformations as done in [63]. The latter includes
techniques such as modifying RGB channels, applying random zoom transformations, as
well as denoising filters such as Gaussian blurs.
Another prominent work in this category is defenceGAN [64] based on GANs (generative
adversarial networks). It involves training a GAN to learn the distribution of unperturbed
images. This allows it to map perturbed images to unperturbed ones thereby acting as a
denoising technique. This method is applauded to be robust to various types of adversarial
attacks.
Modifying the Model
In terms of modifying the target model, the most basic form of doing so is adversarial
training. Here, the model is retrained (and weights are updated) using adversarial samples
with the hope of making the model robust to adversarial attacks.
In regular training, the aim is to minimize the expected natural loss over a dataset {x, y}
by optimizing model parameters θ [65] [48] [66]:
min
θ
L(x, y; θ)
However, in adversarial training the loss that is minimized is the adversarial loss, giving
rise to the following optimisation problem:
min
θ
max
δ∈∆L(x + δ, y; θ)
The adversary in this case, attempts to find perturbations δ that belong to a set of per­
turbations ∆(which could be l2 or l∞bounded) that maximise the loss in order to fool
the model into misclassifying the input. Since this is a min­max (saddle­point) problem it
is guaranteed to be non­convex. This means training times are longer with adversarial
training compared to regular training [65].
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
15
==PAGE:24==
There exist many variants of adversarial training. Some such as [67] [68] use generative
models (StyleGAN) to synthesize adversarial samples which are later used for training the
target model. Here, the latent representations learned by the generative model is used to
generate perturbations in the hope of increasing model robustness against attacks. The
intuition is that generative models are able to capture semantic­level features of images
and by focussing on these during training, the model becomes more robust to adversarial
attacks. Other techniques are simpler such as training the models on attacks generated
using FGSM [69]. Other works such as [70] propose changing components of the model
such as replacing softmax cross­entropy loss with a new loss called Max­Mahalanobis
center loss in an attempt to induce robustness into the model.
Although adversarial training is a hugely popular defence mechanism, there is a tendency
of the model performance degrading on clean samples following the training on adversar­
ial samples.
A second popular approach in this category is defensive distillation [71]. In this technique
the distilled model known as the student model is trained using output from the original
model (teacher) as labels. In this case the student is trained on class probabilities as
labels instead of hard labels which is beneficial as probabilities encode additional infor­
mation about each class in addition to simply providing a sample’s correct class [71]. The
architecture of both models is identical and so is the training data. The logits to the soft­
max layer are modified by dividing them by a scalar known as the temperature T. The
goal is to smoothen the loss function so as to increase generalisability of the model to
unknown datasets and by extension to adversarial attacks.
2.6.2
Reactive Defence Approaches
The last defence category of employing detectors does not suffer from the drawback of
adversarial training. There exist some notable techniques in this subcategory.
AdvFAS [72] is a face anti­spoofing framework that combines a detector coupled with a
corrector. The detector is responsible for detecting a spoofing attack. However, generally
detectors trained on spoofing attacks generalize poorly to adversarial samples. There­
fore, a corrector is used to correct the errors incurred by the detector. Instead of treating
the output of the detector as the final decision, a combined coupled score known as the
expected score is used instead. This score takes into account the results of both the
detector and corrector. In other words, if the detector misclassifies an adversarial image
as non­adversarial the corrector is responsible for recognizing that and adjust the score
accordingly.
The detector is a binary classifier based on convolution neural networks (CNN). The puri­
fier on the other hand uses a feature recovery loss to retrieve the features of the perturbed
image and restore it.
16
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:25==
3
Foundations
This chapter provides an introduction to the PAD models, MAD models, face recognition
models as well as adversarial attacks and metrics used throughout this thesis.
3.1
PAD Models
3.1.1
Deep Pixel­Wise Binary Supervision for Face Presentation Attack
Detection
Figure 3.1: From [73]: “Diagram showing the proposed framework. Two outputs, i.e., a
14 × 14 feature map and a binary output are shown in the diagram. The dense blocks
consist of multiple layers with each layer connected to all other layers. The feature maps
are normalized and average pooled in the transition blocks.”
Deep Pixel­wise Binary Supervision for Face Presentation Attack Detection (DeepPixBiS)
[73] is the first PAD model used. The reason for choosing this method is that it incorpo­
rates auxiliary information during training to improve generalisation performance without
requiring expensive computation of depth maps or other hard to obtain information. This
makes this model easy to deploy in mobile environments and also practical to implement
and test. This model is based on the DenseNet [74] architecture. DenseNet consists of
densely connected layers where each layer is connected to all previous layers before it via
skip connections. This helps mitigate the vanishing gradient problem making it possible
to create very deep networks. It also has other benefits such as reducing the total number
of parameters that need to be trained. Furthermore, it is easier to train since as the flow
of information and gradients through the network is improved. Due to the high level of
inter­layer connectivity each layer has direct access to the gradients from the loss func­
tion and original input signal leading to implicit deep supervision [74]. This helps make it
easier to train these networks.
Previous literature [75] in this domain uses auxiliary information in the form of spatial and
temporal supervision to improve classification performance. Spatial supervision involves
using depth masks with the idea being that with a live image the depth map would reflect
the distances of various facial landmarks to the camera whereas an impostor image would
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
17
==PAGE:26==
have a flat mask. Temporal supervision uses rPPG signals which guides the network to
learn from live or spoof face videos respectively (the signal will be stronger for live images).
However, for spatial supervision the creation of depth maps is required for every training
sample which is time consuming and cumbersome. Similarly, using temporal information
is not suitable for cases where a decision needs to be made quickly or in cases where the
model needs to be deployed on devices with limited computational power. This motivated
the authors of DeepPixBiS to use frame level pixel­based binary supervision as a proxy
to computing depth maps.
Basically, each pixel is given a binary label indicating whether it is impostor or bona fide.
This eliminates the need for depth map synthesis. A sigmoid activation function is used
to produce an output map which then is used to generate the first loss using binary cross
entropy loss. The second loss is obtained by connecting the feature map to a linear layer
and thereafter using a sigmoid activation function. The weighted sum of the two losses is
then used as the final loss which is what is optimized.
3.1.2
Learnable Multi­level Frequency Decomposition and Hierarchical
Attention Mechanism for Generalized Face Presentation Attack
Detection
Figure 3.2: From [76]: “The overall workflow of our proposed LMFD­PAD solution. Note
the utilization of our MFD and HAM (three different channel attention components) com­
ponents.”
The second PAD model used is LMFD­PAD ­ Learnable Multi­level Frequency Decom­
position and Hierarchical Attention Mechanism for Generalized Face Presentation Attack
Detection (LMFD) [76]. This method was chosen since it offers a different approach to PA
detection by projecting samples to the frequency domain. This contrasts nicely with the
aforementioned DeepPixBiS model.
The LMFD model is a dual­stream CNN model. The first stream employs four learnable
frequency filters that learn image features in the frequency domain. It has been shown in
[76] that certain PA cues are more discriminative in the frequency domain. For instance
print attacks have been shown to have less responses to high frequencies compared to the
bona fide and replay attacks. Reflections and color distortions in replay and print attacks
respectively can be extracted effectively using highpass and lowpass filters. Furthermore
18
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:27==
poor generalisation of CNN based PAD techniques is attributed to variations in the attacks
and capture environments, such as illuminations and sensors. Decomposing an input face
image into different level frequency components aims to address this. In other words,
learnt features in the frequency domain are not affected too drastically by changes in
the environment and so help make the model more generalisable and better at unseen
datasets.
The second stream uses information available in the RGB images to complement the
learned features of the frequency domain. The model thus integrates learned features
from both the frequency and spatial domains to improve PAD generalization capability.
In order to integrate features learned from both domains and to utilize features from differ­
ent layers of the model, a hierarchical attention mechanism (HAM) is used. This consists
of two spatial attention blocks and one channel attention block. HAM procedure inte­
grates information from the two streams at different levels since lower and higher level
layers represent different information. Lower layers represent more concrete features
such as edges and texture, while higher levels more abstract things such as semantic
information. This is also why channel attention is applied to the upper layer and the two
spatial attention modules to the lower layers.
Finally, the outputs from these three attention blocks are concatenated to provide pixel­
wise supervision (as is done in DeepPixBis). Features from the two ResNet streams
(spatial and frequency domains) are also concatenated to provide binary supervision.
3.2
MAD Models
3.2.1
MixFaceNet­MAD
Figure 3.3: From [77]. Main model architecture depicting use of many mixed depth­wise
convolutional layers. For a more detailed view of the head, embedding and downsampling
layers the reader is referred to [77]. It must be noted here that this diagram depicts the
backbone. In this thesis a fully connected layer is added after the embedding layer for the
final binary decision as done in [78].
The first MAD model used in this thesis is referred to as MixFaceNet­MAD (MixNet). This
is basically a model that uses the MixFaceNet as backbone [77]. The reason for choos­
ing this model is its low computational complexity coupled with high accuracy. A fully
connected layer is added after the embedding layer of the backbone to carry out binary
classification as done in [78].
We now give a brief description of the main convolutional operations (MixConv) used in
MixFaceNet.
Convolution operations are computationally demanding, especially as the number of fea­
tures increases. Improving both the efficiency and accuracy of convolution operations is
a goal of CNN research.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
19
==PAGE:28==
Depth­wise convolutions first introduced in [79] have been a successful technique in this
regard. Depth­wise convolutions break the input into different channels and applies each
(same sized) filter separately to each channel before concatenating the outputs. This
reduces the computational overhead by factor C [79] where C is the number of dimensions
as compared to standard convolutions which convolve in the entire depth dimension.
However, based on [80] both large and small kernel sizes are needed to be able to cap­
ture high­resolution and low­resolution patterns respectively thereby improving model ac­
curacy. The authors therefore developed mixed depth­wise convolutions (MixConv) con­
volutions that split the channels into groups and apply different sized filters to each group.
The output feature maps are then concatenated in the end. These are an improvement
over vanilla depth­wise convolutions, where the kernel size used is constant. This tech­
nique has been shown to significantly improve MobileNet accuracy and efficiency on Im­
ageNet classification.
MixFaceNet heavily uses these mixed depth­wise convolution operations. A more detailed
analysis of the architecture is out of scope. The interested reader is instead referred to
[77].
3.2.2
OrthoMAD
Figure 3.4: From [81]: “Overview of the architecture design for the integration of the new
regularisation term. The regularisation loss is applied at the vector (Z1 and Z2), hence,
their gradients do not affect the final classification layer. The system is composed of three
components, a backbone network, two identity vectors and a final classification layer that
uses the concatenation of both vectors”
The OrthoMAD [81] model was the second MAD model implemented. It is simpler and
uses a backbone network (in this thesis ResNet­18) with the main contribution being an
additional regularisation loss term that aims to promote orthogonality between the identity­
related embeddings. The loss term is the inner product of two identity vectors Z1 and Z2
where the objective is to minimize the product in order to achieve orthogonality. This
serves the purpose of disentangling identity information such that a morphing attack can
be detected. By disentangling the identity information it becomes easier to distinguish
morphed images (containing two identities) from bona fide images) containing a single
identity. This method was chosen for its simplicity of use and implementation.
3.3
Face Recognition Models
Three face recognition models are used. Namely ArcFace, MagFace and AdaFace.
20
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:29==
3.3.1
ArcFace
They are mostly the same using ResNet as the backbone differing mainly in loss functions.
ArcFace [26] aims to improve the discrimnative power of Softmax loss through a modified
loss function that promotes higher similarity for intra­class samples and higher diversity for
inter­class samples [26]. This is done by distributing the embeddings on a hypersphere
and using geodesic distance to enforce higher separability between classes.
3.3.2
MagFace
With previous angular margin­based losses such as the one used in ArcFace, the within­
class distributions are unstable especially in unconstrained scenarios. High quality sam­
ples stay close to the decision boundary in this case while lower quality samples stay
at the class center. This can hurt performance on in­the­wild face recognition in cases
where the quality of samples varies. MagFace [27] attempts to fix this by encoding quality
information into the face representation. This is done by using the feature magnitudes as
a quality indicator.
3.3.3
AdaFace
AdaFace [28] like MagFace emphasizes the need to adjust the margin based on the quality
of the sample. The feature norms are used as a quality indicator. The novelty here is that
different importance is attached depending on the difficulty of the sample. If the quality
of the images is high then hard samples are emphasized during training. Conversely
if quality is low then very hard samples (unrecognizable images) are ignored so as not
to fit too much on that particular sample. In contrast to MagFace, by emphasizing hard
samples in this way more discriminative features are learned.
3.4
Query­Based Black Box Adversarial Attacks
In this thesis it was decided to implement black­box attacks. This was done mainly be­
cause this attack type is more realistic in the sense that it does not require access to model
parameters. Therefore, it is easy to implement from an attacker’s perspective. Given that
the attack must be implemented in this black­box setting, the level of threat posed by a
successful implementation is also higher. Any vulnerabilities detected in the face imper­
sonation models against this attack type is naturally more serious and implementation of
effective defence strategies more crucial. Specifically, it was decided to look exclusively
at query­based attacks. This was done under the assumption that implementation would
be simper and less time­consuming than a transfer­based attack which would require
training of a separate classifier just for the purpose of attack generation.
For query­based attacks the main contributions mostly aim at improving query efficiency
while maintaining attack performance. Nevertheless in order to cover both types of query­
based attacks (score based and decision boundary based) a mixture of attacks were cho­
sen. The following black­box adversarial attacks were implemented: Sign­OPT (SignOpt)
[82], HSJA [57], Square Attack (SA) [83] and SimBA [84]. The first two are decision based
while the last two are score­based. Another distinction to be made here is that SignOpt
and HSJA make some estimate of the gradient while SimBA and SA do not.
In order to evaluate the performance of attacks and specifically the size of the produced
perturbations we used the l2 and l∞norms.
The l2 norm is measured as the euclidian distance between the perturbed input and the
original:
||x′ −x||2 =
√∑
i
(x′
i −xi)2
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
21
==PAGE:30==
This norm measures the overall effect of the many pixel perturbations.
The l∞norm measures the absolute difference in pixel values between the perturbed
input and original:
||x′ −x||∞= max
i
|x′
i −xi|
A brief description of each attack now follows:
The pseudocode for each attack can be reviewed in their respective papers and also in
appendix A.1.
3.4.1
HSJA
HSJA begins with a sample that is already misclassified. This is done by either providing
a sample that is already in the target class (for untargetted attack) or with a sample that
is blended with noise (for targetted attack). For PAD we use the former approach while
for MAD the latter approach. Then it estimates the decision boundary of the model us­
ing binary search. Following this, The sample is perturbed to the point at the boundary.
An estimation of the direction of the gradient is made and an iterative procedure begins
where the image is continuously perturbed such that it progresses geometrically bounc­
ing between the edges of the boundary and the region where the sample is misclassified.
Eventually the sample converges to a point that is at a minimum distance to the original
unperturbed input sample while still at the boundary so that the perturbed sample is mis­
classified. The gradient estimation is done using monte carlo estimation. The reader is
referred to [57] for an intuitive illustration.
3.4.2
SignOpt
The hard­label (decision based) attack problem is formulated as an optimization problem
in [85] as follows (for untargetted attack):
g(θ) = arg min
λ>0(f(x0 + λ θ
||θ||) ̸= y0)
Here, g(θ) represents the distance from the starting sample x0 (to attack/perturb) to the
nearest adversarial example found in the direction θ. It may also be thought of as the
distortion. Since we want perturbations to be as imperceptible as possible, the goal is to
minimize this objective:
min
θ
g(θ)
Once the optimal direction (θ∗) to take to minimize this objective has been found, the
adversarial example can be obtained by perturbing the original input like:
x∗= x0 + g(θ∗) θ∗
||θ∗||
In this case g(θ) is found using binary search while the objective function is minimized
using zeroth­order algorithms.
For estimating the direction of the gradient, SignOpt makes use of the finite differences
approach. However, a modification is done here by estimating only the sign of the di­
rectional derivative instead of the derivative itself. This proves to be less computationally
expensive.
22
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:31==
3.4.3
Square Attack
Square Attack (SA) is simpler in the sense that it does not attempt to make gradient
estimations. Instead it uses random search to optimize the objective function. However,
it does require access to probability output and is therefore less restrictive than the two
previously mentioned attacks. Random search samples a random update at each iteration
and adds it to the image sample. If the objective function is improved, the update is
kept otherwise discarded. SA modifies random search by incorporating special sampling
distributions depending on if the attack is l2 or l∞based. A l2 based attack minimizes the
overall distance of a perturbed sample from the original one. A l∞based attack minimizes
the absolute maximum distance between a perturbed sample and original sample. The
updated samples are such that the pixels modified are chosen contiguously in the shape
of squares. A theoretical analysis is provided to motivate the choice of squares as the
shape in the paper.
3.4.4
SimBA
SimBA attack is the final score based attack implemented. This is yet again a very simple
attack that samples a random direction in each iteration and perturbs the input in this
direction for a fixed given perturbation size. The output probabilities are used to either
accept or reject the perturbation. If the update results in an increase in the probability
that the new sample belongs to the target class then it the update is kept, otherwise it is
rejected.
3.5
Metrics
The following metrics and plots were used throughout this thesis to evaluate the used
models. Part of these metrics and plots are defined in ISO/IEC 30107­3 [22] and ISO/IEC
19795­1 [29] [18]:
1. Attack Presentation Classification Error Rate (APCER): defined as the ratio of
attack presentations wrongly classifed as bona fides.
2. Bona Fide Presentation Classification Error Rate (BPCER): defined as the ratio
of bona fides wrongly classified as attack presentations. In the vulnaerability analy­
sis chapter 5 we show values for BPCER100, BPCER20 and BPCER10. These are
computed at the following respective APCER thresholds: APCER=1%, APCER5%
and APCER10%.
3. Detection Error Tradeoff Curve (DET): Curve that represents the tradeoff between
the APCER (security) and BPCER (user inconvenience). Typically we would see a
trend of increasing BPCER for lower APCER. In other words, higher security comes
at the cost of higher user inconvenience.
4. Detection Equal Error Rate (D­EER): which is where the APCER is equal to the
BPCER. This is a single value that quantifies the overall detection performance. In
this thesis, we primarily use this metric to assess impersonation detector perfor­
mance and also attack performance.
5. False Match Rate (FMR): defined as the “proportion of the completed biometric
non­mated comparison trials that result in a false match.”. A non­mated compari­
son trial is where two samples from different identities are compared. The FMR is
then the proportion of these trials that are accepted. So the proportion of impostor/­
fake authentication attempts that are falsely accepted. This metric can be used to
measure the security vulnerability.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
23
==PAGE:32==
6. False Non­Match Rate (FNMR): defined as the “proportion of the completed bio­
metric mated comparison trials that result in a false non­match.”. A mated com­
parison trial is where two samples from same identity are compared. The FNMR is
then the proportion of these trials that are rejected. So the proportion of genuine au­
thentication attempts that are falsely rejected. This metric can be used to measure
user­inconvenience.
7. Impostor Attack Presentation Accept Rate (IAPAR): The IAPAR is defined as
“proportion of impostor presentation attacks using the same PAI species that result
in a accept” [86]. In this thesis, we use this metric to measure impact of attacks on
the face recognition systems.
8. Tandem Equal Error Rate (T­EER) which is a parameter free joint evaluation metric
recently introduced in [87]. Instead of having to rely on two separate scores, D­EER
and IAPAR, the T­EER score attempts to quantify in a single score the joint impact
of attacks on detectors and face recognition models.
9. KDE plots of the score distributions of the classified images: These plots are
used to analyze attacks.
24
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:33==
4
Methodology
This chapter aims to describe the steps undertaken to answer the research questions.
The sections are ordered in the sequence the various implementation steps were carried
out during the phase of the project.
The steps are outlined here for clarity:
• Data Preprocessing: All data went through a general set of preprocessing steps.
Following this, the data corresponding to each model went through a set of model­
specific preprocessing steps as well.
• Impersonation Detector Model Training: We trained the two PAD models and
two MAD models. Classification performance was evaluated quantitatively by using
standardised metrics described earlier in chapter 3 (D­EER, IAPAR, T­EER). The
performance achieved here is referred to as the baseline. Once a satisfied level
of baseline performance was reached, we generated attacks against the trained
models.
• Adversarial Attack Generation: The four attacks were generated against each of
the models. In some cases, model changes were required to accommodate im­
plementation of the attacks. This is described in more detail further below in this
section. In some cases, there was a slight difference in the attack parameters used
which is also described.
• Adversarial Attack Evaluation: We evaluated the impact of the attacks compared
to the baseline. The same procedure for assessment was used as used for base­
line with differences being only in terms of the data used (adversarial samples vs
PAs/MAs).
• Implementation of Defence Mechanisms: We implemented the two defence mech­
anisms: defensive distillation and adversarial training.
• Defence Evaluation: Finally, we tested how well the defence mechanisms were
able to defend against the implemented adversarial attacks. This assessment was
done in the same way as done previously but using only a subset of metrics (D­EER
and BPCER).
We now give description of the databases used followed by a more detailed account of
the steps involved.
4.1
Databases
In this section, we give an overview of the various databases used.
4.1.1
PAD
For training the PAD models we originally used the Replay­Mobile (RM) [50] database.
However, due to poor attack performance it was decided to introduce some challenge
through cross­database evaluation. Therefore, the OULU­NPU (OULU) database [88]
was used for training instead and RM for evaluation. Consequently, the training dataset
of RM and the test dataset of OULU were not used.
We now provide a description of both datasets. table 4.1 below shows the database
compositions.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
25
==PAGE:34==
The RM database consists of 1190 video clips of photo and video presentation attacks
(spoofing attacks) to 40 clients, under different lighting conditions. The training dataset
consists of 120 bona fide samples and 192 attack samples. The test dataset consists of
110 bona fide samples and 192 attack samples.
The test dataset of RM was used for performance evaluation. Generation of perturbed
images was done against the (presentation) attack images in the test dataset.
The OULU­NPU database consists of print attacks and video attacks (captured using
mobile devices) with different lighting conditions and background scenes. The training
dataset consists of 360 bona fide samples, and 1440 attack samples (print and replay
combined). The development datasets consists of 270 bona fide samples, and 1080
attack samples. The test dataset consists of 360 bona fide samples and 1440 attack
samples.
We combined the training and development datasets into one single joint training dataset
that was used to train the models.
Database
Split
Images
Bona fide
Attack
RM
Train
120
192
Test
110
192
OULU
Train
360
1440
Dev
270
1080
Test
360
1440
Table 4.1: Composition of databases used for PAD models
4.1.2
MAD
Similar to PAD, we used a cross­database evaluation procedure where a subset of the
FERET database [89] [90] [91] was used for training. For evaluation we used a subset of
the FRGCv2 (FRGC) [92] [93] database.
We now provide a description of both datasets. table 4.2 below shows the database
compositions.
The FERET database consists of images to which the following four morphing techniques
are applied [94]: FaceFusion a proprietary morphing tool, FaceMorpher an open­source
face morphing tool, OpenCV a morphing algorithm using OpenCV provided by a tutorial
and UBO−Morpher (UBO) a morphing tool provided by the University of Bologna [95]
[96]. The dataset used consists of 622 bona fide reference images, 786 bona fide probe
images and 529 images each for the four morphing techniques.
For training we used the entire FERET database. The reference and probe images were
used as bona fides while the morphs as spoof samples.
The FRGC database consists of images to which the same morphing techniques have
been applied. It consists of 1440 bona fide reference images, 1721 bona fide probe im­
ages and 962 images for each of the morphing techniques.
We used the morphs and the reference images of the FRGC database for evaluation
purposes.
26
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:35==
Database
Bona fides
Morphs
Reference
Probe
FaceFusion
FaceMorpher
UBO
OpenCV
FERET
622
786
529
529
529
529
FRGC
1440
1721
962
962
962
962
Table 4.2: Composition of databases used for MAD and face recognition models
4.2
Data Preprocessing
All data used underwent the same preprocessing with only slight differences. Since we
wished to evaluate the performance of attacks on face recognition systems the images
needed to be aligned and cropped. The cropping was done to a resolution of 224x224.
In case of RM, detection of faces was done using RetinaFace [22] while alignment and
cropping were done using util packages from the insightface project [97]. For the
remaining three datasets, FERET, FRGC and OULU, the Multi­Task Cascaded Convolu­
tional Neural Networks model (mtcnn) [21] was used for the joint task of alignment and
cropping.
After this alignment and cropping procedure, the resulting images were ready to be fed
into the face recognition models. This is described in detail below in section 4.5.
However, for use in training for the impersonation detection models, some additional
model specific data preprocessing transformations were also applied. Random Horizon­
tal Flips were applied in case of three (DeepPixBiS, MixNet and OrthoMAD) of the four
models. Colour Jitter was used for both PAD models. The LMFD model had an additional
set of transformations such as Hue Saturation, Cut Outs etc. The full list can be seen in
appendix A.2.
These transformations were the default ones provided by the authors of the respective
models. The selection of each transformation is not the focus of this thesis. They are
mentioned for the sake of reproducibility.
4.3
Impersonation Detector Model Training
Once data was preprocessed, the two PAD and two MAD models were trained. The
usual metrics of loss curve and classification accuracy were used to ensure there were
no obvious errors in the training procedure. The actual assessment of training success
was made after evaluating the trained model on the respective dataset. For the PAD
models this was the test dataset of the RM database while for MAD it was a combination
of the morphs and reference images in the FRGC database. The D­EER score was used
for evaluation. Although not a strict requirement was set to mark the task completed and
the model trained, we aimed to achieve a D­EER of below 30 for baseline performance.
Procedure for calculating the D­EER, IAPAR and and T­EER scores is given in section 4.5.
4.4
Attack Generation
The attacks were implemented against the respective test dataset of each database. For
the PAD models this was the test dataset of the RM database (PAs) while for the MAD
models this was the morphing images of the FRGC database (MAs).
Attack algorithm implementations from the Adversarial robustness toolbox (ART) [98]
were used to generate perturbations. It was a prerequisite for some of the attacks that
the model used must have a binary output. Therefore, slight modifications (sigmoid to
softmax) were made to the DeepPixBiS and OrthoMAD models to accommodate this.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
27
==PAGE:36==
It must be noted that an attack can either be l2 or l∞bounded (strictly speaking also l0
and l1 but that is beyond scope). The former is where the constraint on the perturbation is
represented as the euclidian distance between the original sample and perturbed sample.
The goal is then to minimize this distance while maintaining model misclassification. The
latter is where the constraint is represented as the maximum absolute difference between
vectors of the original and perturbed samples.
In this thesis the focus was not on a particular norm­bounded attack constraint. It was
to assess overall attack impact. Therefore, default parameters were used during attack
generation some of which were l2 bounded and some l∞bounded.
In general regarding the attack algorithms, default parameters were used. In cases of
subpar attack performance it was attempted to adjust some parameters. The two PAD
models shared a set of parameters whilst the two MAD models shared a (different) set
of parameters. The reason for this is that the attacks generally fared better for the MAD
models so it was attempted to adjust the parameters for PAD.
The most notable difference was in the HSJA and SignOpt attacks. Both of these attacks
provided the option to specify a sample that is already adversarial which the algorithm
would use a starting point to generate perturbations from. This is contrast to starting
from random noise which in some cases can be a more difficult starting position. It was
observed that for the PAD models, by providing the algorithms with a bona fide image
from the RM test dataset attack performance was drastically improved. We took care to
provide a sample from the test set to still keep the attack as realistic as possible since an
attacker would most likely not have access to the training dataset. For the MAD models,
the default setting was used where no initial starting sample was provided.
After adversarial sample generation, an inverse normalisation was applied to the tensors
to ease visualization. For more details see appendix A.2
Following attack generation the performance was evaluated. Procedure for calculating
the D­EER, IAPAR and and T­EER scores is given below in section 4.5.
4.5
General Evaluation Procedure
In this section we describe how the metrics described in chapter 3 were implemented.
We name it a general procedure since the procedure was similar for both baseline per­
formance evaluation and for evaluating the impact of the generated attacks. The main
difference being, in terms of baseline the presentation/morphing image was used as the
“attack” sample while in terms of attack evaluation the adversarial sample was used.
4.5.1
Computing IAPAR
To compute the IAPAR we first needed to set the decision threshold for each face recog­
nition model. Pretrained weights were used for each model.
The decision thresholds were set based on the FMR. We used thresholds corresponding
to FMR=0.1% and FMR=0.01% calculated for each face recognition model. The operat­
ing thresholds were computed using bona fide non­mated comparison trials (considering
zero­effort impostor attack) against the FRGC database. Originally, the RM database
was used but very low thresholds were obtained possibly due to low intra­class variance
therefore the FRGC database was used instead.
To compute the IAPAR we followed the procedure: We generated pairs of mated attack
samples for each PAD and MAD model. For each attack, the attack sample was paired
28
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:37==
with the corresponding identity from the bona fide dataset. In the case of PAD the dataset
was RM. In the case of MAD the dataset was FRGC. The feature embeddings of these
pairs was then computed using each face recognition model and the cosine similarity be­
tween each pair was computed. If the similarity score was above the operating threshold
for the respective face recognition model, the impostor attempt was considered success­
ful. In case of the morphing attacks the first contributing subject was used to generate the
mated pairs.
It must be noted here that the IAPAR was computed first for baseline where the respective
presentation or morphing attack sample was used as the “attack” sample. After this,
the IAPAR was calculated for each adversarial attack where the “attack” sample was the
adversarial sample. This was necessary to assess the impact of adversarial attacks on
the recognition performance of the face recognition systems.
4.5.2
Computing BPCER scores
In addition to reporting the D­EER, we also reported the BPCER scores for different
thresholds. Specifically, we reported BPCER100, BPCER20 and BPCER10. These are
computed by setting the APCER threshold to 1%, 5% and 10% respectively. This was
done using the pyeer Python package. Score files were generated by running model
evaluation against bonafide and attack images. In case of baseline scores, the “attack”
images were presentation attacks, while for adversarial attacks it was the perturbed attack
images generated. The bonafide score file was generated by filtering and keeping only
the score where the corresponding image label was ”bonafide” (label: 1) while the attack
score file was generated by keeping the score only where the image label was ”attack”
(label: 0).
4.5.3
Computing T­EER scores
In order to do a joint evaluation of the two separate systems (face impersonation and face
recognition) we used the D­EER in addition to IAPAR scores. However recent literature
introduced a single parameter­free evaluation metric to evaluate performance of the joint
systems. This is called the tandem equal error rate (T­EER) [87]. This presents us with a
single scalar value that gives the performance of spoofing/adversarial attacks taking into
account both a face impersonation detector system as well as a face recognition system.
It consisted of computing two score files one containing scores evaluated against the
PAD (or MAD) model and the other containing scores computed using a face recognition
model (MagFace, ArcFace and AdaFace in­turn). Both score files contained the same
three types of comparisons with the exception that in the face recognition case, the face
recognition model was used to compute the actual scores.
These three types of comparisons were:
1. mated comparison between probe and reference images
2. non­mated comparison between probe and reference images
3. mated comparison between each attack and its respective bonafide
The reader is referred to the paper [87] for additional information.
4.6
Defence Techniques
The two defence techniques used were defensive distillation [71] and adversarial training
[99]. The first one was given higher priority. In case the first technique did not improve
model robustness, the second one was implemented. Both of these techniques have
been briefly mentioned in chapter 2.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
29
==PAGE:38==
For the PAD models we used defensive distillation while for the MAD models we used
adversarial training. We now give an overview of the two techniques.
4.6.1
Defensive Distillation
The procedure for defensive distillation was as follows:
1. Trained teacher model using OULU­NPU train dataset. The pre­softmax logits were
divided by a scalar T.
2. Retrieved softmax probability vectors by running the teacher model in evaluation
mode on the same dataset. The same scalar T was used.
3. Trained student model using previously obtained probability vectors as soft­labels.
The pre­softmax logits were divided by the same scalar T.
4. To evaluate the defended (student) model, T was set to 1.0.
For DeepPixBiS a temperature (T) of 5.0 was used while for LMFD a temperature of 100.0
was used. These values were determined through experimentation. The temperature
was set to 5.0 and then gradually increased until an acceptable level of performance was
reached. The performance was evaluated using D­EER scores (3).
4.6.2
Adversarial Training
For adversarial training we used the PGD­AT method which is described to be the state­
of­the art in [99]. The procedure was as follows:
1. Generated perturbed samples using the PGD attack (ART) using original (unde­
fended) base model.
2. Trained new model using a combination of generated adversarial samples and orig­
inal training data (FERET). This was done by modifying the dataloader such that
every second morph image from the FaceFusion morphs should be PGD gener­
ated. The training set consisted of 3525 image samples in total 529 of which were
FaceMorpher images. Therefore, the actual number of adversarial images used
during training was only 264.
3. The defended model was evaluated as usual.
4.7
Defence Evaluation Protocols
In order to conduct a complete assessment of the implemented defence techniques three
protocols were defined. The first alphabet in the protocol denotes the model type used to
generate the attack. The second alphabet denotes the model type the attack is evaluated
against. The letter U means the attacks have either been generated or are tested against
the undefended model. The letter D means the attacks have either been generated or
are tested against the defended model. The protocols are as follows:
• U →U: This is the baseline performance used throughout the Vulnerability Analysis
section (chapter 5). Here, the attacks have been generated against the baseline
(undefended) model and evaluated against the same (undefended) model.
• U →D: Attacks have been generated against the baseline (undefended) model sim­
ilar to the above protocol. However, the evaluation is done against the defended
model. This protocol aims to determine to what extent the defence mechanism can
protect the model against attacks that have been generated against a prior unde­
fended version of the model. This is the worst­case scenario from a defence per­
spective and protecting against this protocol is hardest. It may occur in cases where
30
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:39==
a previously undefended model is now defended but an attacker has successfully
managed to generate adversarial attacks prior to defence.
• D →D: Attacks have been generated against the defended model and evaluation is
done against the same (defended) model. This is a less strict protocol than above
since adversarial images need to be generated against a model that is already de­
fended.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:41==
5
Vulnerability Analysis
In order to address the first three research questions pertaining to performance impact
on face impersonation detectors and face recognition systems, we must do a vulnerability
analysis. We use standardised metrics to quantify the performance impact. These are
described in section 3.5.
5.1
Adversarial Attacks Applied on Presentation Attack
Samples
For the PAD evaluation, we used the impostor images from the RM dataset to set the
baseline. For each PAD model, IAPAR scores for each of the perturbed images for each
attack were obtained and compared to baseline. The experimental setup for PAD can be
reviewed in sections 4.1.1 4.2 and 4.3.
5.1.1
Impact on PAD Models
For DeepPixBiS, we see in table 5.1 SA achieving highest D­EER score followed by HSJA.
An increase in D­EER compared to the baseline generally means an increase in the errors
of the PAD model and hence that the adversarial attacks affect the detection capabilities of
the model. SignOpt and SimBA achieve the same D­EER score and very similar BPCER
scores as well. SA also achieves the highest BPCER scores across all thresholds.
In the KDE plot fig. 5.1 we see similar trends with SA and HSJA having a greater proportion
of scores in the higher range. Interestingly, the scores for HSJA seem to be concentrated
around 0.7 with none in the extreme range of >0.9. In contrast, for SA we see there are
scores above that threshold.
The corresponding DET curves are shown in fig. 5.2. The PA baseline curve is computed
using presentation attack samples (no adversarial perturbations) and serves as the base­
line the attacks are compared to. We see that the DET curves correspond to the values
in table 5.1. For SA, we see relatively high BPCER scores for low APCER values. From
a defender’s perspective this makes it hard to defend against SA since tightening security
(setting thresholds based on low APCER) comes at the cost of higher user inconvenience
(high BPCER). Also, we see that even though HSJA achieves a higher D­EER than base­
line, the BPCER scores (for low APCER) are relatively lower compared to baseline. This is
in contrast to the SignOpt and SimBA attacks where BPCER remains high for low APCER
even though the D­EER scores for both attacks is lower than for HSJA.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
33
==PAGE:42==
PAD model
Attack
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
DeepPixBiS
­
15.8
42.73
30.91
24.55
SA
23.54
53.64
41.82
36.36
HSJA
20.87
26.36
24.55
24.55
SignOpt
18.21
53.64
33.64
25.45
SimBA
18.21
53.64
33.64
25.45
LMFD
­
12.61
31.82
20.91
14.55
SA
49.02
90.0
84.55
80.91
HSJA
20.87
49.09
40.91
28.18
SignOpt
24.51
52.73
43.64
37.27
SimBA
19.18
49.09
30.91
24.55
Table 5.1: D­EER, BPCER100, BPCER20, BPCER10 in % for attacks on DeepPixBiS
and LMFD
Figure 5.1: KDE plot of attacks on DeepPixBiS
34
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.2: DET curves for attacks DeepPixBiS
Next, we see the results of LMFD. Results are shown in table 5.1. All attacks seem to be
effective with SA once again achieving the highest D­EER with the relative increase being
much more significant than that for DeepPixBiS. This time, the SignOpt attack achieves
the second highest D­EER score followed by HSJA and SimBA. The BPCER scores are
dominated by SA as before. The DET fig. 5.4 and KDE plots fig. 5.3 correspond closely
and affirm these results.
Particularly for the SA we see how the KDE curve resembles the curve for the bona fide
scores with quite a high overlap. This shows the high effectivity of this attack. In contrast
to DeepPixBiS we see that the baseline impostor scores terminate at around 0.6 whereas
in the former, they extend all the way to 1.0. Consequently we see a lower D­EER on the
baseline for LMFD owing to better classification performance.
Looking at the DET curves we again see how SA achieves high BPCER scores. Con­
sidering the other attacks we see that high BPCER scores are maintained. Compared to
DeepPixBiS results, we see that no attack has a BPCER below baseline. This indicates
that the attacks are more effective against LMFD than against DeepPixBiS.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.3: KDE plot of attacks on LMFD
Figure 5.4: DET curves for attacks LMFD
5.1.2
Impact on Face Recognition Models
Finally, we see the IAPAR scores for attacks on DeepPixBiS and LMFD in table 5.3. We
see very high scores across both models and both FMR thresholds. From an attack
perspective, maintaining a high IAPAR (close to baseline) is optimal in this case since it
means the target person (attack sample) is matched by the face recognition system at the
specified threshold.
The IAPAR scores for SA are lowest amongst other attacks as seen in table 5.3. The
reason for this is the relatively large magnitude of the perturbations in this attack. This
can be seen in fig. 5.5 below where we show a sample from SA, HSJA and SignOpt. It can
also be seen in table 5.2 (similar trends for LMFD seen in table A.1) where we compute
the l2 and l∞norms of all attacks. SA can be seen to have highest norm scores. The
norms presented in the table are averaged values. It is interesting to note here that HSJA
36
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:45==
Attack
l2
l∞
SA
14469
157.2
HSJA
1845.3
42.8
SignOpt
1884.3
38.3
SimBA
643.9
11.9
Table 5.2: l2 and l∞norm scores for perturbed images generated against DeepPixBiS
and SignOpt achieve roughly the same norm values whereas the D­EER score of HSJA is
higher. We can therefore conclude that perturbations made by HSJA are more impactful.
(a) PA impostor
(b) SA
(c) SignOpt
Figure 5.5: Visualising perturbed images against DeepPixBiS
Looking at the tables for IAPAR, as expected we see a bigger drop in scores for the lower
FMR threshold. For all cases except SA the IAPAR of the baseline is maintained. This
testifies to the successful resolution of the constrained optimization problem of finding
perturbations and the effectivity of the attacks.
Based on this we may also conclude that HSJA might be the stronger attack for Deep­
PixBiS as it maintains a very high IAPAR while also having a high D­EER score and low
norm scores. Based on the same reasoning for LMFD we may conclude SignOpt to be
the stronger attack.
We also see that MagFace is the most robust of all three face recognition models followed
by ArcFace. In both cases it is impossible to assess the level of threat posed by each
attack without taking into account D­EER scores as well. For instance, for DeepPixBiS it
is unclear based on IAPAR alone what the second best attack is. This leads us to do a
joint impact evaluation.
5.1.3
Joint Impact Evaluation on PAD and Face Recognition
Evaluating overall attack performance is difficult because the two systems (PAD model
and face recognition model) are evaluated separately. The D­EER results alone disregard
the choice of face recognition model. While the IAPAR results alone do not fully capture
the level of threat posed by each attack.
This motivates the need for a tandem assessment of the two models. For this we turn our
attention to the tandem equal error rate (T­EER) [87].
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
37
==PAGE:46==
Attack
Baseline
HSJA
SignOpt
SA
SimBA
PAD model
FMR(%)
FR model
DeepPixBiS
0.1
MagFace
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.97
1.0
ArcFace
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
AdaFace
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.01
MagFace
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.93
1.0
ArcFace
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.98
1.0
AdaFace
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.99
1.0
LMFD
0.1
MagFace
1.0
0.98
0.98
0.84
1.0
ArcFace
1.0
0.99
0.99
0.96
1.0
AdaFace
1.0
0.99
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.01
MagFace
1.0
0.97
0.94
0.7
1.0
ArcFace
1.0
0.98
0.98
0.89
1.0
AdaFace
1.0
0.99
0.99
1.0
1.0
Table 5.3: IAPAR scores FMR=0.1% & FMR=0.01% for DeepPixBiS and LMFD
In table 5.4 we see the T­EER scores of all attacks against DeepPixBiS. As this is a tandem
assessment metric the score is computed for each face recognition model separately.
The scores for all ρ thresholds are shown for completeness. The ρ threshold is the spoof­
prevalence database prior and is predefined in the T­EER calculations. It determines
the relative number of spoof (attack) sample pairs to non­mated pairs. The T­EER is a
parameter­free evaluation metric which omits the need for ρ. Therefore, ideally the T­EER
score should be roughly equal across all ρ values. We see in table 5.4 this is indeed the
case.
In line with the D­EER scores we see once again SA achieving highest T­EER scores
across all face recognition models followed by HSJA. We see that for the SA the T­EER
is lower for MagFace than for the other face recognition models. This affirms the results
from IAPAR where we concluded MagFace to be the most robust face recognition model.
However, the difference in T­EER scores is very slight. This means that in a realistic
setting of a dual­system deployment comprising DeepPixBiS and a face recognition model
T­EER does not help us make a choice on what face recognition model to use. This is
so because based on T­EER all face recognition models fair (roughly) equally in terms of
robustness/vulnerability. Furthermore, based on T­EER results we cannot conclude what
the second most robust face recognition model is, after MagFace as the scores are the
same for ArcFace and AdaFace.
38
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:47==
Concurrent T­EER
ρ = 0
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
ρ = 1.0
PAD model
FR model
Attack
DeepPixBiS
AdaFace
­
18.75
18.75
18.75
18.75
18.75
SA
25.0
25.51
25.51
25.51
25.51
HSJA
21.02
21.02
21.02
21.02
21.02
SignOpt
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
SimBA
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
ArcFace
­
18.75
18.75
18.75
18.75
18.75
SA
25.0
25.51
25.51
25.51
25.51
HSJA
21.02
21.02
21.02
21.02
21.02
SignOpt
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
SimBA
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
MagFace
­
18.75
18.75
18.75
18.75
18.75
SA
24.86
25.48
25.48
25.48
25.48
HSJA
21.02
21.02
21.02
21.02
21.02
SignOpt
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
SimBA
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
19.89
Table 5.4: Concurrent T­EER scores of attacks vs. baseline on DeepPixBiS. Bolded val­
ues indicate highest obtained scores across all attack types for each face recognition
model.
In table 5.5 below the T­EER results for LMFD are presented. The first thing to notice
here is that for SA the T­EER varies with the ρ threshold. With ρ = 0 only the non­
mated pairs are taken into account. The non­existence of any attack samples means all
samples would go through the PAD model undetected leading to a high T­EER score (for
low face recognition threshold τ). Looking at the right­hand side figure in fig. 5.6 we see
the curve for ρ = 0 has high T­EER values for low τ values (considering graph to left of
pink intersection point). With increasing ρ we expect the PAD system to detect at least
some of the attack samples leading to the curves having lower T­EER for the same low
τ values. Again looking at the figure this is why we see the curves representing low ρ
values, starting at higher T­EER values.
As face recognition threshold τ increases we expect a drop in T­EER for especially the
cases where ρ is low as the face recognition system is trained to detect non­mated sam­
ples. Looking at the figure again essentially this means for the curves representing low
ρ values we expect sharp decreases. All this, would lead to an intersection between all
T­EER paths seen by the pink dot in the figure.
What we see for SA instead (see fig. 5.7) is that as ρ increases and more weight is attached
to the attack samples, the PAD model becomes increasingly worse at detecting the attack
attempts. In short, this means that the PAD system is worse at detecting SA samples than
non­mated. So the T­EER paths are higher instead of lower than the baseline (ρ = 0).
Naturally, this precludes an intersection of the T­EER paths and the possibility of a single
tandem equal error rate.
In contrast to IAPAR scores, from the T­EER results table 5.5 we do not see any significant
change in results between the face recognition models. Even for SA the T­EER scores
are identical across all face recognition models. Again this testifies to the inadequacy
of T­EER to help make a decision on choice of face recognition system in a dual­model
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
39
==PAGE:48==
setting.
Concurrent T­EER
ρ = 0
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
ρ = 1.0
PAD model
FR model
Attack
LMFD
AdaFace
­
15.91
15.91
15.91
15.91
15.91
SA
66.48
65.91
63.07
60.0
56.93
HSJA
25.42
25.42
25.42
25.42
25.42
SignOpt
35.23
33.3
33.3
33.3
33.3
SimBA
25.57
25.57
25.57
25.57
25.57
ArcFace
­
15.91
15.91
15.91
15.91
15.91
SA
66.48
65.91
63.07
60.0
56.93
HSJA
25.5
25.5
25.5
25.5
25.5
SignOpt
35.23
33.3
33.3
33.3
33.3
SimBA
25.57
25.57
25.57
25.57
25.57
MagFace
­
15.91
15.91
15.91
15.91
15.91
SA
66.48
65.91
63.07
60.0
56.93
HSJA
25.47
25.47
25.47
25.47
25.47
SignOpt
35.23
33.3
33.3
33.3
33.3
SimBA
25.57
25.57
25.57
25.57
25.57
Table 5.5: Concurrent T­EER scores of attacks vs. baseline on LMFD. Bolded values
indicate highest obtained scores across all attack types for each face recognition model.
Figure 5.6: T­EER plots of HSJA on LMFD AdaFace
40
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.7: T­EER plots of SA on LMFD AdaFace
5.2
Adversarial Attacks Applied on Morphing Attack Samples
For the MAD evaluation, we used the morphing attack images from the FRGC dataset to
set the baseline. For each MAD model, IAPAR scores for each of the perturbed images
for each attack were obtained and compared to baseline.
The experimental setup for MAD can be reviewed in sections 4.1.2 4.2 and 4.3.
5.2.1
Impact on MAD Models
The results can be seen in table 5.7. For MixNet, all attacks except SimBA were effective.
This is seen by the high D­EER scores. SA achieved the highest D­EER score amongst all
attacks and across all four morphing datasets. This was followed by HSJA and finally by
SignOpt and SimBA. We see some variation in baseline (no attack) D­EER scores across
the morphing datasets. The lowest baseline D­EER is achieved on the FaceMorpher
dataset, while the highest is achieved on the FaceFusion dataset.
We see peculiar behaviour for SA and HSJA amongst all four morphing datasets. We see
in fig. 5.8 the DET curves extend vertically upward. We take the SA plot in fig. 5.8a as an
example for this analysis. At a certain APCER percentage (71% in this case) the model
decision threshold is 1.0 (this is due to 71% of attack samples having value 1.0). Since
the threshold is already at a maximum level it does not change for lower APCER. As a
result, 71% of these image samples will never be classified as attacks as the threshold
cannot go higher. This has the consequence that the BPCER scores are 100.0 since no
bona fide image sample can be strictly greater than the threshold of 1.0. This analysis
extends to the other morphing cases as well where we see the curves extending vertically
upward.
The lack of a clear tradeoff between APCER and BPCER here means that enforcing
defence using solely a higher model threshold is not effective. In other words, for low
APCER thresholds (high security) the BPCER scores have a tendency to go to 100.0 for
SA and HSJA attacks. From a defence perspective this warrants the training of more
robust classifiers.
In table 5.7 we see also some variation in detection performance across morphing types.
For SA the FaceMorpher dataset is most vulnerable followed by OpenCV, UBO and then
FaceFusion. For HSJA the order changes to: FaceFusion, UBO, OpenCV, FaceMorpher.
However at this point we have no information on the attack effectivity against the different
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
41
==PAGE:50==
face recognition models. For that, we look at IAPAR scores towards the end of the section.
Finally, from the norm scores in table 5.6 below, we see suprisingly that HSJA achieves
the lowest score in l2 and amongst the lowest in l∞making this attack highly effective.
Similar trends are observed across the other three morphing datasets (see table A.3,
table A.4, table A.2).
Attack
l2
l∞
SA
12272.8
38.9
HSJA
253.1
1.2
SignOpt
321.5
2.6
SimBA
273.5
1.0
Table 5.6: l2 and l∞norms for perturbed images MixNet FaceFusion
MAD model
Morph type
Attack
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
MixNet
FaceFusion
­
14.53
54.1
31.94
20.83
SA
71.49
100.0
100.0
100.0
HSJA
49.17
100.0
100.0
100.0
SignOpt
18.23
55.0
34.86
26.11
SimBA
13.74
49.58
29.44
18.33
FaceMorpher
­
5.32
17.99
5.76
3.54
SA
85.85
100.0
100.0
100.0
HSJA
39.33
100.0
69.44
63.68
SignOpt
10.49
22.43
15.56
10.69
SimBA
6.07
15.62
6.46
3.96
OpenCV
­
7.19
24.03
8.96
5.76
SA
83.47
100.0
100.0
100.0
HSJA
44.06
100.0
75.14
67.71
SignOpt
11.94
26.32
17.15
13.61
SimBA
7.07
20.9
7.92
6.39
UBO
­
9.95
50.69
17.57
9.93
SA
79.58
100.0
100.0
100.0
HSJA
47.24
100.0
100.0
75.14
SignOpt
14.35
53.82
23.54
17.57
SimBA
9.19
45.9
15.62
8.47
Table 5.7: D­EER and BPCER scores of attacks vs. baseline on MixNet MAD model.
Bolded values indicate highest obtained scores across all attack types for each morph
type.
From the KDE plot in fig. 5.9 below we can see that the score distributions of SA and HSJA
are more concentrated at the extreme right value (1.0). The probability density values are
higher compared to the other attacks and the tails are also flatter. Interestingly, for the
HSJA attack we see that the probability density value near the peak is much higher than
for other attacks including for the SA. Combining this with the DET curve analysis1, it can
be concluded that although there are a higher number of scores of value 1.0 in SA, the
proportion of scores at relatively high values (9.99e­1 ­ 1.0) is higher for HSJA. Thus it
follows (as seen in the plot in fig. 5.9) that the there are no occurrences of data points
1This is also confirmed by the computed score files which are provided as part of the submission
42
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:51==
(a) DET curves for MixNet FaceFusion
(b) DET curves for MixNet FaceMorpher
(c) DET curves for MixNet OpenCV
(d) DET curves for MixNet UBO
Figure 5.8: DET curves for all attacks across all four morphing datasets for MixNet
below the value 0.5 for HSJA. We conclude therefore that the effectivity of HSJA is high
and that the attack is more generalizable and more robust to dataset variations.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.9: KDE plot of attacks on MixNet FaceFusion
For OrthoMAD, we see similar results with all attacks except SimBA being effective (with
the exception of OpenCV dataset). Results are shown in table 5.8. In contrast to MixNet,
we see SignOpt achieving the second highest D­EER score after SA. SA achieves ex­
ceptionally high D­EER scores throughout all datasets with correspondingly high BPCER
scores as well. The BPCER scores are 100.0 across all datasets.
From a defence perspective again we see the need for training more robust classifiers.
44
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:53==
MAD model
Morph type
Attack
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
OrthoMAD
FaceFusion
­
25.39
81.04
60.21
45.49
SA
95.96
100.0
100.0
100.0
HSJA
45.42
98.33
92.78
85.42
SignOpt
57.28
99.86
98.33
95.62
SimBA
25.39
81.53
61.25
46.53
FaceMorpher
­
17.03
62.15
38.33
26.81
SA
96.88
100.0
100.0
100.0
HSJA
38.55
97.01
89.93
82.08
SignOpt
52.62
99.86
98.33
96.53
SimBA
16.98
62.15
38.96
26.39
OpenCV
­
16.77
61.32
38.54
24.44
SA
96.88
100.0
100.0
100.0
HSJA
37.14
96.6
87.5
77.78
SignOpt
48.87
99.65
97.85
93.61
SimBA
17.1
61.25
38.61
24.93
UBO
­
25.52
80.97
62.01
49.86
SA
91.26
100.0
100.0
100.0
HSJA
44.95
98.68
93.12
85.76
SignOpt
58.92
99.93
99.38
97.85
SimBA
25.43
80.69
62.15
50.28
Table 5.8: D­EER and BPCER scores of attacks vs. baseline on OrthoMAD MAD model.
Bolded values indicate highest obtained scores across all attack types for each morph
type.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) DET curves for OrthoMAD FaceFusion
(b) DET curves for OrthoMAD FaceMorpher
(c) DET curves for OrthoMAD OpenCV
(d) DET curves for OrthoMAD UBO
Figure 5.10: DET curves for all attacks across all four morphing datasets for OrthoMAD
The KDE plot for the FaceFusion dataset is shown below in fig. 5.11. We see that base­
line impostor scores are relatively high indicating sub­par classification performance of
OrthoMAD compared to MixNet. This is also apparent from the D­EER scores.
46
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.11: KDE plot of attacks on OrthoMAD FaceFusion
5.2.2
Impact on Face Recognition Models
Next, we see the IAPAR scores of both models (tables: 5.9, 5.11, 5.10, 5.12). The trend
is similar as in the previous results with MagFace being the most robust model as lowest
scores are achieved. Across all four datasets and the two models the IAPAR is maintained
for all attacks except SA as is expected (recall norm scores in table 5.6). We do see some
variations in baseline scores across the different datasets, with FaceMorpher achieving
lowest scores and FaceFusion achieving highest. At the smaller FMR threshold we see
quite a significant drop in IAPAR for SA for both models. For FaceMorpher it gets as low
as 0.27 for MagFace and ArcFace table 5.11.
Taking these results into account, HSJA and SignOpt are more versatile and generalis­
able attacks for MixNet and OrthoMAD respectively. The level of threat they pose is also
greater owing to their significantly lower norm scores compared to SA.
For MixNet we conclude that HSJA is the most effective attack based on a combined look
at D­EER, IAPAR scores and perturbation norms. Moreover we see AdaFace is most
vulnerable followed by ArcFace across both FMR thresholds. Amongst the morphing
datasets, FaceFusion is most vulnerable (highest IAPAR).
For OrthoMAD we conclude SignOpt to be most effective. Based on IAPAR scores we
again see AdaFace followed by ArcFace being most vulnerable across both FMR thresh­
olds. Amongst the morphing datasets, FaceFusion is most vulnerable.
We downplay the effectivity of SA despite high D­EER scores based on primarily high
norm values and very visible perturbations. Secondly, we also notice relatively lower
levels of IAPAR for SA. Finally, for SA we notice the existence of very visible artefacts
(fig. 5.5b) which means it would be easy to defend against this attack using an active
defence mechanism. The same cannot be said for HSJA or SignOpt.
We now look at T­EER scores.
5.2.3
Joint Impact Evaluation on MAD and Face Recognition
We look first at T­EER scores for the MixNet model. The scores are shown in table 5.13,
table 5.14, table A.6 ,table A.5. In general, and on average we see the highest scores are
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
47
==PAGE:56==
Attack
Baseline
HSJA
SignOpt
SA
SimBA
MAD model
Morph type
FR model
MixNet
FaceFusion
MagFace
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.79
0.95
ArcFace
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.83
0.97
AdaFace
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.96
1.0
FaceMorpher
MagFace
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.51
0.79
ArcFace
0.84
0.84
0.84
0.55
0.84
AdaFace
0.92
0.92
0.92
0.76
0.92
UBO
MagFace
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.75
0.93
ArcFace
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.8
0.96
AdaFace
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.95
0.99
OpenCV
MagFace
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.56
0.82
ArcFace
0.87
0.87
0.87
0.6
0.87
AdaFace
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.8
0.94
Table 5.9: IAPAR FMR=0.1% MixNet. Bolded values indicate highest obtained scores
across all face recognition models for each morph type.
Attack
Baseline
HSJA
SignOpt
SA
SimBA
MAD model
Morph type
FR model
OrthoMAD
FaceFusion
MagFace
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.73
0.95
ArcFace
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.79
0.97
AdaFace
1.0
1.0
0.99
0.95
1.0
FaceMorpher
MagFace
0.79
0.79
0.78
0.51
0.79
ArcFace
0.84
0.83
0.82
0.54
0.84
AdaFace
0.92
0.91
0.91
0.76
0.92
UBO
MagFace
0.93
0.93
0.92
0.7
0.93
ArcFace
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.76
0.96
AdaFace
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.92
0.99
OpenCV
MagFace
0.82
0.82
0.8
0.53
0.82
ArcFace
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.57
0.87
AdaFace
0.94
0.94
0.92
0.79
0.94
Table 5.10:
IAPAR FMR=0.1% OrthoMAD. Bolded values indicate highest obtained
scores across all face recognition models for each morph type.
achieved on the FaceFusion dataset while lowest on FaceMorpher (excluding SA). This
is in line with what we observed from the IAPAR results (FaceFusion achieving highest
IAPAR). Similar to the PAD case, we see again the failure of the T­EER method to produce
a single concurrent score for SA and HSJA owing to the high effectivity of these attacks.
Like before, we do not see significant changes across the different face recognition mod­
els. This is in contrast to the IAPAR scores where there are clear differences.
In the previous section we concluded based on D­EER and IAPAR results that the HSJA
attack is stronger since it is more versatile and generalizable.
The lack of a single T­EER score makes drawing similar conclusions harder looking solely
48
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:57==
Attack
Baseline
HSJA
SignOpt
SA
SimBA
MAD model
Morph type
FR model
MixNet
FaceFusion
MagFace
0.84
0.84
0.84
0.56
0.84
ArcFace
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.62
0.89
AdaFace
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.84
0.95
FaceMorpher
MagFace
0.6
0.59
0.59
0.27
0.59
ArcFace
0.65
0.65
0.64
0.27
0.64
AdaFace
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.49
0.77
UBO
MagFace
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.51
0.79
ArcFace
0.85
0.85
0.85
0.57
0.85
AdaFace
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.79
0.94
OpenCV
MagFace
0.63
0.63
0.63
0.32
0.63
ArcFace
0.68
0.68
0.67
0.31
0.67
AdaFace
0.79
0.79
0.8
0.53
0.79
Table 5.11: IAPAR FMR=0.01% MixNet. Bolded values indicate highest obtained scores
across all face recognition models for each morph type.
Attack
Baseline
HSJA
SignOpt
SA
SimBA
MAD model
Morph type
FR model
OrthoMAD
FaceFusion
MagFace
0.84
0.84
0.82
0.49
0.84
ArcFace
0.89
0.89
0.88
0.52
0.89
AdaFace
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.81
0.95
FaceMorpher
MagFace
0.6
0.59
0.58
0.28
0.59
ArcFace
0.65
0.63
0.61
0.27
0.65
AdaFace
0.77
0.76
0.74
0.48
0.77
UBO
MagFace
0.79
0.79
0.78
0.48
0.79
ArcFace
0.85
0.84
0.83
0.5
0.85
AdaFace
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.77
0.94
OpenCV
MagFace
0.63
0.63
0.61
0.29
0.63
ArcFace
0.68
0.67
0.65
0.28
0.68
AdaFace
0.79
0.78
0.77
0.52
0.79
Table 5.12: IAPAR FMR=0.01% OrthoMAD. Bolded values indicate highest obtained
scores across all face recognition models for each morph type.
at the table values. This is especially the case seeing the sharp drop in T­EER score for
SA in table 5.14.
This leads us to conclude that T­EER does not fair so well as a metric in cases where the
attack is abnormally strong.
For OrthoMAD, analysis becomes even harder since a T­EER is not even computed for the
baseline. This is most likely due to the poor classification performance of the OrthoMAD
model as was seen in the generally high D­EER scores as well. Therefore, we refrain from
discussing the T­EER results further. But this does lead us to conclude the unsuitability
of T­EER when either attack performance is too high or model performance is subpar.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
49
==PAGE:58==
Concurrent T­EER FaceFusion
ρ = 0
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
ρ = 1.0
MAD model
FR model
Attacl
MixNet
AdaFace
­
23.45
23.49
23.49
23.49
23.49
SA
72.18
72.18
72.07
29.71
23.91
HSJA
74.76
72.25
68.83
65.51
62.96
SignOpt
33.5
33.61
33.61
33.61
33.61
SimBA
22.69
22.69
22.69
22.69
22.69
ArcFace
­
23.45
23.49
23.49
23.49
23.49
SA
72.18
72.18
72.07
29.65
23.83
HSJA
74.76
72.25
68.83
65.51
62.96
SignOpt
33.5
33.61
33.61
33.61
33.61
SimBA
22.69
22.69
22.69
22.69
22.69
MagFace
­
23.45
23.49
23.49
23.49
23.49
SA
72.18
72.18
72.07
30.03
24.5
HSJA
74.76
72.25
68.83
65.51
62.96
SignOpt
33.5
33.61
33.61
33.61
33.61
SimBA
22.69
22.69
22.69
22.69
22.69
Table 5.13: FaceFusion T­EER scores of attacks vs. baseline on MixNet MAD model.
Bolded values indicate highest obtained scores across all attack types for each face recog­
nition model.
Concurrent T­EER FaceMorpher
ρ = 0
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
ρ = 1.0
MAD model
FR model
Attack
MixNet
AdaFace
­
11.09
11.09
11.09
11.09
11.09
SA
96.5
2.8
1.86
1.6
1.49
HSJA
62.71
61.25
59.1
56.77
54.88
SignOpt
22.48
23.1
23.1
23.1
23.1
SimBA
11.97
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
ArcFace
­
11.1
11.1
11.1
11.1
11.1
SA
96.5
2.69
1.93
1.57
1.46
HSJA
62.71
61.25
59.1
56.77
54.88
SignOpt
22.5
23.08
23.08
23.08
23.08
SimBA
11.97
12.01
12.01
12.01
12.01
MagFace
­
11.09
11.09
11.09
11.09
11.09
SA
96.5
6.77
4.48
3.68
3.17
HSJA
62.71
61.25
59.1
56.77
54.88
SignOpt
22.49
23.11
23.11
23.11
23.11
SimBA
12.07
12.04
12.04
12.04
12.04
Table 5.14: FaceMorpher T­EER scores of attacks vs. baseline on MixNet MAD model.
Bolded values indicate highest obtained scores across all attack types for each face recog­
nition model.
50
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:59==
To sum up, in case of MAD the combination of D­EER and IAPAR scores served as a
better measure to assess attack performance and model vulnerability in face of attacks
as opposed to T­EER.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:61==
6
Defence Analysis
For defending against the attacks, we opted for a proactive approach (described pre­
viously in section 2.6.1): training more robust models. The two most popular ways to
achieve this is through adversarial training and defensive distillation. Defensive distilla­
tion was chosen as the primary defence mechanism as it offers advantages compared to
adversarial training. Firstly, it does not require access to perturbed inputs. So in theory it
should generalise well to all types of attacks and is pragmatic in implementation.
In adversarial training the model is trained on adversarial samples generated using a
single attack type. The primary disadvantage of adversarial training is therefore that it
is unrealistic to train on all known attack types [100]. Therefore generalisability suffers
and an attack the model has not been trained against might be highly effective against
that model. Furthermore, adversarial training is known to reduce baseline performance
(termed baseline performance and robustness trade­off [99]).
The defence protocols and metrics used have been described previously and can be
reviewed in section 4.7 and section 3.5 respectively.
Since SimBA was the weakest attack as seen in the previous section chapter 5 and in the
interest of time defence analysis was omitted for this attack.
6.1
Impact of Defensive Distillation on PAD Models
We first analyze results for PAD. Two protocols were used (see section 4.7). In the first, U
→D, the perturbed images generated against the baseline undefended model are used.
Whereas in the second D →D, the perturbed images have been generated against the
defended model.
For PAD we used defensive distillation. We used a temperature T value of 5.0 in case
of DeepPixBiS. While for LMFD a temperature of 100.0 was used. These values were
chosen via empirical means through experimentation.
In table 6.1 below we see the results of defensive distillation. For the U →D protocol
we see a reduction in D­EER scores for all attacks except SA. Whereas for the second
protocol D →D we see a reduction in D­EER scores of all attacks. The reduction is
greater for the second protocol. This is to be expected since with a smoother loss function
it becomes harder to find adversarial samples. What is interesting to note here is that,
baseline performance is maintained for the defended model.
In table 6.2 below we see the results for the LMFD model. In this case, we see a reduction
in D­EER scores of all attacks for both protocols. From a defence perspective this means
that the detection capabilities of the model has improved and it is able to better classify
adversarial inputs as attacks. The reduction is greatest in the second protocol as was
noted above. Again as before we see that baseline performance is largely maintained.
As noted earlier, a reactive defensive approach can be used against SA so the lack of
reduced D­EER against SA for the defended model is dismissed. The main finding is
then that using defensive distillation we are able to defend the PAD models against the two
most effective black­box attacks: HSJA and SignOpt. All this, without losing performance
against the baseline.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
53
==PAGE:62==
PAD model
Protocol
Attack
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
DeepPixBiS
U →U
­
15.8
42.73
30.91
24.55
SA
23.54
53.64
41.82
36.36
HSJA
20.87
26.36
24.55
24.55
SignOpt
18.21
53.64
33.64
25.45
U →D
­
15.8
42.73
30.91
24.55
SA
24.51 ↑
46.36
37.27
31.82
HSJA
16.25 ↓
26.36
24.55
18.18
SignOpt
17.95 ↓
46.36
31.82
26.36
D →D
­
15.8
42.73
30.91
24.55
SA
16.25 ↓
46.36
31.82
24.55
HSJA
16.25 ↓
46.36
31.82
24.55
SignOpt
16.25 ↓
46.36
31.82
24.55
Table 6.1: D­EER and BPCER scores after defensive distillation on DeepPixBiS T = 5.0.
Arrows indicate increase or decrease in score relative to the U →U protocol.
PAD model
Protocol
Attack
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
LMFD
U →U
­
12.61
31.82
20.91
14.55
SA
49.02
90.0
84.55
80.91
HSJA
20.87
49.09
40.91
28.18
SignOpt
24.51
52.73
43.64
37.27
U →D
­
13.13 ↑
36.36
22.73
17.27
SA
20.16 ↓
55.45
42.73
35.45
HSJA
11.64 ↓
24.55
17.27
11.82
SignOpt
15.28 ↓
37.27
25.45
17.27
D →D
­
13.13 ↑
36.36
22.73
17.27
SA
20.87 ↓
52.73
42.73
31.82
HSJA
8.0 ↓
17.27
11.82
8.18
SignOpt
12.61 ↓
40.91
19.09
15.45
Table 6.2: D­EER and BPCER scores after defensive distillation on LMFD T = 100.0.
Arrows indicate increase or decrease in score relative to the U →U protocol.
6.2
Impact of Adversarial Training on MAD Models
Next we look at MAD results. table 6.3 and table 6.4 show MixNet results. Comparing the
U →D protocol to U →U (table 5.7) we see a remarkable increase in robustness for all
attacks with the exception of SignOpt across all morphing types. Especially for the SA we
see pronounced decrease in D­EER score. However, we also see a decrease in baseline
performance, with the relative decrease being greatest for the FaceMorpher and OpenCV
datasets.
If we compare the D →D protocol in table 6.4 the increase in robustness is even more
significant with D­EER scores dropping to as low as 1.75. Like before it seems the de­
fended model is unable to defend against the SignOpt attack with scores actually being
higher than baseline.
Moving on to OrthoMAD, we see results in table 6.5 and table 6.6. In contrast to MixNet
results, in U →D we see a reduction in D­EER scores for SA and SignOpt while for HSJA
54
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:63==
Adversarial Training MixNet U →D
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
MAD model
Morph type
Attack
MixNet
FaceFusion
­
24.4 ↑
100.0
65.62
46.67
SA
16.32 ↓
100.0
100.0
34.1
HSJA
24.85 ↓
100.0
65.62
46.67
SignOpt
25.69 ↑
100.0
65.62
48.33
FaceMorpher
­
19.18 ↑
100.0
44.58
30.0
SA
13.11 ↓
100.0
100.0
35.07
HSJA
19.81 ↓
100.0
46.67
32.01
SignOpt
22.56 ↑
100.0
53.06
41.46
OpenCV
­
20.18 ↑
100.0
48.33
33.54
SA
13.81 ↓
100.0
100.0
29.51
HSJA
20.53 ↓
100.0
48.33
34.86
SignOpt
23.61 ↑
100.0
58.06
41.46
UBO
­
20.14 ↑
100.0
50.76
36.53
SA
12.15 ↓
100.0
50.76
17.85
HSJA
20.68 ↓
100.0
53.06
39.31
SignOpt
22.85 ↑
100.0
58.06
42.92
Table 6.3: D­EER and BPCER scores after adversarial training on MixNet (undefended).
Arrows indicate increase or decrease in score relative to the U →U protocol (table 5.7).
Adversarial Training MixNet D →D
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
MAD model
Morph type
Attack
MixNet
FaceFusion
­
24.4 ↑
100.0
65.62
46.67
SA
2.0 ↓
12.64
0.35
0.21
HSJA
2.67 ↓
27.29
0.14
0.0
SignOpt
27.9 ↑
100.0
100.0
100.0
FaceMorpher
­
19.18 ↑
100.0
44.58
30.0
SA
2.58 ↓
16.32
0.35
0.28
HSJA
2.88 ↓
53.06
0.21
0.07
SignOpt
24.7 ↑
100.0
100.0
100.0
OpenCV
­
20.18 ↑
100.0
48.33
33.54
SA
1.75 ↓
6.18
0.35
0.21
HSJA
2.25 ↓
19.38
0.14
0.0
SignOpt
25.71 ↑
100.0
100.0
100.0
UBO
­
20.14 ↑
100.0
50.76
36.53
SA
2.7 ↓
27.22
0.35
0.28
HSJA
3.41 ↓
46.67
0.42
0.14
SignOpt
25.64 ↑
100.0
100.0
100.0
Table 6.4: D­EER and BPCER scores after adversarial training on MixNet (defended).
Arrows indicate increase or decrease in score relative to the U →U protocol (table 5.7)
the D­EER seems to be higher. This is the case for all datasets except UBO. Baseline
performance is again compromised. For the D →D case the results are largely identical.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
55
==PAGE:64==
Adversarial training OrthoMAD U →D
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
MAD model
Morph type
Attack
OrthoMAD
FaceFusion
­
44.0 ↑
96.67
91.74
85.28
SA
1.46 ↓
2.92
0.21
0.07
HSJA
43.25 ↓
96.32
91.18
83.68
SignOpt
38.71 ↓
95.97
87.85
77.57
FaceMorpher
­
48.21 ↑
97.57
93.54
88.33
SA
1.46 ↓
2.92
0.21
0.07
HSJA
43.25 ↑
96.32
91.18
83.68
SignOpt
45.87 ↓
97.29
91.25
84.38
OpenCV
­
48.34 ↑
98.68
93.19
90.42
SA
2.2 ↓
5.21
0.83
0.21
HSJA
49.0 ↑
98.12
92.99
89.51
SignOpt
46.71 ↓
97.29
91.6
85.42
UBO
­
42.45 ↑
98.96
92.64
85.56
SA
6.86 ↓
91.39
15.56
0.83
HSJA
40.99 ↓
98.68
92.22
83.33
SignOpt
35.41 ↓
97.15
86.46
73.47
Table 6.5: D­EER and BPCER scores after adversarial training on OrthoMAD (unde­
fended). Arrows indicate increase or decrease in score relative to the U →U protocol
(table 5.8)
Adversarial training OrthoMAD D →D
D­EER
BPCER100
BPCER20
BPCER10
MAD model
Morph type
Attack
OrthoMAD
FaceFusion
­
44.0 ↑
96.67
91.74
85.28
SA
6.12 ↓
93.06
15.62
0.28
HSJA
42.33 ↓
96.67
91.11
84.1
SignOpt
42.33 ↓
96.67
91.04
84.1
FaceMorpher
­
48.21 ↑
97.57
93.54
88.33
SA
6.12 ↓
93.06
15.62
0.28
HSJA
42.33 ↑
96.67
91.11
84.1
SignOpt
47.75 ↓
97.85
93.54
88.26
OpenCV
­
48.34 ↑
98.68
93.19
90.42
SA
3.12 ↓
65.69
0.83
0.21
HSJA
48.04 ↑
98.68
93.26
90.35
SignOpt
48.04 ↓
98.68
93.26
90.21
UBO
­
42.45 ↑
98.96
92.64
85.56
SA
4.87 ↓
79.93
3.47
0.21
HSJA
40.7 ↓
98.89
92.43
83.75
SignOpt
40.7 ↓
98.89
92.43
83.75
Table 6.6: D­EER and BPCER scores after adversarial training on OrthoMAD (defended).
Arrows indicate increase or decrease in score relative to the U →U protocol (table 5.8)
We conclude here that adversarial training is able to defend against some but not all attack
56
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:65==
types. Also, baseline detection performance greatly suffers as a result of adversarial
training.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:67==
7
Discussion on Defence
Figure 7.1: From [101]: “... the defended model is very smooth in neighborhoods of
training points: i.e., gradients of the model outputs with respect to its inputs are zero and
the adversary does not know in which direction to look for adversarial examples. However,
the adversary can use the substitute model’s gradients to find adversarial examples that
transfer back to the defended model. Note that this effect would be exacerbated by models
with more than one dimension.”
This chapter focusses solely on discussion on defence results seen in the previous chap­
ter.
Both defensive distillation and adversarial training are a form of gradient masking [102]
[103].
Gradient masking techniques result in models that are very smooth in specific directions
of training points making it difficult for attacks to find gradients which makes it harder to
craft adversarial examples.
However, based on [102] [103] models trained with these techniques should still be vul­
nerable to attacks crafted using undefended models. This is due to high transferability
of adversarial samples. Samples generated against one model are highly likely to cause
misclassification when evaluated against a different model [101].
From the paper [102]: “We show a more general flaw in the category of gradient masking.
Even if the defender attempts to prevent attacks by not publishing the directions in which
the model is sensitive, these directions can be discovered by other means, in which case
the same attack can still succeed. We show that the black­box attack based on transfer
from a substitute model overcomes gradient masking defenses.”.
The idea here is that the substitute model would have gradients and that the adversarial
samples generated against that, would transfer to the defended model. This can be seen
in fig. 7.1. In our case we do not use a substitute model but the adversarial samples are
generated against the undefended model itself. In any case, the transferability property
still holds.
The following excerpt from the article [103] asserts this as well: “If we transfer adversarial
examples from one model to a second model that was trained with either adversarial
training or defensive distillation, the attack often succeeds, even when a direct attack
on the second model would fail. This suggests that both training techniques do more to
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
59
==PAGE:68==
flatten out the model and remove the gradient than to make sure it classifies more points
correctly.”.
In the context of this thesis, this implies three things:
1. High attack performance for U →D protocol: D­EER scores in the U →D protocol
should be roughly the same as for the U →U protocol for all attack types and all
models. In other words scores should be maintained.
2. Low attack performance for D →D protocol for the HSJA and SignOpt attacks:
These two attacks make use of local gradient information. HSJA makes an estimate
of the direction of the gradient, while SignOpt an estimate of the sign. So crafting
adversarial examples should be more difficult against defended models. Therefore,
D­EER scores in the D →D protocol should be relatively low (compared to U →U)
for these attacks.
3. High attack performance for D →D protocol for the SA attack: Since SA makes no
use of local gradient information the gradient masking should be ineffective for this
attack. Therefore, we should see relatively high D­EER scores.
We now analyze each of these implications in turn.
7.1
High attack performance for U →D protocol
The results show that both forms of defensive training lead to an overall increase in robust­
ness (lower D­EER scores). There are only a few exceptions. For DeepPixBiS, MixNet
and OrthoMAD we see exceptions in SA, SignOpt and HSJA attacks respectively, where
high D­EER scores are maintained. For LMFD there are no exceptions.
It is uncertain why high D­EER scores are not maintained for all attack types. But it
seems that through the training process the decision surface and boundary is not only
smoothened but also changed in ways that make most existing adversarial attacks be­
come correctly classified. It is also uncertain why the attack types in the exceptions men­
tioned previously differ across the models. The three attacks: SA, SignOpt and HSJA are
exceptions for three separate models. Since the training procedure is invariable, these
differences must be attributed to differences in model architecture.
7.2
Low attack performance for D →D protocol for the HSJA
and SignOpt attacks
We see indeed that relatively low D­EER scores are obtained for the HSJA and SignOpt
attacks for both PAD models.
However, with respect to MAD results we see a lot of variation. For MixNet we see across
all four morphing types that the HSJA attack is defended against while SignOpt is not. For
OrthoMAD, SignOpt is defended against (for all four morphing types) while HSJA is only
defended against in two morphing types. Essentially we see roughly opposing trends.
Go into the why here?
7.3
High attack performance for D →D protocol for the SA
attack
We see that high attack performance is not maintained and the SA attacks are defended
against (low D­EER scores are obtained) across all models. The large size of the pertur­
bations could be a reason for this. Especially since the D­EER is abnormally high for the
60
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:69==
undefended model, meaning making a reduction in D­EER is more probable regardless
of which defensive mechanism is used. Furthermore, from the analysis in section 7.1,
we saw SA had only high D­EER in one exceptional case for the U →D protocol. Given
this knowledge and the fact that D →D protocol is more challenging it is perhaps not
surprising to see low attack performance.
To sum up we can conclude that from a defence perspective the defence mechanisms fair
quite well. According to both implications 1 (7.1) and 2 (7.2), we should have expected
the implemented defence techniques to be ineffective and hence lower model robustness
(higher D­EER). However, the results in both cases show an increase in model robustness
and lower D­EER scores. This is more profound for the PAD models while for MAD there
are some exceptions especially in 7.2.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:71==
8
Conclusion
In this chapter we sum up the main conclusions drawn from the previous chapters on
vulnerability analysis and defence evaluation. Finally, we answer the proposed research
questions.
For the PAD models we discovered that the LMFD model is most vulnerable to adversarial
attacks. Across both PAD models, MagFace was seen to be the most robust face recog­
nition model followed by ArcFace. Regarding T­EER scores the same trends in attack
performance were seen with the same conclusions drawn regarding categorisation of at­
tacks based on attack performance. However, it was seen that the difference in scores
across different face recognition models was insignificant, making it difficult to argue over
the choice of face recognition system. Consequently, based solely on T­EER results Mag­
Face was seen to be the most robust model but the second most robust model could not
be concluded. We also saw that the T­EER method was unable to produce a single con­
current value for SA undermining the use of this evaluation metric for abnormally strong
attacks. Therefore, we conclude that the combination of D­EER and IAPAR scores served
as a better evaluation metric. SA was seen to be the most impactful attack but this was
undermined by the high norm scores achieved by this attack.
For the MAD models we saw generally very high BPCER scores with some reaching
100.0, motivating the need to develop robust classifiers through proactive defence strate­
gies. It was interesting to note for MixNet the HSJA attack achieving the lowest norm
scores despite resulting in the second highest D­EER. This testified to the high impact of
this particular attack. We discovered the FaceFusion dataset to be most vulnerable to ad­
versarial attacks. Also, MagFace was seen to be the most robust face recognition model
followed by ArcFace. Finally, the T­EER evaluation metric failed to produce single con­
current values for the most impactful attacks. For OrthoMAD, a value was not computed
for even baseline. These leads us to conclude that not only is T­EER an inadequate met­
ric in cases of abnormally impactful attacks but also in cases of models that have subpar
baseline classification performance (for OrthoMAD seen by the relatively high baseline
D­EER (compare table 5.8 to table 5.7)).
We now answer the proposed research questions in turn:
Research Question 1: What is the impact of adversarial attacks on the performance of
face impersonation detectors?
For both PAD models, we see that all attacks lead to an increase in D­EER.
For the DeepPixBiS model we see a percentage increase in D­EER ranging from a low
of 15.25% to a high of 48.98% (table 5.1)
For the LMFD model we see a percentage increase in D­EER ranging from a low of
52.10% to a high of 288.73% (table 5.1)
For the MixNet and OrthoMAD models we see that the SimBA attack does not lead to an
increase in D­EER across all morphing types.
Excluding SimBA results, for the MixNet model we see the following percentage increases
in D­EER (table 5.7):
• FaceFusion: low of 25.46% and a high of 392.01%
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
63
==PAGE:72==
• FaceMorpher: low of 97.18% and a high of 1513.72%
• OpenCV: low of 66.06% and a high of 1060.9%
• UBO: low of 44.22% and a high of 699.79%
Excluding SimBA results, for the OrthoMAD model we see the following percentage in­
creases in D­EER (table 5.8):
• FaceFusion: low of 78.89% and a high of 277.94%
• FaceMorpher: low of 126.36% and a high of 468.87%
• OpenCV: low of 121.46% and a high of 477.69%
• UBO: low of 76.13% and a high of 257.61%
It can be seen clearly that the adversarial attacks have been very impactful.
Research Question 2: Which adversarial attacks have the greatest impact on the per­
formance of face impersonation detectors?
Based on D­EER score analysis, following is the list of most impactful attacks:
• DeepPixBiS: SA, HSJA, SignOpt (tied with SimBA) (table 5.1)
• LMFD: SA, SignOpt, HSJA, SimBA (table 5.1)
• MixNet: SA, HSJA, SignOpt, SimBA (table 5.7)
• OrthoMAD: SA, SignOpt, HSJA, SimBA (table 5.8)
As can be seen SA has been the most impactful attack, while SimBA has been the least im­
pactful. However, based on the previous analysis of l2 and l∞norm scores, SA achieved
relatively high norm scores. This was due to the high perturbation magnitude of SA. This
makes this attack easy to defend against using reactive defence approaches and reduces
the actual impact of the attack in a real­world scenario. The large perturbation magnitudes
lead to a low IAPAR of this attack as well. Therefore, taking into account IAPAR and norm
results, the second best attack in the list above is a better indicator for most impactful
attack.
Research Question 3: Is it possible to fool the impersonation detectors and simultane­
ously fool face recognition model(s), such that a perturbed facial image is authenticated
in the face recognition system?
Through this project we were able to show that black­box adversarial attacks can greatly
impact both face impersonation detectors and face recognition models. We were able to
show that the two systems can simultaneously be fooled such that a perturbed image is
wrongly classified by the detector and authenticated in the recognition system. To show
this we used a combination of D­EER scores and IAPAR scores.
Specifically we saw for DeepPixBiS (table 5.3) very high IAPAR scores.
• FMR 0.1%: low of 0.97 and high of 1.0
• FMR 0.01%: low of 0.93 and high of 1.0
Similarly for LMFD (table 5.3) we saw high IAPAR scores:
• FMR 0.1%: low of 0.84 and high of 1.0
• FMR 0.01%: low of 0.70 and high of 1.0
64
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:73==
For MixNet (table 5.9) (table 5.11), we see generally high IAPAR. Again excluding SimBA
we have (across all four morphing types):
• FMR 0.1%: low of 0.51 and high of 1.0
• FMR 0.01%: low of 0.27 and high of 0.95
For OrthoMAD (table 5.10) (table 5.12), we see also generally high IAPAR. Excluding
SimBA we have (across all four morphing types):
• FMR 0.1%: low of 0.51 and high of 1.0
• FMR 0.01%: low of 0.27 and high of 0.95
It must be noted that the exact number of attack samples that get authenticated in the face
recognition system depends on the operating threshold set for the detection models which
is context dependent and depends on the APCER set. This could be 1%, 5%, or 10%. In
any case, the high IAPAR means the majority of these samples will get authenticated.
To more easily do a tandem evaluation of the combined systems we used the T­EER
evaluation metric. However, we saw that the T­EER cannot be used in cases where either
the attack is abnormally impactful (SA) or where baseline model performance is subpar
(OrthoMAD).
Research Question 4: Can proactive defence mechanisms help protect face imperson­
ation detectors against adversarial attacks?
Defensive distillation proved to be very successful for both PAD models. For the MAD
models, it did not and we had to opt for adversarial training.
First we summarize defensive distillation results:
For DeepPixBiS we saw that with the exception of SA on the U →D protocol, defensive
distillation led to a decrease in D­EER for all other attacks. Also, the baseline detection
performance was maintained.
For LMFD we saw that for all attacks, defensive distillation led to a decrease in D­EER.
Furthermore, in contrast to DeepPixBiS, it was seen that HSJA (across both protocols)
led to a D­EER even lower than the U →U baseline. Baseline detection performance was
seen to be slightly worse (13.13 vs. 12.61) but still low enough to consider the defence
successful.
Adversarial training proved to also be a good defence strategy with the only drawback
being a reduction in baseline detection performance.
For MixNet, we saw a reduction in D­EER across both protocols for all attacks except
SignOpt. Compared to defensive distillation, baseline detection performance proved to
be significantly worse post adversarial training.
For OrthoMAD, we saw again a reduction in D­EER across both protocols for all attacks
with exceptions on HSJA (for the FaceMorpher and OpenCV morph types). In this case,
we again see a worsening of baseline detection performance post adversarial training.
We conclude that black­box adversarial attacks can effectively impact face impersonation
detection performance. However, they can also be effectively defended against using
proactive defence strategies. In the context of this thesis, defensive distillation for PAD
models proved to be the most successful defence mechanism leading to both lower D­
EER scores while maintaining baseline detection performance.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
65
==PAGE:74==
8.1
Future Work
8.1.1
Implementing Black­box Transfer Based Attack
As mentioned in section 2.5.2 black­box adversarial attacks can be classified into two
types: query­based and transfer based. In this thesis, the focus was on query­based
attacks. A natural next step would be to implement a transfer based attack and see if the
current defended models are able to defend against it.
Transfer based attacks are expected to be hard to defend against (based on [104] both
defensive distillation and adversarial training can be bypassed by transfer based attacks).
This is because since the surrogate model is chosen by the attacker, full knowledge of the
model is available paving the way to attack the surrogate using white­box attacks. In addi­
tion, white­box attacks are more impactful than black­box attacks [105]. Even though the
attacks would have been generated using a white­box attack on a surrogate model which
could be different in architecture from the target model, the attacks are still expected to
succeed. This is due to adversarial example transferability, i.e. “the property that adver­
sarial examples crafted to be misclassified by a model are likely to be misclassified by a
different model” [101]. The surrogate model used in this case could be a simple ResNet
based classifier.
8.1.2
Attack Performance Assessment Based on Query Efficiency
In this thesis, we looked at D­EER scores and norm scores to assess attack performance.
However, most query­based adversarial attacks are assessed on query efficiency. This is
because the faster an attack is able to craft an adversarial sample the greater the threat.
Also in real­world scenarios where models are available through application programming
interfaces (APIs) an abnormally large number of API requests from a single source could
be suspicious. Especially in case of API throttling where the number of requests allowed
per user is limited.
As future work, it would therefore be interesting to also assess attack performance based
on query efficiency.
8.1.3
Implementing Reactive Defence Strategies
In this thesis, we implemented only proactive defence strategies. It would be interesting
to implement reactive approaches and see how well they fare in comparison.
66
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO/IEC 2382­37:2022(en) Infor­
mation technology — Vocabulary — Part 37: Biometrics. Standard ISO/IEC 2382­
37:2022. 2022. URL: https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:2382:-37:ed-3:v1:
en.
[2]
What Are the Three Types of Authentication? URL: https : / / optimalidm . com /
resources/blog/types-of-authentication-methods/ (visited on 03/08/2024).
[3]
BRIAN GLEESON. 5 Password Cracking Techniques Used in Cyber Attacks. 2023.
URL: https://www.proofpoint.com/us/blog/information- protection/password-
cracking-techniques-used-in-cyber-attacks.
[4]
Nalini Ratha, Jonathan Connell, and Ruud Bolle. “An Analysis of Minutiae Match­
ing Strength”. In: June 2001, pp. 223–228. ISBN: 978­3­540­42216­7. DOI: 10.
1007/3-540-45344-X_32.
[5]
John Daugman. “Probing the Uniqueness and Randomness of IrisCodes: Results
From 200 Billion Iris Pair Comparisons”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 94 (Dec.
2006), pp. 1927–1935. DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.2006.884092.
[6]
Andy Adler, Richard Youmaran, and Sergey Loyka. “Towards a Measure of Bio­
metric Information”. In: May 2006, pp. 210–213. DOI: 10.1109/CCECE.2006.277447.
[7]
Andreas Nautsch et al. “Entropy analysis of i­vector feature spaces in duration­
sensitive speaker recognition”. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acous­
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2015, pp. 4674–4678. DOI: 10.
1109/ICASSP.2015.7178857.
[8]
Grand View Research. Global Facial Recognition Market Size, Share
Trends
Analysis Report by Technology (2D, 3D, Facial Analytics), by Application (Ac­
cess Control, Security Surveillance), by End­use, by Region, and Segment Fore­
casts, 2021­2028. 2021. URL: https : / / www . grandviewresearch . com / industry -
analysis/facial-recognition-market#:~:text=The%20global%20facial%20recognition%
20market,extensively%20used%20to%20enhance%20security. (visited on 08/18/2023).
[9]
Gitnux. The Most Surprising Facial Recognition Statistics And Trends in 2023.
2023. URL: https : / / blog . gitnux . com / facial - recognition - statistics/ (visited on
08/18/2023).
[10]
Erik Learned­Miller et al. “Labeled Faces in the Wild: A Survey”. In: Apr. 2016,
pp. 189–248. ISBN: 978­3­319­25956­7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-25958-1_8.
[11]
Y. Lecun et al. “Gradient­based learning applied to document recognition”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pp. 2278–2324. DOI: 10.1109/5.726791.
[12]
Daniel Sáez Trigueros, Li Meng, and Margaret Hartnett. Face Recognition: From
Traditional to Deep Learning Methods. 2018. arXiv: 1811.00116 [cs.CV].
[13]
Andrew Jason Shepley. Deep Learning For Face Recognition: A Critical Analysis.
2019. arXiv: 1907.12739 [cs.CV].
[14]
Andrian Firmansyah, Tien Fabrianti Kusumasari, and Ekky Novriza Alam. “Com­
parison of Face Recognition Accuracy of ArcFace, Facenet and Facenet512 Mod­
els on Deepface Framework”. In: 2023 International Conference on Computer Sci­
ence, Information Technology and Engineering (ICCoSITE). 2023, pp. 535–539.
DOI: 10.1109/ICCoSITE57641.2023.10127799.
[15]
Chenqi Kong, Shiqi Wang, and Haoliang Li. Digital and Physical Face Attacks:
Reviewing and One Step Further. 2022. arXiv: 2209.14692 [cs.CV].
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
67
==PAGE:76==
[16]
Christian Rathgeb et al. Handbook of Digital Face Manipulation and Detection:
From DeepFakes to Morphing Attacks. Feb. 2022. ISBN: 978­3­030­87663­0. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-87664-7.
[17]
Fatemeh Vakhshiteh, Ahmad Nickabadi, and Raghavendra Ramachandra. Adver­
sarial Attacks against Face Recognition: A Comprehensive Study. 2021. arXiv:
2007.11709 [cs.CV].
[18]
International Organization for Standardization. Information technology — Biomet­
ric performance testing and reporting — Part 1: Principles and framework. Stan­
dard ISO/IEC 19795­1:2021. 2021.
[19]
Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. “Deep face recognition: A survey”. In: Neurocom­
puting 429 (2021), pp. 215–244.
[20]
Yassin Kortli et al. “Face recognition systems: A survey”. In: Sensors 20.2 (2020),
p. 342.
[21]
Kaipeng Zhang et al. “Joint Face Detection and Alignment Using Multitask Cas­
caded Convolutional Networks”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Letters 23.10 (Oct.
2016), pp. 1499–1503. ISSN: 1558­2361. DOI: 10.1109/lsp.2016.2603342. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LSP.2016.2603342.
[22]
Jiankang Deng et al. RetinaFace: Single­stage Dense Face Localisation in the
Wild. 2019. arXiv: 1905.00641 [cs.CV].
[23]
M.A. Turk and A.P. Pentland. “Face recognition using eigenfaces”. In: Proceed­
ings. 1991 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 1991, pp. 586–591. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.1991.139758.
[24]
Ronald A Fisher. “The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems”. In:
Annals of eugenics 7.2 (1936), pp. 179–188.
[25]
Timo Ojala, Matti Pietikäinen, and David Harwood. “A comparative study of texture
measures with classification based on featured distributions”. In: Pattern recogni­
tion 29.1 (1996), pp. 51–59.
[26]
Jiankang Deng et al. “ArcFace: Additive Angular Margin Loss for Deep Face Recog­
nition”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 44.10
(Oct. 2022), pp. 5962–5979. ISSN: 1939­3539. DOI: 10.1109/tpami.2021.3087709.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3087709.
[27]
Qiang Meng et al. MagFace: A Universal Representation for Face Recognition and
Quality Assessment. 2021. arXiv: 2103.06627 [cs.CV].
[28]
Minchul Kim, Anil K. Jain, and Xiaoming Liu. AdaFace: Quality Adaptive Margin
for Face Recognition. 2023. arXiv: 2204.00964 [cs.CV].
[29]
International Organization for Standardization. Information technology – Biomet­
ric presentation attack detection – Part 1: Framework. Standard ISO/IEC 30107­
1:2016. 2016. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/53227.html.
[30]
Stepan Komkov and Aleksandr Petiushko. “Advhat: Real­world adversarial attack
on arcface face id system”. In: 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern
Recognition (ICPR). IEEE. 2021, pp. 819–826.
[31]
Mahmood Sharif et al. “A general framework for adversarial examples with objec­
tives”. In: ACM Transactions on Privacy and Security (TOPS) 22.3 (2019), pp. 1–
30.
[32]
Bangjie Yin et al. “Adv­makeup: A new imperceptible and transferable attack on
face recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03162 (2021).
[33]
Xingxing Wei, Ying Guo, and Jie Yu. “Adversarial sticker: A stealthy attack method
in the physical world”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 45.3 (2022), pp. 2711–2725.
68
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:77==
[34]
Lazaro Janier Gonzalez­Soler. “Generalisable Presentation Attack Detection For
Multiple Types Of Biometric Characteristics”. doctoralthesis. Hochschule Darm­
stadt, 2023, p. 144. DOI: 10.48444/h_docs-pub-355.
[35]
Mathias Ibsen et al. “Attacking Face Recognition With T­Shirts: Database, Vulner­
ability Assessment, and Detection”. In: IEEE Access 11 (2023), pp. 57867–57879.
ISSN: 2169­3536. DOI: 10.1109/access.2023.3282780. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2023.3282780.
[36]
Matteo Ferrara, Annalisa Franco, and Davide Maltoni. “On the effects of image
alterations on face recognition accuracy”. In: Face recognition across the imaging
spectrum (2016), pp. 195–222.
[37]
David J Robertson et al. “Detecting morphed passport photos: a training and in­
dividual differences approach”. In: Cognitive research: principles and implications
3.1 (2018), pp. 1–11.
[38]
Luca Debiasi et al. “PRNU­based detection of morphed face images”. In: 2018
International Workshop on Biometrics and Forensics (IWBF). 2018, pp. 1–7. DOI:
10.1109/IWBF.2018.8401555.
[39]
Sushma Venkatesh et al. Face Morphing Attack Generation Detection: A Com­
prehensive Survey. 2020. arXiv: 2011.02045 [cs.CV].
[40]
Raghavendra Ramachandra and Christoph Busch. “Presentation Attack Detec­
tion Methods for Face Recognition Systems: A Comprehensive Survey”. In: ACM
Comput. Surv. 50.1 (Mar. 2017). ISSN: 0360­0300. DOI: 10.1145/3038924. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3038924.
[41]
Jianwei Yang, Zhen Lei, and Stan Z. Li. Learn Convolutional Neural Network for
Face Anti­Spoofing. 2014. arXiv: 1408.5601 [cs.CV].
[42]
Oeslle Lucena et al. “Transfer Learning Using Convolutional neural networks for
Face Anti­Spoofing”. In: July 2017, pp. 27–34. ISBN: 978­3­319­59875­8. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-59876-5.
[43]
Meng Shen et al. “Effective and Robust Physical­World Attacks on Deep Learning
Face Recognition Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security 16 (2021), pp. 4063–4077. DOI: 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3102492.
[44]
Xiaoyong Yuan et al. Adversarial Examples: Attacks and Defenses for Deep Learn­
ing. 2018. arXiv: 1712.07107 [cs.LG].
[45]
Teng Long et al. “A Survey on Adversarial Attacks in Computer Vision: Taxonomy,
Visualization and Future Directions”. In: Comput. Secur. 121.C (Oct. 2022). ISSN:
0167­4048. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2022.102847. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.
2022.102847.
[46]
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and Har­
nessing Adversarial Examples. 2015. arXiv: 1412.6572 [stat.ML].
[47]
Alexey Kurakin, Ian J Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. “Adversarial examples in
the physical world”. In: Artificial intelligence safety and security. Chapman and
Hall/CRC, 2018, pp. 99–112.
[48]
Aleksander Madry et al. Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant to Adversarial
Attacks. 2019. arXiv: 1706.06083 [stat.ML].
[49]
Seyed­Mohsen Moosavi­Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Deep­
Fool: a simple and accurate method to fool deep neural networks. 2016. arXiv:
1511.04599 [cs.LG].
[50]
Artur Costa­Pazo et al. “The Replay­Mobile Face Presentation­Attack Database”.
In: 2016 International Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG).
2016, pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.1109/BIOSIG.2016.7736936.
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
69
==PAGE:78==
[51]
Naveed Akhtar et al. Advances in adversarial attacks and defenses in computer
vision: A survey. 2021. arXiv: 2108.00401 [cs.CV].
[52]
Kaleel Mahmood et al. Back in Black: A Comparative Evaluation of Recent State­
Of­The­Art Black­Box Attacks. 2021. arXiv: 2109.15031 [cs.CR].
[53]
Pin­Yu Chen et al. “ZOO”. In: Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on Artificial
Intelligence and Security. ACM, Nov. 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3128572.3140448. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145%2F3128572.3140448.
[54]
Zhichao Huang and Tong Zhang. Black­Box Adversarial Attack with Transferable
Model­based Embedding. 2020. arXiv: 1911.07140 [cs.LG].
[55]
Maksym Andriushchenko et al. Square Attack: a query­efficient black­box adver­
sarial attack via random search. 2020. arXiv: 1912.00049 [cs.LG].
[56]
Wieland Brendel, Jonas Rauber, and Matthias Bethge. Decision­Based Adversar­
ial Attacks: Reliable Attacks Against Black­Box Machine Learning Models. 2018.
arXiv: 1712.04248 [stat.ML].
[57]
Jianbo Chen, Michael I. Jordan, and Martin J. Wainwright. HopSkipJumpAttack: A
Query­Efficient Decision­Based Attack. 2020. arXiv: 1904.02144 [cs.LG].
[58]
Yujia Liu, Seyed­Mohsen Moosavi­Dezfooli, and Pascal Frossard. A geometry­
inspired decision­based attack. 2019. arXiv: 1903.10826 [cs.LG].
[59]
Thibault Maho, Teddy Furon, and Erwan Le Merrer. SurFree: a fast surrogate­free
black­box attack. 2020. arXiv: 2011.12807 [cs.CR].
[60]
Nicolas Papernot et al. Practical Black­Box Attacks against Machine Learning.
2017. arXiv: 1602.02697 [cs.CR].
[61]
Zihao Liu et al. Feature Distillation: DNN­Oriented JPEG Compression Against
Adversarial Examples. 2019. arXiv: 1803.05787 [cs.CV].
[62]
Nilaksh Das et al. Keeping the Bad Guys Out: Protecting and Vaccinating Deep
Learning with JPEG Compression. 2017. arXiv: 1705.02900 [cs.CV].
[63]
Edward Raff et al. “Barrage of random transforms for adversarially robust defense”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 2019, pp. 6528–6537.
[64]
Pouya Samangouei, Maya Kabkab, and Rama Chellappa. Defense­GAN: Protect­
ing Classifiers Against Adversarial Attacks Using Generative Models. 2018. arXiv:
1805.06605 [cs.CV].
[65]
Oscar Knagg. Know your enemy. 2019. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/
know-your-enemy-7f7c5038bdf3 (visited on 01/06/2019).
[66]
Dimitris Tsipras et al. Robustness May Be at Odds with Accuracy. 2019. arXiv:
1805.12152 [stat.ML].
[67]
Wei­An Lin et al. Dual Manifold Adversarial Robustness: Defense against Lp and
non­Lp Adversarial Attacks. 2020. arXiv: 2009.02470 [cs.CV].
[68]
Sven Gowal et al. “Achieving Robustness in the Wild via Adversarial Mixing With
Disentangled Representations”. In: June 2020, pp. 1208–1217. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
CVPR42600.2020.00129.
[69]
Eric Wong, Leslie Rice, and J. Zico Kolter. Fast is better than free: Revisiting ad­
versarial training. 2020. arXiv: 2001.03994 [cs.LG].
[70]
Tianyu Pang et al. Rethinking Softmax Cross­Entropy Loss for Adversarial Ro­
bustness. 2020. arXiv: 1905.10626 [cs.LG].
[71]
Nicolas Papernot et al. Distillation as a Defense to Adversarial Perturbations against
Deep Neural Networks. 2016. arXiv: 1511.04508 [cs.CR].
[72]
Jiawei Chen et al. AdvFAS: A robust face anti­spoofing framework against adver­
sarial examples. 2023. arXiv: 2308.02116 [cs.CV].
70
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:79==
[73]
Anjith George and Sebastien Marcel. Deep Pixel­wise Binary Supervision for Face
Presentation Attack Detection. 2019. arXiv: 1907.04047 [cs.CV].
[74]
Gao Huang et al. Densely Connected Convolutional Networks. 2018. arXiv: 1608.
06993 [cs.CV].
[75]
Yaojie Liu, Amin Jourabloo, and Xiaoming Liu. Learning Deep Models for Face
Anti­Spoofing: Binary or Auxiliary Supervision. 2018. arXiv: 1803.11097 [cs.CV].
[76]
Meiling Fang et al. Learnable Multi­level Frequency Decomposition and Hierar­
chical Attention Mechanism for Generalized Face Presentation Attack Detection.
2021. arXiv: 2109.07950 [cs.CV].
[77]
Fadi Boutros et al. “MixFaceNets: Extremely Efficient Face Recognition Networks”.
In: International IEEE Joint Conference on Biometrics, IJCB 2021, Shenzhen,
China, August 4­7, 2021. IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/IJCB52358.2021.
9484374. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCB52358.2021.9484374.
[78]
SMDD­Synthetic­Face­Morphing­Attack­Detection­Development­dataset. 2022. URL:
https://github.com/naserdamer/SMDD-Synthetic-Face-Morphing-Attack-Detection-
Development-dataset (visited on 02/29/2024).
[79]
François Chollet. Xception: Deep Learning with Depthwise Separable Convolu­
tions. 2017. arXiv: 1610.02357 [cs.CV].
[80]
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. MixConv: Mixed Depthwise Convolutional Kernels.
2019. arXiv: 1907.09595 [cs.CV].
[81]
Pedro C. Neto et al. OrthoMAD: Morphing Attack Detection Through Orthogonal
Identity Disentanglement. 2022. arXiv: 2208.07841 [cs.CV].
[82]
Minhao Cheng et al. Sign­OPT: A Query­Efficient Hard­label Adversarial Attack.
2020. arXiv: 1909.10773 [cs.LG].
[83]
Maksym Andriushchenko et al. Square Attack: a query­efficient black­box adver­
sarial attack via random search. 2020. arXiv: 1912.00049 [cs.LG].
[84]
Chuan Guo et al. Simple Black­box Adversarial Attacks. 2019. arXiv: 1905.07121
[cs.LG].
[85]
Minhao Cheng et al. “Query­Efficient Hard­label Black­box Attack: An Optimization­
based Approach”. In: ArXiv abs/1807.04457 (2018). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:49672236.
[86]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO/IEC 30107­3:2017 Informa­
tion technology Biometric presentation attack detection. Standard ISO/IEC 30107­
3:2017. 2017. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/67381.html.
[87]
Tomi H. Kinnunen et al. “t­EER: Parameter­Free Tandem Evaluation of Counter­
measures and Biometric Comparators”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence (2023), pp. 1–16. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3313648.
[88]
Zinelabinde Boulkenafet et al. “OULU­NPU: A Mobile Face Presentation Attack
Database with Real­World Variations”. In: 12th IEEE International Conference on
Automatic Face Gesture Recognition (FG 2017). 2017, pp. 612–618. DOI: 10 .
1109/FG.2017.77.
[89]
Eklavya Sarkar et al. “Are GAN­based morphs threatening face recognition?” In:
ICASSP 2022 ­ 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2022, pp. 2959–2963. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP43922.
2022.9746477. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9746477.
[90]
Eklavya Sarkar et al. “Vulnerability Analysis of Face Morphing Attacks from Land­
marks and Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: arXiv preprint (Oct. 2020). URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.05344.
[91]
P.Jonathon Phillips et al. “The FERET database and evaluation procedure for face­
recognition algorithms”. In: Image and Vision Computing 16.5 (1998), pp. 295–
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
71
==PAGE:80==
306. ISSN: 0262­8856. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0262-8856(97)00070-X.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S026288569700070X.
[92]
Eklavya Sarkar et al. “Vulnerability Analysis of Face Morphing Attacks from Land­
marks and Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: arXiv preprint (Oct. 2020). URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.05344.
[93]
P.J. Phillips et al. “Overview of the face recognition grand challenge”. In: 2005
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR’05). Vol. 1. 2005, 947–954 vol. 1. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2005.268.
[94]
U. Scherhag et al. “Detection of Face Morphing Attacks based on PRNU Analysis”.
In: Trans. on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science (TBIOM) (2019).
[95]
Christoph Busch. Face Morphing and Morphing Attack Detection. 2023. URL: https:
//christoph-busch.de/files/Scherhag-PhD-Thesis-2020.pdf (visited on 12/08/2023).
[96]
Ulrich Scherhag et al. “Face morph detection for unknown morphing algorithms
and image sources: A multi­scale block local binary pattern fusion approach”. In:
IET Biometrics 9 (Sept. 2020), pp. 278–289. DOI: 10.1049/iet-bmt.2019.0206.
[97]
InsightFace. https://github.com/deepinsight/insightface. Accessed: 2023­12/23.
[98]
Maria­Irina Nicolae et al. “Adversarial Robustness Toolbox v1.2.0”. In: CoRR 1807.01069
(2018). URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.01069.
[99]
Tao Bai et al. Recent Advances in Adversarial Training for Adversarial Robustness.
2021. arXiv: 2102.01356 [cs.LG].
[100]
Shilin Qiu et al. “Review of artificial intelligence adversarial attack and defense
technologies”. In: Applied Sciences 9.5 (2019), p. 909.
[101]
Nicolas Papernot et al. Towards the Science of Security and Privacy in Machine
Learning. 2016. arXiv: 1611.03814 [cs.CR].
[102]
Nicolas Papernot et al. Practical Black­Box Attacks against Machine Learning.
2017. arXiv: 1602.02697 [cs.CR].
[103]
Ian Goodfellow et al. Attacking machine learning with adversarial examples. 2024.
URL: https://openai.com/research/attacking-machine-learning-with-adversarial-
examples (visited on 02/11/2024).
[104]
Anirban Chakraborty et al. “Adversarial attacks and defences: A survey”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.00069 (2018).
[105]
Yixiang Wang et al. “DI­AA: An interpretable white­box attack for fooling deep neu­
ral networks”. In: Information Sciences 610 (2022), pp. 14–32.
72
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:81==
A
Appendix
A.1
Pseudocode for Implemented Attacks
A.1.1
HSJA
Figure A.1: From [57]
A.1.2
SignOpt
Figure A.2: From [82]
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
73
==PAGE:82==
A.1.3
SA
Figure A.3: From [83]
A.1.4
SimBA
Figure A.4: From [84]
A.2
Data Preprocessing Techniques
An inverse normalisation was applied after adversarial sample generation:
i.e.
µ = [−0.485/0.229, −0.456/0.224, −0.406/0.225], σ = [1/0.229, 1/0.224, 1/0.225] (PAD)
and
µ = [−0.5/0.5, −0.5/0.5, −0.5/0.5], σ = [1/0.5, 1/0.5, 1/0.5] (MAD)
followed by the to_pil_image function of the torchvision.transforms.functional pack­
age that took care of converting the tensors to a PIL image.
DeepPixBiS:
1. Colour Jitter: brightness=0.15, contrast=0.15, saturation=0.15, hue=0.0
2. RandomHorizontalFlip: p=0.5
74
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:83==
Attack
l2
l∞
SA
26692
238
HSJA
20530
228
SignOpt
19341
202
SimBA
19003
200
Table A.1: l2 and l∞norm scores for perturbed images generated against LMFD
3. Normalize: [0.485, 0.456, 0.406], [0.229, 0.224, 0.225]
LMFD:
1. HorizontalFlip: p=0.5
2. ShiftScaleRotate: shift_limit=0.05, scale_limit=0.05, rotate_limit=0.1, p=0.5
3. ColorJitter: brightness=0.15, contrast=0.15, saturation=0.15, hue=0.15
4. HueSaturationValue: hue_shift_limit=15, sat_shift_limit=15, val_shift_limit=15
5. Cutout: num_holes=2, max_h_size=8, max_w_size=8, fill_value=0, p=0.5
6. Normalize: [0.485, 0.456, 0.406], [0.229, 0.224, 0.225]
MixNet
1. RandomHorizontalFlip: p=0.5
2. Normalize: [0.5, 0.5, 0.5], [0.5, 0.5, 0.5]
OrthoMAD
1. RandomHorizontalFlip: p=0.5
2. Normalize: [0.5, 0.5, 0.5], [0.5, 0.5, 0.5]
A.3
Norm tables
Attack
l2
l∞
SA
14240
38
HSJA
269
1.6
SignOpt
474
5.0
SimBA
267
1.0
Table A.2: l2 and l∞norms for perturbed images MixNet FaceMorpher
Attack
l2
l∞
SA
13256
38
HSJA
261
1.3
SignOpt
379
3.6
SimBA
271
1.0
Table A.3: l2 and l∞norms for perturbed images MixNet Ubo
A.4
T­EER plots
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
75
==PAGE:84==
Attack
l2
l∞
SA
13900
38
HSJA
264
1.4
SignOpt
416
4.2
SimBA
269
1.0
Table A.4: l2 and l∞norms for perturbed images MixNet OpenCV
Concurrent T­EER OpenCV
ρ = 0
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
ρ = 1.0
MAD model
FR model
Attack
MixNet
AdaFace
­
14.14
14.1
14.1
14.1
14.1
squareattack
91.93
3.31
2.4
2.03
1.89
hsja
69.84
67.62
63.37
59.88
58.47
signopt
24.24
24.24
24.24
24.24
24.24
simba
14.68
14.64
14.64
14.64
14.64
ArcFace
­
14.14
14.1
14.1
14.1
14.1
squareattack
91.93
3.71
2.58
2.03
1.82
hsja
69.84
67.62
63.37
59.88
58.47
signopt
24.24
24.24
24.24
24.24
24.24
simba
14.68
14.64
14.64
14.64
14.64
MagFace
­
14.14
14.1
14.1
14.1
14.1
squareattack
91.93
7.05
4.8
3.92
3.52
hsja
69.84
67.62
63.37
59.88
58.47
signopt
24.24
24.24
24.24
24.24
24.24
simba
14.68
14.64
14.64
14.64
14.64
Table A.5: opencv TEER scores of attacks vs. baseline on MixNet MAD model
Concurrent T­EER UBO
ρ = 0
ρ = 0.2
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.8
ρ = 1.0
MAD model
FR model
attack type
MixNet
AdaFace
­
17.75
17.75
17.75
17.75
17.75
squareattack
83.99
83.89
6.73
5.53
5.06
hsja
71.7
69.59
65.81
62.42
60.31
signopt
27.43
27.43
27.43
27.43
27.43
simba
18.99
18.95
18.95
18.95
18.95
ArcFace
­
17.75
17.75
17.75
17.75
17.75
squareattack
83.99
83.89
6.88
5.75
5.24
hsja
71.7
69.59
65.81
62.42
60.31
signopt
27.43
27.43
27.43
27.43
27.43
simba
18.99
18.95
18.95
18.95
18.95
MagFace
­
17.75
17.75
17.75
17.75
17.75
squareattack
83.99
83.89
10.22
8.62
7.89
hsja
71.7
69.59
65.81
62.42
60.31
signopt
27.43
27.43
27.43
27.43
27.43
simba
18.99
18.95
18.95
18.95
18.95
Table A.6: ubo TEER scores of attacks vs. baseline on MixNet MAD model
76
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
==PAGE:85==
Defending Face Impersonation Detectors against Adversarial Attacks
77
==PAGE:86==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
