==PAGE:1==
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning
with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
Master Thesis
march, 2024
By
Felipe Antonini Miehrig
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Transport Management,
Department of DTU Management, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Business Analytics, MSc Eng.
Felipe Antonini Miehrig ­ s212676
Signature
Date
ii
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this project, we investigate the application of Fully Bayesian Gaussian Processes (FBGPs)
in Bayesian Optimization (BO) and Active Learning (AL) while applying acquisition func­
tions capable of harnessing the extra information from their Gaussian Mixture (GMM) pre­
dictive posterior. Our approach involves implementing a computationally efficient alterna­
tive to MCMC estimation, the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)­optimized Mixtures of
Gaussian Processes (MGP) within statistical distance­based acquisition functions (SAL),
and introducing three novel BO acquisition functions along the way: MGP­UCB (Mix­
ture of Gaussian Processes Upper Confidence Bound), RMGP­UCB (Random Mixture of
Gaussian Processes Upper Confidence Bound), and IRMGP­UCB (Improved Random
Mixture of Gaussian Processes Upper Confidence Bound).
These methods leverage
marginal posterior variance from Fully Bayesian estimated GPs to quantify model dis­
agreement, optimizing BO decision­making. A key aspect of our research is the compar­
ative evaluation of these new acquisition functions against the state­of­the­art SCoreBO
(Self­correcting Bayesian optimization) methods and their SGD­estimated counterparts,
aiming to benchmark their computational efficiency and predictive capabilities.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This work would not have been possible without the help and support of several parties
whose contributions deserve to be appropriately acknowledged.
First, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Filipe Rodrigues, who
patiently spent considerable time supporting me throughout the last semester. I would also
like to thank my co­supervisor, Christoffer Riis, for his immense help, especially during the
early stages, and for his brilliant work that gave basis to this project.
I would also like to give special thanks to the FCC D&A team at Danske Bank, who gave
me the flexibility I needed to focus on this project while working as a student assistant in
parallel to my studies.
Special thanks to my Family, to whom I will be eternally grateful for giving me love and
supporting my endeavors even from across the Atlantic.
I could not forget to mention my lifelong friends back home and the new friendships I made
throughout my stay at DTU. The bonds forged through my journey made the experience
in the last years very enriching and exciting.
It was a fun ride.
iv
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Computation Aware Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Fully Bayesian Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Mixture of Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
MGPs in Active Learning and Bayesian Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theory
7
3.1
Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Priors and Bayesian estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Kernels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Bayesian Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Active Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Methodology
29
4.1
Bayesian Active Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
MGP with SGD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Bayesian Optimization using statistical distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4
Upper confidence bound optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.5
Fully Bayesian Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5
Experiments
45
5.1
General Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Active Learning Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.3
Bayesian Optimization Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Results
51
6.1
Active Learning Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Bayesian Optimization Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7
Conclusion
63
Bibliography
65
A Active Learning
69
B Bayesian Optimization
72
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Black box systems are everywhere. In science, computing, and engineering, this term
refers to systems whose inputs and outputs depend on each other through some un­
known machinery or relationship [1]. The typical analysis of these systems relies on the
stimulus/response approach, trying to infer the underlying relationship gradually.
The Gaussian process (GP) is a fitting tool to model this phenomenon. GPs fall in the
class of non­parametric models. They are universal approximators, which means that,
under certain conditions, they can approximate any continuous function to an arbitrary
degree of accuracy. Consequently, GPs have seen frequent use in fields that have black
box systems at the center of their applications, such as Bayesian Optimization [2], Active
Learning [3], and simulation meta­modeling [4]. In the case of BO and AL, obtaining new
data points is usually associated with very high costs, having the GP as a surrogate [5]
to the true underlying black box process, thus serving as guiding the next steps of data
acquisition.
Given the incremental aspect of the tasks, Gaussian Processes are commonly fit to small
datasets. In the early steps of the process, the likelihood surface of GP parameter fit can
be highly multimodal, giving rise to concerns regarding the choice of the best model fit.
Especially in early iteration steps, the adequate selection of parameters might be essential
to lead to good results. A pointwise estimation might lead to suboptimal or even wrong
conclusions. A different and probabilistic route to modeling of GPs comes in the form of
the Fully Bayesian framework. Instead of analyzing one set of parameter hypotheses, the
Bayesian approach allows the contemplation of several competing hypotheses through
several sampled parameter sets.
In the context of Active Learning and Bayesian Optimization, it has been empirically tested
that better results can be achieved by using acquisition functions that take into account
the less myopic Fully Bayesian GP framework [6], namely the Bayesian Query By Com­
mittee (BQBC) and Query by Mixture of Gaussian Processes (QBMGP). This has been
further generalized by acquisition functions that consider the disagreement between the
whole GP posterior distributions and its respective conditional posteriors using Statistical
distances, namely Statistical distance based Active Learning (SAL), and subsequently
adapted to the realm of Bayesian Optimization with the introduction of Self Correcting
Bayesian Optimization (SCoreBO) [7].
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods [8], which are associated with high com­
putational cost, are usually the go­to methods for parameter estimation under the Fully
Bayesian GP framework. A new approach proposed by Riis, Rodrigues, and Camara
Pereira [9] mimics the advantages of the MCMC estimated GPs with a batch of Stochas­
tic Gradient Decent (SGD) [10] optimized GPs while presenting competing performance
alongside considerable computational savings.
The objective of this project is twofold. First, we adapt and investigate how the SGD
estimated Mixture of Gaussian Processes (MGP) posterior method works for Statistical
distance­based acquisition functions in the AL and BO tasks (SAL and SCoreBO, respec­
tively) by benchmarking them against their Fully Bayesian counterparts. Secondly, we
propose a new branch of Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bound (GP­UCB) BO ac­
quisition functions by using the fully Bayesian estimated GPs marginal posterior variance
to measure disagreement, the MGP­UCB. We analyze how well the SGD method works
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
1
==PAGE:10==
for that new sort of function and benchmark them against SCoreBO state­of­the­art ac­
quisition functions.
2
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
Throughout this chapter, we review the pieces of work in the literature that serve as a
backbone to this project while tracing the parallels to analogous approaches. Review­
ing the most common computationally aware GP formulation methods, we highlight some
bottlenecks in the Gaussian process modeling. We also highlight the importance of the
Fully Bayesian Gaussian Process formulation and, consequently, the applications of its
Mixture of Gaussian predictive posterior. We also highlight that the term Mixture of Gaus­
sian Processes doesn’t always refer to the same type of methods (Mixture of experts or
MGP posterior). However, both prove themselves capable of modeling multimodal pos­
teriors. Finally, we review the applications of those in the realm of Active Learning and
Bayesian Optimization, while in the end, mentioning how to have the advantages of an
FBGP formulation while not being actually Fully Bayesian.
2.1
Computation Aware Gaussian Processes
Gaussian Processes are flexible universal approximators and the tool of choice for model­
ing several real­life phenomena. Despite their usefulness, they come at a computational
cost of O(n3) and storage of O(n2) due to the inversion of the gram matrix. The vanilla,
or exact Gaussian process, becomes infeasible in standard machines when the modeled
dataset grows above the 10.000 observations range. Methods like the Cholesky decom­
position are used to make the computations and matrix inversions more stable; however,
these still don’t solve the high computational cost of the operation. One option in the
online learning scenario is to sequentially update the Cholesky decomposition and the
matrix inversion estimate using the methods like the Schur complement by keeping track
of the past during past iterations. However, when there is no sequential aspect to the
task, those won’t help much.
In real­world applications where big data is standard, other approaches are necessary.
The marginal information gain decreases while the number of data points N increases. It
might be tempting to subsample the dataset. However, smarter methods based on low­
rank approximation of the covariance matrix are available, like the Nyström approximation
method [11]. By introducing pseudo inputs M ≪N, inducing points methods Snelson and
Ghahramani [12] provide approximations with O(M2N) computation cost. Combining the
inducing points methods with the exploitation from covariance matrix structure, the frame­
work of structured kernel interpolation(SKI) improves the scalability of sparse GP approx­
imations. This method is further worked on by employing matrix­vector multiplications
(MVMS) [13], resulting in linear rather than exponential running times for SKI. Modern
GP packages [14] use Blackbox Matrix­Matrix multiplication methods (BBMM) inference
in a modified batched version of conjugate gradients algorithm (CG) [15], reducing the
complexity of GP inference from O(m3) to O(m2).
There is also a different class of GP approximations that leave the model definition un­
touched and instead approximate the posterior formulation by using Variational Inference
(VI) [16]. VI imposes a family of densities to the posterior and then finds the family member
close to the target. Minimizing the KL divergence between the true and induced posterior,
Titsias [17] combines the VI and Spare GP approximations in a single framework.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Fully Bayesian Gaussian Processes
The Fully Bayesian treatment of GPs allows for the consideration of different hypothe­
ses for its hyperparameters, which is extremely useful specially when data is few, usually
leading to multimodal marginal posteriors. Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) estima­
tion methods [18] like Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [19] give a natural probabilistic weighting
to model hyperparameters in the form of the frequency that those are sampled. The prob­
abilistic estimation of hyperparameters leads to improved estimates and predictive per­
formance when compared to the maximum likelihood estimation [20]. On top of that, the
MCMC estimation and probabilistic formulation can provide the building blocks for mod­
eling more complex GP structures, e.g., in Non­stationary Gaussian Process Regression
[21].
Notably, when approximated by MCMC sampling, the GP posterior combines several con­
ditional posterior from each sample, yielding a Gaussian mixture posterior.
2.3
Mixture of Gaussian Processes
Unfortunately, there seems to be no unique approach linked to the term Mixture of Gaus­
sian Process (MGP). This term has been used when referring to the mixture of experts [22]
approach using an Infinite Mixture of Gaussian Process Experts [23]. In this context the
individual experts are GP regression models, where, using a Dirichtlet Process (DP) [24]
a gating network is implemented considering an infinite number of experts, this way being
capable of modelling multimodal data. The approach is further deepened by the introduc­
tion of mixture of warped Gaussian process (MWGP) [25], which circumvents the inability
of MGPs to deal with non­stationary probabilistic regression in practice. Introducing a
more complex gating mechanism with the stick­breaking process Saikai and Dang [26]
propose a new mixture model of Gaussian process experts with improved performance.
Additionally, using the Variational Inference framework and a truncated stick­breaking pro­
cess to approximate the posterior Zhao and Sun [27] demonstrate the application of an
infinite mixture of GPs in Traffic flow prediction.
2.4
MGPs in Active Learning and Bayesian Optimization
MGPs have also been successfully applied in the field of Active Learning [28], where they
shine with their ability to learn from multi­modal data. Having in mind that the FBGPs
posterior is a MGP, Riis et al. [6] proposed new Active Learning acquisition functions like
the Query by Mixture of Gaussian Process (QBMGP) that are capable of accounting for
the disagreement between parameters hypothesis. Those are further generalized to yield
statistical distance­based active learning (SAL) acquisition functions [7], which are capa­
ble of capturing the whole marginal and conditional posteriors distributions disagreement
acquired by the MCMC sampling.
The fully Bayesian GP formulation is also valuable for Bayesian Optimization. It is an
essential foundation Sparse Axis­Aligned Subspaces (SAASBO) method [29] for High­
Dimensional Bayesian optimization, which introduces shrinkage inducing priors to the
hyperparameters, being able to detect which dimensions to prioritize.
Regarding BO
acquisition functions, the Self­Correcting Bayesian Optimization (SCoreBO) acquisition
functions Hvarfner et al. [7] extend the SAL framework so that a disagreement between
optima is now captured by the acquisition functions, fomenting exploitation.
The FBGP approach relies heavily on MCMC sampling, which poses a high computa­
tional burden to the process. There are ways of mirroring the MCMC process of sampling
hyperparameters by Optimizing several different GPs on a batch with SGD. This is pre­
4
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:13==
cisely what is done in the MGP formulation of FBGP by Riis, Rodrigues, and Camara
Pereira [9], where the hyperparameters of M GPs are initialized by sampling from priors
and then optimized for a specified number or learning steps. The samples are assigned
weights according to how well their specific GP model fits the data. This has proven it­
self to yield all the benefits of the MCMC estimation while keeping the computational cost
relatively lower, thus being a good option for Active Learning and Bayesian Optimization
with MGPs.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:15==
3
Theory
In this section, we introduce the theory’s core concepts used in this work. This includes
Gaussian Processes, their derivations, and foundations such as covariance functions
and kernels. We introduce the Fully Bayesian GP formulation and give an overview of
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning topics.
3.1
Gaussian Processes
Gaussian Processes [30] are a well­known class on non­parametric models. Their natural
probabilistic formulation and flexibility have allowed them to be successful in several fields,
including regression, classification, Bayesian optimization, and active learning. GPs are
also prominent in Geo statistics, where their implementation is better known as kriging.
Several points of view can be taken when introducing these models. For instance, Gaus­
sian Processes can be viewed as a generalization of the Gaussian probability distribution
as a stochastic process that governs the properties of functions instead of scalars and
vectors, as do probability distributions. For short, a GP can be seen as an infinitely dimen­
sional Gaussian distribution, allowing the convenient analytical properties of Gaussians
to be applied to their more sophisticated framework.
Another formulation leading to GPs is the weight­space view, which uses well­known para­
metric linear model formulations as a starting point. It turns out that when applying linear
regression to a high­dimensional feature space, depending on the relations between fea­
tures, a kernel trick can take care of the job by simplifying many computations.
3.1.1
Derivation
We will start from the standard formulation of a linear regression with Gaussian noise:
f(x) = x⊤w,
y = f(x) + ϵ,
(3.1)
Where the noise assumes an independent, identically distributed Gaussian distribution:
ϵ ∼N(0, σ2
n).
(3.2)
Given the independent observations assumption, the likelihood of such a model would be
given by:
p(y|X, w) =
1
(2πσ2n)1/2 exp
(
−1
2σ2n
∥y −X⊤w∥2
)
= N(X⊤w, σ2
nI),
(3.3)
Following a Bayesian approach, we can set a prior on the weights w with a covariance
matrix Σp, and following the Bayes rule, the posterior of the weights becomes:
w ∼N(0, Σp),
p(w|y, X) = p(y|X, w)p(w)
p(y|X)
,
(3.4)
With a normalizing constant of the form:
p(y|X) =
∫
p(y|X, w)p(w) dw.
(3.5)
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
7
==PAGE:16==
p(w|y, X) ∝exp
(
−1
2(w −¯w)⊤
( 1
σ2n
XX⊤+ Σ−1
p
)
(w −¯w)
)
,
(3.6)
Where:
¯w = σ2
n(σ−2
n XX⊤+ Σ−1
p )−1Xy,
(3.7)
It is not hard to identify that it follows a Gaussian distribution with mean ¯w and covariance
matrix A−1
p(w|X, y) ∼N(¯w = 1
σ2n
A−1Xy, A−1)
(3.8)
With A = σ−2
n XX⊤+ Σ−1
p . The mean is also the mode, which characterizes the max­
imum a posteriori (MAP) estimate of w. The addition of the prior on the weights yields
an equivalent formulation to the frequentist Ridge Regression with a quadratic penalty
1
2wT Σ−1
p w.
For obtaining predictions on a test set, for instance, the model averages over all possible
parameter values and assumes the familiar Gaussian distribution in the form:
p(f∗|x∗, X, y) =
∫
p(f∗|x∗, w)p(w|X, y)dw
= N
( 1
σ2n
x⊤
∗A−1Xy, x⊤
∗A−1x∗
)
.
(3.9)
Now, having these at hand, we could use a famous trick to improve the expressiveness
of the input space by applying an arbitrary function ϕ(x) to the design matrix mapping the
vector x to a N­dimensional space. A classic example of this is the mapping to a specific
space of powers of x such as ϕ(x) = (1, x, x2, x3. . . . )T . So, trivially:
f(x) = ϕ(x)⊤w
(3.10)
Thus, the predictive density of a linear model with an extended feature space is analogous
to 3.9 but with x∗replaced with ϕ∗= ϕ(x∗) and X with Φ = Φ(X). This formulation
might be painful to work with, as often, the dimensions of the extended feature space
might be higher than the number of observations themselves. This gives rise to the Dual
representation [31]:
f∗|x∗, X, y ∼N (ϕ⊤
∗ΣpΦ(K + σ2
nI)−1y,
ϕ⊤
∗Σpϕ∗−ϕ⊤
∗ΣpΦ(K + σ2
nI)−1Φ⊤ΣpΦ∗)
(3.11)
Where K = Φ⊤ΣpΦ. The feature space now only shows up accompanied by the covari­
ance matrix in the generic form ψ⊤Σpψ where ψ represents the feature space function
applied to either the train (Φ) or test (ϕ∗) sets. Where in the equation at hand the ker­
nel k(x, x′) = ϕ(x)⊤Σpϕ(x′). The fact that Σp is positive semi­definite allows for singu­
lar value decomposition of the covariance matrix and thus the alternative representation
k(x, x′) = ψ(x) ˙ψ(x′), having ψ(x) = Σ1/2
p
ϕ(x). This is usually called the kernel trick and is
particularly useful when calculating the kernel is more convenient than the feature space
itself. This has been vastly applied to other classical machine learning algorithms like
support vector machines.
8
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:17==
3.1.2
GP Specification
The Gaussian Process can be completely specified by its mean function m(x) and a kernel
or covariance function k(x, x′) such that:
m(x) = E[f(x)],
k(x, x′) = E[(f(x) −m(x))(f(x′) −m(x′))],
f(x) ∼GP(m(x), k(x, x′)).
(3.12)
One of the most standard covariance functions used in Gaussian processes is the smooth
and infinitely differentiable squared exponential (SE).
k(x, x′) = exp(−1
2||x −x′||2)
(3.13)
The SE kernel can be obtained by a linear model with infinite Gaussian­shaped basis
functions as input variables. It is easy to see that points close in space present higher co­
variance than points further apart. This decrease in covariance is based on the Euclidian
distance d = ||x −x′||2. The addition of a lengthscale parameter ℓin the denominator,
controls how rapidly this covariance decreases while d increases.
In real­life applications, it is more often than not the case that we don’t directly observe
the function f but rather a corrupted (noisy) realization of the function, defined as y. In
that more realistic case, we have:
cov(y) = K(X, X) + σ2
nI
(3.14)
Where σ2
nI represents a diagonal matrix adding homoscedastic noise to the observations.
[y
f∗
]
∼N
(
0,
[K(X, X) + σ2
nI
K(X, X∗)
K(X∗, X)
K(X∗, X∗)
])
.
(3.15)
The upper left corner represents the covariance between the train set with added Gaus­
sian noise on the diagonal, the upper right and lower left elements represent the covari­
ance of the train and test, and the lower right the covariance between the test set.
With the help of this representation, we can introduce the well­known predictive equations
of GPs, which inherit the analytical tractability and simplicity of the Gaussian equations.
p(f∗|y, X, X∗) = N(µ∗, Σ∗),
µ∗= K∗(K + σ2
nI)−1y,
Σ∗= K∗∗−K∗(K + σ2
nI)−1K∗⊤.
(3.16)
Where for simplicity of notation K = K(X, X), K∗= K(X∗, X), and K∗∗= K(X∗, X∗).
Another useful representation of the predictive mean is:
µ∗=
n
∑
i=1
αik(xi, x∗),
where
α = (K + σ2
nI)−1y
(3.17)
Which is identical to the predictions of a kernel ridge regression as stated by Theodoridis
[32] .
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
9
==PAGE:18==
For a richer representation and more flexibility in the models, more parameters are usually
incorporated into the kernel. In the case of the SE kernel function, the equation containing
all the hyperparameters is usually represented in the form:
k(x, x′) = σ2
fexp(−||x −x′||2
2ℓ2
) + σ2
nI
(3.18)
Where ℓis the lengthscale, σ2
f is the signal variance, and σ2
n the noise variance. It is
essential to highlight that the hyperparameter ℓis a d dimensional diagonal matrix with
specific parameters for each dimension of the input x. The following plots show variation
in the hyperparameters of a GP with SE kernel fit the same data points:
Marginal Likelihood
The marginal likelihood of GP is obtained by integrating and marginalizing out the latent
unobserved variable f.
p(y|X) =
∫
p(y|f, X)p(f|X)df.
(3.19)
Which in the log form yields the marginal log­likelihood
log p(y|X) = −1
2y⊤K−1
y y −1
2 log |Ky| −n
2 log 2π.
(3.20)
Where Ky = Kf + σ2
nI. The data fit term in the equation is y⊤K−1
y y/2, the complexity
penalty term is log |Ky|/2 and the normalization constant n log 2π/2. To optimize for hy­
perparameters, we will look for the partial derivatives of the marginal log­likelihood. Here,
one of the biggest shortcomings of GPs becomes clear. The computational overhead of
the operation involves inverting a n×n matrix K, which imposes a time O(n3), with O(n2)
memory storage cost. There are several ways of circumventing this problem, most relying
on approximation methods.
3.1.3
Cholesky Decomposition
In practice, the direct K matrix inversion is rarely done. There are ways of exploiting the
positive semi­definite structure of the covariance matrix with numerical methods to arrive
at more stable computations. The Cholesky factorization is commonly used for GP com­
putations due to some of its advantages, including computational efficiency when com­
pared to other matrix decomposition methods like LU decomposition. Cholesky exploits
the symmetry and can run twice as fast.
L = chol C,
LL⊤= C
(3.21)
Where C is a positive semi­definite matrix like the covariance matrix, with the Cholesky
factor at hand it is possible to solve an arbitrary linear system Cx = b in O(n2) time by
forward­backward substitution by reformulating it as LL⊤x = b [14]. Thus the term α
from equation 3.16 can be precomputed where C = K + σ2
nI. This satisfies most of the
computational burden of computing the predictive mean µ∗. The posterior covariance can
also be written using the Cholesky factor as
Σ∗= K∗∗−[LK∗]⊤[LK∗]
(3.22)
10
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:19==
Finally, we can also compute the marginal log­likelihood in quadratic time using Cholesky
as
log p(y | x) = −1
2[y⊤α + 2
∑
i
log Lii + n log 2π].
(3.23)
The Cholesky factorization of the covariance matrix can also speed up computations in
scenarios where data comes sequentially by allowing the sequential rank updates of a
fixed GP fit by using previously computed Cholesky factors.
Sample paths
Cholesky decomposition also plays a pivotal role in generating sample paths from a GP
(sampling f). This can be quickly done after the Cholesky decomposition of the poste­
rior covariance is obtained. The only additional step is to randomly generate a standard
Normal distribution z = N(0, 1) so that the sample paths of the GP can be drawn as:
fs = µ + Lz
(3.24)
However, this is not very scalable as the computing cost of the Cholesky factor is already
O(n3). Some more efficient yet approximation­relying methods have been introduced,
including the function space approximation, Weight space approximations [30], and more
recently, the sampling using Pathwise conditioning [33].
Figure 3.1: Sample paths from a GP sampled with the Cholesky decomposition method
described in equation 3.24.
3.2
Priors and Bayesian estimation
One of the benefits of the Bayesian approach is the possibility of incorporating field knowl­
edge in statistical modeling. This is usually done through the addition of priors to hyper­
parameters. When little is known about the underlying data­generating process, flat or
weak priors are a good starting point, as those don’t bias the model­selecting process
with strong prior assumptions. Priors for the hyperparameters of a GP θ = (ℓ, σ2
f, σ2
n)
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
11
==PAGE:20==
can be easily incorporated by simple addition of the prior probabilities in the maximum a
posteriori (MAP) estimation:
ˆθ = arg max
θ
p(y | x, θ)p(θ).
(3.25)
Which, due to the properties of log transformation, translates to the unnormalized log
posterior:
log p(y | x, θ) + log p(θ).
(3.26)
Gradient methods can be used to solve 3.25, and the log parametrization of the hyperpa­
rameters is usually prudent to limit the parameters space to the positive domain by setting
LN distributions as the priors, for instance.
We can thus represent the GP in the so­called fully Bayesian formulation in the form:
p(f, θ|y, X) ∝p(y|f)p(f|θ, X)p(θ)
(3.27)
Which gives rise to the fully Bayesian predictive posterior of X∗
p(y∗|y) =
∫∫
p(y∗|f∗, θ)p(f∗|θ, y)p(θ|y)df∗dθ
(3.28)
Monte Carlo sampling is an essential method in the Bayesian modeling toolbox, which
allows one to draw hyperparameters from the posterior conditioned on the data D =
{x, y}.
{θi}S
i=1 ∼p(θ | D),
(3.29)
which for the noiseless function f yields
p(f | D) ≈1
s
s
∑
i=1
GP(f; µD(θi), KD(θi));
(3.30)
The posterior is then approximated by a mixture of Gaussian Processes corresponding
to the sampled hyperparameters, and the predictive distribution is a Gaussian mixture as
shown in figures 3.2 and 3.3.
12
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: Three GP samples of a fully Bayesian GP with dif­
ferent hyperparameters. The vertical line represents the point
at which the posteriors will be shown on the subsequent plot.
Figure 3.3: View of the posterior on a specific choice o x.
It is easy to see that the conditional posteriors are Gaussian
shaped, while the marginal one is represented by the combi­
nation of these, a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM).
The choice of the markov chain monte carlo (MCMC) Algorithm to use up to the mod­
eler. Traditional methods, like Metropolis­Hastings could be used, but moment­informed
methods like Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [34] when gradients of the log posterior are
available.
3.3
Kernels
Covariance functions or Kernels are a crucial building block of GPs. They dictate to what
degree points x that are close in space are likely to have a similar output y. However,
not every arbitrary function applied to an input pair x and x′ is a valid covariance function.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
13
==PAGE:22==
Several characteristics of covariance functions deserve to be highlighted.
A covariance function that depends on x −x′ is called a stationary covariance function,
being invariant to translations in the input space. the further addition of the absolute
operator |x −x′| to the relation brings us to an isotropic covariance function. On the other
hand, functions that depend on x · x′ are called dot product covariance functions. These
functions are invariant to the rotation of coordinates about the origin but not to translations.
It i useful to introduce the general definition of a kernel, a function k that maps a pair of
inputs x ∈X, x′ ∈X into R.
(Tkf)(x) =
∫
X
k(x, x′)f(x′) dµ(x′),
(3.31)
The term comes from the theory of integral operators, where operator Tk is defined as
the above equation. A kernel is symmetric if k(x, x′) = k(x′, x). Thus, every covariance
function is symmetric by definition. The Gram matrix Kij = k(xi, xj) is called a covariance
matrix if k is a covariance function.
Squared Exponential
The squared exponential (SE) covariance functions play a major role GP modeling. They
have already been introduced as 3.18 falls in this category. They have the general notation
as follows:
kSE(d) = exp(−d2
2ℓ2 )
(3.32)
ℓis the lengthscale parameter, and d is the distance between an input pair. This function
is infinitely differentiable and thus very smooth. Samples of kernels with different choices
of lenghtscale are illustrated in figure 3.4. It can be derived by expanding input with a
feature space of infinite Gaussian­shaped basis functions densely centered in x.
14
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:23==
(a) GP Samples with SE lenghtscale = 0.1
(b) GP Samples with SE lenghtscale = 0.5
(c) GP Samples with SE lenghtscale = 1
Figure 3.4: Gaussian Process Samples with Different lenghtscales
Matérn Family
The Matérn family of covariance functions is a prominent kernel class that often appears
in the GP literature.
kMatern(r) = 21−ν
Γ(ν)
(√
2νr
ℓ
)ν
Kν
(√
2νr
ℓ
)
,
(3.33)
ℓis the already introduced lengthscale, and Kν is a modified Bessel function.
Their
parametrization allows for different degrees of smoothness depending on the parameter
ν ∈R>0. The sample paths defined by functions in this class are ν −1 times continuously
differentiable. ν is usually chosen to be a half­integer. The case where ν = 1/2 yields
the exponential covariance, which is continuous but nowhere differentiable, looking like a
very noisy process. This kernel is often referred to as the Ornstein­Uhlenbeck process.
Increasing the smoothness so that ν →∞makes the resulting covariance function equiv­
alent to the squared exponential. Other common choices of are ν = 3/2 and ν = 5/2
(those are illustrated in figure 3.5).
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) GP Samples with Matérn 1/2 Kernel
(b) GP Samples with Matérn 3/2 Kernel
(c) GP Samples with Matérn 5/2 Kernel
Figure 3.5: Gaussian Process Samples with Different Matérn Kernels
Neural Network Kernel
Given that a GP can be derived by increasing the dimensions of a n dimensional input
variable x in a linear model with a mapping ϕ(x) mapping Rn →Rinf. It is not hard to
identify that a one­layer neural network with infinite neurons can be represented as a GP.
This is not only true but an analytical kernel function has also been derived for the case
of a specific activation function, the so­called Neural Network Kernel.
kNN = sin−1
(
2x⊤Σx′
√
(1 + 2x⊤Σx)(1 + 2x′⊤Σx′)
)
(3.34)
Several kernel functions are available for modeling as displayed in table 3.1; however,
those might still be somewhat rigid choices. Kernels can be combined and manipulated by
a series of valid operations that preserve their essence, yielding functions that still satisfy
the requirements to be identified as valid kernels and covariance functions. Bishop [31]
lists several valid operations that can be extremely useful when modeling various data
with GPs. There are even metaheuristics that assist in automatic kernel building based
on simple, productive grammar.
16
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:25==
Covariance Function
Expression
Constant
σ2
0
Linear
∑D
d=1 σ2
dxdx′
d
Polynomial
(x · x′ + σ2
0)p
Squared Exponential
exp
(
−r2
2ℓ2
)
Matérn
1
Γ(ν)2ν−1
( √
2νr
ℓ
)ν
Kν
( √
2νr
ℓ
)
Exponential
exp
(
−r
ℓ
)
γ­Exponential
exp
(
−
( r
ℓ
)γ)
Rational Quadratic
(
1 +
r2
2αℓ2
)−α
Neural Network
sin−1
(
2x⊤Σx′
√
(1+2x⊤Σx)(1+2x′⊤Σx′)
)
Table 3.1: Common covariance functions used in Gaussian process models. Adapted
from Rasmussen and Williams [30].
3.4
Bayesian Optimization
Decision­making is an essential process for reaching objectives not only in technical or
business fields but also in everyday human life. This process consists of trying to make the
best decision based on the information at hand. But what is an optimal decision in the first
place, and how can it be quantified? Those are questions that Bayesian decision theory
can help address based on technical and probabilistic approaches, using Bayesian infer­
ence to quantify and optimize decision­making under uncertainty. Bayesian Optimization
builds upon that probabilistic rich framework, introducing algorithms that help optimization
of black­box functions. These show up when the underlying process can not be explicitly
quantified.
Policies and Acquisition functions
Bayesian Optimization [35] is usually applied in a scenario of sequential decision­making,
in which information (Data) is gathered sequentially, allowing more informed decisions to
be taken in each process iteration. This procedure is founded in the optimization policy,
which gives quantified guidance on where to do the following observation based on the
currently available data. It is a cyclic procedure in which the policy selects the next ob­
servation location, and then the data is updated accordingly. This is repeated until some
stopping criterion is satisfied, usually called the stopping rule.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
17
==PAGE:26==
Algorithm 1 Generic Bayesian Optimization Algorithm adapted from Garnett [35]
1: Input: initial dataset D
▷can be empty
2: repeat
3:
x ←POLICY(D)
▷select the next observation location
4:
y ←OBSERVE(x)
▷observe at the chosen location
5:
D ←D ∪{(x, y)}
▷update dataset
6: until termination condition is reached
▷e.g., budget exhausted
7: return D
Policies are commonly built upon acquisition functions. Those functions give numerical
scores to each potential observation location by how much it would aid in reaching the
desired optimum. Sometimes, both terms are even considered to be exchangeable. In
more technical terms a function α : X →R assigns a score reflecting preference for each
point in the domain using the notation α(x; D), where each evaluation is made conditioned
on the available data D usually deriving the posterior belief of the objective function given
p(f | D). A point x is preferred over another point x′ if α(x; D) > α(x′; D). The maximiza­
tion problem governs the decision process:
x ∈arg max
x′∈X
α(x′; D).
(3.35)
Replacing an optimization problem with another one might seem unreasonable at first
glance. Still, acquisition functions tend to map observations into domains that can be
more easily optimized by simpler off­the­shelf optimizer algorithms or simply by picking
the highest value from a pool of input value combinations U.
Utility functions
Bayesian decision theory gives the stepping stones to make decisions under uncertainty.
To formalize this approach, let the random variable ψ encode the uncertain elements when
making a decision. Bayesian inference then gives the toolbox to reason about ψ in the light
of available data D via the posterior distribution p(ψ | D). it is possible then to represent
the utility function u(a, ψ, D) that measures the quality of taking action a given ψ and the
information conveyed by the gathered data D. The expected utility can be represented
as:
E[u(a, ψ, D)|a, D] =
∫
u(a, ψ, D)p(ψ|D)dψ.
(3.36)
And thus, the optimizing action is selected as
a ∈arg max
a′∈A
E[u(a′, ψ, D)|a′, D].
(3.37)
Utility functions can be formulated based on the properties of the modeling problem and
the modeler’s preferences (e.g., risk­seeking, neutrality, or aversion). The budget of the
procedure(how many iterations the optimization can be run for based on current con­
straints) plays a significant role in the theory of optimality. In practical terms, an optimal
decision considering only a budget of one iteration left might not be the same as the op­
timal decision when two or more iterations are still available. However, approximations
based on the one­step look ahead have proven to be reasonable, especially considering
18
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:27==
the prohibitive computational complexity of non myopic approaches (the ones that take
into account all the remaining observations in the budget).
The simplest utility in Bayesian optimization might be the linear utility v(ϕ) = ϕ. This
means that the expected utility is just the posterior mean of ϕ:
E[u(ϕ)|x, D] = µD(x),
thus, x = arg max
x′∈A
µD(x′).
(3.38)
The linear utility is equivalent to a risk­neutral approach. This can be easily seen con­
sidering the maximization is completely indifferent to the variance of the posterior distri­
bution of ϕ, only carrying about where the maximum is expected to lie. Risk­averse and
risk­seeking utilities are rarely seen in the bayesian optimization literature, however, in­
corporating the standard deviation to the utility function can help adding more expressivity
as more information about the shape of the posterior distribution is more well described.
This can be done by decomposing the utility with the posterior mean µ and its standard
deviation σ:
µ + βσ
(3.39)
Where β can be seen as a tunable risk­tolerance parameter and has a role of controlling
the degree of exploration, as will be elaborated on later.
it is essential to highlight some different approaches when assigning the utility to the
dataset D = (x, y), as various points of view yield different types of acquisition functions.
The simple reward attributes a utility u to the data based on the domain of observations
or data points present in the dataset D:
u(D) = max µD(x)
(3.40)
The global reward, on the other hand, expands the action space to the whole domain X,
giving an expected utility based on the global maximum of the posterior mean:
u(D) = max
x∈X′ µD(x).
(3.41)
Despite looking similar, the nuanced difference between those acquisition strategies gives
rise to two different acquisition functions in the one­step look ahead setting, the expected
improvement (EI) and the knowledge gradient (KG) acquisition functions, respectively,
having the latter usually outputting riskier decisions. An alternative view is the cumulative
reward where the utility of the data is given by the sum of all observed values so far:
u(D) =
∑
i
yi
(3.42)
The Information theoretic approach
The optimization problem can also be viewed through the lenses of information gain, giv­
ing rise to the important class of information­theoretic acquisition functions. In the context
of Bayesian optimization, for instance, let ω be a random variable encoding the location of
the global optimum x∗and the maximum value of the objective f∗. The initial uncertainty
about ω can be quantified via the entropy of the prior distribution p(ω):
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
19
==PAGE:28==
H(ω) = −
∫
p(ω) log p(ω)dω.
(3.43)
The information gain provided by the data D is the decrease in entropy when moving from
the prior to the posterior:
u(D) = H(ω) −H(ω|D),
(3.44)
where H(ω|D) represents the entropy of the posteririor
H(ω|D) = −
∫
p(ω|D) log p(ω|D)dω.
(3.45)
Which is an analogous formulation is the Kullback­Leibler (KL) Divergence between the
posterior and the prior:
u(D) = DKL[p(ω|D) || p(ω)] =
∫
p(ω|D) log p(ω|D)
p(ω) dω.
(3.46)
In practical terms, this quantifies the information in the data D by how much our belief in
ω changes after gathering it. The acquisition function using the KL divergence gives rise
to the mutal information acquisition function.
However, mutual information between two variables ω and ψ can be more generally de­
fined by
I(ω; ψ) =
∫∫
p(ω, ψ) log p(ω, ψ)
p(w)p(ψ) dω dψ.
(3.47)
Which is also the KL divergence between the joint and the product of the marginals
DKL[p(ω, ψ)||p(ω)p(ψ)]. It is easy to see that when the two random variables ω and ψ
are independent, their mutual information is zero. A different perspective on the mutual
information can also be profitable depending on the scenario:
I(ω; ψ) = H(ω) −E[H(ω) | ψ].
(3.48)
Which represents the expected decrease in entropy of ω after observing ψ.
3.4.1
Gaussian Process for acquisition function computation
We have discussed the utility function in the light of posterior distributions of ϕ, which
assumes an underlying model fit to data. In theory, several different models could be
used to model the underlying function in BO, like the parametric beta­Bernoulli mod­
els as shown by Shahriari et al. [36] or, more generally, Generalized Linear Models
(GLMs).
In the context of machine learning hyperparameter optimization [37], for in­
stance, the non­parametric Tree­Structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) [38] is usually the
model of choice. However as noticeable after a quick glimpse in the Bayesian optimiza­
tion and Active Learning literature, due to their flexibility and natural probabilistic features,
the non­parametric class of Gaussian processes models is generally the go­to models
when it comes to modeling the posterior of these functions.
Considering that the GP models an objective function f : X →R conditioned on gathered
observation D = (x, y) yields the formulation:
20
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:29==
p(f | D) = GP(f; µD, KD)
(3.49)
Given the convenient properties of the GP we can formulate the predictive distribution of
f′ = f(x) as:
p(f′ | x, D) = N(f′; µ = µD(x), σ = KD(x, x))
(3.50)
In the case of noisy data, this can be extended by simply adding the diagonal noise matrix
to the covariance matrix. Bringing us back to the equation provided in 3.16.
3.4.2
Common Bayesian Optimization Acquisition Functions
There are several acquisition functions used in the literature of Bayesian Optimization,
however a few of them have received the most attention. Some of these are introduced
next.
Probability of improvement
One of the simplest acquisition functions is the Probability of improvement (PI) [39], which
evaluates the probability of a new observation improving the utility by a margin ϵ, which
then defines a threshold τ = u(D) + ε;. Taking into account the next step in the iteration
with utility u(D) yields:
αPI(x; D, τ) = P(u(D′) > τ|x, D).
(3.51)
Which can be conveniently represented in terms of the cumulative normal distribution Φ:
αPI(x; Dn) = P[v > τ] = Φ
(µn(x) −τ
σn(x)
)
,
(3.52)
Of course this come with the dependency on the parameter . Different choices of this pa­
rameter can present tradeoffs between exploitation and exploration, and some heuristics
have been proposed to guide the selection of these alongside alternative parametriza­
tions.
Expected Improvement
The Expected Improvement (EI) [40] acquisition function is given by assuming risk neu­
trality and a one­step lookahed with the utility function of D based on 3.40. It measures the
instantaneous improvement u(D′) −u(D) by making a next observation on point x. Thus
it can be quantified as the expected value of maxµD′(x′) giving the acquisition function:
αEI(x; D) =
∫[
max µ′
D(x′)p(y|x, D)dy
]
−max µD(x).
(3.53)
With f∗as the last seen optimum, the equation can be rewritten as:
αEI(x; D) =
∫
max(f′ −f∗, 0)N(f′; µ, σ2)df′.
(3.54)
Whose max operator can be decomposed in two different integrals:
αEI(x; D) =
∫∞
f∗f′N(f′; µ, σ2)df′ −f∗
∫∞
f∗N(f′; µ, σ2)df′,
(3.55)
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
21
==PAGE:30==
The first term is the expected value of a normal distribution truncated at f∗and the second
is the Complementary normal CDF scaled by f∗. It is thus possible to write the acquisition
function parametrized by the normal pdf ϕ and cdf Φ as:
αEI(x; D) = (µ −f∗)Φ
(µ −f∗
σ
)
+ σϕ
(µ −f∗
σ
)
.
(3.56)
Knowledge Gradient
The Knowledge Gradient (KG) [41] is obtained when considering the utility function given
on 3.41. There is no constraint to return a previously evaluated point as the final solution.
Which leads to the acquisition function:
αKG(x; D) = argmaxEn[µ∗
n+1 −µ∗
n|xn+1 = x].
(3.57)
Mutual Information
As in the brief introduction to Information Theoretic acquisition functions, these approaches
differ by definition from the ones viewed so far. They try to quantify the amount of informa­
tion provided by a random variable ω by a dataset D. The twist is to purposefully define w
to provide insight into the optimization problem. Starting from equation 3.44, the marginal
information gain is:
H(ω | D) −H(ω | D′),
(3.58)
The expected marginal information gain and the mutual information acquisition function
can be defined as:
am(x; D) = H(ω | D) −E[H(ω | D′) | x, D]
= I(y; ω | x, D),
(3.59)
Different acquisition functions are obtained based on which information ω is decided to
contain.
Entropy search
The Entropy search (ES) [42] acquisition function measures the expected information gain
by querying an arbitrary point x and looks for the point that gives the most information
about the optimum x∗.
αES(x; Dn) := H(x∗| Dn) −Ey|x,Dn[H(x∗| Dn ∪{(x, y)})]
(3.60)
predictive entropy search
The predictive entropy search (PES) [43] acquisition function exploits the symmetry prop­
erty of the mutual information rewriting (ES) as:
αPES(x; D) = H(y | x, D) −E[H(y | x, x∗, D) | x, D].
(3.61)
Which is usually favored over the former due to restricting entropy computations to the
one­dimensional domain of p(y | x.D), Hence the name.
Thompson Sampling
Another well­known acquisition function approach in the Bayesian optimization literature
22
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:31==
is the Thompson sampling, which explores a stochastic approach by sampling paths from
the objective function posterior:
αTS(x; D) ∼p(f | D).
(3.62)
After obtaining a sample from the posterior, the sample from p(x∗| D) can be easily
obtained by finding the maximum x of each sampled GP path:
x ∈arg max
x′∈X αTS(x′; D).
(3.63)
This is an elegant stochastic approach that intrinsically deals with the exploration­exploitation
trade­off. However, sampling paths from a GP might require significant computational
power, which will be touched upon later. In low­dimension domains, simple brute force
sampling through low discrepancy sequences might take care of finding the optimum for
each sampled GP path. However, as the dimensions increase, this approach becomes
increasingly inefficient due to the curse of dimensionality. An option is to use gradient op­
timization methods to find the ”fantasized” optimum x∗for each sampled GP path. There
are also several approximation methods that provide computationally efficient ways of
sampling the posterior of GPs.
Upper Confidence Bound
Lastly, the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) is a very intuitive acquisition function. In this
case, a confidence parameter π ∈(0, 1) is selected to compute the pointwise upper bound
for an objective function:
αUCB(x; D, π) = q(π, x, D)
(3.64)
where, q is the quantile function of the predictive distribution. Given a GP and the prop­
erties of the normal distribution, this quantile takes a similar form:
αUCB(x; D, π) = µ + βσ
(3.65)
β = Φ−1(π) and its confidence level can be calculated via the inverse Gaussian CDF.
(sometimes the beta is also parametrized as β1/2). This term is responsible for controlling
the exploration­exploitation tradeoff of the acquisition function.
3.4.3
Evaluation of Bayesian Optimization algorithms
Thus far, several approaches to Bayesian optimization have been introduced, but the
reader might be posing the question of how to compare them. This question begs for
some backtracking as to the problem that needs to be solved. BO focuses on finding the
optimal value f∗of some specific cost function. The analyst would not only want to find
the desired optimum but also do so in a reasonable time (within the fewest number of
iterations possible).
The concept of regret comes into place as a measure of optimization progress and con­
vergence rate across time. The more significant the gap between the current optimum
and the global optimum f∗, the more substantial the regret. The concept of regret also
helps elucidate the trade­off between exploitation and exploration, two core concepts of
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
23
==PAGE:32==
Bayesian optimization. Overfocusing on exploitation might be tempting due to its imme­
diate progress; however, balancing the approach with the right degree of exploration is
likely to be favorable for lower degrees of regret in the long run.
The dataset containing the first τ pairs of observations in the optimization procedure is
defined as:
Dτ = (xτ, yτ) = {(xi, yi)}τ
i=1.
(3.66)
Considering ϕτ = f(xτ) be the actual objective function at the observation locations, and
maxϕτ the best true function point observed so far, the simple regret associated with that
dataset is given by:
rτ = f∗−maxϕτ
(3.67)
Therefore, the simple regret is nonincreasing and nonnegative. Where ϕ is the value of
the observation at a point x.
In order to introduce the cumulative regret, it is useful to introduce the concept of instan­
taneous regret first defined as:
ρi = f∗−ϕi
(3.68)
Where ϕ is the proposed observation to be queried by the algorithm.
Then we can define the cumulative regret as:
Rτ =
∑
i
ρi = τf∗−
∑
i
ϕi.
(3.69)
3.5
Active Learning
Active Learning [44], sometimes called ”optimal experimental design,” is a field of machine
learning that addresses the usually overlooked question of ”what data to learn from?”. This
approach focuses on maximizing learning with the fewest data points possible. This might
be profitable in scenarios where a lot of unlabeled data is available, for instance, in a pool
of uncategorized fraudulent transactions, or in cases where data is promptly available to
be queried, like in experiments where the outcome is of interest. Active learning considers
that labeling any data point (finding y for a specific set of independent variables x) carries
some cost or burden, either time, financial, computational, or a mixture of those.
Active learning can also be seen under a more machine learning­centric point of view
in which the objective is to achieve the highest level of performance (depending on the
task at hand) with the lowest amount of data possible or analogously to approximate the
hyper­parameters of the ”true” model most efficiently as possible with just a few set of
training data.
Many of the concepts of Bayesian Optimization are also present in active learning. This
time, the acquisition functions are built so that the focus of the problem is more exploratory
than exploitative.
There are several settings where active learning can take place, and those are usually
categorized by how the unlabeled data is queried. The Membership query synthesis sce­
nario assumes the ability to query any set of points in the input space. This might not be
24
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:33==
possible in many cases but may be more reasonable in others, for instance, in laboratory
experiments where the experimenter can change any variable x to impact the outcome
of interest y. In the Stream­based selective sampling scenario, on the other hand, data
is assumed to arrive sequentially, and it is up to the analyst or model to decide whether
to spend resources labeling that data point or not. Finally, the most common and some­
times simple scenario is called Pool­Based Active Learning. Where the analyst has at
their disposal a set of Labeled data L and a pool of unlabeled data points U. To maximize
learning, the scenario then asks which data point to query from U in iteration step i.
3.5.1
Common Active Learning Acquisition Functions
As in Bayesian Optimization, several classes of acquisition functions have been studied
in the AL literature. However, some of them are more notorious than others and thus are
highlighted next.
Uncertainty Sampling
We have so far addressed why and when active learning can be implemented. However,
we haven’t yet elaborated on the decision process. There are several ways to decide
which data point to query next, but most of them resort to some uncertainty measure.
One of the simplest methods called Uncertainty Sampling [45], samples the point at which
the model is the least certain. In a default binary classification setting, the next point to
query would be the one in which the prediction would be the closest to 0.5. In regression
settings, the variance of the prediction could serve as the measure of uncertainty; thus,
the next point to the query would be the one in which ˆy has the highest variance. A more
general way of tackling this problem is using entropy as a measure of uncertainty.
αent(x; D) = −
∑
i
P(yi|x; θ) log P(yi|x; θ),
(3.70)
Which is part of several important information theoretic active learning query methods.
Query­By­Committee
Query­By­Committee (QBC) [46] is analogous to ensemble methods in ML. It promotes
the fitting of several models, or a so­called committee per active learning iteration C =
{θ(1), . . . , θ(C)}, which represent competing hypotheses. The new queried point should
then be where the committee disagrees the most. In the classification setting, this dis­
agreement can be quantified by standard voting, and in regression, it can be computed
by calculating the variance of the C model predictions. There are several ways to build
the Committee, one simple and effective way is to sample an arbitraty number of models
of the posterior distribution P(θ | L) with MCMC for instance.
Variance Reduction
Variance Reduction methods [47] came to be along the first statistical analyses of active
learning, trying to minimize the learner’s future error by variance minimization. In regres­
sion settings, the learner’s future generalization error can be decomposed as
ET [(g(x; θ) −y)2|x] = E[(y −E[y|x])2]
+ (EL[g(x; θ)] −E[y|x])2
+ EL[(g(x; θ) −EL[g(x; θ)])2],
(3.71)
Where EL is the expectation over a labeled set L, E is the expectation over a conditional
density P(y | x), and ET is the expectation over both. g(x; θ) is a learned functions
predicted output and y is the true data label. This decomposition is analogous to the
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
25
==PAGE:34==
bias­variance decomposition σ2
ϵ + Bias2( ˆf(x0)) + Var( ˆf(x0)) [48], as the first term on
the right side indicates the noise, which is irreducible and doesn’t depend on the model
or training data, the second term is the bias, that represents the error due to models
misspecifications, and lastly, the final variance term, which is the remaining component
of the means squared error concerning the true regression function. As the other two
components are irreducible due to the nature of the data and model, reducing the variance
component is the way to move forward. This brings us to a query strategy that favors
querying points that, if added to L would reduce the overall variance of the model.
αvar(x; D) = argmin
˜x
˜σ2
o.
(3.72)
Where ˜σ2
o is the variance of the model after a new data point ˜x has been added to L.
Estimated Error reduction
Estimated Error reduction query strategies [49] are also possible and intend to minimize
a specific error metric after adding a specific point to the set L. The former introduced
query strategies to an indirect error reduction while trying to minimize the variance. This
approach can have a high computational burden due to model refitting for each new pos­
sible query in U, imposing prohibitive costs for several applications.
3.5.2
Evaluation of Active Learning algorithms
There is no consensus on analyzing how well Active Learning runs perform. Most of the
analyses have in their foundation some data fit metric for each iteration; in other words,
they measure how well the so far queried data Di describe some test set, randomly set
aside from the start purely for measurement reasons. Some standard metrics for data
fit in each iteration include the classic negative marginal log likelihood (NMLL) and the
root mean squared error (RMSE). For instance, a new GP could be fit to data Di and
their predictive performance measured for the left­out test set in each iteration i using a
selected metric.
Figure 3.6 illustrates the gradual improvement of the fit on the test set as new data points
are queried in each iteration. The modeled function gradually takes the same shape as
the true underlying function, and the MLL is improved as the line colors go from red to
blue.
26
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.6: The plot depicts the improvement of the Higdon function fit through the active
learning iterations. The lines are colored by the negative log­likelihood of the iterations
exemplified in algorithm 0, where red values represent a poorer fit while blue represents
a better one.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:37==
4
Methodology
4.1
Bayesian Active Learning
As seen thus far, Bayesian optimization and Active Learning might be seen as two sides
of the same coin, differing mainly on their end goal. While BO tries to find the global
maximizer of a black­box function, AL tries to explore the space as thoroughly as possible,
measuring this progress using some predictive performance metrics.
Their querying strategies (acquisition functions) are also coined into two main sub­classes,
some deriving from decision science principles and others using founded information the­
ory. We now present some acquisition functions used in the Fully Bayesian GP frame­
work.
Active Learning Mackay
Among the most common acquisition functions used in AL is the information­theoretic Ac­
tive Learning Mackay (ALM) [50]. This selects the point with the highest Shannon entropy,
which, given a Gaussian posterior of a GP, is equivalent to maximizing the predictive pos­
terior variance σ2(x)
αALM = H(y|x, D) ∝σ2(x)
(4.1)
Single GPs might be flexible and powerful function approximators, but they still focus
on a specific hypothesis about the underlying data­generating process. By using the
fully Bayesian GP formulation introduced in equation 3.28, it is possible to harness the
information of different hypotheses upon the data by MCMC, for example. This way, every
sample θ = {σ2
e, σ2
n, ℓ} can be considered a different model hypothesis naturally weighted
by the probabilistic posterior sampling machinery of MCMC. This more robust approach
can give rise to bayesian Active Learning methods. With this framework at hand, it is
possible to reformulate the ALM as Bayesian Active Learning Mackay (B­ALM) as
αB­ALM = H
[∫
p(y|x, θ)p(θ|D)dθ
]
= H
[
Ep(θ|D)[p(y|x, θ)]
]
∝Ep(θ|D)
[
σ2
θ(x)|θ
]
(4.2)
Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement
When the goal is to tune the model’s hyperparameters by optimizing the conditional mu­
tual information between the model parameters and its output, it effectively amounts to
maximizing the anticipated reduction in posterior uncertainty. This approach is founda­
tional to the Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement (BALD) strategy, as delineated
by Houlsby et al. [51].
αBALD(x) = I(yx; θ|D) = H(p(yx|D)) −Eθ[H(p(yx|θ, D))]
(4.3)
Bayesian Query by Committee
The QBC has also recently found its Bayesian counterpart through a clever formulation
that understands the committee as the GPs with hyperparameters in the MCMC sample.
This approach leads to a formulation that harnesses the disagreement (variance) in means
of the GPs conditioned on these different hyperparameter hypotheses:
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
29
==PAGE:38==
αBQBC(x) = Vθ[µθ(x|D)] = Eθ[(µθ(x|D) −µ(x|D))2],
(4.4)
Where µθ is the GP predictive mean of specific data point x conditioned on a particular
set of hyperparameters θ in the MCMC sample. The disagreement interpretation is more
straightforward based on the actual definition of variance as the squared distance between
the conditioned means and the general average model mean on the right side of the
equation.
Bayesian optimization
Bayesian active learning
Objective
Optimize f
Improve prediction of f
Model
Assumed correct
Inherently uncertain
PES/BALD
H[x∗|Dn] −Ex[H[x∗|Dn, {x, x}]]
H[θ|Dn] −Ex[H[θ|Dn, {x, x}]]
KG/B­QBC
Ex[µ(x|Dn)]
Ex[(µ(x|Dn, θ) −µ(x|Dn))2]
Table 4.1: Comparison between Bayesian optimization and Bayesian active learning.
Adapted from the presentation of the article by Hvarfner et al. [7].
Query by Mixture of Gaussian Processes
An extension of BQBC is achieved by tracing the parallel to the actual marginalized fully
Bayesian GP posterior. By marginalizing on every set of hyperparameters θ, the marginal
posterior is equivalent to a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). Thus, the predictive posterior
is a mixture of M Gaussians with mean µGMM and variance matrix σ2
GMM. These parame­
ters are mathematically derived as:
µGMM(x) = 1
M
M
∑
j=1
µθj(x)
(4.5)
σ2
GMM(x) = 1
M
M
∑
j=1
σ2
θj(x) + 1
M
M
∑
j=1
(
µθj(x) −µGMM(x)
)2
(4.6)
Where it is easily seen that the σ2
GMM consists of two terms. Those being BALM and
BQBC. This leads to a new acquisition function defined as Query by Mixture of Gaussians
Processes (QB­MGP) [6].
αQB­MGP(x) = Ep(θ|D)
[
σ2
θ(x)|θ
]
+ Eθ[(µθ(x|D) −µ(x|D))2],
(4.7)
One iteration of active learning with the FBGP and QBMGP acquisition function is shown
in figure 4.1.
30
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.1: We see the Gramacy1d function in red with its potential noise illustrated by a
90% confidence interval around it. The sixth AL iteration, Fully Bayesian GP fit, is shown
with the MGP mean in dark blue and the individual conditional GPs in light blue. The
MGP variance is shown via the 90% confidence interval in orange. Below, we see the
QBMGP acquisition function values around x, higher where the marginal posterior has
higher variance σ2
GMM(x).
Statistical Distance­based Active Learning
The Bayesian AL acquisition function presented uses the disagreement of different model
hypotheses and the marginal posterior to guide its exploration. However, being guided
solely by the disagreement in mean as in BQBC might be too restrictive and overlooks
uncertainty in characteristics of the GP like the output scale parameter, disfavoring ex­
ploration. Thus, a more general approach is proposed to seek disagreement by using
any statistical distance measure. The general Statistical distance­based Active Learning
(SAL) [7] acquisition function is presented as:
αSAL(x) = Eθ[d(p(y|x, θ), p(y|x, D))] ≈1
M
M
∑
m=1
d(p(y|x, θm), p(y|x, D))
(4.8)
Where a M number of hyperparameters θ = {ℓ, σf, σϵ} are sampled from the posterior
θm ∼p(θ | D), and d is a statistical distance of choice.
It is curious to highlight that BQBC is recovered through the SAL formulation by choosing d
as simply the semi­metric difference in means and, more interestingly, BALD is equivalent
to the SAL formulation using d as the forward KL divergence (which is not a symmetric
operation thus not classifying as a distance but as a divergence).
Moment Matching
The statistical distance between a GP’s marginal and conditional posteriors (GMM and a
Gaussian) is not available in close form, so some approximation methods are necessary.
A precise and closely approximated way forward is MC; however, sampling from the pos­
terior can be extremely costly even when using numerical methods. Even though a GMM
is usually not well approximated by a Gaussian distribution, it is shown that this approx­
imation is not very far off when computing statistical distances [7]. Thus, the method of
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
31
==PAGE:40==
Gaussian distribution Moment matching (MM) is used. This exploits the fact that most
useful statistical distances (or divergences in the case of KL) have a closed form when
computed over two Gaussian distributions, as shown in table 4.2.
The marginal posterior can be approximated by plugging the GMM mean and variance
in a normal distribution N(µ = µGMM, σ2 =σ2
GMM), and then computing the distances
in closed form. This process is illustrated in figure 4.2. In the original application, the
Hellinger and Wasserstein distances are used to calculate the SAL acquisition functions
(and KL is implicitly used due to its equivalence to BALD).
Figure 4.2: The figure illustrates the same three conditional posteriors (Gaussians) shown
in figure 3.3. The GMM marginal posterior is moment matched to a Gaussian shown in
black with the same mean and variance as the GMM.
Distance
General Formula
Closed Form
Hellinger
H2(p, q) = 1
2
∫
X
(√
p(x) −
√
q(x)
)2
dλ
1 −
√
2σ1σ2
σ2
1+σ2
2 exp
(
−1
4
(µ1−µ2)2
σ2
1+σ2
2
)
Wasserstein
Wk(p, q) =
(∫1
0 |Fq(x) −Fp(x)|k dx
) 1
k
√
(µ1 −µ2)2 + (σ1 −σ2)2
KL Div.
DKL(P||Q) = ∑p(x) log p(x)
q(x)
log σ2
σ1 + σ2
1+(µ1−µ2)2
2σ2
2
−1
2
Table 4.2: Statistical Distances and Their Closed Forms for Normal Distributions
32
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:41==
4.2
MGP with SGD
The fully Bayesian GP formulation has proven itself to be successful in reaching state­of­
the­art results in Active learning with the corresponding acquisition functions BQBC and
QBMGP proposed by Riis et al. [6] and further generalized with the SAL acquisition func­
tions [7]. Despite their good results, those approaches rely heavily on the HMC estima­
tion, which can be very computationally intensive. Riis, Rodrigues, and Camara Pereira
[9] propose a computationally less intensive approach that tries to mimic the features of
a fully Bayesian estimation but yields comparable, if not superior, results.
Instead of M naturally weighted hyperparameter samples from MCMC, the alternative
approach opts for initializing a batch of M GPs to be optimized on the same dataset
using standard SGD methods. The hyperparameters of the GP are initialized with low­
informative priors in the log space, further mirroring the fully Bayesian treatment. This
method introduces two degrees of freedom to the modeling: the learning rate of the SGD
algorithm and the number of learning steps. With a few learning steps nl, the model will
consist of many weak learners. Conversely, with a higher nl, all model hyperparameters
converging to the same optimum will likely defeat the method’s purpose.
To introduce weighting to the ”sampled” hyperparameters like naturally done in MCMC,
the M GPs are assigned weights wi, based on how well they fit the training data based on
their Marginal Log Likelihood (ML).
wi =
exp(MLLi)
∑
m exp(MLLm)
(4.9)
This guarantees that better­fitting GPs (Hyperparameters closer to the true ones) will have
a higher impact on the predictive posterior.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.3: The plot shows the surface of estimated lengthscales and output scales on
the log space colored by the respective fit (MLL). The dots represent the final values after
SGD iterations and the crosses are the starting prior sampled values. The contour plot is
light­colored on denser regions, and the marginal densities are shown on the top and the
right. The multimodality of the parameter posterior can be clearly seen.
The predictive posterior of the MGP would then be:
p(y∗|y) ≈1
M
M
∑
j=1
wjN(µθj(x∗), Σθj(x∗)),
where
M
∑
j=1
wj = 1
(4.10)
The new predictive posterior allows for the adaptation of the previously seen acquisition
functions B­ALM, B­QBC, and QB­MGP using the weights wj:
αB­ALM(x) =
M
∑
j=1
wjσ2
θj(x)
(4.11)
αB­QBC(x) = 1
M
M
∑
j=1
wj
(
µθj(x) −µGMM(x)
)2
(4.12)
34
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:43==
αQB­MGP(x) = 1
M
M
∑
j=1
wj
(
µθj(x) −µGMM(x)
)2 +
M
∑
j=1
wjσ2
θj(x)
= αB­QBC(x) + αB­ALM(x)
(4.13)
This way, GPs with higher weights will have a heavier impact on which point to query for
each active learning iteration. The contour plots for hyperparameter initialization and final
values is shown in figure 4.3. We can see a specific iteration of the AL process in figure
4.4 where the weights of each conditional GP is colored by the same scale as in 4.6.
Figure 4.4: On top, we see the fit of the seventh iteration (initialized with 3 observations)
of an MGP where each GP is colored by its fit (MLL), and the MGP mean is colored in
blue. The MGP 90% confidence interval is shown in orange. The true synthetic function
(Higdon) is shown in red with its potential added noise illustrated by the 90% confidence
interval. Below, we see the QBMGP acquisition function values distribution around x,
which is higher in points of high marginal posterior variance, as it should be.
Parallel to the Gaussian Mixture Model
This formulation traces an even closer parallel to the Gaussian Mixture Models as the QB­
MGP is equivalent to the variance of a fully specified GMM, and the marginal posterior
mean becomes the mean of a fully specified GMM:
M
∑
j=1
wjµθj(x)
(4.14)
This also gives space for an interesting interpretation of the underlying data­generating
process through the scope of ancestral sampling. To sample new observations from the
posterior, we first pick a conditional GP with parameters θj (GMM component) to sample
from based on how likely their hyperparameters are (sample a latent variable zi from a
categorical distribution with M categories and parameters wj). We then sample from
its respective conditional predictive posterior (Gaussian distribution with location µθj and
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
35
==PAGE:44==
scale σθj). Conducting this process n times for a set of points x would yield a sample of
the marginal posterior.
The process is illustrated by the probabilistic graphical model in figure 4.5.
1. Select a component z based on the mixing coefficients: z ∼Cat(w1, w2, . . . , wM)
2. Given the selected component z, sample a value from its Gaussian distribution:
x ∼N(µθj, σ2
θj)
xn
zn
µ
Σ
w
N
Figure 4.5: Probabilistic graphical model of the GMM data generating process.
SAL in the MGP formulation
We propose the straightforward replication of this approach in the SAL acquisition func­
tions:
αSAL(x) = 1
M
M
∑
m=1
d(p(y|x, θm), p(y|x, D))
With, p(y|x, D) = N(µGMM(x), σGMM(x))
(4.15)
In this case the N is again a moment matched Normal distribution but the location and
scale parameters are the weighted counterparts 4.14, and 4.13, respectively. This yields
the SAL­Hellinger, SAL­Wasserstein, and BALD/SAL­KL (by selecting KL divergence as
the function d).
Instabilities in training and workarounds
The new approach to building and training MGPs comes at the cost of instability of the
batched GP training. We experienced hyperparameters tend to converge to points with
very large lengthscale, yielding very uninformative models through learning, especially in
earlier AL iterations when the number of queried points is still low. Riis, Rodrigues, and
Camara Pereira [9] propose some measures to stabilize the training. However, we differ
in which measures to take. We propose cutting the lower p percentile of samples (GPs)
based on their fit to the training data (MLL scores). We have used p varying from 50% to
75%. This would mean that if we desired to estimate M models, we would actually need to
initialize and train M/p models and then discard the lowest percentile as shown in figure
4.6.
36
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.6: The likelihood values for 32 GPs
estimated on a batch with SGD. Their value
colors them, and the vertical line represents
the 50th percentile, which is used for discard­
ing all the samples below it.
Figure 4.7: The surface of estimated length­
scales and output scales for the respective
iteration.
4.3
Bayesian Optimization using statistical distances
The statistical distance­based acquisition functions measure disagreement between con­
ditional and marginal posterior, motivating hyperparameter learning throughout the itera­
tions process by querying points where this disagreement is most pronounced. By further
conditioning on sampled optima for each conditional GP, a new method was developed,
providing additional sources of disagreement about the belief of each GP concerning
where the optimum is.
This method draws inspiration from the information­theoretic acquisition function Joint
Entropy Search (JES) [52], which considers the optimal pair (x∗, f∗) as a representation
of an optimum.
αJES(x) = I((x, y); (x∗, f∗)|Dn)
= H[p(y|D, x)] −E(x∗,f∗)[H[p(y|D, x, x∗, f∗)]]
= H[p(y|D, x)] −E(x∗,f∗)[H[p(y|D ∪(x∗, f∗), x, f∗)]].
(4.16)
Conditioning on these so­called ”fantasized” optima yields a higher disagreement between
conditional and marginal posterior. The fact that the method conditions on a noiseless
output f∗instead of its observed counterpart y∗transforms the posteriors into truncated
Gaussians with a maximum value of f∗. This is an intuitive result, as after conditioning
on a noiseless maximum f∗, it is natural that no observation will be able to surpass that
value, providing an upper bound for the conditional posterior. This procedure originates
the Self­Correcting Bayesian Optimization (SCoreBO) [7] acquisition function:
αSC(x) = Eθ∗[d(p(yx|D), p(yx|θ, ∗, D))] .
(4.17)
The main in the new formulation is that now the conditional GPs are also conditioned on
the N optima represented by ∗in the equation. The joint posterior p(θ, ∗|D) = p(∗|θ, D)p(θ|D)
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
37
==PAGE:46==
can be approximated through hierarchical sampling by first sampling M hyperparameters
θ and then for each one of them (each conditional posterior) draw N optima.
αSC(x) ≈
1
NM
M
∑
m=1
N
∑
n=1
d(p(yx|D), p(yx|θm, ∗θm,n, D)),
(4.18)
Algorithm 2 SCoreBO iteration adapted from Hvarfner et al. [7]
1: Input: Number of hyperparameter sets M, number of sampled optima N, current data
D
2: Output: Next query location x′.
3: for m ∈{1, . . . , M} do
4:
θm ∼p(θ|D)
5:
for n ∈{1, . . . , N} do
6:
∗θm,n ←max fθm,n, where fθm,n ∼p(f|θm, D)
▷Draw n optima for each θm
7:
p(yx|θm, x∗
m,n, D) ←CondGP(x∗
m,n, θm, D) ▷Condition GPs on each optimum
8:
end for
9: end for
10: x′ = arg max α(x)
▷Defined in Eq. 4.17
The sampling of N optima per drawn hyperparameter θ can be done by first drawing N
sample paths of the conditional GP. Traditional ways of doing this include the Cholesky
decomposition method introduced in equation 3.24. Due to the high computational cost
associated with the MCMC sampling of θs, linearly scaling approximate sample path meth­
ods like the Matheron Path method [53] are preferred. After the N sample paths are
drawn, as illustrated in 4.9, and subsequently, their optimum (x∗, f∗) is found via gradient
methods like SGD.
This process for one fantasized optimum on one of the conditional GPs is illustrated in
figure 4.8. This process is done for each one of the M conditional GPs N times, with
different sample paths (green line).
38
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.8: The figures show the step­by­step process of 1. having a conditional GP with
its posterior, 2. sampling one sampled path and identifying its optimum f∗, 3. conditioning
the GP to that fantasized optimum f∗, 4. truncating the conditioned posterior to that
maximum f∗.
There is no analytically tractable formula for calculating statistical distances between the
truncated Gaussian conditionals and the Gaussian Mixture posterior. That’s why we have
resorted to the method of moment matching (MM). Now, not only does a Gaussian rep­
resent the marginal posterior with the GMM moments, but the Gaussian represents the
truncated Gaussian conditionals with equivalent moments. This is done by finding the
mean µT and variance σ2
T of the truncated Gaussian at f∗and plugging those into a
N(µT , σ2
T )
σ2
f|f∗(x; D ∪(x∗
ℓ, f∗
ℓ)) = σ2
T (f∗; mℓ
n(x), sℓ
n(x))
(4.19)
Where σ2
T (b; µ, σ2) is the formula for the variance of an upper truncated Gaussian at b,
σ2
f|f∗is conditional posterior variance after conditioning on the new optimum f∗, mℓ
n(x)
and sℓ
n(x) are the mean and variance of that conditional GP at point x.
Given the standardized upper bound β = (b −µ)/σ and the standard normal PDF ϕ and
CDF Φ, the upper truncated Normal T N moments can be calculated as follows:
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
39
==PAGE:48==
µT (b; µ, σ2) = µ −σ ϕ(β)
Φ(β),
σ2
T (b; µ, σ2) = σ2
[
1 −β ϕ(β)
Φ(β) −
( ϕ(β)
Φ(β)
)2]
.
(4.20)
The process of conditioning and truncation with moment matching can be seen in figure
4.10.
Figure 4.9: The plot shows the 1d Auckley function [54] in the background being optimized
using SCoreBO. The orange line represents the mean of one of the conditional GPs esti­
mated in that iteration, with its standard deviations represented by the orange confidence
interval. The blue lines are three sample paths of that conditional GP sampled in that
iteration.
Figure 4.10: On the left plot, we see the GP shown in the former plot is now conditioned on
the optimum of one of the sample paths. On the right, the sample conditioned GP posterior
is truncated using moment matching as exemplified in 4.20. The variance is reduced and
approximately truncated at points near the optimum, and the mean is slightly decreased.
The biggest bottleneck of SCoreBO is the first Monte Carlo sampling of M hyperparameter
θs. Having the SGD method proposed by Riis, Rodrigues, and Camara Pereira [9] in mind,
we mirror the approach in the SCoreBO calculations with an analogous approach to 4.15.
40
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:49==
4.4
Upper confidence bound optimization
It is beneficial to contemplate the Bayesian optimization process through the lenses of
exploration­exploitation tradeoff.
During exploration, one should seek the points with
higher surrogate variance, while during exploitation, points with higher surrogate mean
are favored. Some acquisition functions clearly separate the exploitation and exploration
components, as in EI. However, the UBC acquisition function is where these components
are the clearest, where β is a hyperparameter controlling the desired degree of explo­
ration, left to the user to decide.
GP­UCB
It is shown by Srinivas et al. [55] that it is possible to cast this problem to the BO lenses
by defining:
min
t
∑
t
r(xt) = max
t
∑
t
f(xt),
(4.21)
Where r(xt) is the instantaneous regret and t is the number of the current iteration. Using
the definitions of UCB, they define:
αGP­UCB = µ(x) +
√
βtσ(x)
(4.22)
It is shown that for specific choices of kernels and given a choice of a, b > 0, if:
βt = 2 log(t2π2/(3δ)) + 2d log(t2dbr
√
log(4da/δ))
(4.23)
There is a 1 −δ probability of the algorithm having sub­linear regret, which means the
sublinear regret refers to a situation where the cumulative regret grows slower than linearly
with the number of steps t. Formally, an algorithm achieves sublinear regret if the limit of
the cumulative regret RT as t approaches infinity is 0:
lim
n→∞
Rn
n = 0
(4.24)
These results are founded in theory about kernels and maximum information gain that
rely on the information capacity of different kernels.
RGP­UCB
The theoretical results indicate a desirable feature of the acquisition function. However,
it leads to significantly greater choices of βt than needed, as discussed by Berk et al.
[56], fomenting overexploitation. The Randomised Gaussian Process upper confidence
bound (RGP­UCB) is then introduced. The ”randomized” comes from the fact that βt is
sampled from a distribution, specifically the Gamma, due to its nonnegative support. In
each iteration, the exploration parameter is sampled from a gamma distribution, mitigating
the impact of manually selecting the exploration parameter:
βt ∼Γ(κt, θ),
where κt =
log
(
1
√
2π(t2 + 1)
)
log(1 + θ/2)
(4.25)
Convergence proofs are given using the definitions of Bayesian regret due to the now
probabilistic aspect of the problem [56].
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
41
==PAGE:50==
In the RGP­UCB, the exploration­exploitation tradeoff is governed by the θ parameter as
increasing it will cause an increase in the expected value of βt, favoring exploration. By
empirical tests, it was shown that θ = 1 gives a decent performance in varied scenarios,
thus being a good choice when the exploration­exploitation characteristics of the problem
are unknown. Figure 4.11 shows the changes in the distribution of βt throughout iterations
of the BO runs.
Figure 4.11: The plot shows the distribution of the βt ∼Γ(κt, θ) parameter for different
Bayesian Optimization iterations t. it can be seen that the distributions become wider,
and the means increase with t. The Illustration is for a choice of parameter θ = 1
IRGP­UCB
A further refinement of the method is called improved RGP­UCB (IRGP­UCB) [57] with
achieves better convergence rates. In this new approach, the exploration parameter βt is
sampled from a two­parameter exponential distribution.
p(ξ; s, λ) =
{
λ exp(λ(ξ −s))
if ξ ≥s,
0
otherwise,
(4.26)
The two­parameter exponential is simply a generalization of the exponential distribution
where a location parameter s is introduced and can be straightforwardly sampled using
a standard exponential distribution like ξt ←s + Z, where Z ∼Exp(λ). It is essential to
highlight that the IRGP­UCB drops the dependence on the number of the iteration t.
42
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:51==
4.5
Fully Bayesian Optimization
The GP­UBC methods 4.21 use the first and second moments of the GP predictive pos­
terior as in their exploitation and exploration components, respectively. Those are the GP
predictive mean µ(x) and square root of variance σ(x). By default, this sort of analysis is
conducted with single GPs fitting each iteration’s data. With the Fully Bayesian GP frame­
work, including the extra information from all the GP samples in the GP­UCB acquisition
function seems straightforward.
Riis, Rodrigues, and Camara Pereira [9] harnessed the information from the fully Bayesian
formulation by replacing σ(x) in UCB with the values for BALD and obtained competitive
BO results. However, using BALD as a measure of uncertainty or disagreement in the
context of GP­UCB doesn’t seem to have a straightforward translation. As seen prior,
BALD in the FBGP formulation is equivalent to the KL divergence between the conditional
posteriors and the marginal posterior, thus not being comparable to a variance metric and
lacking guarantees of being in a similar scale.
Instead, We propose replacing the single GP predictive moments with the fully Bayesian
GP counterparts. As we have seen so far, the predictive posterior of the fully Bayesian
GP is equivalent to a GMM with respective moments µGMM 4.5 and σGMM 4.6. This would
give space to a new and straightforward GP­UCB formulation, the Mixture of Gaussian
Processes Upper Confidence Bound (MGP­UCB):
αMGP­UCB = µGMM(x) +
√
βtσGMM(x)
(4.27)
This new approach allows for simple adaptation of the random GP­UCB variations that
have been introduced so far by following the RGP­UCB and IRGP­UCB sampling rules.
We refer to these alternatives as RMGP­UCB and IRMGP­UCB, for brevity.
The use of the two components of σGMM(x), those being BALM and BCBC could also
prove themselves to be helpful as those represent a different component of the uncer­
tainty, the average variance and the spread of means of the conditional GPs. Those val­
ues are guaranteed to be smaller than the σGMM(x), and by consequence, would provide
less incentive for exploration.
With the computationally less intensive SGD formulation, σGMM(x) is simply be replaced
with 4.13 and µGMM(x) becomes the weighted sum of all conditional GP means 4.14.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:53==
5
Experiments
We try to evaluate the performance of the newly proposed approaches to AL and BO while
benchmarking against their MCMC estimated counterparts. In the AL setting, we refer
explicitly to the experiments with the yet untested SAL Hellinger and SAL Wasserstein with
SGD estimation. Considering BO, on the other hand, we test the proposed MGP­UCB and
its random variants RMGP­UCB and IRMGP­UCB with both MCMC and SGD estimated
hyperparameters as well as the SCoreBO with the latter approach. We follow a similar
setting to the experiments conducted in the research by Riis et al. [6], Riis, Rodrigues,
and Camara Pereira [9], as well as Hvarfner et al. [7].
5.1
General Experimental setup
5.1.1
GP models
All the GPs are set with an RBF­ARD Kernel 3.18 and all the hyperparameters θ =
{ℓ, σ2
n, σ2
ϵ } are given a non­informative LN(0, 3) prior, while the mean is considered to be
zero. The FBGPs are fit using No U­turn Sampler (NUTS) [58] with 256 warmup steps,
256 samples, and a thinning of 16, cutting down the final number of hyperparameter sets
sampled to 16. For the SGD estimated MGP models we use the Adam [59] Optimizer
with a learning rate lr of 0.1 and 100 learning steps. The number of models optimized in
the batch is 32, which is cut down to 16 with the strategy exemplified in 4.6. This gives
both approaches (MCMC and SGD­based) the same number of samples. The GPs are
set in Gpytorch [14] except for the MCMC which is performed with Pyro [60]. The BoTorch
package [61] is used to develop the acquisition functions.
5.1.2
experimental setup
Each experiment, both in AL and BO, starts with 3 observations sampled using the max­
min Latin Hypercube Sampling [62]. The inputs are scaled to the unit cube [0, 1]d and,
in each iteration, are sampled from a pool U of 10000 randomly uniformly generated
data points. The AL experiments run 30 times for each synthetic and acquisition function
combination, while BO optimization only runs 20 times due to time and computational
constraints to the project.
5.2
Active Learning Experiments
5.2.1
Simulators for Active Learning
We measure the performance of these methods using synthetic functions (simulators) well
known in the literature. We use all the same simulators as Riis et al. [6], Riis, Rodrigues,
and Camara Pereira [9], and Hvarfner et al. [7] including six functions AL and BO experi­
ments each. For the AL, we use two one­dimensional functions Gramacy (1d) [63], which
presents an oscillatory shape, and Higdon (1d) [64], which is piecewise linear. In the 2d
realm, we have gramacy2d (2d), which presents mostly flat regions on its landscape with
the exception of a large valley and peak right next to each other, and Branin (2d) [65] that
has a very smooth and nonlinear surface. The Ishigami (3d) [66] function is famous for
its usage for sensitivity analysis and is highly nonlinear. Lastly, Hartmann (6d) [67] is a
higher dimensional function with 6 local minima and one global optimum, which will put
the model’s performance in higher dimensions to test.
The specifications for each function used in AL are displayed in table 5.1, including their
dimensions, noise, input space, and the number of AL iterations they are run for.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
45
==PAGE:54==
Simulator
d
σ2
e
Input space
Iterations
Gramacy1d
1
0.100
[0.5, 2.5]
90
Higdon
1
0.100
[0, 20]
60
Gramacy2d
2
0.050
[­2, 6]2
40
Branin
2
11.320
[­5, 10] × [0, 15]
60
Ishigami
3
0.187
[­π, π]3
200
Hartmann
6
0.019
[0, 1]6
60
Table 5.1: Information about Synthetic functions used for Active Learning
Figure 5.1: Gramacy1d function
Figure 5.2: Higdon Function
Figure 5.3: gramacy2d function
Figure 5.4: Branin function
46
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.5: 2d plots of Ishigami each with one of the input variables averaged out.
5.2.2
Evaluation of Active Learning runs
The objective of an active learning task is, by definition, explorative. It tries to query points
smartly so the hyperparameters can get closer to the ”true” within the fewest iterations
possible. For each AL iteration i, we then use the queried data point pair Di = (xi, yi) to
fit a GP and query the point x′ that maximizes a chosen acquisition function α, we query
the point and its observation y′, and increase the dataset as Di+1 = Di+1∪{(x′, y′)}. In this
case, the output observations y are noisy. By setting aside 1000 randomly selected points
evaluated at the true (noiseless) function DT = (xT , yT ), we have a representation of the
true underlying process, a ground truth, that we call test set. Then, when it comes to the
performance evaluation, we take an alternative approach by taking the noiseless version
of the data queried so far D′
i = (xi, fi). We then fit a new single GP to the noiseless data
D′
i and evaluate its Negative Log Likelihood using equation 3.20 on the noiseless test set
DT . This gives an estimated measure −MLLi of how much the currently gathered data
D′
i reflects the true function represented by the test set.
The iterative Active Learning process is exemplified with the pseudo algorithm 0 and a
visual inspection of its progress through the iteration steps is illustrated in figure 5.6.
Algorithm 3 Active Learning with Gaussian Processes
1: Initialize D0 and pool U
2: Set aside a test set DT = (xT , fT ) of 1000 points evaluated at the true function
3: for each iteration i = 1, 2, . . . , N do
4:
Fit a GP model to Di
5:
x′ ←argmax α(U)
6:
Query y′ for point x′
7:
Update Di+1 ←Di ∪{(x′, y′)}
8:
Convert queried data to noiseless version D′
i = (xi, fi)
9:
Fit a new single GP to noiseless data D′
i
10:
Evaluate NLLi on the noiseless test set DT
11:
Store the measure NLLi to evaluate how well D′
i represents the true function
12: end for
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.6: The evolution of the NLL fit through Active Learning iterations is now replicated
for the Gramacy1d function. It can be seen that the GP gradually assumes the true shape
of the function while the iterations increase. The palette gives fits with lower MLL red
colors and higher MLL blue colors.
5.3
Bayesian Optimization Experiments
5.3.1
Simulators for Bayesian Optimization
Some of the same functions are used for the Bayesian optimization experiments. Branin
shows up again with the same number of dimensions and Hartmann, now in its 3d, 4d, and
6d versions. The Rosenbrock [68] is the new addition to the experiments, being tested on
its two and four­dimensional versions. The characteristics of each function, including a
number of dimensions d, noise standard deviation σ2
e, input space bounds, and a number
of iteration runs, are displayed in table 5.2.
Simulator
d
σ2
e
Input space
Iterations
Branin
2
0.5
[­5, 10] × [0, 15]
100
Rosenbrock2d
2
2.5
[­1.5, 1.5]2
150
Rosenbrock4d
4
2.5
[­1.5, 1.5]4
150
Hartmann3d
3
0.5
[0, 1]3
150
Hartmann4d
4
0.5
[0, 1]4
150
Hartmann6d
6
0.5
[0, 1]6
150
Table 5.2: Information about Synthetic functions used for Bayesian Optimization.
48
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.7: Rosenbrock2d function.
Figure 5.8: 2d plots of Hartmann3d each with one of the input variables averaged out.
5.3.2
Evaluation of Bayesian Optimization runs
A similar approach to the Active Learning experiments is taken; however, this time around,
no test set is needed. At each iteration i the highest true function value observed so far
is stored in a variable f∗
i , and the current regret ri between that point and the global true
function optimum f∗is calculated and stored. The process is exemplified in the pseudo
algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 Bayesian Optimization with Gaussian Processes
1: Initialize D0 and pool U
2: Define true global minimum f∗
3: for each iteration i = 1, 2, . . . , N do
4:
Fit a GP model to Di
5:
x′ ←argmax α(U)
6:
Query y′ for point x′
7:
Update Di+1 ←Di ∪{(x′, y′)}
8:
Convert queried data to noiseless version D′
i = (xi, fi)
9:
get maximum true output queried so far fi∗←max(fi)
10:
Evaluate current regret ri(f∗
i , f∗)
11:
Store the measure ri to evaluete convergence rate
12: end for
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:59==
6
Results
6.1
Active Learning Results
Pitfalls of AL evaluation
As stated in Chapter 5, we evaluate the Active Learning performance by measuring the
Negative log­likelihood on the test set. That way, we can visually compare different acqui­
sition functions in each iteration step. However, there is no straightforward way to assess
the performance of a complete run quantitatively. To make this issue more transparent,
we might have an acquisition function that, on average, yields worse results in the begin­
ning but converges to an overall better performance in the end, and, alternatively, another
acquisition function that tends to have better results at the beginning but then fails to con­
verge to a better final metric. Considering a generic stance where the analyst has no
preference for either, summing up all the results may be a good starting point (area under
the curve). Considering metrics like RMSE or MAE, this approach is sensible and propor­
tional to the average metric across all steps of the AL run. However, when considering
a metric like NMLL, this gives rise to the second pitfall of run evaluation, as the NMLL
metric has no lower bound. Having these two issues in mind, Riis et al. [6] suggest a new
approach called the relative decrease in AUC. It gets around the lower bound problem by
artificially setting it as the minimum NMLL across all runs for each function.
The relative ranking approach
The relative decrease in AUC is a reasonable approach for AL evaluation; however, based
on our experience, we notice that the NMLL results for single iteration steps might be un­
stable. We witness throughout the experiments that the NMLL might assume an extremely
high value for a single step of the AL run and then come back to reasonable results on the
next step. In a manual evaluation, sporadic jumps like these could easily be disregarded;
however, when considering those in an overall performance evaluation, metrics like AUC
might penalize these outliers too heavily.
Having this issue in mind we adopt a ranking­like metric for comparison between different
acquisition functions. The approach is simple, for each run number i = {1, 2, . . . 30} we
calculate the rank of the acquisition functions α. Then, we average the ranks through all
runs numbers.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
51
==PAGE:60==
Table 6.1: Active Learning results
Average ranking for each synthetic function, method and acquisition function conditioned
on Method
BALM
BQBC
QBMGP
Random
SALHL
SALKL
SALWS
Function
Method
Gramacy1d
MCMC
4.06
3.83
3.91
2.58
4.93
4.71
3.98
SGD
4.32
3.62
3.88
4.18
4.46
4.03
3.51
Higdon
MCMC
4.43
3.94
4.14
4.26
3.95
3.43
3.86
SGD
4.71
3.77
4.22
4.10
3.82
3.50
3.88
Gramacy2d
MCMC
4.35
4.68
4.43
2.39
4.17
3.81
4.17
SGD
2.87
4.52
4.54
2.84
4.33
4.19
4.71
Branin
MCMC
3.69
2.45
2.79
5.68
5.77
5.25
2.37
SGD
3.99
2.29
3.06
5.76
5.23
5.08
2.58
Hartmann
MCMC
4.83
3.63
4.27
4.29
3.83
3.39
3.76
SGD
5.09
3.85
3.81
4.82
3.58
3.32
3.53
Ishigami
MCMC
5.18
4.74
5.41
3.40
1.82
2.46
4.92
SGD
6.22
4.22
5.27
4.38
1.48
2.24
4.19
Mean
MCMC
4.42
3.88
4.16
3.77
4.08
3.84
3.84
SGD
4.53
3.71
4.13
4.35
3.82
3.73
3.73
52
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:61==
Table 6.2: Active Learning results
Overall average ranking for each synthetic function, method and acquisition function
BALM
BQBC
QBMGP
Random
SALHL
SALKL
SALWS
Mean
Function
Method
Gramacy1d
MCMC
8.72
8.33
8.38
6.22
9.97
9.62
8.44
8.53
SGD
6.40
6.04
6.82
6.37
7.40
6.44
5.85
6.47
Higdon
MCMC
8.61
7.52
7.86
8.02
7.57
6.51
7.41
7.64
SGD
8.70
7.02
7.81
7.67
6.85
6.37
7.06
7.35
Gramacy2d
MCMC
8.34
9.18
8.63
4.83
8.23
7.57
8.07
7.84
SGD
4.59
8.19
8.31
4.49
8.06
7.75
8.75
7.16
Branin
MCMC
7.11
4.71
5.32
10.99
11.15
10.20
4.55
7.72
SGD
7.23
3.92
5.34
10.92
9.80
9.32
4.45
7.28
Hartmann
MCMC
9.72
7.45
8.62
8.73
7.69
6.84
7.69
8.11
SGD
9.03
6.50
6.49
8.53
6.15
5.57
6.00
6.9
Ishigami
MCMC
11.03
10.33
11.31
7.17
3.45
4.89
10.69
8.41
SGD
9.51
6.19
7.63
6.53
2.08
3.29
6.24
5.92
Mean
MCMC
8.92
7.92
8.35
7.66
8.01
7.61
7.81
SGD
7.58
6.31∗
7.07
7.42
6.72
6.46∗∗∗
6.39∗∗
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
53
==PAGE:62==
Fully Bayesian MGP estimation (MCMC)
MGP with SGD
Figure 6.1: On the left, the average NMLL per iteration step with one standard deviation
confidence interval. On the right side for each method is the average ranking per iteration
step.
54
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:63==
Average iteration time for AL tasks
Figure 6.2: Average iteration time for each step and function for AL tasks. The green color
represents the SGD method, while the blue represents the MCMC estimation. Confidence
intervals of one standard deviation are shown.
Active Learning results discussion
The ranking results conditioned on the method (MCMC or SGD) of the Active Learning
runs are shown in table 6.1. This table reveals what are the best performing acquisition
function considering the method (acquisition functions in runs estimated with MCMC are
only ranked against the other acquisition functions with the same method). The visual
representations of these results are shown in figure 6.1 with average NMLL and ranking
for each step and method.
We also display the overall ranking of methods on table 6.2. This way it is possible to
assess what is the best overall combination of acquisition function and estimation method.
Gramacy1d
Regardless of the estimation method, we can see an overall struggle of every acquisition
function to surpass the random baseline. In the fully Bayesian estimation, remarkably,
all functions performed worse, and in the SGD method, on the other hand, all performed
better except BALM and SAL­HL. The overall ranking shows that SAL­WS with SGD came
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
55
==PAGE:64==
out as the top­performing acquisition function.
Higdon
The performance of the acquisition function this time around is seen as more favorable
as most of them tend to surpass the baseline. BQBC comes on top in the MCMC setting,
while the statistical distance­based SAL­KL (equivalent to BALD) shows the best perfor­
mance under the SGD setting and also overall. All SAL acquisition functions display good
results in this synthetic function regardless of the estimation method.
Gramacy2d
The results for the two­dimensional Gramacy function are nothing but unexpected. No
single acquisition function managed to surpass the random baseline. This might have
something to do with poor initialization and the fact that this function is mostly zero except
in a relatively small subsection of the input space.
Branin
In the Branin function, we see SAL­WS shining on the MCMC estimation while also coming
on second with SGD, but BQBC wins now under that estimation method (and also overall).
SAL­KL and SAL­HL performed especially poorly in this function, while QBMGP also had
competitive results.
Hartmann
Under the six­dimensional input space of the Hartmann function, SAL­KL took the first spot
with both estimation methods (and consequently overall). All SAL acquisition functions
performed nicely regardless of the estimation method, as well as BQBC. BALM presented
the worst results overall.
Ishigami
Finally, in the Ishigami function, we see SAL­HL coming on top both under MCMC and
SGD estimation.
SAL­KL once again showed competitive results, while SAL­WS got
somewhat frustrating results this time around.
Iteration time
The charts in figure 6.2 display the average iteration time per step and function split into
two lines (blue for MCMC and green for SGD). The SGD estimation is remarkably quicker,
up to 10 times faster in early iterations for some functions. The MCMC method has the
advantage of having a stable, almost nonincreasing iteration time for most functions. In
contrast, the SGD iteration time increases approximately linearly on the log scale with
iteration steps. In AL tasks with a higher number of iteration steps, like with Ishigami, the
difference in iteration time between both methods is not statistically significant for later
iteration steps under one standard deviation. Considering experiments with few iterations
and relatively low dimensions like the ones performed in this project, SGD is the better
choice considering computational time. Considering the increasing trend in iteration time
with SGD, it is evident that this method might not be the quickest one in cases of longer­
running experiments.
Overall
We can see by the overall rankings across methods in table 6.2 that the SGD estimation
methods beat the MCMC estimation in every single synthetic function. This is remark­
able, considering how lighter this estimation method is compared to the fully Bayesian
MCMC counterpart. Conditioned on the estimation method (table 6.1), surprisingly, the
random baseline came on top for MCMC. This might be due to the bad performance of
the acquisition function on both Gramacy functions. Considering SGD methods, BCBC
came slightly on top, taking the lead overall due to its persisting good performance across
56
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:65==
most synthetic functions. Even if SAL­based methods took the lead in specific functions,
they have shown unexpectedly bad performance under other functions, e.g., SAL­WS
on Ishigami and SAL­HL on Branin. This led to taking a slightly worse spot overall with
SAL­KL, SAL­WS, and SAL­Kl, with SGD taking the second, third, and fourth spot, re­
spectively. QBMGP’s weak performance was an overall surprise, while the also weak
results of BALM were somewhat less surprising.
6.2
Bayesian Optimization Results
A more traditional route is taken when analyzing the results of the Bayesian Optimization
runs. The standard performance metrics in BO don’t suffer from the same complications
as with AL metrics. The simple regret metric, for instance, is lower­bounded and stable
across iterations. Approaches that consider the area under the curve are thus efficient.
We take an area under the curve approach and analyse each method by their average
simple regret across iteration steps. The plot of cumulative simple regret per iteration
step can be regarded as a ”horse race”, with the last iteration value being the time each
acquisition function crossed the finish line.
Table 6.3: bayesian Optimization results
Average regret for each synthetic function, method and acquisition function
IRMGP­UCB
MGP­UCB
RMGP­UCB
SCoreBO­HL
SCoreBO­WS
Mean
Function
Method
Branin
MCMC
0.73
0.69
0.86
0.81
0.97
0.81
SGD
0.84
0.83
0.82
1.06
1.30
0.97
Hartmann3d
MCMC
0.12
0.18
0.16
0.46
0.21
0.23
SGD
0.35
0.24
0.29
0.83
0.37
0.42
Hartmann4d
MCMC
0.42
0.42
0.38
0.55
0.50
0.46
SGD
0.32
0.32
0.38
0.68
0.49
0.44
Hartmann6d
MCMC
1.26
1.24
1.25
1.47
1.19
1.28
SGD
0.75
0.82
0.84
1.11
0.98
0.90
Rosenbrock2d
MCMC
3.53
2.98
2.32
2.31
2.94
2.82
SGD
2.73
2.68
2.05
2.46
3.06
2.60
Rosenbrock4d
MCMC
26.85
32.02
27.39
20.20
44.08
30.11
SGD
18.69
21.24
16.08
27.53
48.71
26.45
number of wins
MCMC
1
1
1
2
1
SGD
1
2
3
0
0
Overall
2
2
2
0
0
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
57
==PAGE:66==
Fully Bayesian MGP estimation (MCMC)
MGP with SGD
Figure 6.3: On the left, the average log regret per iteration step with one standard deviation
confidence interval. On the right side for each method is the average cumulative simple
regret per iteration step.
58
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:67==
Average iteration time for BO tasks
Figure 6.4: Average iteration time for each step and function for BO tasks. The green
and blue colored lines represent the MCMC estimated UCB and SCoreBO acquisition
functions, respectively. In contrast, the red and blue lines show the iteration times for
SGD­based UCB and SCoreBO acquisition functions, respectively. The confidence inter­
vals of one standard deviation are shown for each line.
Bayesian Optimization results discussion
The average regret per method and acquisition function is displayed in table 6.3 where
the best average regret per method is shown in bold, and the best overall value for each
function (regardless of method) is grey colored. We compute the number of ”wins” condi­
tioned on the method and overall. The plots with log regret and cumulative simple regret
are shown in figure 6.3.
Branin
The Branin function experiments with MCMC estimation seem to have performed better
on average. Conditioned on the estimation method, we see that RMGP­UCB had the best
regret by a slight margin for SGD estimation, while under MCMC, the best one was the
MGP­UCB, also taking the number one spot overall.
Hartmann3d
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
59
==PAGE:68==
Within Hartmann3d experiments, MCMC estimation also seems to work better overall,
with IRMGP­UCB being the best in that category and RMGP­UCB coming in second.
Under the SGD setting MGP­UCB presented the best final cumulative simple regret.
Hartmann4d
Going to the Hartmann4d synthetic function experiments, we see SGD estimation taking
the lead for the first time. Under the MCMC estimation, RMGP­UCB is the best­performing
one, while under SGD, MGP­UCB takes a slight edge over IRMGP­UCB (it could also be
considered a tie). All SCoreBO acquisition functions, regardless of estimation method,
have higher average regret than all UCB methods this time.
Hartmann6d
The highest dimensional function used for the experiments also showed better results un­
der SGD estimation, particularly with IRMGP­UCB. All SGD­estimated acquisition func­
tions showed better performance than their MCMC counterparts. However, under MCMC,
SCoreBO­WS performed the best.
Rosenbrock2d
SGD estimation also showed itself, on average, more performative in the Rosenbrock2d
function. RMGP­UCB had the best overall results under SGD, while SCoreBO­HL per­
formed the best under MCMC, slightly better than RMGP­UCB. All UCB functions per­
formed better with SGD estimation, considering these function experiments.
Rosenbrock4d
The average regret of Rosenbrock4d functions is considerably higher in scale than other
functions. SGD estimation came on top again, with RMGP­UCB having the lowest aver­
age regret. For MCMC, SCoreBO­HL had the best results. Once again, all UCB acquisi­
tion functions performed better under the SGD estimation.
Iteration time
The average iteration times for step and synthetic functions are shown in figure 6.4. This
time, they are further split into types of acquisition functions, SCoreBo and UCB, as the
former presents longer computation times. All the remarks made under the Active Learn­
ing experiments regarding iteration times are also valid for the BO experiments. The only
difference is that SCoreBO acquisition functions iteration times tend to catch up and sur­
pass their MCMC counterparts more quickly than other acquisition functions. This is due
to several factors. Firstly, as presented in 4.17, they have N times the number of condi­
tional posterior than the other acquisition functions used in the project. They also have
the sampling of the N sample paths for each of the original N conditional GPs and finding
their optimum as steps in their pipeline. Additionally, we experienced that for the SGD­
based SCoreBO methods, a higher p (4.6) of 75% was needed to achieve good results.
These three factors were likely to considerably increase the average iteration time for
these functions and memory usage.
Overall
As noted, the SGD method tends to give better results with UCB acquisition functions
while, on average, lagging behind the in the MCMC estimation with the SCoreBO ap­
proach. Conditioned on methods for MCMC, SCoreBO­HL presented good performance,
but UCB methods were up there too, with three wins each. Considering SGD’s estimated
methods, UCB acquisition function performed generally better, having RMGP­UCB come
on top with three wins. Overall, the three UCB methods performed the best but usually
within two different estimation methods, like IRMGP­UCB and MGP­UCB. RMGP­UCB
was the only one to win twice within the same method (SGD), being a contender for the
60
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:69==
best overall acquisition function and method combination. However, IRMGP­UCB has
an arguable tie for best performance in Hartmann4d, coming in second due to a slight
difference in the third decimal case. If this tie were considered, IRMGP­UCB would have
three overall wins, two within the SGD and one in MCMC, rivaling or even dethroning
RMGP­UCB as the best overall acquisiton function.
The title of the actually best­performing acquisition function is a bit blurry, and unfortu­
nately, due to time constraints, the experiments could only be run twenty times for each
combination. However, one thing is clear: UCB methods had an edge against SCoreBO
methods overall, with IRMGP­UCB and RMGP­UCB being the possible two champions.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:71==
7
Conclusion
Through this work, we have investigated how state­of­the­art statistical distance­based
acquisition functions in Active Learning (SAL) and Bayesian Optimization (SCoreBO) [7]
perform under the computationally lighter SGD estimation, initially proposed by Riis, Ro­
drigues, and Camara Pereira [9]. We demonstrated that SGD estimation of the MGP
posterior is a quicker and generally better­performing method for every synthetic function
tested in AL tasks. We also investigated how the SCoreBo acquisition functions adapted
to this estimation method, yielding overall worse results than their originally proposed
MCMC counterparts.
We also proposed a simple yet proven powerful Bayesian Optimization acquisition func­
tion, MGP­UCB, alongside its random counterparts, RMGP­UCB and IRMGP­UCB. Those
approaches drew inspiration from the QBMGP Active Learning acquisition function [6] by
harnessing information about several GP model hypotheses and thus providing compet­
itive performance. The newly proposed class of BO acquisition functions also showed
better results under the computationally lighter SGD­estimated framework, achieving the
best of both worlds.
Although comprehensive, we acknowledge the limitations of this work. Due to time con­
straints, the BO experiments couldn’t be replicated as often as first planned, yielding less
precise results and several close ties between different acquisition functions. This is par­
ticularly evident when observing the high variance in simple regret in most BO experi­
ments. There was little time to do any hyperparameter tuning regarding the acquisition
functions, especially considering the total number of learning steps and learning rate for
the SGD­based runs. The pool­based approach for Bayesian Optimization also proved
somewhat inappropriate, as we observed that the functions would repeatedly converge
to the same few data points closer to the global optimum.
Aside from addressing the abovementioned issues, there is still much room for further
research. We highlight the possibility of trying new kernels and hyperparameter choices
for SGD learning and RMGP­UCB, such as θ in the gamma function for sampling the
exploration parameter βt. The use of BQBC as the source of variance in MGP­UCB,
alternatively to QBMGP, is also mentioned but never experimented with, which seems a
promising path due to its good results in SGD­based AL tasks.
All in all, MGP­UCB, and especially its random variants RMGP­UCB and IRMGP­UCB,
have shown persistent good performance, and even beaten state­of­the­art SCoreBO
methods. Their competitive results, together with their lower computational costs, make
the MGP­UCB family of acquisition functions more appealing for many practical appli­
cations in Bayesian optimization, especially with the quicker and well­performing SGD
estimation methods.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Mario Bunge. “A General Black Box Theory”. In: Philosophy of Science 30.4 (1963),
pp. 346–358. ISSN: 00318248, 1539767X. (Visited on 03/13/2024).
[2]
Benjamin Letham et al. Constrained Bayesian Optimization with Noisy Experiments.
2018. arXiv: 1706.07094 [stat.ML].
[3]
Sumit Kumar et al. “Active Learning with Gaussian Processes for High Throughput
Phenotyping”. In: Adaptive Agents and Multi­Agent Systems. 2019.
[4]
Christoffer Riis et al. “Active Learning Metamodels for ATM Simulation Modeling”.
English. In: Proceedings of the 11th SESAR Innovation Days, 2021. 11th SESAR
Innovation Days ; Conference date: 07­12­2021 Through 09­12­2021. 2021.
[5]
Robert B. Gramacy. Surrogates: Gaussian Process Modeling, Design and Opti­
mization for the Applied Sciences. http://bobby.gramacy.com/surrogates/. Boca
Raton, Florida: Chapman Hall/CRC, 2020.
[6]
Christoffer Riis et al. Bayesian Active Learning with Fully Bayesian Gaussian Pro­
cesses. 2023. arXiv: 2205.10186 [cs.LG].
[7]
Carl Hvarfner et al. Self­Correcting Bayesian Optimization through Bayesian Active
Learning. 2024. arXiv: 2304.11005 [cs.LG].
[8]
Christian Robert and George Casella. “A Short History of Markov Chain Monte
Carlo: Subjective Recollections from Incomplete Data”. In: Statistical Science 26.1
(Feb. 2011). ISSN: 0883­4237. DOI: 10.1214/10-sts351.
[9]
Christoffer Riis, Filipe Rodrigues, and Francisco Camara Pereira. Mixture of Gaus­
sian Processes for Bayesian Active Learning. TechRxiv. Available online 20 July
2023. July 2023. DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.23702517.v1.
[10]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016, p. 291. ISBN: 978­0262035613.
[11]
Christopher Williams and Matthias Seeger. “Using the Nyström Method to Speed
Up Kernel Machines”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed.
by T. Leen, T. Dietterich, and V. Tresp. Vol. 13. MIT Press, 2000.
[12]
Edward Snelson and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Sparse Gaussian Processes using Pseudo­
inputs”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by Y. Weiss,
B. Schölkopf, and J. Platt. Vol. 18. MIT Press, 2005.
[13]
Jacob R. Gardner et al. Product Kernel Interpolation for Scalable Gaussian Pro­
cesses. 2018. arXiv: 1802.08903 [cs.LG].
[14]
Jacob R. Gardner et al. GPyTorch: Blackbox Matrix­Matrix Gaussian Process Infer­
ence with GPU Acceleration. 2021. arXiv: 1809.11165 [cs.LG].
[15]
Jonathan R Shewchuk. An Introduction to the Conjugate Gradient Method Without
the Agonizing Pain. Tech. rep. USA, 1994.
[16]
David M. Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D. McAuliffe. “Variational Inference: A Review
for Statisticians”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 112.518 (Apr.
2017), pp. 859–877. ISSN: 1537­274X. DOI: 10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773.
[17]
Michalis Titsias. “Variational Learning of Inducing Variables in Sparse Gaussian Pro­
cesses”. In: Proceedings of the Twelth International Conference on Artificial Intelli­
gence and Statistics. Ed. by David van Dyk and Max Welling. Vol. 5. Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research. Hilton Clearwater Beach Resort, Clearwater Beach,
Florida USA: PMLR, 16–18 Apr 2009, pp. 567–574.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
65
==PAGE:74==
[18]
Dani Gamerman and Hedibert F. Lopes. Markov Chain Monte Carlo: Stochastic
Simulation for Bayesian Inference. 2nd. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2006. DOI: 10.
1201/9781482296426.
[19]
Steve Brooks et al. Handbook of Markov Chain Monte Carlo. Chapman and Hal­
l/CRC, May 2011. ISBN: 9780429138508. DOI: 10.1201/b10905. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1201/b10905.
[20]
Vidhi Lalchand and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Approximate Inference for Fully Bayesian
Gaussian Process Regression. 2020. arXiv: 1912.13440 [stat.ML].
[21]
Markus Heinonen et al. Non­Stationary Gaussian Process Regression with Hamil­
tonian Monte Carlo. 2015. arXiv: 1508.04319 [stat.ML].
[22]
Robert A. Jacobs et al. “Adaptive Mixtures of Local Experts”. In: Neural Computation
3 (1991), pp. 79–87.
[23]
Carl Rasmussen and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Infinite Mixtures of Gaussian Process
Experts”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by T. Diet­
terich, S. Becker, and Z. Ghahramani. Vol. 14. MIT Press, 2001.
[24]
Yee Whye Teh. “Dirichlet Process”. In: Encyclopedia of Machine Learning and Data
Mining. 2017.
[25]
Yurong Xie, Di Wu, and Zhe Qiang. “An Improved Mixture Model of Gaussian Pro­
cesses and Its Classification Expectation–Maximization Algorithm”. In: Mathematics
11.10 (2023). ISSN: 2227­7390. DOI: 10.3390/math11102251.
[26]
Yuji Saikai and Khue­Dung Dang. Mixtures of Gaussian process experts based on
kernel stick­breaking processes. 2023. arXiv: 2304.13833 [stat.ML].
[27]
Jing Zhao and Shiliang Sun. “High­Order Gaussian Process Dynamical Models for
Traffic Flow Prediction”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems
17.7 (2016), pp. 2014–2019. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2016.2515105.
[28]
Jing Zhao et al. “Promoting active learning with mixtures of Gaussian processes”. In:
Knowledge­Based Systems 188 (2020), p. 105044. ISSN: 0950­7051. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2019.105044.
[29]
David Eriksson and Martin Jankowiak. High­Dimensional Bayesian Optimization
with Sparse Axis­Aligned Subspaces. 2021. arXiv: 2103.00349 [cs.LG].
[30]
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian processes for
machine learning. Adaptive computation and machine learning. MIT Press, 2006,
pp. I–XVIII, 1–248. ISBN: 026218253X.
[31]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Sci­
ence and Statistics). 1st ed. Springer, 2007. ISBN: 0387310738.
[32]
Sergios Theodoridis. Machine Learning: A Bayesian and Optimization Perspective.
1st. USA: Academic Press, Inc., 2015. ISBN: 0128015225.
[33]
James T. Wilson et al. Efficiently Sampling Functions from Gaussian Process Pos­
teriors. 2020. arXiv: 2002.09309 [stat.ML].
[34]
Michael Betancourt. A Conceptual Introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. 2018.
arXiv: 1701.02434 [stat.ME].
[35]
Roman Garnett. Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2023.
[36]
Bobak Shahriari et al. “Taking the Human Out of the Loop: A Review of Bayesian
Optimization”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 104.1 (2016), pp. 148–175. DOI: 10.
1109/JPROC.2015.2494218.
[37]
Takuya Akiba et al. Optuna: A Next­generation Hyperparameter Optimization Frame­
work. 2019. arXiv: 1907.10902 [cs.LG].
[38]
Shuhei Watanabe. Tree­Structured Parzen Estimator: Understanding Its Algorithm
Components and Their Roles for Better Empirical Performance. 2023. arXiv: 2304.
11127 [cs.LG].
66
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:75==
[39]
Harold J. Kushner. “A New Method of Locating the Maximum Point of an Arbitrary
Multipeak Curve in the Presence of Noise”. In: Journal of Basic Engineering 86
(1964), pp. 97–106.
[40]
J. Mockus, Vytautas Tiesis, and Antanas Zilinskas. “The application of Bayesian
methods for seeking the extremum”. In: vol. 2. Sept. 2014, pp. 117–129. ISBN: 0­
444­85171­2.
[41]
P. Frazier, Warrren B Powell, and Savas Dayanik. “The Knowledge­Gradient Policy
for Correlated Normal Beliefs”. In: INFORMS J. Comput. 21 (2009), pp. 599–613.
[42]
Philipp Hennig and Christian J. Schuler. Entropy Search for Information­Efficient
Global Optimization. 2011. arXiv: 1112.1217 [stat.ML].
[43]
José Miguel Hernández­Lobato, Matthew W. Hoffman, and Zoubin Ghahramani.
Predictive Entropy Search for Efficient Global Optimization of Black­box Functions.
2014. arXiv: 1406.2541 [stat.ML].
[44]
Burr Settles. “Active Learning Literature Survey”. In: 2009.
[45]
David D. Lewis and William A. Gale. A Sequential Algorithm for Training Text Clas­
sifiers. 1994. arXiv: cmp-lg/9407020 [cmp-lg].
[46]
H. S. Seung, M. Opper, and H. Sompolinsky. “Query by committee”. In: Proceedings
of the Fifth Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory. COLT ’92. Pitts­
burgh, Pennsylvania, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1992, pp. 287–
294. ISBN: 089791497X. DOI: 10.1145/130385.130417.
[47]
D. A. Cohn, Z. Ghahramani, and M. I. Jordan. Active Learning with Statistical Mod­
els. 1996. arXiv: cs/9603104 [cs.AI].
[48]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of Statistical
Learning. Springer Series in Statistics. New York, NY, USA: Springer New York Inc.,
2001.
[49]
Nicholas Roy and Andrew McCallum. “Toward Optimal Active Learning through
Sampling Estimation of Error Reduction”. In: International Conference on Machine
Learning. 2001.
[50]
David John Cameron MacKay. “Information­Based Objective Functions for Active
Data Selection”. In: Neural Computation 4 (1992), pp. 590–604.
[51]
Neil Houlsby et al. Bayesian Active Learning for Classification and Preference Learn­
ing. 2011. arXiv: 1112.5745 [stat.ML].
[52]
Carl Hvarfner, Frank Hutter, and Luigi Nardi. Joint Entropy Search for Maximally­
Informed Bayesian Optimization. 2023. arXiv: 2206.04771 [cs.LG].
[53]
James T. Wilson et al. Pathwise Conditioning of Gaussian Processes. 2021. arXiv:
2011.04026 [stat.ML].
[54]
Ernesto Padernal Adorio and Revised January. “MVF ­ Multivariate Test Functions
Library in C for Unconstrained Global Optimization”. In: 2005.
[55]
Niranjan Srinivas et al. “Information­Theoretic Regret Bounds for Gaussian Process
Optimization in the Bandit Setting”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Theory
58.5 (May 2012), pp. 3250–3265. ISSN: 1557­9654. DOI: 10.1109/tit.2011.2182033.
[56]
Julian Berk et al. Randomised Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bound for
Bayesian Optimisation. 2020. arXiv: 2006.04296 [cs.LG].
[57]
Shion Takeno, Yu Inatsu, and Masayuki Karasuyama. Randomized Gaussian Pro­
cess Upper Confidence Bound with Tighter Bayesian Regret Bounds. 2023. arXiv:
2302.01511 [cs.LG].
[58]
Matthew D. Hoffman and Andrew Gelman. The No­U­Turn Sampler: Adaptively Set­
ting Path Lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. 2011. arXiv: 1111.4246 [stat.CO].
[59]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
2017. arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs.LG].
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
67
==PAGE:76==
[60]
Eli Bingham et al. Pyro: Deep Universal Probabilistic Programming. 2018. arXiv:
1810.09538 [cs.LG].
[61]
Maximilian Balandat et al. “BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte­Carlo Bayesian
Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33. 2020.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.06403.
[62]
C. Devon Lin and Boxin Tang. Latin Hypercubes and Space­filling Designs. 2022.
arXiv: 2203.06334 [stat.ME].
[63]
Robert B. Gramacy and Herbert K. H. Lee. Cases for the nugget in modeling com­
puter experiments. 2010. arXiv: 1007.4580 [stat.CO].
[64]
Robert B. Gramacy and Herbert K. H. Lee. Adaptive design and analysis of super­
computer experiments. 2009. arXiv: 0805.4359 [stat.AP].
[65]
Alexander I. J. Forrester, Andras Sobester, and Andy J. Keane. Engineering Design
via Surrogate Modelling ­ A Practical Guide. Wiley, 2008, pp. I–XVIII, 1–210. ISBN:
978­0­470­06068­1.
[66]
Andrea Saltelli et al. Sensitivity Analysis in Practice: A Guide to Assessing Scientific
Models. USA: Halsted Press, 2004. ISBN: 0470870931.
[67]
Victor Picheny, Tobias Wagner, and David Ginsbourger. “A benchmark of kriging­
based infill criteria for noisy optimization”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Opti­
mization 48 (Sept. 2013). DOI: 10.1007/s00158-013-0919-4.
[68]
Marcin Molga and Czesław Smutnicki. “Test functions for optimization needs”. In:
Test functions for optimization needs 101 (2005), p. 48.
68
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:77==
A
Active Learning
Figure A.1: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on NMLL for each step.
Figure A.2: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on NMLL for each step.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.3: Percentage of times SGD method wins over MCMC based on NMLL for each
step of the acquisiton functions
Figure A.4: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on NMLL for each step.
70
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.5: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on NMLL for each step.
Figure A.6: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on NMLL for each step.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
71
==PAGE:80==
B
Bayesian Optimization
Figure B.1: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on regret for each step.
Figure B.2: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on regret for each step.
72
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:81==
Figure B.3: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on regret for each step.
Figure B.4: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on regret for each step.
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure B.5: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on regret for each step.
Figure B.6: Percentage of times SGD wins over MCMC based on regret for each step.
74
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
==PAGE:83==
Bayesian Optimization and Active Learning with a Mixture of Gaussian Processes
75
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 4800
www.byg.dtu.dk
