==PAGE:1==
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine
Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Jacob Bahnsen Schmidt
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, As­
mussens Allé, Building 303, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five and a half months at the Section for Scientific
Computing, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration with Mikrobiologisk afdeling at Rigshospi­
talet, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.,
Quantitative Biology and Disease Modelling.
Allan Peter Engsig­Karup ­ Supervisor
Signature
Date
Frederik Boëtius Hertz ­ Supervisor
Signature
Date
Karen Leth Nielsen ­ Supervisor
Signature
Date
Jacob Bahnsen Schmidt ­ s184346
Signature
Date
ii
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Introduction: Bacterial infections requires effective and immediate treatment, however
the current diagnostic practices, utilizing bacterial cultures and PCR­tests can be slow
and expensive. Furthermore Rigshospitalet is a highly specialised hospital, meaning that
patients often present with other severe diseases masking it increasingly difficult to differ­
entiate between inflammation and bacterial infection. This thesis will therefore focus on
developing a tool to expedite the diagnostic process.
Methods: In order to overcome this task a dataset utilizing data from Rigshospitalet is pro­
duced making use of Electronic Health Records, including biochemical variables and vital
parameters. This dataset is used to train Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Gradient
Boosting Machines (GBM), specifically utilizing the XGBoost algorithm. The output proba­
bility of these algorithms are then calibrated using the Venn­ABERS calibration technique.
Furthermore the Conformal Risk Control (CRC) method is used to provide the models with
uncertainty guaranties. Moreover the XGBoost model is analysed using SHAP­analysis.
Results: The results were produced utilizing two version of the dataset, a safe version
containing 13686 easier observations and a full version containing all 31307 observations.
The safe dataset was used to verify the model performance in a safe environment, making
sure that the models can predict well defined bacterial infections, before moving to the full
dataset introducing uncertain observations. The SVM scored an area under the curve
(AUC) of the Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve, of 0.94, when trained on
the safe dataset. The XGBoost algorithm scored an AUC of the ROC­curve of 0.96.
When training both algorithms on the full dataset the SVM scored an AUC of the ROC­
curve ranging between 0.82 and 0.92 depending on the infection class, while the XGBoost
algorithm scored an AUC of the ROC­curve ranging between 0.89 and 0.96 dependent
on the infection class. The models trained on the full dataset were calibrated using the
Venn­ABERS calibration technique. This significantly improved the model performance,
improving the micro averaged sensitivity and F1­score of the XGBoost algorithm by 8%
and 4% respectively. Further the CRC­method was applied controlling the sensitivity to
90%, at the cost of reducing the micro averaged Specificity and F1­score of the XGBoost
algorithm by 17% and 4% respectively.
Conclusion: The XGBoost model outperformed the SVM on all available performance
metrics. Furthermore the Venn­ABERS calibration technique proved to significantly im­
prove the model performance, as well as improving the natural interpretability of the model
output. The CRC­method was successfully applied providing the models with statistically
robust user specified uncertainty guaranties. All in all the key findings of this thesis high­
lights a promising future with great potential for improved diagnostic precision utilizing
machine learning.
Keywords: Machine learning, Support Vector Machine, XGBoost, Venn­ABERS calibra­
tion, Conformal prediction, Conformal risk control, SHAP­analysis, Bacterial infections.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Allan P. Engsig­Karup, Frederik
Boëtius Hertz and Karen Leth Nielsen, for their all­important expertise, guidance and en­
couragement throughout the entire process of conducting my Master thesis. Their exten­
sive knowledge and insightful feedback have been instrumental in shaping this project
and in the quality hereof. Further i would like to express my gratitude to my friends and
family for cheering me on through hard times, especially Kasper Schou Telkamp, whom
I not only consider a great friend but also appreciate for providing constructive feedback
on earlier versions of this thesis.
iv
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:7==
Notation and expected prerequisites
The mathematical notation in this master thesis is adapted from Pedregosa et al. 2011,
Bishop 2006, T. Chen and Guestrin 2016 and Angelopoulos and Bates 2021. This thesis is
written on an academic level corresponding to a Master’s student in the field of quantitative
biology and disease modelling. It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in
the areas of statistics and biology.
The code used to produce the results in this thesis is available as a private repository on
https://github.com/utubun/MLDoc. Access can be granted by contacting the author of
this thesis or the repository owner. The dataset is however protected by the General Data
Protocol Regulation (GDPR) and will therefore not be publicly available.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Actronyms
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Setting the Scene
3
3
Electronic Health Records in Denmark
5
3.1
The dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Data Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Summary Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Case Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Principal Component Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Methods
19
4.1
Support Vector Machines (SVM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
XGBoost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Scoring Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Conformal Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Results
27
5.1
Safe dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Full dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.4
SHAP­plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Discussion
51
6.1
Data Biases and Outlier handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Conformal Predictions and Human in the Loop systems . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.3
Model Calibration and Feature Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7
Conclusion
57
8
Perspective
59
Bibliography
60
A Outlier Filtration
65
B Biochemical Normal Ranges
68
C Summary Statistics
72
D Distribution of Input Variables
76
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
vii
==PAGE:10==
E
Scoring rules
78
E.1 Precision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
E.2 Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
E.3 Specificity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
E.4 F1­Score
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
E.5 Multi­class Brier Score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
F
Baseline Confusion Matrix Assuming Perfect Predictions
79
G Preliminary CatBoost Results
80
G.1 Safe Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
G.2 Full Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
viii
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:11==
Acronyms
DTU Technical University of Denmark.
BSI Blood Stream Infection.
PSBSI Possible Blood Stream Infection.
UTI Urinary Tract Infection.
PSBSI Possible Urinary Tract Infection.
SVM Support Vector Machine
GBM Gradient Boosting Machine
CRC Conformal Risk Control
SHAP SHapley Additive exPlanations
WGS Whole Genome Sequencing
NGS Next Generation Sequencing
AUC Area Under the Curve
ROC Receiver Operating Characteristics
MADS Mikrobiologisk Afdelings DataSystem
GDPR General Data Protocol Regulation
PCA Principal Component Analysis
RBF Radial Basis Function
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
ix
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
The fight against bacterial infections requires accurate and immediate treatment of pa­
tients. The diagnosis process is however not always straight forward, especially not when
diagnosing patients admitted to Rigshospitalet. Rigshospitalet is a highly specialised hos­
pital mainly treating patients from Denmark with an auxiliary need for intensive and highly
specialised care. Globally the mortality of bacterial infections is still high. A study by Ikuta
et al. 2022 estimated that 7.7 million deaths world wide in 2019 could be associated with
33 different bacterial genera or species. The mortality is significantly lower in developed
countries. The mortality rate in high­income countries was found to be 52.2 deaths pr.
100,000 population. One of the most important courses of action is early detection and
treatment, therefore machine learning could prove effective at addressing this problem.
Further the data is available and machine learning is therefore a promising opportunity for
addressing the problem.
Rigshospitalet is a highly specialized hospital, patients admitted to Rigshospitalet will
therefore typically present a diverse range of diseases. These comorbidities often cause
inflammation, meaning that the overall process of identifying and locating bacterial infec­
tions becomes more troublesome and demanding, in some cases leading to longer waiting
times from detection to appropriate treatment. Typically these patients will have under­
gone multiple surgeries, resulting in the potential insertion of multiple catheters. These
catheters are high risk factors for bacterial infections and will frequently be changed upon
detection of a bacterial infection. This does however create an increased workload for
the physicians, as they may have to change all catheters if the location of the infection is
unknown, as well as treading the patient with broad spectrum antibiotics. Further this can
also complicate the ongoing diagnosis process and prolong the patients need of care, as
the broad spectrum antibiotics likely will lower the level of infection, which in turn will lower
the chance of identifying the initial cause of the infection.
Currently doctors and medicinal staff relies on three main tools for identification of infection
in patients, which include:
1. Unspecific biomarkers of inflammation: Biomarkers such as C­Reactive Protein
(CRP), which is know to be elevated during inflammation.
2. Patient anamnesis: The patients medical history can reveal certain risk factors and
help inform the physicians decision.
3. Diagnostic tests: Diagnostic tests such as PCR­tests or bacterial cultures.
4. Experience: Finally in some cases the doctors will have to rely on experience and
gut instinct.
The issues with this is that it is common for patients at highly specialised hospitals such as
Rigshospitalet to have many comorbidities that can push the biomarkers of inflammation,
such as CRP, outside their normal ranges, without them necessarily having a bacterial
infection. Furthermore the diagnostic tests can be slow and expensive, which is why
machine learning could provide decision support for the physicians. Further the data is
readily available due to Rigshospitalets current practices on data collection, easing the
cost of implementing data driven approaches.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
1
==PAGE:13==
Generally there are three main focuses of bacterial infection. These are frequently en­
countered and are urinary tract infections (UTI), blood stream infections (BSI) and airway
infections. One of the major problems at Rigshospitalet is that the high level of comorbidi­
ties in patients can mask their symptoms, making it challenging to differentiate between
the three main types of bacterial infection. It is therefore imperative to develop methods
that can assist the doctors and potentially shine a light on groups of biomarkers that in
combination can describe the differences between the different infection types.
This master thesis aims to develop a new tool that can assist clinicians in the classification
of bacterial infections, by training and testing different machine learning models, focusing
on Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Gradient Boosting Machines (GBM), specifically
by making use of the Scikit­learn and XGBoost frameworks (Pedregosa et al. 2011 and
T. Chen and Guestrin 2016) in order to implement support vector classifiers and gradient
boosted trees.
These model types have proven able to differentiate between bacterial infection and non­
bacterial infection. Similar to the aim of this study, Marandi et al. N.D. have researched
the use of machine learning approaches for early detection of bloodstream infection (BSI)
using electronic health records. In their study they make use of a variety of different ma­
chine learning approaches, such as a GBM, the XGBoost library and google’s TabNet
model. Their use of the XGBoost model yielded a ROC­curve AUC of 0.73, with a speci­
ficity of 94% and a sensitivity of 26% (Marandi et al. N.D.) which means that the model
excels at identifying patients without BSI.
Rawson et al. used SVMs to predict community­acquired bacterial infections in patients
within the first 72 hours of admission to hospital. They did this using only six commonly
available blood parameters and were able to obtain a ROC­curve AUC of 0.84, with a
sensitivity and specificity of 0.89 and 0.63, when using a likelihood­estimate cut­off of
0.81, however when they changed the likelihood­estimate cut­off to 0.82 they achieved a
sensitivity and specificity of 0.44 and 0.93 respectively (T. Rawson et al. 2019), signaling
a potentially badly calibrated model and a high uncertainty.
The main objective of this research is therefore to asses if the aforementioned machine
learning models can be used to differentiate between the three main focuses of bacterial
infection and in addition explore the models predictive behavior in order to potentially
acquire new groups of potent biomarkers of bacterial infection, while also ensuring a well
calibrated model with well defined uncertainties.
To achieve this two different case studies will be implemented, using two different versions
of the dataset. A simple or ”safe” version of the dataset and a full version of the dataset,
a more vigorous description can be seen in section 3.4. Additionally, the methods will
be compared using AUC of the ROC­curve in conjunction with the models sensitivity and
specificity, among other evaluation metrics. Finally the conformal prediction framework
will be used to calibrate the models and provide statistical guarantees for their uncertainty.
Figure 1.1: Overview of the machine learning process.
2
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:14==
2
Setting the Scene
Bacterial infections is a very well known problem in the healthcare system. Throughout
history humanity have fought a battle against bacteria, seeing many deaths during epi­
demics such as the black death (Sakai and Morimoto 2022), which killed approximately
40% of Europe’s population (Duncan and Scott 2005). Since then we have invented many
tools to combat bacteria, such as the discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming in
1928 (Fleming 1929). Excessive usage of antibiotics leads to antimicrobial resistant bac­
teria. This threatens the modern healthcare system as we know it and currently the only
tool to combat antimicrobial resistance is to reduce the usage of antibiotics.
Today, doctors and other medicinal staff utilize a wide range of tools and methodologies
to effectively diagnose and combat bacterial infections. Specifically, the laboratory ap­
proaches play an essential role when diagnosing. The current golden standard is the use
of bacterial cultivation (Gerace et al. 2022), sometimes used in combination with PCR
(Zhu et al. 2020), RT­PCR or methods for gene sequencing, such as Whole Genome
Sequencing (WGS) or Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) (P. Chen, Sun, and He 2020).
In recent years there have been a massive growing interest in data driven methods, for
semi­automatic and especially early detection of bacterial infections.
These methods
include various different statistical techniques, but have lately been overtaken by more
complex models from the world of machine learning, such as the Scikit­learn framework
(Pedregosa et al. 2011) and the XGBoost framework (T. Chen and Guestrin 2016).
The main reason for the introduction of machine learning models in the field is to expedite
the process of diagnosis at a lower cost. The current golden standard makes use of
bacterial cultures, although this is a relatively certain method for bacterial identification it
still have some pitfalls. One of them being the overall time consumption of the method,
which is highly dependent on the bacterial doubling time of the bacteria from the patient
sample (Gibson et al. 2018 and P. Chen, Sun, and He 2020).
The machine learning models introduced in this thesis aims to expedite the process of
diagnosis, by predicting the type of bacterial infection, using recent available biochemical
values and vital parameters, along other electronically available patient parameters, and
hence narrowing the search field when the origin of a bacterial infection is unknown.
Furthermore the models applied in this thesis will be compared to the models in the liter­
ature using parameters such as the area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating
characteristics curve (ROC­curve), sensitivity and specificity. Additionally the uncertainty
of the models will be assessed using the conformal prediction framework, in order to
gauge the models practical usability.
The current available studies, using data driven approaches such as classical statistical
methods or machine learning models to predict bacterial infection, all seem to share a
problem regarding low sensitivity. The main problem with low sensitivity models is that
they almost exclusively can be used to exclude a diagnosis.
For example a study by Chan­Peng Hsu tested a range of vital parameters in a univariate
logistic regression setting, to predict gram­negative bacterial infections Hsu et al. 2021.
In their study they found the sensitivity of all parameters to be below 60%. A similar trend
can be seen in a study by Yazeed Zoabi, predicting bloodstream infections based on 606
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
3
==PAGE:15==
features derived from electronic medical records, using Microsoft’s LightGBM framework
(Zoabi et al. 2021).
Additionally, a study by Timothy M. Rawson on diagnosis of bacterial infection in general,
used a Support Vector Classifier with 21 input features and were able to tune the model
and obtain a sensitivity and specificity of 100% and 90% respectively (Timothy M Rawson
et al. 2021).
4
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:16==
3
Electronic Health Records in Denmark
This chapter will dive into the details of how the dataset is structured, what information
it contains and how the dataset have been prepared and filtered for the purpose of ma­
chine learning. This will include a description of the different tables in sundhedsplatformen
(Rigshospitalets database), the time periods for data collection, as well as an explanation
for outlier filtration, followed by a basic statistical description of the dataset. Moreover,
this dataset has never been subject to this type of data­driven investigation previously.
3.1
The dataset
The dataset is produced using danish electronic health records, i.e. patient journals, by
combining different tables from sundhedsplatformen and the MADS database (Mikrobiol­
ogisk Afdelings DataSystem MADS­gruppen 2024). The database contains a table de­
scribing the patient using unique patient identifiers, i.e. hashed CPR­numbers in order to
overcome any problems regarding the General Data Protocol Regulation (GDPR), gen­
der, date of birth and the date of death. Further the dataset is stored in the cloud using
the Microsoft azure platform, from which the dataset cannot be exported, providing further
protection.
Furthermore the database contains a table storing information on the patients biochem­
ical values, i.e. the hemoglobin level, the number of Erythrocytes (red blood cells) and
Leukocytes (white blood cells) and many other blood related variables, totaling 52 different
biochemical variables.
The database also contains a table with information on bacterial isolates. This table shows
all the patient samples. Meaning that every time a sample is obtained from a patient, the
information will be stored in the isolates table with a description of which patient the sample
is taken from, the type of sample (e.g. blood, urin, etc.), the number of different bacteria
found in the sample and the names of those, a unique identifier for the sample and a
sampling date describing when the sample was taken.
This table is essential to the supervised machine learning methods that are applied in this
thesis, as the target labels will be generated based on the origin of the sample i.e. the
sample type in combination with the type of bacteria found in the sample. The reasoning
for using this combination for labeling is to remove as much noise from the dataset as
possible. Specifically the noise related to contaminated samples, as some samples natu­
rally have a higher risk of being contaminated, e.g. when a sample is taken from the lungs
there is a risk of contamination with naturally occurring bacteria from the mouth. This risk
is also present for blood cultures and urine cultures, practically there will always be a risk
of contamination in any type of bacterial culture.
Furthermore the database contains information about the patient diagnoses, the type of
treatment they received, including a description of the the antibiotics and dose prescribed
to the patient, as well as a table describing if the patient have had any previous infec­
tions. A natural question here would be ­ Why are the data labels generated using the
combination of bacteria and location instead of using the diagnostics table? The answer
to this question is that the table containing diagnosis codes simply is too bloated from
a wide range of differential diagnoses, with some patients being labeled with up to 172
different diagnosis codes, with the majority of patients having approximately 25 different
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
5
==PAGE:17==
diagnosis codes as seen in figure 3.1. Additionally there is a problem with some diag­
nosis codes being relatively undescriptive without the full context of the patient journal,
e.g. a patient can get a bacterial infection after undergoing surgery and have it noted as
surgical complications, without necessarily getting a diagnosis code directly related to the
infection.
Figure 3.1: histogram showing the number of unique diagnosis codes pr. patient.
The database also contains a table describing the patients vital parameters, including
their heart rate, diastolic and systolic blood pressure, blood oxygen saturation, weight
and Body Mass Index (BMI), frequency of respiration, the patients temperature and finally
if the patient is receiving oxygen therapy the table states the rate and type of oxygen
therapy they are receiving.
Another table in the database is the Admission table, showing the time period of hospi­
tal admission, the hospital and department the patient was admitted to and the type of
hospital admission.
3.2
Data Filtration
Data preparation is a pivotal phase in the journey toward developing robust machine learn­
ing models. The quality of the dataset directly influences the efficacy and reliability of the
models designed to recognize patterns indicative of infection. This section will describe
the extensive preparation of the dataset and what methods have been used to filter the
dataset, in order to extract meaningful insights and construct a good foundation for ma­
chine learning.
First and foremost the dataset contains inputs that are non­numeric in features that should
be numeric as input to the machine learining algorithms. These are mostly different out­
comes in which the given biochemical test failed to give an answer or cases where the
test was cancelled. These data points are removed from the dataset. There are however
cases of non­numeric inputs that should be considered as valuable data points. Many
laboratory test have a specific support range, in which they can give a precise answer.
This means that in cases where the feature value would fall outside the supported range
of the test, the value will be given as less than X or greater than X. These types of in­
6
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:18==
puts are handled by simply removing the sign, such that e.g. < 10 becomes 10. Another
approach would be to fully remove this data type, but as there are 250,687 data entries
of this data type they are kept. This does however produce some data artefacts that for
example can be seen in figure 3.3, most clearly seen in the top right pane, where it can be
seen that some features contain a mixture of continuous and discrete data. This can be
seen by looking at the Log MONO axis where there is a cloud of points centered around
zero, while there are pillars of points around ­2.5, ­4.5 and ­7.
The next step is to filter the biochemical variables and the vital parameters for outliers.
This is done to ensure a certain level of data quality and avoid skewing the results and
the overall model performance. Examples of outliers in this data set are patients with a
BMI greater than 7000 or a small group of patients with a red blood cell count of zero. In
the cases of physically impossible or improbable inputs the values will simply be removed
and handled as missing data. Further outliers in the dataset are removed by looking at the
distribution of the biochemical variables and setting reasonable cut­offs based on a com­
bination of the distributions, expert knowledge gained from conversations with MD, PhD,
Frederik Boëtius Hertz and standards used by Rigshospitalets biochemical department.
A more commonly used approach is to use a generic cut­off using the Inter Quantile Range
(IQR) rule, where the cut­off values are set as 1.5 · IQR. The reasoning for not using this
approach is that some of the tails in the distribution occur as a result of small specific
patient groups. So in order to not fully remove all data points from these specific data
sub­populations this alternative approach is used.
An example of a sub­population in the dataset is patients with severe anemia. These pa­
tients will due to their condition have an abnormally low number of erythrocytes compared
to the majority of other patients. For this very reason the outlier cut­offs are defined as a
combination of the feature distribution, expert knowledge and cross referencing with the
table containing the patients diagnosis codes. A full table of all cut­off values can be seen
in the appendix in table A.1.
Additionally, the tables with biochemical variables and vital parameters will be filtered
using a time frame around the sampling time. The time frame is set to 7 days prior to
the sampling date. The reasoning for this is to limit the data that the models are trained
upon, to the time period where the patients are infected. Most bacterial infections have a
relatively high growth rate, an example is the doubling time of Escherichia coli, which have
a doubling time of 20­60 min. depending on the environment (Cooper and Helmstetter
1968). This is the general trend for most bacteria (Gibson et al. 2018), meaning that most
bacterial infections will manifest within 7 days of exposure. It would therefore not make
sense to include data further back as this data likely would be obtained prior to bacterial
exposure.
The last step in the filtration of the biochemical variables is to remove features with an
insufficient number of observations. The cut­off is here set to 100 data points. The 100
data points minimum is chosen to ensure a sufficient number of data points for the given
feature across all types of infection, in other words to satisfy the central limit theorem
(Brockhoff et al. 2018), while also limiting the number of features that are removed. This
results in the removal of the following 7 features:
• O2 sat.;HB(aB; pulm), Oxygen saturation in arterial blood.
• pCO2;P(aB; pulm), CO2 tension in arterial blood
• pH;P(aB; pulm), Blood pH.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
7
==PAGE:19==
• pO2;P(aB; pulm), O2 tension in arterial blood.
• Erythrocyt D (Ag);Erc(B) Postnatal Rhesus prophylaxis
• VBGLUF, Glucose measurement.
• HSCRP, High sensitivity C­reaktive protein.
Further the last step in the preparation of the vital parameters table is to aggregate data
on each day per patient. The reason for doing so is to summarize the measurements
into something that can be taken quickly in the clinic, as well as compressing the dataset,
such that vital parameters and biochemical variables are available in similar intervals, i.e.
once a day, as opposed to the naive version of the dataset where vital parameters are
sampled automatically as often as once per minute, as seen in figure 3.2. This figure
shows a histogram counting the number of vital parameter measurements pr. patient pr.
day. Where it is clear that most patients have their vital parameters measured a few times
per day, while others are under surveillance with automatic setups, with upwards of 100
or more measurements pr. day.
Figure 3.2: Histogram showing the number of vital parameter measurements taken each
day pr. patient. The X­axis is here limited to 250, in order to show the distribution towards
zero and it should be noted that the tail of the distribution extends all the way up to the
maximum number of observations pr. day of 1440.
The next step in the filtration process is to remove duplicate observations. The doublets
are cases where a patient have had numerous samples taken multiple days in a row or
as a follow up for earlier infections. This is a consequence of the answer waiting time,
as it sometimes take multiple days for the bacteria to grow in the laboratory. Therefore
multiple samples are obtained to ensure a quick response in the the cases where the
bacterial culture is negative or fails to grow. This type of doublets are removed from the
dataset using a 30­day filtration period. Meaning that if two identical sample types are
positive with the same bacteria within a 30­day period, then the second sample will be
considered to originate from the same infection.
The reasoning for ignoring the subsequent samples is that these samples are taken either
to confirm the outcome of the first sample, to examine if the patient is responding to the
8
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:20==
treatment or as a backup for failed tests. In all cases it makes sense to remove the
observations as this thesis is aimed at training machine learning models that can assist
the physicians in early diagnosis. Removing these doublets also make sense from a
modelling perspective, as the inclusion of these data points essentially would increase the
weight on those specific observations, if they were included and considered as different
instances of infection.
To summarize the dataset have been filtered for outliers using a combination of expert
knowledge and feature distributions. While further applying reasonable data filters to ex­
clude irrelevant data points and ensure that small patient groups with extraordinary bio­
chemical values are retained within the dataset. This process can also be seen depicted
in the Appendix in figure A.1
3.3
Summary Statistics
In this section, the dataset will be presented using summary statistics and basic plotting
techniques, with the aim of gaining a further understanding of the dataset and why it can
be difficult for physicians to differentiate between different focuses of infection based on
the available parameters.
The challenges of diagnosing evidently becomes clear when looking at simple relation­
ships between the most commonly used biomarkers. The scatter plots in figure 3.3 show
a subset of commonly used biomarkers plotted against each other, with 95% confidence
regions drawn as ellipsoids, for each of the three main focuses of infection.
Figure 3.3: Subset of variables plotted against each other, showing why diagnosis based
on commonly used biomarkers is difficult. The dashed ellipsoids are 95% confidence
regions assuming normally distributed data. From the plots it is also clear that the different
biochemical tests are continuous in some ranges and discrete in others.
Evidently, this subset of features does not allow for easy separation between groups. The
top left pane shows the log­transformed CRP and procalcitonin (PROCAL) concentra­
tions. Here it seems as if the two categories Airway and BSI are practically indistinguish­
able. Although, the group of UTI’s is more narrow, it is still similar to the other categories
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
9
==PAGE:21==
and it is clear that these features alone does not provide any significant insights on the
topic of bacterial infections.
The other three panes showing the relationships between, Monocytes (MONO), Leuco­
cytes (LEU) and Albumin (ALB), estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate (eGFR) and Erythro­
cytes (ERY), Hemoglobin (HB). In all panes the tendency that the groups are indistinguish­
able to the human eye becomes clear, further supporting the need for more complicated
data driven approaches.
Table 3.1 shows the summary statistics (Median, Inter quantile range and number of ob­
servations) for a subset of the biochemical parameters included in the study (refer to
table C.1 in the Appendix for a full overview of all biochemical variables). These are then
grouped by the different main focuses of infection. Here it can be seen that the differences
between groups are exceptionally small. Some variables does however show noticeable
differences between groups, e.g. when looking at CRP­levels, it seems that the median
CRP­level is significantly lower in urine infections than in the three other categories. This
does however come with a caveat, as it can be seen that there still is quite an overlap
between groups when looking at the IQR. Similarly the number of neutrophil granulocytes
(NEUTRO) and PROCAL seems to be lower in UTI’s. Furthermore the median level of
PROCAL is also higher in BSI’s. This is consistent with the literature as PROCAL is re­
garded as a biomarker for bacterial infections and used to help guide the diagnosis of
sepsis (Samsudin and Vasikaran 2017). Another interesting feature is the eGFR. eGFR
is a measure of kidney function, calculated based on creatinine (CREA), age and gender,
and its median value seems to be lower in blood infections.
Table 3.1: Table of summary statistics (Median, [IQR] and number of observations)
grouped by the infection type, for a subset of the biochemical variables in the dataset.
The full table showing summary statistics for all biochemical variables can be seen in the
Appendix (C.1).
Variable
SI unit
Airway
BSI
UTI
26
26.5
31
g/L
[21.00, 32.00]
[22.00, 31.00]
[26.00, 36.00]
ALB
703
1406
6524
0.03
0.03
0.03
109/L
[0.01, 0.06]
[0.01, 0.05]
[0.01, 0.06]
BASO
515
911
5721
10
12
8
µmol/L
[6.00, 20.00]
[7.00, 23.55]
[5.00, 14.00]
BILI
566
1500
3919
101
13.5
2
µmol/L
[8.10, 194.75]
[9.00, 18.75]
[2.00, 5.25]
BILIKON
4
30
104
8.5
8.97
6.9
mmol/L
[5.50, 13.93]
[5.70, 15.30]
[4.50, 11.10]
CARB
952
1500
5935
81
82
72
µmol/L
[55.00, 128.00]
[58.00, 136.00]
[53.38, 107.25]
CREA
1162
2690
10428
10
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:22==
Table 3.1: Table of summary statistics (Median, [IQR] and number of observations)
grouped by the infection type. (continued)
Variable
SI unit
Airway
BSI
UTI
56
45
21
mg/L
[16.25, 139.00]
[11.00, 116.75]
[6.00, 58.00]
CRP
1170
2603
9517
6.2
6.1
6.9
mmol/L
[5.40, 7.20]
[5.40, 7.05]
[5.90, 7.90]
HB
1206
2834
10952
1.1
1.2
1
ratio
[1.00, 1.25]
[1.00, 1.30]
[1.00, 1.20]
INR
797
1273
4276
293.5
240
220.5
U/L
[205.00, 451.25]
[182.00, 359.00]
[182.00, 285.88]
LDH
628
1233
4014
10.9
8.5
9.1
109/L
[7.60, 14.80]
[4.10, 13.00]
[6.70, 12.30]
LEU
1181
2691
9959
1.24
0.95
1.37
109/L
[0.72, 1.84]
[0.51, 1.50]
[0.93, 1.91]
LYMFO
514
910
5722
7.88
7.13
6.41
109/L
[5.46, 11.00]
[4.31, 11.00]
[4.48, 9.14]
NEUTRO
500
889
5583
0.65
0.81
0.29
µg/L
[0.21, 2.58]
[0.27, 2.94]
[0.10, 0.69]
PROCAL
249
243
344
77
71
80
mL/min
[45.00, 90.00]
[38.00, 90.00]
[50.00, 90.00]
eGFR
1061
2453
9883
Further it also seems as if the feature BILIKON, which stands for conjugated bilirubin,
shows a fairly clear distinction between BSI’s and UTI’s. This can also be seen when
looking at Figure 3.5. It should however be noted that this feature is sparse relative to the
other features.
The table also contains three engineered features, BAS, ABAS and MBAS, these three
features have previously proven to have a positive impact on the overall predictive ability
of similar models, as shown by Marandi et al. in their study on BSI’s (Marandi et al. N.D.).
The three features are engineered to resemble the early warning score (EWS) feature,
which is calculated based vital parameters, but with the specific focus of biochemical
variables. BAS stands for biochemical abnormality score and is used to describe the
patients level of abnormality related to the biochemical variables. Equation 3.1 shows the
formula used, where the normal ranges that are referred to are the medically considered
normal ranges, defined by Rigshospitalet Labportal 2024. A full table with the biochemical
normal ranges can be seen in table B.1 in the Appendix.
BAS = Number of biochemical variables outside the normal range
Number of biochemical variables
· 100
(3.1)
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
11
==PAGE:23==
Similarly, ABAS is the adjusted biochemical abnormality score calculated as in equation
3.2, where the abnormality level is adjusted in such a fashion that it only accounts for the
measured variables.
ABAS = Number of biochemical variables outside the normal range
Number of available biochemical variables
· 100
(3.2)
Finally, MBAS is the minimal biochemical abnormality score, describing the level of ab­
normality given a specific selected subset of commonly used biochemical variables and
is calculated as in equation 3.3.
MBAS = Number of selected biochemical variables outside the normal range
Number of selected biochemical variables
· 100
(3.3)
Where the selected biochemical variables refers to a list of five commonly used biochem­
ical variables:
• ALAT, Alanine transaminase is a biomarker for acute liver damage.
• CRP, C­reactive protein is an acute phase protein produced during inflammation.
• CREA, Creatinine is a biomarker for kidney function.
• LEU, Number of Leukocytes (white blood cells).
• PROCAL, Procalcitonin is a potential biomarker for bacterial infections.
3.3.1
Feature distributions
The next step in the process before applying the machine learning models is to take a
look at the feature distributions. Machine learning models like the support vector machine
used in this thesis is known to have an increased performance if the input variables have
similar variance and their distribution resembles a Gaussian distribution (Pedregosa et al.
2011). This next step will therefore focus on transforming the input feature distributions.
Most of the features in the dataset belong to the domain of continuous positive data. This
type of data is generally log­normally distributed (Madsen and Thyregod 2011). Visually,
this also seems to be the case when looking at the features presented in figure 3.4. This
figure displays the feature distribution as histograms for a subset of selected features. The
full set of feature distributions can be seen in the appendix in figure D.1. Further figure
3.4 shows the feature distributions within the three main categories of infection focus, as
seen by the colored lines.
12
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.4: Histograms plotted for a subset of biochemical variables. The grey areas
show the overall feature distribution, while the colored lines show the distribution within
each of the three main focuses of infection.
The log­transformation will be applied to input features as described in order to attain the
desired Gaussian distribution. Other approaches that could be considered would be to
fit a power transformation, e.g. the Box­Cox transformation, to each input feature. This
would likely achieve better normality assumptions for the input features (Osborne 2019
and Pawitan 2013). The models tested in this thesis does however, dissimilar to many
other classical statistical models, not require strong normality assumptions and the simpler
log­transformation is therefore chosen for simplicity, as it still provides the desired weak
normality assumptions.
Figure 3.5: Histograms plotted for a subset of biochemical variables. The full set of bio­
chemical variables and vital parameters can be seen in the appendix, Figure D.2.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
13
==PAGE:25==
Evidently, from looking at figure 3.5, which shows the log­transformed feature distribu­
tions, it can be seen that the log­transformation generally yields the desired distributional
properties, although features such as the basophil count (BASO) still show undesirable
distributional properties. This is seen by the heavy left tail in the log domain. BASO is
a type of immune cell and in this case the heavy left tail is caused by the large scale of
different patient groups included in the dataset, specifically cancer patients in treatment
with chemotherapy are known to have impaired cell proliferation, diminishing the number
of available immune cells (Braun and Harris 1981).
3.3.2
Correlation structure
Collinearity and multicollinearity are concepts used to describe high correlation between
two or more features in a dataset. From a statistical standpoint these are undesirable
properties that one should be a aware of. This section will therefore dive into the datasets
correlation structure.
Figure 3.6: Spearman correlation between input features.
Figure 3.6 shows the spearman correlation between all numeric continuous features. This
is used to check for collinearity. And as can be seen from the figure there are only a few
cases which could be problematic in terms of collinearity. For example the concentration of
hemoglobin (HB) and the erythrocyte count (ERY). These features are highly correlated.
The features will not be removed or aggregated as a consequence of collinearity, but
14
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:26==
should be kept in mind when analyzing the models feature importance.
Further it can be seen that there is a strong negative correlation between the creatinine
concentration (CREA) and eGFR. This happens as eGFR is calculated based on the pa­
tients age, height, gender and CREA­levels. Similarly there is also a strong correlation
between BMI and weight.
Additionally, there are two sets of three features each showing strong correlation, {BAS,
ABAS, MBAS} and {BILI, BILIKON, BILIUK}. The correlation in the first set arises from
their similar feature engineering structure as seen in equation 3.1­3.3. The second set
describes the total level of bilirubin (BILI) and the quantities of bilirubin in the conjugated
(BILIKON) and unconjugated (BILIUK) form.
From figure 3.6 there are still a few points to consider, showing a strong correlation. Upon
further investigation it is however found that these point estimates mostly are based on a
sparse number of interactions between specific features in the dataset and will therefore
not be considered when looking for collinearity in the dataset.
3.4
Case Studies
For the scope of this master thesis the dataset will be subset and grouped into different
types of datasets, as to provide a greater understanding of the models. The subsets will
split the dataset into two different datasets. One called the safe dataset and one called
the full dataset.
The full dataset is as the name states the full dataset providing all classes of infection,
including uncertain observations and observations where the patients were labeled with
multiple different focuses of infection.
The safe dataset is a subset of the full dataset and contains what is defined as safe
observations or observations where the doctors are more certain of the diagnosis. This
dataset is created by removing all the observations where the patients are labeled with
more than one infection focus or if the sample was labeled as uncertain e.g. possible BSI
(PSBSI). The safe dataset is created in order to perform a sanity check. The safe dataset
will therefore be used to validate if the models can reproduce known biomarkers related
to the different infection types. While the aim with the full dataset is to generate a better
understanding of the underlying processes, while also providing a model that is true to
the environment in which it aims to operate in.
Infection focus
Safe dataset
Full dataset
Number of Observations
Airway
1007
1233
PSAirway
0
5001
BSI
2159
2969
PSBSI
0
375
UTI
10520
11444
PSUTI
0
1724
Other
0
10655
Total
13686
31307
Multi focus
No
Yes
Table 3.2: Comparative description of the two datasets, showing the number of obser­
vations in each infection category. Multi focus describes whether the dataset includes
observations where a patient was labeled with multiple infection categories.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
15
==PAGE:27==
3.5
Principal Component Analysis
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a method often used in multivariate statistics. The
method is generally great for dimensionality reduction of large datasets with many features
and for that reason it can also be used as a powerful visualization tool. In this section PCA
will be used as a visualization tool in order to gain insight on the most important features in
the dataset, while also highlighting the difficulty of the classification problem and providing
further insights into the model tuning process.
PCA requires a dataset without missingness. Therefore an imputation algorithm (Algo­
rithm 1) is introduced with the purpose of providing realistic feature values in each group.
In practice the algorithm uses the feature mean value within each patient and if this infor­
mation is unavailable it uses the mean value within the infection group.
Algorithm 1 An algorithm for mean imputation used for PCA analysis. The subscript i is
the feature in question, j is the infection type related to the sample, k is the patient from
which the sample originates, while l is the specific sample.
if featureijkl = NA then
featureijkl ←mean(featureijk)
else if all(featureijk = NA) then
featureijkl ←mean(featureij)
else if all(featureij = NA) then
featureijkl ←mean(featurei)
end if
This algorithm is only used for the purpose of PCA, as the mean imputation using the
within group property should be considered as slightly ”cheating”, as it introduces clinically
unattainable information about the outcome into the dataset.
Figure 3.7: Scree plot, showing the variance explained by each of the first 30 principal
components.
The scree plot in figure 3.7 shows the variance explained by each of the first 30 principal
components. Here it becomes clear that most of the variance is explained by the first
three components (20%), although the remaining components still collectively explain a
great proportion of the total variance.
16
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:28==
(a) Observations projected into the space of the
first two PCA components.
(b) Contribution vectors for each feature pro­
jected into the space of the first two PCA com­
ponents.
(c) Observations projected into the space of the
first and third PCA components.
(d) Contribution vectors for each feature pro­
jected into the space of the first and third PCA
components.
Figure 3.8: Principal Component Analysis using the safe dataset, where missing data is
inferred using algorithm 1.
This analysis (figure 3.8a) first and foremost shows that the groups cannot be linearly
separated easily. Although UTI’s seems to be significantly different from the other groups
in the safe dataset. It is however also seen that the two groups airways and BSI are
overlapping, nonetheless it should be noted that these two principal components account
for a rather limited proportion of the total variance, 9.9% and 5.6% respectively.
When looking at figure 3.8b in combination with figure 3.8a potential risk factors can be
identified by looking at the contribution of each feature along the two displayed principal
components. Here it can be seen that High Density Lipoprotein (HDL), BMI and Procal­
citonin (PROCAL) provides a high contribution to the first principal component. Here it
should be noted that HDL and BMI point in the direction of the UTI’s (yellow points) in
figure 3.8a, while PROCAL points in the opposite direction. This indicates that patients
with high values of HDL and BMI, and low values of PROCAL likely would belong to the
group of UTI’s. Further risk factors that potentially could be used to identify a UTI could
be Albumin (ALB), ERY, eGFR and aspartate transaminase (ASAT).
When just looking at PCA dimension one and two no clear distinction between airway in­
fections and BSI’s can be made. The features with a large contribution along the second
principal component are the creatinine concentration (CREA), the carbamide concentra­
tion (CARB), the patients age, their weight and eGFR. These features could potentially
be strong predictors for airway infections and BSI’s.
Figure 3.8c and 3.8d depicts the projection into the space of the first and third principal
components. Here a separation between airway infections and BSIs become slightly more
visible, there are however still larger overlaps between groups in this setting. Figure 3.8d
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
17
==PAGE:29==
shows that potential risk factors for BSIs could be high CREA, CARB and Hemoglobin A1C
(HBA1C) in combination with low Lymphocyte (LYMFO), Monocyte (MONO), Leukocyte
(LEU) and Neutrophil (NEUTRO) count.
This is expected as a low immune­cell count logically will lead to a higher risk of infection.
Further HBA1C is also known as a biomarker for long term blood sugar. This blood pa­
rameter can be elevated in patients with poorly regulated diabetes. Therefore it is also
likely that poorly regulated diabetes is a risk factor for BSIs. This was also shown in a
South Korean study comparing the risk of infection in diabetics to the general population
(Kim et al. 2019).
18
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:30==
4
Methods
This chapter will describe the current state­of­the­art machine learning methods used for
prediction of bacterial infection and how they have been implemented in this research.
This will include theory related to Support Vector Machines (SVM) (section 4.1) and the
XGBoost framework (section 4.2).
In this thesis, these modeling frameworks are deployed in order to research the different
focuses of bacterial infection and most importantly which biomarkers that can be useful for
each of the seven classes contained in the full dataset. Furthermore the scoring rules used
to evaluate the model, e.g. AUC, Sensitivity, Specificity and Brier Score, are introduced
in section 4.3.
In classical statistical modeling frameworks the variance or uncertainty is often modelled
explicitly, however due to the nature of the large dimensionality and the size of the parame­
ter space, many machine learning models lack explicit uncertainty estimation. Therefore
an overview of the conformal prediction framework (Shafer and Vovk 2008) is given in
section 4.4, which provides any model with statistically sound uncertainty guaranties.
4.1
Support Vector Machines (SVM)
In this section theory related to the SVM framework implemented using Scikit­learn’s
python package will be outlined. The specific function used in the python package can be
accessed at https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.svm.SVC. The pre­
sentation of this theory is inspired by Pedregosa et al. 2011 and Bishop 2006.
SVM’s aim to solve classification problems by constructing hyperplanes in high or infinite
dimensional spaces. The SVM makes use of support vectors, in order to construct a
hyperplane. The support vectors are defined by the points in the training set which are
closest to the hyperplane. These points and support vectors essentially create a decision
boundary. The best Support Vector Classifier (SVC) for any given problem will therefore
intuitively, be the SVC with the largest possible decision boundary. A larger decision
boundary will also generally lower the generalization error. When the data classes cannot
be linearly separated a soft margin can be introduced, creating a decision boundary that
allows some level of misclassification. In this case the support vectors will be given by
the points within the soft margin.
In practice this becomes an optimization problem where the model will try to predict the
label space y ∈{1, −1}n given the training dataset xi ∈Rp. where n is the number of
samples and p is the number of features. The SVC solves the primal problem given in
equation 4.1.
min
w,b,ζ
1
2wT w + C
n
∑
i=1
ζi,
subject to yi
(
wT ϕ(xi) + b
)
≥1 −ζi,
ζi ≥0, i = 1, ..., n,
(4.1)
Where w is the weight vector in the feature space and is partly responsible for the decision
function that defines the hyperplane.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
19
==PAGE:31==
C ∑n
i=1 ζi is a term representing the level of misclassification allowed. ζi is a non­negative
slack variable controlling the impact of misclassifying each observation, while C controls
the size and smoothness of the decision boundary. Large values of C will penalize mis­
classified observations more heavily, which effectively will decrease the size of the deci­
sion boundary and increase the complexity of the decision boundary shape. Small values
of C will on the contrary provide wide and smooth decision boundaries as a smaller C
allows for greater levels of misclassification.
yi
(
wT ϕ(xi) + b
)
≥1 −ζi is the constraint that each data point is classified correctly within
a margin of 1 −ζi. yi is the class label given the weight vector w, the feature vector
transformed into a high­dimensional space ϕ(xi) and a bias term b.
The dual form of the optimization problem for training the SVC relies on Lagrangian mul­
tipliers (α) to solve the primal optimization problem and can be written as in equation
4.2.
min
α
1
2αT Qα −eT α,
subject to yT α = 0,
0 ≤αi ≤C, i = 1, ..., n,
(4.2)
Here α is a vector of Lagrange multipliers and eT is a vector of ones, such that eT α become
the sum of Lagrange multipliers.
Q is an n by n positive semi­definite matrix where Qij ≡yiyjK(xi, xj). Here K(xi, xj) =
ϕ(xi)T ϕ(xj) represents the kernel function, describing the similarities between observa­
tions.
yT α is the constraint that the linear combination of class labels and Lagrange multipliers
is equal to zero. Further 0 ≤αi ≤C is the constraint that the Lagrange multipliers have
to be between zero and C. This ensures that the Lagrange multipliers does not become
excessively large.
The overall objective is then to find Lagrange multipliers (α), that minimizes the quadratic
from while satisfying the constraints. When the optimization problem is solved the decision
function can be written as seen in equation 4.3.
∑
i∈SV
yiαiK(xi, x) + b.
(4.3)
An important step in this process is the choice of kernel function. As seen earlier in figure
3.3, 3.8b and 3.8d the data seems non­linearly separable. Therefore a natural choice of
kernel is the radial basis function (RBF). The RBF­kernel (equation 4.4) can be described
as the squared euclidean distance between two observations and functions similar to K­
nearest­neighbours.
K(xi, xj) = e−γ||xi−xj||2.
(4.4)
The setup using the RBF­kernel relies on two user chosen parameters C and γ. Here γ is
chosen as γ =
1
pV ar(X), where p is the number of features. C is chosen using a parameter
grid search using different values of C. The best value of C in the grid search is found to be
C = 1. This set of parameters could likely be further optimized, by using a better optimizer.
20
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:32==
A limitation here is that the training time of the SVC grows at least quadratically with the
number of observations. In this case the model is trained upon ∼30, 000 observations,
leading to a training time of one or more hours, given the available computing resources
and the chosen parameter set. Higher values of C increases the training time significantly,
but could also increase the model performance, however increasing it too much will cause
the model to over­fit.
Lastly, it should also be noted that, as mentioned earlier (section 3.3.1), SVM’s gener­
ally perform better when the features have similar variance and distribution. Therefore a
standard scaler is introduced into the pipeline, such that the features are centered towards
zero and the variance is scaled to one.
4.2
XGBoost
In this section theory related to the XGBoost framework will be presented. The theory
in this section is inspired by T. Chen and Guestrin 2016. The specific functions used in
the python package can be accessed at https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/python/
python_api.html#xgboost.XGBClassifier.
XGBoost is a scalable tree boosting algorithm building on the ideas of Friedman 2001.
XGBoost is a supervised machine learning algorithm that tries to accurately classify ob­
servations, using an ensemble of simple classification trees. Given a dataset with n ob­
servations and m features D = {(xi, yi)} (|D| = n, xi ∈Rm, yi ∈R) XGBoost uses an
ensemble of K additive learners in to predict the output, as in equation 4.5
ˆyi = ϕ(xi) =
K
∑
k=1
fk(xi),
fk ∈F.
(4.5)
Here F = {f(x) = wq(x)}(q : Rm →T, w ∈RT ) is the space of regression trees internally
used by XGBoost to create predictions. These are also known as Classification and Re­
gression Trees (CART). q is the structure of each tree and T is the number of leaves in
the tree. fk denotes the k­th independent tree with structure q and leaf weight w. Each
regression tree evaluates to a continuous score on each leaf node, where wi represents
the score assigned to the leaf nodes. In other words, when XGBoost makes a prediction it
uses the sum of scores predicted by the ensemble of the CART’s. This method becomes
very powerful when looking at how each tree is designed and grown. The trees are build
by optimizing the objective function seen in equation 4.6.
L(ϕ) =
∑
i
l(ˆyi, yi) +
∑
k
Ω(fk),
Where Ω(fk) = γT + 1
2λ||w||2.
(4.6)
The first term ∑
i l(ˆyi, yi) is a differentiable convex loss function measuring the similarity
between predictions and reality.
The second term is the regularization term. This term gets larger when the model be­
comes more complex and serves to avoid over­fitting the model. Here γ is a user choice
controlling the loss reduction necessary to split the leaf node further, while λ is user spec­
ified L2 regularization term on the weights w.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
21
==PAGE:33==
The objective is parameterized using functions fk and can therefore not be optimized
traditionally. The model is as a result optimized in an additive setting, minimizing the
objective function seen in equation 4.7.
L(t) =
n
∑
i=1
l
(
yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
+ ft(xi)
)
+ Ω(ft).
(4.7)
Where t represents the t­th iteration. Using a second order Taylor approximation this
equation can be rewritten as in equation 4.8.
L(t) ≃
n
∑
i=1
[l(yi, ˆy(t−1)) + gift(xi) + 1
2hif2
t (xi)] + Ω(ft).
(4.8)
Where gi and hi is the first and second order derivative of the term l(yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
), which
describes the similarity between the i­th observation and the prediction for the i­th obser­
vation given the previous iteration.
Simplifying the equation by removing the constant l(yi, ˆy(t−1)) and expanding the term Ω
the equation can be written as in equation 4.9.
˜L(t) =
n
∑
i=1
[gift(xi) + 1
2hif2
t (xi)] + γT + 1
2λ
T
∑
j=1
w2
j
=
T
∑
j=1
[(
∑
i∈Ij
gi)wj + 1
2(
∑
i∈Ij
hi + λ)w2
j] + γT.
(4.9)
Where Ij = {i|q(xi) = j} is defined as the instance set of leaf j. And the optimal value of
the weights w∗
j for a given tree structure q(x) can be written as in equation 4.10.
w∗
j = −
∑
i∈Ij gi
∑
i∈Ij hi + λ.
(4.10)
Finally, the optimal value of the loss­function for a given tree structure q can be found
using equation 4.11.
˜L(q) = −1
2
T
∑
j=1
(∑
i∈Ij gi)2
∑
i∈Ij hi + λ + γT.
(4.11)
Now the task is to find the optimal hyperparameters for the model. γ and λ are chosen in
a similar manner to section 4.1, where a simple grid search was used. Here a randomized
grid search is used to optimize the hyperparameters. The optimal hyperparameters are
however found to be the default settings of the XGBoost model, where γ = 0 and λ = 1.
To summarize, the XGBoost algorithm trains a model additively, by making an initial pre­
diction. It then iteratively grows several trees, choosing the tree with the largest loss re­
duction in each iteration, such that the final model becomes an ensemble of trees, where
each tree essentially tries to correct the errors of all the previous ones.
22
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:34==
4.3
Scoring Rules
This section will describe the scoring metrics used to compare the model performance.
The models will be compared using multiple metrics, such as the Area Under the Curve
(AUC) of the Receiver Operating Characteristics curve (ROC­curve), precision, sensitivity,
specificity, F1­score and multi­class brier score.
For the models using the full­dataset, the metrics: AUC, precision, sensitivity, specificity
and F1­score will be presented both locally for each class as well as globally using micro
and macro averages.
Sensitivity also know as the recall or the True Positive Rate (TPR) is calculated as in
equation 4.12
TPR =
TP
TP + FN .
(4.12)
Where TP is the number of true positives and FN is the number of false negatives. This
metric describes the models ability to correctly identify people with the illness in question.
Specificity is also known as the True Negative Rate (TNR) and can be calculated using
equation 4.13.
TNR =
TN
TN + FP .
(4.13)
Where TN and FP are the number of true negatives and the number of false positives.
This metric, opposite to the sensitivity, describes the models ability to correctly identify
people without the illness in question.
The multi­class brier score is calculated as in equation 4.14 (Manokhin 2023).
1
N
N
∑
i=1
M
∑
j=1
(pij −yij)2.
(4.14)
Where pij is the predicted probability of each class and yij is a binary variable stating
if the class is present in the sample. This score describes the relationship between the
predicted probabilities and the true class. In the case with seven classes, such as the full
dataset, the multi­brier score, will output a number in the interval [0, 7], where 0 would be
a perfect classifier, while 7 is a perfectly imperfect classifier.
The classical formulas for precision and F1­score can be found in the appendix E.
4.4
Conformal Prediction
The next phase in the modelling process is to access the model performance, how much
the models can be improved and what uncertainty guaranties the model can provide. To
achieve this the Conformal prediction framework created by Shafer and Vovk 2008 will be
applied two fold.
First the model estimated probabilities will be calibrated using the calibration technique
from the conformal prediction framework called Venn­ABERS calibration. The reason
for doing so is to increase the trustworthiness of the model. Specifically, if the model
predicts a probability of airway infection of 42%, it should reflect the reality. Calibrating
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
23
==PAGE:35==
the model will typically not only increase the trustworthiness of the model, but also improve
the models predictive capabilities.
Secondly, the conformal prediction framework is applied to provide conformal risk control,
such that the models will be calibrated to output a set of labels with a guarantee that the
correct labels are in that set, given a user defined error rate. This is a powerful method
that is known to increase the diagnosis accuracy of so called human in the loop solutions
(Cresswell et al. 2024), where humans make machine guided decisions.
In order to understand the methods used to apply conformal risk control, a short introduc­
tion to the conformal prediction framework is given. Conformal predictions is a method
used to create prediction sets. It aims to satisfy the criteria given in equation 4.15 (An­
gelopoulos and Bates 2021).
1 −α ≤P(Yn+1 ∈C(Xn+1)) ≤1 −α +
1
n + 1.
(4.15)
Where (Xn+1, Yn+1) is a new observation from the same distribution and α ∈[0, 1] is a
user specified error rate. The algorithm used to satisfy this criteria can be described in
four steps.
1. Generate a model and a calibration dataset.
2. Define a score function s(x, y) ∈R, such that larger scores reflect a worse agree­
ment between x and y.
3. Compute a quantile ˆq, such that ˆq is equal to the ⌈(n+1)(1−α)⌉
n
quantile of the calibra­
tion scores s1 = s(X1, Y1), ..., sn = s(Xn, Yn), where ⌈·⌉is the ceiling function.
4. Use ˆq to form prediction sets for new observations, such that
C(Xn+1) = {y : s(Xn+1, y) ≤ˆq}.
Typically, the score function is defined as one minus the model class probability output,
such that the score function is large when the models predictions are misaligned with the
ground truth.
4.4.1
Venn­ABERS calibration
Venn­ABERS calibration is a form of conformal predictors, that aims to calibrate the out­
putted model probabilities, such that they conform to the ground truth. The advantages
of the conformal prediction framework is that it provides vigorous uncertainty guaranties
insensitive to the data distribution, size of the dataset and the rudimentary model (Vovk
and Petej 2012).
Venn­ABERS calibration functions by isotonic regression in a two­fold manner, such that
two probabilities are obtained. One describing the probability of belonging to the class and
one describing the probability of not belonging to the class. These are denoted p1 and
p0. These probabilities creates a prediction interval (p0, p1) for the observation belonging
to the positive class, with a guarantee that the true probability is in the prediction interval
(Manokhin 2023).
The two probabilities can be combined using the formula seen in equation 4.16, such that
a new and calibrated probability can be obtained and used in a decision system (Manokhin
2017).
p =
p1
1 −p0 + p1
.
(4.16)
24
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:36==
This is implemented using the python package Venn­ABERS calibration created by Ivan
Petej, which can be accessed at: https://github.com/ip200/venn-abers.
4.4.2
Conformal Risk Control
Conformal risk control (CRC) is a method building on the ideas of Vladimir Vovk (Shafer
and Vovk 2008), which uses conformal predictions in a multi­label setting to control a risk
function, such that it conforms to a certain level of acceptable risk. This is mathematically
formulated in equation 4.17, inspired by the theory developed by Angelopoulos, Bates,
et al. 2022.
P
(
Yn+1 /∈C(Xn+1)
)
≤α.
(4.17)
Where (Xn+1, Yn+1) is a new observation, C(Xn+1) is a function of the model and cali­
bration dataset, that outputs a prediction set, given the input features Xn+1. Finally, α is
a user­specified error rate. Here the construction of the prediction sets is bound by the
miscoverage.
However as seen in section 2 similar studies on the field of bacterial infections generally
produce models with a low sensitivity relative to the specificity. Therefore it is desirable
to design the conformal guarantee seen in equation 4.17, such that it instead provides
guaranties of the form seen in equation 4.18.
E
[
l(C(Xn+1), Yn+1)
]
≤α.
(4.18)
Here l(C(Xn+1), Yn+1) is a bounded loss function, that decreases when the size of the
prediction set C(Xn+1) increases. This is called a conformal risk control guarantee. In
the multi­label setting the sets will be defined as a subset of K classes Yi ⊆{1, ..., K}.
The goal is then to produce a multi­label classifier f : X →[0, 1]K such that the prediction
sets contain a sizeable proportion of true labels.
This is achieved by post­processing the model outputs, such that a probability threshold
is obtained for each class, Cλ(x) = {k : f(X)k ≥1 −λk}, meaning that only classes with
adequately high scores are included in the prediction sets. High values of λk leads to a
high probability of including the class, resulting in a more cautious model.
l
(
Cˆλ(Xn+1), Yn+1
)
= 1 −|Yn+1 ∩Cλ(Xn+1)|
|Yn+1|
.
(4.19)
In order to control the sensitivity of the model, the loss­function l, is introduced in equation
4.19, using the false negative rate (FNR) to control the sensitivity. Setting the error level
α = 0.1 in equation 4.18 will guarantee that the sensitivity is at least 90% on average.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
25
==PAGE:37==
26
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:38==
5
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained from applying the Support Vector Machine
(SVM) and XGBoost models to both the safe and full dataset. First the models will be
evaluated briefly using the safe dataset, to ensure that the models can perform in a safe
environment and reproduce results similar to the physicians.
Secondly, a more thorough evaluation of the results using the full dataset will be pre­
sented. Here the aim is to summarize the model performance using the scoring met­
rics described in section 4.3. This will include metrics from both the naive models, the
Venn­ABERS calibrated models and the models utilizing both Venn­ABERS calibration
and conformal prediction sets.
Lastly the best performing model will be studied using SHapley Additive exPlanations
(SHAP) plots. This type of plots uses game theory to interpret the output of machine
learning models (Lundberg et al. 2020). These plots will be used to extract feature impor­
tance for each class in the full dataset, providing potential biomarkers for each infection
focus.
The advantages of using SHAP­plots is that it is a model agnostic tool and can be widely
used to provide both local and global explainability. The disadvantages however are that
it can be computationally slow, especially for kernel based methods, and that the SHAP­
plots can be difficult to interpret for non­technical users (Bhattacharya 2022). Moreover
it has also been shown in a paper by Huang and Marques­Silva 2023, that the SHAP­
framework tends to provide misleading feature importance, sometimes assigning impor­
tance to features that in fact are not important or vice versa deeming important features
as non­important.
5.1
Safe dataset
In this section the models will be evaluated on a basic level, to ensure that the models can
perform in a safe environment. Here the models are trained using 5­fold cross validation,
with a train­test split using 80% of the data as training points and the remaining 20% as
test points.
5.1.1
Support Vector Machine
The first model to be tested is the SVM. As can be seen in figure 5.1, it seems as if this
model performs quite well on the safe dataset, as the mean AUC across the 5­fold cross
validation is 0.94. However, table 5.1 conveys another story. Here it is clearly seen that
the model mostly is driven by the large group of UTI’s, seen by the large discrepancy
between the micro and macro averaged sensitivity and specificity.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
27
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.1: Micro averaged One vs Rest (OvR) ROC­curve for the SVC fitted to the safe
dataset using 5­fold cross validation, with a 80­20% train­test split.
Precision
Sensitivity
specificity
F1­score
Support
Airways
0.85 (0.040)
0.32 (0.020)
1.00 (0.002)
0.47 (0.017)
209.4 (8.32)
BSI
0.80 (0.024)
0.28 (0.018)
0.99 (0.002)
0.42 (0.020)
422.0 (11.90)
UTI
0.83 (0.008)
0.99 (0.003)
0.32 (0.026)
0.90 (0.005)
2106.6 (13.32)
Micro Average
0.83
0.83
0.48
0.79
Macro Average
0.82
0.53
0.77
0.60
Table 5.1: Classification report, showing model performance of the naive SVM model,
trained on the safe dataset. The values in the table are the mean and (std), using 5­fold
cross validation with a 80­20% train­test split.
28
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:40==
5.1.2
XGBoost
The second model tested is the XGBoost model. The mean AUC of the ROC­curve (figure
5.2) is 0.96, similar to the mean AUC of the SVM at 0.94. The XGBoost model does
however seem to perform slightly better. This is especially seen by the increased micro
and macro averaged sensitivity, specificity and F1­score.
Figure 5.2: Micro averaged OvR ROC­curve for the naive XGBoost model fitted to the
safe dataset using 5­fold cross validation, with a 80­20% train­test split.
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
Airways
0.84 (0.023)
0.55 (0.030)
0.99 (0.002)
0.66 (0.026)
209.4 (8.32)
BSI
0.79 (0.017)
0.49 (0.025)
0.98 (0.003)
0.61 (0.016)
422.0 (11.90)
UTI
0.88 (0.005)
0.97 (0.004)
0.55 (0.017)
0.92 (0.003)
2106.6 (13.32)
Micro Average
0.86
0.87
0.65
0.85
Macro Average
0.84
0.67
0.84
0.73
Table 5.2: Classification report, showing model performance of the naive XGBoost model,
trained on the safe dataset. The values in the table are the mean and (std), using 5­fold
cross validation with a 80­20% train­test split.
All in all this bodes well for the models trained on the full dataset, as these models will be
trained on a larger dataset. This should especially help the XGBoost model, as this will
provide more information about the smaller classes. It could however also handicap the
performance of the SVM, as this model uses support vectors to separate classes. The
introduction of four more classes in the full dataset, can therefore make the spatial sepa­
ration more difficult, especially considering that these four new classes are accompanied
by a higher uncertainty and that three of the new classes are expected to resemble three
existing classes (Gunn et al. 1998).
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
29
==PAGE:41==
5.2
Full dataset
Now the full dataset is introduced. In this section the models will be evaluated more
thoroughly, using the full dataset. Again the models are trained in a 5­fold cross validation
setting, however now the dataset is split into three, such that 80% of the dataset is used for
training. The remaining 20% is further split into two sets, a calibration set and a test set.
1000 observations are used to form the calibration dataset and the remaining observations
are used as the test set.
5.2.1
Support Vector Machine
The SVM is now fitted to the full dataset. The AUC of the ROC­curves for each class can
be seen in figure 5.3. This figure shows that the model have similar performances across
the different classes when looking exclusively at the AUC, varying from a mean AUC of
0.82 to a mean AUC of 0.92.
Here it should be noted that the two largest classes, UTI and Other, have significantly
lower variability across the 5­fold cross validation, seen by a standard deviation approxi­
mately half of the other classes, alongside narrower confidence bands.
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.98 (0.040)
0.10 (0.033)
1.00 (0.000)
0.17 (0.056)
204.6 (7.34)
PSairways
0.90 (0.088)
0.14 (0.038)
1.00 (0.001)
0.24 (0.062)
819.8 (9.72)
BSI
0.95 (0.087)
0.07 (0.029)
1.00 (0.000)
0.13 (0.052)
493.6 (22.07)
PSBSI
1.00 (0.000)
0.10 (0.052)
1.00 (0.000)
0.17 (0.089)
55.0 (2.19)
UTI
0.76 (0.024)
0.59 (0.042)
0.89 (0.008)
0.67 (0.036)
1935.0 (31.96)
PSUTI
0.94 (0.079)
0.04 (0.018)
1.00 (0.000)
0.08 (0.034)
295.0 (17.85)
Other
0.79 (0.047)
0.36 (0.039)
0.95 (0.008)
0.49 (0.047)
1805.8 (40.59)
Micro Average
0.83
0.35
0.95
0.45
Macro Average
0.90
0.20
0.98
0.28
Table 5.3: Classification report, showing model performance of the Naive SVM model.
The numbers are the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross validation.
Looking at the scoring metrics seen in table 5.3, it is evident that the sensitivity of the SVM
generally is extremely low. Furthermore both the micro and macro averaged specificity
and precision of the model are high. This suggests that the model only predicts a specific
class when it is very certain of the right class.
30
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.3: ROC­curves for the SVC fitted to the full dataset using 5­fold cross validation.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
31
==PAGE:43==
This tendency can also be seen in the confusion matrix plotted in figure 5.4. This figure
shows the predicted class vs. the ground truth. Evidently, this model have difficulties
predicting the sparse classes, e.g. when the actual class is airways, the model is more
likely to predict the class other. The same tendency can be seen for all classes except
the UTI’s.
Figure 5.4: Confusion matrix for the naive SVM fitted to the full dataset. The numbers
are summed across the 5­fold cross validation. Refer to appendix F.1 for baseline values
given a theoretically perfect predictor.
The fact that the SVM only predicts a class when it is utmost certain of the correct class
is further supported by the calibration curve plotted in figure 5.5. This figure expresses
the mean predicted probability vs. the fraction of positives. Noticeably, the fraction of
positives is higher than the mean predicted probability for all classes.
This suggests two things. One, the model is badly calibrated, e.g. when the model outputs
a probability of approximately 35% risk of airway infection, the actual risk of airway infec­
tion is 80%. Two, the decision boundary might be too large, resulting in a large fraction
of observations not being detected as the correct class.
This could potentially be fixed by increasing the value of the parameter C, at the expense
of longer training times and a higher risk of over­fitting the model. Instead the model
probabilities are adjusted using the Venn­ABERS calibration method described in section
4.4.1. This method fits a two fold isotonic regression to the calibration dataset with 1000
32
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:44==
observations. It then uses the obtained regression model and equation 4.16, to output
calibrated probabilities as seen in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.5: Micro averaged calibration curve for the naive SVM model, showing the mean
predicted probability vs. the fraction of positives.
The Venn­ABERS calibrated probabilities seen in figure 5.6, seems to improve the calibra­
tion curve significantly. Using the same example as previously, when the model predicts
a probability of approximately 35% the observed probability is approximately 45%.
Additionally, when looking at the two largest classes, UTI and Other, it seems as if the
model probabilities are almost perfectly calibrated, when using Venn­ABERS calibration.
In fact this is the case for most of the classes with the exception of the three smallest
classes, airways, PSBSI and PSUTI. This is likely caused by a lack of positives in the
calibration dataset, resulting in large uncertainty for the isotonic regression model repre­
senting the probability of the positive class.
Furthermore it can be seen that the model is better calibrated towards the endpoints, i.e.
when the predicted probability is close to zero or a hundred. This is seen by a smaller dis­
tance to the dashed line representing a perfectly calibrated model. On the contrary when
the model predicts probabilities in the interval [40, 60]%, the model is badly calibrated.
In practice this means that the model is more unreliable in this interval and that if the
model was to be used in a practical setting as an assistance to the physicians, then the
physicians should rely less on the model output when the predicted probability is in this
interval.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
33
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.6: Micro averaged calibration curve for the Venn­ABERS calibrated model, show­
ing the mean predicted probability vs. the fraction of positives.
The Venn­ABERS calibrated probabilities increase the model performance greatly. Look­
ing at table 5.5, it is apparent that the micro and macro averaged sensitivity increases
by 19 and 27 percentage points respectively, with only a small reduction in the specificity
and precision.
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.84 (0.062)
0.38 (0.159)
1.00 (0.002)
0.50 (0.182)
204.6 (7.34)
PSairways
0.73 (0.091)
0.46 (0.084)
0.97 (0.009)
0.57 (0.086)
819.8 (9.72)
BSI
0.78 (0.099)
0.38 (0.100)
0.99 (0.004)
0.51 (0.109)
493.6 (22.07)
PSBSI
0.76 (0.180)
0.45 (0.208)
1.00 (0.001)
0.54 (0.213)
55.0 (2.19)
UTI
0.75 (0.043)
0.61 (0.070)
0.88 (0.035)
0.67 (0.034)
1935.0 (31.96)
PSUTI
0.76 (0.093)
0.42 (0.183)
0.99 (0.006)
0.51 (0.161)
295.0 (17.85)
Other
0.70 (0.037)
0.59 (0.090)
0.87 (0.032)
0.64 (0.058)
1805.8 (40.59)
Micro Average
0.74
0.54
0.91
0.61
Macro Average
0.76
0.47
0.96
0.56
Table 5.4: Classification report, showing model performance of the Venn Abers calibrated
SVM model. The numbers show the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross vali­
dation.
The confusion matrix in figure 5.7, portrays the same story. This is clearly seen by the
increased numbers in the diagonal. E.g. Comparing the Venn­ABERS calibrated SVM
34
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:46==
model (figure 5.7), with the naive SVM model (5.4), it is seen that the naive model correctly
classifies 98 observations as airway infection, compared to the Venn­ABERS calibrated
model, correctly classifying 388 observations as airway infection.
The lower precision and sensitivity can similarly be seen in the confusion matrix, when
looking at the off­diagonal elements. The off­diagonal elements increase similarly to the
diagonal. This essentially means that the Venn­ABERS calibrated model outputs larger
prediction sets, compared to the naive model.
Figure 5.7: Confusion matrix for the Venn­ABERS calibrated SVM fitted to the full dataset.
The numbers are summed across the 5­fold cross validation. Refer to appendix F.1 for
baseline values given a theoretically perfect predictor.
Although the sensitivity is increased in all classes, it is still low considering the setting in
which the model should be used. Bacterial infections can be fatal and the consequences
of missing a positive observation is therefore significantly larger, compared to the conse­
quences of mispredicting a healthy individual.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
35
==PAGE:47==
The next step in the modelling process is therefore to adjust the model, using Conformal
Risk Control (CRC). CRC is, as described in section 4.4.2, a method used to control the
risk by outputting prediction sets with statistical guaranties. Due to the severity of certain
bacterial infections it is desirable to control the sensitivity, such that the correct diagnosis
is contained in the prediction set most of the time, therefore the CRC method is set to use
α = 10%, such that the sensitivity within each class is controlled towards an average of
90%.
Applying the CRC method to the Venn­ABERS calibrated SVM model, does as expected
increase the sensitivity. This model obtains micro and macro averaged sensitivities of
91% and 92% respectively. It does however come with a significant cost related to the
precision and specificity. E.g. the precision for the classes BSI and PSBSI decreases
from 38% and 45% to 16% and 4% respectively. This is a significant reduction and it
essentially means that whenever a prediction set is outputted e.g. containing the label
BSI, the chance that this is the correct diagnosis is 16% (std. 0.082).
These tendencies are also depicted in the confusion matrix in figure 5.8. Similar to the
application of the Venn­ABERS calibration, the CRC method further increases the number
of correctly classified observations, e.g. the model now correctly classifies 763 observa­
tions as airway infection, opposed to the 388 from the Venn­ABERS calibrated model.
The values in the off­diagonal are however also increased significantly, due to the nature
of the CRC method.
It might initially seem as if the consequences of using CRC to form prediction sets destroys
the model performance and accuracy, when looking at the precision and F1­score. It
is however valuable to apply the CRC method as it provides statistical guaranties that
otherwise would be unknown. The usefulness of the CRC method and the size of the
prediction sets it outputs will be discussed further in section 6.
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.17 (0.161)
0.90 (0.058)
0.69 (0.152)
0.26 (0.178)
169.6 (6.05)
PSairways
0.22 (0.016)
0.95 (0.013)
0.37 (0.052)
0.35 (0.022)
656.0 (10.97)
BSI
0.16 (0.028)
0.94 (0.019)
0.46 (0.151)
0.27 (0.042)
403.4 (17.72)
PSBSI
0.04 (0.037)
0.91 (0.079)
0.58 (0.299)
0.08 (0.063)
43.0 (2.97)
UTI
0.58 (0.028)
0.91 (0.020)
0.62 (0.046)
0.71 (0.024)
1579.2 (26.81)
PSUTI
0.16 (0.082)
0.89 (0.050)
0.65 (0.145)
0.26 (0.103)
235.0 (13.04)
Other
0.51 (0.046)
0.91 (0.012)
0.53 (0.105)
0.65 (0.037)
1456.2 (34.59)
Micro Average
0.43
0.91
0.54
0.55
Macro Average
0.26
0.92
0.56
0.37
Table 5.5: Classification report, showing model performance of the Venn Abers calibrated
SVM model, using the conformal prediction framework to generate predictions. Prediction
sets are generated using 1000 calibration points and the desired error rate is set to α =
10%. The numbers show the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross validation.
36
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.8: Confusion matrix for the Venn­ABERS calibrated SVM fitted to the full dataset,
using CRC to form prediction sets. The numbers are summed across the 5­fold cross
validation. Refer to appendix F.1 for baseline values given a theoretically perfect predictor.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
37
==PAGE:49==
5.2.2
XGBoost
The second model tested on the full dataset is the XGBoost model. Initially comparing the
AUC’s of this model with the AUC’s for the SVM, this model seems to have significantly
improved performance. Here the mean AUC across the 5­fold cross validation ranges
from 0.89 in the class other to 0.96 in the airway and PSBSI class. The AUC’s for each
of the classes can be seen in figure 5.9.
Interestingly, the standard deviation related to the mean AUC’s is of similar magnitude
across all classes. This suggests that the model potentially generalizes well across differ­
ent class sizes. Further the uncertainty being similar across the different models indicates
that the uncertainty primarily arises from the quality of the dataset and the data splits in
the cross validation.
Figure 5.9: ROC­curves for the XGBoost model fitted to the full dataset using 5­fold cross
validation.
38
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:50==
Another interesting observation here is that both the models seem prone to errors caused
by potentially bad data splits. This can be seen both in figure 5.3 and 5.9, where it is seen
that the fourth cross validation fold performs significantly worse than the other folds.
Similar to the SVM, the XGBoost model produces a high specificity across all classes.
The micro averaged precision for the XGBoost model is equal to that of the SVM model.
The slightly lower macro averaged precision for the XGBoost model does however show
that the variability in precision is lower across the different classes, compared to the SVM.
This also suggests that the model is relatively certain whenever it predicts a class. E.g. a
UTI precision of 82% means that if the model outputs the UTI label 10 times it will be the
correct diagnosis in roughly 8 cases.
Furthermore and perhaps most importantly the micro and macro averaged sensitivity of
the XGBoost model is 62% and 55% respectively. Compared to the SVM, the XGBoost
model increases the micro and macro averaged sensitivity by 27 and 25 percentage points
respectively. This is especially promising, as the application of the CRC method innately
will decrease the specificity and precision. A higher naive sensitivity will therefore lead to
comparatively smaller reductions in the precision and specificity.
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.88 (0.141)
0.55 (0.209)
1.00 (0.001)
0.66 (0.223)
204.6 (7.34)
PSairways
0.83 (0.128)
0.51 (0.120)
0.98 (0.009)
0.63 (0.132)
819.8 (9.72)
BSI
0.84 (0.170)
0.43 (0.149)
0.99 (0.004)
0.56 (0.177)
493.6 (22.07)
PSBSI
0.81 (0.292)
0.58 (0.269)
1.00 (0.001)
0.67 (0.295)
55.0 (2.19)
UTI
0.82 (0.053)
0.74 (0.071)
0.91 (0.025)
0.78 (0.063)
1935.0 (31.96)
PSUTI
0.89 (0.130)
0.43 (0.165)
1.00 (0.001)
0.57 (0.197)
295.0 (17.85)
Other
0.81 (0.075)
0.62 (0.077)
0.93 (0.026)
0.70 (0.078)
1805.8 (40.59)
Micro Average
0.83
0.62
0.94
0.70
Macro Average
0.84
0.55
0.97
0.65
Table 5.6: Classification report, showing model performance of the Naive XGBoost model.
The numbers show the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross validation.
Comparing the confusion matrix for the naive XGBoost model and the naive SVM (see
figure 5.10 and 5.5), it is clearly seen that the XGBoost outperforms the SVM. E.g. the
XGBoost algorithm is able to accurately predict 1069 BSI’s compared to the 179 accurate
BSI predictions from the naive SVM. In fact depending on the predicted class the XGBoost
algorithm provides up to a 10­fold increase in the number of true positives, compared to
the SVM.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
39
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.10: Confusion matrix for the naive XGBoost model fitted to the full dataset. The
numbers are summed across the 5­fold cross validation. Refer to appendix F.1 for base­
line values given a theoretically perfect predictor.
40
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.11: Micro averaged calibration curve for the naive XGBoost model fitted to the
full dataset, showing the mean predicted probability vs. the fraction of positives.
Similar to the SVM, the XGBoost model underestimates the true risk of infection, how­
ever slightly less comparatively. Using the same example as for the SVM, it is seen that
when the model predicts ∼35% risk of airway infection, the observed risk is ∼70%, as
seen by the calibration curves plotted in figure 5.11. Therefore the Venn­ABERS calibra­
tion is applied once again in order to enhance the intuitive interpretation of the outputted
probabilities.
The calibration curve for the Venn­ABERS calibrated XGBoost model is illustrated in figure
5.12. The Venn­ABERS calibration results in mostly well calibrated probabilities through­
out the whole probability space, especially when looking at the classes UTI, Other and
BSI.
It should however be noted that the worst calibrated class once again is the PSBSI class.
This suggests that there perhaps are too few data points in this class to provide meaningful
insights.
Comparing the calibration curves for the Venn­ABERS calibrated models, it seems as
if the model probabilities are better calibrated towards the midsection of the graph (see
the interval [0.4, 0.6] mean predicted probability). The specificity and sensitivity is also
reflected in this graph. This is seen by the relatively low variability towards zero, compared
to the increased variability towards the mean predicted probability of 100%.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
41
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.12: Micro averaged calibration curve for the Venn­ABERS calibrated XGBoost
model fitted to the full dataset, showing the mean predicted probability vs. the fraction of
positives.
Again, the increased model performance is also reflected in the classification report. Table
5.8 shows that the sensitivity increases in each class, with only minor penalties to the
precision and specificity. E.g. The macro averaged precision is reduced by six percentage
points, while the macro averaged specificity only is reduced by one percentage point.
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.82 (0.105)
0.71 (0.239)
0.99 (0.001)
0.74 (0.205)
204.6 (7.34)
PSairways
0.75 (0.115)
0.64 (0.155)
0.96 (0.015)
0.69 (0.128)
819.8 (9.72)
BSI
0.75 (0.131)
0.60 (0.207)
0.98 (0.004)
0.66 (0.193)
493.6 (22.07)
PSBSI
0.76 (0.222)
0.69 (0.204)
1.00 (0.002)
0.72 (0.207)
55.0 (2.19)
UTI
0.81 (0.046)
0.75 (0.093)
0.90 (0.018)
0.78 (0.070)
1935.0 (31.96)
PSUTI
0.81 (0.123)
0.64 (0.195)
0.99 (0.002)
0.71 (0.179)
295.0 (17.85)
Other
0.76 (0.065)
0.71 (0.095)
0.89 (0.023)
0.74 (0.081)
1805.8 (40.59)
Micro Average
0.78
0.70
0.92
0.74
Macro Average
0.78
0.68
0.96
0.72
Table 5.7: Classification report, showing model performance of the Venn Abers calibrated
XGBoost model. The numbers show the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross
validation.
42
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:54==
Furthermore the Venn­ABERS calibration also results in a slight increase in F1­score,
meaning that the calibrated model provides a better balance between precision and sen­
sitivity. This is also visible in the confusion matrix seen in figure 5.13. Here it is clear that
the calibrated model yields an increased number of true positives, while still maintaining
a high precision.
Figure 5.13: Confusion matrix for the Venn­ABERS calibrated XGBoost model fitted to
the full dataset. The numbers are summed across the 5­fold cross validation. Refer to
appendix F.1 for baseline values given a theoretically perfect predictor.
Finally the CRC method is applied to the Venn­ABERS calibrated XGBoost algorithm, in
order to control the sensitivity. This is done using an α = 0.1, meaning that the desired
sensitivity is set to 90%. This reduces the micro averaged precision and specificity by 19
and 17 percentage points respectively.
Comparing the confusion matrix using the CRC method on the calibrated XGBoost model
(figure 5.14) to the confusion matrix in figure 5.13, it is seen that the number of true posi­
tives only increase marginally. In fact the number of true positives decrease by 98 for the
UTI class. Further it is also seen that the precision decreases as the model provides a
set of possible differential diagnoses.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
43
==PAGE:55==
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.51 (0.269)
0.89 (0.053)
0.92 (0.090)
0.61 (0.242)
169.6 (6.05)
PSairways
0.48 (0.138)
0.90 (0.023)
0.77 (0.172)
0.61 (0.130)
656.0 (10.97)
BSI
0.46 (0.159)
0.87 (0.041)
0.85 (0.123)
0.59 (0.149)
403.4 (17.72)
PSBSI
0.30 (0.335)
0.95 (0.054)
0.72 (0.321)
0.34 (0.357)
43.0 (2.97)
UTI
0.70 (0.069)
0.91 (0.012)
0.76 (0.089)
0.79 (0.051)
1579.2 (26.81)
PSUTI
0.46 (0.179)
0.87 (0.031)
0.88 (0.156)
0.57 (0.189)
235.0 (13.04)
Other
0.60 (0.082)
0.92 (0.019)
0.66 (0.132)
0.72 (0.062)
1456.2 (34.59)
Micro Average
0.59
0.90
0.75
0.70
Macro Average
0.50
0.90
0.80
0.60
Table 5.8: Classification report, showing model performance of the Venn Abers calibrated
XGBoost model, using the conformal prediction framework to generate predictions. Pre­
diction sets are generated using 1000 calibration points and the desired error rate is set to
α = 10%. The numbers show the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross validation.
Figure 5.14: Confusion matrix for the Venn­ABERS calibrated XGBoost model, using
CRC to form prediction sets. The numbers are summed across the 5­fold cross validation.
Refer to appendix F.1 for baseline values given a theoretically perfect predictor.
5.3
Comparison
To summarize, the results chapter contains a detailed examination of the SVM and XG­
Boost model performances. The analysis encompasses the performance on both the
44
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:56==
safe and full datasets, describing the issues such as probability calibration and risk con­
trol. Further the model performance is summarized in table 5.9. This table does addition­
ally, to the previously discussed performance metrics, include the Multi Brier Score. This
score describes the similarity between model probabilities and observed outcome, with
a lower score signalling a better calibrated model, as described in equation 4.14. From
the Multi Brier Score it is also clear that the XGBoost algorithm significantly outperforms
the SVM. The XGBoost model will therefore be examined further in the following section
using SHAP­plots to provide insights on the most important features.
Model
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Multi Brier Score
Naive SVM
0.83
0.35
0.95
0.45
0.533
Venn­ABERS SVM
0.74
0.54
0.91
0.61
0.500
Naive XGBoost
0.83
0.62
0.94
0.70
0.401
Venn­ABERS XGBoost
0.78
0.70
0.92
0.74
0.380
Table 5.9: Comparison table, showing the micro averaged performance metrics for each
model, in both their naive and calibrated states.
5.4
SHAP­plots
In this section the XGBoost model is scrutinized using SHapley Additive exPlanations
plots (SHAP­plots), in order to gain insights into the most important features and how
these affect the model output. The SHAP­values are calculated using concepts from
game theory. In this case, using a multi­label­output model, these values represent the
Log­odds of predicting that class. Specifically, in the plots in this section the SHAP­values
represent how much knowing the value of a given feature changes the Log­odds model
output for that specific observation.
Figure 5.15b shows feature importance SHAP­plot related to the class of airway infections.
The figure shows the SHAP value for O2Therapy on the y­axis and the O2Therapy value
on the x­axis. Here it can be seen that if a patient is receiving a high rate of O2Therapy
E.g. above 60 L pr. minute the log­odds output will increase by a number in the interval
[1, 3]. In this figure the choice of coloring is the Early warning score (EWS). This shows
the interaction between O2Therapy and EWS. This is useful for discovering interactions
where one value of O2Therapy can lead to multiple outcomes of SHAP­value. Here an
O2Therapy value of zero can leads to a SHAP­value in the interval roughly [­1, 0.5]. It
can then be seen that if both the O2Therapy and EWS values are low the model outputs
a low chance of airway infection.
Figure 5.15a, shows the 9 most important features alongside the sum of the remaining
features. Here it is evident that the model especially utilizes information about the patients
ability to breathe and oxygenate their blood, seen by both O2Therapy and Saturation
being amongst the most important features. Further, the model also identifies high age
as a risk factor for airway infections. This is also consistent with the literature (Meyer
2004), as age is a known risk factor for airway infections.
The model also identifies lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) as a potential biomarker for airway
infections. LDH is known as an unspecific biomarker for tissue damage (Drent et al. 1996)
and it is therefore quite interesting to see that the model associates low values of LDH
with a higher risk of airway infection. This should however be interpreted in the context of
bacterial infections, meaning that low LDH comparatively to the ensemble of other classes
is associated with a higher probability of airway infection.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
45
==PAGE:57==
Creatinine (CREA) and estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate (eGRF) are both measures
of kidney function, as described in section 3.3, here it is interesting to see that the model
weights the raw value of CREA higher than the eGFR, which essentially is the CREA
concentration adjusted by age and gender.
(a) Feature importance showing the 9 most im­
portant features, when predicting the class air­
way infection.
The x­axis shows the SHAP
value of a given observation, colored by the rel­
ative magnitude of the feature.
(b) This scatter plot shows the SHAP value of
O2Therapy as a function of O2Therapy, the
observations are then colored using the EWS.
The gray shadow in the bottom shows the point
density.
Figure 5.15: SHAP plots for the airway class, using the XGBoost model trained in the first
cross­validation fold (fold 0).
The SHAP­plots for PSairway infections show similar tendencies to the SHAP­plots for
airway infections. Figure 5.16a, shows the feature importance for PSairway infections.
Again it is seen that the model values information about the patients ability to transport
and oxygenate blood, seen by the presence of O2Therapy, Saturation and hemoglobin
concentration (HB). Gender also seems to provide significant insights, this is also seen
in figure 5.16b, which shows that the SHAP­value associated with O2Therapy can vary
greatly at low levels of O2Therapy. This variation seems to be partly explained by gender,
such that men women are associated with a lower risk of PSairway infection.
(a) Feature importance showing the 9 most
important features, when predicting the class
PSairway infection.
The x­axis shows the
SHAP value of a given observation, colored by
the relative magnitude of the feature.
(b) This scatter plot shows the SHAP value of
O2Therapy as a function of O2Therapy, the ob­
servations are then colored by sex (male=1,
female=0).
The gray shadow in the bottom
shows the point density.
Figure 5.16: SHAP plots for the PSairway class, using the XGBoost model trained in the
first cross­validation fold (fold 0).
46
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:58==
The next SHAP­plot (figure 5.17), explains the model output associated with BSI’s. For
this class of infection, the model generally values information about the patients immune
system, seen by the presence of the leukocyte (LEU) and lymphocyte (LYMFO) count,
where especially a low LEU count results in high risk of BSI. Normally bacterial infections
should cause an elevated LEU count (Honda et al. 2016), Rigshospitalet does however
have a large group of immunocompromised patients, which could explain this peculiar
result.
Furthermore the patients temperature seems to be a predictor of BSI’s. This is persis­
tent with the literature, patients with BSI’s are known to have elevated body temperature,
except for cases where the blood circulation if affected, which can cause hypothermia
(Kushimoto et al. 2013).
Additionally, bilirubin (BILI) and HB are shown as predictors. HB seems to have a rela­
tively low effect on the model output, it is however interesting to see that high concentra­
tion of BILI is associated with BSI, as BILI is known to elevate when erythrocytes (ERY)
containing HB are broken down.
(a) Feature importance showing the 9 most im­
portant features, when predicting the class BSI.
The x­axis shows the SHAP value of a given
observation, colored by the relative magnitude
of the feature.
(b) This scatter plot shows the SHAP value of
LEU as a function of LEU, the observations are
then colored by LYMFO. The gray shadow in
the bottom shows the point density.
Figure 5.17: SHAP plots for the BSI class, using the XGBoost model trained in the first
cross­validation fold (fold 0).
The class PSBSI utilizes similar predictors to the class BSI. This class does however put
less emphasis on the immune cell counts and more emphasis on parameters related to
kidney function, as seen in figure 5.18a. Looking at figure 5.18b, it is also fascinating to
see that the model utilizes age to create discrete age groups, similar to how physicians
might utilize age groups. E.g. It seems as if the model creates age groups such as less
than 20, 20­35, 35­60 and above 60.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
47
==PAGE:59==
(a) Feature importance showing the 9 most im­
portant features, when predicting the class PS­
BSI. The x­axis shows the SHAP value of a
given observation, colored by the relative mag­
nitude of the feature.
(b) This scatter plot shows the SHAP value of
age as a function of age, the observations are
then colored by eGFR. The gray shadow in the
bottom shows the point density.
Figure 5.18: SHAP plots for the PSBSI class, using the XGBoost model trained in the first
cross­validation fold (fold 0).
The last major group of interest in this thesis is the UTI’s. The SHAP­plots in figure 5.19
show that the model identifies gender as a risk factor for UTI. From figure 5.19b it is seen
that the SHAP­value for sex is adjusted by a value in the intervals [0, 1], [­1, 0] based on
the patients gender.
Further the model correlates high concentrations of C­reactive protein (CRP) to a low
likelihood of UTI, compared to the other classes of infection. Similarly a high concentration
of albumin (ALB) impacts the model output towards a greater risk of UTI. This is also
consistent with the initial discoveries made in section 3.3, where it was seen that the
median CRP value for the UTI class is lower in comparison to the other classes, whereas
the median value of ALB in contrast is higher.
(a) Feature importance showing the 9 most im­
portant features, when predicting the class UTI.
The x­axis shows the SHAP value of a given
observation, colored by the relative magnitude
of the feature.
(b) This scatter plot shows the SHAP value of
sex (male=1, female=0) as a function of sex,
the observations are then colored by eGFR.
The gray shadow in the bottom shows the point
density.
Figure 5.19: SHAP plots for the UTI class, using the XGBoost model trained in the first
cross­validation fold (fold 0).
The class PSUTI share three of its nine most important features with the class UTI. These
features are age, LEU and HB. Age is a risk factor of most diseases and interestingly
enough figure 5.20b shows that the model outputs a higher risk of UTI when patients are
48
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:60==
aged 60­80 year. It should also be noted that the relationship between age and the SHAP
value for age roughly is parabolic.
(a) Feature importance showing the 9 most
important features, when predicting the class
PSUTI. The x­axis shows the SHAP value of a
given observation, colored by the relative mag­
nitude of the feature.
(b) This scatter plot shows the SHAP value of
age as a function of age, the observations are
then colored by eGFR. The gray shadow in the
bottom shows the point density.
Figure 5.20: SHAP plots for the PSUTI class, using the XGBoost model trained in the first
cross­validation fold (fold 0).
The last class is the Other class. This class in an ensemble of other types of infection, e.g.
skin infection or eye infection etc. Again age is a risk factor. Further it is also seen that high
values of CRP and international normalized ratio (INR) leads to a higher probability of this
class. CRP is an unspecific biomarker of inflammation and INR is a ratio describing the
bloods ability to coagulate. Here it is interesting to see that the model recognizes CRP as
the most important feature for the class containing the largest umbrella of sub­diagnoses.
(a) Feature importance showing the 9 most
important features, when predicting the class
Other. The x­axis shows the SHAP value of a
given observation, colored by the relative mag­
nitude of the feature.
(b) This scatter plot shows the SHAP value of
CRP as a function of CRP, the observations are
then colored by INR. The gray shadow in the
bottom shows the point density.
Figure 5.21: SHAP plots for the Other class, using the XGBoost model trained in the first
cross­validation fold (fold 0).
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
49
==PAGE:61==
50
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:62==
6
Discussion
This chapter will dive into the discussion on the topics of this thesis. This will address
potential pitfalls of the modelling process, from start to finish. Starting with a discussion of
how the data have been collected and handled, and if the methods used introduce certain
biases as well as aleatory or epistemic errors.
Subsequently, the choice of machine learning algorithms will be discussed, including the
choice of parameters and how the data satisfies the conditions for the models. This will
also include a discussion on the conformal prediction framework and which conditions
that needs to be meet, in order to deploy the models successfully.
Finally, the advantages and disadvantages of the SHAP­analysis will be discussed with
respect the the trustworthiness of the SHAP­outputs, especially considering the findings of
Huang and Marques­Silva 2023, showing that SHAP­values can be unreliable for feature
importance.
6.1
Data Biases and Outlier handling
The dataset contains many missing data points. Therefore the data have been enriched
using a strategy, mixing continuous and discrete data points as described in section 3.2.
This can introduce a bias, as the true feature value is unknown. This can affect the models
differently. The Support Vector Machine (SVM) utilize the euclidean distance between
observations to create decision boundaries, while the XGBoost model uses decision trees.
As the discrete data points inherently have less variance and smaller spatial differences,
the SVM will have problems optimizing the support vectors.
The bias towards this data type have a smaller impact on the XGBoost model. The XG­
Boost model does not explicitly utilize distances as the SVM. Instead it essentially uses a
long sequence of logical questions, splitting the data into different groups. The important
detail here is that the model asks a question e.g. featurei ≤x. When the model is trained
the questions that the model ask are chosen based on the information gain, meaning that
if a feature provides little to no information, e.g. if the majority of feature values are iden­
tical, the model will put less weight on that feature and it will have a lesser direct impact
on the model.
However, it should be noted that this data enrichment method fundamentally introduces
epistemic errors. Some features e.g. haptoglobin (HAPTO), is highly influenced by this
type of data entries, meaning that the majority of data entries for these features will have
identical values, even if the patients true blood parameters are different. This type of
epistemic error will essentially reduce the available information gain from the affected
features. This type of error is limited by the precision of the biochemical test methods and
are therefore not easily fixed.
Another approach could be to use a different encoding of the variables. Another type of
gradient boosting machine (GBM) is the CatBoost model (Prokhorenkova et al. 2018).
This GBM is know to have excellent performance on datasets with many categorical fea­
tures, as the model uses an encoding trick where it encodes the data sequentially. This
have been proven to reduce leakage and improve the predictive performance (McElfresh
et al. 2024). It could therefore be interesting to test this model, while encoding the features
affected by the data enrichment strategy as ordinal data.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
51
==PAGE:63==
All in all considering the AUC of both the SVM and the XGBoost models, it seems as
if the models are able to capture and explain most of the variance in the dataset and
especially the remaining errors by the XGBoost model could therefore be expected to
arise from the quality of the dataset. This calls for both epistemic and aleatory errors. The
epistemic errors mean that the model perhaps lack information about other parameters. In
practice the physicians also utilize the patient anamnesis and their presenting symptoms
when providing a diagnosis. It is likely that these descriptive features could improve the
model performance further and reduce the level of epistemic errors, e.g. if the model is
informed whether a patient is coughing or not or if they feel pain when urinating. These are
symptoms of airway infection and UTI respectively and would likely reduce the number of
epistemic errors.
The dataset is also subject to aleatory errors. These errors are related to the data col­
lection methods. The dataset contains information from sundhedsplatformen. Data from
sundhedsplatformen is handheld, meaning that the data is registered by humans, which
increases the risk of erroneous data entries. This was seen in section 3.2, where many
entries of clearly erroneous data was encountered, however the data filtration will not
capture numerically valid miss inputs.
In relation to the aleatory errors the quality of the data labels should also be discussed.
As described in section 3.1, the data labels are generated using clinical findings, such as
bacterial growth cultures. The task for the physicians here is to identify when a positive
bacterial culture is caused by infection and when it is caused by contamination or growth
of normal bacterial flora.
In terms of data availability, as mentioned in section 3.1, it would be possible to include the
use of diagnosis codes. The inclusion of diagnosis codes would however as described be
time consuming. Further the diagnosis codes are based on handheld data from sundhed­
splatformen. This introduces the same type of aleatory errors as previously discussed.
Furthermore, the diagnosis codes are also occasionally transferred from previous hospital
admissions, such that the diagnosis codes simply not are applicable at the given time.
Given the currently available data labels and the results seen in section 5.4. It is seen
that the categories airway and PSairway have five features out of nine in common, when
looking at the SHAP­value ranked feature importance, seen in figure 5.15a and 5.16a.
Similarly the sets {BSI, PSBSI} and {UTI, PSUTI} have four and three features in com­
mon respectively. This suggests that these classes perhaps are more similar than first
anticipated and it would therefore be interesting to evaluate the models in a setting where
the PS classes are considered as their native class. These findings should however be
interpreted with appropriate skepticism and should be subject to further scrutiny before
being considered as definitive.
In relation to section 3.2, the outlier removal process should also be discussed. Specifi­
cally the chosen cut­off values utilized to detect and remove outliers. The cut­offs in this
project are set as to include as many observations as possible, while still excluding ob­
servations that are clear results of human error. The cut­offs are as described based on
prior domain knowledge and have not been subject to sensitivity analysis, with respect to
the model performance. The reason for doing so is to obtain a dataset that is as true to
the real world as possible. As described in section 3.2, another approach would be to use
the Inter Quantile Range (IQR) rule.
The outliers in the dataset should however not have any significant effect on the mod­
els. The SVM utilizes the RBF­kernel which functions similar to the k­nearest­neighbours
52
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:64==
method. Outliers will by definition not have nearby neighbours and should therefore not
have significant impact on the performance on the SVM. The XGBoost model builds de­
cision trees iteratively with the intention of fixing errors made in precious iterations. The
outliers can therefore have an effect on the XGBoost model. The XGBoost model does
however try to handle this using a parameter controlling the minimum loss reduction re­
quired to grow a new tree (T. Chen and Guestrin 2016), meaning that the model only
includes new trees in the ensemble, if it significantly improves the model performance.
6.2
Conformal Predictions and Human in the Loop systems
The conformal prediction framework is a powerful method used to generate prediction
sets. In this thesis both the Venn­ABERS calibration method and the conformal risk con­
trol (CRC) method is applied to ensure a well calibrated model with uncertainty guaranties.
In this section the results related to the CRC method is discussed with the intention of clar­
ifying when and why the method is useful, as well as discussing the practical application
at different levels of controlled uncertainty.
The usage of conformal prediction sets in conjunction with human decision makers, have
in a paper by Cresswell et al. 2024, investigating human in the loop systems, been proven
to outperform both humans decision makers working on their own and humans making
informed decisions based on outputs from machine learning algorithms providing top­k
prediction sets. Top­k prediction sets outputs prediction sets of size k, meaning that the
k most likely labels are included in the prediction set. Conformal prediction sets does
on the contrary provide varying set sizes, depending on the desired uncertainty guaran­
tee. Figure 6.1 shows the prediction set sizes from the XGBoost model trained on the full
dataset. Here it is seen that as the sensitivity rises, the model will output larger predic­
tion sets, while the prediction set sizes become smaller when the sensitivity is lowered.
Conformal prediction sets are compared to top­k sets a powerful method in conjunction
with human decision makers, as the varying set sizes signals uncertainty in a human like
fashion. For example if the model outputs a set size of one it signals confidence in the
prediction, while if the set size is either large or zero, it signals that the model is uncertain
and that the human decision maker perhaps should be more careful when making a de­
cision. From figure 6.1 it is seen that when the sensitivity is controlled to 99% the median
set size is three. This means that the model, in order to provide a statistical guarantee on
the sensitivity of 99%, needs to include roughly half of the label space. In practice this will
not narrow the field of search significantly, however if the sensitivity is controlled towards
95% or 90% it is seen that the median set size is two and one respectively. This narrows
the field of search for the physicians while still providing high model sensitivity.
Figure 6.1: Histograms showing the prediction sets sizes at different levels of alpha rang­
ing from 0.01 to 0.3, when using Conformal Risk Control, to control the model sensitivity.
This results in a mean sensitivity of 0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.8 and 0.7 respectively, when reading
the plots from left to right.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
53
==PAGE:65==
Moreover, Cresswell et al. 2024 found that conformal prediction sets potentially reduce
the response time of the decision maker. These findings where however not conclusive,
nevertheless promising in the field of bacterial infections, where speed and accurate treat­
ment are of high importance.
Further it should be discussed what the model needs, in order to be deployed successfully.
When the model makes predictions using the conformal prediction framework it assumes
that the new data observations arise from the same distribution on which the model is
trained and calibrated. It is therefore important to setup an out of distribution detection
algorithm, such that if new observations, that are out of distribution, are encountered the
model will not provide predictions, as the statistical conditions in these cases cannot be
satisfied. This would essentially also mean that the statistical guaranties provided by
the conformal prediction framework would be invalidated, which is why the model should
not be allowed to influence the decision makers, when out of distribution observations
are encountered. For example, the dataset is biased towards sick people, i.e. patients
with many different presenting diseases. It is therefore likely that samples from healthy
individuals would be out of distribution and predictions based on this type of samples
would therefore likely provide faulty conclusions.
6.3
Model Calibration and Feature Importance
Lastly, the model will be discussed with respect to validity. How well is the model cali­
brated, in terms of parameter optimization, probability calibration and what can we learn
from the model.
Section 4.1 and 4.2 describe the parameter optimization, using a grid search. In this
thesis a narrow grid search was used, to reduce training costs and complexity. It is likely
that the performances of both models included in this thesis will increase with further
parameter optimization. However considering the performance of the XGBoost model
seen in table 5.9 it is likely that further model tuning only will lead to marginal gains.
This is also supported by a competing GBM named CatBoost. On their website 1 a table
comparing the CatBoost model with other GBM’s can be seen. They find that log­loss
performance gain from tuning the XGBoost model is between approximately zero and
four percent across nine different benchmark datasets.
Furthermore the Venn­ABERS calibration technique was applied to attain a model with
probability outputs rooted in reality. As seen in section 5, the Venn­ABERS calibration
performs extremely well on both models. There are virtually no downsides to the Venn­
ABERS calibration technique, as the only requirement is a calibration dataset.
Finally, it will be discussed what information can be learned from the models. SHAP­plots
is a widely used technique for explainable AI. As already mentioned in section 5, SHAP­
value feature importance is known to assign importance to non important features and
vice versa assign zero importance to important features.
One of the problems with using SHAP­values is that it assumes independence of all fea­
tures. This condition is however often not satisfied in machine learning datasets. This is
also seen in figure 3.6, further it is also known that e.g. the feature eGFR is dependent
on the CREA concentration. The results in section 5.4, should therefore be interpreted
with skepticism. The insights gained from the SHAP­plots does however largely agree
with the results from the principal component analysis (PCA). There are however differ­
ences, in the PCA the features O2Therapy and sex have approximately zero impact. This
1https://catboost.ai/#:~:text=Full%20news%20list-,Benchmarks,-Quality
54
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:66==
does however not mean that they have zero importance. The feature sex is binary and
is therefore naturally unfit for PCA. The O2Therapy feature contains low variance as only
few patients are in the need of treatment with oxygen therapy and should therefore also
be expected to have a low impact on the PCA. These two features should however be
expected to have a high importance, as gender is a well known risk factor for UTI (Vasude­
van 2014) and O2Therapy is a treatment given to patients that have trouble oxygenating
their blood.
The PCA revealed that variables such as procalcitonin (PROCAL), body mass index (BMI)
and High Density Lipoprotein (HDL) could be potential important features. These features
does however not show up in the SHAP feature importance analysis. This does not prove
that the SHAP feature importance analysis is erroneous, but it does mean that the model
should be scrutinized further before any conclusions on potential new biomarkers can be
made.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
55
==PAGE:67==
56
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:68==
7
Conclusion
This master thesis focused on training machine learning algorithms that can assist physi­
cians in diagnosing bacterial infections. The main objective of this thesis was to assess if
the trained machine learning algorithms can differentiate between the three main focuses
of bacterial infection and explore if the models predictive behavior could be used to ac­
quire new groups of biomarkers for infection. Further the goal was to calibrate the model,
such that results can be guarantied within reasonable uncertainty.
The key findings of this thesis emphasize that machine learning models, specifically Gra­
dient Boosting Machines (GBM) such as the XGBoost model, has great potential when
diagnosing bacterial infections. Through the analysis of both the safe and the full dataset,
the XGBoost model proved to outperform the Support Vector Machine (SVM) in all as­
pects. Specifically, the XGBoost model significantly outperforms the SVM in terms of
sensitivity for airway infections and BSI’s.
However, a variety of problems where encountered in the modelling process. Particularly,
the models are limited by the quality of the dataset. The classification problem of bacterial
infections is inherently imbalanced towards UTI’s. Further it is likely that the data labels
are subject to errors.
Calibrating the model output probabilities using the Venn­ABERS calibration technique
proved useful, as it both improves the natural interpretation of the model output, as well
as selected performance metrics, such as Sensitivity, F1­score and Multi Brier Score.
Utilizing Venn­ABERS calibration only comes at a small cost of a calibration dataset of
1000 observations.
Another tool from the world of conformal predictions was also applied, in order to gen­
erate prediction sets. This thesis successfully utilized the Conformal Risk Control (CRC)
method, in order to control the sensitivity and generate prediction sets of varying size,
signalling uncertainty in a human like fashion.
Furthermore, the context in which the model operates should be considered carefully, as
new observations that are out of distribution will violate the statistical assumptions and
cause the uncertainty guaranties to break down.
Moreover, the aim of the study was to investigate if the models predictive behaviour could
provide groups of new biomarkers to differentiate between different focuses of bacterial
infection. For this purpose a SHAP­analysis was used. Here it was found that the SHAP­
analysis on a surface level cannot provide insights on new potential biomarkers and that
the outcomes of the SHAP­analysis should be approached with skepticism.
All in all, these findings highlight the effectiveness and validity of the XGBoost model, when
used in conjunction with Venn­ABERS calibration and Conformal Risk Control. Integrating
the methods with Rigshospitalets current methods could offer a promising future within the
world of bacterial infections and diagnostic medicine.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
57
==PAGE:69==
58
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:70==
8
Perspective
This chapter delves into diverse viewpoints and critical analyses that contribute to a nu­
anced understanding of the research findings. Examining various angles, this section
aims to broaden the discourse surrounding the study, limitations and potential future re­
search, by representing multiple perspectives.
As mentioned in the discussion, a natural first step for further research on the topic
would be to test other models and perform a broader search of the parameter space,
potentially further optimizing the models. Specifically the usage of the CatBoost model
(Prokhorenkova et al. 2018) would be interesting, especially if the dataset was to be en­
riched by the addition of multiple categorical variables. Preliminary results utilizing the
CatBoost model can be seen in appendix G.
Another potential outlook on the problem would be to attempt to predict the bacteria, in
the bacterial growth culture. In an ideal world this could potentially expedite the diagnos­
tic process by several days. The difficulty of the classification problem might however
also increase significantly, as this would introduce many new classes. Moreover, this will
further increase the class imbalances, as most bacterial infections are driven by a small
group of bacteria.
Given the magnitude of the dataset, it would be interesting to further dive into diagnostics
in specific patient groups. For example looking at bacterial infections in Intensive Care
Unit (ICU) patients. ICU patients are as the name states in intensive care and their vital
parameters are therefore under constant surveillance. It would therefore be interesting
to gather a dataset utilizing time series data from admission to the hospital, to when the
patient is discharged. This dataset could then be examined using tools from more tradi­
tional statistical frameworks, such as models from time series analysis, generalised mixed
effects models or hierarchical generalized linear models. These tools could be used to
raise alarms signalling hospital acquired infection.
The available dataset could also be utilized to predict the severity of disease. If the dataset
and models can provide a measure of survival chances and a potential time frame for the
severity of the disease, it would significantly help physicians decide, when to use the fast
and expensive diagnostic tests, versus when the patient potentially can be sent home
during the analysis. Specifically being able to reduce the number of occupied hospital
beds would significantly reduce the cost, which in turn can improve patient care in other
areas.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
59
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
Pedregosa, F. et al. (2011). “Scikit­learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Ma­
chine Learning Research 12, pp. 2825–2830. URL: https://www.jmlr.org/papers/
volume12/pedregosa11a/pedregosa11a.pdf?ref=https:/.
Bishop, Christopher (2006). Pattern recognition and machine learning. English. Springer.
ISBN: 0­387­31073­8.
Chen, Tianqi and Carlos Guestrin (2016). “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system”. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining. doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939785, pp. 785–794. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/2939672.2939785.
Angelopoulos, Anastasios N and Stephen Bates (2021). “A gentle introduction to confor­
mal prediction and distribution­free uncertainty quantification”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07511.
Ikuta, Kevin S et al. (2022). “Global mortality associated with 33 bacterial pathogens in
2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019”. In: The
Lancet 400.10369. DOI: 10.1016/S0140­6736(22)02185­7, pp. 2221–2248. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(22)02185-7.
Marandi, Ramtin Zargari et al. (N.D.). “Machine learning approaches for early diagnosis
of bloodstream infection using electronic health records”. In: Unpubliched.
Rawson, TM et al. (2019). “Supervised machine learning for the prediction of infection
on admission to hospital: a prospective observational cohort study”. In: Journal of An­
timicrobial Chemotherapy 74.4. doi: 10.1093/jac/dky514, pp. 1108–1115. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/jac/dky514.
Sakai, Tatsuo and Yuh Morimoto (2022). “The History of Infectious Diseases and Medicine”.
In: Pathogens 11.10. doi: 10.3390/pathogens11101147, p. 1147. URL: https://doi.org/
10.3390/pathogens11101147.
Duncan, Christopher John and Susan Scott (2005). “What caused the black death?” In:
Postgraduate medical journal 81.955, pp. 315–320. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC1743272/pdf/v081p00315.pdf.
Fleming, Alexander (1929). “On the antibacterial action of cultures of a penicillium, with
special reference to their use in the isolation of B. influenzae”. In: British journal of
experimental pathology 10.3, p. 226. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC2048009/pdf/brjexppathol00255-0037.pdf.
Gerace, Elisabetta et al. (2022). “Recent Advances in the Use of Molecular Methods for
the Diagnosis of Bacterial Infections”. In: Pathogens 11.6. doi: 10.3390/pathogens11060663,
p. 663. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens11060663.
Zhu, Hanliang et al. (2020). “PCR past, present and future”. In: Biotechniques 69.4. doi:
10.2144/btn­2020­0057, pp. 317–325. URL: https://doi.org/10.2144/btn-2020-0057.
Chen, Peixin, Wenwen Sun, and Yayi He (2020). “Comparison of the next­generation se­
quencing (NGS) technology with culture methods in the diagnosis of bacterial and fun­
60
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:72==
gal infections”. In: Journal of Thoracic Disease 12.9. doi: 10.21037/jtd­20­930, p. 4924.
URL: https://doi.org/10.21037%2Fjtd-20-930.
Gibson, Beth et al. (2018). “The distribution of bacterial doubling times in the wild”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the Royal Society B 285.1880. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2018.0789, p. 20180789.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2018.0789.
Hsu, Chan­Peng et al. (2021). “Clinical physiological parameters for the prediction of
gram­negative bacterial infection in the emergency department”. In: BMC Infectious
Diseases 21.1. doi: 10.1186/s12879­020­05758­1, pp. 1–10. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1186/s12879-020-05758-1.
Zoabi, Yazeed et al. (2021). “Predicting bloodstream infection outcome using machine
learning”. In: Scientific reports 11.1. doi: 10.1038/s41598­021­99105­2, p. 20101. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-99105-2.
Rawson, Timothy M et al. (2021). “Supervised machine learning to support the diagnosis
of bacterial infection in the context of COVID­19”. In: JAC­antimicrobial resistance 3.1.
doi: 10.1093/jacamr/dlab002, dlab002. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/jacamr/dlab002.
MADS­gruppen (2024). MADS (Mikrobiologisk Afdelings DataSystem). URL: https : / /
madsonline.dk/ (visited on 01/15/2024).
Cooper, Stephen and Charles E Helmstetter (1968). “Chromosome replication and the di­
vision cycle of Escherichia coli Br”. In: Journal of molecular biology 31.3. doi: 10.1016/0022­
2836(68)90425­7, pp. 519–540. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(68)90425-7.
Brockhoff, Per B. et al. (2018). Introduction to Statistics at DTU. DTU Compute. URL:
https://02402.compute.dtu.dk/enotes/book-IntroStatistics.
Samsudin, Intan and Samuel D Vasikaran (2017). “Clinical utility and measurement of
procalcitonin”. In: The Clinical Biochemist Reviews 38.2, p. 59. URL: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5759088/.
Rigshospitalet Labportal (2024). Online. URL: https://labportal.rh.dk/Labportal.asp?
ShowStart=Y.
Madsen, Henrik and Poul Thyregod (2011). Introduction to General and Generalized Lin­
ear Models. English. Chapman & Hall. ISBN: 9781420091557.
Osborne, Jason (2019). “Improving your data transformations: Applying the Box­Cox trans­
formation”. In: Practical Assessment, Research, and Evaluation 15.1. DOI: 10.7275/qbpc­
gk17, p. 12. URL: https://doi.org/10.7275/qbpc-gk17.
Pawitan, Yudi (2013). In All Likelihood. Oxford University Press.
Braun, Donald P and Jules E Harris (1981). “Modulation of the immune response by by
chemotherapy”. In: Pharmacology & Therapeutics 14.1. DOI: 10.1016/0163­7258(81)90012­
7, pp. 89–122. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/0163-7258(81)90012-7.
Kim, Eun Jin et al. (2019). “Diabetes and the risk of infection: a national cohort study”.
In: Diabetes & metabolism journal 43.6. DOI: 10.4093/dmj.2019.0071, p. 804. URL:
https://doi.org/10.4093/dmj.2019.0071.
Shafer, Glenn and Vladimir Vovk (2008). “A Tutorial on Conformal Prediction.” In: Journal
of Machine Learning Research 9.3. URL: https : / / www . jmlr . org / papers / volume9 /
shafer08a/shafer08a.pdf.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
61
==PAGE:73==
Friedman, Jerome H (2001). “Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting ma­
chine”. In: Annals of statistics, pp. 1189–1232. URL: https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=d101cfcfdf22760dc55d8dff28d6ffc49b4fd846.
Manokhin, Valery (2023). Practical Guide to Applied Conformal Prediction in Python. En­
glish. Packt Publishing Ltd. ISBN: 978­1­80512­276­0.
Cresswell, Jesse C et al. (2024). “Conformal Prediction Sets Improve Human Decision
Making”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13744. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13744.
Vovk, Vladimir and Ivan Petej (2012). “Venn­abers predictors”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.0025.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1211.0025.
Manokhin, Valery (June 2017). “Multi­class probabilistic classification using inductive and
cross Venn–Abers predictors”. In: Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Conformal and
Probabilistic Prediction and Applications. Ed. by Alex Gammerman et al. Vol. 60. Pro­
ceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, pp. 228–240. URL: https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v60/manokhin17a.html.
Angelopoulos, Anastasios N, Stephen Bates, et al. (2022). “Conformal risk control”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02814. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.02814.
Lundberg, Scott M et al. (2020). “From local explanations to global understanding with
explainable AI for trees”. In: Nature machine intelligence 2.1. DOI: 10.1038/s42256­
019­0138­9, pp. 56–67. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0138-9.
Bhattacharya, Aditya (2022). Applied Machine Learning Explainability Techniques: Make
ML models explainable and trustworthy for practical applications using LIME, SHAP,
and more. Packt Publishing Ltd.
Huang, Xuanxiang and Joao Marques­Silva (2023). “The Inadequacy of Shapley Values
for Explainability”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08160. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.
08160.
Gunn, Steve R et al. (1998). “Support vector machines for classification and regression”.
In: ISIS technical report 14.1, pp. 5–16. URL: https://see.xidian.edu.cn/faculty/chzheng/
bishe/indexfiles/new_folder/svm.pdf.
Meyer, Keith C (2004). “Lung infections and aging”. In: Ageing research reviews 3.1. DOI:
10.1016/j.arr.2003.07.002, pp. 55–67. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2003.07.002.
Drent, M et al. (1996). “Usefulness of lactate dehydrogenase and its isoenzymes as in­
dicators of lung damage or inflammation”. In: European Respiratory Journal 9.8. DOI:
10.1183/09031936.96.09081736, pp. 1736–1742. URL: https://erj.ersjournals.com/
content/erj/9/8/1736.full.pdf.
Honda, Takayuki et al. (2016). “Neutrophil left shift and white blood cell count as markers
of bacterial infection”. In: Clinica Chimica Acta 457. DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2016.03.017,
pp. 46–53. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2016.03.017.
Kushimoto, Shigeki et al. (2013). “The impact of body temperature abnormalities on the
disease severity and outcome in patients with severe sepsis: an analysis from a multi­
center, prospective survey of severe sepsis”. In: Critical care 17. DOI: 10.1186/cc13106,
pp. 1–9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/cc13106.
Prokhorenkova, Liudmila et al. (2018). “CatBoost: unbiased boosting with categorical fea­
tures”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 31.
62
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:74==
McElfresh, Duncan et al. (2024). “When do neural nets outperform boosted trees on tab­
ular data?” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36. URL: https://
proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/f06d5ebd4ff40b40dd97e30cee632123-
Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf.
Vasudevan, Ranganathan (2014). “Urinary tract infection: an overview of the infection and
the associated risk factors”. In: J Microbiol Exp 1.2. DOI: 10.15406/jmen.2014.01.00008,
p. 00008. URL: https://doi.org/10.15406/jmen.2014.01.00008.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
63
==PAGE:75==
64
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:76==
A
Outlier Filtration
Table A.1: Table showing the cut­off values for outlier removal, when filtering the biochem­
ical variables and the vital parameters. Empty fields mean that there are no relevant limits
for that feature.
Variable
Code
Variable Name
Lower
boundary
Upper
boundary
Note
ABGLU
Glucose Arterie blood
ABPH
Arterial blood pH
ALAT
Alanine
aminotransferase
92
ALB
Albumin
AMYL
Amylase
198
APTT
Activate partial
thromboplastin time
100
ASAT
Aspartate
transaminase
500
BASO
basophilocyte count
5
BILI
Bilirubin
BILIKON
Konjugated bilirubin
BILIUK
Unkonjugated bilirubin
CA
Calcium
CAI
Ionized calcium
CARB
Carbamide
CHOL
Cholesterol
CL
Chloride
CREA
Creatinine
CRP
C­reaktive protein
DIMER
Fibrin D­Dimer
ECVBE
Base excess Ecv
EOS
Eosinophil count
ERY
Erythrocyte count
FERRITIN
Ferritin
2500
GGT
Gamma­Glutamyl
Transferase
GLU
Glucose
0.001
HAPTO
Haptoglobin
HB
Hemoglobin
0
HBA1C
Glycated Hemoglobin
HCO3
Hydrogencarbonat
HDL
High Density
Lipoprotein cholesterol
INR
International
normalized ratio blood
test
JERN
Iron
0.001
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
65
==PAGE:77==
Table A.1: Continued
Variable
Variable Name
Lower
boundary
Upper
boundary
Note
K
Potassium
KBGLU
Capillary blood glucose
LDH
Lactate
dehydrogenase
2500
LDL
Low Density
Lipoprotein cholesterol
LEU
Leukocyte count
LYMFO
Lymphocyte count
25
MCH
Mean corpuscular
hemoglobin
MCHC
Mean corpuscular
hemoglobin
concentration
MG
Magnesium
MONO
Monocyte count
NA
Sodium
NEUTRO
Neutrophil count
PHOS
Phosphate
PROCAL
Procalcitonin
25
TRANSJBG
Transferrin saturation
TRIG
Triglyceride
TSH
Thyroid Stimulating
Hormone
eGFR
estimated Glomerular
Filtration Rate
BMI
Body Mass Index
10
75
Diastolic BP
Diastolic Blood
Pressure
0
HR
Heart Rate
0
350
O2Therapy
Oxygen therapy
0
150
RespFreq
Respiration frequency
0
100
Saturation
Blood oxygen
saturation
0
100
Systolic BP
Systolic Blood
Pressure
0
400
Temperature
Patient Temperature
10
42.3
Weight
Weight
20
If age is > 15
Weight
Weight
25
If age is > 20
Weight
Weight
0.2
250
66
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.1: Flow chart, showing the data filtration process in detail. In the figure observa­
tions are considered as a full line of data, i.e. a combination of all features measured at
a given time for a given patient, while data points denotes single data entries for a given
feature.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
67
==PAGE:79==
B
Biochemical Normal Ranges
Table B.1: Table showing the normal ranges for the biochemical variables as defined by
Rigshospitalet Labportal 2024.
Variable
Sex
Age (Years)
Lower
boundary
Upper
boundary
Unit
ABGLU
4.2
7.2
mmol/L
ABPH
7.37
7.45
pH
ALAT
0­4
5
45
U/L
ALAT
Women
5­17
8
32
U/L
ALAT
Men
5­8
8
27
U/L
ALAT
Men
9­13
8
37
U/L
ALAT
Men
14­7
8
47
U/L
ALAT
Women
18­125
10
45
U/L
ALAT
Men
18­128
10
70
U/L
ALB
0
26
34
g/L
ALB
1­3
34
42
g/L
ALB
4
36
48
g/L
ALB
Women
5­14
39
47
g/L
ALB
Women
15­17
35
47
g/L
ALB
Men
5­17
39
50
g/L
ALB
18­39
36
48
g/L
ALB
40­69
36
48
g/L
ALB
70­125
34
45
g/L
AMYL
0­1
80
U/L
AMYL
2­17
105
U/L
AMYL
18­125
25
120
U/L
APTT
0
25
35
s
APTT
1­125
25
37
s
ASAT
0
15
65
U/L
ASAT
1­4
10
60
U/L
ASAT
5­17
17
46
U/L
ASAT
Women
18­125
15
35
U/L
ASAT
Men
18­125
15
45
U/L
BASO
0.01
0.1
109/L
BILI
0­4
5
25
mol/L
BILI
Women
5­17
3
18
mol/L
BILI
Men
5­13
3
20
mol/L
BILI
Men
14­17
3
25
mol/L
BILI
18­125
5
25
mol/L
BILIKON
4
mol/L
BILIUK
Women
17
mol/L
BILIUK
men
22
mol/L
CA
0
2.1
2.62
mmol/L
CA
1­4
2.17
2.66
mmol/L
CA
women
5­13
2.26
2.58
mmol/L
68
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:80==
Table B.1: Continued
Variable
Sex
Age (Years)
Lower
boundary
Upper
boundary
Unit
CA
women
14­17
1.95
2.58
mmol/L
CA
men
5­13
2.22
2.58
mmol/L
CA
men
14­17
2.1
2.58
mmol/L
CA
18­125
2.15
2.51
mmol/L
CAI
1.18
1.32
mmol/L
CARB
0­1
1.8
5.4
mmol/L
CARB
2­17
2.5
7.5
mmol/L
CARB
women
18­49
2.6
6.4
mmol/L
CARB
women
50­125
3.1
7.9
mmol/L
CARB
men
18­49
3.2
8.1
mmol/L
CARB
men
50­125
3.5
8.1
mmol/L
CHOL
5
mmol/L
CL
0­2
91
115
mmol/L
CL
3­17
97
108
mmol/L
CL
18­125
98
106
mmol/L
CREA
0
14
34
mol/L
CREA
1­2
15
31
mol/L
CREA
3­4
23
37
mol/L
CREA
women
5­8
28
50
mol/L
CREA
women
9­10
32
58
mol/L
CREA
women
11­13
34
62
mol/L
CREA
women
14­17
41
80
mol/L
CREA
women
18­125
50
90
mol/L
CREA
men
5­8
26
49
mol/L
CREA
men
9­10
31
59
mol/L
CREA
men
11­13
39
68
mol/L
CREA
men
14­17
52
93
mol/L
CREA
men
18­125
60
105
mol/L
CRP
10
mg/L
DIMER
0­55
50
FEU/L
DIMER
56­65
60
FEU/L
DIMER
66­75
70
FEU/L
DIMER
76­125
80
FEU/L
ECVBE
­3
3
EOS
0­13
0.05
0.7
109/L
EOS
14­17
0.03
0.6
109/L
ERY
women
3.94
5.16
1012/L
ERY
men
4.25
5.71
1012/L
FERRITIN
0­13
7
140
g/L
FERRITIN
14­125
12
300
g/L
GGT
0­17
10
45
U/L
GGT
women
18­39
10
45
U/L
GGT
women
40­125
10
75
U/L
GGT
men
18­39
10
80
U/L
GGT
men
40­125
15
115
U/L
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
69
==PAGE:81==
Table B.1: Continued
Variable
Sex
Age (Years)
Lower
boundary
Upper
boundary
Unit
GLU
4.2
6.3
mmol/L
HAPTO
0­13
0.05
0.5
g/L
HAPTO
14­49
0.35
1.85
g/L
HAPTO
50­125
0.47
2.05
g/L
HB
0­1
6 8.
3
mmol/L
HB
2­11
6.5
8.9
mmol/L
HB
12­17
6.6
9.9
mmol/L
HB
women
18­125
7.3
9.5
mmol/L
HB
men
18­125
8.3
10.5
mmol/L
HBA1C
48
mmol/mol
HCO3
22
27
mmol/L
HDL
1
mmol/L
INR
0
1.3
ratio
INR
1­125
1.2
ratoi
JERN
0­4
5
23
mol/L
JERN
women
5­10
8
29
mol/L
JERN
women
11­17
6
33
mol/L
JERN
men
5­10
6
30
mol/L
JERN
men
11­17
8
32
mol/L
JERN
18­125
9
34
mol/L
K
0­0
3.5
6.1
mmol/L
K
1­4
3.3
4.6
mmol/L
K
5­17
3.3
4.6
mmol/L
K
18­125
3.5
4.4
mmol/L
KBGLU
4.2
6.3
mmol/L
LDH
0­3
155
450
U/L
LDH
4­4
100
345
U/L
LDH
5­13
157
327
U/L
LDH
14­17
121
271
U/L
LDH
18­69
105
205
U/L
LDH
70­125
115
255
U/L
LDL
3
mmol/L
LEU
0­1
6.2
16.2
109/L
LEU
2­11
4.5
12.5
109/L
LEU
12­17
4.4
10.5
109/L
LEU
18­125
3.5
8.8
109/L
LYMFO
0­5
1.83
7.85
109/L
LYMFO
6­12
1.32
4.07
109/L
LYMFO
13­17
1.2
3.6
109/L
LYMFO
18­125
1
3.5
109/L
MCH
0­1
1.4
1.7
fmol
MCH
2­5
1.5
1.7
fmol
MCH
6­11
1.6
1.8
fmol
MCH
12­17
1.6
1.9
fmol
MCH
18­125
1.7
2.1
fmol
70
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:82==
Table B.1: Continued
Variable
Sex
Age (Years)
Lower
boundary
Upper
boundary
Unit
MCHC
0­17
20
22
mmol/L
MCHC
18­125
19.7
22.2
mmol/L
MG
0­0
0.81
1.27
mmol/L
MG
1­5
0.76
1
mmol/L
MG
women
6­13
0.73
0.93
mmol/L
MG
women
14­17
0.65
0.93
mmol/L
MG
men
6­17
0.71
0.93
mmol/L
MG
18­125
0.71
0.94
mmol/L
MONO
0­17
0.21
0.77
109/L
MONO
18­125
0.2
0.8
109/L
NA
0­4
137
144
mmol/L
NA
5­17
135
147
mmol/L
NA
18­125
137
144
mmol/L
NEUTRO
0­13
1.6
6.7
109/L
NEUTRO
14­17
2
9.6
109/L
NEUTRO
18­125
1.6
5.9
109/L
PHOS
0­4
1.16
1.81
mmol/L
PHOS
women
5­13
1.09
1.72
mmol/L
PHOS
women
14­17
0.72
1.49
mmol/L
PHOS
women
18­125
0.76
1.41
mmol/L
PHOS
men
5­13
1.07
1.74
mmol/L
PHOS
men
14­17
0.85
1.74
mmol/L
PHOS
men
18­49
0.71
1.53
mmol/L
PHOS
men
50­125
0.71
1.23
mmol/L
PROCAL
0.5
g/L
TRANSJBG
0­11
0.41
TRANSJBG
12­17
0.48
TRANSJBG
women
18­49
0.1
0.5
TRANSJBG
women
50­125
0.15
0.5
TRANSJBG
men
18­125
0.15
0.57
TRIG
2
mmol/L
TSH
0
0.73
8.92
10−3IU/L
TSH
1­5
0.69
5.89
10−3IU/L
TSH
women
6­12
1.07
5.54
10−3IU/L
TSH
women
13­17
0.66
5.1
10−3IU/L
TSH
men
6­17
1.06
5.8
10−3IU/L
TSH
18­125
0.4
4.8
10−3IU/L
eGFR
0­1
70
mL/min
eGFR
2­16
80
mL/min
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
71
==PAGE:83==
C
Summary Statistics
Table C.1: Table of summary statistics (Median, [IQR] and number of observations)
grouped by the infection type.
Variable
SI unit
Airway
BSI
UTI
57.14
57.14
50
%
[46.15, 66.67]
[45.45, 68.42]
[35.29, 61.54]
ABAS
1233
2968
11444
7.4
8.95
7.5
mmol/L
[6.29, 8.80]
[6.88, 11.12]
[6.20, 8.90]
ABGLU
14
18
84
7.41
7.42
7.42
pH
[7.35, 7.44]
[7.35, 7.45]
[7.37, 7.46]
ABPH
50
67
243
31
29
23
U/L
[20.00, 47.00]
[18.00, 48.00]
[16.00, 36.00]
ALAT
514
1218
4219
26
26.5
31
g/L
[21.00, 32.00]
[22.00, 31.00]
[26.00, 36.00]
ALB
703
1406
6524
61
56
60
U/L
[40.00, 88.00]
[37.00, 79.00]
[42.00, 83.00]
AMYL
383
502
1515
37
33
30
s
[31.00, 45.00]
[27.00, 39.00]
[27.00, 34.00]
APTT
264
260
1271
49
54
29
U/L
[33.50, 111.50]
[32.00, 114.00]
[21.00, 49.00]
ASAT
227
201
626
16
14
12
%
[12.00, 20.00]
[10.00, 18.00]
[8.00, 18.00]
BAS
1233
2969
11426
0.03
0.03
0.03
109/L
[0.01, 0.06]
[0.01, 0.05]
[0.01, 0.06]
BASO
515
911
5721
10
12
8
µmol/L
[6.00, 20.00]
[7.00, 23.55]
[5.00, 14.00]
BILI
566
1500
3919
101
13.5
2
µmol/L
[8.10, 194.75]
[9.00, 18.75]
[2.00, 5.25]
BILIKON
4
30
104
101.5
23
8
µmol/L
[59.75, 144.25]
[6.00, 98.00]
[5.00, 40.00]
BILIUK
4
29
61
2.23
2.19
2.28
mmol/L
[2.10, 2.36]
[2.06, 2.34]
[2.16, 2.39]
CA
214
321
1470
72
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:84==
Table C.1: Table of summary statistics (Median, [IQR] and number of observations)
grouped by the infection type. (continued)
Variable
SI unit
Airway
BSI
UTI
1.2
1.22
1.23
mmol/L
[1.13, 1.26]
[1.16, 1.27]
[1.18, 1.28]
CAI
197
758
3009
8.5
8.97
6.9
mmol/L
[5.50, 13.93]
[5.70, 15.30]
[4.50, 11.10]
CARB
952
1500
5935
4.25
3.85
4.4
mmol/L
[3.63, 5.55]
[3.10, 4.70]
[3.60, 5.30]
CHOL
28
104
1012
105.42
105
105
mmol/L
[101.00, 110.38]
[100.00, 108.64]
[102.00, 107.00]
CL
76
115
545
81
82
72
µmol/L
[55.00, 128.00]
[58.00, 136.00]
[53.38, 107.25]
CREA
1162
2690
10428
56
45
21
mg/L
[16.25, 139.00]
[11.00, 116.75]
[6.00, 58.00]
CRP
1170
2603
9517
5.1
3.2
1.3
FEU/L
[1.85, 11.95]
[1.30, 6.65]
[0.60, 4.25]
DIMER
201
115
319
1.1
­1.2
­0.4
mmol/L
[­2.52, 4.22]
[­4.95, 1.70]
[­2.70, 2.00]
ECVBE
99
125
547
0.09
0.04
0.1
109/L
[0.01, 0.24]
[0.01, 0.17]
[0.03, 0.22]
EOS
515
911
5723
3.54
3.45
3.96
1012/L
[3.10, 4.20]
[3.04, 3.89]
[3.41, 4.47]
ERY
111
188
1668
452
325
280
µg/L
[243.00, 664.00]
[130.00, 760.50]
[120.00, 620.50]
FERRITIN
113
184
719
150
114.5
47
U/L
[69.25, 320.25]
[48.00, 186.88]
[22.00, 148.25]
GGT
46
88
444
7.4
6.6
6.5
mmol/L
[5.60, 9.60]
[5.50, 8.60]
[5.55, 8.20]
GLU
199
991
3566
0.96
1.14
1.19
g/L
[0.55, 1.61]
[0.26, 2.21]
[0.10, 2.21]
HAPTO
26
62
194
6.2
6.1
6.9
mmol/L
[5.40, 7.20]
[5.40, 7.05]
[5.90, 7.90]
HB
1206
2834
10952
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
73
==PAGE:85==
Table C.1: Table of summary statistics (Median, [IQR] and number of observations)
grouped by the infection type. (continued)
Variable
SI unit
Airway
BSI
UTI
38
42.5
39
mmol/mol
[32.50, 40.50]
[36.00, 55.00]
[35.02, 44.00]
HBA1C
43
76
1050
24.9
23.4
23.8
mmol/L
[21.90, 27.40]
[21.22, 25.92]
[22.30, 25.50]
HCO3
76
100
526
1.02
1.01
1.31
mmol/L
[0.85, 1.40]
[0.67, 1.35]
[1.04, 1.67]
HDL
28
70
974
1.1
1.2
1
ratio
[1.00, 1.25]
[1.00, 1.30]
[1.00, 1.20]
INR
797
1273
4276
5.5
7
8
µmol/L
[4.00, 9.75]
[4.00, 13.00]
[5.00, 14.00]
JERN
30
62
372
4
3.94
3.9
mmol/L
[3.70, 4.30]
[3.60, 4.30]
[3.60, 4.23]
K
784
2367
9841
6.7
9
6.3
mmol/L
[5.75, 17.50]
[6.30, 11.62]
[5.65, 8.24]
KBGLU
15
32
154
293.5
240
220.5
U/L
[205.00, 451.25]
[182.00, 359.00]
[182.00, 285.88]
LDH
628
1233
4014
2.55
2.1
2.3
mmol/L
[1.80, 3.55]
[1.00, 2.50]
[1.60, 3.20]
LDL
20
45
479
10.9
8.5
9.1
109/L
[7.60, 14.80]
[4.10, 13.00]
[6.70, 12.30]
LEU
1181
2691
9959
1.24
0.95
1.37
109/L
[0.72, 1.84]
[0.51, 1.50]
[0.93, 1.91]
LYMFO
514
910
5722
40
40
40
%
[40.00, 60.00]
[20.00, 60.00]
[20.00, 40.00]
MBAS
1233
2969
11444
1.9
1.9
1.9
fmol
[1.80, 2.00]
[1.80, 2.00]
[1.80, 2.00]
MCH
87
161
1483
20.2
20.4
20.4
mmol/L
[19.70, 21.00]
[19.52, 21.09]
[19.80, 20.90]
MCHC
91
158
1530
0.88
0.82
0.84
mmol/L
[0.79, 0.96]
[0.72, 0.91]
[0.76, 0.92]
MG
549
953
2439
74
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:86==
Table C.1: Table of summary statistics (Median, [IQR] and number of observations)
grouped by the infection type. (continued)
Variable
SI unit
Airway
BSI
UTI
0.7
0.67
0.7
109/L
[0.47, 0.96]
[0.38, 1.00]
[0.50, 0.97]
MONO
514
911
5723
139
137
138
mmol/L
[136.00, 142.00]
[134.00, 140.00]
[135.00, 141.00]
NA
796
2385
9958
7.88
7.13
6.41
109/L
[5.46, 11.00]
[4.31, 11.00]
[4.48, 9.14]
NEUTRO
500
889
5583
1.12
1.09
1.08
mmol/L
[0.88, 1.45]
[0.84, 1.42]
[0.87, 1.32]
PHOS
570
1104
3310
0.65
0.81
0.29
µg/L
[0.21, 2.58]
[0.27, 2.94]
[0.10, 0.69]
PROCAL
249
243
344
0.13
0.14
0.17
[0.08, 0.18]
[0.08, 0.26]
[0.11, 0.26]
TRANSJBG
13
54
311
2.17
1.73
1.44
mmol/L
[1.38, 2.79]
[1.19, 3.11]
[1.06, 2.07]
TRIG
96
201
1158
2.26
1.63
1.44
10−3IU/L
[1.25, 4.77]
[0.67, 2.87]
[0.81, 2.46]
TSH
42
77
1183
77
71
80
mL/min
[45.00, 90.00]
[38.00, 90.00]
[50.00, 90.00]
eGFR
1061
2453
9883
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
75
==PAGE:87==
D
Distribution of Input Variables
Figure D.1: Histograms showing the distribution of the numeric untransformed input vari­
ables. The Grey areas are the histograms showing the overall density of observations in
the dataset, while the coloured lines are the densities observed in each of the three main
infection categories.
76
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:88==
Figure D.2: Histograms showing the distribution of the Transformed numeric input vari­
ables. The Grey areas are the histograms showing the overall density of observations in
the dataset, while the coloured lines are the densities observed in each of the three main
infection categories.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
77
==PAGE:89==
E
Scoring rules
E.1
Precision
The precision also known as Positive Predictive Value (PPV) is calculated as in equation
E.1.
PPV =
TP
TP + FP .
(E.1)
Where TP and FP are the number of true and false positives respectively.
E.2
Sensitivity
Sensitivity also know as the recall or the True Positive Rate (TPR) is calculated as in
equation E.2
TPR =
TP
TP + FN .
(E.2)
Where TP is the number of true positives and FN is the number of false negatives.
E.3
Specificity
Specificity is the also known as the True Negative Rate (TNR) and can be calculated using
equation E.3
TNR =
TN
TN + FP .
(E.3)
Where TN and FP are the number of true negatives and the number of false positives.
E.4
F1­Score
The F1­score is calculated using the formula seen in equation E.4.
F1 =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN .
(E.4)
Where TP, FP and FN are the number of true positives, false positives and false negatives.
E.5
Multi­class Brier Score
The multi­class brier score is calculated as in equation E.5 (Manokhin 2023).
1
N
N
∑
i=1
M
∑
j=1
(pij −yij)2.
(E.5)
Where pij is the predicted probability of each class and yij is a binary variable stating if
the class is present in the sample.
The classical formulas for precision, sensitivity, specificity and F1­score can be found in
the appendix E.
78
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:90==
F
Baseline Confusion Matrix Assuming
Perfect Predictions
Figure F.1: A confusion matrix showing the output, assuming the predictor classifies all
observations correctly.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
79
==PAGE:91==
G
Preliminary CatBoost Results
In this chapter the preliminary results of an untuned CatBoost model is shown, utilizing
the datasets described in section 3.1.
G.1
Safe Dataset
Figure G.1: Micro averaged One vs Rest (OvR) ROCcurve for the CatBoost model fitted
to the safe dataset using 5­fold cross validation, with a 80­20% train­test split.
precision
sensitivity
specificity
f1­score
support
Airways
0.79 (0.027)
0.52 (0.019)
0.99 (0.002)
0.63 (0.018)
209.4 (8.32)
BSI
0.74 (0.015)
0.45 (0.009)
0.97 (0.002)
0.56 (0.005)
422.0 (11.90)
UTI
0.87 (0.006)
0.97 (0.004)
0.51 (0.014)
0.92 (0.004)
2106.6 (13.32)
Micro Average
0.84
0.85
0.62
0.84
Macro Average
0.80
0.64
0.82
0.70
Table G.1: Classification report, showing model performance of the naive CatBoost
model, trained on the safe dataset. The values in the table are the mean and (std), using
5­fold cross validation with a 80­20% train­test split.
80
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:92==
G.2
Full Dataset
Figure G.2: ROC­curves for the CatBoost model fitted to the full dataset using 5­fold cross
validation.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
81
==PAGE:93==
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.90 (0.115)
0.28 (0.093)
1.00 (0.001)
0.42 (0.128)
204.6 (7.34)
PSairways
0.86 (0.106)
0.34 (0.073)
0.99 (0.005)
0.48 (0.094)
819.8 (9.72)
BSI
0.88 (0.106)
0.21 (0.065)
1.00 (0.001)
0.33 (0.096)
493.6 (22.07)
PSBSI
0.82 (0.289)
0.32 (0.158)
1.00 (0.000)
0.45 (0.215)
55.0 (2.19)
UTI
0.79 (0.034)
0.68 (0.051)
0.90 (0.014)
0.73 (0.044)
1935.0 (31.96)
PSUTI
0.91 (0.091)
0.24 (0.093)
1.00 (0.000)
0.37 (0.136)
295.0 (17.85)
Other
0.80 (0.051)
0.51 (0.047)
0.93 (0.015)
0.63 (0.050)
1805.8 (40.59)
Micro Average
0.82
0.49
0.94
0.59
Macro Average
0.85
0.37
0.97
0.49
Table G.2: Classification report, showing model performance of the Naive CatBoost
model. The numbers are the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross validation.
Figure G.3: Confusion matrix for the naive CatBoost model fitted to the full dataset. The
numbers are summed across the 5­fold cross validation. Refer to appendix F.1 for base­
line values given a theoretically perfect predictor.
82
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:94==
Figure G.4: Micro averaged calibration curve for the naive CatBoost model, showing the
mean predicted probability vs. the fraction of positives.
Figure G.5: Micro averaged calibration curve for the Venn­ABERS calibrated CatBoost
model, showing the mean predicted probability vs. the fraction of positives.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
83
==PAGE:95==
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.74 (0.098)
0.58 (0.169)
0.99 (0.002)
0.65 (0.150)
204.6 (7.34)
PSairways
0.74 (0.121)
0.53 (0.093)
0.96 (0.018)
0.61 (0.086)
819.8 (9.72)
BSI
0.75 (0.110)
0.44 (0.127)
0.98 (0.008)
0.55 (0.121)
493.6 (22.07)
PSBSI
0.73 (0.250)
0.57 (0.209)
1.00 (0.002)
0.63 (0.224)
55.0 (2.19)
UTI
0.78 (0.029)
0.69 (0.090)
0.89 (0.021)
0.73 (0.056)
1935.0 (31.96)
PSUTI
0.77 (0.075)
0.54 (0.146)
0.99 (0.001)
0.63 (0.133)
295.0 (17.85)
Other
0.73 (0.056)
0.65 (0.073)
0.87 (0.039)
0.68 (0.047)
1805.8 (40.59)
Micro Average
0.76
0.62
0.91
0.67
Macro Average
0.75
0.57
0.96
0.64
Table G.3: Classification report, showing model performance of the Venn Abers calibrated
CatBoost model. The numbers show the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross
validation.
Figure G.6: Confusion matrix for the Venn­ABERS calibrated CatBoost model fitted to
the full dataset. The numbers are summed across the 5­fold cross validation. Refer to
appendix F.1 for baseline values given a theoretically perfect predictor.
84
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:96==
Precision
Sensitivity
Specificity
F1­score
Support
airways
0.26 (0.176)
0.88 (0.073)
0.81 (0.155)
0.37 (0.178)
169.6 (6.05)
PSairways
0.34 (0.068)
0.90 (0.023)
0.65 (0.140)
0.49 (0.075)
656.0 (10.97)
BSI
0.29 (0.045)
0.86 (0.044)
0.77 (0.049)
0.43 (0.056)
403.4 (17.72)
PSBSI
0.19 (0.301)
0.92 (0.094)
0.76 (0.212)
0.22 (0.275)
43.0 (2.97)
UTI
0.63 (0.043)
0.91 (0.011)
0.68 (0.067)
0.74 (0.030)
1579.2 (26.81)
PSUTI
0.33 (0.186)
0.84 (0.078)
0.83 (0.147)
0.43 (0.161)
235.0 (13.04)
Other
0.55 (0.050)
0.90 (0.021)
0.61 (0.091)
0.68 (0.036)
1456.2 (34.59)
Micro Average
0.50
0.89
0.67
0.62
Macro Average
0.37
0.89
0.73
0.48
Table G.4: Classification report, showing model performance of the Venn Abers calibrated
CatBoost model, using the conformal prediction framework to generate predictions. Pre­
diction sets are generated using 1000 calibration points and the desired error rate is set to
α = 10%. The numbers show the mean and (std) obtained from the 5­fold cross validation.
Figure G.7: Confusion matrix for the Venn­ABERS calibrated CatBoost model fitted to
the full dataset, using CRC to form prediction sets. The numbers are summed across
the 5­fold cross validation. Refer to appendix F.1 for baseline values given a theoretically
perfect predictor.
Predicting Bacterial Infections Using Machine Learning
85
==PAGE:97==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Asmussens Allé, Building 303
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
