==PAGE:1==
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green
Transition: A Feasibility Study
Bridging the Valley of Death
Master Thesis
DTU Entrepreneurship
Department of Entrepreneurship
==PAGE:2==
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
Bridging the Valley of Death
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Luka Harambasic, Niklas Lüttringhaus
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
DALL∙E (OpenAI), 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Entrepreneurship, Diplomvej, Buildings 371 & 372,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Entrepreneurship at
Denmark Technical University (DTU) - in partial fulfillment of the technology entrepreneur-
ship master’s.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of entrepreneurship,
startup ecosystems, and clean tech.
Luka Harambasic - s213099
Signature
Date
Niklas Lüttringhaus - s213112
Signature
Date
27.02.2024
27.02.2024
==PAGE:4==
Acronyms
aFFR automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve. 33, 38
BI Business Incubator. 12, 13, 43
BMC Business Model Canvas. iv, 2, 5–11, 22, 27, 28, 36, 40, 43, 47, 50
CP Commercial prototype. 16, 35
CSE Copenhagen School of Entrepreneurship. 32, 35, 36, 41, 47
DTU Technical University Denmark. 2, 19, 20, 22, 30, 32–38, 40, 41, 47, 48, 50
FCR Frequency Containment Reserve. 33, 38
GLDK Green Lab Denmark. 47, 49, 51
GMA General Morphological Analysis. 9, 10
IEA International Energy Agency. 14
KIT Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. 22
KPI Key Performance Indicator. 20, 40, 42, 48, 49
MM Morphological Matrix. iv, 2, 5, 9–11, 27, 28, 47, 50, 107–115
MVP Minimum Viable Product. 16, 31
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory. 22, 46
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 12
POC Proof of Concept. 16, 35, 47, 50
PPA Power Purchase Agreement. 1, 16, 19, 29, 31, 36, 37, 40, 42, 45, 47, 48
SEO Search Engine Optimization. 25, 41
SF Sub Function. 10, 11, 27, 28, 30, 43, 47
SME Small and medium-sized enterprise. 15
SP Solution Principle. 10, 11, 28, 30, 43, 47, 50
TA Thematic Analysis. 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 16, 27, 28, 30, 31, 36, 40, 96
TUM Technical University of Munich. 19, 21, 32
VP Value Proposition. 7, 23, 24, 37, 48, 110
WCET Washington Clean Energy Testbeds. 21–26, 30, 31, 34, 40, 41, 45, 105
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis examines the potential of establishing a clean tech startup program within Dan-
ish universities to facilitate the green transition. Employing a mixed-methods approach,
including snowball sampling, thematic analysis, and benchmarking, this study identifies
essential support areas for clean tech startups to overcome the critical valley of death.
Subsequently, the study highlights the essential need for support in funding, prototyping,
and regulatory aspects for clean tech startups. Importantly, it introduces an innovative
framework that integrates the Business Model Canvas (BMC) with a Morphological Ma-
trix (MM), offering strategic guidance for program development. The findings suggest that
a specialized support program can substantially alleviate the obstacles clean tech startups
encounter, thus accelerating their commercial development. The thesis concludes with
actionable recommendations for the program’s implementation and future research direc-
tion.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acronyms
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of this work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Snowball Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Thematic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Business Model Canvas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Competitor Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Morphological Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Gathering Insights
12
3.1
Value of Startup Programs in Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Startup interviews
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Business Model Canvas Benchmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Synthesizing Insights
27
4.1
Creating the Morphological Matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
The Concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Conclusion
50
5.1
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Bibliography
52
A Appendix
57
A.1 Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 Gathering Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.3 Synthesizing Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Startups have become the vanguards of innovation, reshaping industries and altering our
lifestyles and environment.
From Tesla’s electrification of the automobile industry to Enphase microinverter technol-
ogy enhancing the efficiency and reliability of solar photovoltaic systems, these compa-
nies demonstrate the profound impact that innovative startups can have in accelerating
the transition to a sustainable future. As the world grapples with the urgent need for sus-
tainable development, the role of these startups innovating on energy solutions becomes
increasingly critical.
However, the journey from an idea to market success is fraught with challenges. In Den-
mark, a country known for its commitment to sustainability and a vibrant startup ecosys-
tem, many clean tech ventures fail to cross the valley of death as can be seen by the
placement of Denmark in figure 1.1. This metaphorical valley, not a geographic feature,
symbolizes the daunting phase between initial funding and achieving sustainable revenue,
a period in which many startups fail.
Figure 1.1: Percentage of enterprises experiencing high growth out of the total number of
active enterprises with a minimum of 10 employees in 2019 [1]
This thesis delves into the critical support role that startup programs such as incubators
and accelerators can play in nurturing these startups.
The genesis of this research lies in a personal journey for the authors — our venture,
Sparkle, aimed at ”democratizing electricity” through innovative residential power pur-
chase agreements. The potential of this business model has been evidenced by the
success of 1komma5 - raising more than Euro 215 million in their Series B [2]. However,
Sparkle faced legal and financial hurdles. The complexities of creating homeowner con-
tracts and Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) were exacerbated by the high costs and
difficulties in securing a suitable test location to prove the business model - leading to
the project’s premature conclusion. This experience is not unique but indicative of the
broader struggles within the Danish clean tech startup landscape.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
1
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.2: Visualisation of the valley of death adapted from UC DAVIS [3]
1.1
Aim of this work
Motivated by our experiences and the evident gap in support for clean tech startups, this
thesis drafts a proposition for a university-based program specifically tailored for these
kinds of companies. This work will guide readers through our research to identify the
essential resources needed for these startups to scale, evaluate the existing support sys-
tems, and uncover the contributing market gaps.
The result is a comprehensive framework that can serve as the foundation of a university-
based program to accelerate the commercialization of clean tech technology. To guide
our research, the following research questions are asked:
• Which resources do clean tech startups need to scale in Denmark? (Chapter 3.2)
• Which support systems exist for clean tech startups in Denmark during the prototyp-
ing phase? (Chapter 3.3)
• Which factors contribute to the severe valley of death in Denmark? (Chapter 3.2
and 3.3)
• Which services and resources would a program have to provide to help startups
bridge the valley of death? (Chapter 4)
• How could such a program be designed to be desirable for all stakeholders? (Chap-
ter 4)
This research was conducted as part of the Technology Entrepreneurship masters pro-
gram at Technical University Denmark (DTU). Our effort is concentrated on developing
a strong decision framework for a potential clean tech startup program that can be used
within DTU but one that remains applicable to a broader setting. Beyond this framework,
a novel approach for data-based business modeling is developed, merging the BMC with
a MM. Due to the time constraints of this work, we have omitted discussions on politics,
concrete partnerships, and the design of a specific program.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Methodology
This work follows a three-step process encompassing a range of methodologies and fun-
damental principles. To allow readers to focus on a single topic, each method’s back-
ground and our application are covered in the Methodology chapter. Results can then be
seen in chapter 3, Gathering Insights.
Chapter 3 begins with the process of data gathering from sources such as literature, in-
terviews, and benchmarking (see chapters 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 respectively). Chapter 4 sub-
sequently covers the analysis and equalization of the provided input data. In this chapter,
we will also build the aforementioned foundational framework that can be used to design
the program. This framework will be demonstratively applied to a medium-term program
design example in chapter 4.2. The reader will be guided through each aspect of the
framework and justification for the decisions made will be given. Figure 2.1 illustrates this
process while including the main methodologies employed in each step.
Figure 2.1: A visual representation of the methodology
2.1
Snowball Sampling
Snowball sampling by Goodman [4] is a non-probability sampling technique that is com-
monly used in social science research where existing study subjects recruit future subjects
from among their acquaintances, creating a chain of referrals [5]. It is a useful method
for identifying and recruiting hard-to-reach populations [6]. This paper will use snowball
sampling as a starting point for two other methodologies - interviews and benchmarking,
which will build the foundation for answering the research questions.
Snowball sampling starts with the selection of a preliminary group of participants who fulfill
the study’s inclusion criteria. This initial step involves pinpointing these participants, who
then facilitate the researcher’s access to further potential participants through referrals,
thereby creating a snowballing effect.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
3
==PAGE:10==
In the context of this investigation, the target demographic is startup founders. Drawing
from our experiences and sample literature, the efficacy of warm introductions over cold
contacts in engaging such populations is significantly higher, suggesting a strategy more
likely to yield participation [7].
To encapsulate the methodology, the following steps were undertaken:
1. Define inclusion criteria
2. Initial seed selection
3. Referral process
In total, 114 companies and individuals were contacted.
2.1.1
Define inclusion criteria
The study focused on clean tech startups, specifically those generating renewable electric-
ity. While targeting Copenhagen, our search expanded to Europe and beyond. Germany
also played a significant role due the authors’ existing networks there. For the experts we
contacted, we primarily focused on those based in Copenhagen, aiming to engage local
experts who could potentially support the program over the long term. This approach led
to a wide target group, fitting the broad clean tech concept.
2.1.2
Initial seed selection
We initiated our outreach by tapping into our extensive network within the Copenhagen
clean tech ecosystem, leveraging relationships built over two years of active engagement.
These individuals were contacted via different communication platforms, creating a first
seed group of relevant individuals. Additionally, we employed Google searches to iden-
tify promising startups, directly contacting their founders. To locate these, we conducted
Google searches with different keyword combinations. Words between the « and » sym-
bols were used as placeholders to show different variations.
Variations
• «location»: Copenhagen, Denmark, Germany, EU, Europe, [empty]
• «stage»: Pre-seed, Seed, Series A, [empty]
Key word combinations
• «stage» clean tech startups to watch «location»
• top «stage» clean tech startups «location»
• «stage» energy startups «location»
• clean tech accelerator «location»
• clean tech cluster «location»
The combination of the two variations («location» (5), «stage» (3)), plus one constellation
without any of the variations, generated 84 different search combinations.
2.1.3
Referral process
When a contact person was available through a previous connection, we contacted them
directly. In other cases, where only the organization was identified, we aimed to contact
an individual instead of emailing to a generic info@ email address. Most of these were
the founders of the startup or recommended contact persons from their websites. Due to
the different nature of the contacted stakeholders, the contacting approach was tailored
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
4
==PAGE:11==
for each group. Startups were easily reached with LinkedIn or via personal emails. Com-
munication with ecosystem partners was more varied, including emails, telephone calls,
and social media. Synchronization of the team and interview partners was achieved with
a call scheduling tool for ease of use and flexibility.
After the initial contact, meetings were scheduled to interview the individuals. The intervie-
wees sometimes mentioned referrals during the interview without the interviewer asking
for them specifically. To ensure that everyone had a similar chance to referr, every par-
ticipant was asked if they were aware of others to talk to at the end of an interview (see
2.2 Thematic Analysis). This was used to identify interview partners and similar programs
(see 2.4 Competitor Benchmarking).
2.1.4
Limitations
Snowball sampling is a valuable methodology for accessing hard-to-reach populations;
however, it is important to acknowledge its inherent limitations. A primary concern is the
potential for sample bias. Given that participants are recruited through referrals, the result-
ing sample may not accurately represent the broader population under study, potentially
skewing findings. Furthermore, as outlined in the section on inclusion criteria, this issue
could significantly impact the results presented in this thesis [8].
2.2
Thematic Analysis
Thematic analysis is a method of analyzing qualitative data to identify, analyze, and report
patterns (themes) within the data. Thematic Analysis (TA) demonstrates high adaptabil-
ity as researchers do not need to know the format and content of the data in advance,
making it useful for ”generating unanticipated insights” [9]. This flexibility is paramount in
exploratory research, such as this, where pre-defined categories may not be evident or
emerge organically during the analysis process [10, 11]. While it is true that TA can some-
times overlook the complexity of narratives and is inherently subjective [12], we believe
that with careful methodological design and cross-validation (refer to 3 for more informa-
tion), these risks can be mitigated. Our research aims to uncover broad patterns and
themes from interview data, making TA the most suitable and pragmatic choice for our ob-
jectives. Table A.1 showcases all considered methodologies for the qualitative analysis.
Although TA is typically displayed as a linear process, it is important to mention that in
actuality, it is an iterative process [9, 13, 14, 15]. Thus, codes and themes were reworked
multiple times to ensure consistency and reduce overlap - increasing clarity.
2.2.1
Application
While table 2.1 shows the general process of our TA, we would like to note several consid-
erations usually omitted in literature. In step two, codes are created to represent certain
patterns in the data [15]. However, the definition of a code and the process of forming
these codes is not covered extensively in the literature. During the TA, we defined a code
as a thought that stands independently and can be understood without requiring the un-
derlying texts to explain its meaning. Themes are similarly expressed as complete and
descriptive thoughts but with a broader scope, as a theme encapsulates multiple codes.
A similar approach was demonstrated by Braun and Clarke. Themes that describe a
category or topic often fail to impart meaningful knowledge beyond a categorization of
codes - which contributes little value to the identification startup needs. This TA forms
one of the base inputs for the Business Model Canvas (BMC) and subsequently for the
Morphological Matrix (MM), discussed later in this chapter.
For conducting the interviews, we distinguished between the ones with startups and the
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
5
==PAGE:12==
Phase
Summary
Phase 1: Familiarise
oneself with the data
Immerse in the data, transcribe verbal data, and make
marginal remarks and initial codes on the transcript.
Phase 2: Generating
initial codes
and developing a coding manual for the organization.
Phase 3: Searching for
themes
Sort initial codes to find overarching themes, create a vi-
sual map of codes and themes, and categorize these.
Phase 4: Reviewing
themes
emerging patterns, rework themes if necessary, and ana-
lyze the entire data set for coherence.
Phase 5: Defining and
naming themes
determining the essence of each theme - ensuring themes
are focused, non-overlapping, and addressing the re-
search question.
Phase 6: Producing the
report
Write up the analysis, describe themes and evidence, and
construct a narrative that highlights the essence of each
theme.
Table 2.1: Phases of TA adapted from [9]
ones with the ecosystem. Startups can be likened to customers; they would provide ad-
ditional insights into the challenges they faced when scaling their business and how they
might have been able to resolve these. The goal was to uncover unknown unknowns,
which requires non-priming handling of the participants so data is not skewed toward the
expected result that is inherent when pitching a concept. In contrast, the surrounding
ecosystem mainly serves as a source of knowledge for the known unknowns.1 This en-
tails any information regarding the implementation of a startup program and thus could
be handled in a more straightforward manner; by asking questions such as:
• Are there any competing programs out there?
• How would such a program be integrated into the existing clean tech sector?
• What financial instruments are there to fund such a program?
• Have there been similar programs, and if so, why do they not exist anymore? Etc.
2.3
Business Model Canvas
The Business Model Canvas is a strategic management tool used to visually outline a
company’s value proposition, infrastructure, customers, and finances to understand and
develop business strategies. It was introduced by Osterwalder and Pigneur in 2010 as an
innovative tool designed to assist entrepreneurs in developing and refining their business
models. The foundational principles of the BMC are detailed in the work, ”Business Model
Generation” [18].
The BMC framework serves multiple purposes: it is a tool for describing, analyzing, and
designing business models and, as such, provides a holistic view of the essential elements
of a business, outlining how these components work together to generate and capture
value [19]. Renowned for its straightforward visual representation, the BMC simplifies the
understanding of complex business models.
The framework is particularly valuable for defining and communicating business ideas
or concepts, making it a crucial resource for academic research and practical business
1Unknown unknowns and known unkowns as defined by Logan [17]
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
6
==PAGE:13==
analysis alike [20, 21].
2.3.1
Structure
Figure 2.2 is the official template for visualizing and structuring the BMC. Each box, repre-
sents a so-called Building Block [18]. A brief description of the contents of each building
block can be found below.
Figure 2.2: BMC template by Strategyzer [22]
Key partnerships are critical to the business’s success, as they identify the network that
provides essential services or resources, such as suppliers, manufacturers, and distribu-
tors.
Key activities
outline the tasks integral to the business model, including production,
marketing, research and development, and customer service.
Key resources identify assets required by the business’s activities; these can be tangible
(e.g., physical assets like property or equipment) or intangible (e.g., intellectual property
like patents or trademarks).
Value propositions outline the bundle of products and services that create value for
a specific customer segment, describing the unique benefits the business offers to its
customers, setting it apart from its competitors.
Customer relationships highlight the relationships a company establishes with specific
customer segments, including customer service, support, and loyalty programs, as well
as the methods used to manage these relationships.
Channels identify how a company communicates with and reaches its customer seg-
ment to deliver a Value Proposition (VP), including both communication channels (e.g.,
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
7
==PAGE:14==
advertising, sales, and pubic relations) and distribution channels (e.g., online, retail, and
direct sales).
Customer segments are the groups of people or organizations the business aims to
reach and serve. This helps companies to understand their target market.
Cost breakdown lists all the costs associated with running a business, including both
fixed costs (e.g., rent, salaries, and insurance) and variable costs (e.g., materials, sup-
plies, and shipping).
Revenue streams describe how a company makes money from its customer segment,
including the types of revenue (e.g., one-time sales, subscriptions, and commissions) and
the methods used to collect it (e.g., invoicing, payment gateways, and subscriptions).
2.3.2
Application
The BMC serves as a tool that facilitates the breakdown of a business model into its essen-
tial components for comparison across different organizations (see 3.3 Business Model
Canvas Benchmarking) and also structures our analysis to ensure comprehensiveness
(see 4 Synthesizing Insights). By integrating the BMC into our methodology, we aim to
systematically assess each aspect of the startup program, ensuring that no critical com-
ponent of the business model is overlooked.
2.4
Competitor Benchmarking
The modern concept of benchmarking as a management tool is often attributed to the
Xerox Corporation in the 1970s. Xerox developed a formalized benchmarking process to
compare its performance against other companies, leading to improved processes and
performance [23, 24], which Camp documented in benchmarking: The Search for Indus-
try.
According to Zairi and Leonard there are four main types of benchmarking [24]:
Competitive benchmarking informs on performance against rivals. Through the knowl-
edge of competitors’ strengths and weaknesses, organizations can form effective strate-
gies. However, challenges in obtaining data and risks of a ’me too’ strategy may hinder
innovation despite methods like customer surveys aiding in objective assessment.
Functional benchmarking focuses on comparing specific business functions against a
competitor’s value chain to inspire improvements and foster partnerships [25].
Internal benchmarking , usually performed in multinational corporations, establishes
best practices by comparing operations within the organization across different countries
to identify the best practices.
Generic benchmarking expands the scope of comparison to multifunctional business
processes across any organization, fostering innovation by focusing on processes rather
than specific industries.
Fifer compares 14 different benchmarking processes and concludes ”that there are many
similarities between the different approaches”, [25] even across benchmarking categories.
The most established approach from [23] is described in table 2.2.
2.4.1
Application
The traditional view of benchmarking positions it as a comprehensive process best suited
for established companies. Yet, in this study, it represents just one element of a more
extensive methodology, emphasizing the Analysis Phase.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
8
==PAGE:15==
Stage
Steps
1. Planning
1. Identify what is to be benchmarked.
2. Identify comparative companies.
3. Determine data collection method.
2. Analysis
1. Determine current performance ’gap’.
2. Project future performance levels.
3. Integration
1. Communicate findings & gain acceptance.
2. Establish functional goals.
4. Action
1. Develop action plans.
2. Implement specific actions and monitor progress.
3. Recalibrate benchmarks.
Table 2.2: Benchmarking Process Steps by Camp
During the initial stages of the Planning Phase, a crucial step involves defining the bench-
marking subject. To this end, the BMC (see 2.3 Business Model Canvas) is employed to
provide a high-level organizational framework.
The benchmarking process is supplemented by the Snowball method (see 2.1 Snowball
Sampling) while the conducted interviews yield additional insights. Quantitative data col-
lection was primarily executed through internet research and a survey sent via email. An
example email can be found in the appendix (see A.1).
In the Analysis Phase, selected organizations were compared to identify gaps in their
offerings and business models. These findings facilitate the conceptualization of an ide-
alized organization that combines the market strengths and mitigates the weaknesses of
the analyzed entities.
This phase deviates from conventional benchmarking practices by eliminating direct com-
munication and stakeholder acceptance. Instead, it merges all derived insights into a
foundational BMC, together with the themes identified through TA (see 2.2). This under-
pins the development of the final MM (see chapter 2.5).
The last phase of this work matches quite closely the Action phase as described by Camp.
Utilizing the MM, this phase delivers actionable recommendations for program implemen-
tation and strategies to differentiate the proposed solutions from existing market offerings.
2.5
Morphological Matrix
The Morphological Matrix is a part of the General Morphological Analysis (GMA), a cre-
ative and heuristic method used to understand complex problems and systematically de-
velop different solutions; it was comprehensively introduced by Zwicky in 1967 [26].
Its use lies in the generation of ideas [27] for non-quantifiable problems along multiple
dimensions [28, 29]. A well-known alternative would be Brainstorming; however, for more
complex cases like business models, a more systematic way is required [27, 18].
The term morphology means the study of form or patterns. It aims to under-
stand the object based on typology which contains various types of patterns.
Morphology has been associated with many scientific disciplines where the con-
struction of formal structure is required such as linguistics, geology or astronomy.
— Lee, Hwan, and Hong [28]
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
9
==PAGE:16==
In a comprehensive review by Álvarez and Ritchey [30], eight primary domains were iden-
tified based on 79 papers. These contrasting applications underscore the versatility and
established credibility of GMA in addressing complex issues across various fields.
Seidenstricker, Scheuerle, and Linder further elaborate on the adaptability of GMA, noting
that it can be effectively integrated with other methodologies for enhanced information pro-
cessing. This suggests a broader scope for the application of GMA’s, extending beyond
its traditional confines to a more interdisciplinary approach.
A notable application of the GMA is detailed by Lee, Hwan, and Hong, who outline a five-
step process specifically designed for the development of new business models [28]. This
process includes:
1. Problem description: Identify generic perspectives of the business model.
2. Possible solution analysis: List possible strategies and protocols for each per-
spective.
3. Morphological chart/matrix construction: Construct the business model creation
template.
4. Solution selection/evaluation: Create a business model theme by identifying an
appropriate combination of strategies/protocols.
5. Applying solution: Implement the real business model based on the established
theme
Seidenstricker, Scheuerle, and Linder further condense these five steps into three phases.
1. Phase I Definition of aim and identification of potential fields.
2. Phase II Generation of ideas for new business models.
3. Phase III Assessment of business model ideas.
They break down the complexity of a business model in the following elements: value
proposition, technologies, competencies and key resources, channels and customer rela-
tions, value chains and processes, network and partner and revenues. This might remind
readers of the BMC. However, Seidenstricker, Scheuerle, and Linder approach empha-
sizes the internal capabilities and technologies of an organization, highlighting the impor-
tance of competencies and key resources more explicitly than the BMC. This suggests a
deeper dive into a business’s operational and technological underpinnings, complement-
ing the BMC’s broad overview of business model components.
To construct this MM, it is necessary to identify multiple Sub Functions (SFs), each en-
compassing a range of Solution Principles (SPs). Though this process may initially ap-
pear intricate, a practical exploration using the beer brewing process — a familiar concept
in research — can shed light on its applicability. By examining the SPs of wort produc-
tion, fermentation, and packaging, we can define various SPs, as illustrated in table 2.3.
Through strategic combinations of these SPs, it is possible to craft an array of beer styles.
For instance, a fruity Ale might be produced using infusion mashing for wort production,
top fermentation, and bottling for packaging. Conversely, a clean and crisp Lager could
result from decoction mashing combined with bottom fermentation. Additionally, an exotic
sour beer may be achieved through spontaneous fermentation, leveraging wild yeasts and
bacteria [31, 32]. This example helps to illustrate the fundamental working of a MM with
SFs and their respective SPs.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
10
==PAGE:17==
Sub Functions
SP1
SP2
SP3
Wort production
Infusion mash.
Decoction mash.
Temp. controlled mash.
Fermentation
Top ferm.
Bottom ferm.
Spontaneous ferm.
Packaging
Bottling
Canning
Kegging
Table 2.3: An example MM based on beer brewing
2.5.1
Application
Similar to the application of Benchmarking (see 2.4 Competitor Benchmarking), this paper
uses parts of the overall process to fit it into its methodology described at the beginning
of this chapter. Since the problem is already defined, its definition will be skipped. Sub-
sequently, we will focus on the generation of new ideas. Secondly, this application of the
MM takes inspiration from but won’t follow the exact structure described by Seidenstricker,
Scheuerle, and Linder, instead leveraging the BMC as guidance as it is an already estab-
lished concept in this work and a known concept in the field of entrepreneurship.
The first step will divide the MM into Building Blocks - establishing nine areas just like the
BMCs Building Blocks.2 Next, the SFs are created based on the insights generated by the
TA (see chapter 2.2) and Competitor Benchmarking (see 2.4 Competitor Benchmarking)
[27]. These describe the recommended functions the program should offer.
Leveraging insights and the authors’ experiences in this domain, up to four SPs per SF
are created. To ensure transparency, a tagging system is introduced, enabling readers to
delve into specific SPs and their foundational insights (refer to chapter 4.1 Creating the
Morphological Matrix for more details). Subsequently, an optimal constellation of SPs is
selected to present a cohesive recommendation for the program’s design. It’s noteworthy
that the SPs are not mutually exclusive, allowing for multiple SPs to be chosen for a single
SF [28].
2Note that each of the Building Blocks can be seen as its own MM nested in the larger MM [30].
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
11
==PAGE:18==
3
Gathering Insights
Following the methodology, the upcoming chapter will delve into the findings derived from
the analysis of the startup interviews (3.2), benchmarking data (3.3), and literature review
(3.1). This exploration will serve as the groundwork for synthesizing key insights and
crafting an outline for the startup program.
Each crucial insight is assigned an identifier (e.g., TA-M for TA - Funding is one of the
main concerns for Startups regarding scaling and prototyping), enabling the identification
of the source behind a specific decision in program design. Also note the color of the tags,
as when combining tags, the standard color changes to the mixed color of the two source
tags. These identifiers double as hyperlinks, allowing readers to explore specific areas of
particular interest.
3.1
Value of Startup Programs in Literature
Much research focuses on incubated companies as the central factor for the success of
Business Incubators (BIs) [33, 34, 35]. Yet, it’s crucial to adopt a broader perspective
that transcends the focus on startups alone, encompassing the socio-economic impact.
These advantages of incubators often outweigh immediate outcomes [35], with public
policymakers expecting them to ”create jobs, revitalize cities and regions, diversify local
economies, commercialize new technologies, transfer technology from universities and
major corporations and strengthen local and national economies in general” as Tavoletti
states [36].1
Despite the wealth of published literature on the success stories [35, 37, 38, 39], finding
concrete evidence that BIs are broadly successful is sparse. A study from Germany involv-
ing 1,021 businesses and 108 technology-oriented BIs found that a third of businesses
from incubators are active in low-value industries, 19% of firms were already established
at least two years prior to joining an incubator and only 3% of startups would not have
been founded without an incubator [40]. This skepticism is echoed by other studies such
as from Monck, which examined 251 businesses and discovered a 38% failure rate for
businesses within incubators, compared to a 32% failure rate for those founded outside
of incubators.
Although this criticism has been gaining traction in recent times [36], BIs possesses sev-
eral positive attributes that contribute significantly to the startup ecosystem and broader
economic landscape. They provide entrepreneurs with essential resources such as office
space, mentorship, and access to networks of investors and potential customers, thereby
reducing the initial barriers to business establishment and growth [42]. Incubators also
foster a collaborative environment where entrepreneurs can share ideas, learn from each
other’s experiences, and collaborate on projects, enhancing innovation and creativity [43].
Furthermore, by concentrating on specific industries or technologies, incubators can cat-
alyze advancements and push the boundaries of emerging sectors, supporting the com-
mercialization of new technologies and contributing to technological progress [37, 42]. In
1Denmark, as highlighted by an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) study,
excels in starting businesses, ranking fourth in employer enterprise birth rates. However, it lags in long-term
business sustainability, falling to 23rd in survival rates past three and five years, trailing behind Croatia (6th),
Czechia (9th), and Bulgaria (17th). This contrast underscores a critical area for improvement in fostering
enduring businesses [1].
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
12
==PAGE:19==
some cases, incubators have been instrumental in revitalizing local economies by attract-
ing talent, creating jobs, and stimulating economic activity in underdeveloped or declining
regions [1].
3.1.1
Incubator success factors
The effectiveness of these incubators hinges on their ability to function as sustainable busi-
nesses, emphasizing industry-specific support and offering comprehensive programs that
cultivate a supportive community [44, 45]. Incubators’ role can be summarized as linking
talent with technology and capital [46], a concept further expanded by Lee and Ostery-
oung, who identify 14 critical success factors for incubators. This expansion not only
broadens the scope of what constitutes ’capital’ by moving beyond mere financial consid-
erations to include ”durable produced goods that are subsequently utilized as productive
inputs for further production” [48].
14 Success factors for incubators by Lee and Osteryoung
• Goal/Operations Strategy
– Goal (clarity, achievement)
– Operation
strategy
(concrete-
ness, realization)
• Physical/Human Resources
– Easy access to facility and equip-
ment
– Common
access
to
service
space and office equipment
– Networking
of
entrepreneurial
support
– Expert organization
• Incubator Services
– Technology transfer and R&D
– Business and law consulting
– Financial support and consulting
– Entrepreneurial education
• Networked Program
– Institutional networking
– Networking of tenant/off-line firm
– Networking of finance/business
consulting firm
– Government
Local
community
support
3.1.2
Startup needs
A substantial body of research has been dedicated to understanding the necessities for
startups to scale successfully. Recently, more works have been published emphasizing
the unique challenges hardware startups face in the clean tech sector [49, 50, 37, 51].
While diverse, these startups share common requirements: access to cutting-edge equip-
ment and materials for building prototypes, alongside manufacturing facilities for crafting
physical models and areas to test [37, 38].
At the core of clean tech innovation lies prototyping, a critical process that transforms con-
cepts into tangible, testable products. Nevertheless, navigating the path from a laboratory
setting to a market-ready prototype presents numerous obstacles. The most prominent
challenges include the prohibitive costs of securing lab and testing spaces and the need
for specialized equipment [38]. These hurdles are particularly daunting during the initial
stages of research and development, a period marked by a notable scarcity of funding
and startup support (see figure 1.2 for visualization) [52, 38].
To navigate these challenges, BIs play a pivotal role in providing startups with the es-
sential success factors during this critical phase. These factors include the capability
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Different Technology areas by stage of startups [52]
for commercial-scale prototyping, interactions with investors, favorable market conditions,
non-financial support, a clear development trajectory, a team with ample experience, and
visibility among investors [37, 52, 51, 47].
Moreover, clean tech startups, especially those in sectors such as power and energy
generation, energy storage, and power-to-gas, encounter additional hurdles. These in-
clude extended commercialization periods and the necessity for early-stage risk capital
providers to assess and address technological risks [52].2 Access to supportive resources
like incubators, accelerators, and entrepreneurship training programs can significantly in-
fluence the success trajectory of hardware startups in the clean tech domain [37, 38, 39].
Therefore, a clean tech program, as proposed herein, should include such resources to
facilitate the growth and development of these startups.
3.1.3
Technology parks
Since their inception in the 1950s in the United States, technology parks have signifi-
cantly evolved, playing a pivotal role in fostering innovation, supporting the growth of new
technology-based firms, and facilitating academic spin-offs, thereby contributing to re-
gional development and economic growth [53, 54, 55, 56]. Despite widespread adoption
across various countries, a universally accepted definition of these parks remains elusive.
These parks serve as essential bridges between industry and academia, creating a con-
ducive environment for interaction between research institutes and companies. This inter-
action is crucial for innovation, facilitating knowledge exchange, nurturing the growth of
new technology-based firms, and promoting the transfer of university knowledge to tenant
companies [54, 53, 55, 57]. Furthermore, Technology Parks catalyze regional develop-
ment, stimulating economic growth and revitalizing urban areas [55, 56, 58, 59].
2The study by the International Energy Agency (IEA) analyzed 40 startups from a cohort of 604 firms that
received funding in 2010.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
14
==PAGE:21==
However, the effectiveness of Technology Parks is subject to debate. While some studies
highlight their positive contributions to both the region and tenant companies, particularly
in fostering greater interaction with universities, others question their true effectiveness.
The success of a Technology Park cannot be directly replicated from one region to an-
other due to varying local contexts, necessitating a tailored approach to technological
development through parks.
The factors contributing to the success and failure of Technology Parks are multifaceted.
Success factors include effective academia-industry collaboration, strategic location, and
comprehensive support services for startups and Small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs), fostering innovation and regional economic development. Conversely, failure
factors often stem from a lack of adaptability to local economic and cultural contexts, in-
sufficient integration with regional innovation strategies, and a failure to fully engage with
and support the specific needs of tenant firms. Addressing these challenges demands a
tailored approach that considers the unique characteristics of the regional ecosystem and
ongoing research to explore and mitigate challenges.
3.2
Startup interviews
3.2.1
Contacting
Due to the different nature of the contacted stakeholders, the contacting approach was
tailored for each group. Startups were easily reached with LinkedIn or via personal emails.
Communication with ecosystem partners was more varied, including emails, telephone
calls, and social media. Synchronization of the team and interview partners was achieved
with a call scheduling tool for ease of use and flexibility.
3.2.2
Conducting the interviews
In conducting the interviews, a collaborative yet distinct approach was adopted to ensure
both efficiency and depth in data collection. Initially, extensive background research was
jointly undertaken for each interviewee. This effort involved gathering comprehensive
information on the interviewees and their organizations and formulating a tailored set of
questions to prompt detailed responses, ensuring a well-rounded understanding of the
interviewee’s background. Notion3 was utilized for collaborative preparation, yet roles
were differentiated during the 30-minute interviews.
For each interview, one team member-led, focusing on question delivery and overall di-
rection, while the other supported by observing and interjecting for clarification or deeper
exploration as needed. The stakeholder type significantly influenced this approach: Inter-
views with startups were conducted without revealing the research context, focusing on
open-ended questions. In contrast, ecosystem interviews began with a pitch about the
project, followed by a more directed discussion (see chapter 2.2 for more information). All
meetings were conducted using remote meeting tools such as Microsoft Teams or Google
Meet, recorded and machine transcribed. The transcripts can be found in appendix A.2.
3.2.3
Analysing the interviews
Direct outreach to startups yielded a 29% response rate, resulting in six interviews. Table
3.1 provides an overview of the startups engaged. Due to confidentiality requirements, it
is not possible to disclose the names of all startups and individuals within this document.4
3Notion is a digital tool for note-taking, project management, and collaboration.
4For a visual representation of the stages, see figure 1.2.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: Codes of the TA
Startup
Industry
Interviewee
Stage
Employees
Operating Country
Chiral Energies
Carbon Capture
Anonymized
POC
10
Israel
Energy Wind Machines
Wind Energy
A. Gamborg
MVP
10
Denmark/Sweden
KiteX
Wind Energy
A. Okholm
MVP
28
Denmark
Luminescent
Heat to Power
D. Tamir
CP
20
Israel
Reel
Solar PPA
J. Sigvert
CP
29
Denmark
Reverion
G2P & P2G
F. Fischer
CP
66
Germany
Table 3.1: Overview of interviewed startups
These interviews were analyzed using the process presented in chapter 2.2. The analysis
of the interviews with these startups followed the methodology outlined in chapter 2.2.
Initially, the raw interview data was transcribed, followed by the creation of initial codes
(see figure 3.2). These were refined to eliminate overlaps and redundancies. Themes
emerged by aggregating concepts into overarching ideas. This process was iterative,
involving continuous cycles of code and theme evaluation and refinement. A detailed
exploration of the themes follows.
3.2.4
Themes
From the TA, seven principal themes were identified. These will be explored in detail
in the following sections, with specific tags provided for each theme to facilitate cross-
referencing in later discussions (refer to table A.2 in the appendix).
TA-M
Funding is one of the main concerns for startups regarding scaling and prototyping.
Except for Reel, all interviewed startups develop hardware products and mentioned the
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
16
==PAGE:23==
difficulty of obtaining the necessary capital for testing and scaling.
[...] to bring financing to hardware in the beginning, it’s very, very difficult. [...]
and until it becomes a commercial, it’s taking a lot of time.
— Tamir [60]
Tamir insights were echoed by nearly every startup interviewed. A key factor contributing
to difficulties in funding is the substantial capital required. This sum not only includes
expenses for materials and labor needed to build the prototype but also the costs asso-
ciated with testing facilities. For instance, small test sites, like those used by KiteX, can
easily incur costs exceeding DKK 200,000. Such steep financial demands force startups
to either decelerate their testing pace or cut back on the testing altogether.
I think what we are basically just missing is more, well, I mean funding that will
allow us to test for a longer period of time.
— Okholm [61]
This discussion brings to light a notable aspect: hardware startups often rely on substan-
tial funding, which predominantly comes from public sources. A significant advantage of
public funding beyond the sheer amount is its non-intrusive nature regarding the startup’s
capitalization table. Tamir and Fischer emphasize the importance of this aspect, pointing
out that dead equity in a startup can substantially diminish its prospects for securing future
investments [60, 62]. Additionally, these funding sources also have lengthy application
and reporting processes, making them a significant time investment for young startups
[61, 62].
And I mean also Y Combinator. [...] it helps a lot at first, but then at some point
you have investors saying ”no thanks” because there are people who actually
do nothing [...].
— Fischer [62]
This will be an important factor in chapter 4 where the financial aspects of the program
are discussed.
TA-S
A prototype of relevant size is essential for startups to scale effectively and get
their first customers.
The primary factor driving the need for capital among startups is the development of a pro-
totype. A recurring strategy is to create prototypes that are minimally sized yet sufficiently
large to attract potential customers and investors. However, this approach has limitations,
as a truly appealing solution for customers usually involves a commercial-scale product.
So that is the experience we have had, this 10 kW, so to speak, represents
a significant capacity, enough to surpass the energy requirements of a typical
household,[...]
— Fischer [62]
What constitutes a ’commercial scale’ varies considerably. For Reverion, it might be 10
kW, for Energy Machines Wind, 25 kW, and for Luminescent, 60 kW. This disparity in size
largely stems from differences in target customers and available resources to build the
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
17
==PAGE:24==
prototype.
Yeah, I mean, so the first one is that we chose to go for this portable market
slash camping and so forth. And I think that’s a challenge in itself because, I
mean, we’re not really sure if it’s the proper market. So that’s a big risk to take
instead of, you could say, going for the household market. But the reason why
we chose this more niche market [...]
— Okholm [61]
Ultimately, constructing a commercial-scale prototype can be seen as crucial. Such proto-
types allow startups to conduct field tests directly relevant to their early customers, as was
the case for Reverion.5 Opting for installations of this nature paves a more direct path to
investor and customer readiness than investing in several smaller prototypes, which may
ultimately incur higher costs than building a suitably sized prototype from the outset [62,
61, 63].
TA-I
A location will need extensive physical infrastructure to support prototype devel-
opment.
It’s very important that you have a very good place for manufacturing, a place
where you have CNC, 3D printing all the stuff.
— Tamir [60]
What Doron Tamir mentions here is something universal among the interviewed startups
- physical infrastructure to support the development of these prototypes: [61, 64, 63, 60,
62]
• Access to a well-equipped workshop [62, 63, 64, 61, 60]
• Enough space for not only a prototype but also a working area and offices close [61,
64]
• Access to power, internet, and other amenities [64, 62]
• Data measuring infrastructure such as smart meter and equipment to measure power
quality [62]
Yeah, and so my challenge right now is that I need a workshop, right? I need
somewhere to assemble this. So I assembled these turbines in the basement in
a building in Karlsberg.
— Gamborg [64]
The core resources outlined above are essential for any startup engaged in prototype
development. Many such startups, including KiteX, Reverion, and Luminescent, initiated
their development on university campuses. However, they soon encountered the limita-
tions of the available infrastructure. For instance, Reverion faced a shortage of natural
gas for adequate testing, while Luminescent struggled with an insufficient compressed air
5While Reverions’ first test installation was on university grounds, they designed the prototypes with com-
mercial sclae in mind. Due to this, Reverion quickly found an industry partner willing to test their product in
real-world conditions.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
18
==PAGE:25==
supply suggesting that a dedicated area where the startups requirements are considered
is crucial.
TA-SC
A program will need supporting services that are relevant to the startups.
In addition to physical infrastructure, various soft factors were identified as crucial for
successful startup founding. For instance, at Reverion, effective project management and
accounting were pivotal, particularly in comparison to practices at Technical University of
Munich (TUM). Other essential aspects highlighted include:
• Access to experts in respective fields [60, 61]
• On-site electrician for simple setups [62]
• Geographical proximity to test site [64, 61]
• Geographical proximity to talent pool [64]
• Integration of Grid and ancillary services [62]
So this is so there’s this whole thing where I live in Copenhagen. I don’t want
to travel to Jutland to test, right and and what does that cost? [...], I have this
guy who just graduated from DTU. He’s great at doing wind turbine simulations.
He’s not moving to Jutland. Absolutely not.
— Gamborg [64]
TA-PPA
An early PPA can help validate but might not be significant monetarily.
Within the interviews, we asked whether a PPA could elevate some of the pains of proto-
typing. Given that the prototypes in question are of a commercial scale, the potential for
substantial and reliable funding through a PPA is significant.
Quite exciting because just, it would be quite exciting or quite useful because we
would get something for the power. So that’s an improvement over the current
situation.
— Gamborg [64]
While some interviewees were very compelled by the proposition, others did not view
it as a significant financial incentive. Instead, they found the idea of a PPA appealing
primarily as a form of certification from a trusted entity. Nevertheless, such a PPA could
be effectively implemented through a behind the meter arrangement with DTU.
Luka Harambasic: ”An area that you then via PPA can sell the electricity directly
to DTU. So, for a small startup [...] to generate money and validate with real-
world data with grid integration, what they are promising really works in the real
world, not only in the lab.”
Andreas Gamborg:”I mean, that’s what I that’s exactly what I needed two years
ago.”
— Gamborg [64]
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
19
==PAGE:26==
TA-U
Startups currently test on University grounds but with significant limitations.
Startups interviewed for this study often tested their solutions on university campuses
(such as Risø). In 2007, Forskningscenter Risø underwent a merger with several other
scientific and research institutions, including the DTU. DTU has since assumed responsi-
bility for its operations, benefiting from access to equipped workshops, consumables, and
laboratories.
So we just set it up and make yard essentially and we were actually lucky to
be able to have a spot at Riso, which is this national lab out at the Roskilde.
— Gamborg [64]
However, these startups faced challenges, such as competition for space and limited
access to industrial equipment like large quantities of natural gas or compressed air [60,
63, 62], and specialized measuring tools like advanced cameras and smart meters [61].
So, the university enabled us to test it on campus, using bottled gases, but we
didn’t have a continuous supply of gas available there.
— Fischer [62]
TA-R
Ease of regulation plays a major role in the speed and confidence which startups
prototype with.
This crucial insight stands out as a key finding. All interviewees highlighted rules and
regulations as significant obstacles they encountered or continue to face. Starting with
the permitting process, startups and their products must satisfy specific criteria before
construction can begin. This impediment significantly restricts many startups’ prototyping
capabilities, as they are either unable to construct the desired prototype (e.g., KiteX) or
prohibited from developing any prototype at all within Denmark and its municipalities (e.g.,
Energy Machines Wind), as noted by [64, 63].
It was a real struggle to find a place to install a turbine and then get the permission
from the municipal house. And we’ve given up in Denmark [...]. I don’t think we’re
ever going to. Maybe when we have it fully tested, we might be able to. But the
problem in Denmark is the municipalities have their own rules. [...] It’s a very
stupid situation we put ourselves in. So no, none of these turbines are being put
up, right?
— Gamborg [64]
However, the permitting for the prototype is not the only hurdle. Startups will eventually
need these certifications to legally sell to customers. This leads to the program not only
needing to lower legal barriers for the deployment of prototypes but also the necessity to
accelerate the certification process of the products.
So you can demonstrate the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), but you haven’t,
so to speak, and that’s what we’re ’struggling’ with now; the customers now nat-
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
20
==PAGE:27==
urally want to know that everything is compliant. If you now bypass that in the
first stage. Then it sort of lulls the startups into a false sense of security, [...] look
for someone who deals with permitting and so on from day one, because that’s
going to be a big thing. Just so that one doesn’t create too much of a false sense
of security if you know what I mean.
— Fischer [62]
Some of these pains stem from municipality regulations that differ from place to place [64,
65] and could be elevated through a stronger connection between startups and munici-
palities where the program could serve as this interconnect similar to how TUM helped
Reverion [62].
3.2.5
Data Saturation
Data saturation is critical in qualitative research, indicating the point where new data
merely echo what has already been collected [66]. In practical terms, achieving data sat-
uration often occurs after conducting around 9 to 17 interviews. While Braun and Clarke
advises caution in using data saturation to determine sample size, suggesting it implies an
objective truth in data, this guideline can still be useful, particularly for researchers new to
qualitative studies. It’s important to remember that the richness of qualitative data comes
from its ability to capture diverse perspectives rather than quantifying specific instances
of a theme [66, 67]. Data saturation seems to have been achieved concerning the neces-
sary facilities and challenges in prototype development. However, it remains less clear in
financial aspects how startups could afford the program and what they require in terms of
processes.
3.3
Business Model Canvas Benchmarking
3.3.1
Organisation selection
Ten organizations were initially identified after internet research and recommendations
from interviewees. Only organizations that offer programs for companies in the clean
tech sector were considered. Also, the integrating startups into their program was an
essential part of the selection criteria besides the offered services.
• GreenLab (Website) [68]
• Energy Lab 2.0 (Website) [69]
• Power Lab (Website) [70]
• Washington Clean Energy Testbeds (WCET) (Website) [71]
• Wells Fargo Innovation Incubator (IN2) (Website) [72]
• Sustainability Accelerator Program (Website) [73]
• Startup Camp (Website) [74]
• Romania ClimAccelerator (Website) [75]
• Clean Energy Accelerator (Website) [76]
A limitation of this approach has been that we could only find websites with English content.
The search was conducted in Denmark from German Google accounts. As Google highly
customizes its experience, other programs with non-English speaking insights might not
have been identified. Interviewees recommended GreenLab and Energy Lab 2.0, which
did not appear in the keyword search.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
21
==PAGE:28==
3.3.2
Organisation profile
The characteristics of each selected organization were fundamental to our interpretation
of their business models. Consequently, a brief introduction to each organization’s pro-
file is provided. Below is a summary of these profiles, with all relevant data in a table
representation in the appendix A.3.
As for location, the information provided on the organization’s website was chosen - as
some of the organizations have multiple locations serving different purposes (e.g., Power
Lab). The founding year wasn’t always easily located; some don’t expose it, some refer
to the moment in time when the design of the program started (e.g., Energy Lab 2.0), and
others when the program was officially registered. To make the funding easier to compare,
all amounts were converted into Euros.
GreenLab , a private entity established in 2019, is fostering a circular economy in Spøt-
trup, Denmark, with a focus on integrating sectors such as agriculture, food, and energy
alongside an emphasis on Power-to-X technologies. As of the latest data, GreenLab
boasts a diverse team comprising 54 professionals per their LinkedIn profile and 31 indi-
viduals listed on their official website [77].
Energy Lab 2.0 , an initiative located at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) in
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany, represents a significant investment in energy re-
search. Established with an initial funding of EUR 22 million in 2014, this project under-
scores the commitment of KIT to advancing energy-related studies and technologies. The
facility’s construction began in 2017. Designed with a projected operational lifetime of 20
years, Energy Lab 2.0 is poised to contribute substantially to understanding and develop-
ing energy systems. [69]
Power Lab part of GreenLabs DK at DTU, is located in Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. Estab-
lished in 2016, Power Lab focuses on advancing electric equipment, renewable energy
sources, and smart grid technologies. The lab specializes in integrating smart home and
electric appliances into energy systems, strongly emphasizing wind power and e-mobility.
Key research areas include real-time grid analysis and the development of control center
tools. As of 2011, Power Lab has been funded with an investment of EUR 12 million (105
million DKK). [70, 78]
Washington Clean Energy Testbeds located at the University of Washington in Seattle,
United States of America, focuses on three key areas: solar harvesting, energy storage,
and system integration. The organization employs 12 members, according to LinkedIn,
and 8 are featured on their official website [79]. Establishing WCET was a significant
financial undertaking, with EUR 7 million (equivalent to USD 8 million) invested in planning
and design. The WCET officially opened its doors in 2017. [71]
Wells Fargo Innovation Incubator (IN2) a collaborative endeavor involving the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Wells Fargo Foundation, and the Danforth Plant
Science Center, is headquartered in Olivette, United States of America. Established in
2014, IN2 focuses on advancing technologies in agriculture, commercial buildings, and
housing sectors. With an allocation of EUR 45 million (USD 50 million), the initiative
actively engages through its digital platform. [72]
3.3.3
Business Model Canvas
A table per organizations BMC can be found in the appendix (see A.4 to A.8). Each section
will be explained in the following chapter, and key findings will be highlighted.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
22
==PAGE:29==
BB-KP
Key partners
In the current landscape of organizational collaboration, a pattern emerges where entities
across various sectors increasingly engage with academic institutions to enhance their
innovation capabilities. Some entities are intrinsically linked to academic environments,
facilitating a seamless exchange of knowledge and resources. Notably, initiatives such as
GreenLab, PowerLab and the Wells Fargo Innovation Incubator exemplify this by forging
partnerships with universities, underscoring the critical role of academia in driving forward
the frontiers of innovation [68, 70, 72].
Furthermore, some partnerships extend beyond academia, involving strategic collabora-
tions with the broader industry. For instance, three of the five organizations engage with
energy suppliers at different operational scales, ranging from local initiatives like Energy
Lab 2.0 to broader engagements with national energy departments, as exemplified by the
WCET. This industry-wide collaboration is further illustrated by entities such as IN2, which
maintains a robust network of over 60 partners. Uniquely, IN2 collaborates directly with
incubators and accelerators to support startups, showcasing a distinctive strategy to ex-
ploit synergistic relationships for fostering innovation and entrepreneurial success. These
collaboration patterns not only underline the similarities and differences among the organi-
zations but also reflect the complex nature of organizational strategies aimed at boosting
innovation, research, and development through diverse and strategic partnerships.
BB-KA
Key activities
Across the examined entities, a core element of their operational framework is provid-
ing facilities accompanied by a suite of services. These services include workshops and
access to specialized emulation equipment. Such offerings are not merely add-ons but in-
tegral to their VP, transferring theoretical knowledge to practical application in a controlled
yet versatile environment.
Startup scouting and selection diverge among the entities, with only WCET and IN2 incor-
porating it as a cornerstone of their operational agenda. This divergence raises questions
regarding the entities’ strategic priorities and ecosystem positioning [72, 71]. For WCET
and IN2, the emphasis on startup scouting and selection ensures a proactive approach to
innovation, suggesting a model that supports and actively seeks emergent technologies
and business models. This strategic orientation may reflect differences in mission, target
audience, or perhaps a broader vision of their role within the innovation ecosystem.
BB-KR
Key resources
The reviewed organizations share key operational elements: staff, facilities, and networks.
With their skills and dedication, staff are central to achieving organizational objectives and
driving innovation. Physical and digital facilities are required to perform main activities and
deliver services to fulfill customer needs. An example of a physical facility can be seen
in figure 3.3. Additionally, extensive networks of partners, stakeholders, and customers
create a collaborative environment for knowledge sharing and expanding market access.
GreenLab exemplifies the importance of digital platforms, particularly through its Symbio-
sisNet system, as highlighted on their website [68]. This platform serves not only as an
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.3: Overview of the GreenLab area [68]
operational tool but also as a strategic asset in marketing efforts. It reflects the organi-
zation’s commitment to leveraging technology to enhance its value proposition (VP) and
connect with its audience.
BB-VP
Value proposition
Three entities emphasize this network between academic institutions and development
partners [68, 72, 69]. This combination creates a setting that supports innovation and uses
universities’ academic strength and resources to improve these organizations’ growth
paths. However, looking closer at what each entity offers, the variety in their approaches
becomes clear.
For instance, GreenLab distinguishes itself through a cost-effective and flexible infrastruc-
ture tailored for production facilities, complemented by a streamlined process for permits
and approvals, alongside the educational initiatives of the GreenLab Academy, and the
presence of five specialized on-site facilities [68].
On the other hand, Energy Lab showcases a comprehensive range of 21 laboratories and
facilities, along with 8 joint projects, covering a wide array of energy innovations. Power
Lab is dedicated to testing, developing, and showcasing energy technologies, providing
both self- and full-service [70]. WCET delivers specialized equipment services across
5 key areas, enhanced by industry workshops, benchtop space, a remote access pro-
gram, and funding support to aid in research and development efforts. In contrast, IN2
stands out by offering substantial financial support through Euro 230,000 (USD 250,000)
in technical assistance, encouraging growth by pairing companies with experts, thus pre-
senting a distinctive method of generating value through non-dilutive funding and strategic
partnerships [72]. While these organizations all share the goal of nurturing a networked
community, different entities vary in how they strive to achieve this goal.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
24
==PAGE:31==
BB-CR
Customer relationships
The customer relationship strategies of GreenLab, Energy Lab 2.0, and IN2 focus on part-
nership and co-creation with industry peers, highlighting a commitment to collaborative
growth and innovation [68, 69, 72]. These entities engage deeply with partners, promot-
ing a shared exchange of ideas and resources. Conversely, WCET and Power Lab cater
to clients preferring independence, with Power Lab also offering a full-service option for
those desiring closer support [71, 70]. IN2 uniquely engages customers by grouping star-
tups into batches, fostering community and support among its clients.
BB-C
Channels
Analyzing communication strategies in selected organizations highlights a common issue:
digital discoverability. Despite their relevance in their fields, many struggle with Search
Engine Optimization (SEO), making it harder for startups, potential partners, and the com-
munity to find them. This problem is especially noticeable in the European organizations,
discovered through word-of-mouth, suggesting a preference for traditional over digital vis-
ibility methods. The interviews revealed a lack of awareness about these entities, even
among experts.
While each organization has a website, the effectiveness of these online platforms differs.
Some have sophisticated, independent websites, while others are part of larger academic
websites, which may weaken their online visibility. Social media activity also varies, with
only U.S.-based organizations consistently engaging on LinkedIn and X (formerly Twitter).
Conversely, GreenLab excels with a comprehensive online engagement strategy, main-
taining active social media accounts and offering a newsletter [68, 77]. GreenLab also
provides unique engagement through guided tours and educational programs, and IN2
uses its network for lead generation, showing a strategic use of relationships for business
development [72].
BB-CS
Customer segments
The strategies for customer engagement and collaboration vary widely. GreenLab fo-
cuses on the industrial sector, aiming to build strong partnerships with established compa-
nies. On the other hand, Energy Lab, Power Lab, and WCET aim to include researchers
and academics, showing a commitment to driving innovation through collaboration be-
tween academia and industry [69, 70, 71]. WCET stands out by targeting clean tech
startups and established firms, focusing on its customer base and reinforcing its influence
in the green technology field. This variety in approaches highlights how these entities en-
gage with market segments. Notably, IN2 focuses solely on startups, presenting a unique
case for examining the impact of such specialization on innovation and growth within the
green technology sector [72].
BB-CB
Cost breakdown
Analyzing the cost structure of organizations from the outside is challenging due to the
lack of access to their detailed financial records. As a result, we were forced to rely
on assumptions about how these organizations spend their money - assuming that the
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
25
==PAGE:32==
main costs for these entities are concentrated in five key areas: facilities, utilities, staff,
marketing, and legal and consultancy services. These areas are believed to be critical to
their operations, supporting their daily activities and long-term strategies.
BB-RS
Revenue streams
The ways these organizations monetize their services showed significant variation. Power
Lab and WCET employ a pay-per-use model with variable rates for those involved in
EU-funded projects or connected to the university, offering clear pricing that helps users
anticipate costs [80, 81].
In contrast, GreenLab uses a ”facility-as-a-service” model without public pricing, indicating
a more customized strategy for clients, likely based on the specifics of each project or the
client’s requirements [68]. However, Energy Lab 2.0 and the Wells Fargo Foundation do
not disclose their pricing strategies at all [69, 72], suggesting they might rely on significant
funding sources to subsidize access to their services. IN2 stands out by providing startups
with USD 250,000 in technical assistance, supported by the Wells Fargo Foundation’s
substantial funding [72].
This range of monetization strategies highlights the diverse ways these entities support
their operations and accommodate various user needs and funding mechanisms.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
26
==PAGE:33==
4
Synthesizing Insights
4.1
Creating the Morphological Matrix
Earlier in this work, we introduced a tagging system. Subsequently, these tags will be
combined to form SFs within the MM, as illustrated in Figure 4.1. SFs are labeled with a
specific syntax, such as MM-KR-SF-2, to clearly identify each one based on their position
within the BMC.
Figure 4.1: Identifier syntax of SFs
In line with this study’s approach, the BMC was used to organize all insights generated
in chapter 3. When insights were similar, they were consolidated into a single card in
the BMC, referred to as a learning similarly to a theme in the TA.1 The BMC was then
deconstructed to create the MM, which effectively mirrors the BMC in a list format. Some
learnings were broad and thus divided into multiple SFs within the MM. These subfunc-
tions were linked back to the tagged insights to maintain transparency and traceability.
Figure 4.2 demonstrates this process applied to a key result. The first layer of the diagram
includes data sources such as BMC benchmarking, TA, and literature review.2 Bench-
marking was conducted following the BMC framework, and as such, BB-KR represents a
BMC benchmarking key resources. The TA revealed several insights with similar charac-
teristics, labeled as TA-U, TA-S for these insights (refer to chapter 3.2 Startup interviews
for more information).
These insights collectively formulate a single key resource in a BMC context, specifically,
”Physical Space (workshops, office space, installation areas).”
Given the need for specificity in the MM, the key resource is broken down into SFs in layer
three, each contributing to realizing this key resource.
The SFs are then tied back to their source material through the tags introduced earlier in
the TA and BMC benchmarking stages. These tags act as breadcrumbs, allowing anyone
reviewing the model to trace each insight back to its original source.
By structuring the results in this way, the thesis not only presents its findings but also offers
a clear methodology for how these results were generated. Readers are encouraged to
jump between the relevant chapters to gain a deeper understanding of the source material
1A learning is defined as a validated insight that is significant enough to be included in the BMC on its
own and is relevant to the business strategies of startup programs. A learning may be supported by one or
multiple insights.
2Note that the tagging system was not applied in the literature review, as it served as a critical supplemen-
tary source.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
27
==PAGE:34==
for each of the proposed aspects of the program. Besides the formulated version of the
results, a complete MM per BMC building block can be found in the appendix (see tables
A.9 to A.16).
Figure 4.2: The cross-method tagging system
4.1.1
Key partners
This section provides an overview of the key partners identified in the benchmarked pro-
grams. The rationale behind the selection of these SFs is not discussed here as there
isn’t a lot to argue based on our insights. This ley parters have to be included. Also, the
interviewees did not specify any particular requirements therefore TA tags are not appli-
cable either. Thus, we will list the key partners from the BMC benchmarking process with
the corresponding SPs.
MM-KP-SF-1
BB-KP
University
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Leverage entrepreneurship education programs
• SP-2: Facilitate student-led startup incubation
• SP-3: Engage in university-sponsored technology competitions
• SP-4: Create internship programs for hands-on experience
MM-KP-SF-2
BB-KP
Industry
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
28
==PAGE:35==
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Establish industry advisory boards for startups
• SP-2: Facilitate industry-specific pilot programs
• SP-3: Initiate industry-sponsored research projects
MM-KP-SF-3
BB-KP
Local community
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Organize clean energy awareness workshops
• SP-2: Implement community feedback loops for product development
• SP-3: Engage in community-based clean tech initiatives
MM-KP-SF-4
BB-KP
Energy supplier
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Develop joint venture projects for clean energy
• SP-2: Offer exclusive access to proprietary data
• SP-3: Partner for grant applications on clean tech solutions
MM-KP-SF-5
BB-KP
Other startup programs
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Foster cross-program partnerships for resource sharing
• SP-2: Offer co-branding opportunities for mutual visibility
• SP-3: Establish referral programs for startup exchange
4.1.2
Key activities
MM-KA-SF-1
TA-PPA
BB-KA
Tracking and reporting of start up progress
Only GreenLabs focuses on its digital backbone for all the generated data. SymbiosisNet
is a tool for monitoring project data and facilitating reporting. Despite doubts about the
direct financial benefits of early PPAs, these contracts are valuable for proving a startup’s
worth to customers by demonstrating their solutions’ reliability and expected performance.
A case in point is Energy Machines Wind, which has successfully secured a PPA with a
utility company, showcasing such agreements’ practical application and benefits.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Quantitive performance tracking
• SP-2: Qualitative performance tracking
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
29
==PAGE:36==
• SP-3: Project-based reporting, e.g. short-term and focused on program deliver-
ables
• SP-4: Strategic reporting, e.g. broader approach also focussing on much more
“future” problems
MM-KA-SF-2
BB-KA
Scouting and selecting startups
This SF serves as the top of the funnel and focuses on identifying startups with the po-
tential to drive innovation in the energy sector. The chosen SPs are inspired by models
like the WCET and the Wells Fargo Innovation Incubator, ensuring the effective use of
resources and maximizing the program’s impact.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Collaboration with other startup programs (incubators, accelerators)
• SP-2: Hunt fresh out of university startups (e.g. DTU, CBS, etc.)
• SP-3: Cold calling specific startups
• SP-4: Go to pitch competitions and events
MM-KA-SF-3
TA-SC
BB-KA
Offering technical testing support with experts
Benchmarking insights show similar programs’ diverse technical support structures; from
emulator-centric approaches to hands-on services. The variation between self-service
and full-service models, as seen at Power Lab and Energy Lab 2.0, emphasizes the need
for adaptable technical testing support. From the TA, instances like KiteX’s efforts in
establishing a wind turbine testing facility and Reverion’s rapid prototype development
with on-campus experts highlight the critical role of expert-led testing in the prototyping
process. To address these findings, the program integrates SPs such as in-house support,
self-learning materials, and external collaborations, ensuring comprehensive support for
startups.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: In house support offers
• SP-2: Self learn materials
• SP-3: External help, e.g. DTU, GreenUp etc.
MM-KA-SF-4
BB-KA
Offering industry specific mentorship
Industry-specific mentorship is a common feature across startup programs, notably high-
lighted by the WCET. Recognizing this, the program incorporates several SPs to provide
targeted mentorship: an in-house team of experts (SP-1), access to an external network
of industry professionals facilitated by ACTS (SP-2), and leveraging alumni and other
founders as mentors (SP-3). These strategies ensure startups receive guidance tailored
to their specific sector challenges, enhancing their growth and development potential.
Solution Principles
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
30
==PAGE:37==
• SP-1: In house expert team
• SP-2: Access to external collection with industry experts (fostered by ACTS)
• SP-3: Alumni and other founders act as mentors
MM-KA-SF-5
BB-KA
Fostering a start up community
Creating a startup community is vital for enabling peer support and collaboration, enhanc-
ing innovation, and solving common challenges.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Online forums and social media
• SP-2: Recurring networking events
MM-KA-SF-6
TA-R
TA-U
BB-KA
Providing legal services
Including legal services is strongly justified by insights from TA and benchmarking. The
latter highlighted the proactive engagement of legal experts in programs like the WCET.
From the TA, the significance of legal services is further underscored. TA-R revealed that,
aside from financial hurdles, legal challenges are a major concern for startups, particularly
in obtaining prototype building permits. Startups often navigate industry-specific regula-
tions and permits, which can be significantly streamlined with expert legal support. The
experiences of startups interviewed, including those by Fischer, Okholm, and Gamborg,
highlight the struggles and delays caused by the permitting process. [62, 61, 64].
Reverion and Luminescent, for instance, utilized university resources to ease regula-
tory hurdles, demonstrating the potential benefits of partnerships in alleviating legal chal-
lenges.
The department applied for the funding project and managed the finances. We
had a secretariat that handled all the accounting, paying bills, and so on. — Fischer [62]
The authors themselves struggled with the legal aspect of their first startup, Sparkle. A
residential solar PPA business - Installing solar panels on private roofs in return for an
exclusivity power purchase agreement with the owners. Contracts would have had to be
over 20 or more years, with multiple challenges such as owners moving out, fires, natural
damage, etc. A contract alone would have cost Euro 15,000 (DKK 100,000) or more,
making it hard to get an Minimum Viable Product (MVP) up and running. This further
illustrates legal requirements’ complexities and prohibitive costs, emphasizing the need
for accessible legal advice.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Partnering with industry specific law firms
• SP-2: In-house legal support
• SP-3: Legal Workshops and seminar organization
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
31
==PAGE:38==
MM-KA-SF-7
TA-M
TA-I
TA-SC
BB-KA
Providing business support
Business support is crucial for startup success, as evidenced by practices at GreenUp3
and the Copenhagen School of Entrepreneurship (CSE), which offer specialized knowl-
edge and consultation services. Highlighting the importance of strategic decision-making,
Okholm mentioned the risks associated with market selection:
Yeah, I mean so the the first one is that - we chose to go for this portable market
slash camping and and so forth. And I think that’s a challenge in itself because
I mean we’re not really sure if it’s proper market.
— Okholm [61]
Moreover, the support provided to Reverion founders at the TUM demonstrates an effec-
tive model for alleviating administrative and financial burdens on startups.
The department applied for the funding project and managed the finances. We
had a secretariat that handled all the accounting, paying bills, and so on. — Fischer [62]
To address these needs, our proposed incubation program should feature a comprehen-
sive business support system that is as mentioned in 4 Synthesizing Insights.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Mentorship Program
• SP-2: Collaborate with other departments from DTU
• SP-3: Easier access to resources and tools (market research, industry reports, con-
tacts, etc.)
• SP-4: Use third parties like GreenUp, Ignite, CSE etc.
4.1.3
Key resources
MM-KR-SF-1
BB-KR
Operational focused staff
Benchmarking insights reveal a a focus business-centric operational staff with a notice-
able absence of technical expertise. This suggests a gap in the operational model that
could be addressed by adopting a flexible staffing strategy. The proposed approach in-
volves maintaining a core minimal administrative staff while leveraging partnerships for
specialized services such as installations, legal, and technical expertise. This approach
balances efficiency and depth, providing startups with thorough support without the incu-
bator incurring the costs of a large, specialized internal team.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Core minimal staff (admin) + partners for services (e.g. installations, legal,
business support…)
• SP-2: Everything in house strategy (as much in house expertise as possible)
3The GreenUP Accelerator is a Danish program supporting climate tech startups with funding, mentoring,
and courses focused on CO2 reduction and scale-up for international markets.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
32
==PAGE:39==
• SP-3: No full time direct employee (As much as possible will be handled by self
service and partners)
MM-KR-SF-2
TA-I
Workshop
The interviews with startup participants consistently underscored the need for a well-
equipped workshop for constructing prototypes and the necessity for advanced data-
measuring equipment. This type of equipment includes smart meters, camera systems
for remote surveillance, and potentially customer-specific measuring devices.
Yeah, and so my challenge right now is that I need a workshop, right? I need
somewhere to assemble this. So I assembled these turbines in the basement of
a building in Karlsberg.
— Gamborg [64]
Another, more complex, aspect is the integration of flexibility services like Frequency Con-
tainment Reserve (FCR) and automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFFR). These
services will grow in significance within the next years [82] and startups, especially in the
clean tech sector, will need to leverage this trend [62]. Grid integration is especially com-
plex for startups as minimum capacities are required to participate in different markets [83].
Consolidating multiple assets from startups could thus enable much earlier participation
and product development.
What I believe... Now, when it comes to the new energy world, it’s essential to
consider bidirectional flexibility. Let’s ensure flexibility is integral to everything,
including services.
— Fischer [62]
Moreover, the proximity of the workshop to test sites and offices emerges as a critical
consideration. The iterative nature of prototyping requires that these facilities be located
near each other to facilitate rapid iterations and modifications.
We’ve pretty quickly found out that you need to be close to your test site. — Fischer [62]
I’m not sure if they have any locations near Copenhagen, probably not, but I
mean that’s a big constraint for us, right? It needs to be close to make sense.
— Okholm [61]
As mentioned, a dedicated purpose build area will best serve these requirements. This
area could be established on existing university grounds, such as the Risø campus, or in
collaboration with other entities like Lnyngby or Copenhagen City.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Partner with existing providers, e.g. Campus Risø, DTU Skylab
• SP-2: Build a new workshop specific to startup needs
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
33
==PAGE:40==
MM-KR-SF-3
TA-SC
BB-KR
Office space
The WCET showcases effective management of office space flexibility, offering a range of
options like Reserved Lab Bench, Hot Seats, Dedicated Desk, Private Office, and Meeting
Rooms. This strategy highlights the importance of providing a variety of office space
solutions to cater to the different needs of startups.
To accommodate the office space requirements of startups while remaining flexible we
propose to partner with existing facilities providing the hands-off approach already men-
tioned.
So this is so there’s this whole thing where I live in Copenhagen. I don’t want to
travel to Jutland to test, right and and what does that cost? And I know that these
bigger companies have a real issue attracting people, ’cause I have, I have this
guy who just graduated from DTU. He’s great at doing wind turbine simulations.
He’s not moving to Jutland. Absolutely not.
— Gamborg [64]
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Partner with existing providers, e.g. Science Park, DTU, Skylab
• SP-2: Build a new building
MM-KR-SF-4
TA-I
TA-U
TA-S
BB-KR
Installation areas
Figure 4.3: Overview of the Energy Lab 2.0 area [69]
Integrating a dedicated installation area is a pivotal element in the proposed solution.
Specifically, TA-S highlights the necessity to accommodate prototypes of commercial
dimensions, a range that spans ten to 100 kilowatts. This would elevate many of the
challenges faced by startups conducting tests on university premises, as noted in TA-U.
Andreas Okholm’s vision of a ”big test field with hundreds of turbines” speaks to the am-
bition and scale of prototyping needs [61].
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
34
==PAGE:41==
So ideally I would like a big test field with hundreds of turbines. And I mean the
way it’s set up at the moment, you’re sort of almost only allowed to set up one
test turbine.
— Okholm [61]
Thus, partnerships with entities like DTU Campus Lyngby and Science City Lyngby can
offer interim solutions, but the establishment of a new, dedicated area for installation
emerges as a crucial recommendation. This approach not only addresses the space and
regulatory challenges faced by startups but also aligns with successful models observed
in organizations like Energy Lab 2.0 (see figure 4.3) and GreenLab.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Partner with existing providers, e.g. DTU Campus Lyngby, DTU Campus
Risø, DTU Power Lab, Science City Lyngby
• SP-2: Develop new area
MM-KR-SF-5
TA-U
BB-KR
Relations partner (investors, industry, etc.) network
Establishing a robust partner network, including investors and industry connections, is piv-
otal for startup ecosystems, as evidenced by Wells Fargo’s network of over 60 partners
and GreenLab’s industry connections. These relationships not only facilitate initial pro-
totype setups and quality assessments but also pave the way for early contracts, which
are crucial milestones for startups. Reverion’s early prototype setup at a farmer’s biogas
plant demonstrates how industry connections can propel startups to investor readiness.
And I think that’s precisely the beauty of it for all young startups, so to speak.
After (setting up the Commercial prototype (CP)), it’s investor-ready or relatively
easily becoming investor-ready. We have achieved that and have now grown
from 5 to 70 in the last 14 months.
— Fischer [62]
Similarly, Luminescents’ installation of its Proof of Concept (POC) at a potential customer
site showcases the advantages of having direct access to industry-specific machinery
and expertise, a goal that KiteX is also pursuing. To leverage these insights, the pro-
gram should strive for direct partner involvement in decision-making, mentoring, and goal-
setting.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Direct involvement of partners in startup selection
• SP-2: Partner integration into the decision-making of the program
• SP-3: Mentoring from partners for startups
• SP-4: Hosted workshops
MM-KR-SF-6
BB-KR
Relations to other startup programs and universities
Forming connections with other startup programs and universities is essential. As seen
with collaborations between Skylab and CSE or GreenUp involving their respective uni-
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
35
==PAGE:42==
versity students (Kopenhagen University, Copenhagen Business School, and DTU). IN2’s
network of over 60 partners, including accelerators and universities, along with Green-
Lab’s joint research projects with DTU, validate the benefits of such relationships.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Exchanges (e.g. speakers, startups, facilities)
• SP-2: Open network events
• SP-3: Recurring syncs
MM-KR-SF-7
BB-KR
Data collection hub
GreenLab’s SymbiosisNet introduces an intelligent grid combining energy infrastructure
and data measurement tailored for companies in their green industrial park. Similarly to
GreenLab’s SymbiosisNet, we proposed suitable data collection mechanisms here. The
aforementioned PPA could serve as a measuring tool for startups co-developed with po-
tential customers.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Buy solution
• SP-2: Build in-house
MM-KR-SF-6
BB-KR
Communication and knowledge management
GreenLab’s Academy and CSE’s intranet resources show the importance of effective
communication and knowledge management within the startup ecosystem. Implement-
ing tools such as chat, emails, a knowledge hub, and an intranet will facilitate information
sharing, collaboration, and learning among startups.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Chat
• SP-2: E-Mails
• SP-3: Knowledge Hub
• SP-4: Intranet
4.1.4
Value Proposition
MM-VP-SF-1
TA-I
TA-U
TA-S
BB-VP
Location for startups to install hardware
The scarcity of locations for hardware startups to install and test their prototypes presents
a significant opportunity for the program. Insights from both BMC benchmarking and TA,
particularly the cases of GreenLab and Energy Lab 2.0, indicate a gap in the market.
Startups often face a dilemma: either delay testing until the first commercial deployment
or face the high costs and complexities of setting up independent testing facilities, as
shown by KiteX’s experiences.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
36
==PAGE:43==
And then we also had to reassemble it ourselves. So I guess we spent some
weeks on that and then the whole electricity part, we also spent some weeks
on that, and then the whole server, the kind of thing also took some weeks. So
I mean, it was not half a year or months. It was maybe a combined workload
of two months in terms of hours from our side and 200,000 Danish kroner. But
it was also a very small test site, right? It’s not like a test site for a large wind
turbine.
— Okholm [61]
Collaborations with DTU Risø Campus or DTU could serve as the initial starting point
for the program. However, DTU Risø’s location, being somewhat removed from urban
centers, may not optimally attract startups and talent. Ultimately, the goal is to develop a
playground entirely managed by the program.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Small scale facility on uni Campus
• SP-2: Integration into Risø Campus or PowerLab
• SP-3: Access to piece of land via Lyngby (e.g. next to LIFE Campus)
• SP-4: New playground area
MM-VP-SF-2
TA-PPA
Opportunity for startups to sell electricity
Another unique VP for the startups is the opportunity to sell electricity. Our research
indicates that establishing a PPA, particularly with a university campus or city, not only
facilitates early revenue streams from prototypes but also validates the startup’s business
model and its technology.
I mean, that’s what I that’s exactly what I needed two years ago. — Gamborg [64]
To capitalize on this, the program suggests several approaches: creating PPAs with uni-
versities, local municipalities like Lyngby, or directly with grid providers. These options
provide varying levels of engagement and potential revenue, with the choice depending
on strategic alignment and available resources. Opting out of PPAs is also considered,
acknowledging scenarios where it may not align with a startup’s objective, for example, in
energy storage.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: PPA with Uni
• SP-2: PPA with Lyngby (or similar)
• SP-3: No PPA
• SP-4: PPA with grid provider
MM-VP-SF-3
TA-SC
Business support for startups
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
37
==PAGE:44==
Similar to the university support outlined in MM-KR-SF-1, tailored business support is vital
for the early success of startups. Decisions like selecting a target market are influenced by
numerous factors, and a program like the one suggested can minimize these variables,
thereby simplifying decision-making processes. This includes developing services like
FCR or aFFR in collaboration with startups that need it.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Advisory services through Uni departments in relevant fields
• SP-2: In house mentoring
• SP-3: External advisory networks accessible to startups through the program
• SP-4: Mentorship Program
MM-VP-SF-4
TA-SC
BB-VP
Technical support
Collaboration with the DTU could grant startups immediate access to extensive techno-
logical knowledge and specialized expertise.
Yes, so [TUM has] not just establish[ed] a central institute for funding, but rather
integrat[ed] it with all the other 60 doctoral candidates, exchanging ideas about
which sensor can do what, and, I don’t know, maybe pick up a bit more than you
initially thought and learning from other projects.
— Fischer [62]
By creating partnerships with university departments and simplifying the process for star-
tups to engage with experts, the program could greatly facilitates the acquisition of vital
technical insights.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Advisory services through Uni departments in relevant fields
• SP-2: Advisory services provided by partnering industry
• SP-3: In house technical expertise with dedicated staffing
MM-VP-SF-5
TA-R
BB-VP
Legal support
As elaborated in Chapter 3.2, startups emphasize the importance of legal requirements.
This necessitates legal support, encompassing guidance on the feasibility of various ac-
tions. This support is crucial for guiding emerging businesses towards sustainable growth,
tackling both product specifications [61] and business elements such as term sheets [62].
A practical example can be found in GreenLab, which aims to simplify the process of
obtaining permits and approvals, providing significant aid for companies dealing with the
intricacies of legal compliance.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Advisory services through Uni departments in relevant fields
• SP-2: Advisory services provided by partnering industry
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
38
==PAGE:45==
• SP-3: In house legal expertise with dedicated staffing
MM-VP-SF-6
BB-VP
Network and Community
Among the institutions discussed, IN2 frequently highlights its community, particularly em-
phasizing the closeness within their batches. This focus suggests that IN2 fosters an en-
vironment that prioritizes collaboration and support. which should be also the goal of this
program.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Shared office space
• SP-2: Partnering with startup programs
• SP-3: Utilise external expert networks (e.g. Science city Lyngby, CLEAN, etc.)
• SP-4: Collaborate with uni experts
MM-VP-SF-7
TA-R
BB-VP
Lowered regulatory requirements
Many industries, such as small wind farms, require strict permits, especially for prototypes
on public or leased land. Providing a space where regulations are lowered would dras-
tically speed up the startup prototyping process [61]. Moreover, making these permits
easier to obtain is essential as startups will eventually need them to sell to commercial
customers [62]. For example, small wind turbines are only permitted by two people in
Denmark, and combining the permits from multiple turbines would make this process sub-
stantially more efficient.
[...] there’s basically two or three persons in Denmark that can do these small
wind turbine certifications. That’s one guy we need to have.
— Okholm [61]
The GreenLab area is officially designated as a regulatory energy test zone, serving as
a site for examining and implementing energy solutions within a controlled environment.
This suggests that achieving something similar is feasible, but it will require time since it
necessitates approval from the Danish Government [84].
The test zone permit gives GreenLab dispensation from electricity regulations
[...]
— GreenLab [84]
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Collaborate with Regulatory bodies in relevant areas (build up as need arises)
• SP-2: Get special approval for lowered regulation zone similar to Nordhavn com-
mune or GreenLab
• SP-3: Purely base the playground on private property (needs to be checked if this
helps)
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
39
==PAGE:46==
MM-VP-SF-8
TA-PPA
TA-SC
Improved validation towards investors
As highlighted in MM-KA-SF-1, a PPA stands out as a valuable tool for validating tech-
nology. By utilizing a PPA, startups can demonstrate the reliability and efficiency of their
innovations to potential investors. Additionally, supporting services (as discussed in Chap-
ter 3.2 Startup interviews) contribute to well-rounded businesses.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Digital Reporting tools on key KPIs
• SP-2: Transparent evaluation methodology of the program itself
• SP-3: Partner with investors to mold application criteria, KPIs, and reporting
MM-VP-SF-9
TA-I
BB-VP
Workshop access
The significance of accessing workshops is discussed in MM-KR-SF-2. Practically, both
the WCET and DTU Risø demonstrate that shared workshops provide a strategic benefit
by consolidating resources. This approach minimizes the need for separate investments
by startups, significantly cutting costs and promoting a culture of collaboration.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Collaborate with Skylab workshops (small scale), DTU Risø workshops (large
scale)
• SP-2: Partnering with PowerLab
• SP-3: Collaborate with third party manufacturing and open workshops
• SP-4: Build own
4.1.5
Channels
MM-CH-SF-1
Direct outreach/scouting for startup selection
Although no specific insights were derived from the TA or BMC benchmarking, we believe
that this aspect is crucial and should be considered in the development of such a program.
This might be more relevant in the beginning to reach the perfect startups.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Cold acquisition
• SP-2: Startup conferences (e.g., TechBBQ, Townhall, etc.)
• SP-3: Tag on to other startup programs
MM-CH-SF-2
BB-CH
Social media channels
Among the five organizations studied, LinkedIn emerges as the predominant platform
for social media engagement, with four organizations actively utilizing it. Notably, two of
these organizations also experimented with YouTube channels. However, these attempts
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
40
==PAGE:47==
did not evolve into active engagements, resulting in inactive channels. From personal
experience, LinkedIn seems like the most effective platform for organizations, particularly
when resources for social media management are limited.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: LinkedIn
• SP-2: X (formerly Twitter)
• SP-3: Instagram
• SP-4: Youtube
MM-CH-SF-3
BB-CH
Website
Several organizations have been pinpointed for needing enhancements in key areas. A
major shortfall is their lack of effective search SEO strategies, which adversely affects
their online visibility. Moreover, their websites face usability challenges, hindering users’
ability to easily navigate and find information. Specifically, GreenLab’s website, despite
having extensive content, lacks structural transparency. Conversely, IN2 provides limited
information, resulting in a lack of sufficient detail for visitors while PowerLab’s website is
simply notably outdated. These problems highlight a critical need for these organizations
to revamp their digital presence. This presents a key opportunity for a new program.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: DTU branded and hosted site
• SP-2: Stand alone website
• SP-3: Focus on SEO
MM-CH-SF-4
BB-CH
Networking events and Workshops
GreenLab and the WCET (e.g. Technology Licensing for Climatetech) actively organize
events and workshops. These activities play a crucial role in brand building and estab-
lishing the programs as key players and thought leaders. This aids in enhanced visibility,
fosters community engagement, and facilitates knowledge exchange, thereby strengthen-
ing the brand presence.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Hosting domain specific talks
• SP-2: Recurring networking events
• SP-3: Sponsor relevant events and workshops
MM-CH-SF-5
BB-CH
University associated startup programs
Only IN2 distinctly highlights its strategy of utilizing connections with other programs to
attract relevant startups to its program. As this program would be associated with DTU
collaborations between the major players (e.g. CSE, Risø, Powerlab, etc.) in the Copen-
hagen area are already established and only need to be strengthened.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
41
==PAGE:48==
Solution Principles
• SP-1: An seat in this program as a prize for startup competitions (e.g. Xtech, Ingite,
etc.)
• SP-2: Partnerships with other programs
4.1.6
Customer relationships
MM-CR-SF-1
BB-CR
Advisory roll of program
Advisory systems with in-house or industry experts are common in benchmarked organi-
zations, such as GreenLab and Energy Lab 2.0. This reliance on expert advice extends to
various startup programs, emphasizing the importance of technical experts in establishing
the program as a knowledge hub.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Through in house experts
• SP-2: Through industry knowledge of partners
MM-CR-SF-2
TA-PPA
Quality assurance
The PPA is frequently emphasized for incentivizing startups to achieve certain KPIs. For
example, a minimum capacity requirement in the PPA for specific times encourages star-
tups to design their products with capacity markets in mind. Collaborating with potential
customers to establish these KPIs ensures customer-centric product development from
the start.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Regular performance review
• SP-2: Peer reviews
• SP-3: Tools and Resources
MM-CR-SF-3
BB-CR
Alumni network and longterm connection
The annual report of IN2 notably highlights their portfolio projects. We recommend a simi-
lar approach leveraging startups’ achievements to strengthen the communication strategy
and digital presence.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Networking events
• SP-2: Alumni network to serve as advisors
• SP-3: Yearly roundups for current and alumni
MM-CR-SF-4
TA-SC
TA-I
BB-CR
Self service tools and resources
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
42
==PAGE:49==
BIs are not able to address all needs, so self-service resources are vital for areas lacking
resources or staff capacity. Well-documented procedures for permits or expert contact
lists can significantly cut down task completion time. This is particularly evident in pro-
grams associated with universities, where self-service tools enable users to use facilities
after training independently.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Easier access to resources (market research, industry reports, contacts, etc.)
• SP-2: (Digital) library
• SP-3: Administration tools
4.1.7
Customer segments
Like the section on key partners, the SFs mentioned here are not accompanied by detailed
reasoning. Nevertheless, they align closely with the customer segments identified through
the BMC benchmarking.
MM-CS-SF-1
BB-CS
Local Clean-Tech Startups (Seed to Series-A round)
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Access to local investors, government grants, and investment opportunities.
• SP-2: Availability of advanced prototyping, testing facilities, and pilot sites
• SP-3: Opportunities for networking and collaboration within the local clean tech
ecosystem
MM-CS-SF-2
BB-CS
EU Clean-Tech Startups (Seed to Series-A round)
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Offer office space
• SP-2: Offer accommodations
• SP-3: Support for cross-border collaboration with startups and research institutions
4.1.8
Cost Breakdown
Similar to previous chapters no direct insights could be acquired, therefore no direct rea-
soning will be provided. However, several cost drivers associated with the concept pro-
posal are listed with the corresponding SPs.
MM-CB-SF-1
BB-CB
Staff salaries
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Flexible staffing to adjust payroll expenses according to workload
• SP-2: Internship programs
• SP-3: Outsourcing non-core functions
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
43
==PAGE:50==
MM-CB-SF-2
BB-CB
Facility maintenance
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Leverage existing facilities, e.g. Skylab, Futurebox
• SP-2: Involve the community in maintenance via Community Engagement days
• SP-3: Use generated electricity from startups
MM-CB-SF-3
BB-CB
Utility costs
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Use generated electricity from startups
MM-CB-SF-4
BB-CB
Marketing
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Utilize social media and SEO for cost-effective digital marketing
• SP-2: Engage communities for organic growth with community building
• SP-3: Use analytics for efficient, targeted marketing strategies with Analytics and
Targeting
MM-CB-SF-5
BB-CB
Program operational costs
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Reduce resource needs by managing programs digitally
• SP-2: Use volunteer mentors for cost-effective expert advice
• SP-3: Obtain resources through strategic partnerships
MM-CB-SF-6
BB-CB
Legal and consultancy fees
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Reduce external fees by developing in-house expertise
• SP-2: Obtain services at preferential rates through pre-negotiated Rates
• SP-3: Minimize fees by using legal tech for standard tasks with legal tech platforms
4.1.9
Revenue Streams
MM-RS-SF-1
TA-M
BB-RS
Fees for facility
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
44
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.4: Pricing from the WCET for Photovoltaic Fabrication and Testing [81]
The WCET and PowerLab provide transparent and public pricing sheets. WCET ’s model
is divided into three tiers: University of Washington, Non-Profits, and Industry Members/-
Standard Industry, as shown in figure 4.4. On the other hand, PowerLab categorizes its
services into Commercial and Research activities. Comparing the two, both offer similar
rates for technical consulting. PowerLab charges 133 Euro for DTU, Technical/administra-
tive support [80], while WCET’s Engineering Staff Fees are approximately 140 Euro (150
USD) [81]. Unlike these entities, other organizations do not disclose their pricing. For IN2,
it is suggested that their services might be financed through the 230,000 Euro (250,000
USD) grant awarded to startups, illustrating the range of pricing approaches possible to
support such programs.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Monthly subscription fee for everyone
• SP-2: Consumption based tiered fees (e.g. WCET, PowerLabDK)
• SP-3: Subsidised through funding from startups
MM-RS-SF-2
TA-PPA
BB-RS
Profits from the sale of electricity generated by startups
As previously highlighted, a PPA offers numerous advantages, ranging from targeted prod-
uct development to initiating a revenue stream for startups. An illustrative calculation for a
PPA is presented in equation 4.1. We consider a PPA for a 25KW wind turbine operating
at 1,500 full load hours annually in this scenario. This represents approximately 80% of
the time of a typical onshore wind turbine.
Revenue = Capacity (kW) × Full Load Hours (h/year) × Price (DKK/kWh)
(4.1)
Revenue = 25 kW × 1500 h/year × 2.5 DKK/kWh
= 37, 500 kWh/year × 2.5 DKK/kWh
= 93, 750 DKK/year
PPAs could finance the program through profits from sold electricity, potentially removing
the need for startups to make equity-based payments (see MM-VP-SF-2 and TA-PPA
in 3.2 Startup interviews for further details). No similar offerings were observed among
the reviewed organizations, which could suggest concerns about the feasibility of such
a model. However, it’s important to note that these programs do not provide physical
locations for installations as envisioned by this concept.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
45
==PAGE:52==
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Electricity revenue is not relayed to startup
• SP-2: Electricity is sold at markup to other actors
• SP-3: No additional revenue
MM-RS-SF-3
TA-M
BB-RS
Convertible loans and Equity
Many programs opt for convertible loans or equity funding. However, these funding meth-
ods are not readily liquid and, therefore, unsuitable for covering the operational costs of
such programs. Additionally, our research indicates that startups with dirty cap tables en-
counter significant hurdles in subsequent funding rounds.4 This issue is further discussed
in chapter 3.2 Startup interviews. Equity funding should be avoided as it also does not
seem to be necessary. For example, IN2 provides around 230,000 Euro (250,000 USD)
in technical support without taking equity.
Conversely, GreenUp offers a convertible loan of up to 135,000 Euro (1,000,000 DKK), a
proposition we would have declined with Sparkle if we had been accepted with our startup.
This decision was echoed by other founders we interacted with, who rejected the offer due
to concerns over compromising their capitalization table for a relatively modest sum.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Convertible debt (unpriced equity)
• SP-2: Convertible notes (below a specific valuation cap)
• SP-3: Equity-linked notes (converted into equity at a set price)
• SP-4: SAFE Documents
MM-RS-SF-4
BB-RS
Sponsoring
The Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, a nonprofit research institute, benefits from
significant financial support, notably from the Wells Fargo Foundation, which contributes
to various projects, generating over 185,000,000 Euro (200,000,000 USD) in revenue.
The NREL shows a keen interest in developing new solutions and actively participating
in projects. Given the absence of public pricing and that some startups receive up to
230,000 Euro (250,000 USD) in technical assistance from the institute’s facilities on a
nondilutive basis funding likely originates from organizations driven by philanthropic mo-
tives. Similarly, Energy Lab 2.0 receives backing from several governmental bodies: the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), the Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy (BMWi), and the Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts (MWK),
highlighting a broad spectrum of support for testing facilities.
Solution Principles
• SP-1: Grants and Funds
4A ”dirty cap table” refers to a complex or disorganized record of company ownership involving multiple
shareholders, different securities, and ambiguous ownership structures. This complexity can lead to chal-
lenges in clarifying ownership percentages, voting rights, and issues during investment rounds or acquisitions
[85, 86].
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
46
==PAGE:53==
• SP-2: Industry support
4.2
The Concept
The following chapter will illustrate the use of the previously established framework on a
DTU based concept program. As can be gathered from the preceding findings, a clean
tech startup program that effectively addresses all issues laid out can quickly reach an
unattainable scope. Thus, we propose a three-tiered approach for the establishment of
this program. Firstly, an initial proof of concept, secondly, a medium term phase with
limited scope, and finally, a comprehensive program, requiring greater investment while
broadening its scope.
In the first phase the program should rely entirely on existing university locations and re-
sources and should therefore be limited to one or two startups. This proof of concept
phase demonstrates the program’s attractiveness and possible viability to potential fund-
ing sources such as the Green Lab Denmark (GLDK) fund.
Once proven in concept, a more permanent area can be established as discussed in
MM-VP-SF-1 and MM-KR-SF-4. This phase will be covered in more detail below.
Given the success of phase two, a third phase expands the overall scope of the program.
At this stage the program includes capacity services, a greater scope of in-house exper-
tise, and the capability to deploy a larger spectrum of prototypes. This holistic approach
would set the proposed program apart from its competitors.
4.2.1
The second stage
We recommend that readers consult the MM tables from A.9 to A.17 for an in-depth ex-
ploration of the SF and SPs, as not every aspect is extensively discussed here. This
suggestion should be viewed as a guideline, highlighting key considerations and focus
areas to establish a clean tech startup program. This recommendation will follow the
structure of the BMC.
The key activities primarily focus on the services provided to startups. Given the es-
tablished ecosystem of DTU and its surroundings, we suggest a ”hands-off” approach.
Startups can already access early funding through avenues like the innovation fund or
micro-grants, business support through Skylab or CSE, legal services via DTU’s partner
firms, and engage in numerous startup events in Copenhagen. Through collaboration
across ecosystem partners startups can better leverage these offerings. As required by
M-KA-SF-3, technical expertise can be sourced internally from DTU by easing access to
its institutes.
Moreover, since the proposed startup program necessitates startups having an existing
POC, this program could act as a next step for startups emerging from early-stage incuba-
tion programs like Skylab Ignite, simplifying the scouting and selection process. Nonethe-
less, the program should not merely be seen as an additional component of the DTU
ecosystem. Part of its role is to attract startups to Copenhagen and Denmark. There-
fore, actively reaching out to promising candidates outside of the university should also
be considered.
A critical SF among the key activities is MM-KA-SF-1, which involves tracking and report-
ing startup progress. The aim is to accelerate the commercial readiness of prototypes,
requiring evidence of the product’s effectiveness in real-world scenarios for early cus-
tomers. We recommend employing quantitative performance tracking guided by specific
program deliverables, such as reliability requirements. This can be facilitated through
mechanisms like a PPA or regular progress reports.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
47
==PAGE:54==
The key resources for the program range from personnel in MM-KR-SF-1 to workshops,
the installation area and communication tools (MM-KR-SF-2 to MM-KR-SF-8). We sug-
gest capitalizing on existing assets to reduce the program’s complexity. This strategy is
particularly relevant for utilizing existing workshop and office facilities (e.g. DTU Skylab,
DTU Risø, Powerlab, etc.). This way the program can offer startups a broad spectrum of
accessible facilities without the incurring additional costs.
The installation area, denoted as MM-KR-SF-4, is a pivotal resource the program should
offer. Establishing a new area, an energy park, delivers a unique VP, uncommon in other
global programs. Rather than pre-constructing exhaustive facilities we propose that in-
frastructure is developed as needed by participating startups. Thus reducing initial invest-
ment costs and focussing on actual needs of the startups. However, a major challenge
is finding a large, regulation-compliant area for startups to develop their prototypes. Dis-
cussions with Lyngby city officials have identified potential land near the LIFE campus for
development, making it a possible location for the program
The VPs of the proposed clean tech incubator are comprehensive, designed to provide a
holistic platform for startups focused on hardware installation and development. It offers
business, technical, and legal support, all within a supportive community and network.
Central to the incubator’s value is MM-VP-SF-1, providing startups strategic locations
for their hardware projects. As a core VP we recommend against collaborating with yet
another university based scientific testing facility similar to Risø. Instead we advocate for
a dedicated area such as the LIFE campus close to DTU, or a strategic partnership with
GreenLab.
Our proposal introduces a unique opportunity for startups to generate revenue with MM-
VP-SF-2; by entering into PPAs with DTU. This setup simplifies the typically complex legal
processes associated with PPAs, making it an attractive option for startups. By designing
the PPA as a KPI tracking tool, the investor appeal of these startups could be strengthened
significantly (MM-VP-SF8).
As for business support, the authors recommend beginning with little in-house mentoring
while engaging external advisory networks. This two-pronged strategy is designed to
reduce program complexity by outsourcing noncritical support structures. This focuses
efforts on unique VPs such as technical expertise and installation area. While MM-VP-
SF-5, legal support, is unlikely to be feasible in an initial program, we suggest leveraging
partnerships to extend existing advisory services found at universities, avoiding the need
for in-house legal expertise at the outset.
Besides legal support, lowered regulatory requirements are crucial. Thus, we suggest
collaborations with regulatory bodies to streamline processes such as small wind turbine
approval. Furthermore, MM-VP-SF-7 includes the establishment of a special approval
zone similar to initiatives like Nordhavn commune or GreenLab.
Lastly, we strongly advocate for the inclusion of workshops through collaborations with
Skylab, Risø, and PowerLab, alongside additional partnerships with third-party manufac-
turers (MM-VP-SF-8). This approach is designed to provide startups with a spectrum of
developmental resources, aligning with the program’s commitment to minimizing initial
investments while closely meeting the startups’ needs.
Overall, this VP outlines a multifaceted approach to supporting clean tech startups, em-
phasizing strategic location access, streamlined business and technical support while
keeping the program within an attainable scope.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
48
==PAGE:55==
The program is strengthened by its good customer relationships, establishing the program
as a vital link between startups and their potential early customers. Co-creation of the
programs KPIs with these potential customers ensures that the startups’ solutions align
with industry demands.
Furthermore, incorporating an alumni network is a staple in incubation programs for good
reason. The invaluable insights and experiences alumni provide are instrumental, offering
new startups broader perspectives that profoundly influence their strategic direction and
decisions.
With regard to channels, we suggest a strategic mix of direct outreach and presence in
relevant environments to effectively reach and attract clean tech startups. Scouting for
startups through direct approaches (MM-CH-SF-1) can uncover innovations hidden to
traditional marketing channels, offering a fresh pool of candidates.
With MM-CH-SF-2, we recommend an active LinkedIn presence to tap into the profes-
sional audiences within the clean technology sector.
Thus, a well-designed, search-
optimized website should be considered a crucial asset, ensuring high visibility and easy
access for startups looking for support. An unfortunate example can be seen in Green-
Labs case: none of the interviewed startups knew about the program despite its significant
scale.
As we have previously discussed in MM-KA-SF-2, MM-CH-SF-5 underscores the signif-
icance of forming partnerships with other startup programs. Such collaborations act as
a vital feeder system for the incubator, facilitating connections with startups at various
developmental stages.
These suggested channels aim to build a comprehensive and effective strategy for attract-
ing and engaging with the most promising clean tech startups, setting a solid foundation
for the incubator’s success.
The program is proposed to rely on a diversified financial model to support its operation.
Focusing on securing grants, like those from GLDK, and establishing corporate partner-
ships ensures a stable and supportive financial foundation for the organization and its
clean tech startup. Notably, we advise against equity financing due to its potential to
complicate startup cap tables.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
49
==PAGE:56==
5
Conclusion
This thesis investigates the challenges faced by clean tech startups in the valley of death
and proposes a solution through the development of a program which supports startups
through this initial critical phase. We introduce a novel, data-driven approach to busi-
ness model development, creating a framework intended to underpin such a program.
While this thesis is contextualized within the environment of Technical University Denmark
(DTU), the framework is crafted to be broadly applicable beyond this specific setting.
Additionally, the thesis demonstrates the practical application of this framework and for-
mulates recommendations for the implementation of the startup program. This program
is designed to equip startups with the essential resources, support systems, and market
insights necessary for scaling their operations successfully and navigating through the
valley of death.
5.1
Reflection
The integration of the Morphological Matrix (MM) and Business Model Canvas (BMC),
enriched by different data-gathering methods, emerged as a valuable asset of our re-
search. This methodology, distinct from existing literature, offers a flexible, organized,
and research-founded way to develop business models. It highlights the potential for
creating sustainable and innovative business models and invites further exploration of
its practical applications. The MM allows readers to trace back our steps in conjunction
with the tagging system. This way, the developed and selected SPs are easily tracked
to their sources, and decisions can be scrutinized. With other constraints, for example,
geographic location or industry focus, an entirely different concept could be created with
the MM.
However, we acknowledge the limitations of our study. By interviewing a larger number
of startups our findings would have greater representation. Additionally, our reliance on
qualitative interviews limits data depth, which could be enriched by incorporating quantita-
tive surveys to engage a broader audience. Decreasing the number of expert interviews
may be considered beneficial. While these interviews were valuable for snowball sam-
pling and identifying potential partners, mentors, or similar roles, they contribution was of
limited value to this specific study.
The BMC benchmarking could have been substituted with a conventional competitor anal-
ysis. Although our approach benefits from benchmarking’s core feature - comparing dif-
ferent organizations - these findings could not be implemented as the program did not yet
exist at the time of research.
5.2
Outlook
As we conclude our exploration into clean tech startup programs, we propose a tiered
implementation strategy to address the complexities inherent in launching such an initia-
tive. We suggest the program start with a POC, utilizing minimal resources on university
premises to demonstrate its viability and attract initial funding, particularly highlighting its
value to potential investors like the GLDK fund. This initial phase aims to validate our
proposed approach in a real-world context, setting the stage for expansion.
As the program matures beyond its validation phase, we anticipate a transition into a
more structured phase, where the foundation is strengthened, and the program’s reach
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
50
==PAGE:57==
is broadened. This involves scaling up to a permanent setup that supports extensive
prototype testing in collaboration with municipal and industrial partners. This growth will be
informed by the program’s demonstrated value propositions and its success in facilitating
prototype development within a more accommodating regulatory framework.
Operationally, the program is designed to leverage the strong ecosystems that exist around
academic institutions like DTU, offering startups an array of support services ranging from
business and legal advice to technical guidance and networking opportunities.
As we lay the groundwork for this innovative program, we offer the following recommen-
dations to those who will carry this work forward:
Conduct a detailed impact analysis:
Assess the program’s potential environmental,
societal, and economic impact. Questions such as the amount of CO2 reduction, job cre-
ation, and the survival rate of startups should be addressed to underscore the program’s
value.
Explore integrations with GreenLab: GreenLab has a successful, exportable concept.
Thus, starting collaborations with entities like GreenLab could be beneficial.
Cultivate an industry network: Success hinges on a robust network within the industry.
While our attempts to engage with key companies like Vattenfall, Ørsted, and others did
not yield immediate results, we stress the importance of persisting in these efforts.
Establish a strong advisory board: The interest from industry veterans is unmistakable.
An effective advisory board can provide invaluable guidance. We are more than willing to
facilitate introductions.
Pursue a next funding round:
Engage with the GLDK fund for the next funding cycle.
Our discussions suggest a strong alignment with their criteria. They also provide an appli-
cation template, which we encourage exploring further. We are willing to assist with this
process if needed.
This thesis marks the beginning of what we hope will be a transformative journey for
clean tech startup programs. As we hand over the baton, we are optimistic about the
potential impact of this and similar programs - not only on the startups it will support but
also on the broader quest for sustainable solutions. The path ahead is promising, and
with continued innovation, collaboration, and support, we believe that these can make a
significant contribution to the clean tech sector and beyond.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
51
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
n.a. “Promoting Start-Ups and Scale-Ups in Denmark’s Sector Strongholds and
Emerging Industries”. In: (May 2022). DOI: 10.1787/8F9BD7B0-EN.
[2]
n.a. 1KOMMA5° announces a New Investor named 2150. URL: https://1komma5g
rad.com/en/press/press-releases/1komma5o-announces-new-investor-2150.
[3]
Emir Uzunoğlu. “Pre-emptive Management in Entrepreneurship”. In: (2012). DOI:
10.13140/RG.2.2.21506.58568.
[4]
Leo A. Goodman. Snowball Sampling. Vol. 32. Institute of Mathematical Statistics,
Mar. 1961, pp. 148–170. DOI: 10.1214/aoms/1177705148.
[5]
W. Lawrence Neuman. Social research methods: qualitative and quantitative ap-
proaches, p. 598. ISBN: 1292020237.
[6]
Warren D. TenHouten. “Site Sampling and Snowball Sampling - Methodology for Ac-
cessing Hard-to-reach Populations”. In: BMS Bulletin of Sociological Methodology
134 (1 Apr. 2017), pp. 58–61. ISSN: 20702779. DOI: 10.1177/0759106317693790.
[7]
Haje Jan Kamps. Startup founders, this is how you get your first investor meeting.
Dec. 2022. URL: https://techcrunch.com/2022/12/16/intros-cold-emails/?guccounte
r=1.
[8]
Kim Leighton et al. “Using Social Media and Snowball Sampling as an Alternative
Recruitment Strategy for Research”. In: Clinical Simulation in Nursing 55 (June
2021), pp. 37–42. ISSN: 1876-1399. DOI: 10.1016/J.ECNS.2021.03.006.
[9]
“Thematic Analysis: Striving to Meet the Trustworthiness Criteria”. In: (2023). [On-
line; accessed 2. Jan. 2024].
[10]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Using thematic analysis in psychology”. In: Qual-
itative Research in Psychology 3 (2 2006), pp. 77–101. ISSN: 14780887. DOI: 10
.1191/1478088706QP063OA.
[11]
Nigel King. “Essential Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research”.
In: Essential Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research (Mar. 2004).
DOI: 10.4135/9781446280119.
[12]
Immy Holloway and Les Todres. “The Status of Method: Flexibility, Consistency and
Coherence”. In: Qualitative Research 3.3 (2003), pp. 345–357. ISSN: 1468-7941.
DOI: 10.1177/1468794103033004.
[13]
Anthony G. Tuckett. “Applying thematic analysis theory to practice: A researcher’s
experience”. In: Contemporary Nurse 19.1-2 (2005), pp. 75–87. ISSN: 10376178.
DOI: 10.5172/CONU.19.1-2.75. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.5172
/conu.19.1-2.75.
[14]
Ashley Castleberry and Amanda Nolen. “Thematic analysis of qualitative research
data: Is it as easy as it sounds?” In: Currents in Pharmacy Teaching and Learning
10.6 (2018), pp. 807–815. ISSN: 1877-1297. DOI: 10.1016/j.cptl.2018.03.019.
[15]
Vicki Squires. Thematic Analysis. 2023. ISBN: 978-3-031-04396-3. DOI: 10.1007/9
78-3-031-04394-9_72.
[16]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Toward good practice in thematic analysis: Avoid-
ing common problems and be(com)ing a knowing researcher”. In: International Jour-
nal of Transgender Health 24 (1 2023), pp. 1–6. ISSN: 26895277. DOI: 10.1080/26
895269.2022.2129597.
[17]
David C. Logan. “Known knowns, known unknowns, unknown unknowns and the
propagation of scientific enquiry”. In: J. Exp. Bot. 60.3 (2009), pp. 712–714. ISSN:
0022-0957. DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erp043.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
52
==PAGE:59==
[18]
Alexander Osterwalder and Yves Pigneur. Business Model Generation. John Wiley
and Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2010. ISBN: 978-0470-87641-1.
[19]
Greg Fisher, John Wisneski, and Rene Bakker. “Business Model Canvas”. In: Aug.
2020, pp. 174–184. ISBN: 9780190081478. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780190081478.003
.0019.
[20]
Alan Murray and Veronica Scuotto. “The Business Model Canvas”. In: Symphonya.
Emerging Issues in Management (Nov. 2016), pp. 94–109. ISSN: 1593-0319. DOI:
10.4468/2015.3.13murray.scuotto.
[21]
Kyllikki Taipale-Erävala, Erno Salmela, and Hannele Lampela. Towards a New Busi-
ness Model Canvas for Platform Businesses in Two-Sided Markets. 2020.
[22]
Strategyzer AG. Business Model Canvas - Template. URL: https://www.strategyze
r.com/library/the-business-model-canvas.
[23]
Robert C. Camp. Benchmarking: The Search for Industry Best Practices that Lead
to Superior Performance. Milwaukee, Wis.; White Plains, N.Y.: Quality Press, 1989.
ISBN: 9780873890588.
[24]
Mohamed Zairi and Paul Leonard. Practical Benchmarking: The Complete Guide.
Springer Netherlands, 1996. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-011-1284-0.
[25]
Robert M Fifer. “Cost benchmarking functions in the value chain”. In: Planning Re-
view 17 (3 Jan. 1989), pp. 18–19. ISSN: 0094-064X. DOI: 10.1108/eb054255.
[26]
F. Zwicky. “The Morphological Approach to Discovery, Invention, Research and
Construction”. In: New Methods of Thought and Procedure. Ed. by Fritz Zwicky and
Albert G. Wilson. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1967, pp. 273–297.
ISBN: 978-3-642-87617-2.
[27]
Sven Seidenstricker, Stefan Scheuerle, and Christian Linder. “Business Model Pro-
totyping – Using the Morphological Analysis to Develop New Business Models”. In:
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 148 (Aug. 2014), pp. 102–109. ISSN:
18770428. DOI: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.023.
[28]
Ji Lee, ; Hwan, and Yoo S Hong. A morphological approach to business model
creation using case-based reasoning. 2011.
[29]
Tom Ritchey. “General Morphological Analysis (GMA)”. In: Wicked Problems - So-
cial Messes: Decision Support Modelling with Morphological Analysis. Berlin, Hei-
delberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 7–18. ISBN: 978-3-642-19653-9. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-642-19653-9_2.
[30]
Asunción Álvarez and Tom Ritchey. “Applications of General Morphological Analysis
From Engineering Design to Policy Analysis”. In: Acta Morphologica Generalis AMG
4.1 (2015). ISSN: 2001-2241.
[31]
Remedios Castro et al. “Influence of different fermentation conditions on the an-
alytical and sensory properties of craft beers: Hopping, fermentation temperature
and yeast strain”. In: Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 106 (Mar. 2022),
p. 104278. ISSN: 0889-1575. DOI: 10.1016/J.JFCA.2021.104278.
[32]
Angela Capece et al. “Conventional and Non-Conventional Yeasts in Beer Produc-
tion”. In: Fermentation 2018, Vol. 4, Page 38 4 (2 June 2018), p. 38. ISSN: 2311-
5637. DOI: 10.3390/FERMENTATION4020038.
[33]
“The evolution of Business incubators: Comparing demand and supply of business
incubation services across different incubator generations”. In: Technovation 32 (2
Feb. 2012), pp. 110–121. ISSN: 01664972. DOI: 10.1016/J.TECHNOVATION.2011
.11.003.
[34]
Amezcua Alejandro. Boon or Boondoggle? Business Incubation as Entrepreneur-
ship Policy - ProQuest. 2010.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
53
==PAGE:60==
[35]
Ömer Çağrı Özdemir and Yasin Şehitoğlu. “Assessing the Impacts of Technology
Business Incubators: A framework for Technology Development Centers in Turkey”.
In: Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 75 (2013). The Second International
Conference on Leadership, Technology and Innovation Management (2012), pp. 282–
291. ISSN: 1877-0428. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.04.032.
[36]
Ernesto Tavoletti. “Business Incubators: Effective Infrastructures or Waste of Public
Money? Looking for a Theoretical Framework, Guidelines and Criteria”. In: Journal
of the Knowledge Economy 4 (4 Dec. 2013), pp. 423–443. ISSN: 18687873. DOI:
10.1007/S13132-012-0090-Y/METRICS.
[37]
Ben Saunders. My take on climate-tech investing: hardware, software, and more.
[Online; accessed 4. Feb. 2024]. Nov. 2023. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/posts
/ben-saunders-polar_in-the-face-of-a-wider-vc-funding-slowdown-activity-7127567119
864467457-qTjb?trk=public_profile_like_view.
[38]
Perspectives from the IN2 Network: State of the Cleantech Landscape | Innovation
Incubator (IN2). [Online; accessed 4. Feb. 2024]. Jan. 2021. URL: https://in2ecosy
stem.com/perspectives-from-the-in2-network-state-of-the-cleantech-landscape.
[39]
Case Studies | Cleantech Group. [Online; accessed 4. Feb. 2024]. Aug. 2014. URL:
https://www.cleantech.com/advisory/case-studies.
[40]
Prof. Dr. Rolf Sternberg et al. Wirkungsanalyse deutscher Technologie- und Grün-
derzentren. 1994. URL: https://www.iwkg.uni-hannover.de/de/forschung/forschungs
projekte/detailseite/projects/wirkungsanalyse-deutscher-technologie-und-gruenderzent
ren/.
[41]
C. S. P. Monck. “Science parks and the growth of high technology firms”. In: (1988),
p. 270.
[42]
Christine Tamásy. “Rethinking Technology-Oriented Business Incubators: Develop-
ing a Robust Policy Instrument for Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and Regional De-
velopment?” In: Growth and Change 38 (3 Sept. 2007), pp. 460–473. ISSN: 1468-
2257. DOI: 10.1111/J.1468-2257.2007.00379.X.
[43]
J. Piet Hausberg and Sabrina Korreck. “Business incubators and accelerators: a
co-citation analysis-based, systematic literature review”. In: Handbook of Research
on Business and Technology Incubation and Acceleration (Mar. 2021). DOI: 10.433
7/9781788974783.00009.
[44]
Onise Alpenidze and Alexandrina Maria Pauceanu. “Key success factors for busi-
ness incubators in Europe: an empirical study”. In: Academy of Entrepreneurship
Journal 25 (Jan. 2019), pp. 1–13.
[45]
What Makes a Good Business Incubator Key Factors - FasterCapital. [Online; ac-
cessed 4. Feb. 2024]. Jan. 2024. URL: https://fastercapital.com/content/What-Ma
kes-a-Good-Business-Incubator--Key-Factors.html.
[46]
Raymond W. Smilor, David V. Gibson, and Glenn B. Dietrich. “University spin-out
companies: Technology start-ups from UT-Austin”. In: Journal of Business Venturing
5.1 (Jan. 1990), pp. 63–76. ISSN: 0883-9026. DOI: 10.1016/0883-9026(90)90027-Q.
[47]
Sang Suk Lee and Jerome S. Osteryoung. “A Comparison of Critical Success Fac-
tors for Effective Operations of University Business Incubators in the United States
and Korea”. In: Journal of Small Business Management 42.4 (Aug. 2004), pp. 418–
426. ISSN: 1540-627X. DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-627X.2004.00120.x.
[48]
Paul Anthony Samuelson. Economics. Maidenhead, England, UK: McGraw-Hill, 1976.
ISBN: 978-0-07054590-8.
[49]
Dihui Han et al. “How do circular start-ups achieve scale?” In: Sustainable Prod.
Consumption 40 (Sept. 2023), pp. 363–375. ISSN: 2352-5509. DOI: 10.1016/j.spc
.2023.06.007.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
54
==PAGE:61==
[50]
Padmalini Singh. “From Startup to Scale Up: The Key Challenges”. In: AMC Indian
Journal of Entrepreneurship 2 (June 2019), p. 37. DOI: 10.17010/amcije/2019/v2i2
/145363.
[51]
Ingo Michelfelder et al. “Attracting venture capital to help early-stage, radical clean-
tech ventures bridge the valley of death: 27 levers to influence the investor per-
ceived risk-return ratio”. In: J. Cleaner Prod. 376 (Nov. 2022), p. 133983. ISSN:
0959-6526. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133983.
[52]
Ten years of clean energy start-ups – Analysis - IEA. [Online; accessed 4. Feb.
2024]. July 2021. URL: https://www.iea.org/articles/ten-years-of-clean-energy-start-
ups.
[53]
Zoltán Pálmai. “An innovation park in Hungary: INNOTECH of the Budapest Univer-
sity of Technology and Economics”. In: Technovation 24 (5 May 2004), pp. 421–432.
ISSN: 01664972. DOI: 10.1016/S0166-4972(02)00098-6.
[54]
“A typology of clean technology commercialization accelerators”. In: Journal of Engi-
neering and Technology Management - JET-M 32 (2014), pp. 26–39. ISSN: 09234748.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jengtecman.2013.10.006.
[55]
Inje Cho, Eung-Hyun Lee, and Hoonje Cho. “How Should Techno Parks Innovate to
Support Start-ups and Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Effectively in the Era
of the Fourth Industrial Revolution?” In: (2017). DOI: 10.7165/wtr17a0829.16.
[56]
Imran Makhdoom et al. “Science and Technology Parks: A Futuristic Approach”. In:
IEEE Access 10 (2022), pp. 31981–32021. ISSN: 21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCES
S.2022.3159798.
[57]
Iago Cotrim Henriques, Vinicius Amorim Sobreiro, and Herbert Kimura. “Science
and technology park: Future challenges”. In: Technology in Society 53 (May 2018),
pp. 144–160. ISSN: 0160791X. DOI: 10.1016/j.techsoc.2018.01.009.
[58]
Dodie Tricahyono et al. The role of business incubator on cultivating innovation on
start-ups: The case study of Bandung techno park (BTP) Indonesia. 2018.
[59]
Mina Hanin, J J Henkin, and Shadman Rahman. Transforming Southern California
into a Clean-Tech Hub. 2023.
[60]
Doron Tamir. “Luminescent, Interview on Startup Program”. Interviewed by Niklas
Lüttringhaus on 21/10/2023. 2023.
[61]
Andreas Okholm. “KiteX, Interview on Startup Program”. Interviewed by Niklas Lüt-
tringhaus and Luka Harambasic on 10/10/2023. 2023.
[62]
Felix Fischer. “Reverion, Interview on Startup Program - translated from German”.
Interviewed by Niklas Lüttringhaus on 19/10/2023. 2023.
[63]
Anonymized. “Anonymized, Interview on Startup Program”. Interviewed by Niklas
Lüttringhaus and Luka Harambasic on 12/11/2023. 2023.
[64]
Andreas Gamborg. “Energy Machines Wind, Interview on Startup Program”. Inter-
viewed by Luka Harambasic on 08/11/2023. 2023.
[65]
Lubanski Marianna. “Interview on Startup Program”. Interviewed by Niklas Lüttring-
haus and Luka Harambasic on 03/08/2023. 2023.
[66]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Thematic Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA, USA:
SAGE Publications Inc, Dec. 2020. ISBN: 978-1-52641730-5.
[67]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Using thematic analysis in psychology”. In: Qual-
itative Research in Psychology 3.2 (Dec. 2006). ISSN: 1478-0887. DOI: 10.1191/1
478088706qp063oa.
[68]
GreenLab. GreenLab - Frontpage. [Online; accessed 23. Feb. 2024]. Feb. 2024.
URL: https://www.greenlab.dk.
[69]
Svenja Geißler. “Energy Lab 2.0 - Landing Page”. In: (Feb. 2024). [Online; accessed
23. Feb. 2024]. URL: https://www.elab2.kit.edu/english/index.php.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
55
==PAGE:62==
[70]
PowerLabDK. [Online; accessed 24. Feb. 2024]. Feb. 2024. URL: https://www.po
werlab.dk.
[71]
Washington Clean Energy Testbeds - Single-stop, open access. [Online; accessed
24. Feb. 2024]. Feb. 2024. URL: https://www.wcet.washington.edu.
[72]
Innovation Incubator (IN2) | Innovation. Validation. Commercialization. [Online; ac-
cessed 24. Feb. 2024]. Feb. 2024. URL: https://in2ecosystem.com.
[73]
Sustainability Accelerator Program - Startup Wise Guys. [Online; accessed 24. Feb.
2024]. Feb. 2024. URL: https://startupwiseguys.com/growing/sustainability-accelera
tor-program.
[74]
Startup Camp: Deeptech - Chalmers Ventures. [Online; accessed 24. Feb. 2024].
Nov. 2023. URL: https://chalmersventures.com/startup-camp-deeptech.
[75]
Romania ClimAccelerator – Acceleratorul startupurilor verzi. [Online; accessed 24.
Feb. 2024]. Sept. 2023. URL: https://www.impacthub.ro/climaccelerator.
[76]
Altitude. [Online; accessed 24. Feb. 2024]. Feb. 2024. URL: https://www.worldstar
tup.co/programme/altitude.
[77]
GreenLab: Overview | LinkedIn. [Online; accessed 24. Feb. 2024]. Feb. 2024. URL:
https://www.linkedin.com/company/greenlabskive/?originalSubdomain=dk.
[78]
PowerLabDK. [Online; accessed 26. Feb. 2024]. Jan. 2013. URL: https://backend
.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/105043296/PowerLabDK.pdf.
[79]
Washington Clean Energy Testbeds: Overview LinkedIn. [Online; accessed 24. Feb.
2024]. Feb. 2024. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/company/washington-clean-energ
y-testbeds.
[80]
PRICE LIST FOR POWERLAB.DK. [Online; accessed 26. Feb. 2024]. Jan. 2017.
URL: https://www.powerlab.dk/-/media/Sites/PowerLabDK/access_and_use/Power
Lab-Prisliste-2017-V1.ashx?la=da.
[81]
[Online; accessed 25. Feb. 2024]. Aug. 2023. URL: https://www.wcet.washington.e
du/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/230701-WCET-Rate-Doc.pdf.
[82]
Laura Schmidt et al. “Driving Towards Grid Balance An Architecture Clarification
White Paper Energinet”. 2020.
[83]
n.a. Behovsvurdering for Systemydelser 2022. 2022. URL: https://energinet.dk/me
dia/ai2e2l4i/behovsvurdering-for-systemydelser-2022.pdf.
[84]
GreenLab. Test zone designation paves the way for the use of green power. [Online;
accessed 23. Feb. 2024]. Feb. 2024. URL: https://www.greenlab.dk/knowledge/tes
t-zone-designation-paves-the-way-for-the-use-of-green-power/.
[85]
Nirjhor Rahman. Buyer beware: Bad cap tables will kill startups | The Business
Standard. 2021. URL: https://www.tbsnews.net/features/panorama/buyer-beware-b
ad-cap-tables-will-kill-startups-270943.
[86]
n.a. Common Causes of a Messy Cap Table - Shockwave Innovations. URL: https:
//shockwaveinnovations.com/common-causes-of-a-messy-cap-table/.
[87]
Anthony J. Onwuegbuzie, Nancy L. Leech, and Kathleen M.T. Collins. “Qualitative
Analysis Techniques for the Review of the Literature”. In: The Qualitative Report
17.28 (July 2012), pp. 1–28. ISSN: 1052-0147. DOI: 10.46743/2160-3715/2012.175
4.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
56
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
Methodology
Methodology
Advantages
Disadvantages
Content Analysis
Can be automated
Easily replicable
Low investment required
Useful for quantifying data
Time-consuming if manual
Subjective interpretation
Not suitable for complex textual analysis
Thematic Analysis
Highly accessible
Effective for large data volumes
Simplifies complex information
Flexible in data interpretation
Can oversimplify complex narratives
Subjective
May overlook nuanced meanings
Narrative Analysis
Provides deep understanding of subjects
Personalizes customer experiences
Maintains holistic customer profiles
Rich in detail
Non-scalable
Time-intensive
Cannot be automated
Grounded Theory Analysis
Develops new theories from data
Data-informed results
Useful for exploring unfamiliar topics
Grounded in real-world data
Requires high objectivity and creativity
Can be overly theoretical
May not provide concise answers
Discourse Analysis
Uncovers underlying motivations
Provides broad understanding of context
Reveals social norms and power structures
Deep analysis of language use
Subjective
Labor-intensive
Broad and less focused approach
Table A.1: Qualitative data analysis methodologies that were considered [87]
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
57
==PAGE:64==
A.2
Gathering Insights
A.2.1
Interview Transcripts
Felix Fischer - Reverion
Bookmark: Introduction and overview of the project
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:02] Genau, ich hatte es ja bisschen angerissen, aber bei
linkedin hat man immer 200 Zeichen, daher ich hier mal ganz kurz, was wir sozusagen
eigentlich machen. Die Idee u. Das ist die technische Universität Dänemark, das ist ja
sogar eine Partner Universität der TUM, wir haben auch so viele Studenten hier.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:21] Plant einen einen ganz spezifischen Energieein Kubatur
oder ein Energieprogramm sozusagen ins Leben zu rufen.
Bookmark: Support for startups in the clean tech energy sector
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:28] Für Start UPS, die in diesem Clean Tech Energie Umfeld
genau wie ihr ja auch seid, sozusagen um die zu supporten und vor allem die eigentlich
Skalierung des Produktes zu supporten. Das heißt nicht unbedingt ganz ganz Early Stage,
also keine Mini kleinen Proofs of Concept und nicht wesentlich later Stage, sondern wirk-
lich die die erste Commercial Applications, Skating solche Sachen in die Richtung ja. Aber
ich will nicht zu viel verraten. Ich will dich nicht prime oder so und ich irgendeine Richtung
sozusagen schubsen, aber was wir sozusagen herausfinden wollen, ist einfach, was denn
Startups, Scale ups wie deins oder wie oder soll ich lieber sagen eigentlich brauchen, um
das sozusagen auch erfolgreich hinzukriegen.
Bookmark: Mission and goals of the startup
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:01:10] Ich wissen aber ich wäre trotzdem nett, wenn du ganz
ganz kurz eure eure Mission sozusagen beschreiben könntest. Das eigentliche Passieren
am Ende dann auch, habt den Container, den man im Hintergrund sieht.
Felix Fischer [00:01:22] Ja genau, sehr gerne.
Bookmark: Description of the prototype and its capabilities
Felix Fischer [00:01:25] Ja, ich bin Felix eben an der TU studiert, hat Maschinenbau mit
Schwerpunkt Energie und Prozess Technik studiert, dann eine Promotion angefangen,
dort haben wir dann noch an der Uni 3 Jahre quasi die Gelegenheit gehabt, zum Glück
nicht über irgendeinen Inkubator sonstige, sondern über tatsächlich staatliche Förderung
knapp 2000000€ einen ersten, eben größeren Proof of Concept, quasi Demonstrator
sozusagen zu bauen, und das ist eben das Kraftwerk hier, wir bauen ein Brennstoffzellen
System auf.
Bookmark: Efficiency and advantages of the prototype
Felix Fischer [00:01:53] Was nur effizient wie noch nie Strom erzeugen kann, aber gle-
ichzeitig als riesen Energiespeicher dienen, sozusagen in das Erdgasnetz als Speicherka-
pazität nutzt und sozusagen selber eine Autogasanlage ist. Also ein Kraftwerk power
to gas anlage ist. Gas Anlage in einem beides so effizient wie noch nie und genau in
Summe ein echter Game Changer für die Energiewende und deswegen sind wir so hart
und Scan, also wir haben zu fünft quasi den Prototyp gebaut, vollautomatisiert alles noch
ungeschützten Uni Umfeld, aber eben. Mit dem ganzen langwierigen Prozess, staatliches
Funding application dafür und so weiter und dann, als das im Feld erfolgreich lief, und das
ist glaube ich eben das Schöne für alle jungen Startups sozusagen.
Bookmark: Development process and growth of the startup
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
58
==PAGE:65==
Felix Fischer [00:02:39] Danach ist es dann Investor, Ready ja oder relativ leicht Investor
Ready zu werden, das haben wir geschafft und sind dann jetzt von 5 auf 70 gewachsen
in den letzten 14 Monaten.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:02:50] Ja, sehr schnell. Krass.
Felix Fischer [00:02:53] Wachsen, wachsen, irgendwie halt so schnell es geht, weil wir
im Prinzip das Kraftwerk selber, sozusagen eine Kombination aus bestehenden Tech-
nologien. Die lange bekannt und erforscht sind und wir nicht sozusagen Rocket Science.
Das ist n fusions Prinzip. Erkundet haben es andere möglich Systeme bauen aus aus
kommerziell verfügbaren Technologien so.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:03:12] Ich habe das Video gesehen. Ich wusste nicht, dass das
auch mit Biogas geht, sondern eigentlich nur mit ja.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:03:22] Auch in Deutschland genau ist genau Wasserstoff. Danke,
dass in beide Richtungen geht, sondern auch mit Biogas, das wusste ich davor noch gar
nicht, sehr cool und.
Felix Fischer [00:03:30] Auch der ersten AOK.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:03:34] OK, und Ihr habt einer Effizienz von 80 Prozent könnt ihr
auf der Webseite ich glaube normal lass mich nicht lügen, ich habe jetzt nicht, ich habe
nicht studiert aber 40 Prozent oder sowas ist normal für Biogasanlagen P mal Daumen.
Felix Fischer [00:03:48] Okay.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:03:49] Das war ein Interesse, aber ich finde.
Felix Fischer [00:03:51] Genau, genau das ist klar.
Das ist so, dass das heute Mo-
toren stehen. Die Bakasse brennen, dann kommt 40 Prozent Strom ungefähr 40 Prozent
Wärme raus. Die Wärme wird ganz häufig nicht genutzt und dann gibt es eben dieselben
Brennstoffzelle nutzen, dann stand der Technik Systeme von Bosch nicht kommerziell
groß verfügbar, aber Blumen Energy und anderen Herstellern die kein 60. Aber durch
das bessere System Design bringen wir nicht 60 Jahre ins Netz. Dann macht so OK cool
und genau das ist aber ein riesen Sprung, aber ohne sozusagen die kernkomponente
Breitseite überhaupt anzufassen.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:04:29] Ohne komplett neue Technologien sozusagen reinzumachen.
OK, sehr cool, das heißt?
Felix Fischer [00:04:34] Ihr.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:04:35] Sorry, ihr habt den Prototyp auf im Feld sozusagen aufge-
baut du und 5 oder 4 weitere Jungs sozusagen und dabei Support von der Universität
bekommen. Oder wie lief das ab?
Felix Fischer [00:04:46] Ja, also wir waren ganz normal angestellt, Doktoranden und der
Lehrstuhl sozusagen hat das Förder Projekt beantragt, der Lehrstuhl hat die Mittel ver-
waltet, wir hatten eben einen Sekretariat, was das ganze Rechnungswesen und Rech-
nungen zahlen und so weiter gemanagt hat, wir hatten Zugriff auf die Werkstatt, die die
voll ausgestattete quasi elektro und mechanische Werkstatt und das Personal dort nur
in, also anteilig ja, also die die haben jetzt nicht 5 + 20 sondern eher 5 plus. 1 aber
sozusagen. Trotzdem wird Now ja einen Elektriker, der die Pläne zeichnen durfte, der am
Ende die quasi Abnahme gemacht hat, der den Schaltschrank offiziell verdrahtet hat, ein
ein Schlossermeister, der uns beigebracht hat, wie man selber schweißen und so weiter
also aber vor allem hatten wir den Platz und die Tools und das ist ja sozusagen so der
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
59
==PAGE:66==
der Benefit für uns in dem Fall und. Ist aber ein ein großes Institut. Also der hat 60 Leute
eben voll ausgestattete Elektro, mechanische Werkstatt und das alles sozusagen nicht
zentral. Ja, so wie ihr das jetzt glaub plant einen zentralen Institut was Förderung macht,
sondern wirklich ein eigentlich sozusagen ein ein noch andere integriert mit den ganzen
60 anderen Doktoranden im Austausch über welcher Sensor kann und keine Ahnung was
n bisschen vergisst wieviel eigentlich doch nichts schnappt und aus anderen Projekten
lernt und keine Ahnung. Das alles irgendwie reingeflossen noch an der Uni in den ersten
Prototyp zu bauen und den, der war so von Anfang an so konzipiert, dass der schon dann
eben ins Feld geht. Also die Uni hat uns ermöglicht, den noch quasi auf dem Campus
zu testen, mit Flaschen Gasen, aber wir haben dort keinen quasi kontinuierlichen Gas
frei gehabt. Aber wir konnten dort auch keine große Mengen Wasserstoff produzieren, ja,
sondern immer nur ein paar Minuten quasi. OK, es funktioniert, Zack, abgefackelt.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:06:42] Dann war die Flasche leer, oder?
Felix Fischer [00:06:44] Genau, und da gibt es aber. Also genau das ist ein bisschen
unser Bottleneck an der Uni, aber es war uns klar, nein, deswegen war sozusagen das
alles so designt, dass ist halt schon ins Feld kommt, dort lief das dann tatsächlich 3 Monate
komplett unbemannt und dann haben wir gesagt, jetzt sind wir ready das nochmal Faktor
10 nochmal zu skalieren. Also das war schon relevante Größe, sozusagen die eigentlich
Uni Projekte sozusagen wie sprengt. Aber halt noch ein Zehntel von kommerziell.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:09] Ja, klar, ja.
Felix Fischer [00:07:10] Aber auch nicht mehr sozusagen Labor, Labor, sondern schon
irgendwie Industrie Komponenten.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:14] Und das heißt, Ihr hattet eigentlich nie einen ganz klassis-
chen Proof of Concept, der, der wirklich nur im Labor rumsteht und wo man sozusagen
testet und so weiter.
Felix Fischer [00:07:24] Doch, aber das, das haben wir in der Schule gemacht, die, bevor
wir das Geld bekommen haben, also das Ganze hat, also jetzt sind wir super schnell Scan,
aber das ganze hat, also wir haben angefangen zu zweit im Labor vor 7 Jahren oder 6
Jahren.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:39] OK, cool. Ja, und das heißt die Uni.
Bookmark: Collaboration with the university and research institute
Felix Fischer [00:07:41] Hat also werden wir Labor einfach stur und hat eben auch der
Schützen teil und wurde in anderen Projekten über die Jahre quasi aufgebaut.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:49] Ist Standard bei der Trump, weil ich hab noch nie von
so einem so einem. Einheitlichen oder so einem großkalibrigen Programm sozusagen.
Bei der TUM gehört oder fanden das nur alle Profis sozusagen sehr cool und wollten
mitmachen.
Felix Fischer [00:08:02] Das ist nur ein Prof also wirklich aus also das ist so ein bisschen
die Besonderheit, im Maschinenwesen der TUM gibt es sehr große Lehrstühle, ganz an-
ders, als man das irgendwie in Dänemark und sonst so kennt. Eben ist wirklich eher ein
ein industrielles Forschungsgebiet, sozusagen was auch noch Lehre macht und Master-
arbeit betreut, aber ist halt eben 40 Mitarbeiter wissenschaftlicher wissenschaftlicher Mi-
tarbeiter, von denen sind glaube ich, Szenen aus der Grundfinanzierung quasi für Lehrer
und so weiter und 30 über Drittmittel Projekte finanziert.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
60
==PAGE:67==
Bookmark: Collaboration with industry partners
Felix Fischer [00:08:34] Die dann mit Industrie, Partnern und so weiter teilweise EU teil-
weise global keine Ahnung gemacht werden. Also die ganze Spiele wird gespielt und
dann gibt es wirklich mittelbar mit Projektmanagern 4 Stück jeweils Teams haben und die
Anträge selber schreiben und so weiter also ausgelegt. Ja, es ist eine genau, aber s. Und
tatsächlich ist auch vor 10 Jahren. Also Orcan Energy kennt man vielleicht auch, ist auch
aus dem Natural vorgegangen, also es passiert sozusagen schon häufiger, dass eben
aus bei dir sehr, sehr, es ist eine Mischung aus Grundlagenforschung, es gibt aber auch
sehr angewandte, der Großteil eigene Forschung nahe an Sachen, die kommerzialisiert
werden, selten durch eigene Ausgründungen, häufiger durch die Projektpartner. Ja, aber
genau das ist sozusagen so. Ist da der Lehrstuhl aufgesetzt, und davon gibt es noch viele
andere im Maschinenwesen. Aber das ist schon auch so ein Spezifikum. Und dann gibt
s aber was ich vorhin noch sagen wollte, ist jetzt keine zentrale Test fläche oder so, ja,
sondern wir konkurrieren um den Parkplatz, den wir am Ende des Tages genutzt haben
mit den Fahrzeugen, ja mit der Anlieferung und mit dem Nachbarn der Schule, der auch
gerne irgendein Demonstrator hinstellen will, es nicht, ja, es ist nicht so, also ja, große In-
stitute, aber auch 4 Ellbogen und so weiter ist nicht ein Konzertiertes zentral vermitteltes
OK, lass uns Spielwiese für Startups. Sekunden oder K bereitstellen. Es gibt keinen Liv-
ing Web oder wie auch immer man das sonst woanders nennt, dann KIT. gibt es zum
Beispiel so ein riesen Areal nur für Solaranlage, Gewinn, Container, virtuelle Kraftwerke,
keine Ahnung, eine riesige Spielwiese wo man wo man alle Arten von neuen Batterie
Technologien P2G keine Ahnung, das ist alles in so ähnlichen Containern wie wir, das
hatten wir nicht ne also da denkst.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:10:23] Denkst du das hätte was gebracht?
Felix Fischer [00:10:23] Hätte aber nicht.
Bookmark: Challenges in infrastructure and regulations
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:10:25] Also.
Felix Fischer [00:10:25] Definitiv was gebracht, ja. Wenn wir, so haben wir halt an allen
Regulatorien sozusagen vorbei, das Ding halt irgendwie an der Stelle betrieben, wo eigentlich
kein Strom war und mussten die Infrastruktur dafür selber legen und das ging mit viel Au-
gen zudrücken von allen Seiten und das ging, weil wir irgendwie halt den Elektriker im
Haus hatten, aber wenn man sich vor deutsche Uni eigentlich vorstellt, mit das muss ein
Bauantrag durch und dann muss ein Kanal gelegt werden, wo eine Leitung reingeht und
das muss, dann hast du 3 Jahre. Nur Frust.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:10:57] Ja, ich bei meiner Uni nicht mehr C benutzen wie die
waren, nur im Testprogramm die ganze Zeit im Demonstrationsprogramm zum.
Felix Fischer [00:11:04] Beispiel von deswegen sage ich mal, wir sind da gut durchgekom-
men und es ist nichts passiert. Ja Gott sei Dank, sobald da halt dann doch mal irgendwie
was passiert, denn seit tot, ja, also wirklich tot und wir waren halt lange lange, lange,
lange haben wir uns, kannte jeder, wir könnten in einem Plus an den Fakultäten. Stefan
hat schon promoviert und war schon Abteilungsleiter, hatte Zugriff auf die ganze Projekt
Akquise, projektmittel und so weiter wurden zwischen finanziert über andere Projekte
und also da kam viel zusammen das so gut läuft. Ja das ist nicht wie gesagt, es ist nicht
sozusagen g streamlined um wirklich Hardware Company sozusagen irgendwie zu ihrem
kopieren.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
61
==PAGE:68==
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:11:47] Ja, du meintest ja auch, dass einige eigentlich nur von
Partnerunternehmen weiter genommen werden, die.
Felix Fischer [00:11:53] Ideen und Technologien.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:11:55] Genau. Und welche?
Felix Fischer [00:11:58] Das ist, glaube ich, dass ihr euch vorstellt, oder wie ich mir das
vorstellen würde, dann irgendwann mal vor ein paar Hektar. Keine Ahnung, ja, oder viele
Quadratmeter, wo man sagt, OK, da ist Stromanschluß kein Thema ist Test Genehmi-
gung, irgendwer ist da, der sich um diese ganzen Anschlüsse kümmert, irgendwer das
Genehmigungstechnische unter Kontrolle hat und so weiter das ist wäre ein also das wäre
massiver leichter gewesen für uns, wenn man da irgendwie mit 3 Monaten Vorlauf sich
anmeldet jetzt seinen Platz zu stellen.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:12:26] Und nach diesem Container, ihr habt dann gewisse KPI
sozusagen validiert. Bei dem Container hat gesagt, dass das läuft so, wir haben unge-
fähr die Effizienz, die wir wollen, cetera nehme ich mal schwer und dann seid ihr zu
einem größeren larger scale Prototypen 100 KW oder ich habe es irgendwo glaube ich
gelesen was was der Container rübergegangen und der Schritt dazu, den habt ihr dann
wahrscheinlich direkt beim Kunden schon aufgestellt oder nochmal auf einer Test Wiese
oder was war sozusagen da.
Felix Fischer [00:12:54] Der, der genau 100KW.
Bookmark: Transition to commercialization
Felix Fischer [00:12:56] Jetzt kommerzielle Größe da ist eben die erste fertig, die wir
haben, ja notdürftig sozusagen. Also dann haben wir die Firma gegründet, ja, mit Venture
Capital und halt eben, also vorher schon ja, also mit den 10, also mit der mit dem großen
Proof concept sozusagen, oder wie auch immer, nennt Mini Demonstrator keine Ahnung,
ja mit also mit der Kiste, da ist schon wieder Kapital bekommen haben dann eine GMBH
gegründet, haben dann auch noch ein weiteres Forschungsprojekt eingeworben. Was die
Entwicklung, sozusagen die ersten kommerziellen Anlagengröße, kofinanziert K. Dann
nicht mehr zu 100 Prozent, aber halt immerhin zu 50. Und das hat so viel Gas, Hunger
sozusagen, dass wir das hier nicht an unserem Produktionsstandort lange testen können,
ja, sondern dass wir gemacht haben, wir besting und ja mal eine Woche, ja, aber jetzt
sozusagen ist dann direkt im Feld, also harte, harte Realität Bedingungen.
Bookmark: Its easy to find people willing to validate good products
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:13:51] Direkt Kunden, da müsstet ihr euch darum kümmern,
dass ihr jemanden im Feld, das war ne Bauarbeiter Gemeinschaft oder so, ich glaube
aufgestellt habt.
Felix Fischer [00:13:59] Also Landwirte, ja.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:14:01] Genau da weiter. Wie gesagt, ich benutze. Aber ich
meine daher, und da habt ihr das ihr angeschrieben und dann haben sie gesagt, ja cool
da hin, oder wie lief das ab?
Felix Fischer [00:14:11] Diese sind auf uns zugekommen.
Felix Fischer [00:14:15] Ich weiß ganz.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:14:16] Viel zusammen bei euch.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
62
==PAGE:69==
Felix Fischer [00:14:18] Die, die wir haben, sozusagen. Also Biogas und Landwirtschaft
sind das Problem, werden E gefördert. Sie haben 20 Jahre Laufzeit für die Förderung
und die laufen alle jetzt in diese End letzten Endphasen sozusagen der Förderung nicht
weiter und ganz viele sind super umtriebig und gehört zu den Forschungsinstituten fragen
habt ihr habt ihr eine Idee, wie sollen wir welchen Weg, keine Ahnung und die Turm hat
einen Campus in Straubing der sich nur mit so nicht nur aber überwiegend mit Biotech-
nologie, Biologie, Energie und so weiter beschäftigt und der ist da eines Tages einfach
aufgeschlagen. Ja, und dann kam 1. Zum anderen wurde ja von A nach B verleitet und
dann ist der Straubing nach Garching gefahren, also noch eine Stunde mehr weg in Kauf
genommen hat uns kennengelernt, hat, die andere kennengelernt und gesagt, OK ich
hätte Bock groß zu machen, also zu begleiten, ja dann haben wir mit dem gemeinsam
dieses Forschungsprojekt beantragt. Ist auch strukturschwache Regionen und geht noch
mal höhere Förderquote und keine Ahnung also an.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:15:18] Eurer Stelle hätte ich jetzt schon mal Lotto gespielt, so
langsam ne also.
Felix Fischer [00:15:21] In eurem Glück. Der Harte arbeitet nicht nur Glück.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:15:26] Ja, natürlich. Das ist ein bisschen bisschen. Von beiden
gehört natürlich.
Felix Fischer [00:15:30] Genau. Ich glaube, das ist aber auch, also das musst du, glaube
ich, jedem Start irgendwie den klarmachen, wenn es schwierig ist, irgendwie zu finden,
der bereit ist, das zu verlieren, dann ist das falsche Produkt. Also ich glaube, es gibt,
gerade wenn es Richtung Energie gibt, geht, das ist so ein Hot topic, da haben alle Bock
auf alles also und werden selbst von den großen Utilities überrannt, so habt ihr nicht Lust
mit unserem kleinen Wasserstoff Projekt zu machen.
Bookmark: Opportunities and challenges in the energy sector
Felix Fischer [00:15:56] Ja habt ihr nicht Lust mit uns keine Ahnung und die ganzen
virtuellen Kraftwerksbetreiber die Batterie also Sprint ich weiß nicht ob du die kennst dich
im Jahr 20 Deutschland. Genau da haben wir auch an der Challenge teilgenommen, weil
die auch sich im Energiespeicherung haben wir auch jetzt 1000000 gewonnen, um ein
neues, neues Design zu bauen, der ich glaube sozusagen dann den Weg in die Anwen-
dung zu finden oder zumindest erste demonstrations Standorte, wenn Geld keine Rolle
spielt, aber das dir jemand einen Platz gewährt für deine Anlage, das muss für jedes Alter
möglich sein aktuell in dieser Phase wo Unsicherheit hoch 100 und keiner weiß weiter und
alle wollen innovativ sein. Da sehe ich eigentlich kaum Bottleneck oder so. Also daran
sollte es nicht scheitern, wenn eine gute Idee hat. Weißt du, was in Deutschland gefühlt?
Ich weiß nicht, wie es in Dänemark, aber so hier jeder jeder Hans und Franz, der mit den
anderen Inkubator Programm waren hat dann sobald es irgendwie relevante Größe hat
ja. Wenig Probleme, glaube ich also, außer du machst das mit Fusion oder Kern oder
keine Ahnung. Ja dann ist natürlich schwierig, aber. Genau alle, alle Arten von irgendwie
2 Capture, Direct Capture, Quatsch und eben redox Flow Batterien. Keine Ahnung, sogar
Landwirte stellen sich die ersten Redox Flow Batterien hin.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:17:17] Krass, ja. Sobald man über du meintest, relevante Scale
sozusagen.
Felix Fischer [00:17:22] Den Kinderkram. Ja genau, die wollen ja nicht nicht irgendwie
mini, mini, mini sozusagen so diese 10 KW Einheit die hier steht, das war kein Problem da
einen Landwirt zu finden, weil der hat den Platz, ja die haben, das haben wir genehmigt als
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
63
==PAGE:70==
Test Objekt für kurze Zeit, ja das heißt er musste auch keine genehmigungs Planänderung
und keine Ahnung machen, weil das Landratsamt da einfach das Baden nördlich von
Garching direkt. Die haben da quasi alles mega Schmalspur akzeptiert. Wenn man das
aber sozusagen in wesentlich, also kleiner wäre ihnen völlig egal gewesen, dann hätte
er hat gesagt, er macht einfach niemanden davon. Aber hätte auch keinen Mehrwert
gehabt und größer. Dann wird es natürlich schwierig, da brauchst du Lehmann, der sich
auskennt nur mit Genehmigung und Zulassung und TÜV und keine Ahnung, ja.
Bookmark: Importance of safety and permits
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:18:11] Ja, ja, vor allem Deutschland ist das.
Felix Fischer [00:18:14] Aber das ist komplett. Also das ist so die, die die Experience wir
gemacht haben, dieses 10 KW sozusagen, also es ist schon Leistungen, damit kann man
mehr als sozusagen Haus bedarf decken, ja der hat. Das ging ja dann nur sozusagen.
Eigentümer dürfte das nicht verstehen und sind zu Geld machen, aber es hat halt eben
sozusagen ein bisschen geklaut, aber dann sozusagen gekocht und geheizt. Cool, so
hat gestern kein Geld verloren, ja er hat ja nichts gekostet, den trotzdem eine kleine viel
bezahlt für quasi Erlaubnis da stehen dürfen.
Felix Fischer [00:18:48] Seine superschlanke Geschichte ohne Vertrag und also mit drei-
seitigem Vertrag und so also.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:18:55] Das glaube ich auch key, dass das Ganze möglichst
schlank bleibt und und. Free sozusagen. Dass du kein.
Felix Fischer [00:19:01] E Team daran werden.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:19:02] Contracts.
Felix Fischer [00:19:04] Ja, das halt eben. Der erste Schritt beim zweiten, also wenn
man, wenn man das mit dir utilities gemacht hatte, die wollten was Versicherung und
keine Ahnung und dann kannst du es knicken wenn irgendwo irgendwer Fragen dieser
ist Stage wo du dann bist. Ja nach ihrer braucht aber irgendwie Versicherung dafür dieser
mit denen wir geredet haben alle gesagt was sollen wir denn da versichern? Wir können
das Risiko nicht einschätzen, das ist etwas Neues, keine Chance machen wir nicht oder
keine Ahnung 2000000 ja ihr wollt deckungssummer 2000000 gebt mir 2000000.
Felix Fischer [00:19:34] So, dann hast du verloren, ne, also das heißt da ist dann wiederum
OK eine Uni die sagt OK keine Ahnung, Risiko ist mir egal. Das ist ein Standort, da
passiert nichts, da wohnt keiner das so, das ist ne forschungsweise, da mach ich das mal
ja.
Bookmark: Plan for miniaturized proof concept
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:19:50] Aber das ist, genau darauf wollen wir n bisschen hinaus,
der ich reiß das mal ganz kurz ab, was aktuell im Plan ist. Sozusagen das verändert sich
auch die ganze Zeit. Aber naja, wir haben, wir wollen eine Fläche auf dem Uni Campus,
die Miniatur Proof Concept, also wirklich sehr sehr kleine Sachen, das ist wie groß ist die
Fläche, die ist 300 * 400 Meter oder irgendwie so erstmal zum Anfang und dann reden
wir mit der Stadt Limburg, das ist da in der Stadt ist die Universität, dass wir von denen
auch eine Fläche kriegen und sofort sozusagen eine Stromnetz auch von der Von der
Stadt bekommen ohne diese ganze Legislatur Pumps die man da braucht oder permitting
et cetera et cetera. Und das ist dann die Stadt als auch die Uni sozusagen den Output
validiert, die Reliability validiert und die vorläufige Sicherheit und solche Sachen, dass wir
das ne als Entzeugniss dieses Programms den Startups sozusagen an die Hand geben,
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
64
==PAGE:71==
und damit können sie raus in die Welt gehen, so nach dem Motto, das ist aktuell der Plan,
aber das hört sich ja ganz gut an, sozusagen. Eigentlich schon.
Felix Fischer [00:20:53] Mal. Also wenn man, wenn man das hinkriegt, sozusagen das
auf einem kurzen Dienstweg sozusagen dahin zu bringen, ne, und dann ist nur die Frage
sozusagen halt, wieviel bringt ihr so ein Zertifikat in Anführungszeichen? Also klar, du
kannst die KPIs nachweisen, aber du hast noch nicht sozusagen, das ist jetzt wo wir
gerade kämpfen in Anführungszeichen, die Kunden die die wollen jetzt natürlich wissen,
dass alles konform ist. Ja, wenn man jetzt das quasi bypassed in der ersten stage. Dann
wiegt man so ein bisschen die Startups Gefühl der Sicherheit, OK, wir haben jetzt einmal
ins Feld gebracht, ja, wir haben Wirkungsgrad gezeigt und keine Ahnung, das ist cool,
das ist für Investoren und alles ist super, ja, aber dann fehlt trotzdem, also man muss
sie gleichzeitig noch mitgeben, muss gleichzeitig darauf vorbereiten ok geschützt envi-
ronment sind, dann sucht euch irgendwie der sich mit Permitting und so weiter von Tag
1 an beschäftigt, weil das wird ein dickes Ding. Das nur, dass man nicht so ein zu viel
Sicherheit wenig ja wiegt.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:21:51] Ja, genau, ja, perfekt. Das war es eigentlich schon 3
oder 2 abschließende Mini kleine Fragen, was denkst du sind die 3 Top Themen die so
ein Programm Cover müsste ich weiß wir haben viel darüber geredet aber nur einmal
ganz kurz abgerissen.
Bookmark: Importance of flexibility and measurement
Felix Fischer [00:22:05] Was ich glaub ja für für. Jetzt, wenn es irgendwie um neue En-
ergiewelt geht, dann halt auf jeden Fall diese Bidirektional flexibel.
Bookmark: Considerations for startup equity
Felix Fischer [00:22:16] Also lass Flexibilität irgendwie, das muss alles mitgedacht wer-
den, Services.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:22:21] O.
Felix Fischer [00:22:24] Ja, ja, das also das muss also, damit es wirklich mehr hat, dann
alles irgendwie zentral wirklich gerechnet und gemessen werden. Und wenn es halt also
in dieser frühen Phase halt wirklich so diese, das muss einfach sein, ne, ihr wollt, die sollen
sich nicht 13 Monate bewerben und keine Ahnung, sondern und das Dritte was ich noch
mitgeben würde, wenn die danach als Startup gründen wollen, dann muss man halt also
keine Ahnung was ihr euch vorstellt, ob ihr da irgendwie dann shareholder werdet oder
auf der Cap Table. Erscheinen wollte oder sowas. Das kann also ja also wahrscheinlich
irgendwas weiß ich nicht.
Bookmark: Equity or convertible loan
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:23:02] Standard DTU hat Finanz Tools sozusagen wie das bere-
its abbilden, da würde man einfach reinklicken und das hat mit Equity oder Convertible
Lone 1 von beiden zu tun.
Bookmark: Concerns of traditional investors
Felix Fischer [00:23:13] Wollt ihr mitgehen, da auch da sozusagen gibt es natürlich viele
quasi klassische Investoren, die das kritisch sehen. Also bei uns war der das, also wenn
ich in Dänemark jetzt nicht sagen ja, aber bei uns sind sie heilfroh, sozusagen, das hat
die Uni nicht. Irgendwie Inkubator mäßig massiv an, also 0 Anteil 7 0. Ja sie kriegen ja
aber halt Lizenzgebühren, weil die Patente an der Uni angemeldet haben.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
65
==PAGE:72==
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:23:37] Die Fraunhofer, eigentlich von der vom Stil her geführt.
Felix Fischer [00:23:41] Das war einfach. Ja, die haben wir auch. Also da haben wir einen
ein Startup, das hat tatsächlich Inkubator Grant mit, aber irgendwie mini Cap table Anteil,
also irgendwie mini und das hat die tatsächlich erstmal gehindert, die wurden dann, da
musst du dann erstmal Fraunhofer irgendwie rausgekauft und keine Ahnung du fängst mit
Themen an die nicht so schön sind. Und ich meine auch The Combinator. Also du kannst
du ja vielleicht alle, das ist ja, das bringt erstmal ganz viel, ja, aber dann irgendwann hast
du doch irgendwie Investor sagt Nein danke, weil da sind Leute, die eigentlich nichts tun
und keine Ahnung, wir haben damals gar nicht geleistet.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:24:19] Toten tote, tote Stocks hast du halt.
Felix Fischer [00:24:22] Ja, genau deswegen würde ich einfach schauen im Sinne des,
damit sie erfolgreich sein können.
Bookmark: Importance of fair treatment
Felix Fischer [00:24:26] Ne macht das irgendwie von Anfang an fair.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:24:30] Und dann eine letzte Frage, wen sollen wir noch inter-
viewen? Hast du irgendeinen Tipp den ich anschreiben soll, anrufen soll was auch immer.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:24:38] Wer interessant sein könnte.
Felix Fischer [00:24:38] Wäre also, wenn ihr die Möglichkeit habt ihr MT.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:24:43] OK.
Felix Fischer [00:24:44] Cool. Also ich kann ich jetzt keine Namen nennen, also Ihrer
sind die Großen, die Rausgewachsen sind. Aber es ist nicht ganz so viele. Auch diese
Kerosin gibt es sicher noch andere. Die haben halt eben. Also das war jetzt ein Beispiel
für die haben wirklich ein richtig schönes Energietechnik mit einem eigenen Windrad, mit
einem Solarpark, wo sozusagen Energiewende, wie auch immer das Living Mobility En-
ergy erreicht haben, nicht ja, aber so ein, wirklich eine testweise haben sie schon, und da
die Container Dorf genau, guck dir das mal an, wie auch immer, Energy t kenne ich.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:22] Schon. Aber keine Sorge, ja dann vielen vielen Dank,
super cool, ich wünsche euch und dir viel Erfolg. Was auch immer ich glaube, das regelt
sich schon.
Felix Fischer [00:25:32] Ich hoffe danke ciao.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:34] Na dann, ciao.
Andreas Okholm - KiteX
Bookmark: Introduction and setting expectations
Andreas Okholm [00:00:00] And then I guess I think maybe it’s probably obvious, but I
mean if you’re going to publish something that I said, maybe that would be good to to ask
me.
Luka Harambasic [00:00:08] Yes, we’ll do so.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:09] 100 percentage all right again, we’re here to learn from
you. So there are no stupid answers. I hope we don’t ask any stupid questions.
Andreas Okholm [00:00:22] And there are also if you have any questions, feel free to just
shoot.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
66
==PAGE:73==
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:25] Them and randomly in the middle, etcetera. And feel free
to just keep talking. We it’s our job to interrupt you if if it’s enough about one topic.
Bookmark: Description of the company and product
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:34] So Luka and I, know a bit, a little bit about Kitex, but can
you just very, very briefly like describe what you guys are doing And yeah, your guys’s
product.
Andreas Okholm [00:00:44] Yeah, Yes. So, so right now we’re building you could say an
extremely lightweight wind turbine or very maturely optimized wind turbine. And the the
first market we’ve targeted is you could say this portable of great, great use. But we also
want to transition into you could say the broader or larger market which we believe in this
sort of house or rural market where which is sort of a traditional household turbine kind of
thing.
Andreas Okholm [00:01:17] But the general sort of start of the company, if you also go
a little bit back and also why we’re doing this is that we are you could say kite surfers
and we just know how much energy that you can sort of capture with a really, really light
structure being a kite and these streaks and and I think for looking at a wind turbine, I
think it’s pretty obvious that it’s not a very like structurally optimized design. So you have
these very large cantilever forces and wouldn’t it be better if we could use strings, tensile
structures to hold these big loads? So we thought there’s an opportunity to improve on
the wind turbine design and the goal in general would be to use less material or in the end
reduce the cost of electricity. So that’s sort of the path we are on and we’re just basically
trying to commercialize this technology and move it up size by size.
Bookmark: Challenges in upscaling and commercializing the technology
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:02:14] So when you mentioned that you want to commercialize
this technology, I guess that you guys are actively selling to customers. But what are like
the main challenges that you have experienced or that you also foresee while upscaling
this technology and commercializing it?
Andreas Okholm [00:02:31] Yeah, I mean so the the first one is that, so we we chose to
go for this portable market slash camping and and so forth. And I think that’s a challenge
in itself because I mean we’re not really sure if it’s proper market. So I mean that’s that’s a
big risk to to take instead of you could say going for the household market. But the reason
why we chose this more niche market is of course that we could, you could say there’s
less requirements to the say long term. What do you say robustness of the systems, I
mean the other time requirements are much, much lower and also the price per kilowatt
are much less important. So that’s why we, we tried to go for this market. But I mean we
might end up you would say in few at least failing there this, this is a big risk. But then
the other one is of course that building this prototype and we we couldn’t really afford
to, to build it at the proper scale initially if you would say so, you would say that was the
household market. That’s sort of, yeah, just how we chose to go about it.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:03:38] And a proper scale would be a 1 to 1 replica of what you
would eventually want to build. Or what can I understand a proper scale?
Andreas Okholm [00:03:47] Yeah. So, so right now the turbines there sort of, I would say
a third scale of the turbine we really want to build and and and even beyond that then
that’s even just the tiniest turbine compared to what I really, really want to build.
Andreas Okholm [00:04:05] Yeah, but that’s sort of way out in the future. So yeah.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
67
==PAGE:74==
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:04:12] So to make this your dream reality, to build the really,
really you want to build a turbine?
Bookmark: Requirements for building the desired turbine
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:04:18] What? What would be like the requirement? What do you
say? If you had a list of like wishes that you could give me and I could fulfill them? What
will be on that list essentially?
Andreas Okholm [00:04:29] Yeah. So I mean I think for let’s just go for the the, I mean the
next size which I think is a reasonable market and I think it’s a reasonable place to mature
the technology. I think what we are basically just missing is more, well, I mean funding that
will allow us to to test for a longer period of time. And then perhaps also there’s some you
could say legal requirements or test places. I mean, I think also the regulatory aspects
for small wind turbines are a bit challenging. So ideally I would like a big test field with
hundreds of turbines. And I mean the way it’s set up at the moment, you’re sort of almost
only allowed to set up one test turbine. That’s how they decided. And and furthermore,
once you want to start selling to customers in this market, there’s also lesson challenges.
So that’s both the funding part and there’s the regulatory aspects, right? That’s OK.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:05:27] I’d like to go a little bit more into this area that you you
would like to have.
Bookmark: Testing procedure and validation of the prototype
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:05:32] Can you just walk me through how you guys maybe test
a turbine, let’s say you set it up and then how does the testing procedure go and how do
you validate your your prototype or your turbine?
Andreas Okholm [00:05:43] Yeah, Yeah. So I mean for the the very simple or small tur-
bines if you could say we we made so the ones that we sell for this portable segment,
so each turbine. USD 2000 or whatever it was, Yeah, exactly. To give this impression is
a USD 2000 turbine. It weighs 10 kilos. It’s about 6 meters tall. So those, those ones
we basically just you could say did some brief calculations on a sheet of paper, did some
very simple simulations and then we just built them and and made it better and better and
better just by testing.
Andreas Okholm [00:06:22] So we just set it up and make yard essentially and we and
we were actually lucky to be able to have a spot at Riso which is this national lab out at
the Roskilde.
Andreas Okholm [00:06:35] And then we set up the turbines there and we like we brought
some power to our test site. We like got an electrician to make some stuff there. And then
we set up a Wi-Fi connection. We have a webcam, we have a server out there so that
can gather the data. So we sort of gathering data all the time and then uploading it and
then we are improving on it. So, and this is just by basically observing how it behaves
and making behave better I guess. So that’s how the testing is done. Now the next step
will be there’s more sort of simulation work when we scale up the turbine and then it’s still.
You have to build it and validate that actually works afterwards.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:19] OK.
Bookmark: Investment and effort in setting up the testing facility
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:20] And this DIY I’m going to call DIY testing facility can
roughly do you roughly know how much time or money you guys invested into this? How
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
68
==PAGE:75==
how much of a pain in the ass, essentially was it to to do this?
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:34] Or was it a pain?Yes, it was easy and you guys were just
breezing through in like 2 days now,
Andreas Okholm [00:07:35] so it’s so I guess it’s a challenging thing. So I mean initially
what we got set and we set up there, we have like made a program or so, got some kind
of grants. Where did you got some money through some regional development funds. I
think it was only about 150,000 Danish krona, but they got some funds and then we also
had to pay about 40 or 50,000 Danish kroner for another company to set up a metro like
a tower out there. And then we also had to reassemble it ourselves. So I guess we spent
sort of some weeks on that and then the whole electricity part, we also spent some weeks
on that and then the whole server, the kind of thing also took some weeks. So I mean, I
don’t know, it was not, it was not, it was not half a year or months. It was maybe combined
workload was two months for main hours from our side and yeah, 200,000 Danish kroner,
something like this, so. Actually pretty pretty easy, but it was also very small test site,
right? It’s not like a test site for a large wind turbine.
Bookmark: Plans for scaling up the testing facility
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:08:49] So this test set for large wind turbine. You have you don’t
have one right now I I take it no since you want a field and a large test. Would that scale
like linearly with the size or do you think it would just get insanely more complex for bigger
turbine because now you’re also looking at most stringent regulations or something like
that.
Andreas Okholm [00:08:58] Actually I think we can it’s it’s actually not going to be that bad
to upgrade our existing infrastructure. So that’s probably what we will will do. And also
we have a lot of the, you could say know how and I’ve done it before and these kind of
things. So it’s like, yes, it’s still still, you could say our next household size turbine is not,
I mean it’s not a large turbine, right. So, yeah, So maybe it’ll just spend half a million dkk
going on the next Test side.
Bookmark: Grid integration and regulatory issues
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:09:42] So I guess your tester then also has a grid integration
essentially that you can sell the electricity directly to the grid.
Andreas Okholm [00:09:51] Yeah, so that’s where we don’t have at the moment. What
we’re doing is we are burning the power in some resistors and that is I think we’re just
about to solve the, you could say regulatory issues that would be in terms of getting these
things to to happen. So that’s some requirements for our equipment to be able to sell it to
the grid. And then of course there’s also the whole like registration patch, which I’m not
really sure how we’re gonna handle that at D2, if we can handle it and so forth. That’s a
new thing.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:10:27] OK. So it is quite an important aspect that you guys are
considering at the moment and spending some time to figure out as far as I understand
to actually be a lot of sellers.
Andreas Okholm [00:10:40] Yeah. So I mean, yeah, but this is for the large turbine, right?
So for the small turbine, it’s actually not grid connected at all, right. So that’s why we
haven’t had to bother.
Bookmark: Upgrade plans for small turbine
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
69
==PAGE:76==
Andreas Okholm [00:10:51] But yeah, So what I’m I’m working on now is actually it’s also
like an upgrade package for the small turbine. So you can’t grid connected. So that’s why
I haven’t been, you could say initially investigating it. But of course it’s also relevant for
the household size turbine and we need to find a solution. But I think we could for the first
one or two years. We don’t really need a grid connection, we can still just of the power or
use it for server farm or something like that. Some crypto mining. For the server that you
have there anyway, yeah, something like this.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:11:26] And and graphic cards are expensive. Man. I don’t know
if you’re in mining is still worth it.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:11:30] Power is free probably, yeah.
Bookmark: Plans for a larger test site
Andreas Okholm [00:11:33] But I mean, yeah, so I mean of course the plan is once we
get a bigger test site, so sometime within the next year, we need a plan for how to quick
connect these things.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:11:44] Oh, and and just out of curiosity, a bigger test site, what
sort of like megawatts are we talking here? Well, are we talking megawatts?
Andreas Okholm [00:11:53] Yeah, we’re definitely, we’re definitely not talking megawatts.
So we’re so, so the, I mean so the current turbines right, they’re they they produce 200
watts each. The next size household time turbine will probably be about 5 kilowatts. And
if we have a larger test site which I’m hoping we’ll get where we it’s sort of like a split
test site and you could say partner where they also use the energy, maybe we’ll have 20
turbines. So that would be 100 kilowatts or 00.1 MW.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:12:27] Yeah. Well, you can do some stuff with 0.2 megawatts,
0.1 megawatts, yeah, yeah, cool. So and and that will be in form of like APA probably,
right?
Andreas Okholm [00:12:40] With your partner first, yeah, yeah, that would be quite exciting
or cool. Quite exciting because just no, it would be quite, quite exciting that that would be
quite exciting or quite useful because I mean we would get something for the power. So
that’s an improvement over current situation.
Bookmark: Consideration of Power Purchase Agreement (PPA)
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:13:03] Now this might be a very biased question that leads you
a lot, but I don’t have a better one. How relevant do you think a PPA could have been to
your startup in the early stages? So even for your small winter run, it’s just 200 watts. But.
If you would have gotten a PPA for that is already
Andreas Okholm [00:13:13] so so, so I think for the small one, I don’t, I don’t think it’s it
would be that valuable on this. Of course the prices would be good enough that it would
be attractive for us to put up more turbines. So I mean if it was attractive enough that
maybe we would, I mean say OK, we just build 100 turbines at least we know and we’ll
set it up at our test site. And I actually think that would be quite valuable for us because
then we would sort of improve the technology and it’s sort of a little bit easier to improve
the technology when it’s at our side and not at our customers side.
Andreas Okholm [00:14:02] But I think it’s, I’m not really sure what the price would need
to be for the small turbine for that to be sort of a meaningful thing for the large turbine.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
70
==PAGE:77==
I think that this is exactly what we want to do and I think that’s we need something like
APPAI think that would make a lot of sense for first sort of site.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:14:23] And when you build your smaller winter winds, did you
ever have a spot where at least so Luke and I would try to found a startup in the solar
industry and there was always like this, this feeling of maybe not getting taken seriously
or not having the validation of your product.
Bookmark: Validation and customer response
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:14:40] You needed to actually start like installing it on a larger
scale. Have you faced similar issues with your wind turbines?
Andreas Okholm [00:14:49] I would say yeah. So I mean yes and no, right. So I think,
I mean we haven’t got, we haven’t targeted customers that are very serious so far, right.
So I mean, so it’s sort of yes, yes and no, right. I think the only one where I can say
that we sort of tried maybe a little bit is there some military or defense applications for the
small portable turbine and they haven’t responded that that positively yet and that and
that could in part be in cost that we are sort of. I mean, it’s not that mature the technology
yet.
Andreas Okholm [00:15:29] Yeah, but I think we will. But I think we will have the same
problem when we’re talking about the next size turbine going for you could say private
customers or especially if it’s farmers or small businesses, they would want to see some
validation first. And that’s also why I want to build this 20 turbine test place basically.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:15:52] Do you think a so part of the program that we’re thinking
about is supposed to be exactly this validation aspect that we give you a site and we
connect whatever asset essentially you have to one of these power meters? You get appa
from DTU selling the power to TTU and then at the end of like this end incubator phase,
say three months, six months, whatever, we give you validation of when you produce how
much power, how reliable it was, etcetera. Do you think something like this could help
with this situation?
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:16:22] Or do you think DTU is not the right partner for this, for
example?
Bookmark: DTU partnership for validation
Andreas Okholm [00:16:30] Yeah, No, so I mean I think DTU would be a reasonable
partner in this case actually you could say for wind turbines there’s if you follow at least
this old standard that we are going to follow and I think that’s still a requirement at Denmark.
You actually do these kind of things already, right. So there’s you need to test it for almost
like half a year and you will have a third party that measures your power production and
up time and so forth. So I mean this is all part of the standard for wind turbines. This is
how it’s done already. So I mean I wouldn’t say that’s an added, I mean I think the the
added benefit here would be that it’s more turbines. So when in part of the wind turbine
standard is that you just do it with one turbine, which is if it’s the mindset people had I
think back then that you just built one small one. But I mean, I think we’re, yeah, we need
to do multiples and it’s more like a solar farm where you have a lot of small, small solar
panels. We have a lot of small turbines. That makes sense.
Andreas Okholm [00:17:35] Yeah, I mean I think D2 will be very, you could say it’s a very
credible source, right. So I think that’s a reasonable thing, but still probably wouldn’t count
as actual validation in terms of the wind turbine standards.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
71
==PAGE:78==
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:17:48] OK.
Bookmark: Certification process and requirements
Luka Harambasic [00:17:51] I would have a question a little bit in, in that direction like first
time like we focused on solar, so we haven’t heard about wind turbine requirements and
you said there’s a third party that then where you have to set it up for half a month and
they then validate it.
Luka Harambasic [00:18:06] Are there other half a year?
Luka Harambasic [00:18:09] Sorry, are there other critical stakeholders involved in this?
Bookmark: Involvement of third parties in certification
Luka Harambasic [00:18:14] Something. Yeah. That that you learned the hard way that
you need to get along with them.
Andreas Okholm [00:18:23] Yeah so so basically when we we will have a guy that will
come and and have a look at our turbine and and so do the actual certification. So that’s
one person and he has to have as our special what do you say he I’m not saying he’s
certified but I mean he’s chosen by the here in Denmark whatever they called, I’m not
sure what they’re called but I mean there’s basically two or three persons in Denmark
that can do these small wind turbine certifications. That’s one guy we need to have. But
then beyond that then the measurements for instance these load tests or endurance test,
they need to be done by yet another accredited third party. So they use these two people
involved, right, Or new companies or entities. So but yeah, it’s not been a problem yet.
But I mean it’s something I spent a lot of time on trying to figure out what the standards
are and and talk with. I mean, we hired A consultant basically to figure out how to do
this whole thing, right. So he’s like an expert in helping people get certification for for
wind turbines. But I mean I think right now we are lucky that we are going into the small
wind turbine market because there’s already a path and regulation. So it was much more
challenging when we’re doing the flying wind turbines.
Bookmark: Importance of established certification process
Andreas Okholm [00:19:48] Yeah, 7 to months ago, years ago, right. Then the certifica-
tion process was not even established and then you would have to work with. And I mean
these groups that come up with the certifications and I’ve written some of that documenta-
tion. We haven’t started working on that when we were a small company. But yeah, that’s
a much bigger challenge. So I think that’s also something that maybe some of the other
companies that you will be talking to will be facing, is that the certification requirements
are not even in place yet, right?
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:20:26] All right. Well. I that was more or less all of our question.
Thank you very much for that input. I have just some closing questions that are more
general, so feel free to say whatever.
Bookmark: Requirements for effective program support
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:20:38] What are like the top three things you believe are essential
for a program like this to effectively support startup like yours?
Andreas Okholm [00:20:47] The top three requirements, I mean the one thing which I
have a hard time seeing how it’s going to work is really the flexibility in terms of the sort
of the, the technologies and where they will like, where would they be placed, where will
the sites be, because I guess it will be a diverse set of clean technologies, right?
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
72
==PAGE:79==
Bookmark: Requirements for different clean technologies
Andreas Okholm [00:21:17] And they will have different requirements. So I mean for
instance, for us there aren’t that many good locations. I think. I mean it used to be quite
windy where it is and needs to be pretty close to our our, our office. So we can can
go there often. But then I’m sure other other technologies will have completely different
requirements. So I guess it cannot be in one place, so it will have to be spread out all of
them. But yeah, so I mean we’ll have a need to have some good options for, for the site.
Bookmark: Concerns about electricity pricing and site payment
Andreas Okholm [00:21:50] And then I guess the question is, I mean how do we pay for
this site that needs to be figured out, Yeah, what is the price of the electricity that we’ll
sell? I guess that’s probably less relevant if it’s just a reasonable value. I think that’s fine
with us at least.
Andreas Okholm [00:22:10] Yeah, I can.
Bookmark: Bureaucracy and administrative hurdles
Andreas Okholm [00:22:11] Just the key thing is that it’s, I guess, not too beraucracy, like
not enough, like too much bureaucracy.
Andreas Okholm [00:22:19] I mean, I was out at the Play Show yesterday and I needed to,
like, use some really, really small smoke bombs on our wind turbine to make some cool
video. And I just had to talk with so many people to get that to work.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:22:32] Next next time take us.
Andreas Okholm [00:22:33] I have like a drawback there we’ll we’ll fly around I I.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:22:37] Want to see those things? Really.
Andreas Okholm [00:22:39] Yeah.
Andreas Okholm [00:22:41] Yeah.
Bookmark: Exploring partnerships with other startups
Andreas Okholm [00:22:42] But anyway, just also just when I have it right, I mean, so
I think Thomas, he, he already presented this idea about these Ppas and DTU, I think
maybe half a year, one year ago to me. And I do think it sounds really like a really useful
thing for us, not so much for the small one, but yeah, now the big one that’s coming up.
Bookmark: Potential collaboration with energy startups
Andreas Okholm [00:23:06] Also, I’ve been talking with REEL. I guess there’s another
startup coming out of D2 and I would also be contacting them to see if we can set up
something with them to put turbines next to their solar cells, as it could also be a viable
test site. I’m not sure if they have any locations near Copenhagen, probably not, but I
mean that’s a big constraint for us, right? Though it needs to be close to make sense.
Luka Harambasic [00:23:37] You you’re you just already mentioned real. Do you think
there are? Some others you experience during your time doing kitex, we should also
interview someone who you think super interesting person. They might also, they already
had this struggle, solved this problem, but also maybe at the same stage as you right now.
Andreas Okholm [00:24:09] I mean, I’m not really sure if it’s sort of the same kind of
problem. I mean, we are here out at the El Fella Bell and there’s a lot of, you could say
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
73
==PAGE:80==
energies, a few energy start-ups. At least there’s one with working with hydrogen, there’s
one working with biofuels, There’s one working, yeah, with the atomics, I mean these
reactors, right? But actually I don’t really know their problems in like enough detail to
know if they are struggling with similarly in the situation where like APPA would be be a
relevant thing or like cleanseek accelerator. But I mean, they are energy startups and if
you need some kind of introduction or if you already know them, I mean I can help with
that, yeah.
Luka Harambasic [00:24:52] Awesome that.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:24:53] ’D be awesome. Where? Where’s that exactly?
Andreas Okholm [00:24:56] Again, just so we can do some research before we contact
every single one of them, Yeah yeah, so is we are in in alpha level innovation house in
super.
Andreas Okholm [00:25:08] I’ll follow about Innovation House, I’m not sure.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:13] My Danish is so not good enough. I’ll follow that. OK, got
it? Cool.
Andreas Okholm [00:25:21] Did you find the information about it?
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:23] Yeah, I found the web page.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:27] Yeah, maybe we can just look through the companies and
if if you would be willing to do introductions, that would be super awesome.
Andreas Okholm [00:25:32] Usually that’s a lot more successful than just writing them on
like info at emails, Yeah. And you can see, yeah, I guess there’s six energy start-ups
there, at least mentioned so.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:46] Cool, awesome portfolio. Kydex. Hemeth. I I know them
so.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:55] Yeah, cool. Yeah. We’ll take a look through them. And if
you were willing to do introduction, that would be super awesome again. And otherwise,
that’s it a minute.
Luka Harambasic [00:26:03] Do you have any? Do you have anything?
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:26:04] For us, yeah.
Andreas Okholm [00:26:06] Before you run away. No, not, not, not the.
Andreas Okholm [00:26:10] I mean, maybe I’m just curious if you have a thought about
those some of those issues that I brought up?
Luka Harambasic [00:26:18] Yes, that’s a good part. Yeah, I think most of them like defi-
nitely not the the wind turbine specific ones, but especially the bureaucracy part, like that’s
where we tried it. It’s kind of annoying we we get this point and that’s also I think one of
the big selling points, besides having Ppas that we want to give startups a point where
you just can basically plug in. You have to fulfill certain criteria. You need to have this re-
liability to produce that amount of electricity. But then it should be straightforward. That’s
at least the goal and therefore we are talking with all different stakeholders all over the
ecosystem.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:27:01] And the idea is, sorry, go ahead.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
74
==PAGE:81==
Andreas Okholm [00:27:04] Yeah.
Bookmark: Expanding the program to other energy systems
Andreas Okholm [00:27:04] So this could be for, I mean basically any kind of energy
system that wants to be grid are like connected. So it’s like this grid connected part that’s
sort of you’re focusing on or?
Luka Harambasic [00:27:17] That in the beginning, that’s for sure the part, but then we
also like what we, we also talked, we also asked in our kind of other yeah startups in this
broader Clin Tech area. So we’re also looking into storage solutions. If they are quite
integrate, they might be relevant in the beginning and when we already have there some.
Set up. We also could imagine some pure software startups who try to be smart about
how to load balancing or stuff or if they just need data. But first step definitely is quit
integration and then maybe also about heating. But that’s a future problem.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:27:59] And the other part is that while we want to start at TTU, so
it would be a stage based program essentially that maybe you build a smaller prototype at
TTU, maybe your medium sized wind turbine, but that we are also contacting for example
Lumbu, the city of Lumbu with their renewable energies program. Maybe you could or we
can have a partnership with them that they provide an area.
Andreas Okholm [00:28:25] And that these startups can essentially ship by PPA as well
energy to on a bigger scale of course at that stage so that you have a very clear progres-
sion system within this program to.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:28:37] Take you from start up, the prototype this big to actual,
like substantially substantial infrastructure.
Andreas Okholm [00:28:48] So that’s the whole idea, yeah, looking forward to see if it
something comes out of it.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:28:54] Hope so. Hope so.
Andreas Okholm [00:28:56] Yeah. Cool.
Luka Harambasic [00:28:58] And thank you so much for your time. That was super in-
sightful.
Andreas Okholm [00:29:02] Yep. And yeah, like likewise.
Luka Harambasic [00:29:05] And if you have anything, just feel free. I think you have
Nicholas. I will add you as well. LinkedIn just shoot us a message.
Andreas Okholm [00:29:12] And tell us when, when you take out the smoke bombs again,
we’ll swing by, yeah?
Luka Harambasic [00:29:18] Awesome, cool. Bye, bye. Thank you. Have a nice day.
Doron Tamir - Luminescent
Bookmark: Introduction and Anonymity
Doron Tamir [00:00:02] So.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:03] Don’t worry as well, everything will be anonymized. So
we won’t publish anything with like your logo associated with anything you said. So yeah,
everything is anonymized and we essentially just use it to find out what you guys want and
then try to create a program from it. So it’s not necessarily like a commercial application
or anything like that.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
75
==PAGE:82==
Doron Tamir [00:00:24] No problem I’m not. No secrets.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:28] No, see, I like that. That’s good.
Bookmark: Overview of the Startup and Mission
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:32] So I know a bit, I, I read a bit about your startup. You guys
deal in essentially creating energy from heat with your novel heat engine. You guys were
founded in 20 in 2020, right?
Doron Tamir [00:00:44] Yes.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:45] And are now in a program called Green Scale.
Doron Tamir [00:00:48] I stalked you guys a bit on LinkedIn, yes.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:00:52] OK, cool. But just can you give me a very brief rundown
of like what is your mission and explain your product a little bit.
Doron Tamir [00:01:02] So basically most of the electricity in the world is generated by
heat engine.
Bookmark: Issues with Steam Turbines
Doron Tamir [00:01:08] OK, it’s a steam turbine, but a steam turbine which is actually if it’s
a coil power station, nuclear power station, gas power station. In the end of the process
you will find the steam turbine. Yeah, but steam 21 is very inefficient machine. When it’s
very big, you can improve the efficiency by Preheat and reheat. So it’s other processes.
But when it’s small, it’s very inefficient and very expensive. And when I’m speaking about
small, I’m speaking about usually it’s less than 50 MW, so but quite MW. You know it’s
not the best but it’s OK. You know part of the companies you will will not they have no
50 megabyte steam turbine for OK, but because usually it’s about 80 MW, but we are
targeting the market of less than 20 MW, less than 10 MW, less than five MW. You will not
find steam turbine less than 10 MW to generate electricity. OK, OK.
Bookmark: Market Potential for Energy Generation
Doron Tamir [00:02:21] But the potential, it’s huge because 70 percentage of the world
energy is wasted. OK. So it’s impossible to catch all of it, but you can catch a lot of it. So
actually in any factory or any gas tool buying a gas engine, you have a lot of heat that
you can take it and generate from its zero emission electricity. So this is 1 issue. The
second market, it’s geothermal, which is also, if you have a better heat engine, so you
can improve it. The third market, and maybe the most important one, it’s the renewable
storage. Because in renewable storage, you can take the renewable electricity, convert
it to heat and then store it. It’s much easier to convert heat and then convert it back to
electricity. But you need efficient heat engine, Yeah so. So in the end of the day, you can
be again.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:03:25] It’s for example working on a sand based battery and stuff
like that.
Bookmark: Sand-based Battery and Energy Solution
Doron Tamir [00:03:29] So sand based battery actually what we can do we we are the first
solution that actually can convert PV and wind to full base load, full dispatchable, stable
or actually in other word to be a real energy solution.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
76
==PAGE:83==
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:03:48] In combination with some sort of heat battery system or
straight from the turbine because that’s electricity.
Doron Tamir [00:03:54] Then from a wind turbine, yeah, we’re taking, we’re taking the
electricity, we convert it to heat, OK, then we store the heat and then and then we can
generate the electricity whenever we like. But it’s much cheaper. And what is so nice
about it that even if you have no electricity or renewable electricity because part of our
CapEx is heat engine. So we can take for example, if 15 percentage of the time you don’t
have electricity, we can take on the same heat engine to use for example green hydrogen,
green methanol, whatever. OK.
Bookmark: Storage and Heat Engine
Doron Tamir [00:04:29] So the end of. The heat, Yeah, yeah, for but in the so in the end
of the day, we are a full solution.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:04:36] OK, so you don’t only do the heat engine part, you also
do the storage part in in with luminescent.
Doron Tamir [00:04:43] Yeah, but the storage is nothing, nothing special. OK, OK. If you,
I see you know in your back that you are drinking coffee. OK, yeah. So if you want to
use your special coffee in the morning, you put it in your container. Yeah, it can be to be
continued to be heat also during the the night if you have a good. If you have a good one,
yeah.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:05:12] Yeah, yeah, I know it’s, it’s, it’s quite easy to store electric-
ity. Like my dad also he has APV, we build PV on his roof and we DIY the system where
he heats his water with excess PV electricity. And that also lasts for like 2 days because
it’s 300 liters or whatever of water.
Doron Tamir [00:05:31] Yeah, so exactly. So it’s very, it’s very simple to store it. OK.
Doron Tamir [00:05:40] So that’s what we are doing. We are, we start actually to we
established in 2020 but just in 2021 we start actually to work so. You raised seed and
now you are prototyping or you have Yeah. So raise 7 million in the seed and then we
have another safe round that we increased the seed round to another until 20. So actually
I would seed round with the 20 actually part of our investor are from coming from Denmark,
OK.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:06:22] OK. That’s why you applied.
Doron Tamir [00:06:25] Yeah. So it’s called Match Invest. I don’t know if you know them
but they they invest in our company and actually in the end of the year we’re going to have
prototype I hopefully hopefully and so, so.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:06:43] Before the seed round, you didn’t have a small scale
prototype or something like this.
Doron Tamir [00:06:48] No, no. We’ve done the proof concept, but no more than proof
concept.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:06:53] And how big was that, roughly? Like, is it a?
Doron Tamir [00:06:55] It’s a 60 kilovat, yeah, it’s a 60 kilovat. It’s a it’s a big machine, but
it’s 60 kilovat and that and if if the prototype will be OK. So next year we’re going to have
commercial pilots.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:12] Nice. OK.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
77
==PAGE:84==
Doron Tamir [00:07:13] That’s quick for an industrial solution, yeah.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:07:19] So, so this whole seed thing is very interesting. You had
a small scale proof of concept essentially you said and that was 60 kilowatt. Did you have
the local facilities to have this prototype or what did you need? Take a little bit, maybe
through the process of how you build it, what you needed, and what were the challenges
in this proof of concept, creating it and validating.
Doron Tamir [00:07:45] Yeah, when you are doing hardware, it’s much, much difficult than
software. OK, yeah. So you have a lot of, you know, a lot of problems. So a lot of
challenges.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:08:02] Yeah, It’s also manufacturing.
Doron Tamir [00:08:04] Yeah. So manufacturing, yeah, manufacturing is 1.
Doron Tamir [00:08:09] The team, you know, because we need a lot of expertise.
Doron Tamir [00:08:15] So every, every, every, you know, every iteration look a lot, a lot
of time because when you want to you need to design and then you need to manufacture
and then you need to test and then half a year is gone.
Doron Tamir [00:08:30] So usually if in if it’s in startup, you know everyone is 22, you know
25 S In our case it’s not. We have also younger employees, but but we have also people
in the age of 60 and even even 75, OK.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:08:50] But that is proven to be better for startups if they don’t
only have super young people.
Doron Tamir [00:08:55] Yeah, so, so, but in my point of view, if you want to make a change,
so just how they will do it, OK Software will not make a change, yeah.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:09:09] I I agree we I tried to found a startup in the solar industry as
well where everyone was just doing like PV prognosis software. Exactly. No, we actually
have to build PV.
Doron Tamir [00:09:19] Yeah, So if you want to have change, it’s a must to have a hard-
ware. This is my point of view.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:09:29] So, So what do you see with what are the main challenges
in developing a hardware prototype? Then you mentioned a couple, but maybe go a little
bit more in depth.
Bookmark: Funding and Challenges in Hardware Development
Doron Tamir [00:09:39] First of all it’s to have the funding, OK because funding in we have
a luck that we we bring something to the market that everyone really excited about it. But
to bring financing to hardware in the beginning it’s very, very difficult. It’s not our case but
it’s usually the case OK and and because also because the until you know that you have
to to become a commercial it’s taking a lot of time. So even if you have, if you find funding,
so usually they want, you know, big share of your company. So it’s very important in the
beginning not to dirt your Cape table. Yeah, OK. Because you want slow money or yeah,
because what happen usually to hardware companies that they they want money and
no one want to invest. So they take everything that they can and then after they prove
something and they want serious names to go into the Cape table. Now it’s very dirty
Cape table. No one wants to touch the company. So it’s another challenge. We don’t
face it, but usually this is what happened.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
78
==PAGE:85==
Bookmark: Proving the technology
Doron Tamir [00:11:03] And then the the biggest challenge is to prove the technology
because in the hardware you can wave your hands, but in the end of the day, you need
to bring proof. Yep.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:11:15] And how did you prove your technology?
Doron Tamir [00:11:17] With your proof of concept, yeah. With the proof of concept, yeah.
But it like you build it and then you let it run for X amount of time and maybe like in a in a
university facility or were you able to afford a facility et cetera like yeah we we, yeah we
are my my partner is a professor in the university, OK. So we start in the university. So it
save us some money. Yeah. But this is the way we start, yeah?
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:11:48] OK, nice. And then you mentioned that you want to build
a big scale prototype. Where are you going to do that now?
Doron Tamir [00:11:55] The next phase, the prototype will be with the world leader for all
CRC’s organic making cycle. Yeah, this company, it’s called Romat. They are located
also in Israel and they are the world leader and also they invest in our company. So, so
the prototype will be in the facility and after that we’re going to start to to have our own
facility.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:12:27] And what kinds of aspects do you have to validate for your
machine for them to consider it success.
Doron Tamir [00:12:35] Efficiency. We need. We need it’s not just efficiency, it’s we need
to show that we understand what we are doing. OK, because we’re developing something.
It’s totally new. OK, so you don’t have article about it. You don’t have models about it. So
we’re doing everything from scratch. So we need to convince everyone that we know to
that our model is correct, and if it’s not correct, that we know to explain why it’s not correct.
Doron Tamir [00:13:09] And I guess you do that with numbers to convince them that you
have exactly.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:13:17] And these.
Bookmark: Infrastructure requirements
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:13:18] So what I want to get AT is kind of like what infrastructure
needs a start up like yours has locally so. What do you need from a facility to be able to
achieve this? Essentially, that’s kind of where I’m trying to get with my question.
Doron Tamir [00:13:34] Yeah, it’s really changed from starter to starter. But for example,
for our proof concept, we need a lot a lot of air. Compressed air, OK.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:13:44] OK.
Doron Tamir [00:13:45] And for example, just in the university, because they have, they
have a facility for how you call it wind tunnel. OK, You know what is a wind tunnel? Yeah,
I know what.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:13:57] Is a wind tunnel? Yeah, I’m a I’m a mechanical engineer.
I should know what a wind tunnel is.
Doron Tamir [00:14:02] OK, so because they have wind tunnel, so they have a lot of
compressed air. Yeah, OK so but if we need to build wind tunnel in the beginning or if we
need to to to build the the option for so much compressed air, it was too expensive for us.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
79
==PAGE:86==
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:14:22] And that’s where you partnered essentially with this com-
pany.
Doron Tamir [00:14:25] It’s not company, it’s the university.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:14:28] The university, Sorry. Yeah. OK. So they gave you com-
pressed air. And did you also then like sell or give the electricity that you generate back
to the university in some, some fashion?
Doron Tamir [00:14:40] No, no, we are just operated, you know, for minutes, no more
minutes, OK. So it’s not important.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:14:47] Yeah. But now maybe for the bigger prototype you’re
building.
Doron Tamir [00:14:50] Yeah, the bigger it will not be there. It will be in the, in the OMAT,
the prototype. And even then, you know, it will not operate all the time, OK. The first
machine that will be, it will be a commercial pilot. And then for sure we’re going to sell the
electricity. But till then it will not be, you know, a commercial one. OK.
Bookmark: Early stage testing
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:15:18] Because at DTU now we’re thinking about essentially
creating a scheme where we validate prototypes very, very early on through a, you know
what Appa is, right? Like the power purchase agreement?
Doron Tamir [00:15:32] OK, perfect. Through previous company I was the biggest solar
developer so.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:15:38] Yeah, I saw it. You worked at solar X renewable.
Doron Tamir [00:15:43] Yeah, solar, so.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:15:44] Solex Renewable. I don’t know. That’s it. OK, cool. Yeah.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:15:49] So the idea is to give these very early stage start-ups
PPA that is only with DTU, so the university and essentially buy their generated or their
stored electricity very very early on so that they can do long term testing on reliability for
example of their products. I guess that doesn’t really apply to yours as you only run it
minutes, but maybe you can imagine. Would it have helped you to get some funding?
From like actually selling your product that you will sell in your commercial prototype as
well or in your commercial application as well.
Doron Tamir [00:16:25] I I don’t think it’s for the for the first step it’s so important because
until you want you know you’re doing testing and then you build a new machine and then
testing a new machine so and you don’t want to start to operate your first machine as a if
you have a PPA OK. So because it will not be efficient it it’s OK you understand what you
want to change and then you change it and you make another model so you have a lot of
try and try and go you know so so I’m not sure maybe for the the for the first prototype it
can be OK but also in the prototype you know let’s assume it will work three months OK
half a year. OK. And you will for sure in this half a year you will have a lot of problems. So
let’s assume.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:17:18] Changes.
Doron Tamir [00:17:19] You will have a net of three months usually this prototype will cost
you, you know much, much more than the electricity that you can generate.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
80
==PAGE:87==
Doron Tamir [00:17:30] So I’m not sure that PPA is the right. I think better it’s to find a way
to have, you know funding, easy funding, a place to have pilots.
Doron Tamir [00:17:48] But you know this is the case. I can tell you that for example for
me if someone, let’s assume that the Denmark will give me now, OK, they will tell me, hey
come to Denmark, will give you the option to have your commercial pilots, you will get for
example, let’s assume euro 10 million to build, to operate to everything, but you need to
come to Denmark, OK, not all your company, the R and D can stay in Israel, but the pilot.
So then I will, you know, I will build it in in Denmark and then I’m starting to do everything
in Denmark. So you know for for Denmark, I don’t think it’s the best example, but for
example Czech or Poland, if they will do it, then I will then I will start to work with the local
industry. And then actually what will happen is that I will build my facility in Poland or in
Czech and then you know you can build a real industry, a new industry in these countries,
OK. So it’s not not the best for maybe from Denmark, but but for places that they can do
a metal industry that they have, metal industries can be perfect.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:19:11] Yeah. Yeah.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:19:12] Because you also say very well, manufacturing heavy
technology essentially there’s not much.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:19:19] High tech, I guess. Super high tech like semiconductors
or or things like that. In it?
Doron Tamir [00:19:25] No, exactly.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:19:28] All right, cool.
Bookmark: Milestones for the prototype
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:19:29] That is basically most of my questions. I have like 3 more
that are more general. Just to get to frame essentially this interview a little bit, what’s like
milestones? Do you have planned for your prototype or for even maybe your commercial
prototype? What are like the key things that you have to get or that you have to get
validated beforehand to be able to success succeed in that?
Doron Tamir [00:19:55] Yeah. So first of all, we need a successful prototype. This is the
first one, OK? And then we need a successful commercial pilot.
Doron Tamir [00:20:06] OK. And then after the commercial pilots, we want more commer-
cial pilots, OK. And then we have a new funding.
Doron Tamir [00:20:17] And after this new funding, just a moment, I just need to take this
call one minute, OK, no. Worries because of the hello. OK.
Doron Tamir [00:20:42] OK.
Doron Tamir [00:20:52] OK.
Doron Tamir [00:21:09] SAP, Ken, Ovalas LOBAYA Ken, Abaya and Coulomb focus alti-
tude. Lehima. Ken.
Doron Tamir [00:21:38] Yeah.
Doron Tamir [00:21:48] Because it’s crazy days, yeah.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:21:54] Yeah, yeah.
Doron Tamir [00:21:58] So, yeah, I’m so you asked about the milestone, what do you ask?
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
81
==PAGE:88==
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:22:03] Yeah, yeah. I asked about the milestone, but that’s OK.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:22:09] Just again, two more questions.
Bookmark: Essential elements for program support
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:22:11] So what are like the top three things you think are essen-
tial for program? Any program to support these? Let’s say your smaller scale proof of
concept.
Doron Tamir [00:22:23] What are the?
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:22:23] Top three things you need, Yeah.
Doron Tamir [00:22:25] First of all, it’s really depends who are the participants.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:22:29] OK, now in this case you. Your startup.
Doron Tamir [00:22:33] But for example, I have a previous experience. OK, so if it’s just
young people, so they need everything, but it’s if it’s experienced people, so it’s a little bit
different. But let’s assume it’s a must to understand how to do funding. OK. It’s a must to
have to understand the potential for Horizon, all these kind of brands. Runway, OK, Yeah.
Bookmark: Importance of a good manufacturing place
Doron Tamir [00:23:06] It’s very important if we have for the beginning a very good place
for manufacturing a place that you have CNC 3D printing all the stuff.
Doron Tamir [00:23:23] A place that you know that they can say for example, that we need
compressed air and you have the ability to supply the compressed air.
Doron Tamir [00:23:32] Also it can be very important to have several big companies that
can be part of it. So if they need, because you it’s impossible to supply everything. So
maybe if you have a compressed air in another place or maybe they can build their proof
concepts there.
Bookmark: Importance of networking and expertise
Doron Tamir [00:23:48] Also for knowledge big companies, yeah, a good networking for
experts, OK, so if you want to have advice so we can have you know if it’s a physics,
technical, chemical, low finance, everything, I think this is the case.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:24:10] It’s a little bit of everything.
Doron Tamir [00:24:12] Yeah, exactly.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:24:13] All right, cool. And then last question, Do you know any-
one else that we should interview who might be interesting to us? So energy, startups,
people, whatever.
Bookmark: Recommendation for another interviewee
Doron Tamir [00:24:27] Maybe I can, I can I can give you some someone that is just is in
his first steps. OK, so maybe it will be more easier. It may be better for you.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:24:39] Better fit, Yeah.
Bookmark: Introduction of Neil as a potential interviewee
Doron Tamir [00:24:41] It’s name is Neil. Neil.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
82
==PAGE:89==
Doron Tamir [00:24:47] Neil. Neil. Not Armstrong, No, no. Amir NIR. And his number, I
will write here his number.
Doron Tamir [00:25:02] Let’s see, where is the chat here?
Doron Tamir [00:25:06] Chat, chat, chat, chat. Here’s the chat.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:18] Here we go.
Doron Tamir [00:25:25] So this is his number, so you can text him and ask if he’s ready.
This is the name. If he’s ready, the Internet take it for I think it’s maybe better for you
because he’s really in his first steps. You’re ready? I think 1 year old, OK.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:49] Yeah, Depends how far they get in one year.
Doron Tamir [00:25:51] But yeah, some.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:25:53] Take five years to do.
Doron Tamir [00:25:55] Their first prototype as so I think it’s maybe can be good for you.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:26:00] Awesome. Thank you very much. Do you have any more
questions?
Doron Tamir [00:26:05] Anything you’d like to learn?
Doron Tamir [00:26:08] No, no, I’m OK. OK.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:26:10] Cool.
Bookmark: Closing remarks and well wishes
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:26:12] Well then, thank you very much for the interview. That
was great. Lots of good insight, very general things that you guys needed. But that’s
always nice.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:26:22] Yeah. Thank you very much.
Doron Tamir [00:26:22] I hope you you guys stay safe over there and yeah, yeah and
good luck for you.
Niklas Luettringhaus [00:26:29] Thank you very much. Good luck to you as well.
Doron Tamir [00:26:32] Bye, bye, bye, bye, bye.
Andreas Gamborg - Wind Energy Machines
Bookmark: Background and roles of the speakers
Luka Harambasic [00:00:00] Talk a little bit about the project and then I have a lot of
questions for you.
Andreas Gamborg [00:00:04] Yeah.
Luka Harambasic [00:00:05] So, yeah, I’m Luca. I’m originally from, from Germany, but
right now I’m normally located in Copenhagen. This week I’m in Berlin.
Bookmark: Overview of the project
Luka Harambasic [00:00:17] Looking into or yeah, investigating into this project acts if we
can make this happen on DTU campus to have a place for cleantech and energy startups
where they can have a playground to test new ideas.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
83
==PAGE:90==
Luka Harambasic [00:00:31] But I also right now work as a product manager at Monta.
So EV industry, EV software stuff.
Luka Harambasic [00:00:40] I have a background like in in business informatics.
Luka Harambasic [00:00:45] What about you? What do you do?
Andreas Gamborg [00:00:51] I OK, so I had a question but let’s get back to that.
Bookmark: Experience and history of Speaker 2
Andreas Gamborg [00:00:56] So I’m a mechanical engineer, I am, I’m Danish. I I studied
at DTU, got my masters in 07. So it’s a while ago and my sort of speciality is product
development, mechanical product development. And that’s I think, yeah, I think I know
Thomas Howard from back then, I think he was the guy who sort of set up, set us up,
Yeah.
Andreas Gamborg [00:01:26] And I have worked for several like product development
consultancies around Copenhagen, outside Copenhagen, had a a few years in Norway
in the oil business, which is very different and paid off my student debt.
Andreas Gamborg [00:01:45] Yeah. And now so a few years in Norway, then back in
Copenhagen, and then I met a girl from the US and we moved to the US together. And then
I got connected with Energy Machines from a previous manager and Energy Machines
was looking for somebody to run.
Andreas Gamborg [00:02:09] A company that they had acquired so Vertical Wind AB
which is a Sweden Swedish startup. It started back in 2010 and they produced a few
generators, large generators and they produced 1200 kilowatt Vertical axis wind turbine
that was placed in Falcon bag and they used a wooden tower. And that didn’t go so well.
They forgot to take into account Eigen frequencies, which is pretty rookie mistake if you
ask me.
Andreas Gamborg [00:02:47] They have this big turbine and they actually they ended up
having to pull it down. It’s all of us. So and then after that they had some financial issues
and then energy machines we have this the owner of energy machine is.
Andreas Gamborg [00:03:04] How do you say this?
Andreas Gamborg [00:03:05] A very nice guy who made a lot of money on IT, OK?
Andreas Gamborg [00:03:09] This guy and he was like looking into I want to invest in
some green technology. I like wind turbines. I’ll this looks fun. So he purchased it without
too much like bank or research and then yeah I was connected to it and then I’ve I’ve
been running it for four years now.
Luka Harambasic [00:03:29] Yeah, OK.
Andreas Gamborg [00:03:31] Yeah. So and then two years ago I moved back to Copen-
hagen. So I was doing it remotely, yeah. And then COVID in the US and so on Denmark
just looked very attractive at that point. Yep.
Andreas Gamborg [00:03:48] So and then we build out the team and then we have recently
scaled it down a little bit because.
Andreas Gamborg [00:03:56] Yeah, I think we might get into that because it’s a start up
and budgeting and sort of expectations about what you are able to deliver for a for a
certain amount of financing, right.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
84
==PAGE:91==
Andreas Gamborg [00:04:09] So, yeah, so I’m the director of it. And there’s Julia, who’s a
simulation engineer. She sits in Stockholm and then we have a part time who works with
sales to China. And then here in Copenhagen we have. Two electronic engineers who
help like sort of run a not like a part time sort of arrangement, but they actually hired in
another part of the company and then I’ve had some student workers and we are hiring a
mechanical engineer now.
Bookmark: Products and focus of the company
Andreas Gamborg [00:04:47] So and then our products are.
Andreas Gamborg [00:04:51] So this is a little bit what it’s a little bit fun about the startup,
right. What is your products? And we started out having the plan was to have five different
products and I’m kicking myself for this now. So a small turbine in two different sizes, then
a medium size and then two larger sizes. So the big ones are lift turbines, vertical axis
lift turbines, and the small ones are direct turbines. We have boiled it down to the small
direct turbine and then we do the big lift turbines. So because it resources, right. So that
is where we’re at now. We just installed this 10 kilowatt that I show those pictures of on
LinkedIn and that is being commissioned very soon.
Luka Harambasic [00:05:36] So there there I have a question like is it like the 10 kWh one,
it’s also then yeah, you Commission it and then you also go for the 25 one. Though the
tech is not just purely prototyping testing, that’s also what you will be selling.
Andreas Gamborg [00:05:52] We’re only going to sell the 25, The 10 too small financially.
It’s sort of in a weird place. It’s cost almost the same as the 25, the 20. The reason for the
25 is that the maximum size in Denmark for a house turbine. And in Sweden the maximum
size is 100 kilowatts, but there is a limit to the height, often some some places 25 meters
the Max, so the bottom to tip. So that’s why we sort of expect that. So what we’re trying to
and the 10 at the 100 Watt the drag one is just small enough to not be regulated at all so.
The wind, I don’t know how much you know about the wind industry. Regulation is like a
yeah, it’s very much a constrained, right. So the 25, you only need a building permit, you
don’t need any environmental studies or anything. And then for the 100 Watt you don’t
even need a building permit.
Luka Harambasic [00:06:59] So that’s sort of where we want to go because if you need to
something else like environmental studies then you you’re you’re bogged down for years
who is then your customer group, I saw the case studies on your website, all of them had
like that, they’re not grid connected.
Bookmark: Target customers and market
Luka Harambasic [00:07:18] So is it like for someone who has a nice summer house
somewhere in the forest or?
Andreas Gamborg [00:07:23] So the big ones are grid connected, they have to be grid,
OK. But the 10 kilowatt, let’s just say the 25 because that’s going to be the product, the
25 is grid connected, it’s a farm, it’s basically so. We thought it could be production as
well, but everybody, all the people we hear from fabs or greenhouses, even fish farms as
well could be option. So, so semi large, like if you have a house, it’s too big, it’s too much
power and you don’t really make money selling energy, it’s the.
Andreas Gamborg [00:08:06] The cases that you use, the electricity yourself, the business
can’t like, yeah, it it’s gonna be too cost. It’s too costly to sell the electricity unless you
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
85
==PAGE:92==
start to sort of sell energy at a certain time. And that could be a different business case
with batteries and so on. Yeah, yeah.
Luka Harambasic [00:08:25] Yeah.
Bookmark: Cost and pricing of the 25 kWh turbine
Luka Harambasic [00:08:26] Just just super roughly, like what ballpark are we talking
about with the 25 kWh turbine? What will it cost like?
Andreas Gamborg [00:08:35] So the cost target, well, we wanna sell it for maybe initially
it’s euro 100,000, but I hope to go down to euro 80,000. We wanna be right. We’re trying
to be competitive with what else is out there and there’s not a lot about there, you know
the size. And then even for, yeah, the business case is like the payback time has to be, I
think it has to be less than 10 years.
Luka Harambasic [00:09:06] And then they then, because of the looks of the turbines,
there’s companies that are interested to let’s just say it green wash right where we have
it looks amazing.
Bookmark: Interest from companies in setting up turbines
Andreas Gamborg [00:09:18] Yeah, I think it looks pretty great. So we’re talking to Phil
Morris, you know the cigarette company which is like OK, but they would like to set them
up because every all of these companies have some kind of. Initiative towards going
green, right? And then what does that mean? Like often it’s it’s to show stuff.
Luka Harambasic [00:09:42] OK And how does then your development process look like?
Bookmark: Development process and testing facilities
Luka Harambasic [00:09:47] Maybe on the the exact example, like from going from the
10K Watt one to the 25, How do you test the stuff? Where does this all happen? Is it all
in from Hagen? Do you have their testing facilities or how does it look like?
Andreas Gamborg [00:10:01] So testing turbines and they’re very difficult. There’s a RIsø.
Luka Harambasic [00:10:08] Yep, have been there. Yeah. The wind blading one is is fun.
Andreas Gamborg [00:10:13] What? Which one?
Luka Harambasic [00:10:14] Where they test the the blades of the large scale wind tur-
bines, where they have the frequency tests, or what it is that that looks fun?
Andreas Gamborg [00:10:21] We so we haven’t done anything with them. They would like
to have research projects. I think the way you sort of involved with the UMST, my cousin
is actually running one of the programs out there, which is a little bit arbitrary. I’ve been
out there and talked to him. But it’s just we have this kind of unique thing that we have
financing, so we don’t have to apply for funding. I have to apply internally, right? That’s
like what every year around Christmas I have to do that. But that’s sort of the restraint.
So Sweden, the rule, the regulations are a lot simpler than in Denmark. So our plan is to
test in Sweden. So there you just ask for building permit and they look at a drawing and
they say, whoa, that looks fine. So we get to do sound measurements like noise and and
vibration and all that stuff. We do that in Sweden. So the next one we’re installing is at a
power plant in Sweden and there we do, we start to do more like detail measurements, so
strain gates and like stresses of the blades and so on. But we simply do it on site. Then
we have done a lot of simulation of the blades and the rotor and then we have done some
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
86
==PAGE:93==
component testing. If you go to our LinkedIn, you can see my backyard I have. Placed a
lot of concrete tiles on the wing.
Luka Harambasic [00:11:54] So yeah, that that that’s sort of, yeah. When you then tested
in Sweden, do you also connect it to the grid or is it just only sensor measuring, so the?
Andreas Gamborg [00:12:04] Control system we use is sort of pretty standard expensive
system that we buy from Emerson, which is used to be called meter technique. It’s a
Danish control wind turbine control company. They used to produce.
Andreas Gamborg [00:12:22] They used to produce all control systems for all turbines.
Before 2000 they were like Durka and now all the vestas they just started to do and all
the bigger companies just started to do their own control system, right?
Luka Harambasic [00:12:42] And is there anything else that you need besides this control
system to test this?
Bookmark: Testing infrastructure and components
Luka Harambasic [00:12:49] Or what are like if you set up this whole the testing infrastruc-
ture, what how does this look like? Sorry if if I if you if you set up this testing infrastructure
then at the plant and you have this control system, is that everything you need or are there
other components you you will install you will need to buy?
Andreas Gamborg [00:13:11] Yeah, so if we were just talking about having a research
project with a student from Sweden. But they will measure on the like the strain gauges
on the wings. So we have gone through the required testing of wings.
Andreas Gamborg [00:13:30] There’s a standard E what it’s called EIC 61400 slash 2 for
small turbines, and there it specifies how you load the wings. But because we are, we
have vertical axis, right. So everything is a little bit different, but it it that is the minimum
requirement of testing. So we’ve done that and then we want to build on like adding
dynamic testing and so on, but we do it on site. That’s the plan, yeah.
Luka Harambasic [00:13:58] OK.
Bookmark: Electricity usage and installations
Luka Harambasic [00:14:00] And who? What do you then do with the electricity on site?
Do you?
Andreas Gamborg [00:14:06] Oh, that is going to our. the farm that it was installed and
we have there’s an arrangement with EON so he’s can sell the electricity, but the plan is
that he should use the electricity.
Luka Harambasic [00:14:22] OK, yeah. And do you have somewhere else already set
up? I saw that you have the small trip and the vertical one on box or.
Andreas Gamborg [00:14:31] Yeah. So, yeah, we have one on blocks. We moved recently,
our office, this was on the balcony. We have our office, so we have one in Sweden on a
field on an island.
Andreas Gamborg [00:14:45] Where there isn’t a lot of wind so we don’t get a lot of data
there which is annoying but it’s it’s kind of a fun part is an NGO that is trying to remove
phosphor from the eastern what do you call that the sea outside from Stockholm and they
they have this wetland farm and they needed some power for an irrigation pump and then
they saw our turbine and then we had we have put up multiple turbines there over the
years but. It’s not a good site. So I think we have to move that. And then there’s going to
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
87
==PAGE:94==
be some installations in Copenhagen soon. We’ve we pretty fast found out that you need
to be close to your test site.
Andreas Gamborg [00:15:28] Yeah, yeah. We also with what’s called Phyllis Heron, which
is this farm community garden. Outside just next to Luciana, you know then home in the
back, we had a turbine there and it was used to charge mobile phones.
Andreas Gamborg [00:15:54] So I hope we put up one there again.
Bookmark: Future plans and data collection
Andreas Gamborg [00:15:58] So the plan is for next year to have ten of these running
different places and just get a lot of data, test data.
Luka Harambasic [00:16:05] Have you then heard about like a GreenLabs on Uldand?
Bookmark: Potential collaboration with Green Labs
Luka Harambasic [00:16:10] Super interesting. Like maybe like until we have this program
we are still figuring out if this will happen, but check out Green Labs. They seem to do
super interesting stuff and they I think they’re more and as you are in the case where you
only have to ask for the money in around Christmas, they might be the right ones. I think
like early stage start-ups might struggle to pay them. They are more like testing facilities
where companies can buy in. That’s my current understanding.
Luka Harambasic [00:16:41] But also like we spent now already some some months in in
talking to people, people figuring this out and we barely heard about them, but when you
start looking into them seems super interesting for. OK, really what you described.
Andreas Gamborg [00:16:55] Yeah, yeah. All right. OK.
Bookmark: Challenges with finding installation sites
Andreas Gamborg [00:17:00] It was a real struggle to find a place to install a turbine and
then get the permission from the municipal house. And we’ve given up in Denmark. We
are not, I’m. I don’t think we’re ever going to. Maybe when we have it fully tested, we
might be able to. But the problem in Denmark is the municipalities have their own rules.
So there’s like 80 different municipalities and they all have the same and none of them
know anything about it. It’s a it’s a very stupid situation we put ourselves in. So no, none of
these turbines are being put up, right, because nobody’s saying yes to anything because
you don’t know what you’re saying yes to. Greenlabs, you’ve got to send me a link for
that.
Luka Harambasic [00:17:40] Yeah, I will do so. Thank you. Wait, I can just do it here and
we’ll chat when we have it already. It’s a little bit confusing. There’s I think Greenlab, which
is it’s Queenlab. Queenlabs is on the level of EUDP of funding projects and Queenlab is
the one in Zealand. I will send you the link here all.
Andreas Gamborg [00:18:01] Right.
Luka Harambasic [00:18:07] They are still also on our list to talk to them because they’re
interesting also like little spreading the word and enabling others to build similar projects
to what they do. But they said they are more focusing on, yeah, companies who already
have money, who just need a testing facility and we aim more for like, yeah, startups who
already have done the first initial testing. So basically exactly the stage you are, that’s
exactly the the companies we want to attract with this program.
Bookmark: Need for a testing facility for startups
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
88
==PAGE:95==
Luka Harambasic [00:18:39] And we right now basically figuring out is there a need in the
market for this. So you would be in the end our customer. We have no idea about business
model and shares and what else how this would look like. But exactly the struggles you
talked about, that’s what we would like to solve together with Thomas for for start-ups that
we can have a playground where maybe the permitting is a bit, little bit quicker. City of
Lumby is aware of it with maybe a little bit lower regulations there in the certain area that
you then via PPA can sell the electricity right already directly to DTU. So for small startup
that they already have their first customer generate money and validate with real world
data with a grid integration that what they are promising is really working in the real world,
not only in the lab.
Andreas Gamborg [00:19:33] I mean, that’s what I that’s exactly what I needed to use.
Luka Harambasic [00:19:39] Yeah, with Nicholas, the both of us tried also together to
found a startup. We would also have needed it two years ago. Yeah. So, yeah, we we,
yeah, we we know. I mean.
Andreas Gamborg [00:19:49] No, no. And even for the next one, and like it was just be
so much easier.
Luka Harambasic [00:19:56] It feels like there are some projects out there who really focus
on the academic research of like a lot of simulation stuff and they also do somehow little
bit entrepreneurial stuff. But then just the next step, getting it out of the lab. Then you
have this big ones like Greenlab or Vattenfal and Ørsted, they will have their own testing
facilities, but there’s nothing like for there’s this term in the startup world. Valley of Death
Denmark is really good in creating a lot of startups, but not really good in scaling them
like and they have this gap and that’s basically what we want to bridge with this kind of
program.
Andreas Gamborg [00:20:37] What else?
Bookmark: Exploring different energy production technologies
Andreas Gamborg [00:20:38] So it can be all wind, right? There has to be more different
things.
Luka Harambasic [00:20:43] It it’s not we we don’t want to only go for wind or or solar, we
are we imagine it right now as agnostic as possible. So we need something to start with.
So we are looking mainly in everyone who can produce electricity. If it is feasible, maybe
nuclear, maybe not in the center of Lyngby, but then maybe also storage because in the
end it’s also kind of production, you just release it and yeah just but that’s like where we
want to start with the Grid integration because we think there is a really big pain. And also
from what we talked to seems like that, we heard now from a lot of people that it’s like this
and then we might also go more into heating and other stuff. So we are not don’t want to
specialize on a certain technology.
Bookmark: Energy Machines’ focus on heat pumps and energy storage
Andreas Gamborg [00:21:40] So energy machines main thing is heat pumps, right, Large
scale heat pumps and energy storage in underground energy storage. So we do this
groundwater heat storage. It’s like very tiny changes in heat in the underground. So we
cool, we can cool buildings during the summer, and then we take we pull back the heat in
the winter.
Andreas Gamborg [00:22:08] It’s, yeah, it is in beta. So we can also do it in bore holes.
And so we bought, our owner bought a building in Copenhagen and drilled holes, 300 very
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
89
==PAGE:96==
deep holes and then that is going to be, yeah, heat storage and cooling storage. We’ve
got to showcase what we can do. We’re pretty big, We’re bigger in Sweden and it’s very
difficult because.
Bookmark: Challenges with district heating in Denmark
Andreas Gamborg [00:22:37] District heating is blocking everything. It’s the Danish cor-
ruption, we call it. There is. They all know each other and they say no, you have to be
connected to district heating. It’s very difficult to get in. So he ended up buying a building
system to show it and it’s getting very big in New York now. It’s like, weirdly, it seems like
nobody wants it here, but they love us and. In the US because they are so far behind with
this heating technology.
Andreas Gamborg [00:23:09] Yeah, but that’s, yeah, sorry.
Luka Harambasic [00:23:11] Yeah that that’s super interesting. But then just one question
and after you brought up by now I have to ask, do you think Energy Machines might be
also someone who like more as an partner on this project kind of would would this be
something Energy Machines does or has done in the past or that’s something you do,
you won’t touch?
Andreas Gamborg [00:23:32] I mean if any place where we get to test something that
would be very desirable because we we have a test we so we produce these big heat
pumps in Finland and there’s a test bench there.
Luka Harambasic [00:23:45] But we recently moved into this very like corporate office
here in the.
Andreas Gamborg [00:23:52] Black diamonds this cross.
Andreas Gamborg [00:23:55] But I think half of us would love to move to an industrial
building on Life Saloon instead. And put up a heat pump and then wind turbine and test
there instead. Like we’re we’re missing that playground.
Luka Harambasic [00:24:08] Yeah, that’s all of what we are. Like Thomas is really he
wants this to be big. Like, he wants to not only have startups from DTU, from Denmark
coming there, he wants to attract startups from all over the EU and also that basically offer
them what you just said, that they can live for one year close to this testing facility, to this
playground and figure themselves out. Just hop over and.
Bookmark: Desire for a testing facility and workshop
Andreas Gamborg [00:24:36] Yeah, and so my challenge right now is that I need a work-
shop, right? I I need somewhere to assemble this. So I assembled these turbines in the
basement of in a in a building in Karlsberg.
Andreas Gamborg [00:24:50] And this summer I built this giant tower and just to get that
tower out right, I had to get a crane, pull it out from in there. It’s just not so it’s free because
our owner also bought that building. So now it’s just like a big mess and I get to use it.
But when that is going to be restored in a year or two, I need somewhere to go where and
where is that? So this is so there’s this whole thing where I live in Copenhagen. I don’t
want to travel to Jutland to test, right and and what does that cost? And and I think these,
I know that these bigger companies have a real issue attracting people, ’cause I have, I
have this guy who just graduated from DTU. He’s great at doing wind turbine simulations.
He’s not moving to Jutland. Absolutely not.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
90
==PAGE:97==
Luka Harambasic [00:25:41] He’s like, he would never leave Copenhagen. Like if I leave
Copenhagen, I will leave Denmark.
Andreas Gamborg [00:25:46] Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. And and so that’s one of the
reasons why we have this office in here which is a little bit for some people it’s a little bit
silly because they live in the open Northern Jutland. But it for the young talent you got to
be in here and it’s we see it as a perk that you live in that you work here.
Andreas Gamborg [00:26:06] Yeah. Yeah. My, my other cousin is that bang on all of them
and they uninstall. I think you can’t get talent there. So they had to open up and loop it.
Andreas Gamborg [00:26:19] Yeah, yeah. So very nice to have a workshop and a test
facility. Did you?
Luka Harambasic [00:26:25] I would love that we are right now at the exactly over with
our time. Do you have a few more minutes?
Andreas Gamborg [00:26:32] Yeah, yeah. Good.
Bookmark: Key aspects of a testing facility
Luka Harambasic [00:26:35] Then if you would now sum it up a little bit, like what would
you say are like the 123 most important key aspects of such a program or testing facility?
Playground, however you want to call it.
Andreas Gamborg [00:26:52] What is the most important?
Andreas Gamborg [00:26:55] I mean, a site where there’s some wind for me, right? Like
an outdoor site where I can put up a wind turbine. I think number 2 would probably be like
a workshop or assembly hall of some sort, yeah? Yeah, no.
Andreas Gamborg [00:27:13] And then the location right close by, no. Yeah, yeah.
Luka Harambasic [00:27:22] Do you know someone else we should talk about this like
about this concept especially like we’re still looking for for startups. So again as I said
in the beginning, thanks for so quickly jumping on a call with us because it seems like
old white men in on boards are super easy to get to talk to. Also super interesting what
they know about everything around here but we’re still would love to talk a few more more
startups in the in this space kind of I’m.
Andreas Gamborg [00:27:55] Curious what the old white men are saying. Do they like the
idea on?
Luka Harambasic [00:27:59] Yeah. They also they seem like I think we might already
have some, if we like them founded and build up a little board, advisor board, they might
be up for it, yeah.
Andreas Gamborg [00:28:12] So I used to work for capacitate.
Bookmark: Suggestion to contact Capacitate and Component 2
Luka Harambasic [00:28:16] Have you heard of that? No.
Andreas Gamborg [00:28:18] OK, look them up. Because they have, they call it the tech
station. So they capacitate is a consultancy that works with product development. They’ve
done a lot of prototyping for Novo Nordisk in the past. They also, yeah, work a little bit
with Mærsk. Their speciality is that they are very hands on, so the engineers can often
like build things themselves and the owner is very keen on.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
91
==PAGE:98==
Andreas Gamborg [00:28:47] We need to be able to build and produce things in them,
right. We can’t just. We need to keep that scale here. So that is big mantra. And then
the consultancy is Capitate and then he bought the train station out in Hellerup and they
Hellerup, yeah, Tech station, it’s called. So it’s like the EMI used to be there and there’s
a lot of smaller companies there, but I don’t think they have any. Like they can produce
stuff, but they don’t have the. The test facilities?
Luka Harambasic [00:29:21] Oh yeah, that sounds interesting.
Andreas Gamborg [00:29:23] Yeah. No, they are very interesting and I’m not. Yeah, Jens,
Peter is Jens. Peter Bulholt is the, I guess the owner of it. You can. He’s a very good
person to talk to. He knows everyone.
Andreas Gamborg [00:29:40] Yeah, I was a dans technology, but I don’t think it’s like
maybe not going so well so.
Andreas Gamborg [00:29:47] Half of my colleagues from DANS Technogy also consul-
tancy is at component 2. Do you have your about them? They had also a lot of them
have been at IPU, the institute for Portukto baking on DGU.
Andreas Gamborg [00:30:01] So component 2 you could also contact, tell them and An-
dreas says hi, what is?
Andreas Gamborg [00:30:10] That. Oh, and do yeah, yeah, with Jens as well. Jens.
Andreas Gamborg [00:30:16] Who else? Yeah, So Yan Spin is a very good place to start.
He’s like very into the start up. Community Combinator 2 might be more like they’re very
they’re commercial, but I bet they need to test facilities for some of their projects as well.
Luka Harambasic [00:30:33] Yeah, cool.
Luka Harambasic [00:30:38] Thanks so much.
Bookmark: Interest in the project and desire for updates
Luka Harambasic [00:30:40] Anything else you would like to share with me?
Andreas Gamborg [00:30:46] No, I mean let let me keep me like I I want to hear more
about it, keep me posted.
Bookmark: Project name and acronym
Luka Harambasic [00:30:51] So it’s called ACT Acts for now, Thomas Howard told us
in the beginning, if we want to get a big project out of it and need funding from large
organizations, we need a good acronym.
Luka Harambasic [00:31:04] So I sat down with Jet Chip team.
Luka Harambasic [00:31:08] I really suck that doing acronyms. So Accelerator for clean
tech startup acts.
Andreas Gamborg [00:31:14] And what?
Luka Harambasic [00:31:15] Sorry, accelerator for clean tech status.
Luka Harambasic [00:31:20] Open for suggestions.
Bookmark: Availability of funding for clean tech projects
Andreas Gamborg [00:31:21] Funding for that, isn’t it?
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
92
==PAGE:99==
Luka Harambasic [00:31:23] Yeah, yeah, it it seems like also some like other projects like
Danish Tech Challenge, Challenge and something else, they had funding for like 5 years
and they now need to run on their own. So it seems like there will be a lot of funding for
this kind of stuff available in the near future all. Right, Yeah. And that’s a little bit what
what we are aiming to try to get.
Bookmark: Aiming to develop a heat pump and wind turbine
Andreas Gamborg [00:31:50] I mean, if it we would come out with a heat pump and a wind
turbine, I’m pretty sure.
Luka Harambasic [00:31:55] Yeah, that would be amazing.
Andreas Gamborg [00:31:56] Yeah.
Luka Harambasic [00:31:58] All right, cool then.
Bookmark: Closing remarks and farewell
Luka Harambasic [00:32:00] Thank you SO. Much I keep you updated.
Andreas Gamborg [00:32:03] Yeah, great. Thank you so much.
Luka Harambasic [00:32:06] Have a nice day. You too. Bye.
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
93
==PAGE:100==
A.2.2
Thematic Analysis
Name
Themes
Count
A playground should inlcude data and ana-
lytics infrastrucutre
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
1
A program should not be complex
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
1
Access to accounting over University
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
1
Access to PM thorugh University
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
1
Good connections to other people really
helped
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
1
Inclusion of Grid Services is vital yet difficult
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
3
Partnerships with companies
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
2
Specialized knowledge was important
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
5
Support for proper permitting and TÜV
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
1
Competition from established players
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
1
Pricing of the product is difficult
A program will need supporting services that
are relevant to the startups
1
It’s easy to be investor ready after a decent
size proof of concept
A prototype of relevant size is essential for
startups to scale effectively and get their first
customers
5
Not revolutionary tech but combining exist-
ing things
A prototype of relevant size is essential for
startups to scale effectively and get their first
customers
1
Relevant scale in terms of kwp and other fac-
tors
A prototype of relevant size is essential for
startups to scale effectively and get their first
customers
8
The importance of testing at almost commer-
cial scale
A prototype of relevant size is essential for
startups to scale effectively and get their first
customers
7
Difficulty choosing a target market
A prototype of relevant size is essential for
startups to scale effectively and get their first
customers
1
A PPA as an instrument of validation might
help reach customers quicker
An early PPA can help validate but might not
be significant monetarely
2
Early PPA is probably not significant in terms
of monetary value
An early PPA can help validate but might not
be significant monetarely
2
Early PPA with large company supports ven-
ture financial
An early PPA can help validate but might not
be significant monetarely
1
Still employed while devloping proof of con-
cept
An early PPA can help validate but might not
be significant monetarely
1
Importance of complying with regulation
Ease of regulation plays a major role in the
speed and confidence which startups proto-
type with
1
Continued on next page
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
94
==PAGE:101==
Table A.2 continued from previous page
Name
Themes
Count
Importance of ease of regulation
Ease of regulation plays a major role in the
speed and confidence which startups proto-
type with
8
Low regulation really helped
Ease of regulation plays a major role in the
speed and confidence which startups proto-
type with
1
Regulations change based on Project
Ease of regulation plays a major role in the
speed and confidence which startups proto-
type with
2
Regulatory aspects in Wind
Ease of regulation plays a major role in the
speed and confidence which startups proto-
type with
4
Simple Regulatory framework as an enabler
Ease of regulation plays a major role in the
speed and confidence which startups proto-
type with
2
A dirty cap table represents a big challenge
for young startups.
Funding is one of the main concerns for Star-
tups in regard to scaling and protoyping
3
Funding is a challenge when building a pro-
totype
Funding is one of the main concerns for Star-
tups in regard to scaling and protoyping
2
Funding is hard and messy
Funding is one of the main concerns for Star-
tups in regard to scaling and protoyping
2
Money is one of the main hurdles keeping
the startup from prototyping
Funding is one of the main concerns for Star-
tups in regard to scaling and protoyping
1
Public funding takes long
Funding is one of the main concerns for Star-
tups in regard to scaling and protoyping
2
Selling produced electricity supports the
startup financials
Funding is one of the main concerns for Star-
tups in regard to scaling and protoyping
2
Startups iterate slowly on their design since
testing grounds are expensive and timecon-
suming to set up
Funding is one of the main concerns for Star-
tups in regard to scaling and protoyping
3
Access to great workshop over University
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
1
Access to land over University to test
smaller scale
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
1
Access to limited infrastructure on University
grounds
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
5
Current Testing isntallations
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
6
Funding application over University
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
2
Lack of testing caused problems later on
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
1
No testing was done for the first prototype
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
1
Not a central inkubator but cooperation be-
tween stakeholders
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
2
Public Funding for Proof of Concept
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
1
Spending ltois of time to build their own test
site
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
1
Continued on next page
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
95
==PAGE:102==
Table A.2 continued from previous page
Name
Themes
Count
University as the bottleneck to prototyping
Startups
currently
test
on
University
grounds but with significant limitations
2
Access to a piece of land with existing infras-
tructure
A location will need extensive physical in-
frastructure to support prototype develop-
ment
6
Access to a well equipped workshop is es-
sential
A location will need extensive physical in-
frastructure to support prototype develop-
ment
5
Employee proximity as a key
A location will need extensive physical in-
frastructure to support prototype develop-
ment
1
Proximity to test site is important
A location will need extensive physical in-
frastructure to support prototype develop-
ment
4
Grid integration is tough
A location will need extensive physical in-
frastructure to support prototype develop-
ment
2
Manfuacturing is difficult and time consum-
ing
A location will need extensive physical in-
frastructure to support prototype develop-
ment
1
Prooving Technology is tough
A location will need extensive physical in-
frastructure to support prototype develop-
ment
1
Test grounds are hard to find
A location will need extensive physical in-
frastructure to support prototype develop-
ment
3
Table A.2: TA - Themes
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
96
==PAGE:103==
A.2.3
Business Model Canvas Benchmarking
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
97
==PAGE:104==
Example email
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
98
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.1: Example email sent out to selected organizations, an example is from Green-
Lab
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
99
==PAGE:106==
Organisation Profiles
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
100
==PAGE:107==
Business Model Canvas per Organisation
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
101
==PAGE:108==
A.3
Synthesizing Insights
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
102
==PAGE:109==
Name
Parent
Organi-
sations
Location
Focus Area
Employees
Funding
Amount
Timeline
GreenLab
Private
Spøttrup
(Den-
mark)
Circular economy;
Sector
integration
between
agricul-
ture
food
and
energy and Power-
to-X
54 (LinkedIn);
31
(Website)
N/A
Founded 2019
Energy Lab 2.0
Karlsruhe Institute
of
Technology
(KIT)
Eggenstein-
Leopoldshafen
(Germany)
Energy
N/A
EUR 22 mio (2014)
Funding
in
2014;
Building started in
2017;
Expected
lifetime: 20 years
Power Lab
GreenLabs
DK
/
Technical
Univer-
sity
of
Denmark
(DTU)
Offices: Kgs. Lyn-
gby (Denmark)
Electric equipment;
Renewable energy
sources;
Smart
grid
technologies;
Smart
home
and
electric appliances;
Control
and
ICT-
solutions in energy
systems;
Wind
power;
E-mobility;
Real-time
grid
analysis;
Control
center tools
N/A
EUR 12 mio (105
mio DKK)
Founded
2016;
Funding 2011
Washington Clean En-
ergy Testbeds
University of Wash-
ington
Seattle
(United
States of America)
Solar
harvesting;
Energy
storage;
System integration
12
(LinkedIn);
8
(Website)
EUR 7 mio (USD 8
mio to plan and de-
sign)
Opened
doors
2017
Wells Fargo Innova-
tion Incubator (IN2)
National
Renew-
able Energy Lab-
oratory
(NREL);
Wells Fargo Foun-
dation;
Danforth
Plant
Science
Center
Olivette
(United
States of America)
Agriculture;
Com-
mercial
Buildings;
Housing
11 (Website)
EUR 45 mio (USD
50 mio)
Founded in 2014
Table A.3: Business Model Canvas Benchmarking - Profiles
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
103
==PAGE:110==
Building Block
Content
Key Partners
University; Industry; Local community
Key Activities
Providing facilities; Providing additional services (established
companies)
Key Resources
Staff; Facilities; Network; Digital platform
Value Proposition
Cost-effective and flexible set-up ideal for production facilities;
Streamlined processes for obtaining permits and approvals;
GreenLab Academy; Five on-site facilities; Network
Customer Relationship
Co-creation with industry partners
Channels
Newsletter; Website; Guided Tours; Academy; Social Media:
LinkedIn and Youtube (inactive)
Customer Segments
Industry
Revenue Streams
Facility-as-a-service model (FaaS); Pricing not publicly available
Cost Breakdown
Facilities; Utilities; Staff; Marketing; Legal and consultancy
Table A.4: Business Model Canvas Benchmarking - GreenLab
Building Block
Content
Key Partners
University; Research institutions; Industry; Local energy suppli-
ers
Key Activities
Providing facilities; Providing additional services
Key Resources
Staff; Facilities; Network
Value Proposition
21 different labs and facilities; Eight cooperation projects; Linked
to university; Network
Customer Relationship
Co-creation with industry partners
Channels
Website; Newsletter (inactive)
Customer Segments
Researches
Revenue Streams
Sponsored by Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) – the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy
(BMWi) and the Ministry of Science – Research and the Arts
(MWK); There is no information available if they charge any or-
ganisations
Cost Breakdown
Facilities; Utilities; Staff; Marketing; Legal and consultancy
Table A.5: Business Model Canvas Benchmarking - Energy Lab 2.0
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
104
==PAGE:111==
Building Block
Content
Key Partners
University; Industry; (Local) energy suppliers
Key Activities
Providing facilities; Providing additional services
Key Resources
Staff; Facilities; Network
Value Proposition
Testing;
Technology development;
Educational training and
demonstration of energy technologies; Self-service or full-service
testing; Linked to university; Network
Customer Relationship
Self-service; Full-service
Channels
Website; Social media: LinkedIn (links to DTU Center for Electric
Power and Energy) and Youtube (links to a single Video called
oestkraftDK)
Customer Segments
Researchers; Professionals; Students from companies and uni-
versities
Revenue Streams
Billed per day; based on status (pricing table is available): Com-
mercial Use; DK-funded - Research Activity; Horizon Europe
funded - Research Activity; EU Horizon funded - Research Ac-
tivity
Cost Breakdown
Facilities; Utilities; Staff; Marketing; Legal and consultancy
Table A.6: Business Model Canvas Benchmarking - PowerLab
Building Block
Content
Key Partners
University; National energy department; Industry
Key Activities
Providing facilities; Providing additional services; Startup scout-
ing and selection
Key Resources
Staff; Facilities; Network
Value Proposition
Instrumentation as a service for five different areas; Bench top
space; Remote program; Grant support; Linked to university; Net-
work
Customer Relationship
Self-service; Support
Channels
Website; Social Media: LinkedInan X
Customer Segments
Researchers; Cleantech startups; Established businesses
Revenue Streams
For time and materials the charge on a hourly/weekly/monthly
basis (pricing table is available); Academic pricing is achieved
through University of Washington and state grants and subsidies
Cost Breakdown
Facilities; Utilities; Staff; Marketing; Legal and consultancy
Table A.7: Business Model Canvas Benchmarking - WCET
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
105
==PAGE:112==
Building Block
Content
Key Partners
University; Incubator/Accelerator; Industry (over 60 partners)
Key Activities
Providing facilities; Providing additional services; Startup scout-
ing and selection
Key Resources
Staff; Facilities; Network
Value Proposition
USD 250 000 in technical assistance using their facilities (nondi-
lutive); Company gets matched with expert and community part-
ner; Network
Customer Relationship
Batches; Co-creation with industry partners
Channels
Website; Academy; Social Media: LinkedIn and X; Network:
Companies are chosen by incubators – accelerators – universi-
ties – and industry experts
Customer Segments
Cleantech startups
Revenue Streams
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center is a non profit research in-
stitute; the Wells Fargo Foundation donates for various projects
(over USD 200 000 000 in revenue) and the NREL has an in-
terest in new solutions being development with them being in-
volved. No public pricing is available and some startups receive
USD 250 000 in technical assistance using their facilities (nondi-
lutive). That the money is provided by one of the 3 mentioned
organizations or a combination of them based on a philanthropic
motivation.
Cost Breakdown
Facilities; Utilities; Staff; Marketing; Legal and consultancy
Table A.8: Business Model Canvas Benchmarking - Wells Fargo Innovation Incubator
(IN2)
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
106
==PAGE:113==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-KP-SF-1
University
Yes
Leverage
en-
trepreneurship
education
pro-
grams
No
Facilitate
student-
led startup incuba-
tion
No
Engage
in
university-
sponsored technol-
ogy competitions
No
Create
internship
programs
for
hands-on
experi-
ence
MM-KP-SF-2
Industry
Yes
Establish
industry
advisory boards for
startups
No
Facilitate
industry-
specific
pilot
programs
No
Initiate
industry-
sponsored
re-
search projects
No
MM-KP-SF-3
Local commu-
nity
Yes
Organize
clean
energy awareness
workshops
Yes
Implement commu-
nity feedback loops
for product develop-
ment
No
Engage
in
community-based
clean
tech
initia-
tives
No
MM-KP-SF-4
Energy
sup-
plier
Yes
Develop joint ven-
ture
projects
for
clean energy
Yes
Offer exclusive ac-
cess to proprietary
data
Yes
Partner for grant ap-
plications on clean
tech solutions
No
MM-KP-SF-5
Other
startup
programs
Yes
Foster
cross-
program
partner-
ships for resource
sharing
No
Offer
co-branding
opportunities
for
mutual visibility
No
Establish
refer-
ral
programs
for
startup exchange
No
Table A.9: MM - Key Partners
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
107
==PAGE:114==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-KA-SF-1
Tracking
and
reporting
of
Start-Up
progress
Yes
Quantitive
perfor-
mance tracking
No
Qualitative
perfor-
mance tracking
Yes
Project
based
re-
porting (e.g.
short
term and focused
on program deliver-
ables)
No
(Strategic
report-
ing (e.g.
broader
approach
also
focussing on much
more
future
prob-
lems)
MM-KA-SF-2
Scouting
and
selecting
star-
tups
Yes
Collaboration
with
other
startup
pro-
grams (incubators;
accelerators)
No
Hunt fresh out of
university
startups
(e.g.
DTU; CBS;
etc.)
Yes
Cold calling specific
startups
No
Go to pitch competi-
tions and events
MM-KA-SF-3
Offering
tech-
nical
testing
support
with
experts
Yes
In house support of-
fers
No
Self learn materials
Yes
External help (e.g.
DTU;
GreenUp;
etc.)
No
MM-KA-SF-4
Offering
in-
dustry specific
mentorship
No
In
house
expert
team
Yes
Access to external
collection
with
in-
dustry experts (fos-
tered by ACTS)
No
Alumni
and
other
founders
act
as
mentors
No
MM-KA-SF-5
Fostering
a
StartUp
Com-
munity
Yes
Online forums and
social media
Yes
Recurring network-
ing events
No
No
MM-KA-SF-6
Providing legal
services
Yes
Partnering with in-
dustry specific law
firms
No
In-house legal sup-
port
Yes
Legal
Workshops
and seminar orga-
nization
No
MM-KA-SF-7
Providing busi-
ness support
No
Mentorship
Pro-
gram
No
Collaborate
with
other departments
from DTU
Yes
Easier
access
to
resources and tools
(market
research;
industry
reports;
contacts; etc.)
Yes
Use
third
parties
like GreenUp;
Ig-
nite; CSE; etc.
Table A.10: MM - Key Activities
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
108
==PAGE:115==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-KR-SF-1
Focused Oper-
ational staff
Yes
Core minimal staff
(admin) + partners
for
services
e.g.
installations;
legal
and business sup-
port…)
Yes
Everything in house
strategy (as much
in house expertise
as possible)
No
No full time direct
employee
(As
much as possible
will be handled by
self
service
and
partners)
No
MM-KR-SF-5
Relations part-
ner (investors;
industry;
etc.)
network
No
Direct involvement
of
partners
into
startup selection
Yes
Partner integration
into decision mak-
ing of the program
Yes
Mentoring
from
partners
for
star-
tups
Yes
Hosted workshops
MM-KR-SF-6
Relations
to
other
startup
programs and
universities
No
Exchanges
(e.g.
speakers; startups;
facilities)
No
Open
network
events
Yes
Recurring syncs
No
MM-KR-SF-7
Data collection
hub
Yes
Buy solution
No
Build in-house
No
No
MM-KR-SF-8
Communication
and
knowl-
edge manage-
ment
Yes
Chat
Yes
E-Mails
Yes
Knowledge Hub
No
Intranet
Table A.11: MM - Key Resources
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
109
==PAGE:116==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-VP-SF-1
Location
for
startups to in-
stall hardware
Yes
Small scale facility
on uni Campus
Yes
Integration
into
Risø
Campus
or
PowerLab
Yes
Access
to
piece
of land via Lyngby
(e.g.
next to LIFE
Campus)
Yes
New
playground
area
MM-VP-SF-2
Opportunity for
startups to sell
electricity
Yes
PPA with Uni
Yes
PPA
with
Lyngby
(or similar)
No
No PPA
No
PPA
with
grid
provider
MM-VP-SF-3
Business
support
for
startups
No
Advisory
services
through
university
departments
in
relevant fields
Yes
In house mentoring
Yes
External
advisory
networks
acces-
sible
to
startups
through
the
pro-
gram
No
Mentorship
Pro-
gram
MM-VP-SF-4
Technical sup-
port
No
Advisory
services
through
university
departments
in
relevant fields
Yes
Advisory
services
provided
by
part-
nering industry
Yes
In house technical
expertise with dedi-
cated staffing
No
MM-VP-SF-5
Legal support
No
Advisory
services
through
university
departments
in
relevant fields
Yes
Advisory
services
provided
by
part-
nering industry
No
In
house
legal
expertise
with
dedicated staffing
No
MM-VP-SF-6
Network
and
Community
Yes
Shared
office
space
No
Partnering
with
startup programs
No
Utilise external ex-
pert networks
No
Collaborate with uni
experts
MM-VP-SF-7
Lowered
regulatory
requirements
Yes
Collaborate
with
Regulatory
bodies
in
relevant
areas
(build up as need
arises)
Yes
Get
special
ap-
proval for lowered
regulation
zone
similar
to
Nord-
havn commune or
GreenLab
No
Purely
base
the
playground
on
private
property
(needs
to
be
checked
if
this
helps)
No
MM-VP-SF-8
Improved vali-
dation towards
investors
Yes
Digital
Reporting
tools on key KPIs
No
Transparent evalu-
ation methodology
of the program itself
Yes
Partner
with
in-
vestors
to
mold
application
criteria
KPIs and reporting
No
MM-VP-SF-9
Workshop
access
Yes
Collaborate
with
Skylab
workshops
(small scale); Risø
workshops
(large
scale)
Yes
Partnering
with
PowerLab
Yes
Collaborate
with
third
party
manu-
facturing and open
workshops
No
Build own
Table A.12: MM - VP
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
110
==PAGE:117==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-CR-SF-1
Advisory roll of
program
No
Through in house
experts
Yes
Through
industry
knowledge of part-
ners
No
No
MM-CR-SF-2
Quality
assur-
ance
Yes
Regular
perfor-
mance review
Yes
Peer reviews
Yes
Tools
and
Ressources
No
MM-CR-SF-3
Alumni
net-
work
and
longterm
con-
nection
No
Networking events
Yes
Alumni network to
serve as advisors
Yes
Yearly roundups for
current and alumni
No
MM-CR-SF-4
Self
service
tools
and
re-
sources
Yes
Easier access to re-
sources (market re-
search; industry re-
ports; contacts etc.)
Yes
(Digital) library
No
Administration
tools
No
Table A.13: MM - Customer Relationship
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
111
==PAGE:118==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-CH-SF-1
Direct
out-
reach/scouting
for
startup
selection
Yes
Cold aquisition
Yes
Startup
con-
ferences
(e.g.
TechBBQ; Townhall
etc.)
Yes
Tag
on
to
other
startup programs
No
MM-CH-SF-2
Social
media
channels
Yes
LinkedIn
No
X (formerly Twitter)
No
Instagram
No
Youtube
MM-CH-SF-3
Website
No
DTU branded and
hosted site
No
Stand alone Web-
site
Yes
Focus on SEO
No
MM-CH-SF-4
Networking
events
and
Workshops
Yes
Hosting
domain
specific talks
Yes
Recurring network-
ing events
No
Sponsor
relevant
events
and
work-
shops
No
MM-CH-SF-5
University
associated
startup
pro-
grams
No
An seat in ACTS as
a prize for startup
competitions
(e.g.
Xtech and Ingite)
Yes
Partnerships
with
other programs
No
No
Table A.14: MM - Channel
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
112
==PAGE:119==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-CS-SF-2
EU
Clean-
Tech
Startups
(Seed
to
Series-A
round)
Yes
Offer office space
Yes
Offer
accommoda-
tions
No
Support for cross-
border
collabora-
tion
with
startups
and research insti-
tutions
No
Table A.15: MM - Customer Segments
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
113
==PAGE:120==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-CB-SF-1
Staff salaries
No
Flexible Staffing to
adjust
payroll
ex-
penses
according
to workload
Yes
Internship
pro-
grams
Yes
Outsourcing
non-
core functions
No
MM-CB-SF-3
Utility costs
Yes
Use
generated
electricity
from
startups
No
No
No
MM-CB-SF-5
Program oper-
ational costs
No
Reduce
resource
needs by managing
programs digitally
Yes
Use
volunteer
mentors
for
cost-
effective
expert
advice
Yes
Obtain
resources
through
strategic
partnerships
No
MM-CB-SF-6
Legal and con-
sultancy fees
No
Reduce
external
fees by developing
in-house
In-house
expertise
Yes
Obtain
services
at
preferential
rates through pre-
negotiated Rates
No
Minimize
fees
by
using legal tech for
standard tasks with
legal tech platforms
No
Table A.16: MM - Cost Breakdown
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
114
==PAGE:121==
ID
SF
SP 1
SP 2
SP 3
SP 4
MM-RS-SF-1
Fees for facility
Yes
Monthly
subscrip-
tion one fee for all
Yes
Consumption
based tiered fees
Yes
Subsidised through
funding from Star-
tups
No
MM-RS-SF-2
Profits
from
the
sale
of
electricity
generated
by
startups
No
Electricity revenue
is not relayed to
startup
No
Electricity is sold at
markup to other ac-
tors
Yes
No additional rev-
enue
No
MM-RS-SF-3
Convertible
loans
and
Equity
No
Convertible
debt
(unpriced equity)
No
Convertible
notes
(below
a
specific
valuation cap)
No
Equity linked notes
(converted into eq-
uity at a set price)
No
SAFE Documents
MM-RS-SF-4
Sponsorings
Yes
Grants and Funds
Yes
Industry support
No
No
Table A.17: MM - Revenue Streams
A Clean Tech Startup Program for the Green Transition: A Feasibility Study
115
==PAGE:122==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Diplomvej, Buildings 371 & 372
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk/
