==PAGE:1==
Integrating Electrification and Load Flexibility
for Energy Optimization in Danish Industrial
Sectors
Master’s Thesis in Sustainable Energy - Energy Conversion and Storage
By Martin Lau Nielsen, s173960
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
==PAGE:2==
Integrating Electrification and Load Flexibility for Energy Optimization in Danish
Industrial Sectors
Master’s Thesis in Sustainable Energy - Energy Conversion and Storage
February, 2024
By
Martin Lau Nielsen, s173960
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
This image was created using OpenAI’s DALL∙E, an AI-driven image gen-
eration tool [1].
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé,
Building 403, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://construct.dtu.dk/Sections/thermal-energy
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The present thesis was prepared in collaboration with the Danish Energy Agency at the
Section of Thermal Energy, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU). It is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering Sustainable Energy - Energy Conver-
sion and Storage.
The project was conducted from 01/08/2023 to 22/02/2024 under the supervision of Re-
searcher Nasrin Arjomand Kermani (DTU), Professor Brian Elmegaard (DTU), PhD stu-
dent Roger Padullés I Solé (DTU), and Advisor Fabian Bühler (Danish Energy Agency).
The accredited workload for this thesis is 35 ECTS points.
Martin Lau Nielsen - s173960
Signature
Date
ii
22-02-2024
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I extend heartfelt thanks to my supervisors, Nasrin, Brian, Roger, and Fabian, for
their invaluable insights throughout this project. Your guidance through challenging times
and encouragement to reach the finish line have been instrumental in this journey.
I am also deeply grateful to my family and friends for their support and patience. Thank you
to Dad and Mom for allowing me to stay with them in the final stretch of the project, listening
to my many problems, and giving me insights and new perspectives I wouldn’t have been
without. My brother, Mathias, deserves special thanks for being an ever-present source
of inspiration, discussion, and friendship throughout my time at DTU and in general in life.
Thank you to Skotte for helping me with aesthetic choices regarding many of the charts,
invaluable to someone colorblind. Thank you to Frederik and Magnus for keeping me
company online as motivation, working alongside on your projects. A thank you to my
many friends supporting me and allowing me to withdraw to focus, and get through my last
educational milestone without feeling bad about missing many joyful occasions. Shoutout
to Polipigerne and IA.
Lastly, gratitude to DTU and PF (Polyteknisk Forening) for the free coffee–a small but
significant perk due to the many hours I’ve spent volunteering. My coffee-related savings,
amounting to approximately 85,000 DKK since my first semester, has been the necessary
fuel to keep me going through countless hours of work.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis has explored the electrification and load flexibility opportunities within the
Danish manufacturing industry, focusing on the Dairy sector as a case study. A novel
methodology has been made over the course of the project, applied to Dairy process-
ing, identifying and evaluating alternative electrified technologies for key unit operations.
Using the Danish Energy Agency’s dataset known as Industry Mapping, the study un-
covers the potential for significant energy optimization and CO2e reductions, by adopting
essential technologies such as heat pumps and sensible heat storage, in particular in low-
temperature (> 100 ◦C) unit operations like thermalization and pasteurization. Within, a
hybrid solution for high-temperature unit operations has been suggested as well, aiming
to balance optimizing the energy use with existing utilities in the sector.
Future research could include detailed thermodynamic modeling, and techno-economic
analyses, emphasizing the interdisciplinary nature of addressing electrification and load
flexibility in industrial sectors.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Aim of Study
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
Energy and Climate Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Background
4
3.1
Energy Landscape in Danish Industrial Sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
The Dairy Industry: Energy Utilization and Key Processes . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Flexible Technologies in the Dairy Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Load Flexibility: Concepts and Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Methods and Materials
18
4.1
Data Collection and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Analysis Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Results
21
5.1
Energy Demand and Technology Suitability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Assessing Load Flexibility in Dairy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Load Flexibility Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Discussion
33
7
Conclusion
36
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Bibliography
37
A Appendix
42
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
Thermal electricity capacity in Denmark (a), the potential for electricity from
thermal energy sources. Electricity capacity for large heat pumps (b), cru-
cial for electrification of the heating supply. Data taken and translated from
[17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.1
The total final energy use of Danish manufacturing sectors in 2021. See
Table 3.1 for the explanation of the sector codes, though one of note should
be 9 - Dairies. In Appendix, Figure A.2 the same can be seen, but for all
sectors with associated names. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
The total final energy use of Danish manufacturing sectors in 2021 with
thermal ranges and fuel details. Most energy is used for processes above
200 ◦C, followed by below 100 ◦C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Final energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark with fuel details. More
than 50% of the final energy use of thus originates from natural gas, with
only slightly above 30% being electrical. See Table 3.2 for specific values. .
7
3.4
The average spot price of every hour for 2021 for DK1 and DK2, respec-
tively west and east of the Great Belt. Data is from https://www.energidataservice.
dk/tso-electricity/Elspotprices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.1
Final thermal energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark in the four tem-
perature ranges, with the legend explaining different fuel types used. In-
dustrial process heat demand by temperature level for the dairy industry,
showing how much energy is used per year in that category. Specific val-
ues can be seen in Table 5.1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.2
Final thermal energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark in the four tem-
perature ranges, divided into the unit operations. This shows the industrial
process heat demand by temperature level and unit operation for the dairy
industry, and how much energy they use per year.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3
Final thermal energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark divided into the
form of supply and unit operations. Further details on type of fuel is seen
in legend. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.4
Final energy use (both thermal and electric) of the dairy industry in Denmark
in descending order of usage, where fuel details are shown as well. Specific
values can be seen in Table 5.3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.5
Schematic overview of the main unit operations of ”consumer dairies”, i.e.,
milk for liquid consumption. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.6
Schematic overview of the main unit operations for cheese making.
. . . . 26
5.7
Schematic overview of the main unit operations for milk powder production.
27
5.8
Schematic of utilities and unit operations for the base case. The utilities for
the base case are a natural gas boiler and a chiller, powered respectively
by natural gas and electricity. The natural gas boiler converts water into
steam, which drives the thermalization and pasteurization process. The
chiller drives the cooling and storage. The operation of the natural gas
boiler, alongside the chiller, results in the generation of waste heat. . . . . . 30
vi
==PAGE:8==
5.9
Schematic of utilities and unit operations for a proposed flexible solution.
A heat pump connected to sensible heat storage using water tanks man-
ages thermal energy, facilitating the thermalization and pasteurization pro-
cesses. Excess heat from the chiller, also powered by electricity, is rerouted
to the heat pump. Electricity drives both the heat pump and chiller, where
the heat pump drives the thermalization and pasteurization process, and
the chiller drives the cooling and storage. The overall excess heat from
running the unit operations is rerouted to the sensible heat storage.
. . . . 31
5.10 Schematic of utilities and unit operations for a proposed (hybrid) flexible
solution. It is a combination of the base case and flexible solution, see Fig-
ures 5.8 and 5.9. This proposed change retains the natural gas boiler, fo-
cusing its utility on driving unit operations that require higher temperatures
than thermalization and pasteurization, namely drying and evaporation. As
before, the overall excess heat is rerouted into the sensible heat storage. . 31
6.1
Total natural gas consumption in Denmark over the coming years (a), di-
vided into electricity and heat production, industry, households, transport,
and other. Gas consumption and green gas production over the coming
years (b). Data taken and translated from [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
A.1 The total final energy use of all Danish industrial sectors in 2021. . . . . . . 42
A.2 The total final energy use of Danish manufacturing sectors in 2021.
. . . . 43
A.3 Form of supply overview for the dairy industry. See Table 5.2. . . . . . . . . 44
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
3.1
Sector code and associated sector. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Specific values for the final energy use of the Dairy industry, divided into
the fuel origin. See Figure 3.3 for graph. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
The different recovery (source) and supply (sink) temperatures for a con-
ventional HP, a high-temperature HP (HTHP), and a very high-temperature
HP (VHTHP) [31]. The source temperature level represents the input tem-
perature, and the sink temperature level represents the output temperature. 12
4.1
Flexibility parameters that will be used to quantitatively compare between
solutions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.1
An overview of the final energy use per annum for the Dairy industry, divided
into the four temperature ranges. Showcased is the percentage that the
energy is based on either natural gas or electricity used in a heat pump. It
can be graphically seen in Figure 5.1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Table overview of the temperature ranges, the media, the unit operation,
the associated final energy use, and the percentage of the total. A dash
indicates the continuation of the media type listed directly above. It is a
combination of Figures 5.2 and 5.3. A graphical illustration of this table can
be seen in Appendix, Figure A.3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3
Final energy use per year for every unit operation in the Dairy industry.
The percentage of the total energy use is shown as well. See Figure 5.4
for graphical representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.4
Table overview for ”consumer dairies”, i.e., milk for liquid consumption, and
the associated unit operations, current and alternative technologies, and
proposed flexible solution if applicable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.5
Table overview for cheese making, and the associated unit operations, cur-
rent and alternative technologies, and proposed flexible solution if applicable. 29
5.6
Table overview for milk powder production, and the associated unit opera-
tions, current and alternative technologies, and proposed flexible solution
if applicable.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.7
Comparison of flexibility parameters between the base case and a flexible
solution in dairy processing. In this proposed flexible solution, the aim is to
replace the utility natural gas boiler with a system comprising a heat pump
and sensible heat storage (water tank). This system targets the heating
unit operations, specifically thermalization and pasteurization, as well as
the cooling unit operations, namely storage and cooling. The base case
can be seen in Figure 5.8 and the proposed solution can be seen in Figure
5.9. The emission factor for natural gas of 57.14 tCO2e/TJlower has been
converted to the same unit for the emission factor of the Danish electricity
mix.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Aim of Study
This thesis aims to develop a methodology for exploring various industrial sectors to iden-
tify opportunities for electrification and consider the implementation of load flexibility, for
use in industrial settings. Focusing on one sector as a case – the Dairy industry – this
thesis will investigate and attempt to answer:
1. How do the options for electrification and load flexibility vary for different unit oper-
ations and overall process stages across the Dairy industry?
2. What techniques or technologies are available for managing varying thermal energy
demand in the Dairy industry?
3. Are there any potential hybrid technological solutions that could be advantageous
for the Dairy industry?
The basis is a thorough analysis of the current energy landscape, followed by an in-depth
mapping of key processes. The ultimate goal is to propose a framework that can guide
the Dairy industry – and lay the foundation for using the method in other sectors – to-
ward integrating electrification and load flexibility, enhancing energy efficiency, reducing
environmental impacts, and preparing for an increasingly electrified society.
1
==PAGE:11==
2
Introduction
2.1
Energy and Climate Outlook
The reality of climate change is undeniable. As stated by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) in its 2022 report, it is unequivocal that the significant rise in
greenhouse gases (GHGs) caused by human influence has led to unprecedented changes
to our planet [2]. To keep the global average temperature increase below 2 ◦C (possibly
1.5 ◦C) compared to pre-industrial levels, anthropogenic CO2 needs to be completely
abated by 2050 [2, 3]. A transition must happen, shifting towards new technologies and
solutions that avoid the emissions of CO2 and other GHGs.
The European Union (EU) has ambitious goals for reaching energy and climate goals,
including targets for renewable energy (RE) production (42.5% of final energy consump-
tion [4]) and GHG emission reductions (55%) by 2030 compared to 1990 levels, 90% by
2040, and with the ultimate goal of achieving net-zero GHG emissions by 2050 [5, 6, 7].
These targets align with the EU’s broader efforts to combat climate change and transition
towards a more sustainable energy system [8].
In Denmark, the industrial sector plays a significant role in shaping the national energy
landscape. As of 2021, industry accounted for 23% of Denmark’s total final energy con-
sumption. Furthermore, the industry’s contribution to the country’s total energy-related
GHG emissions stood at 25%. Notably, the sector also represented a significant 37% of
the total final electricity consumption, highlighting the importance of electricity in indus-
trial energy use [9]. Electrification is seen as a crucial tool for decarbonization, especially
given the decreasing electricity prices, which are shaping the energy landscape and mak-
ing access to electricity at competitive prices increasingly crucial for the industrial sector
[10, 11].
In this context of growing electrification, demand response strategies are essential not
only for optimizing energy consumption but also for maintaining grid stability amidst fluc-
tuating demand [12]. The anticipated increase in electricity usage, driven by the electrifi-
cation of the heating supply [13] - as also indicated by Figures 2.1a and 2.1b - the thermal
(fuel-based) electricity production is expected to be gradually phased out and is primar-
ily assumed to be replaced by heat pumps, and to a lesser extent, other heat-producing
installations (biomass boilers, electric boilers, and solar heat) [13]. This underlines the
necessity for effective demand response strategies, where one such strategy is ”load
flexibility”, i.e., ”the ability of an energy- or power relevant generator, consumer or stor-
age system to adapt quickly and with little effort to market or system signals of the energy
sector” [14, 15].
Load flexibility is a broad concept that will be explored and defined within the scope of
this project in Section 3. In collaboration with the Danish Energy Agency and utilizing
their Industry Mapping dataset, using information from previous research upon electrifying
industrial processes [16] and going further, this project will attempt to enhance strategies
for managing and optimizing energy use in the face of Danish industrial energy transition
and provide some insights into what a ”flexible” solution could be for one industry.
2
==PAGE:12==
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
Thermal electricity capacity [MW]
Central plants
Decentralized plants
(a) Thermal electricity capacity
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
Electricity capacity [MW]
Decentralized areas
Central areas
(b) Electricity capacity for large heat pumps
Figure 2.1: Thermal electricity capacity in Denmark (a), the potential for electricity from
thermal energy sources. Electricity capacity for large heat pumps (b), crucial for electrifi-
cation of the heating supply. Data taken and translated from [17].
2.2
Thesis Outline
With the Aim of Study and Introduction setting the scope of this thesis, the following is a
brief outline of what is to come:
• Section 3 - Background will provide an overview of the current energy landscape
within industrial sectors, with a special emphasis on the Dairy industry. It will detail
the predominant energy processes and their utilization patterns. An examination of
alternative technologies that offer greater flexibility will be presented, alongside a
definition of ”load flexibility” and its critical aspects.
• Section 4 - Methods and Materials will elaborate on the methodological approach,
as well as how the Industry Mapping dataset is interpreted, and the key assumptions
underpinning the analysis. This section aims to provide a transparent and repro-
ducible framework for the research, ensuring that the methodology can be applied
or critiqued in future work.
• Section 5 - Results will present the findings of the study in a structured manner.
It will quantify the energy demand within the dairy industry and evaluate the suit-
ability of various electrification technologies to meet this demand, and showcase
opportunities for flexible solutions.
• Section 6 - Discussion will analyze the results, considering their implications for
industrial practices. It will explore the challenges and opportunities identified through
the research.
• Section 7 - Conclusion will wrap up the key findings of the thesis, reflecting on the
research questions and whether they have been adequately addressed. It will also
outline the limitations of the study and propose areas for future work.
3
==PAGE:13==
3
Background
3.1
Energy Landscape in Danish Industrial Sectors
The energy landscape in Denmark has been briefly touched upon in the introduction. The
Danish Energy Agency divides different sectors into categories for their industry mapping,
which this analysis will be based on. In Table 3.1 all sector codes and associated sec-
tors are described. Only sector 6-41 is defined as manufacturing industries, which are
of relevance for this thesis. In Figure 3.1 we see the total final energy use of Danish
manufacturing sectors in 2021 in descending order, with the top three respectively be-
ing ”production of cement”, ”dairies”, and ”production of paint and soap, etc”. The final
energy use of all Danish industrial sectors can be seen in Figure A.1, attributed to their
sector descriptions.
26
9
22
7
13
32
23
31
6
10
29
24
21
8
35
16
11
36
17
27
14
12
25
28
30
33
38
19
15
37
41
18
40
39
20
34
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Figure 3.1: The total final energy use of Danish manufacturing sectors in 2021. See Table
3.1 for the explanation of the sector codes, though one of note should be 9 - Dairies. In
Appendix, Figure A.2 the same can be seen, but for all sectors with associated names.
There is a significant difference from ”production of cement” to ”dairies” of about 9000
TJ/yr, and another drop of 1291 TJ/yr. Most of the final energy use for the manufacturing
sector is below 5000 TJ/yr and even closer to being 2500 TJ/yr and below.
The final energy use can be further divided into the thermal usage, divided into four tem-
perature ranges and associated with fuel details, see Figure 3.2. Most energy is used for
processes above 200 ◦C, followed by below 100 ◦C, with a significant use of natural gas in
both temperature categories. Petroleum coke as well as coal and coke play a larger part
in the processes above 200 ◦C, due to the required high thermal stability and the ability to
release significant amounts of energy upon combustion. These materials are preferred in
high-temperature applications because they can sustain the intense heat necessary for
processes like calcination, which is one of the primary processes in the production of ce-
ment [18]. Natural gas has been used for decades in Denmark, initially due to economic
and security of supply reasons – but also because of its lower carbon footprint than coal
and oil – and that is why it is currently a substantial part of the final energy use [19].
4
==PAGE:14==
Table 3.1: Sector code and associated sector.
Sector code
Sector description
1
Agriculture
2
Horticulture
3
Machine Stations
4
Forestry
5
Fishing
6
Extraction of gravel and stone
7
Slaughterhouses
8
Fish industry
9
Dairies
10
Bakeries, bread factories, etc.
11
Production of feed mixtures
12
Production of sugar
13
Other food industry
14
Beverage industry
15
Textile industry, clothing industry, and leather and footwear industry
16
Wood industry
17
Paper industry
18
Printing houses, etc.
19
Production of industrial gases
20
Production of enzymes
21
Other basic chemicals
22
Production of paint and soap, etc.
23
Pharmaceutical industry
24
Plastic and rubber industry
25
Glass and ceramic industry
26
Production of cement
27
Production of bricks, etc.
28
Production of asphalt and roofing felt
29
Production of mineral wool, etc.
30
Other concrete industry and brickworks
31
Production of metal
32
Metalware industry
33
Production of electronic and communication equipment, as well as electric motors and cables
34
Production of household appliances, lamps, etc.
35
Production of engines, wind turbines, and pumps
36
Production of other machinery
37
Production of motor vehicles and parts thereof, as well as ships
38
Furniture industry
39
Production of medical instruments, etc.
40
Toys and other manufacturing industry
41
Repair and installation of machinery and equipment
42
Construction and civil engineering
5
==PAGE:15==
<100oC
100-150oC
150-200oC
>200oC
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Natural gas
Petroleum coke
Coal and coke
District heating
Electricity for electric rod
Gas/diesel oil
Heat pumps, ambient heat
Fuel oil
Waste, biodegradable
Waste, non-biodegradable
Wood chips
Wood pellets
Wood waste
Electricity for heat pump
Liquefied petroleum gas
Biogas, not upgraded
Electricity in total
Figure 3.2: The total final energy use of Danish manufacturing sectors in 2021 with thermal
ranges and fuel details. Most energy is used for processes above 200 ◦C, followed by
below 100 ◦C.
3.2
The Dairy Industry: Energy Utilization and Key Processes
Significant effort has already gone into the dairy industry in order to 1) increase energy
efficiency, and 2) investigate what processes that can be electrified [16, 20, 21, 22, 23]
both in Europe and Denmark in particular. There is a growing emphasis on actively ex-
ploring the electrification of processes, which could potentially enhance energy efficiency
and reduce carbon emissions. Following this, diversifying the energy sources for the sec-
tor is important, with renewable energy like wind, solar, and biomass, which can improve
sustainability.
The dairy sector has the 2nd highest annual final energy use of Danish manufacturing
sectors, as illustrated in Figure 3.1. In Figure 3.3 and Table 3.2 we see actual the final
energy use per annum of the Danish dairy sector, with the origin of the energy from the
fuel being shown. More than 50% of the annual final energy use comes from natural gas
and slightly above 30% for electricity.
In order to understand how the energy is actually used throughout the industry, current
technologies and unit operations need to be investigated. From literature review, the
highest energy use is found within the heating and cooling processes [24]. But, which
ones? To investigate this, the focus will be on three primary products made in Denmark:
liquid milk to drink, cheese, and milk powder.
6
==PAGE:16==
Waste, biodegradable
Waste, non-biodegradable
Biogas, not upgraded
Electricity in total
Electricity for heat pump
Electricity for electric rod
District heating
Fuel oil
Gas/diesel oil
Coal and coke
Liquefied petroleum gas
Natural gas
Petroleum coke
Wood chips
Wood waste
Wood pellets
Heat pumps, ambient heat
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Figure 3.3: Final energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark with fuel details. More than
50% of the final energy use of thus originates from natural gas, with only slightly above
30% being electrical. See Table 3.2 for specific values.
Table 3.2: Specific values for the final energy use of the Dairy industry, divided into the
fuel origin. See Figure 3.3 for graph.
Fuel detail
Final energy use [TJ/yr]
Percentage of total [%]
Waste, biodegradable
-
-
Waste, non-biodegradable
-
-
Biogas, not upgraded
-
-
Electricity in total
2286.38
34.94
Electricity for heat pump
257.65
3.94
Electricity for boiler
-
-
Electricity for heating rod
41.64
0.64
District heating
22.93
0.35
Fuel oil
-
-
Gas/diesel oil
30.70
0.47
Straw
-
-
Coal and coke
-
-
Liquefied petroleum gas
30.92
0.47
Natural gas
3672.51
56.11
Petroleum coke
-
-
Wood chips
35.23
0.54
Wood waste
-
-
Wood pellets
3.16
0.05
Heat pumps, ambient heat
163.54
2.50
7
==PAGE:17==
3.2.1
Unit operations
Nearly every process step (unit operations) found in food processing is also used within
the dairy industry [25]. With dairy processing, the various unit operations are essential
to transform raw milk into consumable products, via enhancing stability, and texture, and
providing food safety. It can be divided into the following categories [25, 26]:
• Transfer of momentum: This includes thermal processes like pasteurization for
pathogen elimination and cooling to enhance product stability.
• Mixing: Unit operations such as homogenization and fat standardization ensure
uniform texture and meet specific product requirements.
• Phase separation: Techniques like centrifugation and separation isolate compo-
nents based on density or other properties.
• Molecular separation: Processes such as evaporation and spray drying concen-
trate the product or convert it into powder form.
• Physical transformation: Curd consolidation, molding, and processing are crucial
for cheese production, shaping curds into desired structures.
• Microbial and enzymatic transformation: Fermentation and ripening are em-
ployed to produce cheeses and fermented products.
• Stabilization: To maintain product quality and safety, pasteurization, cooling, and
curd pressing are employed after processing.
• Other processes: Including bottling, packaging, and storage, these operations are
vital for product distribution and preservation.
For categorizing the dairy industry, the unit operations that will be talked about in this
thesis are listed as follows. Unless specified otherwise, the following subsections are
from the following books revolving around dairy science, technology, and engineering, as
well as unit operations [25, 26, 27].
Thermalization
This is a unit operation that involves heating milk to a specific temperature, 65 ◦C, for a
short duration, approx. 20 seconds, to enhance its safety by reducing the microbial load
without significantly affecting its sensory qualities. It can be performed in a continuous or
batch process, depending on the production setup. Thermalization can be achieved using
heat exchangers or other heating equipment designed to heat the milk to the required
temperature for the specified duration.
Centrifugation
A subset of separation. A unit operation commonly used in dairy processing to separate
cream from milk by spinning it at high speeds via centrifugal separators creating cen-
trifugal force, causing the components to separate based on their densities. The primary
goal of centrifugation in dairy processing is to separate cream, which contains a higher fat
content, from milk, allowing for the production of various dairy products with different fat
concentrations. Usually carried out as a continuous step to efficiently separate cream
from milk on a large scale.
Homogenization
This unit operation involves breaking down fat globules in milk to create a uniform disper-
sion, preventing cream separation, and improving the texture and consistency. Homoge-
nization is done through homogenizers, which are high-pressure pumps that force milk
through small openings or valves to break down fat globules into smaller particles. It is
commonly a continuous process.
8
==PAGE:18==
Pasteurization
A crucial unit operation which involves heating milk to a specific temperature to destroy
harmful bacteria while retraining the nutritional quality and taste of the milk. Typically
achieved through heat exchangers such as plate heat exchangers. Can be carried out
as both a continuous and batch process, depending on the production scale and equip-
ment used. The temperature range differs between low-temperature long-time (LTLT) to
high-temperature short-time (HTST) to ultra-high-temperature (UHT) pasteurization, re-
spectively 63 ◦C for 30 minutes, 75 ◦C for 20 seconds, and 135-150 ◦C for 1-5 seconds.
Cooling
After pasteurization, the milk needs to be rapidly cooled to a lower temperature to pre-
vent bacterial growth and maintain product quality. Essential to ensure food safety and
preserve the sensory characteristics of the milk. Typically, the temperature is 4 ◦C or in
the case of cheese-making specifically, 30 ◦C. Various technologies are employed, which
can be part of a larger system such as plate heat exchangers, or refrigeration systems
like chillers with a glycol-water mixture as coolant. Some facilities do batch cooling, but
most commonly it is a continuous step.
Bottling
Bottling is a process in which filling machines accurately fill liquid dairy products into
containers without the need to stop the production line. Often, these are designed to
continuously fill containers without interrupting the production.
Storage
This is simply the storage conditions under which the different products in the dairy sector
are exposed to. Proper storage conditions maintain the freshness, nutritional value, and
shelf life of dairy products. Cheese and milk for drinking is stored at 4 ◦C to maintain
quality and safety, whereas milk powder is recommended to be stored between 15-25
◦C. The cooling of the storage is typically done by refrigeration units like chillers, or cold
rooms, in batches.
Curd processing
The next unit operation pertains to cheese-making. Curd processing is typically done
as a batch step, done via cheese vats where milk coagulation occurs under controlled
conditions. It also aids in defining the cheese’s final texture and flavor profile. During
this process, milk is transformed into curd and whey by the addition of rennet and starter
cultures, allowing the curds to develop the desired acidity and consistency.
Curd consolidation & molding
The next step is that the curd is stirred, consolidating the (curd) mass. The step is to
ensure correct moisture content and texture before they are placed into molds and formed
into the final shape and size. Primarily done in batches.
Curd pressing
Oftentimes the curd is also exposed to pressure by a cheese press, depending on the
batch, i.e., what type of cheese is being produced. This step expels additional whey and
shapes the cheese.
Packaging
The next step is packaging. Usually performed as a batch step, depending of course on
the type of product (either cheese or milk powder), this is mostly automated at a packag-
ing line.
Fat standardization
This step is a continuous unit operation that is carried out by (fat) standardization
unit, allowing for precise adjustment of the fat content in the milk by mixing different
milk streams with varying fat content.
9
==PAGE:19==
Evaporation
When producing milk powder, evaporation is a step that removes water from milk to con-
centrate it before further processing (for example preparing it for stable and suitable for
spraying). Falling film evaporators are commonly used, where the milk flows as a thin
film down the inner walls of a tube where steam is used to heat the milk and remove wa-
ter, resulting in concentrated milk, in a continuous process. The temperature range is
typically 55-85 ◦C.
Concentration
This concentration step is another option instead of evaporation to further concentrate
the milk, where typically reverse osmosis systems separates water through a semi-
permeable membrane. Pressure is applied to the milk to force water molecules through
the membrane, creating a more concentrated milk solution. Typically done as a continu-
ous process.
Drying
One of the final significant unit operations in making milk powder is drying, removing
the remaining moisture from concentrated milk to produce the powder. Commonly using
spray dryers, the concentrated milk is atomized into fine droplets and introduced into
a drying chamber where hot air is used to evaporate the moisture, leaving behind dried
milk particles. The temperature is typically around 120 ◦C, and can be performed as a
continuous step in the production.
10
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Flexible Technologies in the Dairy Industry
The food manufacturing industry, herein the dairy sector, is looking into decarbonization
of the current technologies, and looking towards electrification options. Electrified tech-
nologies offer lower GHG emissions (when compared to thermal options), based on a
combination of factors: end-use energy efficiency, time savings, and higher RE percent-
age of the electricity grid and mix [28].
Alternative technologies are not necessarily flexible in themselves, and thus the first step
is to find an alternative (hopefully electrified) and then see by combination with storage
capabilities (process integration), how one could perhaps introduce aspects of flexibility.
In order to assess whether the alternative technologies are usable, the technology readi-
ness level (TRL) scale is used to estimate the maturity of technologies. As defined by the
EU’s Horizon program [29]:
• TRL 1: Basic principles observed
• TRL 2: Technology concept formulated
• TRL 3: Experimental proof of concept
• TRL 4: Technology validated in the laboratory
• TRL 5: Technology validated in a relevant environment (industrially relevant envi-
ronment for key enabling technologies)
• TRL 6: Technology demonstrated in a relevant environment (industrially relevant
environment for key enabling technologies)
• TRL 7: System prototype demonstration in an operational environment
• TRL 8: System complete and qualified
• TRL 9: Actual system proven in an operational environment (competitive manufac-
turing for key enabling technologies or in space)
The following section is the alternative technologies that have been found, which can be
used to drive the unit operations listed in Section 3.2.1. It will be specified which they can
serve as an alternative for.
3.3.1
Alternative technologies
Heat pump
Heat pumps (HPs) can be used to drive the thermalization and pasteurization unit op-
erations.
Heat pumps generally operate by utilizing heat from a lower temperature source to a
higher temperature sink. There are two main types of heat pumps commonly used in
industrial applications, closed-cycle compression and open-cycle heat pumps. The for-
mer is when heat is recovered from a low-grade heat source onto a secondary working
fluid – the refrigerant – through an evaporator. The refrigerant absorbs the heat and is
then compressed using electricity-driven compression, raising its temperature. The high-
temperature output from the condenser can be used directly or further upgraded by a boiler
to meet the processing requirements. The later is when the refrigerant absorbs heat in
the evaporator, is compressed to a higher temperature, and then condensed to release
the heat for use in the process. The refrigerant is then recycled back to the evaporator to
continue the cycle [28, 30].
11
==PAGE:21==
Table 3.3: The different recovery (source) and supply (sink) temperatures for a conven-
tional HP, a high-temperature HP (HTHP), and a very high-temperature HP (VHTHP) [31].
The source temperature level represents the input temperature, and the sink temperature
level represents the output temperature.
Type of heat pump
Tsource [◦C]
Tsink [◦C]
Conventional HP
0-40
0-80
HTHP
40-60
80-100
VHTHP
60-120
100-160
The temperature ranges for different types of heat pumps can be seen in Table 3.3. Here
we see the different ranges of source and sink temperature levels, respectively repre-
senting the input temperature and output temperature. By identifying the source and sink
temperature ranges, it is easier to identify the suitable applications and unit operations
where these can be utilized [31].
High-temperature heat pumps can be integrated at several levels. Significant opportuni-
ties in food manufacturing, particularly within unit operations such as pasteurization and
evaporation distillation [31, 32, 33, 34, 35].
Electric heaters
Electric heaters can be used to drive the thermalization and pasteurization unit opera-
tions.
An electric heater is a device that converts electrical energy into heat. It typically consists
of a heating element, which is an electrical resistor that generates heat when an elec-
tric current passes through it. Electric heaters are commonly used for space heating in
residential and commercial buildings, as well as for industrial processes such as drying,
heating liquids, and maintaining specific temperatures [36, 37].
High-efficiency electric centrifuges
High-efficiency electric centrifuges can be used to drive the centrifugation and separa-
tion unit operations.
Automation and higher-efficiency could offer an alternative, but not a significant one, to
the centrifugal separators utilized in the dairy industry [38].
Centrifuges with variable frequency drives
Centrifuges with variable frequency drives can be used to drive the centrifugation and
separation unit operation.
Variable frequency drives could offer enhanced control over the unit operation, helping
with precise adjustments to the operational speed. This would improve efficiency and ef-
fectiveness, but also energy savings by optimizing the speed for the different stages/prod-
ucts necessary [38].
Ultrasonic homogenizers
It can be used to drive the homogenization unit operation.
Ultrasonic homogenizers use high-frequency sound waves (frequencies higher than hu-
man hearing, 20 Hz to 20 kHz, often 20 kHz to 10 MHz) to mix and reduce particle size in
dairy processing. Compared to traditional homogenizers, they offer advantages such as
faster processing, energy efficiency, and improved product quality [39, 40].
12
==PAGE:22==
Ultrahigh-pressure homogenizers
It can be used to drive the homogenization unit operation.
Ultrahigh-pressure homogenizers use extreme pressures (100-400 MPa) to disrupt and
break down particles. This offers advantages for example enhanced curd firmness. Com-
pared to traditional homogenizers, ultrahigh-pressure homogenizers provide more precise
control over product characteristics and can result in enhanced stability, and improved mi-
crobial and enzymatic inactivation [40, 41].
Microwave pasteurization
Can be used to drive the pasteurization unit operation.
Microwave pasteurization is driven by electromagnetic radiation that generates heat via
molecular vibration, leading to said heating. It can provide faster microbial deactivation
compared to conventional convective/conductive heating. The energy efficiency, reduced
processing times, and ease of operation make microwave heating (pasteurization) a good
choice in the continuous processing of food (or dairy products, in this case) [40].
Vapor absorption refrigeration system
Can be used to drive the cooling unit operation.
Vapor absorption refrigeration systems utilize heat to drive the refrigeration cycle. In dairy
processing, these systems can provide precise temperature control for milk chilling without
the need for traditional homogenizers. Their operation without mechanical compressors
results in lower energy consumption and reduced maintenance costs, making them a
suitable alternative for dairy applications [42].
Automated bottling lines
Can be used to drive the bottling unit operation.
The energy consumption heavily depends on the level of automation and usage of utility
resources. Thus, an alternative to current bottling would be to further automate the step
[43].
Climate controlled warehouses
Can be used to drive the storage step.
It is important to maintain specific temperature and humidity levels in storage facilities,
in order to preserve dairy products. Proper temperature control is essential to prevent
spoilage, maintain product quality, and ensure food safety in the dairy supply chain [44].
Thus, an alternative could be to have a climate controlled warehouse with smart monitor-
ing.
Robotic packaging lines
Can be used to drive the packaging step.
As described for the automated bottling line, the energy consumption heavily depends
on the level of automation [43]. Thus, an alternative to packaging manually or semi-
automated could then be fully automated.
Inline milk analysis system
It can be used to drive the fat standardization unit operation.
Inline milk analysis systems, such as inline light-scattering sensors, provide real-time
monitoring of milk quality parameters like fat content during the milking process. They
offer non-destructive analysis with high sensitivity and speed, allowing for immediate ad-
justments to optimize milk quality. Compared to traditional fat standardization units, inline
systems offer continuous monitoring without the need for manual sampling, leading to
improved efficiency and accuracy [45].
13
==PAGE:23==
Mechanical vapor recrompression
It can be used as an alternative to the evaporation unit operation.
Mechanical vapor recompression uses that it can recompress vapor generated during
evaporation, increasing its temperature for reuse as a heating medium. The process en-
ables the evaporator to operate with just one effect, without the need for a condenser. It
can maintain a constant temperature for the evaporating liquid, reducing energy require-
ments, and being a high-energy efficiency alternative for falling film evaporators [25, 37].
Forward osmosis system
It can be used as an alternative to the concentration unit operation where reverse os-
mosis is used.
Forward osmosis uses an osmotic pressure gradient to move water through a semi-
permeable membrane from a less concentrated (feed) solution to a more concentrated
(draw) solution. Forward osmosis can concentrate streams efficiently with lower energy
consumption compared to traditional reverse osmosis, making it a cost-effective and sus-
tainable alternative [46].
Radiofrequency dryers
It can be used to drive the drying unit operation.
Radiofrequency dryers work by using electromagnetic energy to generate heat directly
within the product, leading to faster and more uniform drying compared to spray dry-
ers. Radiofrequency dryers offer improved energy efficiency, reduced drying times, bet-
ter product quality retention, and the ability to penetrate deeper into the product, making
them a promising alternative [47].
High voltage-induced electrospray
Can be used to drive the drying unit operation.
A promising alternative/technique in the future - as from the source found, no examples
from a pilot or industrial scale - is the unit operation of high voltage-induced electrospray.
It disperses a liquid stream into highly charged droplets, offering precise control over
droplet size. This method can be advantageous in dairy processing as it prevents droplet
coalescence and enhances droplet dispersion, potentially leading to improved product
quality and efficiency compared to traditional spray dryer units, though there are many
challenges still ahead [48].
14
==PAGE:24==
3.3.2
Thermal energy storage
Many of the alternatives/techniques described above inherently lack flexibility; they re-
quire constant input. While they operate effectively with heat input, integrating them with
storage solutions can significantly enhance their flexibility.
There are three categories of thermal energy storage (TES); sensible heat storage, latent
heat storage, and thermochemical storage, where the first two are more common [31, 49,
50, 51]. For the scope of this project, further information on sensible heat storage is found
below.
Sensible heat storage
Sensible heat storage uses heat capacity and the change in temperature of the storage
during the process of either charging or discharging. Eq. (3.1) describes how the amount
of heat stored depends on the specific heat of the medium, temperature change, and the
amount of storage material [52].
Qs =
∫tf
ti
mcpdt = mcp (tf −ti)
(3.1)
where Qs quantity of stored heat [J], m is the mass of storage medium [kg], cp is the
specific heat capacity [J kg−1 K−1], and ti as well as tf is respectively the initial and final
temperature [◦C]. Water is a cheap and readily available storage medium. It is also used
due to its properties, having a high specific heat capacity (4190 J kg−1 K−1), and being
usable for a temperature of 0-100 ◦C.
Hot-water tanks, or water tank storage, is a well-known technology [53] and is used for,
e.g., energy saving in water heating systems via heat and power energy supply systems.
Such a system has an energy storage capacity, at uniform temperature, working with a
finite temperature difference, given by:
Qs = mcp∆ts
(3.2)
where ∆ts is the temperature range that is cycled through, and the rest is as described
above. The temperature range’s lower limit is defined by the requirements of the process,
and the upper limit is by the process, the vapor pressure of the liquid, or the collector heat
loss.
As described in previous sections, many of the temperatures required for dairy process-
ing are within the range accessible for water tank storage. Thus, the integration of heat
pumps with water tank storage could play a crucial role in enhancing energy efficiency and
optimizing thermal energy management in various applications, introducing flexibility, by
using the waste heat available [54].
3.4
Load Flexibility: Concepts and Importance
Load flexibility is among one of many demand response strategies [55], and for the scope
of this project, we will be focusing on what (load) flexibility is. It plays a crucial role in
maintaining the balance between electricity supply and demand. It involves: Adjusting
electricity consumption consumers, such as commercial and industrial sectors, to accom-
modate the growing share of variable RE and electrification. By leveraging flexibility, e.g.,
investments in grid infrastructure can be reduced, grid congestions can be avoided, re-
newable energy curtailment can be minimized, and overall security of the electricity supply
can be enhanced.
Here are some of the critical aspects, which are each vital for optimizing energy use and
enhancing operational efficiency:
15
==PAGE:25==
1. Demand response capabilities
• Response time: How quickly can a process be ramped up or down in response
to changing energy prices or demand?
• Automation: The ability to automate responses to price signals or grid demands
can significantly enhance flexibility.
2. Energy storage
• Thermal storage: Utilizing thermal energy storage systems to shift heating and
cooling loads.
• Electrical storage: Thermal storage is not the only option, as batteries or an
energy vector as H2 (via electrolysis) can be used to store excess energy when
prices are low and use when prices are high.
3. Load management
• Peak shaving: Reducing energy use during peak price periods to minimize
costs. See Figure 3.4 for an example.
• Load shifting: Moving energy-intensive processes to off-peak hours.
4. Operational scheduling
• Maintenance schedules: Scheduling maintenance during periods of low energy
costs or lower production demand.
5. Grid interactions
• Grid services: Participating in grid services like frequency regulation or voltage
support, if viable.
• Tariff structures: Understanding and optimizing for the specific tariff structure
in place.
These are but a few examples. This underscores the very complex approach to achiev-
ing flexibility. Many mechanisms encompassing technological innovations, operational
adjustments, and the influence of political frameworks must be taken into account.
There are many challenges ahead, and the transmission system operator in Denmark –
Energinet – has previously listed some of the challenges that they face, attempting to
maintain grid balance, their raison d’être, as an example [56]. With increased electrifica-
tion, this becomes more and more difficult:
As the electrical system changes significantly with the introduction of more and more re-
newable energy, this reduces the ability to adjust production levels, and at the same time,
there are fewer conventional power plants. With increased electricity primarily based on
this renewable energy, our systems need flexibility, because if weather forecasts do not
hold, in the worst case, one may not be able to run their production. There is also a
lack of adjustable capacity when the sun and wind respectively do not shine and blow. As
the electrical system undergoes this transformation, it becomes less stable and more vari-
able, requiring quicker reactions, e.g., from Energinet’s side and actors delivering system
services.
3.4.1
System services
System services, or ”systemydelser” in Danish, refer to a set of specialized products and
resources used by (transmission) system operators to maintain balance and stability in
16
==PAGE:26==
06:00
12:00
18:00
400
500
600
700
800
900
Average Spot Price [DKK/MWh]
Price Area
DK1
DK2
Figure 3.4: The average spot price of every hour for 2021 for DK1 and DK2, respec-
tively west and east of the Great Belt. Data is from https://www.energidataservice.dk/
tso-electricity/Elspotprices
the electricity system. These services include reserves, regulation power, and system-
supporting properties. System services can be activated automatically or manually to
ensure the overall stability and balance of the electricity market. The portfolio of sys-
tem services is diverse and complex, tailored to meet the specific needs of the electricity
system and ensure its reliable operation [57]. In less complex terms, this means that En-
erginet pays someone to either consume more or less electricity or produce more or less
electricity via different options:
• Fast Frequency Reserve (FFR): FFR is a rapid reserve used to ensure dynamic fre-
quency stability, especially in situations with low system inertia. It responds quickly
to frequency deviations, playing a crucial role in maintaining system stability during
events with rapid frequency changes.
• Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR): FCR, also known as primary reserve,
consists of units that automatically adjust their output to counteract frequency de-
viations. It helps fine-tune the frequency around the nominal value of 50 Hz by
balancing production and consumption in the grid.
• Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR): aFRR is an automatic re-
serve that provides 15-minute power regulation to release activated FCR, balance
small imbalances, and restore balance on interconnections. It differs from FCR as it
does not respond directly to frequency deviations but activates based on automatic
regulation signals.
• Manual Frequency Restoration Reserve (mFRR): mFRR is a manual reserve
used for tertiary frequency restoration, providing a significant portion of the regu-
lation capacity. It is activated proactively based on reliable forecasts and system
planning to predict and address imbalances in the electricity system.
It is important to understand the general categories and functions of the different reserve
types without delving into specific technical details for the current context. This high-level
overview provides a sufficient understanding of the key system services and their roles
in maintaining the stability and balance of the electricity system, as they will play a larger
role in a more electrified industry going forward.
17
==PAGE:27==
4
Methods and Materials
4.1
Data Collection and Analysis
The Industry Mapping dataset provided for this thesis, in Danish ”Kortlægning af produk-
tionserhvervene”, serves as the basis for the majority of the analyses and results. The
most recent version used for data analysis was the ”IndustryMappingENS_2023_03_15”
file.
In the context of energy consumption in manufacturing industries, it is important to con-
sider the various subdivisions within the dataset. For example, the categories outlined in
the documents regarding the industry mapping [58, 59, 60, 61] provide valuable insights
into different aspects of energy usage in these sectors.
When final energy use is listed, it is essential to understand the distinctions between
different energy carriers and in use for process heating. For instance:
• Water/liquid: covers hot water supply or other energy carriers that do not change
phase, such as space heating consumption.
• Steam: pertains to processes where steam is the primary energy carrier, common
in various industries.
• Direct: includes direct combustion into the process, like direct firing in a rotary kiln.
Moreover, when it comes to electricity used for process heating purposes, a specific break-
down is necessary, since the same categorization as above does not exist for electricity.
The electricity is categorized and distributed as follows:
• Electricity for heat pump: electricity designated for a heat pump or mechanical
vapor recompression system.
• Electricity for electric boiler: electricity used for the production of hot water or
steam.
• Electricity for electric rod: electricity utilized for direct heating, such as meeting
the final part of the heat demand for a spray dryer.
The temperature conditions are defined as to the thermal needs of the processes being
studied. There are four temperature ranges, <100 ◦C, 100-150 ◦C, 150-200 ◦C, >200 ◦C.
The focus is on aligning the temperature conditions with the specific heat requirements of
each process, ensuring that the categorization accurately reflects the energy demands of
the production activities.
Python (Jupyter Notebook) has been used as the tool for the data analysis, and the code
is made such that it can be moved over to other sectors by use of a correct string, e.g.,
”Beverage industry” instead of ”Dairies”. It can be toggled off/on for both Danish and
English as well, and for this thesis, has been toggled to English. The code only looks at
2021 data (the latest year within the version of the dataset).
4.2
Assumptions
A conversion rate of $1 (USD) equals e0.93 (EUR) has been used, and unless specified
otherwise, all prices have been adjusted for 2024 inflation to reflect current values in EUR.
18
==PAGE:28==
The allocation of conversion and network losses based on energy supply forms requires
in-depth analyses and is not directly integrated into the dataset.
Internal transportation falls under the category of ”Transport,” which has been specifically
limited to ”Arbejdskørsel” (work-related driving). This has been omitted, to reflect a focus
on energy consumption related to production processes rather than internal logistics or
transportation activities within the facilities.
Separation is a unit operation used to separate the cream from the skim milk, best de-
scribed in dairy processing as a unit operation based on centrifugation (see Section 3.2.1).
However, the data indicates a difference between the processes primarily in where the
electricity usage is divided. Other electric motors in the case of milk for liquid consumption
and cheese-making, whereas it is under pumping for milk powder. This is due to centrifu-
gal pumps are preferentially used for milk, because they operate smoothly even if milk
cannot be discharged, avoiding pressure build-up or damage. The pumps are typically
not designed for viscous products, and thus not as suitable for thicker dairy products [25].
4.3
Analysis Methodology
Below is the step-by-step procedure of how the analysis has been done, to find where
the primary thermal energy use is, investigate whether this can be electrified, and then if
possible, introduce flexibility.
• Establish where the final energy use is in a sector, with information regarding the
type of fuel used.
• Divide it into the four temperature ranges, with information regarding the type of fuel
used.
• Subsequently, do a literature review on the given sector you are investigating.
– What are important products?
– What are key processes?
– What are current technologies?
– What are the current advances and perhaps alternatives in current technolo-
gies?
• Divide the sector further, looking at the temperature ranges and unit operations in
conjunction. What is the required process heat demand?
• Based on this, export data to find the type of media supplying the utilities for these
processes.
• Correlate the data analysis based on the Industry Mapping with the literature review
and overview of the major unit operations.
• Make a schematic overview of the major unit operations, dividing them into the cur-
rent categories:
– Co-product.
– No unique energy use as per Industry Mapping.
– Mechanical process - involves mechanical transformations or physical move-
ments without a primary focus on heating or cooling.
19
==PAGE:29==
Table 4.1: Flexibility parameters that will be used to quantitatively compare between so-
lutions.
Parameter
Value
Operating hours
X hours
Ramp-up speed
X sec/min/hours
Load variability
Low/Moderate/High
Energy efficiency
X%
Operational flexibility
Limited/Moderate/High
Maintenance requirements
X cycles/year
Technology readiness level
TRL 1-9
Environmental impact
X kg CO2-eq/energy unit
Cost-effectiveness
$X/MW/year
– Heating process - applying heat due to several reasons, e.g., safety, quality, or
transformation.
– Cooling process - reducing temperature due to e.g., preservation, quality, main-
tenance, or product setting.
– Furthermore, include whether the unit operation is continuous/batch, what tech-
nology drives it, and what the media that is supplied to the utility is. Include
temperature and time if possible.
• Make an overview of all alternatives/possible combinations of technologies.
• Suggest an introduction of changing either a series or a single unit operation, in
which you can use the alternatives to 1) electrify and two 2) make flexible. The
primary focus should be on the utilities that are changed. If the technology is not
inherently flexible in itself, add a combination of technologies/techniques.
• Quantitatively compare the base case and your proposed flexible solution, using
parameters as the ones seen in Table 4.1.
• Qualitatively compare the base case and your proposed flexible solution, with broa-
der implications. For example, future perspectives wrt. system services and load
flexibility in general.
The parameters seen in Table 4.1 have been defined as part of this project, and have been
chosen due to the requirements of electrification and load flexibility. How many hours a
day does it operate, how quickly can the technology ramp-up, what is the minimum re-
quired load, how efficient, how adaptable it is, how many times a year does it require to
be taken down for maintenance, is it commercially available (high TRL), what is the envi-
ronmental impact and how cost-effective is it. It is a first draft of how one can qualitatively
compare the proposed solutions found by following the method.
20
==PAGE:30==
5
Results
5.1
Energy Demand and Technology Suitability
As described by the methodology, the results are as follows:
In Figure 5.1 we see the final thermal energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark, divided
into four temperature ranges. Further information is found in the legend, explaining the
fuel origin of the energy use. As seen and also noted in Table 5.1, around 86% of the
annual (thermal) final energy use is from natural gas in processes requiring less than
<100 ◦C. Around 95% for 100-150 ◦C, 100% for 150-200 ◦C, and 0% for >200 ◦C.
Figure 5.2 shows the final thermal energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark in the four
temperature ranges, divided into the unit operations. Figure 5.3 shows the final thermal
energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark, divided into the form of supply and unit
operations. By combining these, the values can be seen in Table 5.2 (and illustrated in
Appendix A.3). Around 38% of the total final thermal energy used every year in the dairy
sector is used to create steam primarily by natural gas, and 17% is used as water/liquid for
space heating, in the temperature range <100 ◦C. This table illustrates the dominant role
of natural gas in dairy processing, highlighting potential areas for efficiency improvements
and electrification.
Figure 5.4 displays the final energy use of the entire dairy industry in descending order of
unit operations. Table 5.3 shows the values. Top three unit operations and their annual
final energy use are thermal, heating/boiling, drying, and space heating. Respectively
they make up 27%, 18%, and 12% of the annual total final energy use, and together they
are 57% of the energy use for the dairy sector.
Schematic overviews of the main unit operations for consumer dairies, i.e., milk for liquid
consumption, cheese making, and milk powder production can be seen in Figures 5.5,
5.6, and 5.7. Here the current technologies, as described in section 3.2.1, are listed.
Table 5.1: An overview of the final energy use per annum for the Dairy industry, divided
into the four temperature ranges. Showcased is the percentage that the energy is based
on either natural gas or electricity used in a heat pump. It can be graphically seen in
Figure 5.1.
Temperature range
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Natural gas [%]
Electricity for HP [%]
<100 ◦C
3193.40
85.71%
7.25%
100-150 ◦C
475.55
94.47%
5.47%
150-200 ◦C
486.19
100%
-
>200 ◦C
41.64
-
-
21
==PAGE:31==
<100oC
100-150oC
150-200oC
>200oC
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Natural gas
Electricity for heat pump
Heat pumps, ambient heat
Electricity for electric rod
Wood chips
District heating
Wood pellets
Figure 5.1: Final thermal energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark in the four temper-
ature ranges, with the legend explaining different fuel types used. Industrial process heat
demand by temperature level for the dairy industry, showing how much energy is used
per year in that category. Specific values can be seen in Table 5.1.
<100oC - Evaporation
<100oC - Heating/Boiling
<100oC - Drying
<100oC - Space heating
100-150oC - Evaporation
100-150oC - Heating/Boiling
100-150oC - Drying
150-200oC - Evaporation
>200oC - Drying
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Natural gas
Electricity for heat pump
Heat pumps, ambient heat
Electricity for electric rod
Wood chips
District heating
Wood pellets
Figure 5.2: Final thermal energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark in the four tem-
perature ranges, divided into the unit operations. This shows the industrial process heat
demand by temperature level and unit operation for the dairy industry, and how much
energy they use per year.
22
==PAGE:32==
Steam - Evaporation
Steam - Heating/Boiling
Steam - Space heating
Steam - Drying
Direct - Evaporation
Direct - Heating/Boiling
Direct - Drying
Water/liquid - Evaporation
Water/liquid - Heating/Boiling
Water/liquid - Space heating
Water/liquid - Drying
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Natural gas
Electricity for heat pump
Heat pumps, ambient heat
Electricity for electric rod
Wood chips
District heating
Wood pellets
Figure 5.3: Final thermal energy use of the dairy industry in Denmark divided into the form
of supply and unit operations. Further details on type of fuel is seen in legend.
Table 5.2: Table overview of the temperature ranges, the media, the unit operation, the
associated final energy use, and the percentage of the total. A dash indicates the contin-
uation of the media type listed directly above. It is a combination of Figures 5.2 and 5.3.
A graphical illustration of this table can be seen in Appendix, Figure A.3.
Temperature
Media
Unit operation
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Percentage of total [%]
<100 ◦C
Steam
Heating/boiling
1608.70
38.33
-
Drying
393.58
9.38
-
Space heating
56.42
1.34
Direct
Heating/boiling
60.43
1.44
-
Drying
46.30
1.10
Water/liquid
Evaporation
25.59
0.61
-
Heating/boiling
56.24
1.34
-
Drying
212.87
5.07
-
Space heating
733.26
17.47
100-150 ◦C
Steam
Evaporation
26.03
0.62
-
Heating/boiling
9.53
0.23
-
Drying
393.58
9.38
Direct
Drying
46.30
1.10
150-200 ◦C
Steam
Evaporation
435.01
10.37
Direct
Evaporation
51.18
1.22
>200 ◦C
Direct
Drying
41.64
0.99
23
==PAGE:33==
Heating/Boiling
Drying
Space heating
Evaporation
Cooling/freezing (excluding room cooling)
Other electric motors
Room ventilation
Fans
Pumping
Lighting
Room cooling
Compressed air
Other electricity use
IT and other electronics
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Natural gas
Electricity in total
Electricity for heat pump
Heat pumps, ambient heat
Electricity for electric rod
Wood chips
District heating
Wood pellets
Figure 5.4: Final energy use (both thermal and electric) of the dairy industry in Denmark
in descending order of usage, where fuel details are shown as well. Specific values can
be seen in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Final energy use per year for every unit operation in the Dairy industry. The
percentage of the total energy use is shown as well. See Figure 5.4 for graphical repre-
sentation.
Unit operation
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Percentage of total [%]
Heating/boiling
1743.92
26.76
Drying
1134.27
17.50
Space heating
789.67
12.18
Evaporation
537.80
8.30
Cooling/freezing (excl. room cooling)
502.27
7.75
Other electric motors
400.78
6.18
Room ventilation
374.92
5.78
Fans
284.42
4.39
Pumping
258.57
3.99
Room cooling
129.28
1.99
Lighting
129.28
1.99
Compressed air
129.28
1.99
Other electrical use
51.71
0.80
IT and other electronics
25.86
0.40
24
==PAGE:34==
Raw materials (milk)
No unique final use
Thermalization
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Steam
65 °C, 20 s
Heating/boiling
Centrifugation
Continuous
Centrifugal separator
Other electric motors
Homogenization
Continuous
Homogenizer
Other electric motors
Pasteurization
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Steam
75 °C, 20 s
Heating/boiling
Cooling
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Chilled water
4 °C
Cooling/freezing
Bottling
Continuous
Filling machine
Other electric motors
Dispatching
No unique final use
No unique
energy use
Mechanical
process
Heating
process
Cooling
process
Consumer dairies - liquid for consumption
Storage
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Chilled water
4 °C
Cooling/freezing
Figure 5.5: Schematic overview of the main unit operations of ”consumer dairies”, i.e., milk for liquid consumption.
25
==PAGE:35==
Raw materials (milk)
No unique final use
Thermalization
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Steam
65 °C, 20 s
Heating/boiling
Centrifugation
Continuous
Centrifugal separator
Other electric motors
Pasteurization
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Steam
75 °C, 20 s
Heating/boiling
Cooling
Continuous
Heat exchanger
30 °C
Cooling/freezing
Curd processing
Batch
Cheese vats
Other electric motors
Curd consolidation and
molding
Batch
Curd processing equipment
Other electric motors
Curd pressing
Batch
Cheese press
Other electric motors
Salting
No unique final use
Packaging 
Continuous
Packaging line
Other electric motors
Dispatching
No unique final use
Cheese making
No unique
energy use
Mechanical
process
Heating
process
Cooling
process
Storage
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Chilled water
4 °C
Cooling/freezing
Figure 5.6: Schematic overview of the main unit operations for cheese making.
26
==PAGE:36==
Raw materials (milk)
No unique final use
Fat standardization
Continuous
Standardization unit
Pumping
Final milk treatment 
No unique final use
Cream
 Concentration
Continuous
Reverse osmosis system
Water 
Other electric motors
Evaporation
Continuous
Falling film evaporator
Steam
55-85 °C
Evaporation
Concentrate treatment
No unique final use
Drying
Continuous
Spray dryer
Hot air
120 °C
Spraydrying
Packaging
No unique final use
Storage
Batch
15-25 °C
Cooling/freezing
Separation
Continuous
Centrifugal separator
Pumping
Pasteurization
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Steam
75 °C, 20 s
Heating/boiling
Cooling
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Chilled water
4 °C
Cooling/freezing
Co-product
No unique
energy use
Mechanical
process
Heating
process
Cooling
process
Milk powder
Cooling
Continuous
Heat exchanger
Chilled water
4 °C
Cooling/freezing
Dispatching
No unique final use
Powder storage
No unique final use
Figure 5.7: Schematic overview of the main unit operations for milk powder production.
27
==PAGE:37==
Table 5.4: Table overview for ”consumer dairies”, i.e., milk for liquid consumption, and the
associated unit operations, current and alternative technologies, and proposed flexible
solution if applicable.
Unit operation
Current technology
Alternative technology
Flexible solution
Thermalization
Plate heat exchanger
supplied with natural gas
boiler
Heat pump
Heat pump with sensible
heat storage (water tanks)
Electric heater
Centrifugation
Centrifugal separator
High-efficiency electric cen-
trifuges
-
Centrifuges with variable fre-
quency drives
Homogenization
Homogenizer
Ultrasonic homogenizers
-
Ultrahigh-pressure
homoge-
nizers
Pasteurization
Plate heat exchanger
supplied with natural gas
boiler
Heat pump
Heat pump with sensible
heat storage (water tanks)
Electric heater
Microwave pasteurization
Cooling
Chiller
Vapor absorption refrigeration
system
Chiller with sensible heat stor-
age (water tanks)
Bottling
Filling machines
Automated bottling lines
-
Storage
Chiller
Climate controlled warehouse
Chiller with sensible heat stor-
age (water tanks)
5.2
Assessing Load Flexibility in Dairy
Based on the information in section 3.3.1 and the schematic overviews found seen in
Figures 5.5, 5.6, and 5.7, overviews (formatted as tables) have been made for milk for
liquid consumption, cheese making, and milk powder process.
In Table 5.4 the overview of unit operations, current technology, alternative technologies,
and a possible flexible solution for said unit operation have been listed for milk for liquid
consumption. The same for cheese making and milk powder production can be seen in
Tables 5.5 and 5.6.
28
==PAGE:38==
Table 5.5: Table overview for cheese making, and the associated unit operations, current
and alternative technologies, and proposed flexible solution if applicable.
Unit operation
Current technology
Alternative technology
Flexible solution
Thermalization
Plate heat exchanger
supplied with natural gas
boiler
Heat pump
Heat pump with sensible
heat storage (water tanks)
Electric heater
Centrifugation
Centrifugal separator
High-efficiency electric cen-
trifuges
-
Centrifuges with variable fre-
quency drives
Pasteurization
Plate heat exchanger
supplied with natural gas
boiler
Heat pump
Heat pump with sensible
heat storage (water tanks)
Electric heater
Microwave pasteurization
Cooling
Chiller
Vapor absorption refrigeration
system
Chiller with sensible heat stor-
age (water tanks)
Curd processing
Cheese vats
-
-
Curd
consolida-
tion and molding
Curd processing equipment
-
-
Curd pressing
Cheese press
-
-
Packaging
Packaging line
Robotic packaging lines
-
Storage
Chiller
Climate controlled warehouse
Chiller with sensible heat stor-
age (water tanks)
Table 5.6: Table overview for milk powder production, and the associated unit operations,
current and alternative technologies, and proposed flexible solution if applicable.
Unit operation
Current technology
Alternative technology
Flexible solution
Separation
Centrifugal separator
High-efficiency electric cen-
trifuges
-
Centrifuges with variable fre-
quency drives
Pasteurization
Plate heat exchanger
supplied with natural gas
boiler
Heat pump
Heat pump with sensible
heat storage (water tanks)
Electric heater
Microwave pasteurization
Cooling
Chiller
Vapor absorption refrigeration
system
Chiller with sensible heat stor-
age (water tanks)
Fat
standardiza-
tion
Standardization unit
Inline milk analysis system
-
Evaporation
Falling film evaporator
Mechanical vapor recompres-
sion
-
Concentration
Reverse osmosis system
Forward osmosis system
-
Drying
Spray dryer
Radiofrequency dryers
-
High voltage-induced electro-
spray
Storage
Chiller
Climate controlled warehouse
Chiller with sensible heat stor-
age (water tanks)
29
==PAGE:39==
Boiler
Chiller
Thermalization
Cooling
Pasteurization
Storage
Electricity
Natural gas
Waste heat
Waste heat
Utilities
Unit operations
Figure 5.8: Schematic of utilities and unit operations for the base case. The utilities for
the base case are a natural gas boiler and a chiller, powered respectively by natural gas
and electricity. The natural gas boiler converts water into steam, which drives the ther-
malization and pasteurization process. The chiller drives the cooling and storage. The
operation of the natural gas boiler, alongside the chiller, results in the generation of waste
heat.
5.3
Load Flexibility Opportunities
The proposed changes and introduction of flexibility are dependent on utility and unit op-
eration. The base case for what is currently being employed is illustrated in Figure 5.8.
It shows the utilities of a natural gas boiler and chiller that can drive the thermalization,
pasteurization, cooling, and storage unit operations.
One proposed such change, based on all the previous information in the thesis, is seen in
Figure 5.9. This schematic overview is where the proposed flexible solution is replacing
a natural gas boiler, keeping the chiller, but investing in a heat pump and sensible heat
storage (water tanks) system. This has been further evaluated in Table 5.7.
Another proposed solution, a combination of the previous two, is seen in Figure 5.10. Here
the proposed change is that the natural gas boiler is kept and operates the processes
requiring higher temperatures than the heat pumps that are connected to thermalization
and pasteurization.
30
==PAGE:40==
Heat pump
Thermalization
Cooling
Pasteurization
Storage
Excess heat
Utilities
Unit operations
Sensible heat storage
Chiller
Electricity
Figure 5.9: Schematic of utilities and unit operations for a proposed flexible solution.
A heat pump connected to sensible heat storage using water tanks manages thermal
energy, facilitating the thermalization and pasteurization processes. Excess heat from the
chiller, also powered by electricity, is rerouted to the heat pump. Electricity drives both the
heat pump and chiller, where the heat pump drives the thermalization and pasteurization
process, and the chiller drives the cooling and storage. The overall excess heat from
running the unit operations is rerouted to the sensible heat storage.
Heat pump
Thermalization
Cooling
Pasteurization
Storage
Excess heat
Utilities
Unit operations
Sensible heat storage
Chiller
Electricity
Boiler
Natural gas
Drying
Evaporation
Figure 5.10: Schematic of utilities and unit operations for a proposed (hybrid) flexible
solution. It is a combination of the base case and flexible solution, see Figures 5.8 and
5.9. This proposed change retains the natural gas boiler, focusing its utility on driving
unit operations that require higher temperatures than thermalization and pasteurization,
namely drying and evaporation. As before, the overall excess heat is rerouted into the
sensible heat storage.
31
==PAGE:41==
Table 5.7: Comparison of flexibility parameters between the base case and a flexible
solution in dairy processing. In this proposed flexible solution, the aim is to replace the
utility natural gas boiler with a system comprising a heat pump and sensible heat storage
(water tank). This system targets the heating unit operations, specifically thermalization
and pasteurization, as well as the cooling unit operations, namely storage and cooling.
The base case can be seen in Figure 5.8 and the proposed solution can be seen in Figure
5.9. The emission factor for natural gas of 57.14 tCO2e/TJlower has been converted to the
same unit for the emission factor of the Danish electricity mix.
Parameter
Base case
Flexible solution (HP + TES)
Operating hours
24 hours [62]
20 hours + additional hours depending on
storage [50, 62]
Ramp-up speed
Cold/warm, 0.1-0.4 hours [63]
Cold/warm, 0.25-1 hours [63]
Load variability
Low; minimum 15% load [63]
High; efficient across varying loads due to
storage
Energy efficiency
80% [62]
350% (COP 3.5) [64]
Operational flexi-
bility
Limited by fuel supply and fixed operation
parameters
High; adaptable to changing energy de-
mands
Maintenance
re-
quirements
Regular maintenance for safety and effi-
ciency
Less frequent; simpler due to fewer mov-
ing parts and absence of combustion
Technology
readiness level
TRL 9
TRL 6-8
Environmental
impact
205.7 kgCO2e/MWh [65]
162 kgCO2e/MWh [66]
CAPEX
0.067 Me/MW [63]
0.885 Me/MW + 0.004 Me/MWhcapacity
[63, 67]
Fixed O&M
2424.06 e/MJ/yr [63]
2424.06 e/MJ/yr + 11.24e/MWhcapacity/yr
[63, 67]
Variable O&M
1.33 e/MWh [63]
4.0 e/MWh [63, 67]
32
==PAGE:42==
6
Discussion
One of the key findings of the study seen in results is that just 3 unit operations actually
cover 57% of the final energy use for the entire dairy industry. All three of these were
found to be thermal, and thus it was decided to keep the analysis and focus of the thesis
on the heating/cooling operations, and not necessarily dive into every unit operation and
alternatives to these. Thus, some of the table overviews - in particular cheese making, Ta-
ble 5.5 - are not filled. An in-depth analysis of everything would require further knowledge
about the sector, and even more literature review, to find even more alternative technolo-
gies and thus combinations to propose, and perhaps even looking into electrical storage
as well. All in all, it is not an inexhaustible list.
The values found in Table 5.2 illustrate the dominant role of natural gas in dairy processing,
highlighting potential areas for efficiency improvements and electrification.
Avoiding steam in dairy processing and opting for alternatives like heat pumps and sen-
sible heat storage can lead to significant energy savings and reduced carbon emissions.
Based on a key finding that 38% of the thermal final energy use is used for heating/boiling
in the form of steam, in processes under 100 ◦C, a significant energy saving can be made
here. The latent heat of vaporization (approx. 2265 [kJ kg−1]) makes a significant in-
crease in the amount of energy required. The heat pumps that are proposed as changes
can provide the necessary heating for processes under 100 ◦C efficiently by using elec-
tricity, and most likely sourced by renewable energy, thereby reducing the reliance on
fossil fuels and lowering GHG emissions. The integration of sensible heat storage allows
for better management of energy demand, offering flexibility to store excess heat during
low-demand periods and use it when needed, further optimizing energy use and costs.
Moreover, moving away from steam and incorporating electrified solutions aligns with
broader decarbonization goals and supports the transition towards a more sustainable
energy system. It also opens up opportunities for the dairy industry to innovate and im-
plement advanced technologies that enhance process efficiency, sustainability, and re-
silience to energy price fluctuations.
From next year, 2025, a CO2-tax is implemented for industries in Denmark, starting at 350
DKK per ton CO2 emitted (approx. 47 e/tCO2e) and increasing to 750 DKK per ton CO2
emitted (approx. 100 e/tCO2e) in 2030. This CO2 tax entails an additional cost for the
entire dairy industry of approx. 10 Me, found by a rough and simple calculation (approx.
e9862819, multiply the annual natural gas use seen in Table 3.2, the emission factor of
natural gas seen in Table 5.7, and the cost in e/tCO2e). This measure aims to discourage
the use of fossil fuels and thus would make natural gas boilers more expensive to operate
over the coming years, encouraging the transition to greener alternatives. By significantly
raising the cost of using natural gas, the government intends to incentivize industries
to invest in energy-efficient technologies and renewable energy sources, aligning with
Denmark’s broader climate goals and efforts to reduce carbon emissions. This fiscal
policy is part of a comprehensive strategy to enhance sustainability within the industrial
sector, pushing for a shift towards more environmentally friendly and economically viable
energy solutions.
However, as seen in Figures 6.1a and 6.1b, the Danish Energy Agency has estimated (for
Energinet) that the consumption of natural gas will continue to be a significant part of the
energy mix in Denmark. The overall consumption will decrease, but will remain around
33
==PAGE:43==
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
20,000
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
Consumption of natural gas [GWh]
Electricity and heat production
Industry
Households
Transport
Other
(a) Total consumption of natural gas
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
20,000
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
Gas production [GWh]
RE-gas
Natural gas
Gas consumption
(b) Gas consumption and green gas production
Figure 6.1: Total natural gas consumption in Denmark over the coming years (a), divided
into electricity and heat production, industry, households, transport, and other. Gas con-
sumption and green gas production over the coming years (b). Data taken and translated
from [17].
10000 GWh (approx. 36000 TJ). Figure 6.1b shows that by 2030, this gas will have been
made by renewable means, and thus can still be utilized in hybrid solutions, where old
utility based on gas is not replaced (or kept over a transitionary period).
Reflecting on the proposed flexible solutions, there is a need for hybrid approaches, where
the emphasis is perhaps transitional, but strategic, to meet energy demands and sustain-
ability goals. The proposed solution with the exchange of the natural gas boiler with a
heat pump and sensible heat storage utility is not enough to run the entire dairy industry,
even if heat pump technology is rapidly approaching the necessary temperatures. In the
near future, perhaps very high-temperature heat pumps can deliver what is necessary to
fully electrify the industry. At least as showcased in background, there is a focus on this
area in industry and research. Nevertheless, the energy transition, decarbonization, and
electrification of our society and industry should be pragmatic as well – but must utilize
and consider aspects of nothing going to waste, and instead ensuring as high energy
efficiency as possible.
It should also be noted now that the schematic overview of the main unit operations are not
process flow diagrams, but more so a list and quick overview of what is mostly required
to make the product. They have been adapted into this form to give a quick and brief
overview, foregoing a lot of the complexity found in overviews from either [20] or [25].
Purely on the basis of the important parameters in the background has the different flexi-
ble solutions for the three main products been proposed. Sizing, in-depth thermodynamic
calculations, and more process engineering has not been carried out. There should be
more scrutiny with regards to the quantitative parameters that have been chosen to com-
pare the solutions between one another. Currently, this is the first step, and the nature
of this topic is iterative. In any case, some things can still be said about the solutions for
three products:
Milk for liquid consumption
The proposed flexible solution, as illustrated in Figure 5.9, can replace old utilities for
the unit operations that are most energy intensive (the heating/cooling), with Technology
Readiness Levels (TRLs) estimated between 6 and 8, as noted in Table 5.7. This esti-
mation suggests a medium to high level of technological maturity, that while not yet fully
commercialized, these solutions are well into the development phase and approaching
readiness for widespread adoption.
34
==PAGE:44==
Financially, transitioning to these more sustainable and energy-efficient technologies might
not immediately outperform the traditional setup involving natural gas boilers, due to initial
capital costs and the current cost structure of energy sources. Nonetheless, the introduc-
tion of the CO2 tax and the increasing emphasis on reducing GHG emissions make these
flexible solutions more appealing in the long run.
Automation, represented by technologies such as automated bottling lines and robotic
packaging lines, stands as an underexplored area due to a lack of clear sources as de-
scribed in section 3.3.1 and listed in Table 5.4. However, the general consensus supports
the notion that automation significantly enhances operational efficiency, as also described
in this article. By reducing manual labor, and increasing precision, automation aligns with
the broader goals of sustainability and efficiency in the dairy industry.
Cheese making
Further analysis and in-depth review of alternatives to the unit operations in cheese mak-
ing should be done, since the primary unit operations regarding the curd processing have
not been fully investigated. Nevertheless, the proposed flexible solution seen in Figure 5.9
works here as well, at least for the most energy-intensive unit operations, that is, heating
and cooling.
The overall range for the natural gas boiler regarding cold and warm start-up times is
more rapid than the heat pump solution, however, it requires a minimum load of 15%.
The proposed solution does not require a minimum load to operate efficiently, and can
thus adapt to the changing energy demands.
Milk powder
The production of milk powder has been the most complex product to investigate, and
due to the high temperatures (above 100 ◦C) a second flexible solution and proposed
change to the utilities was necessary. See schematic in Figure 5.10. This one is a hybrid
solution, combining old utilities in the form of the natural gas boiler, where its focus now
lies on delivering the necessary energy to heat steam for the evaporation step and hot
air for the spray drying step. Due to the higher limit of the evaporation step being around
85 ◦C, without further analysis of the feasibility of the proposed solution through thermo-
dynamically calculations, it was chosen that being conservative and on the safe side –
due to a pinch and loss of temperature typically being in the range of 5-10 ◦C – that other
technologies than currently available heat pumps were necessary.
No table overview was created for this proposed solution, as it would simply be an addition
of what is already there for the base case.
35
==PAGE:45==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated the manufacturing industry, specifically the dairy sector, and
developed a methodology for outlining opportunities for electrification and considered the
implementation of load flexibility, as described in section 4.3. This method has been used
on the dairy sector as a case study, but the underlying data analysis and code required
can be used for every sector described in the Danish Energy Agency’s Industry Mapping
dataset.
Several options for alternatives, hereunder electrified technologies, have been found for
the key unit operations within dairy processing. These have been clearly outlined in Ta-
bles 5.4, 5.5, and 5.6. Technologies such as heat pumps, combined with sensible heat
storage in the form of simple water tanks, is a technique that can be utilized to manage
varying thermal energy demand, specifically in the low-temperature range of below 100
◦C. Currently, 38% of the thermal final energy used in the Dairy sector is being used as
steam in a heating/boiling process, namely thermalization or pasteurization. The required
temperatures for these steps have been identified to be significantly lower, showcasing
that steam is not necessary. However, two unit operations require higher temperatures,
namely drying and evaporation, in which a hybrid solution was proposed. Instead of re-
placing the natural gas boiler utility, to begin with, it can be kept only to heat water into
steam for the evaporation step and create hot air necessary for drying. This solution would
in particular be useful for dairies producing milk powder, and can schematically be seen
in Figure 5.10.
If the main focus is on milk for liquid consumption and cheese making, replacing the nat-
ural gas boiler with one of the proposed flexible solutions is a way for them to adapt to
the evolving energy landscape, significantly reduce their carbon footprint, and align with
Denmark’s stringent CO2 reduction targets. This solution can be seen in Figure 5.9. This
approach not only leverages the benefits of electrification but also incorporates the princi-
ples of circular economy by optimizing energy use and minimizing waste. It paves the way
for the dairy industry to become more sustainable, resilient to energy price fluctuations,
and prepared for future regulatory changes favoring renewable energy sources.
7.1
Future work
Several steps are necessary, and possible future work and research is of course neces-
sary if these proposals are to become reality. First, in-depth thermodynamic modeling
calculation of whether the sink/source temperatures in the proposed solutions are feasi-
ble, calculating their efficiencies and afterward a further techno-economical perspective is
necessary for this to be presented to the industry. One of the first steps would be to relate
the proposed method within this thesis to one proposed wrt. efficient energy mapping for
supporting green transition in industry [68].
Optimization and calculations should be made concerning flexibility considerations, espe-
cially taking into account system services, which can be helpful in balancing the electricity
grid. This may necessitate a broader knowledge of electrical systems or a multidisciplinary
team. Addressing electrification and load flexibility is inherently interdisciplinary, requiring
collaboration across fields such as engineering, economics, and environmental science.
Future studies should also investigate the integration of renewable energy sources, the
impact of policy and regulatory changes, and the role of innovation in technology devel-
opment. Case study data from industrial collaborators would be beneficial as well.
36
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
OpenAI. Images Generated by DALL∙E. https://www.openai.com/dall-e/. Accessed:
14-12-2023. 2023.
[2]
IPCC. “Summary for Policymakers”. In: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ed. by P.R. Shukla et al. Cambridge,
UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2022. DOI: 10.1017/
9781009157926.001. URL: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/downloads/report/
IPCC_AR6_WGIII_SummaryForPolicymakers.pdf.
[3]
M. Pathak et al. “Technical Summary”. In: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Cli-
mate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ed. by P.R. Shukla et al. Cam-
bridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2022. DOI: 10.
1017/9781009157926.002. URL: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/downloads/
report/IPCC_AR6_WGIII_TechnicalSummary.pdf.
[4]
European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Directive (EU) 2023/2413
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 October 2023 amending Di-
rective (EU) 2018/2001, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, and Directive 98/70/EC as
regards the promotion of energy from renewable sources and repealing Council Di-
rective (EU) 2015/652. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=OJ:L:
2023:2413:TOC. Accessed: 19-02-2024. 2023.
[5]
European Environment Agency et al. Trends and projections in Europe 2019: track-
ing progress towards Europe’s climate and energy targets. Publications Office, 2019.
URL: https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2800/51114.
[6]
European Environment Agency et al. Trends and projections in Europe 2022. Pub-
lications Office of the European Union, 2022. URL: https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.
2800/16646.
[7]
European Commission. 2040 Climate Target Impact Assessment Executive Sum-
mary. Accessed: 2024-02-19. 2024. URL: https://climate.ec.europa.eu/document/
download/06182e00-03ac-4b6b-a58c-54cb45b080c2_en?filename=2040%20Climate%
20Target%20Impact%20Assessment%20Executive%20Summary_en.pdf.
[8]
European Commission. European Green Deal: EU agrees stronger legislation to
accelerate the rollout of renewable energy. 2019. URL: https://commission.europa.
eu/strategy-and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en.
[9]
International Energy Agency. Denmark 2023: Energy Policy Review. Tech. rep. Ac-
cessed: 2024-02-18. International Energy Agency, 2023. URL: https://iea.blob.core.
windows.net/assets/9af8f6a2-31e7-4136-94a6-fe3aa518ec7d/Denmark_2023.pdf.
[10]
International Energy Agency. Electricity 2024 - Analysis and forecast to 2026. https:
/ / iea . blob . core . windows . net / assets / 6b2fd954 - 2017 - 408e - bf08 - 952fdd62118a /
Electricity2024-Analysisandforecastto2026.pdf. Accessed: 18-02-2024. 2024.
[11]
Max Åhman, Holger Wiertzema, and Malene Arens. Industrial electrification and
access to electricity at competitive prices: Review of climate and energy policy in-
fluence on electricity prices for industry and future implications for industrial elec-
trification. Tech. rep. Miljö- och energisystem, LTH, Lunds Universitet, 2020. DOI:
10.13140/RG.2.2.11300.50565/1.
37
==PAGE:47==
[12]
Christos Timplalexis et al. A comprehensive review on industrial demand response
strategies and applications. Energy Engineering. Institution of Engineering and Tech-
nology, 2022, pp. 1–23. DOI: 10.1049/PBPO215E_ch1. URL: https://digital-library.
theiet.org/content/books/10.1049/pbpo215e_ch1.
[13]
Danish Energy Agency. Sammenfatningsnotat: Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet
2023 (AF23). https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Statistik/af23_-_sammenfatningsnotat.
pdf. Accessed: 20-02-2024. 2023.
[14]
Przemyslaw Komarnicki, Michael Kranhold, and Zbigniew A. Styczynski. “Flexibility
of a General Energy System (GES)”. eng. In: Sector Coupling - Energy-sustainable
Economy of the Future (2023), pp. 127–155. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-658-38111-0_5.
[15]
Gianfranco Chicco et al. “Flexibility from Distributed Multienergy Systems”. eng. In:
Proceedings of the Ieee 108.9 (2020), pp. 1496–1517. ISSN: 15582256, 00189219.
DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.2020.2986378.
[16]
Fabian Bühler, Fridolin Müller Holm, and Brian Elmegaard. “Potentials for the elec-
trification of industrial processes in Denmark”. eng. In: Proceedings of Ecos 2019:
32nd International Conference on Efficiency, Cost, Optimization, Simulation and
Environmental Impact of Energy Systems (2019), pp. 2137–2152.
[17]
Danish Energy Agency. Dataark Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet 2023 (AF23).
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Statistik/af23_- _offentligt_datasaet.xlsx. Ac-
cessed: 20-02-2024. 2023.
[18]
Paul S. Fennell, Steven J. Davis, and Aseel Mohammed. “Decarbonizing cement
production”. eng. In: Joule 5.6 (2021), pp. 1305–1311. ISSN: 25424351. DOI: 10.
1016/j.joule.2021.04.011.
[19]
Ea Energy Analyses. The role of natural gas in the energy system towards 2050.
PDF document. 2019. URL: https://www.ea-energianalyse.dk/wp-content/uploads/
2020/08/The-role-of-natural-gas-in-the-energy-system-towards-2050.pdf.
[20]
C. A. Ramírez, M. Patel, and K. Blok. “From fluid milk to milk powder: Energy use
and energy efficiency in the European dairy industry”. eng. In: Energy 31.12 (2006),
pp. 1984–2004. ISSN: 18736785, 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2005.10.014.
[21]
Fabian Bühler. “Energy efficiency in the industry: A study of the methods, potentials
and interactions with the energy system”. eng. 2018.
[22]
Brian Elmegaard et al. Elektrificering af fødevareindustrien - Vurdering af potentiale
for elektrificering af dansk fødevareindustri. dan. Tech. rep. 2021.
[23]
Brian Elmegaard et al. Electrification of processes and technologies for Danish In-
dustry: Elforsk project 350-038: Final Report. eng. 2021.
[24]
S. N. Moejes and A. J.B. van Boxtel. “Energy saving potential of emerging technolo-
gies in milk powder production”. eng. In: Trends in Food Science and Technology
60 (2017), pp. 31–42. ISSN: 18793053, 09242244. DOI: 10.1016/j.tifs.2016.10.023.
[25]
Pieter Walstra, Jan T.M. Wouters, and Tom J. Geurts. Dairy science and technology,
second edition. eng. Vol. 147. CRC Press, 2005, pp. 1–783. ISBN: 9781420028010.
[26]
Kesha D. Vankar. “Dairy engineering: A keystone to the dairy industry”. eng. In:
Dairy Processing: Advanced Research To Applications (2020), pp. 51–61. DOI: 10.
1007/978-981-15-2608-4_3.
[27]
Lars Kiørboe et al. Kemiske Enhedsoperationer. 6th. Polyeteknisk Forlag, 2019.
[28]
James Atuonwu and Savvas Tassou. “Decarbonisation of food manufacturing by
the electrification of heat: A review of developments, technology options and future
directions”. eng. In: Trends in Food Science and Technology 107 (2021), pp. 168–
182. ISSN: 18793053, 09242244. DOI: 10.1016/j.tifs.2020.10.011.
[29]
Mihály Héder. “From NASA to EU: The evolution of the TRL scale in Public Sector
Innovation”. eng. In: Innovation Journal 22.2 (2017), p. 3. ISSN: 17153816.
38
==PAGE:48==
[30]
Y. H. Venus Lun and S. L. Dennis Tung. Heat pumps for sustainable heating and
cooling. eng. Springer, 2020, ix, 137 Seiten (unknown).
[31]
Khalid Hamid et al. “Potential evaluation of integrated high temperature heat pumps:
A review of recent advances”. eng. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 230 (2023),
p. 120720. ISSN: 18735606, 13594311. DOI: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2023.120720.
[32]
Jiatong Jiang et al. “A review and perspective on industry high-temperature heat
pumps”. eng. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 161 (2022), p. 112106.
ISSN: 18790690, 13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2022.112106.
[33]
Guillermo Martínez-Rodríguez et al. “Detailed Thermo-Economic Assessment of a
Heat Pump for Industrial Applications”. eng. In: Energies 16.6 (2023), p. 2784. ISSN:
19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en16062784.
[34]
Riccardo Bergamini, Jonas Kjær Jensen, and Brian Elmegaard. “Thermodynamic
competitiveness of high temperature vapor compression heat pumps for boiler sub-
stitution”. eng. In: Energy 182 (2019), pp. 110–121. ISSN: 18736785, 03605442.
DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.05.187.
[35]
Fabian Bühler et al. “A comparative assessment of electrification strategies for in-
dustrial sites: Case of milk powder production”. eng. In: Applied Energy 250 (2019),
pp. 1383–1401. ISSN: 03062619, 18729118. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.05.071.
[36]
Sergio Lupi. Fundamentals of electroheat: Electrical technologies for process heat-
ing. eng. Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 1–620. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
319-46015-4.
[37]
Nasrin Arjomand Kermani, Fridolin Müller Holm, and Brian Elmegaard. “A system-
atic review of electrification technologies for Danish food and beverage industry”.
eng. In: Proceedings of Ecos 2022 - the 35th International Conference on Efficiency,
Cost, Optimization, Simulation and Environmental Impact of Energy Systems 2022
(2022).
[38]
J. Upton et al. “Investment appraisal of technology innovations on dairy farm elec-
tricity consumption”. eng. In: Journal of Dairy Science 98.2 (2015), pp. 898–909.
ISSN: 15253198, 00220302. DOI: 10.3168/jds.2014-8383.
[39]
Mayumi Silva and Jayani Chandrapala. “1.26 - Ultrasound in Dairy Processing”.
eng. In: Innovative Food Processing Technologies (2021), pp. 439–464. DOI: 10.
1016/B978-0-08-100596-5.22955-7.
[40]
Masooma Munir et al. “Effects of high pressure, microwave and ultrasound pro-
cessing on proteins and enzyme activity in dairy systems — A review”. eng. In:
Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies 57 (2019), p. 102192. ISSN:
14668564, 18785522. DOI: 10.1016/j.ifset.2019.102192.
[41]
Antonio J. Trujillo et al. “3.18 - Ultrahigh-Pressure Homogenization in Dairy Pro-
cessing: Effects on Quality and Functionality”. eng. In: Innovative Food Processing
Technologies (2021), pp. 315–336. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100596-5.22998-3.
[42]
Swapnil Sureshchandra Bhurat et al. “Technical challenges and opportunities for
milk chilling unit based on vapor absorption refrigeration systems”. eng. In: Materials
Today: Proceedings 69 (2022), pp. 482–487. ISSN: 22147853. DOI: 10.1016/j.
matpr.2022.09.155.
[43]
Gurjeet Singh et al. “Thermal and exergoeconomic analysis of a dairy food pro-
cessing plant”. eng. In: Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry 136.3 (2019),
pp. 1365–1382. ISSN: 15882926, 13886150. DOI: 10.1007/s10973-018-7781-y.
[44]
Beatrice Marchi, Laura Bettoni, and Simone Zanoni. “Assessment of Energy Effi-
ciency Measures in Food Cold Supply Chains: A Dairy Industry Case Study”. eng.
In: Energies 15.19 (2022), p. 6901. ISSN: 19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en15196901.
39
==PAGE:49==
[45]
Artyom R. Khakimov et al. “Effects of Milking System Operating Conditions on
the Milk-Fat-Percentage Measuring Accuracy of an Inline Light-Scattering Sensor”.
eng. In: Applied Sciences-basel 13.21 (2023). ISSN: 20763417. DOI: 10 . 3390 /
app132111836.
[46]
G. Q. Chen, S. L. Gras, and S. E. Kentish. “The application of forward osmosis
to dairy processing”. eng. In: Separation and Purification Technology 246 (2020),
p. 116900. ISSN: 18733794, 13835866. DOI: 10.1016/j.seppur.2020.116900.
[47]
Ammar Altemimi et al. “Critical review of radio-frequency (RF) heating applications
in food processing”. eng. In: Food Quality and Safety 3.2 (2019), pp. 81–91. ISSN:
23991402, 23991399. DOI: 10.1093/fqsafe/fyz002.
[48]
Jonathan J. O’Sullivan et al. “Atomisation technologies used in spray drying in the
dairy industry: A review”. eng. In: Journal of Food Engineering 243 (2019), pp. 57–
69. ISSN: 18735770, 02608774. DOI: 10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2018.08.027.
[49]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data Catalogue for Energy Storage. Tech. rep.
Accessed: 2024-02-17. Danish Energy Agency, 2020.
[50]
Ioan Sarbu and Calin Sebarchievici. “A comprehensive review of thermal energy
storage”. eng. In: Sustainability (switzerland) 10.1 (2018), p. 191. ISSN: 20711050.
DOI: 10.3390/su10010191.
[51]
Ibrahim Dinçer. Thermal Energy Storage Systems and Applications, Thermal En-
ergy Storage. eng. John Wiley & Sons.
[52]
Arun Kumar and S.K. Shukla. “A Review on Thermal Energy Storage Unit for Solar
Thermal Power Plant Application”. eng. In: Energy Procedia 74 (2015), pp. 462–
469. ISSN: 18766102. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2015.07.728.
[53]
Vincent Basecq et al. “Short-term storage systems of thermal energy for buildings:
a review”. eng. In: Advances in Building Energy Research 7.1 (2013), pp. 66–119.
ISSN: 17512549, 17562201. DOI: 10.1080/17512549.2013.809271.
[54]
Michael Papapetrou et al. “Industrial waste heat: Estimation of the technically avail-
able resource in the EU per industrial sector, temperature level and country”. eng. In:
Applied Thermal Engineering 138 (2018), pp. 207–216. ISSN: 18735606, 13594311.
DOI: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.04.043.
[55]
Débora de São José et al. “Use Cases for Contextual Load Flexibility Remunera-
tion Strategies”. eng. In: 9th International Conference on Energy and Environment
Research (2023), pp. 687–695. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-43559-1_65.
[56]
Energinet. Driving Towards Grid Balance. White Paper. 2020. URL: https://energinet.
dk/media/jkwn4ekx/driving-towards-grid-balance.pdf.
[57]
Energinet. INTRODUKTION TIL SYSTEMYDELSER. https://energinet.dk/media/
zrok2sor/introduktion-til-systemydelser-januar-2024.pdf. Accessed on: 2024-02-20.
2024.
[58]
Danish Energy Agency. Bilagsrapport A - Branchenotater. https://ens.dk/sites/
ens.dk/files/Analyser/bilagsrapport_a_-_branchenotater.pdf. Accessed: 2023-09-01.
2023.
[59]
Danish Energy Agency. Bilagsrapport B - Teknologinotater. https://ens.dk/sites/
ens.dk/files/Basisfremskrivning/bilagsrapport_b_-_teknologinotater.pdf. Accessed:
2023-09-01. 2023.
[60]
Danish Energy Agency. Kortlægning af energiforbrug i produktionserhvervene 2022.
https : / / ens . dk / sites / ens . dk / files / Analyser / kortlaegning _ af _ energiforbrug _ i _
produktionserhvervene_2022.pdf. Accessed: 2023-09-01. 2022.
[61]
Danish Energy Agency. Sammenfatning af kortlægning af energiforbrug og energis-
parepotentialer i produktionserhvervene. https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/
40
==PAGE:50==
sammenfatning_af_kortlaegning_af_energiforburg_og_energisparepotentialer_i_
produktionserhvervene.pdf. Accessed: 2023-09-01. 2023.
[62]
Jordan Cox, Scott Belding, and Travis Lowder. “Application of a novel heat pump
model for estimating economic viability and barriers of heat pumps in dairy applica-
tions in the United States”. eng. In: Applied Energy 310 (2022), p. 118499. ISSN:
18729118, 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.118499.
[63]
Danish Energy Agency. Datasheet for Industrial Process Heat - Updated December
2022. https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/technology_data_for_industrial_
process_heat_0.xlsx. Accessed: 2024-02-17. 2022.
[64]
F. Schlosser et al. “Large-scale heat pumps: Applications, performance, economic
feasibility and industrial integration”. eng. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 133 (2020), p. 110219. ISSN: 18790690, 13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.
2020.110219.
[65]
Danish Energy Agency. Energistyrelsens Standardfaktorer for 2023. https://ens.dk/
sites/ens.dk/files/CO2/energistyrelsens_standardfaktorer_for_2023.pdf. Accessed:
2024-01-22. 2024.
[66]
Danish Energy Agency. Nøgletal og internationale indberetninger. https://ens.dk/
service/statistik-data-noegletal-og-kort/noegletal-og-internationale-indberetninger.
Accessed: 2024-02-17. 2024.
[67]
Danish Energy Agency. Datasheet for Energy Storage - Updated September 2023.
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/technology_datasheet_for_energy_
storage.xlsx. Accessed: 2024-02-17. 2023.
[68]
Nasrin Arjomand Kermani et al. “Efficient energy mapping for supporting green tran-
sition in industry”. eng. In: Proceedings of Ecos 2023 - the 36th International Con-
ference on Efficiency, Cost, Optimization, Simulation and Environmental Impact of
Energy Systems 2023 (2023), pp. 2692–2702. DOI: 10.52202/069564-0242.
41
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
Agriculture
Production of cement
Construction and civil engineering
Dairies
Production of paint and soap, etc.
Fishing
Slaughterhouses
Other food industry
Metalware industry
Horticulture
Production of metal
Pharmaceutical industry
Extraction of gravel and stone
Bakeries, bread factories, etc.
Production of mineral wool, etc.
Plastic and rubber industry
Other basic chemicals
Fish industry
Production of sugar
Production of engines, wind turbines, and pumps
Wood industry
Production of other machinery
Paper industry
Production of feed mixtures
Machine Stations
Production of bricks, etc.
Beverage industry
Production of asphalt and roofing felt
Glass and ceramic industry
Other concrete industry and brickworks
Production of electronic and communication equipment, as well as electric motors and cables
Furniture industry
Production of industrial gases
Textile industry, clothing industry, and leather and footwear industry
Production of motor vehicles and parts thereof, as well as ships
Repair and installation of machinery and equipment
Printing houses, etc.
Toys and other manufacturing industry
Forestry
Production of medical instruments, etc.
Production of enzymes
Production of household appliances, lamps, etc.
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Figure A.1: The total final energy use of all Danish industrial sectors in 2021.
42
==PAGE:52==
Production of cement
Dairies
Production of paint and soap, etc.
Slaughterhouses
Other food industry
Metalware industry
Pharmaceutical industry
Production of metal
Extraction of gravel and stone
Bakeries, bread factories, etc.
Production of mineral wool, etc.
Plastic and rubber industry
Other basic chemicals
Fish industry
Production of engines, wind turbines, and pumps
Wood industry
Production of feed mixtures
Production of other machinery
Paper industry
Production of bricks, etc.
Beverage industry
Production of sugar
Glass and ceramic industry
Production of asphalt and roofing felt
Other concrete industry and brickworks
Production of electronic and communication equipment, as well as electric motors and cables
Furniture industry
Production of industrial gases
Textile industry, clothing industry, and leather and footwear industry
Production of motor vehicles and parts thereof, as well as ships
Repair and installation of machinery and equipment
Printing houses, etc.
Toys and other manufacturing industry
Production of medical instruments, etc.
Production of enzymes
Production of household appliances, lamps, etc.
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Figure A.2: The total final energy use of Danish manufacturing sectors in 2021.
43
==PAGE:53==
<100oC - Steam - Heating/Boiling
<100oC - Steam - Drying
<100oC - Steam - Space heating
<100oC - Direct - Heating/Boiling
<100oC - Direct - Drying
<100oC - Water/liquid - Evaporation
<100oC - Water/liquid - Heating/Boiling
<100oC - Water/liquid - Drying
<100oC - Water/liquid - Space heating
100-150oC - Steam - Evaporation
100-150oC - Steam - Heating/Boiling
100-150oC - Steam - Drying
100-150oC - Direct - Drying
150-200oC - Steam - Evaporation
150-200oC - Direct - Evaporation
>200oC - Direct - Drying
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Final energy [TJ/yr]
Natural gas
Electricity for heat pump
Heat pumps, ambient heat
Electricity for electric rod
Wood chips
District heating
Wood pellets
Figure A.3: Form of supply overview for the dairy industry. See Table 5.2.
44
==PAGE:54==
Technical University of Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 403
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://construct.dtu.dk/Sections/thermal-energy
