==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Finite element mesh transition for 
multi-scale modeling of composite 
structures
Xinrun Liu
DTU Wind-M-0740 
Feburary 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0740 
January 2024
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Xiao Chen
Hans-Henrik von Benzon
Xing-Yuan
Seyedsina Samarehmousavi 
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind 
Energy Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: 
Xinrun Liu
Title: 
Finite element mesh transition for multi-scale 
modeling of composite structures
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
iii
Abstract
Local defects, such as ply wrinkles located in specific areas of wind turbine blades, can detri­
mentally affect the structural performance of the blades. Understanding the evaluation of wrinkle
criticality is critical for ensuring the structural integrity and performance of composite structures.
This knowledge also plays a vital role in enhancing the durability and reliability of composite
materials by enabling targeted improvements in design and manufacturing processes. Finite ele­
ment simulation is considered for its ability to accurately predict structural behavior and failure
occurrence, providing advantages of complex geometry handling, design optimization, time and
cost efficiency, and widespread application in engineering. Wind turbine blades are large­scale
composite structures with many geometrical details. However, A fully detailed blade modeling
is computationally expensive, and inefficient evaluation of the crucial areas.
This research presents a novel approach to address the computational challenges by establishing
a technique for 2D mesh transition using MATLAB. This technique seamlessly and automati­
cally integrates from the coarse mesh corresponding to the global structure to the targeted local
region of interest with highly fine meshes, thus achieving the purpose of multi­scale modeling.
Furthermore, a graphical user interface is established to implement the approach of mesh tran­
sition, allowing for simple visualization and adjustment of the shape and quantity of elements
through parameter settings for broader model applicability.
The model employing the mesh transition technique demonstrates the agreed results compared
to the model utilizing highly fine meshes for both isotropic and composite laminate materials
but with significantly lower computation demand due to the large reduction of element number.
The developed modeling strategy is capable of predicting the stress and strain distribution, as
well as applying the Tsai­Wu failure criteria and the quadratic strain­based criterion, within the
multi­scale finite element (FE) models. This approach addresses the computational challenges
caused by the detailed modeling of large­scale structures, as well as facilitates the investigation
and analysis of the local defects with fine meshes taking into account the global model.
Keywords: Wrinkle, Multi­scale modeling, Computational efficiency, Mesh transition, Failure
criteria, automatic reconstruction
==PAGE:4==
iv
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Xiao Chen, Xing­Yuan Miao,
Hans­Henrik von Benzon, and Seyedsina Samarehmousavi, whose devoted guidance, support,
and encouragement have been invaluable throughout my academic journey. I have made signifi­
cant progress under the guidance of my supervisors, not only academically but also in developing
my personal abilities and work habits.
I would also thank my friends in Denmark and China for their great support and encouragement,
particularly the ones who have cheered and inspired me during these last two years. Thank you,
Hao­Ping Yeh, Jiaming Tan, Yi Zhao, Gusta, Xinyu Liu, Zongyue Fang, Nandi Lu, Yi Hsuan
Hsu, and many more. Thanks again to my supervisor Xing­Yuan Miao, with whom I frequently
share late­evening bus rides after long hours of work. Our conversations at the bus stop, have
sparked inspiration and significantly shaped my future career aspirations.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents, Ning Sun and Changhui Liu, for their selfless support,
love, and care. I am so grateful and proud to be their kid.
Sincerely,
Xinrun Liu
==PAGE:5==
v
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Theoretical Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Motivation and objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Modeling methodology
5
2.1
The groundwork of the methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
The process and module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Testing coordinate for the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Mesh transition considering single coarse mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Node definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Optimization of the transition element shape
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Element definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Mesh transition considering multiple coarse meshes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.1
Bidirectional transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.2
Position parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Validation with the wrinkle­defected spar cap laminate model
23
3.1
Comparison via tensile test with isotropic material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.1
Investigate the impact of different element types
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Comparison via tensile test with composite laminate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Investigate the component on the right of the fine mesh model . . . . .
27
3.2.2
Investigate the impact of different elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
GUI Implementation
33
4.1
The interface in GUI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Annotations for components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
File Manipulation with Data Appending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Conclusion
37
5.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Bibliography
39
==PAGE:6==
vi
CONTENTS
A Pseudocodes
43
==PAGE:7==
vii
List of Figures
1.1
A wind turbine blade fractured due to the significant ply wrinkles in the spar
cap’s thick laminate[11]. (a) the fractured wind turbine blade in the field, (b) the
fracture surface of spar cap laminates in the field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The cross­section view of the spar cap at the fracture region[11]
. . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Finite­element mesh transition technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
The concept figure of the mesh transition approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
The expected example of mesh transition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The flow chart of 5 modules to achieve the function of mesh transition . . . . .
6
2.3
The testing coordinate of fine mesh and coarse mesh considering the inconstant
distance between two adjacent nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
The distorted element of Case 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
The layout of mesh transition technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
The algorithm flowchart of initial fine mesh node number identification . . . .
9
2.7
The process of determining the vector of the mesh transition
. . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
The columns in the transition layer and repetition layer . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.9
The method to determine the location of the node in the second column
. . . .
13
2.10 The introduction of the amplification parameter in mesh transition with the pa­
rameter: rt = 2, rtd = 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.11 The middle layer inside the transition layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.12 Comparison of mesh transition layout before and after optimization
. . . . . .
16
2.13 The rotation for optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.14 The method of defining the node number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.15 The node sequence for determining an element in Abaqus (7000001, 8000001,
8000002, 7000002, 7000001) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.16 The bidirectional mesh transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.17 The layout of bidirectional mesh transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.18 The bidirectional mesh transition with intermediate line . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.19 Partition of the elements on both sides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1
The layout of the mesh transition model with 332 meshes on both sides of the
wrinkle model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
The layout of the model with 12600 fine meshes on both sides of the wrinkle model 23
3.3
Strain comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at the edge
connecting to the wrinkle model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Strain comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at the middle
line of the wrinkle model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:8==
viii
LIST OF FIGURES
3.5
Strain comparison with different element types at the edge connecting to the
wrinkle model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
The model on the right on the fine mesh model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.7
Strain comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at the edge
connecting to the wrinkle model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.8
Stress comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at the edge
connecting to the wrinkle model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.9
Comparison of failure criteria between the fine mesh and mesh transition model
at the edge connecting to the wrinkle model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.10 Strain comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model with differ­
ent element types at the edge connecting to the wrinkle model
. . . . . . . . .
31
3.11 Stress comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model with differ­
ent element types at the edge connecting to the wrinkle model
. . . . . . . . .
31
3.12 Comparison of failure criteria between the fine mesh and mesh transition model
at the edge connecting to the wrinkle model (a) CPE4R (b) CPE4I . . . . . . .
32
4.1
The layout of interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
The process of importing coordinate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
The layout of the second tab of GUI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:9==
ix
List of Tables
2.1
Different types of two boundaries relationships in mesh transition
. . . . . . .
7
3.1
Isotropic material property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
The comparison of job time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Elastic properties of composite material used in the simulations [23] . . . . . .
27
3.4
Material properties of adhesive used in the simulations [23] . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Strength components of composite materials used in the simulations (unit: MPa)[23] 27
4.1
The annotation of each Button/Component in GUI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:10==
x
LIST OF TABLES
==PAGE:11==
1
Chapter 1
Introduction
Over the past decade, wind energy has become increasingly important in the field of energy due
to its carbon­free and environmentally friendly characteristics[1]. In line with this trend, the
global wind power installed capacity has shown a continuous rise[2]. Simultaneously, with the
development of wind turbines, the dimension of blades has correspondingly increased to improve
power generation efficiency[3][4]. Hence, manufacturing large­size wind turbines is becoming
a prominent area in the current research.
The laminate composite material, utilized in the construction of the spar cap, plays a vital role
within the wind turbine blade as it is designed to withstand the majority of the load, particularly
bending stresses[5]. However, the thermal­mechanical manufacturing process commonly intro­
duces wrinkle defects in the laminated composite structure, which can impact the integrity of
the composite structure attributed to the fiber misalignment[6][7] and cause negative impacts on
the performance of the spar cap[8][9][10]. Real­world failures attributed to wrinkle defects are
illustrated in Figures 1.1 and 1.2, showing the critical impact of such defects. In this situation,
predicting the mechanical behavior in the wrinkle region and the service life of the wind blade
before installation becomes crucial in order to minimize unforeseen risks and potentially reduce
the additional expenses for repairs or replacements.
Figure 1.1: A wind turbine blade fractured due to the significant ply wrinkles in the spar cap’s
thick laminate[11]. (a) the fractured wind turbine blade in the field, (b) the fracture surface of
spar cap laminates in the field
==PAGE:12==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.2: The cross­section view of the spar cap at the fracture region[11]
1.1
Theoretical Background
Recent studies have demonstrated various methods for non­destructively detecting or inspecting
local defects, such as optical microscopy, X­ray tomography, infrared (IR) thermography, ultra­
sound (UT) scanning, and so on[12][13][14]. These techniques enable the accurate and efficient
detection of local defects, including ply wrinkles, through non­destructive testing (NDT) and/or
inspection. Once detected, it is essential to assess the criticality and impact of these wrinkles.
In practical applications, the common method involves approximating wrinkle geometries with
half­sine or cosine waves, followed by evaluating their criticality using empirical formulas or
FE simulations [15]. Remarkably, the precision of Non­Destructive Testing (NDT) methods is
advancing rapidly, making the inspection of wrinkle defects and the detailed characterization of
their shapes increasingly easier. Therefore, based on the advanced detecting method, Chen X.
et al.[11] propose a robust approach for automated geometric reconstruction and finite element
meshing of entire thick laminates with multiple, asymmetric out­of­plane ply wrinkles. This
approach effectively addresses the challenge of managing complex wrinkle geometries through
comprehensive and detailed modeling efforts. A 2D finite element (FE) model of the wrinkle
can be constructed using fine meshes for enhanced accuracy.
The consideration of mesh transition emerges as a critical next step, aiming to seamlessly inte­
grate the detailed modeled local wrinkle defects within the global model. Kanber, B. et al.[16]
use transition rectangular plate elements to solve the last­plastic plate bending problems. The
transition elements in the mesh structure are mentioned, as shown in Figure1.3a. Chen S. et
al.[17] introduce several techniques of finite­element mesh transition to investigate the effects
of residual stresses on crack propagation. Sebastian D. et al.[18] propose a novel approach for
predicting the temperature field in Powder Bed Fusion (PBF) additive manufacturing processes.
This approach involves developing an adaptively refined mesh, designed to precisely capture ev­
ery aspect of laser beam movement, by transitioning from the coarser mesh to the finer mesh for
enhanced accuracy. Adrian B. et al.[19] present a study on adaptive mesh refinement, predict­
==PAGE:13==
1.2. MOTIVATION AND OBJECTIVE
3
ing the failure position of Double Diffused Metal­Oxide Semiconductor (DMOS) devices using
triangle elements.
Therefore, mesh transition holds significant potential for future industrial applications and can
be widely utilized. Drawing inspiration from these mesh transition techniques, this study de­
velops methods to seamlessly integrate the previously mentioned wrinkle model with the global
structure.
(a) 1 to 2[16]
(b) 1 to 3[17]
(c) 2 to 4[17]
Figure 1.3: Finite­element mesh transition technique
Figure 1.4: The concept figure of the mesh transition approach
1.2
Motivation and objective
Finite element (FE) simulations, widely recognized for their applicability in solving a variety of
problems, are less frequently employed for large­scale models due to the substantial computa­
tional demands. To be more specific, In the field of wind turbines, local defects, characterized
==PAGE:14==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
by complex geometries, require detailed and abundant fine meshes for accurate description, yet
these defects constitute only a minor portion of the entire system. Considering this concern of
substantial computation, the objective of the project is to develop the MATLAB code that facili­
tates the integration of the global structural model with the local regions of interest, exemplified
by the wrinkle model, using the mesh transition shown in Figure1.4.
Novelty
Building upon this foundation, this project introduces an innovative auto­mesh transition tool,
specifically designed for and integrated with Abaqus, aimed at addressing the challenges asso­
ciated with complex multi­scale Finite Element (FE) models. The advantage of the multi­scale
FEM model is the capability to capture both the macroscopic structures and the localized region
so circumvents the huge computational calculation while simulating the entire model with high
resolution. Furthermore, as an extension, a graphical user interface is also established to advance
the implementation of the modeling methodology and visualization of the detailed meshes in a
user­friendly way.
1.3
Overview
The thesis consists of 5 chapters in total to achieve the aim of mesh transition for multi­scale FE
modeling with the following explanation:
• Chapter 1 Introduction: This chapter explains the motivation, objective, and innovation
for developing the mesh transition method.
• Chapter 2 Modeling methodology: This chapter provides a detailed introduction to the
methodology for modeling mesh transitions using MATLAB. It includes guidelines for
determining the transition strategy under various conditions, optimizing the shape of ele­
ments for smooth simulation, and the definition of the parameters.
• Chapter 3 Validation with wrinkle­defected spar cap laminate model: This chapter
demonstrates the feasibility of the mesh transition model in laminate materials by compar­
ing it with the fine mesh model under the tensile test.
• Chapter 4 GUI Implementation: This chapter introduces the GUI interface for the mesh
transition, and the function of each button, field, and component.
• Chapter 5 Conclusion: Summarize and conclude all the results in the thesis and the future
technology road map.
==PAGE:15==
5
Chapter 2
Modeling methodology
In this project, to develop a script via MATLAB to connect the coarse mesh side which represents
the global structural model with the fine mesh side which represents the local regions while
inputting the coordinates of both fine and coarse sides, then enabling the generation of a mesh
transition model with specific parameters as shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The expected example of mesh transition
2.1
The groundwork of the methodology
2.1.1
The process and module
The modeling methodology of mesh transition consists of 5 modules in total during the whole
process shown in Figure2.2 and the function of each module can be explained as follows:
• Initial coordinate: Establish the coordinate for the fine mesh side and coarse mesh side.
• Node definition: Establish the coordinate information of the node in the transition model.
==PAGE:16==
6
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
• Element definition: Establish the element based on the node information.
• Input file generation: Generate the input file for Abaqus involving the node and element
information.
• Visualization: Visualize the transition mesh profile in Matlab before import in Abaqus.
In the first stage, to transition in a relatively easy way, the fine mesh side is always positioned on
the left, while the coarse mesh side is temporarily on the right, establishing a left­to­right transi­
tion orientation. The various transition orientation is determined in the further development.
Figure 2.2: The flow chart of 5 modules to achieve the function of mesh transition
2.1.2
Testing coordinate for the model
The purpose of establishing the code for testing coordinates is to check the result and feasibility of
the mesh transition worked in various boundary situations. Considering the distance of each two
adjacent nodes may not be constant in some models, it is necessary to put the random command
into the definition of the coordinate as the fluctuation shown in Figure 2.3(refer to pseudocodes
in Appendix A).
In consideration of the multiple situations in the simulation such as different inclinations and
lengths on both sides, the code is able to describe all the types of relationships between the fine
mesh side and the coarse mesh side shown in Case 1 and Case 2 of Table2.1. Moreover, the
single element in the mesh transition shows poor performance if the length difference between
the fine and coarse mesh side is too huge such as in Case 3. To be more specific, from Figure
2.4, the single 4­node element in the transition layer exhibits excessive sharpness since the slope
of the connecting line between the two boundary endpoints is too large. Therefore, the result of
the simulation in Abaqus will not be accurate with this kind of distorted element.
==PAGE:17==
2.1. THE GROUNDWORK OF THE METHODOLOGY
7
Figure 2.3: The testing coordinate of fine mesh and coarse mesh considering the inconstant
distance between two adjacent nodes
Table 2.1: Different types of two boundaries relationships in mesh transition
Case number
Conceptual image
Description
Case 1
Parallel Lines
Case 2
Intersecting Lines
Case 3
Lines with substantial difference
==PAGE:18==
8
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
Figure 2.4: The distorted element of Case 3
2.2
Mesh transition considering single coarse mesh
2.2.1
Node definition
In this part, the code will acquire the coordinate information of two boundaries and on the basis of
them, generate the coordinate of the node in the mesh transition(refer to pseudocodes in Appendix
A). The techniques for splitting the transition units include one unit divided into 3[17] and one
unit divided into 2[16] as shown in Figure2.5a and 2.5b. Concerning the element type applied in
Abaqus is the 4­node element(CPE4, CPS4, etc.), the technique in Figure2.5b is excluded due to
the element at the border of two transition units that will obtain 5 nodes, not 4. It will cause an
error that introduces an incompatibility between the neighboring regions.
(a) Fine one transition unit into 3 with the
expected result
(b) Fine one transition unit into 2 with the
error of 5­node element
Figure 2.5: The layout of mesh transition technique
Determination of the number of transition layers
The first step in the code is to identify the fine mesh number and then determine the number of
transition layers and the transition units in each layer. The flow chart of the algorithm is shown
==PAGE:19==
2.2. MESH TRANSITION CONSIDERING SINGLE COARSE MESH
9
below.
Figure 2.6: The algorithm flowchart of initial fine mesh node number identification
As the algorithm flowchart shown in Figure 2.6, the algorithm can be described by subsequent
steps:
==PAGE:20==
10
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
• Check if the initial mesh number is over 2 to make sure the mesh transition is able to start.
• Record the result of dividing each step by three and adding the corresponding remainder,
which is the number of transition units in each layer
• Stop the calculation when the calculated number finally reaches 1 or 2 and record the
calculated value as well.
• Record the number of steps when the value is 1, which is the number of transition layers
Consequently, the amount of the current transition unit is derived from the sum of the quotient
and the remainder, both of which are obtained by dividing the amount of units from the previous
layer by 3, explained below.
ri−1 = mi−1 −
⌊mi−1
3
⌋
· 3
(2.1)
mi =
⌊mi−1
3
⌋
+ ri−1
(2.2)
Where mi is the amount of the transition unit in the current transition layer, mi−1 is the amount
of the transition unit in the previous layer, ri−1 is the remainder of the division of the previous
amount of the transition unit by 3.
Vector definition
The mesh transition shown in Figure2.1 is so ideal that two boundaries are parallel and the bottom
and upper edges are perpendicular to both boundaries. However, the coordinate information of
the fine mesh side and coarse mesh side is closer to Case 2 in Table2.1 in practical applications.
To elaborate, the fine and coarse mesh boundaries and the upper and bottom edges are not parallel
to each other. Therefore, introducing the vector to describe the transition orientation is vital in
this situation. Additionally, the vector orientation follows the direction from the fine mesh side
to the coarse mesh side, in alignment with the mesh transition process. Determining the vector
involves the following process:
(i) First step: From Figure2.7a, the coordinates of the upper and bottom nodes of both the
fine mesh side and the coarse mesh side are known and serve as the initial information.
The equation for calculating the unit vector of the bottom edge and upper edge can be
determined as follows. Therefore, the frame of mesh transition can be ascertained.
v =
[x2 −x1
y2 −y1
]
(2.3)
The magnitude of this vector is:
∥v∥=
√
(x2 −x1)2 + (y2 −y1)2
(2.4)
The unit vector, which is the vector divided by its magnitude, is:
u =
1
∥v∥
[x2 −x1
y2 −y1
]
=
v
∥v∥
(2.5)
==PAGE:21==
2.2. MESH TRANSITION CONSIDERING SINGLE COARSE MESH
11
where (x1, y1), (x2, y2) is the node coordinate of the upper and lower nodes of both the
fine mesh side and the coarse mesh side, respectively.
(ii) Second step: As Figure2.7b, the node on the upper and bottom edge can be located as
illustrated in the subsequent equation based on the layer length:
xn+1 = xn + llayer · ux
yn+1 = yn + llayer · uy
(2.6)
Where xn+1 and yn+1 represent the horizontal and vertical coordinates of the next point,
respectively; xn and yn represent the current horizontal and vertical coordinates, respec­
tively; llayer is the transition length, indicating the distance from the current point to the
next point obtained from equation[2.18] that will be explained later; ux and uy are the
horizontal and vertical components of the unit vector.
(iii) Third step: The unit vector of each column in mesh transition can be calculated based on
the bottom and upper node coordinates via the similar equation[2.3][2.4][2.5] shown in
Figure2.7c.
(a) Determine the vector of the
bottom and upper edge
(b) Determine the node location
of both edges
(c) Determine the vector of
each column
Figure 2.7: The process of determining the vector of the mesh transition
Node amount of each column
Figure2.8 donates the definition of each layer in the mesh transition. The node amount in the first
and second columns of the transition layer and the repetition layer is from the algorithm shown
in Figure2.6 and can be determined by the following equation:
n1 = mi−1 + 1
(2.7)
n2 = (mi −ri−1) · 2
(2.8)
==PAGE:22==
12
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
nr = mi + 1
(2.9)
Where n1,n2, and nr stand the node amount of the first and second columns in the transition
layer and the first column in the repetition layer, respectively, as explained in Figure 2.8.; mi−1
stands the unit amount of the previous transition layer; mi stands the unit amount of the current
transition layer; ri−1 stands the remainder of mi−1 divided by 3, explained in euqation[2.1][2.2]
Moreover, if the repetition time is 0, the first column of the repetition layer shown in Figure2.8
within the green line therefore is the first column of the next transition layer.
Figure 2.8: The columns in the transition layer and repetition layer
Node coordinate definition
In the first column of each layer, nodes are evenly distributed in the direction of the column
vector, which can be described by the following equation.
l1 = ∥v1∥
mi
(2.10)
xn+1 = xn + l1 · ucx
yn+1 = yn + l1 · ucy
(2.11)
Where l1 is the average length, ∥v1∥is the length of the column, and mi is the unit amount in
the layer explained in equation[2.2].
==PAGE:23==
2.2. MESH TRANSITION CONSIDERING SINGLE COARSE MESH
13
In the second layer, the node is determined on the basis of the upper and bottom midpoints in the
transition unit shown as Figure2.9. To elaborate, once the coordinates of these two midpoints are
obtained, the two nodes are evenly distributed in the direction of the connection between these
two midpoints as below equation.
l2 = ∥v2∥
3
(2.12)
xn+1 = xn + l2 · ucx
yn+1 = yn + l2 · ucy
(2.13)
Where l2 is the average length, ∥v2∥is the length of the column.
Figure 2.9: The method to determine the location of the node in the second column
Introduction of parameters
As the aim of the code is to generate the node coordinate information, the following parameters
are needed to describe the layout of the mesh transition.
• Fine and coarse mesh node coordinate
The initial coordinate information defines the location of the layout of two boundaries,
providing the range of the internal transition node and transition orientation.
• Amplification parameter(Am)
The parameter is to describe the amplification relationship of layer width between adjacent
transition layers shown in Figure2.10.
• Repetition parameter between the transition layer(rt)
The parameter to define the number of the repetition layer between the transition layer.
From Figure2.1, the repetition parameter between the transition layer is 2.
• Repetition parameter after the transition layer(rtd)
The parameter determines the number of the repetition layer after the transition layer. From
Figure2.1, the repetition parameter after the transition layer is 1.
The maximum and minimum aspect ratio of the transition could be verifiable based on the above
parameters. For the amplification parameter, the 1 in Figure2.10 means one unit, which means
==PAGE:24==
14
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
the first layer’s width constitutes a proportion of 1/Tn of the total length, where Tn is the total
unit number. The reason for calculating the length per unit instead of setting a fixed value of a
single unit is due to the distance between two boundaries changing under various situations of
practical applications. Moreover, it is necessary to identify the single unit length of the upper
edge and bottom edge in case the two boundaries are not parallel so the length of the upper and
bottom edge is different. The unit number of the next transition layer is Am times more than the
previous layer implying that the unit number relationship between layers is a geometric series.
After the total number of needed units is acquired, the length of the single unit of the top and
bottom edges can be calculated as shown in equation[2.14][2.15][2.16].
Tn = 1 −(Am)n
1 −Am
(2.14)
lbottom unit = lbottom edge
Tn
(2.15)
lupper unit = lupper edge
Tn
(2.16)
Where n is the total amount of transition layer, Tn is the total unit number, lbottom unit is the length
of the single unit of the bottom edge, lbottom edge is the length of the bottom edge, lupper unit is the
length of the single unit of the upper edge, lupper edge is the length of the upper edge.
The two repetition parameters can also impact the length of the single unit of the top and bottom
edges. Specifically, the repetition layer is defined as having the same unit number as the previous
transition layer. In Figure2.10, the rt = 2, and rtd = 1. Therefore, the total unit number can
be added and renewed by the two repetition parameters shown in equation[2.17], and the unit
length of the upper edge and bottom edge experience a change simultaneously based on the
equation[2.15][2.16].
Tn = (rt + 1) · 1 −Amn−1
1 −Am
+ (rtd + 1) · Amn−1
(2.17)
Where n is the total amount of transition layers, Tn is the total unit number, rt is the repetition
time between transition layers, and rtd is the repetition time after transition layers.
After obtaining the unit length of the bottom edge and upper edge, the length per transition layer
can be calculated by following the equation. Additionally, the intermediate layer in the transition
zone is located in the middle of this layer, which is shown in Figure2.11
llayer = nlayer · lunit
(2.18)
Where llayer is the length of the transition layer, nlayer is the unit amount corresponding to each
transition layer, lunit is the length of a single unit.
==PAGE:25==
2.2. MESH TRANSITION CONSIDERING SINGLE COARSE MESH
15
Figure 2.10: The introduction of the amplification parameter in mesh transition with the param­
eter: rt = 2, rtd = 1
Figure 2.11: The middle layer inside the transition layer
==PAGE:26==
16
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
2.2.2
Optimization of the transition element shape
The mesh shape may be sharp as Figure2.12a considering the slope of the fine and coarse mesh
boundaries, the remainder in each transition layer, and the aspect ratio of the transition element.
To avoid sharp elements, the optimized rotation is introduced as Figure2.13, and the adjusted
result is shown in Figure2.12b (refer to pseudocodes in Appendix A). The corresponding formula
related to the rotation matrix is explained as follows[20].
R =
[cos ∆β
−sin ∆β
sin ∆β
cos ∆β
]
(2.19)
[xCrotated
yCrotated
]
= R ·
[xC −xB
yC −yB
]
+
[xB
yB
]
(2.20)
Where R is the rotation matrix; ∆β is the rotated angle; xCrotated, yCrotated, xC, yC, xB, yB are
the x coordinate and y coordinate of the node Crotated, C, B, respectively.
(a) The shape of mesh transition
before the optimization
(b) The shape of mesh transi­
tion after the optimization
Figure 2.12: Comparison of mesh transition layout before and after optimization
After obtaining the coordinate information of node B, Crotated, C, D, the coordinate of Cnew
which is the intersection of straight lines BCrotated and CD can be calculated as the following
equation. Additionally, if line CD is completely vertical, the value of the slope is set as 1015 in
the code instead of the infinite value.
m1 = yCrotated −yB
xCrotated −xB
(2.21)
b1 = yB −m1 · xB
(2.22)
m2 = yC −yD
xC −xD
(2.23)
==PAGE:27==
2.2. MESH TRANSITION CONSIDERING SINGLE COARSE MESH
17
b2 = yD −m2 · xD
(2.24)
xCnew =
b2 −b1
m1 −m2
(2.25)
yCnew = m1 · x + b1
(2.26)
Where m1 and m2 is the slope of line BCrotated and DC, respectively; b1 and b2 is the intercept
of the line BCrotated and DC, respectively.
(a) The element before opti­
mization
(b) The element after optimiza­
tion
Figure 2.13: The rotation for optimization
Additionally, due to the distinction between clockwise and counterclockwise rotations in differ­
ent mesh transition directions, it is imperative to define distinct rotation matrices accordingly.
The R1 in equation[2.27] donates the clockwise rotation; The R2 in equation[2.28] donates the
counterclockwise rotation.
R1 =
[ cos ∆β
sin ∆β
−sin ∆β
cos ∆β
]
(2.27)
R2 =
[cos ∆β
−sin ∆β
sin ∆β
cos ∆β
]
(2.28)
==PAGE:28==
18
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
2.2.3
Element definition
After obtaining the node coordinate in the model, the element can be established based on the
node information. This is done by specifying the element with the node numbers arranged in an
anti­clockwise direction.
Definition of node number
In Abaqus, the node number and the corresponding x coordinate and y coordinate are three nec­
essary information to define the node of the model. In this project, the approach used is to place
the column number first, place the row number after, and separate the two numbers with 0 in the
middle shown in Figure2.14b. The number of middle 0 is controlled by the parameter Af. The
equation for defining the node number is explained as follows.
N = nc · Af + nr
(2.29)
Where N is the node number, nc is the column number, and nr is the row number.
Af is set 106 as the default value. However, Abaqus only accept node number with a maximum
of 10 digits so the exponent of Af need to be adjusted when the column amount is high.
(a) The simple layout of mesh transition
(b) The node number definition
Figure 2.14: The method of defining the node number
The element in Abaqus defined by input file
Element definition is the last step to generate the model via importing the input file in Abaqus. In
this project, the 4­node element is specified. Define the first point in the anti­clockwise direction
from the bottom left corner and complete the definition by returning to this initial point. For in­
stance, follow the order: 7000001, 8000001, 8000002, 7000002, 7000001 shown in Figure2.15.
When defining the element, the start node is from the bottom left corner and this particular node
==PAGE:29==
2.3. MESH TRANSITION CONSIDERING MULTIPLE COARSE MESHES
19
serves as the identification for the element. This practice is adopted to distinguish between dif­
ferent elements and ensure uniformity. The mesh transition result applied in Abaqus is shown in
Figure2.15
Figure 2.15: The node sequence for determining an element in Abaqus (7000001, 8000001,
8000002, 7000002, 7000001)
2.3
Mesh transition considering multiple coarse meshes
In the practical situation, the coarse mesh side may have more than one element. Therefore, the
code needs to be upgraded to consider mesh transition in the situation of multiple coarse meshes.
In this project, using a bidirectional transition is essential for addressing the challenge. This
approach allows for the meshes from both sides to be merged into a single element in somewhere
the model.
2.3.1
Bidirectional transition
First of all, the bidirectional mesh transition to the single coarse mesh is promoted by establishing
the transition direction as a vector explained in equation2.5. Figure 2.16 shows the bidirectional
transition to the single coarse mesh. By utilizing this vector­based method, a more comprehen­
sive understanding of complex mesh transition mechanisms can be achieved.
==PAGE:30==
20
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
(a) The mesh transition from right to left
(b) The mesh transition from left to right
Figure 2.16: The bidirectional mesh transition
2.3.2
Position parameter
The next step to deal with the multiple mesh transition is utilizing the bidirectional transition to
first determine a position of the edge somewhere in the middle, and then do the mesh transition
on both sides towards this edge simultaneously shown as Figure2.17
Figure 2.17: The layout of bidirectional mesh transition
Therefore, A new position parameter ω is also set to describe the position of the intermediate
edge is explained as the following equation:
ω =
lfu
lupper edge
=
lfb
lbottom edge
(2.30)
Where lfu and lfb are the distance between the upper and bottom node of the fine mesh edge and
the upper and bottom node of the intermediate edge, respectively.
On the basis of the bidirectional transition shown in Figure2.16 and the parameter ω, mesh tran­
sition can be accomplished as the Figure2.18.
==PAGE:31==
2.3. MESH TRANSITION CONSIDERING MULTIPLE COARSE MESHES
21
Figure 2.18: The bidirectional mesh transition with intermediate line
Moreover, there is another conceived method to deal with the multiple mesh transition. However,
it can not be used with the established code due to the algorithm of determining the unit number
in each transition layer in Figure2.6, the amount of transition layer between adjacent blocks in
the vertical direction may not be uniform. To be more specific, if the number of mesh is 9, 2
transition layers are needed (9,3,1). However, if the number of mesh is 8, 3 transition layers are
required (8,4,2,1). The last transition unit type is also an uncertain factor even when the number
of nodes in adjacent blocks is identical, as in the case of each block having 8 nodes, the stacking
of the last transition units, illustrated as a combined two­in­one unit in Figure 2.5b, is unfeasible.
This is attributed to an additional node positioned on the border of the 4­node element.
Figure 2.19: Partition of the elements on both sides
==PAGE:32==
22
CHAPTER 2. MODELING METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:33==
23
Chapter 3
Validation with the wrinkle­defected spar
cap laminate model
The wrinkle model[11] in the study is established by extracting coordinate data from ply in­
spection images, using multiple Gaussian functions to fit the complex wrinkle geometry. Then,
reconstruct the entire laminate via interpolation of the ply geometries. In this part, to apply mesh
transition to the simulation, the wrinkle model and the mesh transition model are now integrated.
As shown in Figure3.1, the mesh transition models on both sides share the same set of parameters
and connect different types of coarse mesh bidirectionally.
Also, it is clear to distinguish the mesh difference between Figure3.1 and Figure3.2. This is only
in the case of standard units, where both sides are 1 meter and the wrinkle part is around 1.5 me­
ters in length. In subsequent applications, the difference in the number of meshes will become
even more pronounced. The CPE4 element type is utilized due to its application in handing plane
strain models and is suitable for simulating thick or infinitely long laminates[21][22].
Figure 3.1: The layout of the mesh transition model with 332 meshes on both sides of the wrinkle
model
Figure 3.2: The layout of the model with 12600 fine meshes on both sides of the wrinkle model
==PAGE:34==
24
CHAPTER 3. VALIDATION WITH THE WRINKLE­DEFECTED SPAR CAP LAMINATE MODEL
3.1
Comparison via tensile test with isotropic material
To demonstrate the feasibility of the mesh transition model, a tensile test is conducted on two
models: one model with mesh transition and the other model with the entire fine mesh. The
standard unit used in this test is the meter (m) and Pascal (Pa) and the element type is CPE4.
Both models are characterized as isotropic and elastic material shown in Table3.1. Moreover, to
better highlight the difference in the number of meshes, the length on both sides is 24 m and the
wrinkle part is 1.5 m.
After 0.01 m tension, the distinction in job time can be observed in Table3.2 by summarizing the
message file. This distinction is under the conditions of isotropic and purely elastic materials.
However, a greater variation in running time is expected while considering the varying material
properties and fibers.
Table 3.1: Isotropic material property
Young’s modulus (Pa)
Poisson ratio
3 × 109
0.3
Table 3.2: The comparison of job time
Fine mesh model
Mesh transition model
User time (sec)
15
0.8
System time (sec)
0.7
0
Total CPU time (sec)
16
0.8
Wallclock time (sec)
8
1
The strain extracted from the wrinkle part will serve as the essential criterion to compare the
two models. The strain that occurs on the right edge of the wrinkle is shown in Figure3.3 and
3.4. The mathematical model for calculating the difference percentage is given as the following
equation.
Difference = y1 −y2
y1
(3.1)
Where y1 is the strain of the fine mesh model and y2 is the strain of the mesh transition model.
The strain on the edge, as shown in Figure 3.3, corresponds to the right edge of the wrinkle
model with fine meshes in order to illustrate the difference of response in strain under the tensile
test. The strain in the x and y direction is as expected with the tiny difference which means the
relatively fewer meshes in the mesh transition case will not impact the accuracy of the simulation.
The shear strain exhibits a noticeable deviation in regions where it approaches zero. However,
this will have minimal impact on the simulation due to further simulation being related to the
==PAGE:35==
3.1. COMPARISON VIA TENSILE TEST WITH ISOTROPIC MATERIAL
25
failure so greater attention is given to regions with higher strain, and the region where shear
strain is close to zero is not significant and will not be considered.
Figure 3.3: Strain comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at the edge
connecting to the wrinkle model
Figure 3.4: Strain comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at the middle
line of the wrinkle model
==PAGE:36==
26
CHAPTER 3. VALIDATION WITH THE WRINKLE­DEFECTED SPAR CAP LAMINATE MODEL
3.1.1
Investigate the impact of different element types
To investigate the impact of different types of elements on the result, do the same tensile test
with the same material used before.
The element types are:
• CPE4: 4­node plane stress element, which ’CPE’ stands for the ’Continuum Plane Ele­
ment’
• CPE4R: 4­node plane stress element variant of the CPE4 with reduced integration to re­
duce the computation time by applying fewer integration points. However, it may cause
numerical errors, such as shear locking.
• CPE4I: 4­node plane stress element with incomplete integration, similar to CPE4R.
Among the selected element types, they all exhibit similar evolution shown in Figure3.5. Among
the various types of elements, CPE4 and CPE4I exhibit similar evolution summarizing from ε22
and ε11.
Figure 3.5: Strain comparison with different element types at the edge connecting to the wrinkle
model
3.2
Comparison via tensile test with composite laminate
In this section, The mesh transition model and the fine mesh model both consist of two distinct
components: composite and adhesive. The properties of materials are shown in Table3.3, 3.4,
and 3.5.
==PAGE:37==
3.2. COMPARISON VIA TENSILE TEST WITH COMPOSITE LAMINATE
27
Table 3.3: Elastic properties of composite material used in the simulations [23]
Material
Young’s modulus
Poisson’s ratio
Shear modulus
E11
E22
E33/GPa
v12
v13
v23
G12
G13
G23/GPa
Unidirectional (0°)
39.00
13.00
13.00
0.205
0.205
0.350
3.40
3.40
3.40
Table 3.4: Material properties of adhesive used in the simulations [23]
Material
Young’s modulus
Poisson’s ratio
Strength
E/MPa
v
σu
11
σu
22
σu
11 /MPa
Epoxy­based adhesive
3500
0.3
42.0
42.0
40.0
Table 3.5: Strength components of composite materials used in the simulations (unit: MPa)[23]
Materials
σu,t
11
σu,c
11
σu,t
22
σu,c
22
σu
12
Unidirectional (0°)
850
500
45
170
50
Where σij(i, j = 1, 2) stands for the stress direction in the local coordinate system; u is the
ultimate strength of the material; t and c stand for tension and compression, respectively.
3.2.1
Investigate the component on the right of the fine mesh model
In this part, the fine mesh model and the mesh transition model on the right portion of the wrinkle­
defected spar cap model are extracted to investigate the difference in stress and strain responses
on the boundary that connects with the fine mesh model during the tensile test, shown in Fig­
ure3.6. Furthermore, the challenge of applying the composite laminate in the simulation is the
material property of lamina and adhesive cannot be assigned layer by layer in the mesh transition
model due to the oversize of the single element. Therefore, the simplified model mesh transition
model is established, as depicted in Figure 3.6b, to make the material assignment more efficient.
To integrate the stiffness, Poisson’s ratio, and shear moduli of each oversized element, this study
employs the mixture rule[24] to address the problem, as described below.
El = VfEf + VmEm
(3.2)
1
Et
= Vf
Ef
+ Vm
Em
(3.3)
where Vc is the volume fraction of composites, Ec is Young’s modulus of composites, Vm is
the volume fraction of the matrix, and Em is Young’s modulus of the matrix, El is longitudinal
==PAGE:38==
28
CHAPTER 3. VALIDATION WITH THE WRINKLE­DEFECTED SPAR CAP LAMINATE MODEL
Young’s modulus, Et is transverse Young’s modulus.
ν = Vfνf + Vmνm
(3.4)
where νf and νm are the Poisson’s ratios of composite and matrix, respectively.
1
G = Vf
Gf
+ Vm
Gm
(3.5)
where Gf and Gm are the shear moduli of composite and matrix, respectively.
(a) The fine mesh model
(b) The mesh transition model
Figure 3.6: The model on the right on the fine mesh model
Figure 3.7: Strain comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at the edge
connecting to the wrinkle model
==PAGE:39==
3.2. COMPARISON VIA TENSILE TEST WITH COMPOSITE LAMINATE
29
Figure 3.8: Stress comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at the edge
connecting to the wrinkle model
The strain in this study is 0.3% by controlling the right boundary condition in Abaqus. The
comparison of strain and stress between the fine mesh model and the mesh transition model are
shown in Figure3.7 and Figure3.8. Significant differences in shear strain and stress are observed,
which can be attributed to the near­zero values of shear stress and strain in the fine mesh model.
Additionally, a high difference in longitudinal stress was also noted. Therefore, when calculating
the difference, the near­zero values at the denominator greatly amplify the result. The inference
that led to this result is the mixed rule cannot well determine the elastic property in shear and
longitudinal direction.
Due to significant differences in material properties between adjacent layers, two significantly
divergent values appear in one location. The larger value is attributed to the composite mate­
rial, whereas the smaller value is the adhesive. Then, to investigate the difference between the
fine mesh model and the mesh transition model and summarize the differences across multiple
directions of stress and strain, the failure criterion is used in this study to illustrate the failure
does not occur in advance before the wrinkle­defected part, as explained in Figure3.9. The two­
dimensional Tsai­Wu failure criterion[25][26] serves to describe the failure of composite plies,
as described below.
FTsai­Wu = F1σ11 + F2σ22 + 2F12σ11σ22 + F11σ2
11 + F22σ2
22 + F66σ2
12 ≥1
(3.6)
==PAGE:40==
30
CHAPTER 3. VALIDATION WITH THE WRINKLE­DEFECTED SPAR CAP LAMINATE MODEL
F1 =
1
σu,t
11
+
1
σu,c
11
(3.7)
F2 =
1
σu,t
22
+
1
σu,c
22
(3.8)
F12 = −1
2
(
1
σu,t
11 σu,c
11
+
1
σu,t
22 σu,c
22
) 1
2
(3.9)
F11 =
1
σu,t
11 σu,c
11
(3.10)
F22 =
1
σu,t
22 σu,c
22
(3.11)
F66 =
1
(σu
12)2
(3.12)
The strain­based failure criterion[27] is applied to predict the behavior of the adhesive, which is
the interface between two adjacent composite plies. It is modified for the two­dimensional case,
see equation3.13.
Finterface =
(
εt
22
εu,t
22
)2
+
(ε12
εu
12
)2
≥1
(3.13)
Where σij, εi,j(i, j = 1, 2) stands for the stress direction in the local coordinate system; u is the
ultimate strength of the material; t and c stand for tension and compression, respectively.
Figure 3.9: Comparison of failure criteria between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at
the edge connecting to the wrinkle model
==PAGE:41==
3.2. COMPARISON VIA TENSILE TEST WITH COMPOSITE LAMINATE
31
3.2.2
Investigate the impact of different elements
This study continues to investigate the impact of different element types considering the lami­
nate material, As shown in Figure3.10, 3.11, and 3.12. The difference in shear and longitudinal
direction is still huge compared with the mesh transition model and the fine mesh model, but
the CPE4R element shows lower fluctuation both in strain and stress. From the failure criteria,
the CPE4R element also shows better performance due to the lower difference and smoother
distribution of failure criteria from the comparison among Figure3.12 and 3.9. Furthermore, the
utilization of only one integration point and the implementation of reduced integration in the
CPE4R element can significantly decrease computational demands compared to other element
types.
Figure 3.10: Strain comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model with different
element types at the edge connecting to the wrinkle model
Figure 3.11: Stress comparison between the fine mesh and mesh transition model with different
element types at the edge connecting to the wrinkle model
==PAGE:42==
32
CHAPTER 3. VALIDATION WITH THE WRINKLE­DEFECTED SPAR CAP LAMINATE MODEL
Figure 3.12: Comparison of failure criteria between the fine mesh and mesh transition model at
the edge connecting to the wrinkle model (a) CPE4R (b) CPE4I
==PAGE:43==
33
Chapter 4
GUI Implementation
4.1
The interface in GUI
In this chapter, a GUI (graphical user interface) is established to implement the method of mesh
transition and visualize the detailed meshes in a user­friendly way. The interface consists of three
tabs as shown in Figure4.1. The function of the first tab is to import the necessary information
about the fine mesh model and the left and right coarse mesh nodes, then the code will generate
the visualization of initial coordinates automatically. The second tab is responsible for setting all
the parameters needed in the mesh transition to adjust the mesh shape to make the simulation and
the transition smoother. The third tab provides the generation of a new input file that combines
the fine mesh model and the mesh transition model.
(a) The first tab
(b) The second tab
(c) The third tab
Figure 4.1: The layout of interface
The process of importing coordinates is shown in Figure4.2. The code will identify the input file
and the text file and then visualize them in the axes component. The method to determine the
right and left boundary of the fine mesh model is shown as follows:
• Open the input file and scan each line.
• Parse and extract the lines containing three numbers, where each line represents node in­
formation. The first number denotes the node number, while the second and third numbers
correspond to the x­coordinate and y­coordinate of the node, respectively.
==PAGE:44==
34
CHAPTER 4. GUI IMPLEMENTATION
• Sort the data based on the magnitude of the x­coordinates. Subsequently, identify and ex­
tract the coordinates of the nodes with the smallest and largest values of x­coordinates. The
quantity of these nodes is determined by the user­defined parameter ’Fine mesh number’.
In the second tab of GUI, the visualization of the mesh transition can be observed in the axes
component shown in Figure4.3. The users can observe the configuration of the mesh transi­
tion model and modify it by changing the parameters in the interface (refer to pseudocodes in
Appendix A).
(a) Import the fine mesh model
and generate the fine mesh node
(b) Import the coordinate of
coarse mesh node on the left
(c) Import the coordinate of
coarse mesh node on the right
Figure 4.2: The process of importing coordinate
(a) The visualization of the
left part of the mesh transition
model
(b) The visualization of the
right part of the mesh transition
model
(c) The zoom­in visualization
of the right part of the mesh
transition model
Figure 4.3: The layout of the second tab of GUI
==PAGE:45==
4.2. ANNOTATIONS FOR COMPONENTS
35
4.2
Annotations for components
In the interface, numerous components are directly linked to the parameter settings as outlined
in Section 2.2.1. The function of each button and component is detailed in Table 4.2.
Table 4.1: The annotation of each Button/Component in GUI
Tab
Button/Component
Annotation
Import
Fine mesh model
Provide the function of importing the input
files, which provides a model composed of
fine meshes, offering the coordinate infor­
mation for the left and right boundaries of
the fine mesh model
Fine mesh number
The number of fine mesh nodes on each
boundary of the fine mesh model
Left Coarse Mesh
The text file with the node coordinate of
the coarse mesh side on the left
Right Coarse Mesh
The text file with the node coordinate of
the coarse mesh side on the right
Axes component
The visualization of the location of the
coarse mesh node and fine mesh node as
shown in Figure4.2
Parameter
Position parameter
The ratio of the distance from the fine mesh
side, transitioning to a position with only
one element, to the total distance which is
also explained in equation2.30
Mesh number factor
The exponent of 10. This value is used to
determine the number of digits for node
numbering in Abaqus (Abaqus only ac­
cepts a maximum of nine digits for node
number)
Fine mesh side, Coarse mesh side
The part that fine mesh side or coarse mesh
side transitions to the position with only
one element
Amplification
The multiple by which the width between
adjacent layers increases is shown as Fig­
ure2.10
Repetition 1
The repetition time between transition lay­
ers
==PAGE:46==
36
CHAPTER 4. GUI IMPLEMENTATION
Tab
Button/Component
Annotation
Repetition 2
The repetition time after the last transition
layer
Advance setting
The limitation angle of the transition unit
to provide the transition element too sharp,
where limitation angle 1 is ̸ ABC, and
limitation angle 2 is ̸ EM2M1 shown in
Figure2.13a. )
Axes component
The visualization of mesh transition model
Generation
Element type
The element type of the mesh transition
model in Abaqus
Set name
The set name of the mesh transition model
in Abaqus
Right boundary
The right boundary name of the mesh tran­
sition model in Abaqus
Left boundary
The left boundary name of the mesh tran­
sition model in Abaqus
4.3
File Manipulation with Data Appending
After importing the data and setting the parameter, the GUI will generate a new input file that
combines the mesh transition model and the fine mesh model in the middle as Figure3.1. The
operation will be completed through the following steps:
• Open the input file and copy the contents of the input file into a new file so that this new
file is editable.
• Scan each line and insert the specific symbol at the end of the area which records node and
element information, respectively.
• Insert the node and element information of the mesh transition model after the specific
symbol, respectively.
The benefit of this approach is that it retains the original details of the fine mesh model, including
the set, node number, and other relevant information.
==PAGE:47==
37
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In this research, the approach of the mesh transition which can integrate the global model into
the locally interested region to achieve the purpose of multi­scale FE modeling is successfully
established by MATLAB.
During the process of developing mesh transition, the script initially determines the necessary
number of transition layers and the number of elements in each layer. This is achieved by ana­
lyzing the coordinates and number of elements on both sides of the coarse and fine mesh. Then,
by setting parameters that control the number of repetition layers within the transition layers to
ensure a smoother simulation, the total number of element layers between the coarse mesh and
fine mesh is confirmed. Next, the shape of the elements can be modified and adjusted by control­
ling the parameter that rotates the angle of the quadrilateral elements, thus preventing distorted
elements. Finally, the coordinates and indexes of the nodes, along with the information of the
elements, are generated as the input file for the geometrical construction in Abaqus.
In the validation process with isotropic material and the laminate composite under tensile test,
the results confirmed expectations. Specifically, at the connected edge with the wrinkle model,
the comparison of stress and strain response between the fine mesh model and the mesh transi­
tion model shows an acceptable difference, mostly under 5%. In the case of composite laminate,
the strains and stresses in both shear and longitudinal directions remain close to zero. However,
notable differences are observed between the mesh transition model and the fine mesh model.
Although the values for the mesh transition model approximate zero, they do not achieve the
near­zero levels seen in the fine mesh model. This difference becomes pronounced due to the
use of the fine mesh model’s near­zero values as the denominator in the calculation, resulting in
significantly magnified differences. The Tsai­Wu and quadratic strain­based failure criteria yield
similar results, indicating that failure will not occur prematurely due to significant differences
in stress and strain in the shear and longitudinal directions. This demonstrates the feasibility of
applying the mesh transition approach to the composite laminate structure. CPE4R is recom­
mended as the preferred element type over CPE4 and CPE4I, given its superior computational
efficiency, smoother result production, and minimal differences in failure criteria.
Finally, the development of the Graphical User Interface (GUI) has been successfully completed.
Users can import the input file of the fine mesh model and the coordinate of the coarse mesh side
as the initial information, the regenerated input file will be output automatically. This interface
allows users to import the input file for the fine mesh model along with the coordinates of the
coarse mesh side as initial data. Subsequently, the system automatically regenerates and outputs
the updated input file.
==PAGE:48==
38
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
5.1
Further work
Based on the present achievement, the further work for the improvement are listed as follows:
• Extend the application of mesh transition to test its stability and feasibility in various mod­
els and structures.
• Develop a novel mix rule that better fits combining the properties of multiple laminate
layers into one element.
• Utilize the advanced Abaqus capability to investigate the feasibility of modifying the ma­
terial property around the integration points by judging their locations, which allows the
material properties of different lamina to be represented in a single element. Alterna­
tively, investigate the feasibility of using the FORTRAN code to establish the User El­
ement (UEL), aimed at merging the material properties of different lamina into a single
element.
• Upgrade the mesh transition technique by advancing from 2D to 3D elements, thereby
enriching the model’s complexity and accuracy in simulations.
==PAGE:49==
39
Bibliography
[1]
Clem Silverman. “Wind Power”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Energy 3.7 (2013), pp. 153–
180. ISSN: 21951292, 21951284, 13666851, 18653537, 18653529, 15238253, 00094978.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4471-4385-7_8.
[2]
M. R. Islam, S. Mekhilef, and R. Saidur. “Progress and recent trends of wind energy tech­
nology”. eng. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 21 (2013), pp. 456–468.
ISSN: 18790690, 13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2013.01.007.
[3]
Mladen Bošnjaković et al. “Wind Turbine Technology Trends”. eng. In: Applied Sciences
(switzerland) 12.17 (2022), p. 8653. ISSN: 20763417. DOI: 10.3390/app12178653.
[4]
Gielen Dolf. Future of Wind ­ Deployment Investment Technology Grid Integration and
Socio­Economic Aspects. eng. International Renewable Energy Agency IRENA, 2019.
ISBN: 1523151870, 9292601555, 9781523151875, 9789292601553.
[5]
Ozgun Sener et al. “Evaluation of the Effect of Spar Cap Fiber Angle of Bending­Torsion
Coupled Blades on the Aero­Structural Performance of Wind Turbines”. eng. In: Journal
of Solar Energy Engineering 140.4 (2018), p. 041004. ISSN: 15288986, 01996231. DOI:
10.1115/1.4039350.
[6]
Ningbo Xie et al. “A numerical study on the influence of composite wrinkle defect geom­
etry on compressive strength”. eng. In: Materials and Design 140 (2018), pp. 7–20. ISSN:
18734197, 02641275. DOI: 10.1016/j.matdes.2017.11.034.
[7]
Xiao Chen. “Fracture of wind turbine blades in operation­Part I: A comprehensive foren­
sic investigation”. eng. In: Wind Energy 21.11 (2018), pp. 1046–1063. ISSN: 10991824,
10954244. DOI: 10.1002/we.2212.
[8]
Fangai Yu et al. “Fatigue life prediction for the main spar with wrinkle defects of a wind
turbine blade”. eng. In: Fatigue and Fracture of Engineering Materials and Structures
44.10 (2021), pp. 2764–2780. ISSN: 14602695, 8756758x. DOI: 10.1111/ffe.13545.
[9]
Tomo Takeda. “Micromechanics model for three­dimensional effective elastic properties
of composite laminates with ply wrinkles”. eng. In: Composite Structures 189 (2018),
pp. 419–427. ISSN: 18791085, 02638223. DOI: 10.1016/j.compstruct.2017.10.086.
[10]
M. P. Alves, C. A. Cimini Junior, and S. K. Ha. “Fiber waviness and its effect on the
mechanical performance of fiber reinforced polymer composites: An enhanced review”.
eng. In: Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing 149 (2021), p. 106526.
ISSN: 18785840, 1359835x. DOI: 10.1016/j.compositesa.2021.106526.
[11]
Xiao Chen, Wilfried Njomo­Wandji, and Xing­Yuan Miao. “A robust and automated method
for geometric modelling of thick laminates with multiple and asymmetric ply wrinkles”.
eng. In: Composite Structures 287 (2022), p. 115319. ISSN: 18791085, 02638223. DOI:
10.1016/j.compstruct.2022.115319.
[12]
Peter J. Joyce, Danielle Kugler, and Tess J. Moon. “A technique for characterizing process­
induced fiber waviness in unidirectional composite laminates ­ Using optical microscopy”.
==PAGE:50==
40
BIBLIOGRAPHY
eng. In: Journal of Composite Materials 31.17 (1997), pp. 1694–1727. ISSN: 1530793x,
00219983. DOI: 10.1177/002199839703101702.
[13]
N. Krumenacker, A. Madra, and P. Hubert. “Image­based characterization of fibre wavi­
ness in a representative vacuum­bagged corner laminate”. eng. In: Composites Part A:
Applied Science and Manufacturing 131 (2020), p. 105774. ISSN: 1359835x, 18785840.
DOI: 10.1016/j.compositesa.2020.105774.
[14]
Xiao Chen et al. “Fatigue testing of a 14.3 m composite blade embedded with artificial
defects – damage growth and structural health monitoring”. eng. In: Composites Part A:
Applied Science and Manufacturing 140 (2021), p. 106189. ISSN: 18785840, 1359835x.
DOI: 10.1016/j.compositesa.2020.106189.
[15]
Douglas S. Cairns et al. “Progressive damage analysis and testing of composite laminates
with fiber waves”. eng. In: Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing 90
(2016), pp. 51–61. ISSN: 18785840, 1359835x. DOI: 10.1016/j.compositesa.2016.03.
005.
[16]
Bahattin Kanber and O. Yavuz Bozkurt. “Finite element analysis of elasto­plastic plate
bending problems using transition rectangular plate elements”. eng. In: Acta Mechanica
Sinica/lixue Xuebao 22.4 (2006), pp. 355–365. ISSN: 16143116, 05677718. DOI: 10 .
1007/s10409-006-0012-y.
[17]
Shizhe Chen et al. “Effects of Residual Stresses on Fatigue Crack Propagation of T­Joint
Using Extended Finite Element Method (XFEM)”. eng. In: Metals 12.8 (2022), p. 1368.
ISSN: 20754701. DOI: 10.3390/met12081368.
[18]
Sebastian D. Proell et al. “A highly efficient computational framework for fast scan­
resolved simulations of metal additive manufacturing processes on the scale of real parts”.
und. In: (2023).
[19]
Adrian Bojita et al. “A study of adaptive mesh refinement techniques for an efficient cap­
ture of the thermo­mechanical phenomena in power integrated circuits”. eng. In: Pro­
ceedings of the International Semiconductor Conference, Cas 2017­ (2017), pp. 205–208.
ISSN: 23770678, 1545827x. DOI: 10.1109/SMICND.2017.8101201.
[20]
Philip R. Evans. “Rotations and rotation matrices”. eng. In: Acta Crystallographica ­
Section D Biological Crystallography 57.10 (2001), pp. 1355–1359. ISSN: 13990047,
09074449. DOI: 10.1107/S0907444901012410.
[21]
“4 ­ Fractography Basics”. eng. In: Fractography in Failure Analysis of Polymers (2015),
pp. 48–92. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-323-24272-1.00004-0.
[22]
“Chapter 1 ­ General Problems in Solid Mechanics and Nonlinearity”. eng. In: Finite Ele­
ment Method for Solid and Structural Mechanics (2014), pp. 1–20. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
1-85617-634-7.00001-6.
[23]
Xing Yuan Miao and Xiao Chen. “Structural transverse cracking mechanisms of trailing
edge regions in composite wind turbine blades”. eng. In: Composite Structures 308 (2023),
p. 116680. ISSN: 18791085, 02638223. DOI: 10.1016/j.compstruct.2023.116680.
[24]
D.K.Y. Tam et al. “10 ­ High­performance ballistic protection using polymer nanocom­
posites”. eng. In: Advances in Military Textiles and Personal Equipment (2012), pp. 213–
237. DOI: 10.1533/9780857095572.2.213.
==PAGE:51==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
41
[25]
SW TSAI and EM WU. “GENERAL THEORY OF STRENGTH FOR ANISOTROPIC
MATERIALS”. eng. In: Journal of Composite Materials 5.JAN (1971), pp. 58–+. ISSN:
1530793x, 00219983. DOI: 10.1177/002199837100500106.
[26]
M. R.T. Arruda et al. “Tsai–Wu based orthotropic damage model”. eng. In: Composites
Part C: Open Access 4 (2021), p. 100122. ISSN: 26666820. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcomc.2021.
100122.
[27]
Chien Hua Huang and Ya Jung Lee. “Experiments and simulation of the static contact
crush of composite laminated plates”. eng. In: Composite Structures 61.3 (2003), pp. 265–
270. ISSN: 18791085, 02638223. DOI: 10.1016/S0263-8223(02)00047-8.
==PAGE:52==
42
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:53==
43
Appendix A
Pseudocodes
Algorithm 1 Point Generation and Plotting
Inputs:
p1 ­ the start point of the coarse mesh side
p2 ­ the endpoint of the coarse mesh side
pc1 ­ the start point of the fine mesh side
pc2 ­ the endpoint of the fine mesh side
Output:
Node coordinate of the initial fine mesh side and coarse mesh side
Initialise:
Nfine ­ number of elements in the fine mesh side
Ncoar ­ number of elements in the coarse mesh side
Generate points for the first line segment using GeneratePoints(p1, p2, Ncoar)
Generate points for the second line segment using GeneratePoints(pc1, pc2, Nfine)
function GeneratePoints(point1, point2, numberofelements)
x_values ←Calculate the x values for the points uniformly along the line segment from
point1 to point2
y_values ←Calculate the y values for the points uniformly along the line segment from
point1 to point2
direction ←Calculate the direction vector of the line segment from point1 to point2
Add noise to each point in the direction of the line segment
return the array of generated points [x_values, y_values]
end function
==PAGE:54==
44
Algorithm 2 Unidirectional Mesh Transition
Inputs:
Node coordinate of fine mesh side and coarse mesh side
Element number of fine mesh side Nfine
Output:
node coordinate of the mesh transition model
Initialise:
rt ­ Repetition parameter between transition layer
rtd ­ Repetition parameter after the last transition layer
Am ­ Amplification parameter
while Nfine ≥3 do
Calculate the value of Nfine/3
Store the step number
Store the remainder value
end while
Obtain the number of transition unit Ntran
Obtain the number of non­transition unit Nnon
▷The total number of transition unit = Ntran + Nnon
Obtain the number of transition layer Nl
Calculate the unit vector vbottom for the direction of the line connecting the bottom points of
the fine and coarse grid sides
Calculate the unit vector vupper for the direction of the line connecting the upper points of the
fine and coarse grid sides
Calculate the number of total layers Ntot between the fine mesh side and coarse mesh side
considering the repetition parameter rt and rtd
Calculate the layer width after setting the value of amplification parameter Am.
Determine the node coordinate via the layer width and the unit vector vupper and vbottom.
Calculate the unit vector vi for connecting the corresponding nodes on the upper and bottom
edges.
if The difference in y­coordinates or x­coordinate of the connecting points ≤1 × 10−10 then
Set the difference = 1 × 10−10
end if
for i = 1 : Ntot do
Calculate the node coordinates on the second column of the transition layer based on the
total number of transition units.
▷Ensure an even distribution of points across the second column
Calculate the node coordinates on the first column of the transition layer based on the
Ntran.
▷Utilize the middle point to ensure the nodes in the center of the transition unit
Calculate the node coordinates on the repetition layer based on the total number of transi­
tion units.
end for
Number each node
Write node data to the input file
Create elements
▷Assign element number and node order
Assign element type
▷Quadratic plane strain element ’CPE4’ for the model
Write element data to the input file
==PAGE:55==
45
Algorithm 3 Element Shape Optimization
Inputs:
Coordinate of node A
Coordinate of node B
Coordinate of node C
Coordinate of node D
Output:
Updated coordinate of node C
Initialise:
θini ­ expected angle
Calculate the original angle θABC using CalculateAngle(A,B,C)
Calculate the rotation angle θ = |θABC −θini|
Calculate the coordinate of node C using the rotation matrix
Calculate the new coordinate of node C using IntersectionPoint(A,B,C,D)
Replace the original coordinate of node C with the updated coordinate
function CalculateAngle(point1, point2, point3)
vector1 ←point1 −point2
vector2 ←point3 −point2
dot_product ←Dot product of vector1 and vector2
magnitude1 ←Norm of vector1
magnitude2 ←Norm of vector2
cos_angle ←Cosine of the angle from dot_product and magnitudes of vector1 and
vector2
angle_radians ←Inverse cosine of cos_angle
angle_degrees ←Convert angle_radians to degrees
return angle_degrees
end function
function IntersectionPoint(point2, point3_new, point3, point4)
Calculate the slopes m12 and m34 of the lines through point2, point3_new and
point3, point4 respectively
Calculate the y­intercepts b12 and b34 of the lines
Compute the x­coordinate of the intersection point x
Compute the y­coordinate of the intersection point y
return the intersection point as [x, y]
end function
==PAGE:56==
46
Algorithm 4 Visualization of element
Inputs:
Element index
Node index
Node coordinates
Output:
Element layout plot
Find the index of the element
Find the index of the corresponding node for the element
Find the coordinates of the corresponding node index
Plot the node
Connect two nodes one by one using line segments based on their order in the element
==PAGE:57==
47
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399,
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
