==PAGE:1==
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines
with Large Language Models
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Daniel Grathwol
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Brovej, Building
118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Daniel Grathwol - s213709
Signature
Date
ii
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) are a fundamental aspect of evidence-based medicine
as they help clinicians translate the available evidence into best practice. Given their im-
portance in the daily lives of doctors and patients, it is striking that they are still mostly
available in vast and complicated PDF documents and are not already fully digitized.
To this end, this master’s thesis is an interdisciplinary work that combines the fields of
medicine, process mining, and natural language processing and offers a novel approach
to the automatic translation of clinical guidelines into actionable formats. Therefore, we
first perform an in-depth analysis of the procedural elements present in clinical guidelines
across various medical specialties. This foundational work is crucial for understanding the
specific types of information that need to be extracted and structured, setting the stage for
a subsequent annotation study that results in the first annotated corpus of clinical guide-
lines. This data set can then be used for the fine-tuning of large language models for the
automated extraction of process modules and relations.
We find that Large Language Models can effectively extract procedural structures from
clinical guidelines. However, as our thorough annotation process revealed, the annota-
tion task is highly complex and exhibits a high level of ambiguity. Additionally, our findings
reveal that larger models, which have been exposed to extensive textual data during pre-
training, demonstrate commendable performance even on our small annotated test set.
Conditioning on the extraction of general information from text can additionally increase
a model’s performance. In addition, we present a metamodel that defines common struc-
tures in clinical guidelines which helps to standardize the annotation process and to find
patterns in the underlying textual data. We show that the extracted textual entities can be
successfully converted into a DCR process model and have to realize that an automated
comparison of processes and the associated detection of errors or discrepancies is too
error-prone due to the high level of uncertainty caused by the complexity of the guidelines
on the current status. We believe that our comprehensive findings are promising and
hope that they will spark further research into the automatic extraction of processes from
clinical guidelines in order to change everyday medical practice.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Motivation and Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Key Questions and Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
3
Theoretical Background
7
3.1
Clinical Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Computer Interpretable Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Business Process Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Information Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.5
Large Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Methodology
17
4.1
Formalizing Computer-interpretable Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Comparing Computer-interpretable Guideline Approaches . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Process extraction pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Process Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Annotation Study
25
5.1
Corpus Creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Guideline Dataset Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.3
Annotation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.4
Annotation MetaModel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.5
Process Model Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.6
Annotation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.7
Annotation Dataset Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6
Experiments
37
6.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.3
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7
Conclusion and Future Work
39
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Bibliography
41
A Appendix
51
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Acronyms
AGI
Artificial General Intelligence.
ATDP
Annotated Textual Description of a Process.
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers.
BPM
Business Process Management.
BPMN
Business Process Modelling Notation.
BPMS
Business Process Management System.
CIG
Computer-Interpretable Guideline.
CP
Clinical Pathways.
CPG
Clinical Practice Guideline.
DCR
Dynamic Condition Response.
DCRGraph Dynamic Condition Response Graph.
DMN
Decision Modeling Notation.
E2E
End-to-end.
EHR
Electronic Health Record.
EPC
Event-driven Process Chain.
FHIR
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources.
GDL
Guideline Definition Language.
GoLLIE
Guideline-following Large Language Model for IE.
GPT
Generative Pre-Trained Transformer.
LLM
Large Language Model.
NER
Named Entity Recognition.
NICE
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.
NLP
Natural Language Processing.
PAIS
Process Aware Information System.
PLM
Pre-trained Language Model.
RE
Relation Extraction.
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure.
TF-IDF
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency.
TNM
Task-Network Model.
UIMA
Unstructured Information Management Architecture.
WHO
World Health Organization.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
1
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and Problem Statement
CPGs are a fundamental aspect of evidence-based medicine as they help clinicians trans-
late the available evidence into best practice. The guidelines contain systematically de-
veloped recommendations intended to ensure that the right decisions are made in the
specific clinical setting. Despite their potential to improve the quality and effectiveness
of care, it must be fully recognized that there is a ’gap’ between the recommendations
of clinical practice guidelines and actual clinical practice. However, correctly applying all
evidence-based recommendations, can be time-intensive and challenging. This is espe-
cially true in the interdisciplinary treatment of patients with complex conditions affecting
multiple organ systems. Computerized clinical decision support tools try to mitigate this by
the evidence-based clinical recommendations into actionable, user-friendly formats that
integrate seamlessly into the workflow of healthcare systems. These tools aim to provide
clinicians with up-to-date clinical knowledge at the point of care tailored to the specific
context of each patient’s care. Several notations for the computerization of guidelines
have been proposed to facilitate the creation of executable clinical pathways based on
guideline recommendations. Nevertheless, all face the challenge of requiring a time-
consuming and resource-intensive process for implementation. Often a new language
has to be learned or they have a very technical implementation approach, which is often
not a real option for clinicians.
The task of process (information) extraction from textual descriptions to create structured
representations of clinical pathways highlights the challenges inherent in translating com-
plex, often ambiguous natural language into formalized, computationally interpretable
formats. The variability in writing styles, the diversity of domains, and the intricate na-
ture of clinical processes compound the difficulty of this task. Traditional approaches
have predominantly relied on templates and rule-based systems, which lack the flexibility
to accommodate the wide range of expressions found in clinical guidelines and Stan-
dard Operating Procedures (SOPs). This rigidity fails to address the real-world com-
plexity of medical practice, where guidelines must be adaptable to the specifics of in-
dividual cases. Furthermore, the reliance on extensive, carefully annotated datasets for
training deep learning models, coupled with the multi-perspective nature of process ele-
ments in healthcare—encompassing activities, data objects, actors, resources, and their
interrelations—necessitates significant efforts in data annotation and preparation.
With the recent advances in transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs), such as
BERT, Mixtral, and GPT-4 the landscape of natural language processing and its appli-
cation to use cases across industries has undergone a significant transformation. These
models have demonstrated unprecedented capabilities in understanding, generating, and
processing natural language, offering novel approaches never possible before.
This work explores the intersection of LLM research with the field of medical informatics
and business process management, by exploring the potential of these models to extract
clinical pathways and actions from clinical guidelines and SOPs. By comparing the effec-
tiveness of approaches using encoder-only models and state-of-the-art billion-parameter
decoder-only models, this research aims to identify optimal strategies for constructing
clinical pathways. While different approaches have been proposed for generating pro-
cess models out of textual descriptions, no one has used Large Language Models to
2
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:10==
create declarative clinical pathways from clinical standard operating procedures. Such
pathways, particularly when expressed in declarative process model notations like Dy-
namic Condition Response Graphs (DCRGraphs), provide a flexible and comprehensive
framework for representing clinical processes in a manner that is both computationally
interpretable and aligned with the nuanced requirements of medical practice.
Ultimately, the goal of this research is to contribute to the development of more sophisti-
cated, efficient, and user-friendly clinical decision-support tools. By leveraging the latest
advancements in natural language processing, this work aims to simplify and speed up
the creation of computerized clinical pathways so that they can be kept more up-to-date,
thereby improving the quality of care and patient outcomes. Through the integration of
LLMs and computerized decision support tools, we can move closer to realizing the full
potential of evidence-based medicine, making high-quality, personalized care accessible
to all patients.
1.2
Key Questions and Contributions
Following the previous problem description, this thesis investigates how clinical guidelines
can be translated into a computerized and procedural format using Natural Language
Processing (NLP) and process mining methods. The focus is on extracting procedural
information from clinical guidelines and answering the resulting research questions:
1. Can Large Language Models effectively extract the structure and recommendations
from clinical guidelines?
2. Can we identify patterns and temporal sequences among the extracted recommen-
dations and derive common structures?
3. Can the extracted recommendations and structures be converted into DCRGraph
process model?
4. Can the recency, correctness, and relevance of the extracted recommendations be
determined by utilizing the process models of the guidelines?
First, we need to find out what procedural elements are present in guidelines in different
medical specialties. Then, we need to translate these procedural elements into a process
modeling language. In particular, we will point out and discuss linguistic ambiguities and
determine the correct form of representation in the chosen modeling language. Within
the scope of this thesis, we will primarily focus on the modeling language DCRGraphs,
since it has already proven itself in other industries for example by representing procedu-
ral representations of legal texts and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). Existing
computational modeling languages for clinical guidelines should be incorporated into the
process of creating the translation definition. Based on this definition, an annotation guide
will be created, which will serve as the basis for the creation of a training and verification
dataset. A large language model will then be fine-tuned and used to classify and extract
the process information, followed by validation and benchmarking of the model’s perfor-
mance. Finally, the model will be incorporated into a user interface that allows the upload
of a clinical guideline and the subsequent display of the corresponding process model.
1.3
Structure
The thesis is divided into 7 chapters. Chapter 1 (“Introduction”) motivates the topic of
extracting process flows from clinical guidelines with the use of large language models
and explains the advantages this would have on everyday medical practice. Chapter 2
(“Related Work”) discusses previous approaches to computerizing clinical guidelines and
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
3
==PAGE:11==
the latest advances in the automatic extraction of processes from natural language texts.
Chapter 3 (“Theoretical Background”), provides all information necessary to be able to
follow the content of this thesis. In particular, the topics of Clinical Guidelines, Business
Process Management, Information Extraction, and Large Language Models are discussed
in detail. In Chapter 4 (“Methodology”) the automated extraction pipeline which was de-
veloped in the course of the work is outlined. Chapter 5 (“Annotation Study”) defines a
metamodel for annotating process elements in clinical guidelines. The methodological
considerations are then applied in the experiments in Chapter 6 (“Experiments”), in which
large language models are fine-tuned on the annotation dataset and used to perform the
extraction pipeline. Finally, Chapter 7 (“Conclusion”) summarizes the results of this thesis
and concludes the work.
4
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:12==
2
Related Work
In this section, we summarize the existing literature and state-of-the-art approaches to
process extraction from text. Since the number of publications dealing with process ex-
traction from clinical text is very small, we looked at the entire research field of process
discovery from text.
The initial search was based on several current systematic literature reviews on Process
Discovery from text [1, 2, 3, 4], and key papers were selected. No systematic review is
older than five years (since 2018). In addition to the systematic reviews, a snowball [5]
approach using the graph literature search tool ConnectedPapers was used to include
the most recently published papers.
Process discovery from text, a special branch of process discovery research, can be re-
duced to the use of an algorithmic function to convert a process description into a formal
representation, such as a Business Process Modelling Notation (BPMN). This research
area is much less explored than process recognition from event-log data, which is proba-
bly due to the fact that natural language, with all its ambiguity and variance, is still a major
challenge for process discovery tasks, as several papers point out [4, 6]. One of the sem-
inal papers in this research area from 2011 [7] is still cited as state-of-the-art in almost
every paper, despite the current developments in NLP, suggesting that there is still great
potential for research in this area. Therefore, in addition to the research area of process
discovery, this literature review also took a close look at the area of information extraction
from NLP to see how new developments can be applied to this problem. In particular, we
looked for papers that provide state-of-the-art results in the area of named entity recog-
nition and relation extraction. These two research areas are particularly important, as
shown by Friedrich, Mendling, and Puhlmann [7] paper, in which he extracts a BPMN
model from textual descriptions using WordNet and the Stanford parser. Simplified, the
BPMN elements are extracted with the help of the Stanford parser and transferred into a
so-called “World Model”; then the relations are produced with a WordNet model.
A general distinction can be made between two approaches, the direct approach and the
indirect approach. In the indirect approach, an intermediate representation is chosen -
an example of this is the “World Model” just mentioned. Later Sànchez-Ferreres et al.
[8] builds on this and introduces a framework for semantic reasoning called Annotated
Textual Description of a Process (ATDP), which is used to annotate the textual descrip-
tions. Similar to ATDP, Bellan et al. [9] defines an annotation scheme that then serves
as the basis for an extensive NLP pipeline that can be used first to classify and then ex-
tract elements of the process in the text. In this context, the so-called PET dataset was
created, which remains one of the few available datasets for the task at hand. The low
availability of datasets is probably one of the reasons why the publication of papers using
deep learning methods has been so scarce so far. The only other recent papers worth
mentioning that primarily use deep learning approaches are Han et al. [10] and Qian et
al. [11]. Another quite recent paper that takes a very similar approach to our work is the
paper from Bellan, Dragoni, and Ghidini [12], where they evaluated few-shot extraction of
processes from text using GPT-3.5.
In the direct approach to process discovery, the text is translated directly into a process
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
5
==PAGE:13==
model. López et al. [13], investigate the direct translation of texts into declarative pro-
cess models DCRGraphs, and then in a second paper López et al. [14] builds on this with
a hybrid approach that annotates legal texts and extracts processes also using a NLP
pipeline with multiple classifiers. Looking at the medical domain, much hasn’t been pub-
lished recently, except for Bombieri et al. [15], which extracted workflows from surgical
text resources and compared different LLMs on their performance.
In summary, there are already approaches to extract processes from text automatically,
but the medical domain has not yet been considered in terms of guidelines, and current
approaches such as entity recognition and relation extraction [16, 17] have not really been
explored.
6
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:14==
3
Theoretical Background
This chapter provides the necessary theoretical background for the following chapters.
It is divided into several sub-chapters and begins by explaining the relevance, different
types, and structure of CPGs. The declarative business process modeling notation DCR-
Graph is then discussed and differentiated from other notations. Additionally, it covers
the Pre-Trained Language Model and explains the Transformer Architecture. Lastly, it
explores Named Entity Recognition and Relation Extraction.
3.1
Clinical Guidelines
Clinicians must always stay updated with the latest scientific research to provide their
patients with the best possible treatment. This scientific knowledge is then combined with
their own clinical experience, as well as the patient’s circumstances and preferences - an
approach known as evidence-based practice [18].
CPGs play a big role in applying evidence-based practice, they are designed to influence
practitioners’ decisions about a health intervention [19]. CPGs are developed through a
systematic translation process involving multiple phases. Starting with the latest research
findings, published through studies and papers, being synthesized in systematic reviews
and meta-analyses. Based on them a collaborative consensus between experts in the
field is established on actionable best-practice recommendations. Finally, these evidence-
based recommendations are compiled into a CPG adapted to the setting and audience of
its intended use. CPGs are developed by many different organizations at all levels and
any scale [20, 21]. There are for example CPGs from World Health Organization (WHO)
[22] on a global level, national initiatives like in the UK National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) [23] or Hospital-initiatives like the SOP library from the Cantonal
Hospital of Lucerne in Switzerland [24].
However, Clinical Practice Guideline is a term that is used in many different ways and it
should be noted that CPG are often failing in their relevance and applicability in practice,
the formulation and style of the recommendations; their compatibility with existing opinions
and values and their complexity [25].
Therefore many so-called SOPs are often used in everyday clinical practice. Whereas
CPGs usually consists of a summary of the findings and detailed instructions for apply-
ing these findings to a patient [18]. In contrast, SOPs take into account additional fac-
tors including patient values and preferences, clinical applicability, and the allocation of
healthcare resources. Generally, they give even more attention to outlining the practi-
cal aspects of clinical interventions, often underlined by the usage of more task-oriented
language with a greater reliance on bullet points rather than continuous text [26, 27].
SOPs, therefore, help bridge the gap between evidence-based medicine, clinical practice
guidelines, and the local realities at the point-of-care [28]. Since CPGs and SOPs are
not always completely distinguishable from each other, we continue to use both terms in
this thesis, although we only use the term SOPs when we are talking about the specific
practice-oriented guidelines.
3.2
Computer Interpretable Guidelines
Computer-Interpretable Guidelines (CIGs) are structured representations of clinical prac-
tice guidelines and treatment pathways that computers can understand and execute.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
7
==PAGE:15==
They convert written healthcare protocols into formats that can be integrated into elec-
tronic health records (EHRs), enabling real-time decision support at the point of care.
Standardized terminologies make it possible to connect different systems and create com-
pletely new workflows. They also ensure that the latest evidence-based recommendations
are seamlessly integrated into patient care, reducing the cognitive load on clinical staff and
allowing them to focus more on the patient. An extremely big problem with paper-based
clinical guidelines is that it is very difficult to keep them up to date due to the high research
output. For this reason, CIGs offer a major advantage because they are easier to update
automatically and their content can also be searched more easily by machine learning
models. There are various implementation options for Computer Interpretable Guide-
lines, and a large number of different notations, mainly based on task network models. In
the methodology chapter, we will go into more detail on a few selected ones.
3.3
Business Process Management
Every organization in the world has a number of processes that require management and
optimization. In recent decades, this realization of their importance has led to a growing
interest in understanding how business processes run in companies in order to evaluate
their quality and increase their value [29]. In this context, the discipline of Business Pro-
cess Management has emerged, a combination of the existing disciplines of Business
Administration, Computer Science, and Organizational Management, with the aim of cre-
ating an overarching framework that encompasses “concepts, methods, and techniques
to support the design, management, configuration, execution, and analysis of business
processes” [30].
According to Weske [30] does “A business process consists of a set of activities that are
performed in coordination in an organizational and technical environment. These activi-
ties jointly realize a business goal. Each business process is enacted by a single orga-
nization, but it may interact with business processes performed by other organizations.”
Accordingly, business processes are built on a sequence of activities and their interact-
ing participants, typically captured by business process models, which serve as graphical
representations of the process. The modeling or design and analysis of processes is only
one step in the lifecycle of a business process, alongside configuration, enactment, and
evaluation. The modeling, design, and analysis of processes is just one step in the life
cycle of a business process, alongside configuration, enactment, and evaluation. Once
the process has been identified and modeled, i.e., the dependencies between the vari-
ous process steps have been identified, this process is implemented in the configuration
phase. A business process management system is usually used to set up and config-
ure the process (e.g., connecting external systems, access rights, or setting up a test
environment). The configuration phase is followed by the enactment phase, in which
the business processes are instantiated and executed. The status of the currently initial-
ized processes is then visualized within the business process management system used,
enabling oversight of the process and retrieval of supplementary details from execution
logs. The evaluation phase succeeds the execution phase; the collected execution logs
are analyzed as a whole, and an attempt is made to identify optimization potential [30].
Given that business processes can be designed with any degree of complexity, the phase
of design and analysis is the most human resource-intensive of all four phases, both in
terms of the need for human input and the cognitive load of the human resource [31, 32].
Particularly in industries such as healthcare, with stringent quality standards, regulatory
demands, and a significant number of stakeholders involved, is the construction of the
process the most demanding part and, therefore, highly important to be as efficient and
optimized as possible [33, 34].
8
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:16==
3.3.1
Process Representation and Modeling
Building on the preceding discussion of the significance of the process modeling phase,
this section examines the available modeling choices and languages. Several formal
modeling languages have been proposed in the literature, to name a few: Event-driven
Process Chain (EPC) [35], Petri Nets [36], BPMN [37], DECLARE [38], Dynamic Con-
dition Response (DCR) [39], besides these formal representations process models can
be captured in various formats, textual descriptions [40], checklists [41] or spreadsheets
[42]. The choice of representation is strongly dependent on two things, firstly the format
must convey the information based on its intended use and secondly, it should facilitate
the user’s comprehension of the process as well as possible [43]. For example, the Na-
tional Clinical Guidelines described in Section 3.1, clearly have their area of application, in
which the versatile detailed textual presentation, built around graded recommendations,
is the right form of representation for the user. They can still contain in natural language
described actions, but these are then accompanied by comprehensive continuous text,
which is well suited for comprehensive research on a specific topic. Whereas in the set-
ting of everyday clinical practice, however, these detailed formulations cannot present
the most important information quickly and concisely and a graphically visualized clinical
pathway might be the better form of presentation. Also Ottensooser et al. [44] cannot
point out a significantly better notation and thus once again confirms the justification for
both graphical and textual process modeling, but he emphasizes that unfamiliarity with a
notation can lead to a deterioration in understanding. In addition to the cognitive load and
effort of process creation already described in the introduction, this is another reason to
create an automated graphical representation alongside a textual description. However,
Friedrich, Mendling, and Puhlmann [7] has already recognized and defined that not every
sentence is relevant for the process model. In the following, we will use the term “pro-
cedural knowledge” (defined by [45]) to describe that a sentence or a section contains
relevant elements for a process model.
3.3.2
Difference between Declarative and Imperative Process Modelling
Imperative process modeling focuses on how a process is executed and describes pro-
cesses in a very explicit, enigmatic, and often over-specified way. This explicit approach
leads to a lack of understanding of why the activities must be carried out in a certain order.
Examples of imperative process modeling are BPMN or EPC. Declarative process mod-
eling languages like DCRGraph or DECLARE, on the other hand, use rules to describe
why activities can or must be executed in a certain order, and not how the process is to
be executed [46]. This means that activities can be executed in any order and as often
as required, provided this is not prohibited by a constraint, which leads to more flexibility
during build and runtime.
One would expect modeling languages specialized in clinical guidelines and care path-
ways to provide a similar kind of control flow flexibility as declarative languages, but ac-
cording to [47] Asbru, GLIF, EON or PROforma can model alternative pathways and pro-
vide flexibility to a certain degree, but it is impossible to handle exceptions and unforeseen
situations. All special situations must be predicted and modeled beforehand, leading to
very complex models, especially if the situation can occur at any point in the workflow.
For these reasons, we decided to use DCRGraph, a declarative modeling language that
can be combined with a workflow execution system [48].
3.3.3
Dynamic Condition Response Graphs
DCRGraphs were developed to formalize and digitize knowledge-intensive processes.
The process notation is supported by various formal techniques and serves as a formal
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
9
==PAGE:17==
Legend
DCR Relations
A 
 constrains the execution of a destination activity by 
specifying that it cannot be executed before a source activity has 
been executed at least once in the past
condition
A 
 constrains the execution of a destination activity by 
specifying that while a source activity is pending, the destination 
activity cannot be executed
milestone
An 
 allows a source activity to make a destination activity 
relevant in the process
include
An 
 allows a source activity to make a destination activity 
irrelevant in the process
exclude
A 
 allows a source activity to make a destination activity 
pending (i.e., required to be fulfilled)
response
A 
 allows a source activity to remove the 
pending marking from a destination activity
no-response relation
Figure 3.1: DCR Relations.
basis in the modeling and simulation tool1. Compared to other modeling notations, DCR-
Graphs is also able to model multi-perspective dimensions such as time and data con-
straints. A DCRGraphs specifies a process as a set of events and causal relations (depen-
dencies) between the events. The initial core formal model of DCRGraphs contained four
binary relations: dynamic inclusion, dynamic exclusion, condition, and response relation,
which was later supplemented by the milestone relation [49]. Each event has a fixed label
assigned, specifying the event (e.g., take blood samples). Moreover, a fixed set of roles
can be assigned to an event to express that only this actor or role can perform the event
or activity. For example: “Prepare Surgery” should only be executed by the role nurse.
Because DCRGraphs are executed, each event has a state defined by markings on the
graphical representation of the event. The event can have four different states included
(currently in the domain of discourse), excluded (not in the current discourse), pending
(waiting for execution), and executed (at least once). States can also be combined, i.e.,
an event can, for example, have been both pending and excluded simultaneously. The
different states can be seen graphically in Figure 3.1.
3.4
Information Extraction
Information Extraction (IE) is a subfield of NLP that deals with the automatic identification
and extraction of selected types of entities, relationships, or events in unstructured textual
data and converts them into a structured format. In the following, named entity recognition
and relation extraction, the two essential concepts of IE, are presented [50].
3.4.1
Named Entity Recognition
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a task in NLP used to find spans of text that constitute
proper names and tag the type of the entity. These entities can be any category of interest
e.g., person names, organizations, and locations. It is usually a useful first step in lots of
NLP tasks as it classifies tokens from a semantic perspective and can later be used for
tasks like e.g., linking text to information or extracting relationships between entities [50].
There exist two major challenges when applying NER: entity detection, and type ambigu-
ity. In contrast to other classification tasks, such as part-of-speech tagging, NER requires
1www.dcrgraphs.net
10
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:18==
the identification and labeling of text sections belonging to an entity, rather than individual
tokens (e.g., “University of Copenhagen”). Finding the exact beginning and end of such
an entity is particularly difficult, as non-entity tokens also predominate in a natural lan-
guage corpus [50]. The prevalent method for addressing the span-recognition dilemma
in NER is usually the so-called BIO tagging. In this process, tokens that begin a span of
interest with the label ’B’, tokens that occur inside a span are tagged with an ’I’, and any
tokens outside of any span of interest are labeled ’O’. For the aforementioned entity, this
would mean a label like: “[...] O-in, B-the, I-University, I-of, I-Copenhagen [...]”. There
exist many variations of the BIO tagging algorithm, however, the classical version is still
the most common [51].
The second difficulty constitutes the ambiguity in entity type. Depending on the context the
word appears in, it can refer to different entities. For example, the word “Porsche” could
either refer to the person Ferdinand Porsche, to a car, or to the automobile manufacturer.
To overcome this problem, the use of large language models was particularly advanta-
geous, as these incorporate the context of a sentence into their prediction in comparison
to simple statistical classifiers [50].
3.4.2
Relation Extraction
The task of Relation Extraction (RE) allows for the extraction of additional, nuanced infor-
mation from text by discerning and categorizing the semantic relations among mentioned
entities. To this end, the previous step of the NER can be built upon. Such semantic rela-
tionships, which typically manifest between two or more entities, enrich the understanding
and interpretation of the text [50].
There exist various types of relations, which can be specifically tailored to the applica-
tion task and the domain of interest. For example, for a geographical purpose, the “is in”
relationship can be identified between the city of Copenhagen and the country of Den-
mark. In distinct domains, such as in medical fields a useful relation would probably be
the “causes” relation between an illness and a symptom. These relations can then also
be represented in triples of <Entity1,Relation,Entity2>. Identifying these relationships is
instrumental in transforming unstructured text into a structured format, e.g., a knowledge
graph or a process diagram. This structured approach not only enhances the accessi-
bility of information but also facilitates more advanced analysis and applications of the
extracted data [50].
3.5
Large Language Models
This section provides an introduction to the transformer architecture which constitutes
the backbone of the most widely used large language models to date. It also details on
the training methods used to train such models on a large amount of textual data and
explains how models can be adapted for specific tasks or domains beyond their initial
general-purpose configurations. This section concludes with a brief examination of the
specific language models used in this work, highlighting their relevance and application
in the research presented.
3.5.1
Transformer Architecture
A language model fundamentally specifies a probability distribution over sequences of
tokens, where the probability of a token is predicted based on its context [52]. In the
field of Natural Language Processing, a lot of research has been conducted to determine
the best possible architecture for learning this distribution. These range from statistical
models such as Hidden Markov Models and N-Grams [53] to dense representations such
as Skip-Gram [54] and GloVe [55], which capture semantic word meanings, to LSTM-
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
11
==PAGE:19==
based models such as context2vec [56] and ELMo [57], which further encapsulate the
contextual representations of words. However, the recurrent nature of LSTMs, which
poses a challenge for parallelization, limits their scalability for processing large corpora.
In contrast, Transformer-based language models were found to continuously benefit from
larger architectures and data volumes, which is why they are currently established as the
state-of-the-art approach for language modeling [52].
Unlike earlier complex architectures based on RNN and CNN, the Transformer architec-
ture operates solely through a self-attention mechanism to capture dependencies across
entire input and output sequences, disregarding their length. The transformer architec-
ture introduced by the work of Vaswani et al. [58] consists of an encoder-decoder structure
similar to many other deep neural sequence-to-sequence models. Figure 3.2 depicts the
conventional Transformer architecture, which consists of multiple stacked encoding layers
for the encoder (shown on the left-hand side of the figure) and multiple stacked decoding
layers for the decoder. In order to capture long-range dependencies the representation
of the word input comprises a sum of a word embedding and a positional embedding.
This enables the encoder and decoder to be sensitive to the position of the input words in
the sequence and capture more semantics [59]. Each of the encoding layers consists of
two different sub-layers, known as the self-attention sub-layer and a feed-forward neural
network (FFN) sub-layer. Each sub-layer utilizes a residual connection, and after each
layer, a normalization step is applied, allowing a successful training of the deep stack of
self-attention layers without suffering from the vanishing gradient problem [60].
Positional  
Encoding
Positional  
Encoding
Inputs
Inputs
Outputs 
(shifted right)
Outputs 
(shifted right)
Positional  
Encoding
Positional  
Encoding
Nx
Nx
Output 
Probabilities
Output 
Probabilities
Softmax
Softmax
Linear
Linear
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Feed 
Forward
Feed 
Forward
Feed 
Forward
Feed 
Forward
Multi-Head 
Attention
Multi-Head 
Attention
Multi-Head 
Attention
Multi-Head 
Attention
Masked  
Multi-Head 
Attention
Masked  
Multi-Head 
Attention
Input 
Embedding
Input 
Embedding
Output 
Embedding
Output 
Embedding
Nx
Nx
Figure 3.2: Transformer Architecture
adapted from [58].
The self-attention mechanism is based on the attention mechanism, also known as scaled-
product attention (see Equation 3.1). This is applied to a group of queries, which are the
12
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:20==
vector representations of each word in the sequence.
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(3.1)
The Scaled-Product Attention is a function of the query matrix Q, key matrix K, and value
matrix V , which represent distinct embeddings of words in a sequence obtained by the
multiplication of the input matrix X with three different weight matrices that are trained
during model training. To calculate Scaled Dot-Product Attention, the dot product between
the query matrix Q and all keys in K is computed, then divided by the square root of the
dimension of keys dk. Subsequently, a softmax function is used for scaling to derive
attention weights, which are then multiplied by the value matrix V [58].
The Transformer architecture involves multiple repetitions of the self-attention mecha-
nism, which are carried out independently and in parallel using linearly projected versions
of Q, K, and V . These outputs are then combined and subjected to another round of lin-
ear projection. Different parameter matrices W are learned during training for conducting
these projections. This approach enables the model to focus on information from dis-
tinct representation subspaces at various positions and is, therefore, called Multi-Head-
Attention [58].
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, ..., headh)W O
where headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(3.2)
The Transformer decoder has a structure similar to that of the encoder. It comprises L
stacked decoding layers, but in contrast to the encoder stack, it contains an additional sub-
layer that performs multi-head attention over the output sequence of the encoder stack.
In addition, the output embeddings are offset by one position, and the self-attention layers
are modified to mask out all values in the input of the softmax function after a position i
to ensure that the model is not attending to subsequent positions and preserve the auto-
regressive property [58].
3.5.2
Model Adaptation
Given the scaling properties provided by the transformer architecture, it is possible to
train models on large amounts of data. Since annotated data is very expensive, previous
research has shown that pre-training language models on unlabelled text mainly crawled
from the web, equips these models to grasp general linguistic features. This, in turn,
increases their performance on more specialized, smaller data sets, and also reduces
the risk of overfitting [61]. It has thus become a state-of-the-art approach to initialize the
parameters of a model through pretraining and then adapt them to a specific application.
The possibility to train a model leveraging a large amount of unlabeled data is enabled
by the self-supervised training algorithm. In self-supervised learning, the model derives
implicit supervision signals by manipulating unlabeled data, a process that in language
modeling usually involves modifying the text by removing or masking certain words. The
language model is then trained to predict these altered tokens, thereby learning to approx-
imate the probability distribution over tokens [50]. However, the exact implementation of
the language modeling objective can vary across models. For example, BERT employs
a masked language modeling objective, masking individual tokens and predicting them
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
13
==PAGE:21==
Translate English to German:

cheese => Käse
dog => Hund

holiday => ________________
task description
examples
prompt
Figure 3.3: In-Context Learning Example.
based on the remaining tokens [62]. In contrast, GPT-2 adopts a causal language mod-
eling objective and always predicts the next token based on the preceding token in the
sequence [63].
Since language models are generally used for a specific domain or for solving various
tasks, it is necessary to adapt the pre-trained model to fulfill a specific task (e.g., question
answering). To realize this goal, various adaptation methods can be utilized, with the
three most prevalent ones elaborated upon as follows.
Traditional Fine-Tuning
The traditional approach to adapting models is by complementing model pre-training with
supervised fine-tuning and updates of the model parameters. To this end, the pre-trained
model is again trained on a training dataset of examples demonstrating the correct be-
havior for a task (e.g., labeling the correct sentiment of a movie review) and then used for
inference on a held-out data portion of the same task [64]. This approach, although proven
quite efficient [63], has some shortcomings. First, many task-specific labeled examples
are needed to learn the task sufficiently, and second, the model is only specialized for one
task at a time with a certain model head trained to transform the output into the correct
task format (e.g. the labels ’positive’, ’neutral’ or ’negative for a sentiment classification)
[64, 50].
In-context learning
In contrast to supervised fine-tuning, no update of the model parameters is required for
in-context learning. Under the hypothesis that models can already gather sufficient knowl-
edge in an extensive pre-training phase, this method only involves “conditioning” the mod-
els. For this purpose, the model is provided with a task description in the input context
and maybe additionally some examples and let it fulfill the task [65]. An example input
prompt is shown in Figure 3.3.
Depending on how many examples are provided to the model, a distinction is made be-
tween the zero-shot, one-shot, or few-shot in-context learning methods [65]. In-context
learning offers numerous benefits, such as obviating the need for task-specific fine-tuning,
thereby conserving resources, and enabling a single model to tackle multiple tasks. Nonethe-
less, this strategy is constrained by the model’s context length capacity and may under-
perform on complex tasks that necessitate parameter updates [66].
Instruction Fine-Tuning
Recently, much work has focused on an approach combining the two, called Instruction
Tuning [67, 68, 69, 66]. The idea behind it is to fine-tune the model on a large set of
different tasks verbalized via natural language instructions and let it respond in free text.
Through this, it is possible to train models in a more natural conversational situation and
also to train them for different tasks without changing the setup (i.e., training a new model
head). It is also simple to train while providing good generalization to unseen tasks. A
14
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:22==
shortcoming is however that collecting a large number of high-quality instructions for the
training procedure is expensive [66].
3.5.3
Established Pre-Trained Transformer Models
The discussed Transformer architecture has been successfully applied in various varia-
tions. Due to its outstanding performance across NLP tasks and the significant attention
from researchers, numerous models and papers have been published since the release of
the Transformer paper in 2017 [58]. Although originally designed as an encoder-decoder
architecture, many models implement the encoder and decoder of the Transformer sep-
arately. For example, Autoregressive language models only use the decoder part of the
original transformer architecture and are thus very well suited for the generation of natural
language texts. Open AI’s Generative Pre-Trained Transformer (GPT) model series is a
prominent example of autoregressive models [64]. Conversely, Auto-encoding models
only implement the encoder stack of the transformer architecture and are therefore par-
ticularly effective for tasks that require an increased natural language understanding as
they focus on encoding as much information as possible from the text [59, 60].
Below, we take a closer look at the models that will be used in the course of this thesis.
We use a selection of mostly very up-to-date models, but also mainly open models (ex-
cept for GPT-4) whose parameters are openly available to ensure the reproducibility of
our results. We use two encoder-based models, BioLinkBERT, which has already been
fine-tuned on medical data, and XLM-RoBERTa, which has shown good performance on
NER tasks. We also use three different decoder-based and instruction fine-tuned models.
We compare here Mistral with standard architecture, Mixtral, with a Mixture-of-Experts
architecture, and Gollie, a model fine-tuned specifically for information extraction tasks.
Finally, we employ GPT-4 the best-performing model to date to verify the quality of our
results.
BioLinkBERT
One of the most influential pre-trained transformer auto-encoding model is Bidirectional
Encoder Representation from Transformers (BERT). It was trained on a large corpus of
about 3.3B words from crawled English Wikipedia and BookCorpus [70] and can be fine-
tuned on a variety of different tasks. The training input sequence is formed by the concate-
nation of two sentences that are separated by a special delimiting token [SEP] and starting
with the special token [CLS]. The input embedding is then calculated by summing up the
token, segmentation, and position embeddings of the sentence tokens using WordPiece
embeddings. Word pieces are split with ##; the maximal supported sequence length is
512 tokens [62]. In the biomedical and clinical domain, a variety of domain-specific BERT
adaptations have been explored and released, for instance, BioBERT [71], SciBERT [72],
ClinicalBERT [73], PubMedBERT [74] or BioLinkBERT [75].
XLM-RoBERTa
RoBERTa, another established model developed by Facebook AI model published in 2019
[76]. They presented an improvement to the pre-training of BERT models, which they
called RoBERTa, and showed that it is able to outperform its predecessor on the GLUE
benchmark significantly. Although the architecture of the two models is identical, they
differ in the training objectives, training duration, batch sizes, and the length of the se-
quences used for training. In addition, the data used for training was increased to a total
training size of 160 GB of uncompressed text, and its diversification was enhanced [76].
XLM-RoBERTa is the successor of RoBERTa, and it has been specifically designed to
enhance the cross-language capabilities of its predecessors and provide a more robust
solution for processing and understanding multiple languages within a single framework.
Unlike RoBERTa, which is trained on monolingual data, XLM-RoBERTa is trained on a
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
15
==PAGE:23==
large-scale, multilingual dataset comprising texts from 100 different languages. This ex-
tensive and diverse training process enables the model to capture a wide range of lin-
guistic features and nuances, thereby enhancing its ability to understand and translate
between languages without requiring language-specific training data or modules. Be-
yond multilingualism, XLM-RoBERTa shows state-of-the-art results on NER tasks and is
still used to this date [77].
Mistral v2 Instruct
The Mistral Instruct model is a decoder-based LLM which was recently released by Jiang
et al. [78]. It was instruction fine-tuned on a large set of instruction datasets publicly
available on Huggingface2 and has been shown to outperform recent instruction fine-
tuned models while being more parameter efficient. In this work, we use the updated
version (v2) of the model that contains some updates and improvements over the initial
release [78].
Mixtral
The Mixtral model was also recently released by Mistral AI. In contrast to its predeces-
sor Mistral, this decoder-based LLM uses a generative Sparse Mixture-of-Experts archi-
tecture to store knowledge more efficiently and require fewer parameters. The model
consists of eight so-called “experts”, forming subnetworks of the model. During training
on text sequences, a routing mechanism at each model layer decides on two experts to
process a particular token and combines their output at the end. By separating concerns
in this way, certain areas of the model are used for certain processes and thus become
experts in this area [79].
GoLLIE
Guideline-following Large Language Model for IE (GoLLIE) is another decoder-only model
and constitutes a fine-tuned version of the instruction-tuned Code-LLaMA [80] model.
Compared to the other models, it was specifically fine-tuned to learn how to attend to
annotation guidelines and perform well-known IE tasks. It thus provides a very good
addition to the existing models [81].
GPT-4
OpenAI released ChatGPT in November 30, 2022. It is a chat interface powered by a
refined version of OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 model comparable to InstructGPT. GPT 3.5 stands
out from other models because it has been tailored to improve user input responses. With
InstructGPT, reinforcement learning from human feedback was utilized for the first time.
This method involves fine-tuning a reward model with human feedback and utilizing it as
a reward function to optimize a supervised model in order to produce the best possible
response [82]. Following GPT-3.5, the release of GPT-4 of OpenAI’s GPT-Series out-
performed all comparable LLMs on all benchmarks when it was launched on March 14,
2023 (Zhao et al. [64]). Many have referred to this model as the first step toward Artifi-
cial General Intelligence (AGI) [64], enabling completely new approaches for a number
of tasks. Despite its impressive performance, it remains a closed-source model and has
raised questions about the risk of concentration of power, as well as concerns regarding
audibility and copyright issues [83].
2https://huggingface.co/datasets
16
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:24==
4
Methodology
This chapter describes different categories needed to represent clinical pathways and
guidelines in a computerized process model and evaluates if the DCRGraph notation can
represent all the categories. Initially, we establish a descriptive model to bridge clinical
pathways and guidelines, providing a unified structure for analysis. Subsequently, we
compare different modeling languages developed specifically for the creation of clinical
computer-interpretable guidelines and pathways. Through this analysis, we seek to de-
lineate a common framework for guideline formalization and identify any elements that
DCR might lack or find challenging to represent.
4.1
Formalizing Computer-interpretable Guidelines
The basis for the creation of a process model or clinical pathway on the basis of a guideline
is the assumption that there are overarching elements in the structure regardless of the
notation. By looking at various studies analyzing pathways and guidelines, we arrive at
the following entities [84, 85, 86]:
• goal (pathway) or purpose (guideline)
• indications and contra-indications: when does this guideline apply
• plan: natural language statements describing a set of tasks, decisions, and time
conditions. Tasks and decisions may be sequential or concurrent and could be
for example “observe blood pressure”, “medication administration” or “perform a
treatment”
• classification rules: convert a patient value into a classification further used in the
course of the guideline, for example, a SpO2 of 88% is considered critical in a Covid-
19 guideline.
• decision rules: logical statements, flowcharts, or tables, defining a set of rules based
on input variables coming from the patient’s state (e.g., systolic pressure). Often
used to decide on a following task.
Some modeling notations combine the planning part and the rules part (classification rules
and decision rules), others split it into different notations, like for example BPMN and DMN.
4.2
Comparing Computer-interpretable Guideline
Approaches
Expanding on Section 3.2, in which the term CIG was introduced, we will examine the
variations in the formal modeling notations for clinical guidelines. The comparison will
focus primarily on step 1 of the design and analysis phase of the CIG lifecycle 3.2, but we
will still include the other phases to present as holistic a picture as possible. To compare
all the different guideline modeling notations we build on the comparisons done by Peleg
et al. [87], Mulyar, Aalst, and Peleg [88], and Clercq, Kaiser, and Hasman [89] combined
with the other work done in this domain area [90, 47, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96].
In Table we give an overview of the different elements discussed in the papers mentioned,
and in the following subsections, we go into more detail on why they are needed and
whether and how the element can be represented with DCRGraph. In the course of the
annotation study described in Chapter 5, we will examine how well these defined elements
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
17
==PAGE:25==
can be applied to real guidelines in reality. However, a qualitative test by physicians who
evaluate elements and assess whether all important information from the guideline can
be found in the extracted process will not be part of this work. This is a field for further
research.
We conduct a comprehensive analysis of four prevalent Computer-Interpretable Guide-
line (CIG) methodologies based on Task-Network Models: Asbru [97, 98], EON [99, 100],
GLIF [101, 102], and PROforma [103, 104], alongside a Declare extension known as
CIGDec [47], and the specifications, Guideline Definition Language (GDL) and Task Plan-
ning, which are two modules build on the Electronic Health Record (EHR) interoperabil-
ity standard openEHR. Although an even wider array of languages such as PRODIGY,
GUIDE, Gaston, GLARE, SAGE, HELEN, DeGel, SEBASTIAN, and the Arden Syntax ex-
ist within this domain, our selection was strategically made based on the recency of their
development and their frequency of consideration in different papers. Except for CIGDec,
which is not really used, but is one of the only declarative approaches specifically devel-
oped for the representation of clinical pathways. The elements are very similar at first
glance, except for slightly different terminology. Even if the declarative language CIGDec
does not initially have elements like case, but this is because CIGDec does not have an
execution engine where patient case information could be input.
4.2.1
Organization of Guideline Plan Components
All four CIG methodologies (Asbru, EON, GLIF, and PROforma) offer a mechanism for
organizing guideline plan components through nesting and branching. Asbru and PRO-
forma employ a single, generic class of plan objects, facilitating straightforward repre-
sentation of complex clinical workflows. EON and GLIF differentiate between manage-
ment guidelines and consultation templates or macros, respectively, to accommodate
both high-level decisions and detailed action recommendations. DCRGraphs, in con-
trast, emphasizes a declarative approach that inherently supports flexible nesting and
branching without the need for separate plan object classifications. This contrasts with
openEHR’s task planning model, which relies on a structured but adaptable framework to
represent clinical workflows, potentially offering a more standardized approach to orga-
nizing guideline components.
4.2.2
Representation of Eligibility Criteria
Eligibility criteria are crucial for determining which patients or clinical scenarios a guideline
or pathway applies to. Asbru, EON, GLIF, and PROforma each provide mechanisms for
defining these criteria, albeit with varying degrees of complexity and specificity; in EON, for
example, there is a separate problem solver that selects the appropriate guideline based
on patient information. Asbru is used to define pre-conditions. The criteria are all defined
separately from other criteria and decisions. In the openEHR specification, on the other
hand, there are no general eligibility criteria but so-called subject_preconditions, which
are defined at the task level and not at the guideline level. In the DCRGraph notation,
there are no direct eligibility criteria at the process level, thus the appropriate process has
to be selected manually. This is also due to the fact that DCRGraph is a cross-industry
notation. However, similar to the openEHR specification, DCRGraph condition rules can
be used to create a constraint that, for example, a start event may only be executed under
certain conditions, but all other events must be excluded or also conditioned.
4.2.3
Representation of Goals and Outcomes
Goals and outcomes are essential for guiding the direction of clinical care and for eval-
uating the effectiveness of a guideline or pathway. The CIG methodologies vary in how
explicitly they represent these elements, with Asbru offering the most developed syntax
18
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:26==
for expressing a wide range of intentions. GLIF3 is talking about implementing goals in
the future. openEHR does not consider goal and outcome descriptions, except in their
Guideline Definition Language. DCRGraphs has no particular element for describing the
goal or purpose of a process or event, but in the DCR Portal, it would be possible to add
the goals and expected outcomes into the description of the process.
4.2.4
Representation of starting and end points
For the practical application of guidelines and pathways, the process needs some kind
of start and end criteria. While all four CIG methodologies support the definition of start
and end criteria, EON is the only one with a clear start and end action, all others use
states on action level. Asbru and PROForma, for example, have conditions for terminating
the complete process. The flexibility of DCRGraphs allows the specification of multiple
potential endpoints based on exclusion rules, which can then be used to “exclude” certain
events so that they can no longer be executed. But an important consideration in this
category is the case where the doctor needs to skip steps and start executing in the
middle of the defined process. Fortunately, DCRGraph has this capability out of the box
due to its declarative nature, where every unconstrained included task can be executed
at any point in time.
4.2.5
Representation of Actions
Actions are the core components of any clinical guideline or pathway, detailing the specific
interventions or decisions to be made. Particularly noteworthy in this category are the
task classes from PROForma, where besides the normal action they also have a task
class called enquiries, which are points in the guideline at which information needs to be
acquired from some person or external system.
4.2.6
Representation of Decision Model
The decision model is where the complexities of clinical reasoning are encapsulated, guid-
ing clinicians through if-then-else logic to reach appropriate conclusions based on patient
data. Asbru and PROforma uniquely support expressing the effects of actions, which
is crucial for modeling the reasoning behind clinical decisions. DCRGraphs’ declarative
nature inherently supports complex decision-making processes by allowing for the specifi-
cation of constraints and dependencies between tasks. In comparison, openEHR’s struc-
tured approach could support a standardized representation of decision logic, potentially
enhancing the clarity and interoperability of decision models.
4.2.7
Representation of Patient Data Elements
Patient data elements are crucial for informing clinical decisions and actions within guide-
lines. While CIG methodologies like GLIF and EON specify actions with detailed slots
for patient data. DCRGraph offers through data events the possibility to act on external
data inputs. There is no standard pattern available to display a combination of symptoms.
In openEHR, we have the possibility to integrate patient data through a so-called proxy
subject.
4.2.8
Representation of Medical Concepts
The accurate representation of medical concepts is vital for ensuring that guidelines and
pathways are based on sound clinical knowledge. Asbru and PROforma’s ability to ex-
press the effects of actions and utilize postconditions highlights their advanced capabilities
in this area.
4.2.9
Representation of Supporting Information
Supporting information, such as literature citations and explanatory materials, is essential
for grounding clinical guidelines in evidence and for providing clinicians with context and
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
19
==PAGE:27==
rationale for recommendations. The methodologies vary in how they incorporate support-
ing information, with MLMs including specific slots for citations and links.
To summarise, although DCRGraph is not a notation specifically developed for medical
guidelines and processes, it can still map many standard representation requirements.
It is evident that DCRGraph does not have a direct method for expressing medical con-
cepts, especially patient status. While openEHR or PROforma can easily represent such
information and therefore simplify the modeling process, it poses a challenge in DCR-
Graph. Specific observations like headaches and findings such as lung cancer, are often
occurring in guidelines, but do not have straightforward representations in DCRGraph,
potentially leading to increased complexity in the process model depending on how it is
modeled. This will be further examined in Chapter .
4.3
Process extraction pipeline
This section outlines the NLP pipeline designed for extracting process elements from clini-
cal SOPs. Detailed discussions on each pipeline component are presented in subsequent
subsections. For now, we will consider the annotation process as a given. It is explained
in detail in Chapter 5.
4.3.1
Dataset Preprocessing
The preprocessing stage is pivotal for the complete functionality of the pipeline. Initially,
the annotations are extracted from the INCEpTION tool in the so-called UIMA format [105],
which needs to be transformed into a format suitable for classifier training. This requires
converting entities into the BIO format (described in Section 3.4.1) and resolving and as-
signing relations between entities to the respective sentence. A critical observation during
preprocessing was the inadequacy of INCEpTION’s sentence splitter, which incorrectly
splits sentences, particularly at abbreviations, and fails to handle Markdown syntax prop-
erly. To address this, we refined the sentence-splitting algorithm to suit our specific tasks:
• For Section Extraction: Utilizing the Markdown formatting elements, headings and
subheadings are identified. Text is then segmented into data instances from one
heading to the next, capped at 512 tokens. If a heading includes subheadings,
these are grouped into a single data instance alongside the main heading.
• For NER: The text is divided into data records according to the punctuation. Head-
ings, list elements, and similar elements are treated as separate data records.
• For RE: Since relationships can span multiple data sets, it is essential for this task
to bundle multiple data sets into a single data instance. This bundling respects the
512-token limit and ensures compatibility with the Bert model used for subsequent
training. This approach enables the comprehensive mapping of relationships within
the dataset.
4.3.2
Section Classification
Following the preprocessing of the dataset, we now focus on the classification of the
sections. The structuring of CPGs and SOPs into clearly defined sections significantly
enhances their usability, making it easier to navigate and search [106]. Similar to tex-
tual representations, structure, and nesting also play a major role in the presentation of
processes. Abbad Andaloussi et al. [107] emphasizes the importance of process model
layout in the context of declarative processes. He asserts that a well-organized layout,
characterized by effectively grouped events, is fundamental to the clarity and overall qual-
ity of a process model. Evidence-based CPGs and SOPs are usually developed using
20
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:28==
# Pulmonology - Bronchoscopy and BAL #. Doctors and nurses at Rigshospitalet and referring pediatric departments in Denmark. Nurses in 
regular wards who provide nursing care to children who undergoing bronchoscopy and BAL procedure. 

### **Definitions:** ### Bronchoscopy - in a pediatric context - "pediatric flexible bronchoscopy" is a binocular examination with video recording 
of the airways, preferably performed by pediatric specialists with expertise in pediatric pulmonology and acquired competence to perform the 
procedure. >100 bronchoscopies are performed annually on children at RH. BAL (Broncho Alveolar Lavage) is a procedure whereby a working and 
suction suction channel in the flexible telescope is flushed with fluid and suctioned back for collection of material for examination for 
microbiology, histology and pathology. 

### **Purpose of the examination:** ### 
**Bronchoscopy:** The purpose of bronchoscopy is to visualize anatomy from and larynx to segmental bronchi for diagnosis and video 
documentation of of malformations, anatomical variants, malacia, mucosa and possibly assessment of type and amount of secretion. Furthermore, 
bronchoscopy is used for detection and possible removal of foreign bodies (see the list of indications below). 

**BAL:** The purpose of BAL is to remove bronchial lavage fluid and secretions for analyzes cf. above. 

### **Indication for bronchoscopy:** ### The indication for bronchoscopy is set by the pediatric pulmonologist after clinical assessment of the 
patient. The typical indications are listed below. Assessment of the child/adolescent's airway in case of: 
*-* Persistent stridor or other airway sounds for visualization of anatomy including any fistulas. 
- Persistent/recurrent wheezing 
- Hemoptysis 
- Prolonged/chronic cough 
- Persistent or recurrent atelectasis (possibly instillation of rhDNase to relieve secretions) 
- Persistent or recurrent Pneumonia/consolidations/infiltrate 
- Localized pulmonary hyperlucency/emphysema 
- Artificial airway/tracheostomy issues 
- Suspected foreign body (handled primarily in the thoracic surgery department at RH)

#### Collection of biological material (bronchoalveolar lavage, bronchial biopsy, bronchial brushing): 
- Suspected lower respiratory tract infection (e.g. NTM or Ps Aeruginosa in CF) 
- Aspiration syndromes - Chronic interstitial pneumonia 
- Hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
- Pulmonary hemosiderosis 
- Eosinophilic pneumonia 
- Other (sarcoidosis, alveolar proteinosis, histiocytosis) 
- Endoluminal obstructive pathology 
- Pneumonia in immunosuppressed patients 
#### 

#### Therapeutic options of flexible bronchoscopy in pediatrics 
- Aspiration of endobronchial secretions/clots 
- Installation of medication to relieve secretions (e.g. rhDNase, antibiotics) 
- Foreign body handling/retrieval (primarily performed in the thoracic surgery thoracic surgery at RH). 

### ### ### **Contraindications:** ### ### 
#### ***Absolute contraindications** :* #### 
Acute respiratory failure with hypercapnia (unless the patient is intubated and ventilated) Severe tracheal obstruction Expected significant 
desaturation issues during the procedure. Intractable life-threatening arrhythmias. 

Activity1
Activity2
Activity3
Activity4
Activity1
Activity2
Activity3
Activity4
Activity1
Activity2
Activity3
Activity4
Activity5
Activity1
Activity2
Activity3
Figure 4.1: Section Extraction Process.
the same standardized approach [108] as described in chapter x. Despite this standard-
ized approach, there is no universal standard that dictates the structure or section naming
conventions across all CPGs and SOPs. This lack of a universally recognized framework
means that the structure of these documents can vary considerably depending on the
medical condition or procedure they address. For instance, guidelines for cancer care
will inherently differ in their subsections from those for anesthesia SOPs, reflecting the
unique diagnostic and treatment pathways required for each condition.
This variability showed us the need for a flexible yet systematic approach to section clas-
sification in CPGs and SOPs. We still wanted to capture the section information to later
enable better grouping in the assembly process of the model. Therefore, we evaluated
multiple guideline programs, including NICE from the UK [23], AWMF from Germany [109],
the European Society For Medical Oncology SOPs [110], and the Danish SOPs from our
dataset. This allowed us to establish a formalized structure for classifying the sections of
the SOPs used in the annotation study in this thesis. It can facilitate the nesting of actions
in the DCRGraph to give the reader of the process more context and orientation. The
final section classes are detailed in Table 4.1 and have been validated by an experienced
physician and pharmacist with expertise in developing SOPs.
In addition, each section is classified as to whether it contains procedural knowledge or
not, as well as whether the section is or contains a table. As noted by Friedrich, Mendling,
and Puhlmann [7] “noise is one of the most serious problems affecting generation results”.
How suitable a section is for the extraction of processes is not easy to measure. Friedrich,
Mendling, and Puhlmann [7] uses the term relevance to describe whether a sentence is
suitable or not for the extraction of a process model. According to Freyer, Thewes, and
Meinecke [111], sentences are classified as relevant based on whether they contain ac-
tivities. However, Aa, Leopold, and Reijers [112] explains that natural language is highly
ambiguous and can be interpreted in multiple ways. Sometimes, sentences may be con-
sidered relevant even if they do not explicitly mention an activity; for instance, a symptom
described could be a condition to an activity mentioned in another sentence, therefore the
sentence is relevant although it does not contain an activity.
To realise the classification, we used a few-shot prompting approach and different LLMs.
But we also have to define what procedural knowledge means for the prompt. After rigor-
ous experimentation, we ended up using the following prompt: “ Procedural information
includes any sentence that describes a procedure, action, or activity a clinician or a patient
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
21
==PAGE:29==
should perform. This also includes sentences that describe indications and contraindica-
tions for a procedure. This does not include sentences that define terminology, risk fac-
tors, background information, or explanations, that are not directly related to a procedure.
”
Section Name
Description
Title
Summarizes the main topic or focus of the clinical
guidelines or SOPs.
Introduction and Background /
Scope of Application and Tar-
get Groups
Outlines the intended scope and the specific audi-
ences for whom the guidelines are applicable.
Introduction and Background /
Definition and Terminology
Clarifies key terms and definitions used within the
guidelines.
Introduction and Background /
Epidemiology
Discusses the distribution, patterns, and determi-
nants of health and disease conditions in specific
populations.
Introduction and Background /
Additional Information
Provides general information and context about the
subject of the guidelines.
Clinical Presentation / Patient
Population
Describes the demographic and clinical characteris-
tics of the patients affected by the condition.
Clinical Presentation / Symp-
toms
Lists the signs and symptoms associated with the
condition.
Clinical
Presentation
/
Risk
Factors
Identifies factors that increase the likelihood of devel-
oping the condition.
Diagnostics / Differential Diag-
nosis
Discusses the process of distinguishing the condition
from other similar conditions.
Diagnostics
/
Examinations
Tests
Specifies the tests and examinations used to diag-
nose the condition.
Diagnostics / General Diagnos-
tics
Encompasses the overall process and methods for
identifying the condition.
Treatment and Intervention /
Indications
Specifies the circumstances under which certain
treatments or interventions are recommended.
Treatment and Intervention /
Contraindications
Lists conditions or factors that make a particular treat-
ment or procedure inadvisable.
Treatment and Intervention /
Procedure
Describes the steps or methods involved in the treat-
ment or intervention. Used for almost all procedural
knowledge.
Treatment and Intervention /
Medication
Details the drugs and dosages recommended for
treating the condition.
Outcomes and Monitoring /
General Monitoring
Outlines the general approach to tracking the pa-
tient’s progress and response to treatment.
Outcomes and Monitoring /
Termination Criteria and Treat-
ment Goals
Specifies the objectives of treatment and conditions
for its termination.
Outcomes and Monitoring /
Follow-up
Describes the recommended follow-up care and as-
sessments post-treatment.
Outcomes and Monitoring / Ad-
verse Effects Management
Provides guidelines for identifying and managing side
effects of treatments.
22
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:30==
Preventive Strategies
Suggests measures to prevent the onset or recur-
rence of the condition.
Responsibilities and Organiza-
tional
Details the roles and responsibilities affected by the
guideline and the organizational aspects of imple-
menting the guidelines.
Documentation
Describes how procedures and the process de-
scribed in the guideline has to be documented.
References
Lists the sources of information and evidence used to
develop the guidelines.
Appendix
Contains supplementary material and information
supporting the guidelines.
Other Recommendations
Other recommendations not directly related to the
procedure, but contains supplementary recommen-
dations.
Other
Includes miscellaneous or supplementary informa-
tion not covered in other sections.
Table 4.1: Final Section Classes.
4.4
Process Assembly
Input Data
Section Extract.
NER & RE
LLM
Graph Gener.
DCR Graphs
Figure 4.2: Process Description of the Extraction Pipeline from Text to DCR.
One of the pivotal research questions addressed in this thesis is the feasibility of extracting
recommendations and structures from clinical guidelines to generate a Dynamic Condition
Response (DCR) graph model. To tackle this, the thesis leverages an extraction pipeline
that identifies key activities and relations within the guidelines. Subsequently, this infor-
mation is meticulously assembled to construct the DCR graph. This process involves a
critical examination and comparison of DCR graphs with other Computer Interpretable
Guidelines (CIGs) and the FHIR Guideline Language, elucidating the distinct advantages
and potential of DCR in representing complex healthcare processes. Figure 4.2 provides
an overview on the steps taken to finally assemble the extracted information into an DCR
graph.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
23
==PAGE:31==
24
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:32==
5
Annotation Study
This chapter outlines the process of selecting a suitable set of medical guidelines for an
annotation study focused on annotating elements of the clinical processes. The details of
the data set’s creation and the annotation process are also discussed.
5.1
Corpus Creation
The basis of our annotation study is a carefully curated corpus of medical guidelines,
specifically targeting SOPs. They are essential for this research due to their practical
application in clinical settings and their rich content in procedural knowledge, making them
highly valuable for our objective of enhancing knowledge accessibility for clinicians at the
point of care.
Therefore we approached our selection process with the following criteria:
• Public Accessibility: The guidelines must be freely accessible to ensure wide ap-
plicability.
• Type: We focused on documents that are explicitly identified as SOPs.
• Format Uniformity: The guidelines should have a consistent format to facilitate
automated processing and ensure accuracy in the extraction of process elements.
• Diversity and Relevance: The corpus should cover a broad range of medical spe-
cialties to ensure its relevance to a wide audience, including physicians, nurses, and
pharmacists.
• Language: Considering our annotation team’s proficiency and the predominant lan-
guage in LLMs, we prioritized guidelines in English.
Finding a suitable set of guidelines that meet these criteria proved challenging due to the
decentralized nature of clinical guideline management across different healthcare institu-
tions. Most hospitals maintain their internal CPGs in disparate systems, often inaccessible
publicly and varying significantly in format [113].
However, Denmark presented a unique opportunity where each of its five regions main-
tains a centralized guideline document system. These systems aggregate SOPs (locally
referred to as Instruks) across all hospitals within the region and are mostly publicly avail-
able. This approach nearly matched all our selection criteria, except for the language, as
the guidelines are predominantly in Danish.
This met all our criteria except criterion 5, as the guidelines are only available in Dan-
ish. Apart from this, we did not find a comparable dataset in terms of scope and content,
apart from the recently published guideline dataset from Chen et al. [114]. Already during
October-November 2022, two PhD students from the University of Syddanmark crawled
all publicly available guideline documents in HTML format from all 5 regions (Syddanmark,
Midtjylland, Nordjylland, Sjælland and Hovedstaden). We first asked each region individ-
ually for permission to use the guidelines. After we got permission from all regions to use
the guidelines for this research purpose, we reused the crawled dataset of documents.
Unfortunately, we are not allowed to redistribute the complete data set.
Despite the language barrier, no other dataset matched the Danish guidelines’ compre-
hensiveness and content scope. However, there is one dataset to mention here, the
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
25
==PAGE:33==
recently published guideline corpus from Chen et al. [114], that contains a large collec-
tion of guidelines, with a focus on more standard CPG type documents. This could be
valuable for further research on this topic.
In late 2022, two PhD students from the University of Southern Denmark undertook the
task of crawling all available SOP documents in HTML format from the five Danish regions
(Syddanmark, Midtjylland, Nordjylland, Sjælland, and Hovedstaden). Following individual
permissions from each region for research use, we compiled a dataset that based on the
crawled HTML documents, forms the cornerstone of our study. Unfortunately, we are not
allowed to redistribute the entirety of the data set to the public, but upon request.
5.2
Guideline Dataset Description
This section describes the dataset used for this annotation study. First, several non-
medical categories were completely removed from the dataset (see Table 5.1). Subse-
quently, the HTML had to be extensively preprocessed. The guidelines were downloaded
as complete HTML pages from the document systems and accordingly, the content and
title had to be identified for each region and all non-content HTML elements removed.
We have also removed the table of contents, as it does not need to be annotated, nor
is it of much use for understanding the document as an annotator. In addition, all doc-
uments that were empty or incorrect and also duplicates were removed. After the first
preprocessing, the total number of documents is 70750. In addition, the number of im-
ages, attachments, links to other documents, external links, and tables in the documents
was analyzed. The result was that 12,816 documents (18.12%) contained one or more
images, which in the end was not relevant enough, especially for the task at hand, and we,
therefore, decided to remove all images, the same applies to the attachments and links to
other documents, but we left the textual description of the link in the text. However, tables
were left in the documents for the time being, because after examining a small sample
of 20 documents, we saw that they were filled with procedural knowledge and some of
the documents would not have made sense without the table, and they could also be
interesting for future tasks such as decision model notation recognition. After reviewing
the guideline documents and conducting an initial test annotation, it became apparent
that annotating the documents without any formatting posed challenges. The absence of
clear headings and enumerations made it difficult to comprehend the content. As docu-
ment understanding heavily relies on its formatting, we opted not to completely remove
the HTML but instead converted the HTML into a markdown format to retain the original
formatting of the documents.
To further continue working with the documents and filter out documents that did not fall
within our defined scope, we needed to gain a better understanding of the types, topics,
and procedural knowledge covered by the guidelines in the dataset. With the exception
of one region, the guidelines were not categorized into specific topics. Thus, after the
initial preprocessing step, we had to cluster the documents to gain a clearer insight into
the dataset and filter out the irrelevant guidelines. To achieve this, we applied a Term
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) transformation to a sanitized version
of the documents. We only included terms that occur in at least 5 documents and excluded
terms occurring in more than 95% of the documents.
After applying the TF-IDF algorithm to the documents we get a sparse matrix, where
each row corresponds to a document and each column corresponds to a term in the
vocabulary, with the values being the TF-IDF scores. On the sparse TF-IDF matrix, the
KMeans clustering algorithm is initialized with 20 centroids non-randomly. In this way,
each document is assigned to one of the 20 clusters, and as a result, we obtain clusters
26
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:34==
Region
Non-medical Categories
Tokens
Capital Region
Den sociale virksomhed
13,443,269
Center for ejendomme
Center for HR
Center for Regional Udvikling
Region Hovedstadens Apotek
Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen
Northern Region
Logistik afdeling
6,505,559
Teknisk Afdeling Himmerland
Teknik
Logistik
Service
Southern Region
Administration
29,075,187
Service
PsykInfo
Region Zealand
Administration
6,387,083
HR organisation og ledelse
Indkøb
IT
PortørCentral
Rengøring
Økonomi
Uddannelse
Central Region
25,156,478
Table 5.1: Numbers of tokens per region and categories removed
based on their content similarity. After generating the clusters, we convert the sparse TF-
IDF matrix into a dense matrix, group the documents according to their cluster assignment,
and calculate the mean TF-IDF value for each term within each cluster. The result is a
data frame in which each row represents a cluster and each column indicates the average
TF-IDF value of a term for all documents in that cluster. From this dataset, we select
the 25 most frequent terms per cluster and translate them from Danish to English using
the DeepL translator1. The translated keywords were then embedded in a prompt and
passed to ChatGPT [115] with the instruction to combine the top keywords of each cluster
into two matching terms that best describe the cluster. The terms and clusters can be
seen in Figure 5.1. In order to understand the clusters more deeply and to be able to
assess which clusters contain particularly many documents with process descriptions,
we randomly sampled five documents per cluster and looked at them in more detail, to
assess if they contained any clinical process information related to the clinical pathway of
the patient as defined by our initial scope.
If all five documents in the cluster were deemed suitable, all documents from the cluster
were included in the final data set. This resulted in four clusters that were directly included
in the final dataset. However, if less than five but at least one of the documents examined
was found to be suitable, further sub-clustering was carried out using the same approach
as before, just with only five centroids, and another round of sampling and reviewing was
performed, as shown in Figure 5.2.
1https://www.deepl.com/translator
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.1: Overview of all initial clusters
Furthermore, we decided to set an upper limit of 8000 tokens and a lower limit of 250
tokens per document for the following reasons: we were able to analyze that documents
below 250 tokens often only contain an attachment or link and the actual text content is
then missing or these very short documents do not contain a procedural description, for
documents with 8000 or more tokens the annotation process takes a very long time and
the data set would contain too many sentences on only one topic, which would destroy
the balance of the data set.
In the final dataset after all clustering, we have 17858 documents and an average token
count of 1000 tokens, with a final token count of 21814800.
After completing the clustering and filtering process, it was necessary to convert a consid-
erable number of documents from Danish to English because the primary annotator and
most project participants were not proficient in Danish. An additional factor is the avail-
ability of language models trained on Danish text. After reviewing various studies and
papers comparing available open-source models, Google Translate2 and DeepL Trans-
lator, we found that DeepL is considered the top-performing translation model [116, 117,
118]. Despite not being specifically tested for translating Danish clinical texts, it has shown
strong performance with French medical texts. Therefore, we decided to translate 1514
documents into English using the DeepL Translator. Subsequently, we had a selection
2cloud.google.com/translate
28
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:36==
Clusters
Sampling &
Review
Added to final dataset
5/5
1-4/5
Further clustering
0
2
19
...
7
12
13
14
2
4
5
18
19
Figure 5.2: Clustering approach for defining the most suitable clusters
of documents evaluated by two native speakers who confirmed that the translations were
accurate overall. While there were isolated cases such as incorrect translation of collo-
quial terms like “Pacifier” in the original document by DeepL affecting sentence meaning
slightly, no other significant mistranslations hindered our annotation study’s effectiveness.
Unfortunately, due to limited resources at hand, an extensive qualitative assessment of
all translations could not be conducted.
5.3
Annotation Setup
In our search for the most suitable annotation tool, we evaluated a range of both paid
and open-source options, including Prodigy3, TagTog [119], INCEpTION [120], and Label
Studio. Prodigy stood out for its seamless integration with HuggingFace, extensive cus-
tomizability, and straightforward application of active learning techniques. Nonetheless,
its cost was a prohibitive factor, a limitation shared by TagTog. DCRGraphs Highlighter
would have been very well suited to the topic, especially with the ability to create a DCR
graph at the same time as the annotations, but errors occurred during test annotations
where the spans shifted after saving, rendering it impractical for our needs.
The final decision came down to Label Studio and INCEpTION. INCEpTION, developed
by the UKP Lab at TU Darmstadt, emerged as the preferred choice due to its straightfor-
ward implementation of our metamodel. It efficiently supports section, single span, and
relationship annotations, for these reasons, we finally decided against Label Studio and in
favor of the INCEpTION [120] tool developed by the UKP Lab at TU Darmstadt. The only
drawback of INCEpTION was that the implementation of Active Learning was not very
customizable and therefore not usable for our task. When loading complete guidelines
into the tool, we encountered both sentences with and without procedural knowledge.
The algorithm behind active learning in INCEpTION is based on the uncertainty sampling
strategy (it samples entities where it has the highest uncertainty), this means it also sam-
ples entities in sentences without procedural knowledge, which leads to more confusion
than help for the annotator.
3https://prodi.gy/docs
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
29
==PAGE:37==
5.4
Annotation MetaModel
This section describes the creation of the general annotation MetaModel we used to an-
notate the clinical SOPs.
Chapter 2 outlined existing research on deriving process models from textual content, in-
cluding established guidelines for annotating process elements within texts. Our prelimi-
nary MetaModel utilizes the PET paper’s annotation schema [9], designed for imperative
process model annotations, as a foundation. However, our objective is to extract declar-
ative process models therefore, we integrate this framework with an annotation schema
utilized for legal text process extraction [121, 14]. The resulting MetaModel combines
the PET dataset’s MetaModel with the DCR graph MetaModel, which builds the basis
for the initial annotations (see Figure 5.3). During the annotation, we continuously as-
sessed the necessity of incorporating specific ”medical process elements” identified in
the methodology section. Any required extensions of the MetaModel were discussed in
weekly sessions with two process modeling experts to assess their importance.
Specification
Activity Data
Actor
Behavioural Layer
+ Activity
Relation Description 
+ Condition
+ Response
+ Inclusion
+ Exclusion
From
To
Specification 
Relation Type
Uses
Actor Receiver
Actor Performer
Figure 5.3: Initial Relations Metamodel.
Description of the initial behavioral metamodel:
• Activity/Event Layer: The Activity or Event (we do not differentiate these further
in the course of the document), are defined as a unit of work performed as part of a
process and has multiple states as defined in Section 3.3.3.
• Activity Data Layer: The Activity Data Layer introduced by Bellan et al. [9] captures
the object an activity expression acts on. It enhances the clarity of event labels by
integrating event and activity data, crucial for later process assembly. For instance,
in the example in Figure 5.4 the correct label in the process flow would be “Make
decision”, but from the text, we only obtain the verbose passage “Decision can only
be made”. During process assembly we need to combine the two, if we have them
as separate entities already it’s much easier to create a good activity label. Beyond
that, we always know what the object the activity acts on which is in guidelines often
medications or tools. That can enable things like a list of instruments needed to
perform the process.
• Specification Layer The specification layer captures important details that further
30
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:38==
Decision can only be made by a specialist physician.
uses
performed by
AD
Ac
A
Figure 5.4: Example of the ActivityData (AD) entity detection.
describe an activity.
• Organizational Layer: The organizational layer captures the actors in the sentence,
either the person performing a task (Actor Performer) or the person on whom the
task is performed Actor Receiver.
Description of the initial relations metamodel: The relations are exclusively based on
DCR notation—Condition, Response, Exclusion, and Inclusion Relations—supplemented
by a separate ActivityIndirect relation introduced to specify spans which describe a relation
between two activities. To keep the complexity manageable we disregarded the other
relations such as the Milestone relation.
Having described the original metamodel, we now show the development of the meta-
model to its final form, again accompanied by examples. Description of the newly in-
troduced elements in the final behavioral metamodel:
• Guard Layer: One of the first additions to the metamodel was the guard layer.
A guard refers to a specific type of information that defines conditions, limits, or
thresholds in the clinical context. These entities often represent critical values or
timeframes that impact clinical decisions, such as dosage limits, duration of treat-
ment, or thresholds for test results. This can include measurements (like volume or
concentration), timeframes (like durations or frequencies), or any other quantifiable
condition that affects clinical decisions.
• Observation (Activity Layer): The observation layer refers to any information or
data that is noted or recorded about a patient’s health status, including symptoms,
diagnoses, test results, risk factors such as smoking, or contextual information such
as the patient’s age or condition. Observations are an integral part of any guideline
and cannot simply be mapped to DCRGraph, as part of the presentation of patient
data elements.
• Subprocess Parent (Activity Layer): A Parent Activity refers to a broader category
or subprocess in medical guidelines, typically found in section headings or bold. This
entity encompasses a group of related subactivities, actions, or tasks and can be
broken down into individual subactions. That’s also what is different from the normal
Activity Entity, which targets specific individual actions.
• Input (Activity Layer): An Input Entity refers to any word or phrase that denotes
a specific type of clinical measurement, score, or value. These include, but are not
limited to, physiological measurements, lab test scores, and specific clinical indices.
The difference to the guard is that it does not represent specific numerical values or
thresholds related but for example the category of the measurement or value.
• Output (Activity Layer): An Output Entity refers to any word or phrase that denotes
a specific type of clinical measurement, score, or value. These include, but are not
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
31
==PAGE:39==
limited to, physiological measurements, lab test scores, and specific clinical indices.
The difference to the guard is that it does not represent specific numerical values or
thresholds related but the category of the measurement or value for example Blood
Pressure, Heart Rate, PEEP, Pmean, or PaO2/FiO2.
• Purpose Outcome Layer: One of the last layers introduced was the PurposeOut-
come layer. A PurposeOutcome entity captures the underlying reason, goal, ob-
jective, or anticipated result of a clinical action, procedure, or recommendation. It
addresses the ”why” or the intended effect of a medical intervention or guideline.
Figure 5.5 presents an example of the application of the PurposeOutcome (PO) en-
tity. It describes how the Activity i.e. “Postoperative epidural analgesia” is performed
for “pain management”.
Postoperative epidural analgesia for pain management is not routinely recommended
to
for
PO
ExclRel
A
A
Figure 5.5: Example of how the PurposeOutcome (PO) entity (shown in lightblue) is used
to describe the goal of the action performed, critical for decision making.
Description of the final relation metamodel: We build on the annotation scheme intro-
duced by Bellan et al. [9] and extend it with important information on clinical processes.
Since we have married the two schemas together, we believe that it is suitable as the ba-
sis for annotating both imperative and declarative models. In particular, newly introduced
elements such as observation are critical for the easy visualization of clinical processes.
However, this needs to be further analyzed in a more detailed study.
Belongs to  
(Subprocess)
Behavioural Layer
5 Activit,
5 Observatio%
5 Inpu1
5 Outpu1
5 Subprocess 
Parent
Specification
Purpose Outcome
Guard
Activity Data
Actor
Relation Description 
5 Condition
5 Response
5 Inclusion
5 Exclusion
Connect 
5 And
5 Or
5 Xor
Guard 
Relation Type
Specification 
Relation Type
Because
Guard 
Relation Type
Uses
Connect
Actor Receiver
Actor Performer
To
From
Connect
Figure 5.6: Final Relation Metamodel.
5.5
Process Model Ambiguity
Throughout the annotation process, it has repeatedly become apparent how much am-
biguity there is in textual descriptions of processes. Especially when dealing with such
complex topics as those described in clinical guidelines. Some examples of these am-
biguities are described in the following. We distinguish between the following entities:
32
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:40==
ActivityData (AD), Activity (A), Observation (O), Output(Out), Response (R), Exclusion
Relation (ExclRel), ConditionRelation (CondRel), Specification (S), and Guard (G).
Example 1 (see Figure 5.7), shows a very ambiguous course of drug administration. On
the one hand, several time points are specified (preoperative and 0.5 hours before anes-
thesia). Likewise, the formulations are not exact. Although the model can be administered
during this period, it does not have to be.
Tablet paracetamol (Pamol) can be given preoperatively > 1/2 hour before anesthesia with a small mouthful of water in elective surgery.
uses
with
from
when
to
duration
AD
CondRel
S
S
G
A
A
Figure 5.7: Example 1 of Guideline Ambiguity.
Example 2 (see Figure 5.8), shows an excerpt from a list of activities within the guideline.
In this case, a connecting verb (e.g. administer) is missing, which does not create an issue
given the reading context, but can lead to problems during process extraction. These
cases must be subsequently adapted in the process extraction to be able to model a
logical process step.
 Gabapentin 100-300 mg every 8 hours.
how often
how much
A
S
S
Figure 5.8: Example 2 of Guideline Ambiguity.
As a result of these ambiguities, very different process models can emerge from one de-
scription. For instance, depending on the annotation, the sentence: “If the procedure is
to be performed in LA, blood tests are not required unless the operator has prescribed
otherwise.” resulted in three different process graphs as presented in Figure 5.9. This
example is especially ambiguous as it contains a double condition with the action of per-
forming a blood test. The process at the bottom left describes, for example, that a blood
test is no longer possible if the procedure is carried out in room LA (exclude relation). On
the other hand, a prescription can reactivate the activity. If both conditions are met, there
is a decision problem occurring.
In the process on the right side, the condition relation causes a blood test to be executed
only if the procedure takes place in room LA, but at the same time the exclude relation
prevents this.
The examples demonstrate the ambiguity that this annotation process entails and how this
can lead to serious differences in process creation. For this reason, these inaccuracies
were discussed in regular expert meetings.
5.6
Annotation Procedure
Since we are annotating documents in the medical domain, the initial plan for this thesis
was to have 2 medical students annotate the documents with the help of a research grant.
Unfortunately, the grant was not approved, so we did not have the funds to provide ex-
ternal annotators. As a result, the annotations were only carried out by the non-medically
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
33
==PAGE:41==
prescribe blood 
 tests
perform blood  
tests
procedure is to be  
performed in LA
prescribe blood 
 tests
perform blood  
tests
procedure is to be  
performed in LA
prescribe blood 
 tests
perform blood  
tests
procedure is to be  
performed in LA
Figure 5.9: Three different process graphs based on the same description.
trained author of the paper, a master’s student with a Computer Science background -
a concern that must be clearly stated here. However, as the dataset is published, any-
one can access the annotations and judge the quality for themselves. If, during the an-
notations, ambiguities arose regarding the understanding of the content of one or more
sentences and these were important for the creation of the annotations, ChatGPT4 was
used to help explain the context, for example for a specific treatment or medical term. If
uncertainties about the semantics arose during the annotations, they were discussed in
regular meetings with two business process modeling experts until a consensus for the
“correct” annotation was reached.
From the data set of 1514 translated guidelines, 31 documents were randomly assigned
to the annotators. The process of annotating the clinical guidelines can be broken down
into three main phases.
Phase 1 The guideline documents are generally organized into main chapters, subchap-
ters, paragraphs, and lists. Some documents may only contain a subset of the el-
ements. The annotator must first understand the hierarchical structure and then go
from section to section, highlighting the section, determining whether or not it con-
tains procedural knowledge, and adding the most appropriate section classification
label (see section types in Section 4.3.2). The marked sections do not necessarily
always have to correspond to the hierarchy of the text, for example, if procedures
are described in two sections one after the other and each of the sentences contains
procedural knowledge, they can also be annotated together in one marking.
Phase 2 Once all sentences containing procedural knowledge have been recognized, the
activities are individually labeled. The remaining elements from the MetaModel are
then annotated in relation to the labeled activities. Lastly, the constraints between
the activities are labeled.
Phase 3 Finally, a topic (see topic list) is assigned to the entire document, and the doc-
ument is marked as “containing procedural knowledge”.
The amount of ambiguity as discussed in the previous section and the lack of possibilities
for automation made the annotation process extremely difficult and time-consuming. Dur-
ing the beginning of the annotation, one guideline annotation with 70-80 sentences could
take up to 8 hours (on average 6 min. per sentence), this time includes noting ambigui-
ties and looking up medical specialties. After the first few guidelines, the process could be
halved, to about 4 hours. Another factor that makes the process very time-intensive is the
amount of layers needed to describe the model. For the last few models, the time could
34
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:42==
be reduced to about 2 1/2 hours combined with a prompting approach where we used
Mixtral to semi-automate the annotation process. The script for the automatic creation of
prompts can also be found in the code repository.
5.7
Annotation Dataset Statistics
We named the final annotated corpus MedicalProcessInstruks. We present the first in-
depth annotated corpus of medical clinical guidelines containing information about the
current state of medical practice. The dataset comprises 15 annotated documents with
an average of 1000 tokens each. These were not only annotated for sections but also
thoroughly for their process components and relations. All elements previously defined
in the metamodel could be included during the annotation process. To make this dataset
available for further research, we are releasing it publicly4.
4https://huggingface.co/datasets/dagrat/MedicalProcessInstruks
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
35
==PAGE:43==
36
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:44==
6
Experiments
This chapter delineates the practical application of the methodological framework dis-
cussed in the preceding chapter. It focuses on evaluating the efficacy of two fine-tuned
encoder-only models using a limited dataset. Additionally, it explores strategies to miti-
gate the challenges posed by small datasets through the deployment of larger decoder-
only models, complemented by in-context learning and few-shot prompting techniques.
The chapter is structured into two primary sections: the initial section provides a compre-
hensive overview of the experimental setup, detailing the implementation specifics of the
proposed approaches, while the subsequent section is dedicated to the presentation and
critical analysis of the results achieved.
6.1
Experimental Setup
This section outlines the experimental framework designed to assess the capabilities of
encoder and autoregressive decoder models in extracting intricate process models. Our
study incorporates an evaluation of two encoder models alongside four autoregressive
decoder models, specifically focusing on their proficiency in handling complex modeling
tasks. The models selected for this evaluation are sourced from the Huggingface Trans-
formers Library, a repository of pre-trained models widely recognized in the machine-
learning community. The selection includes BioLink-BERT (BioLinkBERT-base) [75] and
XLM-Roberta in the large model configuration (xlm-roberta-large) [77], with 355 million
parameters, renowned for their effectiveness in linguistic understanding and cross-lingual
representations, respectively.
In addition to BioLink-BERT, we analyzed the entity and relation extraction finetuned
model GoLLIE (CodeLlama) using few-shot prompting combined with their guideline ap-
proach. We evaluated their 34B-parameter model to compare it with our fine-tuning ap-
proach.
The empirical analysis is conducted using the MedicalProcessInstruks Dataset, the dataset
created as part of this work. This dataset is pivotal in our experimental design, offering
a tailored resource to critically evaluate the model’s performance in extracting and inter-
preting complex medical process instructions. The utilization of this specialized dataset
ensures that the findings are directly relevant and applicable to the domain-specific chal-
lenges and nuances presented by medical procedural data.
The experiments are carried out on the DTU HPC cluster on two Tesla A100-PCIE graph-
ics cards with 40GB memory each and the smaller models (BERT & Roberta) on a Tesla
V100-SXM2 with 32GB memory.
6.2
Results
In this section, we summarise and critically reflect on the experimental results. In partic-
ular, we address the problem and impact of sparse data when fine-tuning large language
models, as we have already seen in other work, e.g. PET, where transformer models
do not provide enough data for such a complicated task, which is very complex even for
humans. This is also evident in our dataset MedicalProcessInstruks, as we include as
much data as possible in the training split, but only have one annotated document in the
test dataset.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
37
==PAGE:45==
Table 6.1: Final results on XLMRobertaLarge
Prec.
Recall
F1
Activity
0.5556
0.217
0.3125
Activity Parent
0.25
0.5
0.33
Actor
0.26
0.625
0.37
Specification
0.4
0.11
0.17
Input
1
0.25
0.4
Observation
0.272
0.33
0.3
Overall
0.322
0.17
0.226
Table 6.2: Final results on GoLLIE
Prec.
Recall
F1
Overall
0.71
0.42
0.51
Our experimental setup involved the fine-tuning of BioLinkBERT and XLMRoberta on our
Named Entity Recognition (NER) task, utilizing a PL-Marker implementation named Span-
marker. Contrary to our initial hypothesis, that a model fine-tuned on domain-specific data
would excel in extracting process elements from medical documents the results were
unexpectedly poor, for the domain-adapted BioLinkBERT. In contrast, XLM-Roberta, a
model not specifically domain-tuned but trained on a significantly larger general corpus,
outperformed BioLinkBERT. This outcome aligns with other studies suggesting that XLM-
Roberta’s extensive pre-training corpus may enable it to perform better with limited data,
a consistency observed across various datasets.
With Spanmarker, the sentences can be given to the model individually or with context,
which means that sentences before and after the current instance are also given to the
model. Initially, our approach involved document segmentation without contextual infor-
mation, using a 5-fold cross-validation strategy and iterating over 3 epochs. Unfortunately,
this strategy did not yield significant accuracy improvements for either BioLinkBERT or
XLMRoberta. Subsequently, the models were subjected to an extended training regime
of 6 additional epochs with the same 5-fold cross-validation. This phase demonstrated
a marginal improvement, particularly with XLM-Roberta, which began to show the first
signs of measurable performance. In our final and best approach, we used 10-fold cross-
validation and
6.3
Discussion
If you look at the results of the models, you can clearly see that the annotated data set is
too small to train an encoder-only model in a meaningful way. It must also be emphasized
that further annotators are needed to confirm the quality of the annotations and to expand
the dataset. Even though ambiguities were addressed in weekly meetings, there were
still many cases where a decision had to be made in favor of a particular annotation.
38
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:46==
7
Conclusion and Future Work
7.1
Conclusion
This thesis focused on evaluating the possibility and process of extracting process models
from medical guidelines, aiming to streamline the model creation workflow. Despite the
advancements, the necessity for a domain expert’s involvement persists, primarily due to
the inherent ambiguity in Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). Our analysis revealed
the complexity and variability in SOPs, underscoring the challenge of automating the rep-
resentation of these processes. The inherent ambiguity leads to multiple viable modeling
pathways, necessitating expert judgment to determine the most accurate representation.
The associated problem of not having enough annotated data can be mitigated by using
very large language models. Recognizing terms and extracting relationships with just a
few recordings far outperforms pure encoder models with little data.
7.2
Future Work
Looking ahead, several avenues can be explored to enhance the automation and accu-
racy of process model extraction: Model Training on Human Preferences: Developing a
model trained on human preferences could automate the optimization of process models.
Automation in general using learning from expert decisions, such a model could automati-
cally refine extracted models to the most effective representation. Multilingual Annotation
Expansion: Expanding the annotation framework to include other languages, such as
Danish and German, could broaden the applicability and utility of the extraction process.
Enhanced Dataset Validation: Further validation of the dataset with medical professionals
can ensure the reliability and clinical relevance of the extracted process models.
Graphical Model Training: Leveraging graphical representations as training input for mod-
els could be particularly effective in resolving ambiguities in the text, enhancing the model’s
interpretative accuracy.
Data Augmentation: Smart data augmentation techniques can be employed to enrich
the training dataset, ensuring that the model remains accurate without compromising the
quality of the results.
Local Guideline Comparisons: Analyzing and comparing local guidelines can uncover
discrepancies and foster a more comprehensive understanding of varied procedural stan-
dards.
Decision Model Notation Enhancement: Advancing the capability to identify and automat-
ically generate complex decision models from text can significantly streamline the model
creation process.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
39
==PAGE:47==
40
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
Patrizio Bellan, Mauro Dragoni, and Chiara Ghidini. “A Qualitative Analysis of the
State of the Art in Process Extraction from Text”. In: DP@AI*IA. 2020. URL: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:229345086.
[2]
Patrizio Bellan, Mauro Dragoni, and Chiara Ghidini. “Process Extraction from Text:
Benchmarking the State of the Art and Paving the Way for Future Challenges”. In:
2021. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:238531683.
[3]
Uce Indahyanti, Arif Djunaidy, and Daniel Siahaan. “Auto-Generating Business
Process Model From Heterogeneous Documents: A Comprehensive Literature
Survey”. In: 2022 9th International Conference on Electrical Engineering, Com-
puter Science and Informatics (EECSI). 2022, pp. 239–243. DOI: 10.23919/EECSI56542.
2022.9946460.
[4]
Han van der Aa et al. “Challenges and Opportunities of Applying Natural Language
Processing in Business Process Management”. In: Proceedings of the 27th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics. Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2018, pp. 2791–2801. URL: https:
//aclanthology.org/C18-1236.
[5]
Claes Wohlin. “Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a
replication in software engineering”. In: International Conference on Evaluation &
Assessment in Software Engineering. 2014. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:3348787.
[6]
Bilal Maqbool et al. “A Comprehensive Investigation of BPMN Models Genera-
tion from Textual Requirements - Techniques, Tools and Trends”. In: International
Conference on Information Science and Applications. 2018. URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:70131992.
[7]
Fabian Friedrich, Jan Mendling, and Frank Puhlmann. “Process Model Generation
from Natural Language Text”. In: Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Ed.
by Haralambos Mouratidis and Colette Rolland. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 482–496. ISBN: 978-3-642-21640-4.
[8]
Josep Sànchez-Ferreres et al. “Formal Reasoning on Natural Language Descrip-
tions of Processes”. In: Business Process Management. Ed. by Thomas Hilde-
brandt et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 86–101. ISBN:
978-3-030-26619-6.
[9]
Patrizio Bellan et al. “PET: An Annotated Dataset for Process Extraction from Natural
Language Text Tasks”. In: Business Process Management Workshops. Ed. by
Cristina Cabanillas, Niels Frederik Garmann-Johnsen, and Agnes Koschmider.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2023, pp. 315–321. ISBN: 978-3-031-
25383-6.
[10]
Xue Han et al. “A-BPS: Automatic Business Process Discovery Service using Or-
dered Neurons LSTM”. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Web Services
(ICWS) (2020), pp. 428–432. URL: https:// api.semanticscholar .org/CorpusID :
229376425.
[11]
Chen Qian et al. “An Approach for Process Model Extraction by Multi-grained
Text Classification”. In: Advanced Information Systems Engineering 12127 (2019),
pp. 268–282. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:214606060.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
41
==PAGE:49==
[12]
Patrizio Bellan, Mauro Dragoni, and Chiara Ghidini. Leveraging pre-trained lan-
guage models for conversational information seeking from text. 2022. arXiv: 2204.
03542 [cs.CL].
[13]
Hugo A. López et al. “Assisted Declarative Process Creation from Natural Lan-
guage Descriptions”. In: 2019 IEEE 23rd International Enterprise Distributed Ob-
ject Computing Workshop (EDOCW). 2019, pp. 96–99. DOI: 10.1109/EDOCW.
2019.00027.
[14]
Hugo A. López et al. “Declarative Process Discovery: Linking Process and Textual
Views”. In: Intelligent Information Systems. Ed. by Selmin Nurcan and Axel Ko-
rthaus. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 109–117. ISBN: 978-
3-030-79108-7.
[15]
Marco Bombieri et al. “Automatic detection of procedural knowledge in robotic-
assisted surgical texts”. In: International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology
and Surgery 16 (2021), pp. 1287–1295. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:233330456.
[16]
Deming Ye et al. “Packed Levitated Marker for Entity and Relation Extraction”.
In: Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 2021. URL:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247159046.
[17]
John Giorgi, Gary D Bader, and Bo Wang. “A sequence-to-sequence approach
for document-level relation extraction”. In: Workshop on Biomedical Natural Lan-
guage Processing. 2022. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247939302.
[18]
Dl Sackett et al. “Evidence-Based Medicine. How to Practice and Teach EBM.
Evidence-Based Medicine”. In: Churchill Livingston 2 (Jan. 2005).
[19]
A O Berg, D Atkins, and W Tierney. “Clinical practice guidelines in practice and
education”. en. In: J Gen Intern Med 12 Suppl 2.Suppl 2 (Apr. 1997), S25–33.
[20]
Zoe Slote Morris, Steven Wooding, and Jonathan Grant. “The answer is 17 years,
what is the question: understanding time lags in translational research”. In: Journal
of the Royal Society of Medicine 104 (2011), pp. 510–520. URL: https : / / api .
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1980000.
[21]
Kathleen R. Stevens. “An introduction to evidence-based practice”. In: Newborn
and Infant Nursing Reviews 1.1 (2001), pp. 6–10. ISSN: 1527-3369. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1053/nbin.2001.23413. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1527336901700499.
[22]
WHO Guidelines. Accessed: 2024-01-19. URL: https://www.who.int/publications/
who-guidelines.
[23]
Guidance, NICE advice and quality standards. Accessed: 2024-01-19. URL: https:
//www.nice.org.uk/guidance/published?sp=on.
[24]
KLIFAiRS STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES. Accessed: 2024-01-19. URL:
sop.klifairs.ch.
[25]
R Grol. “Has guideline development gone astray? Yes”. In: BMJ 340 (2010). ISSN:
0959-8138. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.c306. eprint: https://www.bmj.com/content. URL:
https://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c306.
[26]
Steven Woolf et al. “Developing clinical practice guidelines: Types of evidence
and outcomes; values and economics, synthesis, grading, and presentation and
deriving recommendations”. In: Implementation science : IS 7 (July 2012), p. 61.
DOI: 10.1186/1748-5908-7-61.
[27]
J M Grimshaw and I T Russell. “Effect of clinical guidelines on medical practice: a
systematic review of rigorous evaluations”. en. In: Lancet 342.8883 (Nov. 1993),
pp. 1317–1322.
42
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:50==
[28]
T S Sathyanarayana Rao, Rajiv Radhakrishnan, and Chittaranjan Andrade. “Stan-
dard operating procedures for clinical practice”. en. In: Indian J Psychiatry 53.1
(Jan. 2011), pp. 1–3.
[29]
Marlon Dumas et al. Fundamentals of Business Process Management. Berlin:
Springer, 2013. ISBN: 978-3-642-33142-8. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-33143-5.
[30]
Mathias Weske. Business Process Management - Concepts, Languages, Archi-
tectures, Third Edition. Springer, 2019, pp. 1–417. ISBN: 978-3-662-59431-5.
[31]
Michael Zimoch et al. “The Repercussions of Business Process Modeling No-
tations on Mental Load and Mental Effort”. In: Business Process Management
Workshops. Ed. by Florian Daniel, Quan Z. Sheng, and Hamid Motahari. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 133–145. ISBN: 978-3-030-11641-5.
[32]
Amine Abbad-Andaloussi et al. “Complexity in declarative process models: Metrics
and multi-modal assessment of cognitive load”. In: Expert Systems with Applica-
tions 233 (2023), p. 120924. ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.eswa.2023.120924. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0957417423014264.
[33]
Stefano Bonacina et al. “A Design Methodology for Medical Processes”. In: Applied
Clinical Informatics 07 (2016), pp. 191–210. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:20847452.
[34]
Gyuchan Thomas Jun et al. “Health care process modelling: which method when?”
In: International Journal for Quality in Health Care 21.3 (Apr. 2009), pp. 214–224.
ISSN: 1353-4505. DOI: 10.1093/intqhc/mzp016. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/
intqhc/article-pdf/21/3/214/5086950/mzp016.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
intqhc/mzp016.
[35]
G. Keller, M. Nuttigens, and A.-W. Scheer. “Semantische Prozessmodellierung auf
der Grundlage: Ereignisgesteuerter Prozessketten (EPK)”. In: Veröffentlichungen
des Instituts für Wirtschaftsinformatik 89 (1992).
[36]
Carl Adam Petri. Kommunikation mit Automaten. Dissertation, Schriften des IIM
2. Bonn: Rheinisch-Westfälisches Institut für Instrumentelle Mathematik an der
Universität Bonn, 1962.
[37]
Object Management Group OMG. Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN)
Version 2.0. 2006. URL: https://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/PDF.
[38]
Maja Pesic, Helen Schonenberg, and Wil M.P. van der Aalst. “DECLARE: Full
Support for Loosely-Structured Processes”. In: 11th IEEE International Enterprise
Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC 2007). 2007, pp. 287–287. DOI:
10.1109/EDOC.2007.14.
[39]
Thomas T. Hildebrandt and Raghava Rao Mukkamala. “Declarative Event-Based
Workflow as Distributed Dynamic Condition Response Graphs”. In: Places. 2011.
URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14353309.
[40]
Josep Sànchez-Ferreres et al. “Aligning textual and model-based process descrip-
tions”. In: Data and Knowledge Engineering 118 (2018), pp. 25–40. ISSN: 0169-
023X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.datak.2018.09.001. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169023X18301496.
[41]
Claudia Ryniak and Oliver Burgert. In: Current Directions in Biomedical Engineer-
ing 6.1 (2020), p. 20200005. DOI: doi:10.1515/cdbme- 2020- 0005. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1515/cdbme-2020-0005.
[42]
Krzysztof Kluza and Piotr Wiśniewski. “Spreadsheet-based Business Process mod-
eling”. In: 2016 Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information Sys-
tems (FedCSIS). 2016, pp. 1355–1358.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
43
==PAGE:51==
[43]
Han van der Aa. “Comparing and Aligning Process Representations”. In: Lecture
Notes in Business Information Processing. 2018. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:51879863.
[44]
Avner Ottensooser et al. “Making sense of business process descriptions: An ex-
perimental comparison of graphical and textual notations”. In: Journal of Systems
and Software 85.3 (2012). Novel approaches in the design and implementation of
systems/software architecture, pp. 596–606. ISSN: 0164-1212. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jss.2011.09.023. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0164121211002408.
[45]
Michael P Georgeff and Amy L Lansky. “Procedural knowledge”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE 74.10 (1986), pp. 1383–1398.
[46]
Tijs Slaats et al. “Exformatics Declarative Case Management Workflows as DCR
Graphs”. In: Aug. 2013, pp. 339–354. ISBN: 978-3-642-40175-6. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-642-40176-3_28.
[47]
Nataliya Mulyar et al. “Declarative and Procedural Approaches for Modelling Clin-
ical Guidelines: Addressing Flexibility Issues”. In: Business Process Management
Workshops. Ed. by Arthur ter Hofstede, Boualem Benatallah, and Hye-Young Paik.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 335–346. ISBN: 978-3-
540-78238-4.
[48]
DCR Graphs. Accessed: 2023-11-12. URL: https://www.dcrgraphs.net.
[49]
Thomas Hildebrandt, Raghava Rao Mukkamala, and Tijs Slaats. “Nested Dynamic
Condition Response Graphs”. In: vol. 7141. Apr. 2011. ISBN: 978-3-642-29319-1.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-29320-7_23.
[50]
Daniel Jurafsky and James Martin. Speech and Language Processing: An Intro-
duction to Natural Language Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech
Recognition. Vol. 3. Feb. 2024. URL: https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/
ed3bookfeb3_2024.pdf.
[51]
Lance Ramshaw and Mitch Marcus. “Text Chunking using Transformation-Based
Learning”. In: Third Workshop on Very Large Corpora. 1995. URL: https://aclanthology.
org/W95-0107.
[52]
Emily M. Bender et al. “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Mod-
els Be Too Big? ￿￿”. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency. FAccT ’21. Virtual Event, Canada: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 610–623. ISBN: 9781450383097. DOI: 10.
1145/3442188.3445922. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922.
[53]
Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. “Improved backing-off for M-gram language
modeling”. In: 1995 International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing 1 (1995), 181–184 vol.1. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
9685476.
[54]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their
Compositionality”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by
C.J. Burges et al. Vol. 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013. URL: https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2013/file/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Paper.
pdf.
[55]
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. “GloVe: Global
Vectors for Word Representation”. In: Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP). 2014, pp. 1532–1543. URL: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
D14-1162.
[56]
Oren Melamud, Jacob Goldberger, and Ido Dagan. “context2vec: Learning Generic
Context Embedding with Bidirectional LSTM”. In: Proceedings of the 20th SIGNLL
44
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:52==
Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning. Ed. by Stefan Riezler
and Yoav Goldberg. Berlin, Germany: Association for Computational Linguistics,
Aug. 2016, pp. 51–61. DOI: 10.18653/v1/K16-1006. URL: https://aclanthology.
org/K16-1006.
[57]
Matthew E. Peters et al. “Deep Contextualized Word Representations”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long Papers). Ed. by Marilyn Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent. New Orleans,
Louisiana: Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2018, pp. 2227–2237.
DOI: 10.18653/v1/N18-1202. URL: https://aclanthology.org/N18-1202.
[58]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is All you Need”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems. Ed. by I. Guyon et al. Vol. 30. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2017. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/
3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
[59]
Tong Xiao and Jingbo Zhu. Introduction to Transformers: an NLP Perspective.
2023. arXiv: 2311.17633 [cs.CL].
[60]
Kazuki Irie et al. “Language Modeling with Deep Transformers”. In: Proc. Inter-
speech 2019. 2019, pp. 3905–3909. DOI: 10.21437/Interspeech.2019-2225.
[61]
Haifeng Wang et al. “Pre-Trained Language Models and Their Applications”. In:
Engineering 25 (2023), pp. 51–65. ISSN: 2095-8099. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.eng.2022.04.024. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2095809922006324.
[62]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Lan-
guage Understanding”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Ed. by Jill Burstein, Christy Do-
ran, and Thamar Solorio. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational
Linguistics, June 2019, pp. 4171–4186. DOI: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL: https:
//aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
[63]
Alec Radford et al. “Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners”. In:
2019. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:160025533.
[64]
Wayne Xin Zhao et al. A Survey of Large Language Models. 2023. arXiv: 2303.
18223 [cs.CL].
[65]
Tom Brown et al. “Language Models are Few-Shot Learners”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Larochelle et al. Vol. 33. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 1877–1901. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
files/paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
[66]
Jason Wei et al. Finetuned Language Models Are Zero-Shot Learners. 2022. arXiv:
2109.01652 [cs.CL].
[67]
Swaroop Mishra et al. “Cross-Task Generalization via Natural Language Crowd-
sourcing Instructions”. In: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Ed. by Smaranda
Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio. Dublin, Ireland: Association for
Computational Linguistics, May 2022, pp. 3470–3487. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-
long.244. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.244.
[68]
Yizhong Wang et al. “Super-NaturalInstructions: Generalization via Declarative In-
structions on 1600+ NLP Tasks”. In: Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Ed. by Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa
Kozareva, and Yue Zhang. Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates: Association for Com-
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
45
==PAGE:53==
putational Linguistics, Dec. 2022, pp. 5085–5109. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-
main.340. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.340.
[69]
Or Honovich et al. “Unnatural Instructions: Tuning Language Models with (Almost)
No Human Labor”. In: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Ed. by Anna Rogers,
Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki. Toronto, Canada: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, July 2023, pp. 14409–14428. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-
long.806. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.806.
[70]
Yukun Zhu et al. “Aligning Books and Movies: Towards Story-Like Visual Explana-
tions by Watching Movies and Reading Books”. In: 2015 IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2015, pp. 19–27. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.11.
[71]
Jinhyuk Lee et al. “BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language representation
model for biomedical text mining”. In: Bioinformatics 36.4 (Sept. 2019), pp. 1234–
1240. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btz682. eprint: https : / /
academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/36/4/1234/48983216/bioinformatics\
_36\_4\_1234.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz682.
[72]
Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. “SciBERT: A Pretrained Language Model
for Scientific Text”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Ed. by Kentaro Inui et al. Hong
Kong, China: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2019, pp. 3615–
3620. DOI: 10.18653/v1/D19-1371. URL: https://aclanthology.org/D19-1371.
[73]
Emily Alsentzer et al. “Publicly Available Clinical BERT Embeddings”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop. Ed. by Anna
Rumshisky et al. Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA: Association for Computational
Linguistics, June 2019, pp. 72–78. DOI: 10 . 18653 / v1 / W19 - 1909. URL: https :
//aclanthology.org/W19-1909.
[74]
Yu Gu et al. “Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural
Language Processing”. In: ACM Trans. Comput. Healthcare 3.1 (Oct. 2021). DOI:
10.1145/3458754. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3458754.
[75]
Michihiro Yasunaga, Jure Leskovec, and Percy Liang. “LinkBERT: Pretraining Lan-
guage Models with Document Links”. In: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
Ed. by Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio. Dublin, Ire-
land: Association for Computational Linguistics, May 2022, pp. 8003–8016. DOI:
10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.551. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.551.
[76]
Yinhan Liu et al. “RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach”.
In: CoRR abs/1907.11692 (2019). arXiv: 1907.11692. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1907.11692.
[77]
Alexis Conneau et al. “Unsupervised Cross-lingual Representation Learning at
Scale”. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. Ed. by Dan Jurafsky et al. Online: Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, July 2020, pp. 8440–8451. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.747.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.747.
[78]
Albert Q. Jiang et al. Mistral 7B. 2023. arXiv: 2310.06825 [cs.CL].
[79]
Albert Q. Jiang et al. Mixtral of Experts. 2024. arXiv: 2401.04088 [cs.LG].
[80]
Baptiste Rozière et al. Code Llama: Open Foundation Models for Code. 2024.
arXiv: 2308.12950 [cs.CL].
[81]
Oscar Sainz et al. GoLLIE: Annotation Guidelines improve Zero-Shot Information-
Extraction. 2023. arXiv: 2310.03668 [cs.CL].
46
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:54==
[82]
Long Ouyang et al. “Training language models to follow instructions with human
feedback”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by S.
Koyejo et al. Vol. 35. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022, pp. 27730–27744. URL: https:
//proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-
Paper-Conference.pdf.
[83]
Irene Solaiman. “The Gradient of Generative AI Release: Methods and Consider-
ations”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountabil-
ity, and Transparency. FAccT ’23. , Chicago, IL, USA, Association for Computing
Machinery, 2023, pp. 111–122. ISBN: 9798400701924. DOI: 10.1145/3593013.
3593981. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3593013.3593981.
[84]
Roberto Latina et al. “Towards a New System for the Assessment of the Quality
in Care Pathways: An Overview of Systematic Reviews”. en. In: Int J Environ Res
Public Health 17.22 (Nov. 2020).
[85]
Leentje De Bleser et al. “Defining pathways”. en. In: J Nurs Manag 14.7 (Oct.
2006), pp. 553–563.
[86]
openEHR Foundation. openEHR Specification PROC. Accessed: 2024-01-15. URL:
https://specifications.openehr.org/releases/PROC/Release-1.6.0/overview.html#
_clinical_practice_guidelines_cpgs.
[87]
Mor Peleg et al. “Comparing Computer-interpretable Guideline Models: A Case-
study Approach”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 10.1
(Jan. 2003), pp. 52–68. ISSN: 1067-5027. DOI: 10 . 1197 / jamia . M1135. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-pdf/10/1/52/2440180/10-1-52.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M1135.
[88]
Na Nataliya Mulyar, Wil M.P. van der Aalst, and Mor Peleg. “A pattern-based anal-
ysis of clinical computer-interpretable guideline modelling languages”. In: 2006.
URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:209404439.
[89]
Paul Clercq, Katharina Kaiser, and Arie Hasman. “Computer-Interpretable Guide-
line formalisms”. In: Studies in health technology and informatics 139 (Feb. 2008),
pp. 22–43. DOI: 10.3233/978-1-58603-873-1-22.
[90]
Andreas Seyfang et al. “Maintaining Formal Models of Living Guidelines Efficiently”.
In: Artificial Intelligence in Medicine. Ed. by Riccardo Bellazzi, Ameen Abu-Hanna,
and Jim Hunter. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 441–
445. ISBN: 978-3-540-73599-1.
[91]
María Adela Grando, David W. Glasspool, and John Fox. “Petri Nets as a For-
malism for Comparing Expressiveness of Workflow-Based Clinical Guideline Lan-
guages”. In: Business Process Management Workshops. Ed. by Danilo Ardagna,
Massimo Mecella, and Jian Yang. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2009, pp. 348–360. ISBN: 978-3-642-00328-8.
[92]
Marcella Rovani et al. “Declarative process mining in healthcare”. In: Expert Sys-
tems with Applications 42.23 (2015), pp. 9236–9251. ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2015.07.040. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S095741741500500X.
[93]
Begoña Martínez-Salvador and Mar Marcos. “Supporting the Refinement of Clini-
cal Process Models to Computer-Interpretable Guideline Models”. In: Business &
Information Systems Engineering 58.5 (Oct. 2016), pp. 355–366.
[94]
Mor Peleg. “Computer-interpretable clinical guidelines: A methodological review”.
In: Journal of Biomedical Informatics 46.4 (2013), pp. 744–763. ISSN: 1532-0464.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2013.06.009. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1532046413000841.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
47
==PAGE:55==
[95]
Marek Szelągowski et al. “Proposal of BPMN extension with a view to effective
modeling of clinical pathways”. In: Business Process Management Journal 28.5/6
(Jan. 2022), pp. 1364–1390.
[96]
Gregor Lichtner et al. “Representation of evidence-based clinical practice guide-
line recommendations on FHIR”. In: Journal of Biomedical Informatics 139 (2023),
p. 104305. ISSN: 1532-0464. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2023.104305.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532046423000266.
[97]
Y Shahar, S Miksch, and P Johnson. “An intention-based language for represent-
ing clinical guidelines”. en. In: Proc AMIA Annu Fall Symp (1996), pp. 592–596.
[98]
Silvia Miksch, Yuval Shahar, and Peter D. Johnson. “ASBRU: A TASK-SPECIFIC,
INTENTION-BASED, AND TIME-ORIENTED LANGUAGE FOR REPRESENT-
ING SKELETAL PLANS”. In: 1999. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
16173334.
[99]
M A Musen et al. “EON: a component-based approach to automation of protocol-
directed therapy”. en. In: J Am Med Inform Assoc 3.6 (Nov. 1996), pp. 367–388.
[100]
Samson W. Tu. “The EON Guideline Model”. In: 2006. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:61482298.
[101]
L Ohno-Machado et al. “The guideline interchange format: a model for represent-
ing guidelines”. en. In: J Am Med Inform Assoc 5.4 (July 1998), pp. 357–372.
[102]
M Peleg et al. “GLIF3: the evolution of a guideline representation format”. en. In:
Proc AMIA Symp (2000), pp. 645–649.
[103]
John Fox et al. “PROforma: a general technology for clinical decision support sys-
tems”. In: Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 54.1 (1997). Human
Facets in Information Technologies, pp. 59–67. ISSN: 0169-2607. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0169-2607(97)00034-5. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0169260797000345.
[104]
David R Sutton and John Fox. “The syntax and semantics of the PROforma guide-
line modeling language”. en. In: J Am Med Inform Assoc 10.5 (June 2003), pp. 433–
443.
[105]
David Ferrucci et al. Unstructured Information Management Architecture (UIMA)
Version 1.0. OASIS Standard. 2009.
[106]
Vimla L Patel et al. “Cognitive psychological studies of representation and use of
clinical practice guidelines”. In: International Journal of Medical Informatics 63.3
(2001), pp. 147–167. ISSN: 1386-5056. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1386-
5056(01 ) 00165 - 4. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1386505601001654.
[107]
Amine Abbad Andaloussi et al. “Understanding Quality in Declarative Process
Modeling Through the Mental Models of Experts”. In: Business Process Manage-
ment. Ed. by Dirk Fahland et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020,
pp. 417–434. ISBN: 978-3-030-58666-9.
[108]
Izet Masic, Milan Miokovic, and Belma Muhamedagic. “Evidence based medicine
- new approaches and challenges”. en. In: Acta Inform Med 16.4 (2008), pp. 219–
225.
[109]
Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften
e. V. AWMF online. Accessed: 2023-11-14. URL: https://www.awmf.org/leitlinien.
[110]
European Society For Medical Oncology. ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines: Stan-
dard Operating Procedures. Accessed: 2024-01-20. URL: https://www.esmo.org/
content/download/77789/1426712/1/ESMO-Clinical-Practice-Guidelines-Standard-
Operating-Procedures.pdf.
48
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:56==
[111]
Nils Freyer, Dustin Thewes, and Matthias Meinecke. “GUIDO: A Hybrid Approach
to Guideline Discovery & Ordering from Natural Language Texts”. In: International
Conference on Data Technologies and Applications. 2023. URL: https : / / api .
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259885110.
[112]
Han van der Aa, Henrik Leopold, and Hajo Alexander Reijers. “Checking process
compliance against natural language specifications using behavioral spaces”. In:
Inf. Syst. 78 (2018), pp. 83–95. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
52877087.
[113]
“GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT IN EUROPE: An International Comparison.” In: In-
ternational Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care 16.04 (2000), pp. 1039–
1049. DOI: 10.1017/S0266462300103101.
[114]
Zeming Chen et al. MEDITRON-70B: Scaling Medical Pretraining for Large Lan-
guage Models. 2023. arXiv: 2311.16079 [cs.CL].
[115]
ChatGPT. Accessed: 2024-01-12. URL: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
[116]
Hauke Licht et al. No More Cost in Translation: Validating Open-Source Machine
Translation for Quantitative Text Analysis. ECONtribute Discussion Papers Series
276. University of Bonn and University of Cologne, Germany, Feb. 2024. URL:
https://ideas.repec.org/p/ajk/ajkdps/276.html.
[117]
Vivien Macketanz, Aljoscha Burchardt, and Hans Uszkoreit. “TQ-AUTOTEST :
NOVEL ANALYTICAL QUALITY MEASURE CONFIRMS THAT DEEPL IS BET-
TER THAN GOOGLE TRANSLATE By”. In: 2018. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:157060060.
[118]
Paul Sebo and Sylvain de Lucia. “Performance of machine translators in translat-
ing French medical research abstracts to English: A comparative study of DeepL,
Google Translate, and CUBBITT”. en. In: PLoS One 19.2 (Feb. 2024), e0297183.
[119]
Juan Miguel Cejuela et al. “tagtog: interactive and text-mining-assisted annota-
tion of gene mentions in PLOS full-text articles”. In: Database 2014 (Apr. 2014),
bau033. ISSN: 1758-0463. DOI: 10.1093/database/bau033. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/database/article-pdf/doi/10.1093/database/bau033/8245396/bau033.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bau033.
[120]
Jan-Christoph Klie et al. “The INCEpTION Platform: Machine-Assisted and Knowledge-
Oriented Interactive Annotation”. In: Proceedings of the 27th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations. Ed. by Dongyan
Zhao. Santa Fe, New Mexico: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug.
2018, pp. 5–9. URL: https://aclanthology.org/C18-2002.
[121]
Hugo Andres Lopez A. and Vít Simon. “How to (re)design declarative process
notations? A view from the lens of cognitive effectiveness frameworks”. In: (Nov.
2022). DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.28613.32489.
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
49
==PAGE:57==
50
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Metamodel of the PET dataset adapted from [PET].
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.2: DCR Graphs Metamodel adapted from [121].
52
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
==PAGE:60==
Process Extraction from Clinical Guidelines with Large Language Models
53
==PAGE:61==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
