==PAGE:1==
Crystallization of Sugar
Modelling and Analysis of Sugar Crystallization
Master Thesis
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Crystallization of Sugar
Modelling and Analysis of Sugar Crystallization
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Steffen Domy
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Søltofts
Plads, Building 228A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.kt.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Supervisors:
Mohammad Reza Boskabadi, PhD Student, Department of Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering
Seyed Soheil Mansouri, Associate Professor, Department of Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering
Steffen Domy ­ s180371
Signature
Date
ii
Crystallization of Sugar
21.02.2024
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This project was done in collaboration between the Department of Chemical and Bio­
chemical Engineering, ParticleTech, and Nordicsugar. I would like to thank my supervi­
sors Seyed Soheil Mansour and Mohammad Reza Boskabadi for guiding me through this
project and helping me whenever necessary.
Crystallization of Sugar
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
The thesis titled ”Crystallization of Sugar: Modelling and Analysis of Sugar Crystallization”
offers an in­depth exploration of the crystallization process in sugar production, empha­
sizing the development of kinetic models to enhance efficiency and reduce environmental
impact.
Crystallization, a critical step in sugar processing, involves the transformation of sugar
syrup into solid crystals. This process is not only energy­intensive but also crucial for
achieving the desired product quality. This thesis underscores the necessity to analyze
crystallization processes to potentially optimize them. A model is designed to simulate the
crystallization process accurately. This work sets a stepping stone in enabling the identifi­
cation of optimal operating conditions that minimize energy consumption while maximizing
yield and product quality.
Population balance equations provide an opportunity to simulate crystallization processes.
Experiments on a lab­scale crystallizer were performed and were then used to fit the popu­
lation balance model. The fitting was a partial success as the occurrence of agglomeration
disrupted the accuracy of the experiment with a high stirring rate. The results of the ex­
periments and the model fitting must be taken with reservations as the data collection is
difficult and crystallization is sensitive.
In summary, the thesis presents a comprehensive analysis of sugar crystallization, from
experimental investigation to model development.
iv
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Contents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background of Crystallization and Sugar Production
3
2.1
Sucrose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Crystallization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Crystallizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
Sugar production ­ from beets to crystals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.5
Industrial sugar crystallization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Population Balance
23
3.1
Introduction to the Population Balance Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Nucleation kinetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
Growth kinetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4
Population balance in batch cooling crystallization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Experimental Setups and Design of Experiments
26
4.1
Lab­scale batch crystallizer ­ Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Pilot­plant batch crystallizer ­ Setup and Commissioning . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
RePo Sucrometer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Fourier­transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Ocelloscope and seed analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.6
Experimental procedure for lab­scale crystallizer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Batch Cooling Crystallization Results
34
5.1
Crystallization with stirring at 200 RPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.2
Crystallization with stirring at 300 RPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.3
Experimental results discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Population Balance Model Fitting
41
6.1
Model set up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Model fitting ­ comparison to experimental data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3
Model evaluation and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Conclusion
50
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Bibliography
52
A Sucrose
55
B Crystallization
56
Crystallization of Sugar
v
==PAGE:8==
C Experimental Design and Commissioning
58
D Experimental Results
60
E
Model fitting
68
vi
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
CSD
Crystal Size Distribution
FTIR
Fourier­transform Infrared Spectroscopy
SS
Supersaturation
CNT
Classical Nucleation Theory
PATs
Process Analytical Tools
ECSN Embryo Coagulation Secondary Nucleation
TSNT Two­Step Nucleation Theory
M.A.
mean aperture
BCF
Burton­Cabrera–Frank
MSMPR Mixed Suspension, Mixed Product Removal
DT
Stirred Draft­Tube
DTB
Stirred Draft­Tube Baffle
CSTR Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor
CFL
Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy
Crystallization of Sugar
vii
==PAGE:10==
Nomenclature
• L ­ Characteristic length of a crystal
• kv ­ Volume shape factor
• β ­ Surface shape factor
• SS ­ Supersaturation ratio
• ∆G ­ Change in Gibbs free energy
• V ­ Volume
• A ­ Surface area
• m ­ Mass
• Ls ­ Characteristic length, mean aperture
• F ­ Shape factor
• c, c∗­ Solute concentration, and saturated solute concentration
• SS ­ Supersaturation
• ∆GGibbs, ∆Gv,Gibbs ­ Gibb’s free energy change, Gibb’s free energy change per vol­
ume
• σ ­ Interfacial surface tension
• n(L, t) ­ Population density over time and size
• ∆G ­ Linear growth rate
• B ­ Nucleation
• α ­ Size dependency coefficient
• kN ­ Primary nucleation pre­exponential coefficient
• k
′′
N ­ Secondary nucleation pre­exponential coefficient
• np ­ Primary nucleation exponential coefficient
• ns ­ Secondary nucleation exponential coefficient
• kg ­ Growth rate pre­exponential coefficient
• g ­ Growth rate exponential coefficient
• ρ ­ Sugar density
• wK,Kristallfuss ­ Solid crystal mass fraction
• mApperat ­ Massecuite mass in crystallizer
• dSlurry ­ Slurry crystals size
• dKristallfuss ­ Desired crystal size
• NCrystals ­ Crystal population density (1/ml)
viii
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The presence of sugar in our modern lives extends far beyond the confines of a sweet
treat. It is a complex molecule with profound implications for human health, nutrition, and
industry. While it is loved and hated by many simultaneously, it is an essential component
of our diet, where it plays a pivotal role in energy metabolism. It has a diverse range of
applications, ranging from food science to biogas production.
When we refer to sugar in our everyday life, we technically mean sucrose. Sucrose is
a disaccharide sugar consisting of a fructose and a glucose molecule. The worldwide
production of sugar is approx. 165 million tons per year. Roughly 80% of that comes
from sugar cane, and the rest comes from sugar beets (International Sugar Organization,
2021). Sugar is an everyday item that can be bought in most grocery stores. It is sold
in different forms, such as syrups, white sugar, powdered sugar, and brown sugar. Apart
from its use in households, it is also used in the industry. In the food sector, sugar acts
as a sweetening agent, enhancing flavour profiles and balancing the taste of countless
products. From confectioneries to baked goods, sugar contributes not only to sweetness
but also to texture, colour, and preservation qualities (European Food Information Council
(EUFIC), 2013). In the pharmaceutical industry, it functions as a bulking agent, a binder
in tablets, and as a sweetener for medication (PharmaCentral, n.d.). In biotechnology,
sugar is a crucial component in fermentation processes, supporting the growth of mi­
croorganisms for the production of antibiotics, biogas, and other pharmaceutical products
(Ratledge and Kristiansen, 2006).
Denmark has two sugar refining plants that produce sugar from beets. These two plants,
from the company Nordic Sugar, are together the second biggest emitter of CO2 in Den­
mark. In 2019 they emitted 161.633 tons of CO2 (Lund­Hansen, 2022). The high CO2
emission of sugar is partly due to the high energy consumption in the refining process.
The refining process of sugar emits 0.47 kg CO2 per kg of sugar and roughly 30­50%
of the used thermal energy is used during the crystallization (CONCITO, n.d.) (Frenzel,
2020). Due to its high energy usage and resulting contribution to the CO2­emissions,
the crystallization process is an obvious choice for potential optimizations. Additionally,
the crystallization faces another problem, which is also partly responsible for the high
CO2 emission. It is notoriously difficult to control the crystallization which can result in
unwanted product characteristics. The difficulty in controlling the process results in more
energy and time being required during production.
Controlling, predicting, and monitoring the size and Crystal Size Distribution (CSD) in
sugar products are major concerns in sugar crystallization. Crystallization is such a com­
plex process because it is non­linear and non­stationary (Meng et al., 2019). Many pub­
lications about crystallization focus on finding/developing models to predict crystal size
and CSD.
There are different methods of creating such a model. One is to focus on the kinetic mech­
anisms within the crystallization process. This method uses traditional mass, energy, and
population balance equations to create kinetic equations that describe the physical phe­
nomena of nucleation, growth, breakage, and agglomeration in crystallization. Another
method is to use AI­based algorithms on recorded process data from sugar plants to cre­
ate a data­driven model. A third method is to combine the previous two methods into one
single model. The combined model has outperformed the other two in previous research
Crystallization of Sugar
1
==PAGE:12==
work (Georgieva et al., 2003). There are different variations within each of the mentioned
methods that take into account and focus on different aspects of crystallization.
1.0.1
Project overview
The primary goal of this thesis is to perform crystallization experiments and create a kinetic
model. Additionally, it is desired to commission the pilot­plant crystallizer and use it for
said experiments. The approach to achieve this goal is listed in the following intermediate
objectives that found the basis of this project’s workflow.
1. Review crystallization theory and industrial sugar production
2. Find kinetic expressions and establish a model using the population balance
3. Commission pilot­plant crystallizer and design experiments for crystallization
4. Perform crystallization experiments
5. Fit the kinetic model to experimental data
6. Analyze and discuss results
On a larger scale, the outcome of this project can hopefully be used to aid the construc­
tion of a more comprehensive model. The project was carried out in collaboration with
Nordic Sugar and ParticleTech. ParticleTech is a company that develops Process Analyt­
ical Tools (PATs), with a focus on crystallization and particle analysis. They are interested
in methods to analyze processes, which NordicSugar can use to optimize their produc­
tion. The pilot­scale crystallizer was bought for a previous project but has not been used
for some time now.
2
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:13==
2
Theoretical Background of
Crystallization and Sugar Production
Having introduced the project, this section will present the necessary background of su­
crose, crystallization, and sugar production on an industrial scale. Specifically, the part
on industrial sugar crystallization will pave the way for the design of the experiments and
show some of the difficulties in the industry. Furthermore, this section will put the project
into context and build the foundation to understand the experiments, modelling, and dis­
cussions presented later in this report.
2.1
Sucrose
Sucrose is a disaccharide composed of two monosaccharides: glucose and fructose. It
belongs to the broader category of carbohydrates, which are organic compounds com­
posed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Its carbohydrate classification falls under the
subgroup of sugars, further categorized as a non­reducing sugar due to the absence of
a free aldehyde or ketone group (Gillespie, 2018). This characteristic sets sucrose apart
from reducing sugars, such as glucose and maltose, which can undergo oxidation reac­
tions. Sucrose is found in many plants where it is used for fixed carbon transport and
storage (Ward et al., 1997). Its chemical formula is C12H22O11 and its structure can be
seen in figure 2.1. The glucose and fructose molecules are linked by an α,β­1,2­glycosidic
bond. Under normal conditions, pure sucrose is a colourless and odourless crystal. Su­
crose forms crystals because of intermolecular forces acting between them. These forces
are complex, but they include hydrogen bonds (Davies and Chrisofides, 1987).
Figure 2.1: Molecular structure of sucrose (Helmenstine, 2018)
Crystals can be categorized according to different crystal lattices. A crystal lattice rep­
resents how the atoms in a crystal are arranged. Additionally, each crystal has a set of
lattice parameters, which define the angles and lengths between atoms. Sucrose is ar­
ranged in a primitive monoclinic P21 crystal lattice (Doe, 2016). Figure A.1 in Appendix A
shows the crystal lattice of sucrose (Mayer, 2007). The lattice parameters of sucrose are
α = γ = 90◦, β = 103◦, a = 7.8Å, b = 8.7Å, c = 10.9Å (Doe, 2016).
The EU defines two different grades of sugar, Extra White Sugar ­ EU­Grade 1 and White
Sugar ­ EU Grade 2. The difference between the two grades is measured through their
colourization and ash content, which have to remain under a certain limit. The specifica­
tions can be seen in Appendix A (Südzucker, 2020). Appendix A also contains a table of
other basic information on sucrose (PubChem, 2023). Another important metric of sugar
Crystallization of Sugar
3
==PAGE:14==
crystals is their size. Depending on what the sugar is used for, different sizes are of­
ten preferred. The following section will discuss how crystal size is defined and how to
calculate volume and surface area from it.
2.1.1
Size and shape analysis of sucrose crystals
Since sugar crystals do not grow as simple cubes or spheres, it becomes more difficult to
evaluate their size. First, it must be established how the size is measured. This is done
by introducing something called the characteristic length. When using the characteristic
length a crystal is reduced to a single defining linear dimension. This can be done in
multiple ways.
Figure 2.2: Typical sucrose crystal shape (Bubnik and Kadlec, 1992)
Figure 2.2 shows the typical shape of a sucrose crystal (Bubnik and Kadlec, 1992). The
lengths along axis B and C are shown with arrows. The length of axis A is perpendicular
to the B/C plane. All of those axes could theoretically be chosen as the characteristic
length. Other, more practical choices, would be the longest dimension, the equivalent
special diameter, or the mean aperture (M.A.) measured through sieve analysis (Bubnik
and Kadlec, 1992). The important thing when choosing the characteristic length is that
it must be representative of the particle and measurable to a reasonable extent. The
characteristic length is a good parameter that can be used to further analyze a particle.
Apart from the one­dimensional size of a crystal, it is also of interest to know its volume
and surface area. Especially when analyzing the kinetic rate of a crystallization it is helpful
to know more about the particle morphology to understand its behaviour. The volume and
surface of a given object can be calculated with the following equations.
V = kvL3
(2.1)
A = βL2
(2.2)
kv and β are the volume and surface factors, respectively and L is the characteristic length
of the object. Common shapes have already known factors, such as spheres where kv =
0.524 and β = 3.142 (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). For unknown shapes, these
factors have to be measured first.
In an article by Bubník and Kadlec, they estimate kv and β of sucrose, from laboratory
and industrial production, by using two different characteristic lengths. For the first char­
4
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:15==
acteristic length, they combine the lengths of axes B and C into one single dimension with
this equation:
L =
3√
L2
bLc
(2.3)
The axes B and C are measured while the crystal lies on the biggest face, the B/C surface.
They were measured with the microscopic method and photomicrographs. The crystal
samples ranged in size from Lb = 0.6 −3.4mm and Lb = 0.4 −2.1mm. The crystals were
then weighed and by using the sucrose density a linear regression between the mass and
characteristic length was made:
m = kvρL3
(2.4)
from the acquired data kv was estimated to be 0.307, when using L =
3√
L2
bLc as the
characteristic length. Using the shape factor F and literature data β can be calculated. F
is a common shape factor used in sucrose crystallization research (Bubnik and Kadlec,
1992).
F =
A
3√
m2)
(2.5)
Substituting equation 2.4 and 2.2 into 2.5 results in:
F =
β
3√
(ρkv)2)
(2.6)
From this equation β was calculated to be 2.77.
The other characteristic length they used was the M.A., Ls. This parameter is measured
through sieve analysis, where all crystals are put through a set of different­sized sieves.
The crystals that pass through sieve N but are retained by N+1 are grouped and given
the average sieve size of sieve N and N+1. This average sieve size is used as the char­
acteristic length, Ls.
The crystals are again weighed and equations 2.4 and 2.6 are again used to make a linear
regression and calculate kv and β. With this method, they were estimated to be kv = 0.75
and β = 5.02. The linear regression from the sieve analysis had an average difference of
6.9% between the measured and predicted volume, which was slightly worse than the one
from the direct size measurement with 4.1%. Overall both methods performed well and
even though the direct measurement method is more precise, practical considerations for
how the characteristic length is recorded are also important.
2.2
Crystallization
Crystallization is a natural phenomenon where a solute, dissolved in a liquid or gas, trans­
forms into a crystalline form. It occurs in nature but is also a fundamental process in many
industrial production facilities. It serves as a method of purification, separation, and fabri­
cation of a wide range of substances. Crystallization happens when a solvent is oversatu­
rated with one or multiple solutes. Oversaturation is also called Supersaturation (SS) and
Crystallization of Sugar
5
==PAGE:16==
can be expressed as the ratio between the concentration of a solution and the concentra­
tion of a saturated solution at the same temperature (equation 2.7) or as the concentration
difference between the solution and saturated solution (equation 2.8) (South­Eastern Fin­
land University of Applied Sciences, 2021).
SS = c
c∗
(2.7)
∆SS = c −c∗
(2.8)
c∗is the saturated concentration. A SS (using equation 2.7) above 1 means the solution is
oversaturated, a SS below 1 means it is undersaturated, and SS=1 means it is saturated.
The transformation from solute to a crystal structure is defined by two phenomena, nu­
cleation and growth. Agglomeration and breakage also play an important role in crystal­
lization and have a big impact on the final crystal product, but they aren’t included in the
actual transition from a dissolved state to a solid state. There are multiple methods to
achieve oversaturation and thereby induce crystallization.
Cooling crystallization: Cooling crystallization is a popular method in the industry. It
uses the fact that many compound’s solubilities decrease with lower temperatures. Cool­
ing the solution will oversaturate it without changing its composition. This method requires
relatively little energy and, if possible, is usually preferred when compared to evaporation
crystallization (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). Cooling crystallization must be per­
formed carefully as fouling on the heat exchanger is a common problem (SoliQz, n.d.).
For this reason, flash evaporation is often used to cool the solution (Clement et al., 2017).
Even though sugar has a relatively steep solubility curve the sugar industry mainly uses
evaporative crystallization. This is discussed in a section 2.5.
Evaporative crystallization: In cases where the solubility curve is very flat, meaning, the
solubility barely increases with higher temperatures, evaporation crystallization is often
used. Especially salts often have flat solubility curves (Clement et al., 2017). It can also
be used if cooling crystallization is not a possibility for other reasons than the solubility
curve. With this method, the solution is heated to remove the solvent through evaporation,
which increases the concentration. This method is very energy­intensive, even if some of
the heat from the evaporated solvent can be reused (SoliQz, n.d.). In the case of sugar
crystallization, this method is simultaneously performed under a vacuum to decrease the
boiling point of water.
Reactive crystallization: Reactive crystallization, also called precipitation, generates su­
persaturation through the mixing of two streams and encompasses reactive crystallization
and pH shift crystallization. Reactive crystallization generally involves a rapid, exothermic
reaction between components from two feed streams, forming the solid phase. pH­shift
crystallization exploits the pH­induced changes in ionic species, with reactions between
acids and bases (SoliQz, n.d.). Common characteristics of precipitation are high over­
saturation in the mixture, low solubility of the ”precipitate”, and involvement of various
phenomena such as nucleation, agglomeration, and Ostwald ripening (Myerson, Erdemir,
and Lee, 2019).
Anti­solvent crystallization: Anti­solvent crystallization involves mixing a second sol­
vent, which is miscible with the solvent but decreases the solubility of the targeted com­
pound, into the mixture. Recovery of the second solvent is often necessary to make it
6
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:17==
economically viable (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). This method is often used in
the production of proteins or in cases where harmful components have to be removed
(Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019).
Melt crystallization: Melt crystallization is different from the other mentioned methods in
the sense that it doesn’t involve a solvent (SoliQz, n.d.). It can refer to mixtures of mate­
rials that are usually solid at room temperature, but a stricter definition is a pure molten
solid (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). Melt crystallization is used in the production of
ultrapure products. It can be compared to cooling crystallization as the crystallization is
induced through cooling. The defining difference is that for melt crystallization the heat
transfer is the rate­limiting step, while for solutions the mass transfer is the rate­limiting
step (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019).
2.2.1
Nucleation
Crystal nucleation is a fundamental process in the formation of crystalline structures and
marks the inception of crystal formation. Nucleation is the process of dissolved molecules
merging in a suspension to form a structured formation. The crystals that are formed
through nucleation are called nuclei or embryos and can be defined as the smallest
amount of solid phase that can exist inside the suspension (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee,
2019). Further conversion of dissolved solute to solid phase on the crystal surface is no
longer considered nucleation, but crystal growth. During crystal growth, new molecules
attach to the already­formed crystal without forming new nuclei.
Nucleation manifests in two distinct forms: primary and secondary nucleation. Primary
nucleation is the spontaneous formation of crystals. This only occurs when the solvent
is sufficiently supersaturated, while secondary nucleation occurs at lower supersaturation
due to the presence of already existing crystals. Figure 2.3 shows the solubility curve
of sucrose against temperature (M.Temerk, Z.El­Abdein, and Abdullah, 2014). It also
includes curves corresponding to supersaturation at 1.2 and 1.3. Above SS=1.3 is the
unstable zone which will induce spontaneous nucleation. Between SS=1.2 and SS=1.3 is
the intermediate zone, which is the concentration at which no spontaneous nucleation will
occur, but secondary nucleation can occur in the presence of other crystals (M.Temerk,
Z.El­Abdein, and Abdullah, 2014). Most substances will have the same zones, albeit at
different supersaturations.
Primary nucleation
Primary nucleation is further divided into homogenous and heterogeneous nucleation. Ho­
mogenous nucleation is driven by local fluctuations in concentration, while heterogeneous
nucleation occurs on surfaces or impurities of different composition than the crystallizing
solute (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). Homogenous nucleation rarely occurs in prac­
tice and can rather be perceived as an idealized phenomenon for nucleation. Classical
Nucleation Theory (CNT) is used to describe homogenous nucleation through changes
in Gibbs free energy. According to CNT, the concentration fluctuations form clusters of
different sizes, of which only sufficiently big clusters remain stable and become nuclei.
Equation 2.9 shows the expression for the change in Gibbs free energy during the forma­
tion of the nuclei (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019).
∆GGibbs = βL2σ + kvL3∆Gv,Gibbs
(2.9)
L, kv, and β are the characteristic length, volume shape factor, and surface shape factor,
mentioned in section 2.1.1, respectively. σ is the interfacial surface tension and ∆Gv,Gibbs
is the free energy change for the phase transformation per unit of volume. The term βL2σ
Crystallization of Sugar
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: Solubility and supersaturation curves for sucrose at different temperatures
(M.Temerk, Z.El­Abdein, and Abdullah, 2014)
represents the change in surface formation energy relative to the size of a cluster. The
surface formation energy increases with the size of the cluster. kvL3∆Gv expresses the
change in energy caused by the phase transformation, which will be negative and further
decrease with cluster size because the solid state is more stable. Figure B.1 in appendix
B shows how the two terms affect the total free energy change and the critical size at
which point the clusters remain stable and can be considered nuclei (Myerson, Erdemir,
and Lee, 2019). Smaller clusters usually dissolve back again.
By taking the derivative of equation 2.9 and setting it equal to 0 it can be used to determine
the critical size, L∗, and required energy change, ∆G∗, to form stable nuclei.
d(∆GGibbs)
dL
= 2βL∗σ + 3kv(L∗)2∆Gv,Gibbs = 0
(2.10)
Equation 2.10 can be modified to find the critical size:
L∗= −
2βσ
3kvGv,Gibbs
(2.11)
Substituting 2.11 into 2.10 will result in the equation for the critical threshold of Gibbs free
energy for nucleation(Gautam et al., 2021).
∆G∗
Gibbs = −
4β3σ3
27G∗
v,Gibbsk2v
= σ(L∗)2
3
(2.12)
These equations essentially tell us what size the clusters need and what energy is nec­
essary to form nuclei (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). kv and β are π
6 and π, respec­
tively, because CNT assumes spherical clusters/nuclei. CNT goes further where it gives
8
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:19==
equations on nucleation kinetics, which are discussed in section 3.2. It was originally
developed for droplet formation during condensation but has been used in crystallization
because the processes are comparable. It has been useful in certain cases because of its
simplicity but it comes with a wide set of assumptions (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019).
These assumptions include modelling clusters as spherical droplets with uniform interior
densities, density independence regardless of size, and a surface tension that doesn’t
take into account the curvature of the droplet. Additionally, it doesn’t take into account
any complex collisions or detachments where bigger­sized clusters collide or break off
from an existing cluster. It also assumes an immediate distribution of sub­critical clusters
once supersaturation is reached and ignores cluster movement and thermal history.
CNT is generally regarded as too simple and diverges from experimental results in too
many instances (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). Only in very ideal and single­component
systems does the model adhere to experimental data. The main problems are the sim­
plifications in assuming spherical clusters, disregarding curvature in the surface tension,
and not taking into account induction time. It is also too simple to make critical size the
only defining characteristic of the nucleation. Apart from all the flaws CNT has, it must
be said that there are some intrinsic difficulties in analyzing nucleation. The clusters/nu­
clei size can be somewhere between 100 and 1000 molecules, which can’t be recorded
or measured by most experimental equipment, and these clusters only exist for a short
time, which adds further complications. Adjustments to the CNT exist but there are other
approaches as well.
Two­Step Nucleation Theory (TSNT) is an alternative theory to CNT. While CNT assumes
an immediately ordered structure inside a cluster during its formation, TSNT proposes a
liquid­like cluster as the first step in the formation of a nucleus (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee,
2019). Only in the second step, the cluster will transform into a structured crystal. Figure
B.2 in appendix B shows the comparison between the two theories. Several theoretical
and experimental studies have been performed that support TSNT, especially near critical
points and at high supersaturations.
Heterogenous nucleation follows the same principles as homogenous nucleation but it
is catalyzed by the presence of impurities in the solution or equipment such as reactor
walls or stirrers. The ”foreign” objects reduce the surface excess energy for subcritical
clusters, which facilitates nuclei formation. The lower activation barrier makes nucleation
possible at lower supersaturations, but still within the limits of primary nucleation. There
are methods to exploit this phenomenon, such as the use of monolayers, which are sur­
faces explicitly made to induce heterogeneous crystallization (Artusio, Gavira, and Pisano,
2023).
Secondary nucleation
As already mentioned, secondary nucleation is the formation of nuclei due to already
existing crystals in the solution. There are many mechanisms, in which existing crys­
tals can catalyze nucleation. They can either stem directly from a parent crystal due to
some kind of breakage, or they are formed in the liquid phase near the crystal surface.
The categorization of the mechanisms is not strict as they often resemble each other.
Most mechanisms assume that there is some sort of boundary layer on the crystal sur­
face, where solute molecules are loosely ordered (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019).
This phenomenon is called the Embryo Coagulation Secondary Nucleation (ECSN) the­
ory (Agrawal and Paterson, 2015). ECSN says that van der Waal forces from the crystal
attract clusters in the solution, and increase the solute concentration in the boundary layer.
Initial breeding is a type of breakage where fines can occur on the seed crystal during stor­
Crystallization of Sugar
9
==PAGE:20==
age or seed production (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). These small fines can detach
and act as nucleation sites during the early stage of seeded crystallization. Needle/poly­
crystalline breeding is a type of breakage that occurs at very high supersaturations, where
needle­like structures can grow on the crystal surface. These needle­like formations can
then detach from the crystal and become a nucleus. Needle breeding is unlikely to hap­
pen in industrial crystallization. Contact nucleation and collision breeding are both mech­
anisms where some sort of contact with a different object (stirrer or other crystals) can
form new nuclei. Contact nucleation is the ”softer” version where other objects disturb the
boundary layer on the crystal surface, where loosely structured molecules separate from
the surface and form nuclei. This type of secondary nucleation is very common. More
powerful contact is necessary for collision breeding, where chunks from a crystal are bro­
ken off. This mechanism can reshape the parent crystals and is the only type that doesn’t
necessarily require supersaturation (Agrawal and Paterson, 2015).
In cases where the stirring rate is very high, the fluid shear can be strong enough to disturb
the boundary layer. Some of the clusters can disperse into the solution and form nuclei.
This is similar to contact nucleation but doesn’t involve other objects or particles. An­
other mechanism that forms nuclei in the liquid phase is due to the impurity concentration
gradient. Some impurities can suppress primary nucleation and in some instances, these
impurities get incorporated into the crystal during growth. Under these circumstances, the
impurity concentration is lower in the boundary layer because they are adsorbed by the
crystal (Denk and Botsaris, 1972). Thus, the suppressing effect of the impurity is lowered
in the boundary layer which then allows nuclei to form.
Numerous parameters affect secondary nucleation. Supersaturation is the most impor­
tant one. High supersaturation not only thickens the boundary layer but also increases
the chance of detached particles forming new nuclei (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019).
Temperature can affect secondary nucleation as well but it is not fully understood. Higher
temperatures can speed up the incorporation of solute molecules from the boundary layer,
thus thinning out the boundary layer and decreasing the nucleation rate. In other cases,
the temperature has the opposite or no effect. The effect of stirring also changes depend­
ing on the circumstances. For very small crystals (8­10µm) higher agitation increases
nucleation, while systems with bigger crystals aren’t affected. Lastly, the hardness of
crystals and reactor equipment generally has an increasing effect on the nucleation rate.
To summarize nucleation it can be said that there are many mechanisms to form nuclei that
often resemble each other. They mostly differ in their origins and how different parameters
affect them but generally, supersaturation is the most important factor for nucleation.
2.2.2
Crystal growth
After nucleation, where stable nuclei are formed, crystal growth can start. Crystal growth
is vital in controlling the final size, product purity, and crystal habit (shape) (Myerson,
Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). Crystal growth only occurs when the solution is supersaturated
and it is the main driving force for how fast crystals grow (L. Rozsa, J. Rozsa, and Kilpinen,
2018). While nucleation needs at least a supersaturation of 1.2 or 1.3, depending on the
type of nucleation, crystal growth occurs in the whole range, SS>1.
During crystal growth, dissolved molecules from the solution are adsorbed onto the ex­
isting crystal on a layer­by­layer basis (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). When new
molecules are adsorbed to the surface they tend to do at places where they will form
the highest number of new bonds, as this is energetically more favorable. Therefore,
new molecules will not attach on top of a flat surface but rather in corners, which results
in layer­by­layer growth. Figure B.3 in Appendix B illustrates where new molecules are
10
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:21==
added to the crystal surface.
Growth theories
There are a few theories that try to explain the exact mechanism of how new molecules
are incorporated into the crystal. One theory perceives the growth as a two­dimensional
nucleation on the surface of a crystal (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). Molecules will
be adsorbed and can move around on the crystal surface, where they can form clusters
with other molecules moving around on the surface. These clusters can achieve a critical
size from where they grow, similar to real nucleation. There are different variations to
this theory where one says that after a nuclei has formed the rest of a layer emerges
instantly (infinitely fast), as the molecules are attracted to the edges of the two­dimensional
nuclei. In another version, the nuclei do not grow at all and only the formation of enough
nuclei throughout the surface will form a new layer. Both of these versions are generally
considered incorrect. A more fitting version is the birth and spread model, which is a
compromise of the previous two. It says nuclei will form on the surface and then grow at
a finite rate to form a layer. At high supersaturations, the surface nucleation will become
faster than the layer growth, which will result in surface nuclei on top of nuclei that are still
growing.
The Burton­Cabrera–Frank (BCF) model does not consider two­dimensional nucleation
in its theory. In this model, crystal growth is facilitated through dislocations in the surface
as seen in Figure B.4 in Appendix B. Adsorbed molecules will grow along the dislocation
and the dislocation remains even after a layer has been added. This allows for continuous
growth at low supersaturations, which is a situation where the two­dimensional nucleation
model can become inaccurate (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). There are two well­
known versions of this model. One is the BCF surface diffusion model, which says that
the rate­limiting step is the diffusion from the crystal­liquid interface (boundary layer) to
the crystal surface. The other one is bulk diffusion model where the diffusion from the bulk
solution to the boundary layer is the rate­limiting step. The bulk diffusion model takes into
account the agitation and stirring speed in the solution, which is an important parameter
as it affects the boundary layer thickness. Increased agitation will decrease the layer
thickness and result in faster crystal growth.
The last model that will be presented in this project is the diffusion layer model. It focuses
on the solute concentration difference near the crystal surface (Myerson, Erdemir, and
Lee, 2019). Since solute is being incorporated into the crystal, the concentration will
increase when moving away from the surface until it is equal to the bulk concentration.
This concentration gradient induces solute diffusion towards the crystal. The diffusion
layer model is mathematically less complex than the other ones and it is the one that is
usually used in industrial crystallization processes.
Growth rate
Crystal growth can be expressed by the change in mass, volume, or size. A common
method is to describe it through the linear growth rate, which is defined as the change in
length per unit of time (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). This can either be understood
as the literal length change on a single crystal face or through the change in the charac­
teristic length, such as the longest axis of a particle. Only looking at the single faces of
a crystal can give a better understanding of the principles of crystal growth, but looking
at the characteristic length gives insight into how the whole crystal changes. The growth
rate can also be expressed in terms of crystal mass or volume change.
There has been an ongoing discussion on whether crystal size impacts crystal growth
(linear growth rate). In some situations, the small crystals in a crystal population will grow
slower than the bigger crystals (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). In some cases, the
Crystallization of Sugar
11
==PAGE:22==
small crystals might even dissolve while the big ones grow. This phenomenon is called
Ostwald ripening and is due to the system trying to decrease the Gibbs’s free energy.
Upholding the surface of a crystal requires energy, which makes it energetically more
favourable for the system to have big crystals that have a lower surface area relative to
the mass of the crystals. This can be interpreted as the small crystals having a higher
solubility in the solvent than the big crystals, which results in a supersaturation difference
even though the solute concentration is the same in the solution. It must be said that this
phenomenon only occurs for crystals smaller than 1µm.
For bigger crystals, there exist some studies and growth expressions that take the size
into account. However, it has been shown that what was interpreted as size­dependent
growth is actually due to a different phenomenon called growth rate dispersion (Myerson,
Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). In general, McCabe’s ΔL law is applied to crystal growth:
”According to McCabe’s ΔL law: The total linear growth of all crystals in the
massecuite over the same time interval and along similar axes is the same, if
they have similar and invariant geometric shapes and supersaturation is the
same for all crystals in all locations in the massecuite.”
L. Rozsa, J. Rozsa, and Kilpinen, 2018, p. 2
Even though the growth rate is the same for all crystal sizes, it is often the case that the
CSD widens during a crystallization. This development is due to the growth rate disper­
sion. Two mechanisms can be used to explain growth rate dispersion (Myerson, Erdemir,
and Lee, 2019). In one of them, it is proposed that crystals are born (nucleation) with
different permanent growth rates (at fixed conditions) and that they keep them throughout
their existence. This can be due to variations in surface dislocations, mentioned in the
BCF model. Experiments have shown that these dislocations can vary in size and affect
the growth rate. Another proposal is that over a long time, the crystals have the same
average growth rate but it can fluctuate during some periods, which gives the impression
of size­dependant growth.
Figure 2.4: Schematic representation of growth/nucleation rate on crystal size (Mettler­
Toledo, LLC, n.d.)
Understanding nucleation and crystal growth is of great importance during crystallization.
They are the main factors that determine the crystal product size. Figure 2.4 shows a
representation of how growth and nucleation impact crystal size relative to supersatura­
tion. It is only representative and not necessarily how it would play out in a real process.
The figure shows how nucleation is nonexistent or insignificant in lower ranges and be­
12
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:23==
comes the dominating factor at high supersaturation. The growth rate also increases but
only slowly. At low nucleation, only growth contributes to the crystallization, and the lower
number of crystals can grow until the solute runs out. When nucleation takes over, the
number of crystals increases which gives a constant influx of very small crystals to the
crystal population. This results in the average crystal size decreasing.
Crystal size distribution
The size of crystals is often represented by the CSD. The CSD shows the distribution of
differently­sized crystals as a fraction of the whole crystal population that is being ana­
lyzed (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). The fraction can either be presented in terms
of number of crystals or by mass/volume distribution. Figure 2.5 shows a crystal mass
distribution by the use of a histogram. It can also be shown as a graph, but in many cases,
the particles are grouped. Under ideal circumstances, the CSD follows a normal distribu­
tion, but most often it is skewed or asymmetric in some regard. During a crystallization
process, the distribution will likely shift and widen out. Crystal growth will make it shift
to the right, but due to the growth rate dispersion it will likely get wider as some crystals
grow faster. Additionally, when nucleation is a significant factor new crystals will form in
the smallest size interval. Another factor that can impact the size distribution is agglom­
eration, where two crystals collide and become one bigger crystal. Such phenomena can
create multiple maxima in the graph/histogram.
Figure 2.5:
Crystal mass distribution of a hypothetical crystal population (Myerson,
Erdemir, and Lee, 2019)
2.2.3
Agglomeration
Agglomeration can be an important factor in crystallization. During agglomeration, parti­
cles will collide and form bonds with each other. The agglomeration process is divided
into 2 separate steps (Lewis et al., 2015a). First, two or more particles collide with each
other and van der Waals forces can take over to make them stay together. This is an
intermediate formation of loosely connected particles. The frequency of this happening is
heavily dependent on the flow in the system. High stirring will facilitate collisions. There
are two possible outcomes for the second step. This loose aggregate can break off into
its original particles or enough bonds can be made between the particles to form a stable
agglomerate. Breakage of the aggregate is caused by other particles colliding with it or
because of turbulent flow, which creates shear between the particles and fluid. The forma­
tion of stable agglomerates is related to the supersaturation and crystal growth. Crystal
growth facilitates the formation of agglomerates because molecules from the solution can
fill the gaps and create bonds inside aggregates.
Crystallization of Sugar
13
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Crystallizers
In this section, various crystallizer designs employed in the industry will be presented.
Specifically, the focus will be on designs utilized for evaporation and cooling crystalliza­
tion, as they bear the greatest significance to this project and sugar crystallization in gen­
eral. Not every type is included here as the purpose is to show the main aspects of
crystallizer design. Crystallizers are designed with many factors in mind, the most im­
portant ones being, materials used (solute/solvent), desired crystal product criteria, and
annual production volume.
Crystallization can run as a batch or continuous process and the choice is often based
on the annual production rate (Lewis et al., 2015b). Below 5 kton/year batch processes
are common and above 20 kton/year continuous processes usually become more advan­
tageous. Continuous processes are cheaper and require less time from operators. On
the other hand, batch crystallizers are more flexible and batch operation simplifies main­
tenance and cleaning, which can be helpful in cases with frequent fouling. Additionally,
batch operations are better at producing a product with narrow CSD.
Stirred DraftTube (DT) and Stirred DraftTube Baffle (DTB) crystallizers
Several crystallizers can be categorized into the Mixed Suspension, Mixed Product Re­
moval (MSMPR) concept (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). It is a concept that assumes
ideal conditions throughout the reactor and is used to model continuous crystallization pro­
cesses. MSMPR assumes a well­mixed reactor, with a crystal­free feed and a product
composition that is identical to the reactor content. It is mainly used as an easy way to
model the CSD during operation. No reactor conforms to the ideal state of MSMPR but
the Stirred Draft­Tube (DT) and Stirred Draft­Tube Baffle (DTB) crystallizers come the
closest.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: DT (a) and DTB (b) crystallizers (Lewis et al., 2015b)
The DT crystallizer is a simple setup that functions like a Continuous Stirred Tank Reac­
tor (CSTR) with an internal heat exchanger. Figure 2.6(a) shows a DT crystallizer that
14
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:25==
operates as an evaporative crystallizer with a draft tube that separates the middle of the
reactor into an inner and outer tube (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). At the bottom of
the crystallizer, there is a slow­stirring marine­type impeller. This type of stirring prevents
fouling on shafts in top­controlled stirrers, an occurrence that particularly happens in the
boiling zone (gas­liquid interface). The disadvantage of bottom­controlled stirrers is that
crystals can enter and grow inside the sealing of the stirrer.
The feed enters the crystallizer at the bottom next to the impeller but opposite to the
product removal steam. The stirrer not only mixes the feed with the solution but also
creates a convection where the stream flows upward in the outer tube and then downward
in the inner tube. The convection is facilitated by the heat exchanger that heat the solution,
which decreases density. The internal heat exchange has the disadvantage of creating
more surface area for the crystals to collide with and this setup generally only supports
low­heat duties. In cases of cooling crystallization, jacketed reactors for heat exchange
can be used. The DT crystallizer can produce relatively big crystals but doesn’t allow
good control of the CSD. Better control of the CSD is introduced with the DTB crystallizer,
which has fines removal and selective product removal.
The DTB crystallizer, shown in 2.6(b), is built similarly to the DT crystallizer. It differs from
the DT setup by having an external heat exchanger, an elutriation leg, and a skirt baffle
that creates an annular zone for fines removal (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). In this
design, the stream flows upward in the inner tube and downward in the outer one. A loop
is created from the annular zone back to the feed, which can be used to remove some
or all fines (small crystals). In this external loop, the fines are removed either through
heating, which increases solubility or by adding another feed stream that is slightly under­
saturated. Inside the external loop, the fine crystals will dissolve. The purpose of this fine
removal is to narrow the CSD, as only the bigger crystals remain in the reactor and grow
further. Particular caution is required when using fines removal, as it is very sensitive.
The number of fines getting removed can be adjusted by the flow through the external
loop, but increasing the flow will also increase the size of the fines going in. The exter­
nal fines remover has to be adjusted to this for the process to function properly. Some
fines have to remain in the reactor to uphold the crystal population as the product stream
continuously removes crystals (GEA Process Engineering, 2021). Selective product re­
moval is implemented by using an elutriation leg. Smaller crystals are mixed with the feed
stream and flow up the inner tube, but bigger/heavier crystals fall and can leave through
the side of the leg (or get recirculated). The DTB crystallizer is more versatile than the
DT crystallizer as it allows more control options. This allows the unit to produce bigger
crystals and achieve a narrower CSD.
Oslo crystallizer
The Oslo crystallizer is a fluidized bed reactor that is also designed to produce big and
uniform crystals (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). In this setup, a hot feed enters the
top of the crystallizer where some of the solvent is evaporated to create supersatura­
tion. A downcomer then directs the solution down to the fluidized bed where the solute
is consumed by the floating crystals. At the top, the solution moves upward through the
reactor and leaves through a recycling stream where and is heated again. Some fines
are removed through the heat exchanger but an additional fines loop can be added that
removes fines from the top of the reactor. This is similar to the DTB crystallizer where
fines are removed by heating or the addition of undersaturated feed. Some fines remain
in circulation to uphold the population. As the crystals get bigger inside the reactor they
percipitate to the bottom where they are removed with the product stream.
To operate an Oslo crystallizer the fluid velocity through the downcomer and inside the
Crystallization of Sugar
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.7: Fluidized bed (Oslo) crystallizer (Lewis et al., 2015b)
reactor has to be sufficiently high (Clement et al., 2017). This is necessary to fluidize
the crystal and prevent any kind of blockage at the bottom of the downcomer. The Oslo
crystallizer has the advantage that no stirrer can collide with crystals and induce breakage.
Only crystal­crystal collisions remain. Compared to DT/DTB crystallizers, the fluidized
bed has a low capacity (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019) and the supersaturation must
remain very low to prevent fouling/blockage.
Direct and surface cooling crystallizers
Crystallization through direct cooling does not require a heat exchanger surface. Instead,
a refrigerant is mixed into the solution which lowers the temperature. The refrigerant
should not interfere with the solution apart from cooling it. Liquid butane or CO2 is often
used, which will evaporate and leave the reactor similar to evaporative crystallisation. The
refrigerant is then compressed and cooled for recycling.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8: Direct (a) and surface (b) surface crystallizers (Lewis et al., 2015b)
Figure 2.8(a) shows the possible setup of direct cooling, where a separate stream injects
16
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:27==
the refrigerant. This figure also shows a fines loop and the convection of the solution
through the reactor like the DTB crystallizer. Direct cooling is used in cases where very
low temperatures are needed for crystallization.
Figure 2.8(b) shows a Swenson­type surface cooling crystallizer. Here, an external heat
exchanger is used to cool down the solution, usually by 0.5­1 °C (Whiting Equipment
Canada Inc., n.d.). It is important to keep the temperature difference between the solution
and the heat exchanger wall between 5 and 10 °C, to prevent fouling. The reactor body
doesn’t have a stirrer and the solution is only kept in motion by the pump that circulates it.
As with the other designs, this setup can also have a fines loop with skirt baffles, to keep
nucleation in check.
Batch crystallizers
Batch crystallizers have many possible applications and advantages in the industry but
they are also very useful on a laboratory scale where they are used for research (Myer­
son, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). When designing a crystallization process it is important to
understand the kinetics and the effect of varying process conditions. Batch crystallization
allows the testing of a wide range of conditions in a short time. Additionally, they are very
simple to use and require very little maintenance.
At its simplest, a lab­scale crystallizer consists of a vessel with a stirrer and some sort of
temperature control (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). The temperature control could
be a jacketed vessel or an oil/water batch. Such a setup would be able to perform cool­
ing crystallization experiments. To perform evaporation crystallization, the vessel would
require a condenser to handle the exiting vapour and measure the evaporation rate. The
installation of a distillate splitter would also enable better control of solvent removal by
directing some of the condensed solvents back to the reactor. A third possible batch
process is the fluidized bed reactor. It is often used to measure crystal growth kinetics,
especially in cases where the crystals are moderately denser than the solution and the
seed crystals are in the 0.1 to 1 mm size range. However, fluidized beds require extensive
flow and temperature control and additional pumps and tanks.
Figure 2.9: Fed­batch sugar crystallizer (Georgieva et al., 2003)
An important part of batch crystallization is the seeding procedure. Seeding is an action
where a number of small crystals are introduced to the solution, which are then grown to
the desired size. The purpose of seeding is to control the initialization of a batch process,
without inducing nucleation. Nucleation could theoretically be used to create the initial
crystals for a batch process, but nucleation is usually very difficult to control (Myerson,
Crystallization of Sugar
17
==PAGE:28==
Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). Seeding is the preferred method for batch crystallization as it
results in more control and better product characteristics, such as a narrow CSD.
The lab­scale crystallizers mentioned prior, are also used on an industrial scale. They are
used for the same reasons, such as simplicity and a desire to achieve a narrow CSD. The
fed­batch crystallizer is often used in the industry, especially in the sugar industry, such as
the Örtofta sugar plant (NordicSugar, 2023). Figure 2.9 is a schematic representation of
an industrial evaporative crystallizer used in a study of sugar crystallization by Georgieva
et.al. (Georgieva et al., 2003). The crystallizer has an internal heat exchanger that can
create convection and circulation through heat transfer. There is an additional stirrer but
in general, the aim is to keep the circulation calm to prevent crystal collisions.
During a fed­batch operation, the feed is continuously added without the removal of prod­
uct crystals. Fed­batch operation is often used together with evaporative crystallization
because the feed replaces the evaporated solvent whereby the volume in the reactor is
maintained. The feed also gives additional control of the supersaturation, as the feed can
be mixed with more solvent if it is necessary to reduce the concentration in the reactor.
2.4
Sugar production ­ from beets to crystals
Figure 2.10 shows the complete production process of sugar crystals from beets. There
will most likely be deviations from plant to plant, but the main steps remain the same. The
sugar plants in Denmark are operated by Nordic Sugar, by whom the figure was made.
The Sowing of beet seeds is done between late March and mid­April. Harvesting of the
beets starts in September and goes into early December (Landbrug og Fødevarer, 2018).
With the first harvest of beets, the plants also start up and produce sugar around the clock,
usually until sometime in January (Landbrug og Fødevarer, 2018).
Figure 2.10: Production process of sugar from sugar beets (NordicSugar, 2022a)
18
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:29==
2.4.1
Pre­treatment
At the processing plant, the beets go through a series of cleaning and slicing procedures
to remove dirt and other impurities. Once cleaned, the beets are cut into thin, uniform
slices or cossettes, which increase the surface area for sugar extraction. The size of
the cossettes can be adjusted according to the characteristics of the beets. A balance
between maximizing the extraction of sugar and having a manageable pulp after pressing
are the deciding factors when choosing the cossette size (Misra, Srivastava, and Mall,
2022).
2.4.2
Extraction
The cossettes are then subjected to a hot water bath to soften the cell walls, allowing the
sugar to be more easily extracted (Misra, Srivastava, and Mall, 2022). The sucrose is then
extracted in a counter­current diffusion process. The temperature is kept high to inhibit
any enzymatic or bacterial activity, but usually, some fermentation is allowed to take place
as the produced lactic acid helps with dewatering the pulp afterwards (Misra, Srivastava,
and Mall, 2022). A temperature of 73 °C is targeted, as higher temperatures can break
down the cell walls into small particles (Misra, Srivastava, and Mall, 2022). 96% to 98.5%
of sucrose is removed from the beets during the extraction. The remaining pulp is pressed
to remove as much water as possible and can then be used as animal feed or to produce
biogas.
2.4.3
Purification
The raw juice extracted from sugar beets is not yet pure sugar. It contains various impuri­
ties such as organic matter, minerals, and other non­sugar compounds. To purify the raw
juice, it is treated with milk of lime, which is a solution of calcium hydroxide (Ca(CO)2).
Liming serves several purposes. First, it helps to neutralize any acidity in the juice, as the
presence of acid can impede the crystallization of sugar. Second, it reacts with various
impurities, forming solid particles that can be easily separated from the liquid. This pro­
cess, known as coagulation, results in the removal of unwanted substances. The calcium
compounds that precipitate out are referred to as ”scums”.
The clear juice obtained after liming is then subjected to further treatment, such as car­
bonation, to remove excess lime and any remaining impurities. Carbonation involves the
introduction of carbon dioxide gas into the juice, which forms calcium carbonate precipi­
tates. The removal of these precipitates results in a cleaner and purer juice, ready for the
next step.
2.4.4
Evaporation
The clarified juice now undergoes evaporation to concentrate the sugar content. This
is done in a multiple­effect evaporation process using 5 or 6 stages. Steam is used to
evaporate the juice in the first evaporator. The following stages are optimized to utilize the
vapour from previous stages to drive the evaporation. With each evaporator the pressure
decreases, allowing the water to evaporate at lower temperatures (Misra, Srivastava, and
Mall, 2022). The outgoing liquid is called thick juice or syrup and contains roughly 63%
sucrose by weight (Prosenice, n.d.). This concentrated syrup is the precursor to the final
sugar product.
2.4.5
Crystallization
The final and crucial step in sugar production from sugar beets is the crystallization of
sugar through evaporation. In the crystallizer, the thick juice is heated under a vacuum
to make the water evaporate at lower temperatures. Once a certain sugar concentration
in the juice is achieved seeding crystals are introduced to start the crystallization. The
Crystallization of Sugar
19
==PAGE:30==
crystals are then separated from the liquid in a centrifuge. The crystallizers can operate
continuously or as either (fed­)batch and there are usually multiple crystallizers in series
that use the centrifuged juice from previous crystallizers. With each crystallizer in the
series, the quality of the sugar usually decreases. The following sections will go more
into detail about how the crystallization process works.
The crystallized sugar crystals are then subjected to further processing, which may involve
washing, drying, or granulation to produce sugar of various sizes. The final sugar crystals
are ready to be used in a wide range of products.
2.5
Industrial sugar crystallization
The crystallization of sugar is a crucial process in the sugar industry, where sugar crystals
are created from the mother liquor. To achieve this, multiple evaporation crystallizers are
often employed in series, to achieve a high yield and produce different sugar crystals.
The general idea is to use the thick juice in the first crystallizer, while the following crystal­
lizers use the remaining mother liquor and run­off from previous stages (Frenzel, 2020).
Evaporative crystallization is used instead of cooling, even though sugar has a relatively
steep solubility curve. This is partly because fouling is a concern for the heat exchange
surface, but evaporation also has a higher yield since it can continuously remove water to
maintain supersaturation. Cooling processes have to maintain supersaturation through
cooling which can run into practical problems when reaching sub­zero temperatures.
Figure 2.11 shows an illustration of an industrial crystallization set­up for sugar by S. Fren­
zel, where crystallizers in series produce different qualities of sugar. The sugar products
”white sugar 1” and ”white sugar 2” refer to the EU grade sugars EU Grade 1 and EU
Grade 2 mentioned in section 2.1. It must be said that there are many variations to the
industrial set­up. The number of crystallizers and sugar products is adjustable and deter­
mined by each sugar plant’s needs.
Figure 2.11: Crystallization process flow diagram (Frenzel, 2020)
The evaporation is performed at low pressure, usually between 0.2 and 0.3 bar, to de­
crease the boiling point, which will make it easier to have a high supersaturation (Nordic­
Sugar, 2023). Lower temperatures also result in higher yield, as less sugar can remain in
20
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:31==
the water. Figure 2.11 shows 4 crystallizers, where most of the thick juice enters the blue
pathway. The run­off from the centrifuge still contains sugar and is brought to a subse­
quent “raw sugar” crystallizer (green pathway). The run­off from this crystallizer is likewise
brought to a following crystallizer, here called the ”after­product feed” (red pathway). The
sugar from ”white sugar 2” is washed with water right after centrifugation, where some
of the smaller crystals in the sludge are redissolved (NordicSugar, 2023). This run­off is
brought to a melter that also collects the crystals from the subsequent crystallizers (raw
and after­product). In the melter, all crystals are redissolved and brought to the” white
sugar 1” crystallizer to make more refined sugar. There are also set­ups where brown
sugar, which is a low­grade sugar, is produced in other crystallizers. Molasses is a brown
syrup that contains most of the impurities and can be used for animal feed or other pur­
poses.
Modern crystallizer set­ups have something called a crystal foot system, which is a method
where the seed crystals are grown briefly in small cooling crystallizers and then in so­
called ”mother pans” before they enter the daughter pans where they reach the final crys­
tal size. Cooling crystallizers are used in the first step for the seeding crystals because
they are easier to control. The cooling crystallizers are much smaller than the evaporation
crystallizers, which additionally helps with reducing inhomogeneities in the reactor (Fren­
zel, 2020). Before this method, the seed slurry was added directly to the main crystallizer,
which led to a problem. Right after adding the seeding crystals, they still have a very small
surface area, which makes some of the crystals dissolve due to local inhomogeneities in
the crystallizer (Frenzel, 2020).
This was counteracted by introducing a maturation phase, where the evaporation of water
is reduced in the beginning to allow the crystals to grow to a stable size (Frenzel, 2020).
This method came with its own set of problems where it was subsequently difficult to
control the CSD because of secondary nucleation.
According to Frenzel, the crystal foot system grows the seed crystals in a cooling crystal­
lizer to roughly 100­120µm and then to 350­400µm in the ”mother pan” before they are
added to the ”daughter pan” where they are grown to the desired size (Frenzel, 2020).
This system most likely has different variations depending on how each plant operates.
Some of the interconnections, shown in figure 2.11, between the processes, are there to
shift syrups according to which and how much of certain sugar products must be produced
and in case of fluctuations in the thick juice quality (Frenzel, 2020).
2.5.1
Crystallization at Örtofta sugar plant
A different industrial crystallization setup is shown in figure 2.12, which presents the pro­
cess at the Örtofta sugar plant in Sweden run by NordicSugar. This plant only produces
one grade of sugar. Starting with the thick juice it first enters ”Juice A­boiling” where it is
heated and brought to a boil. The plant has cooling crystallizers, that aren’t shown in this
figure, where the seed crystals are grown initially. In the ”A­boiler pans”, the mother liquor
is seeded and the evaporation crystallization begins. The plant has multiple A­boiler pans
that run parallel to each other. This can be compared to the ”mother pan” from the crystal
foot system. Afterward, they enter the ”A­conti pans” which consist of 5 crystallizers on
top of each other. The massecuite stays in a crystallizer until the crystals reach the de­
sired size and then move to the next. They function as fed­batch crystallizers since they
are all continuously fed with the syrup from ”Juice A­boiling”. After the ”A­conti pans”, the
massecuite is centrifuged and the crystals are washed, and then dried. The remaining
syrup from the crystallizer is called ”Green run­off” and the water that is used to wash
the crystals is called ”White run­off”. The white run­off also contains sugar because it
Crystallization of Sugar
21
==PAGE:32==
dissolves some of the smaller crystals during washing. The white run­off is recycled into
the ”Juice A­boiling” and the green run­off goes to the next crystallization stage.
The second stage only contains the ”mother pan” and no conti­pans/daughter pans. The
crystals from this stage aren’t used for the final product but are redissolved and recycled.
The white run­off is recycled back into the ”B­boiler pans” and the green run­off is brought
to the third stage. The third stage resembles the first as it has both mother and daughter
pans, except that the daughter pans aren’t on top of each other but next to each other. The
remaining liquid is discarded as molasses and the solid crystals are dissolved together
with the crystals from the second stage. This newly formed syrup enters the last stage
where another single ”mother pan” recrystallizes the sugar to be used in the final product.
MOLASSE STORAGES
CRYSTAL SUCKER
CRYSTAL SUCKER
SUGAR SILO STORAGS
SEK63
B/C‐MELTING SUGAR
CRYSTAL SUCKER
SEK64
SUGAR DRYER
SUGAR HOUSE SCHEETS ORT 2022
CRYSTAL SUCKER
SEK62
C‐MAICHE
SEK61
C‐CONTI PAN
SEK62
C‐COOLING
SEK63
C‐CONTI 
CENTRIFUGES
SEK63
B‐WHITE RUNOFF
SEK63
B‐GREEN RUNOFF
CRYSTAL SUCKER
SEK63
B‐BATCH 
CENTRIFUGES
SEK63
R‐WHITE RUNOFF
SEK63
R‐GREEN RUNOFF
SEK63
A‐BATCH 
CENTRIFUGES
SEK63
A‐WHITE RUNOFF
SEK63
A‐GREEN RUNOFF
SEK63
R‐BATCH 
CENTRIFUGES
SEK62
R‐MAICHE
SEK62
A‐MAICHE
SEK62
B‐MAICHE
SEK61
JUICE C‐BOILING
SEK61
C‐BOILER PANS
SEK61
A‐CONTI PANS
SEK61
A‐CONTI PANS
SEK61
A‐CONTI PANS
SEK61
A‐CONTI PANS
SEK61
A‐CONTI PANS
SEK61
B‐BOILER PANS
THICK JUICE
SEK61
A‐BOILER PANS
SEK61
JUICE R‐BOILING
SEK61
R‐BOILER PANS
SEK61
JUICE A‐BOILING
SEK61
JUICE B‐BOILING
Figure 2.12: Crystallization process at Örtofta sugar plant (NordicSugar, 2022b)
22
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:33==
3
Population Balance
This section introduces the population balance equation. It starts with the general uses
and its roots in crystallization technology. The later parts review kinetic expressions and
how the population balance can be solved when applied to batch cooling crystallization
3.1
Introduction to the Population Balance Model
As already mentioned, crystal size and CSD are very important characteristics in crys­
tallization processes (Mazzotti, Vetter, and Ochsenbein, 2018). In the sugar industry,
they are often the defining feature that differentiates different sugar products. To better
understand how crystal size and its distribution change throughout a process, and more
importantly how to control and predict it, population balance modelling can be used.
Population balance modelling plays a crucial role in understanding and optimizing crystal­
lization processes. In the realm of industrial crystallization, these models are employed to
depict the generation and evolution of crystals within a crystallizer, shedding light on the
number and properties of the resulting solid product (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019).
A population balance, in essence, is a mathematical representation of the conservation
of the number of particles, considering how the count and attributes of particles, such as
size and shape, undergo changes throughout the process (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee,
2019).
Conventionally, population balances focus on a number balance, accounting for the num­
ber of particles of each specific size. While linear size is the most common basis for these
balances, other independent variables within the particle phase space, encapsulating var­
ious particle properties, can be incorporated into the model (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee,
2019). This multidimensional space may include parameters like shape and density, en­
abling a more comprehensive understanding of the evolving characteristics of the crystal
population.
The initiation of a scientific approach to industrial crystallization processes dates back
to the early 1960s, marked by two seminal papers by Randolph and Larsson (1962) and
Hulburt and Katz (1964). These papers laid the foundation for a population balance frame­
work, providing a systematic and quantitative way to model the generation and evolution
of crystal size distributions. Despite challenges faced during peer review, these publica­
tions catalyzed significant scientific development, propelling the understanding of indus­
trial crystallization processes.
The population balance not only describes how size distributions are created and evolve
during a process but also underscores the necessity of determining crystallization kinet­
ics. Crystallization kinetics involves understanding the mechanisms leading to changes
in the crystal population, encompassing phenomena such as nucleation, crystal growth,
agglomeration, and breakage (Mazzotti, Vetter, and Ochsenbein, 2018). Throughout the
1970s and 1980s, there was a concentrated effort on determining kinetics and employing
population balance modelling for various processes, both continuous and batch (Myerson,
Erdemir, and Lee, 2019).
The general population balance equation is written as follows (Myerson, Erdemir, and
Lee, 2019):
Crystallization of Sugar
23
==PAGE:34==
∂n(L, t)
∂t
+ G∂n(L, t)
∂L
+ B(L) −D(L) + ndln(V )
dt
+
∑
k
nkQk
V
= 0
(3.1)
n(L, t) is the number density function and the two left­most terms describe its change
along the time and spatial domain, respectively. Here, the spatial domain is the linear
size of the crystals. The birth and death terms, B(L) and D(L) describe the change in
particles due to agglomeration, breakage, and nucleation (Lewis et al., 2015a). n dln(V )
dt
accounts for volume change, which is relevant for evaporation crystallization, where a
solvent is removed. The last term defines the inlet and outlet streams of a crystallizer.
The following section will focus on the kinetic expressions used for nucleation and growth.
3.2
Nucleation kinetics
Two relatively simple kinetic expressions for primary and secondary nucleation are given
by equation 3.2 and 3.3, respectively (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). They are con­
structed as empirical power­law equations.
B = kN(SSnp)
(3.2)
Equation 3.2 is valid for cases where heterogeneous nucleation occurs. kN and np are
constants, where np is typically in the range 5­15.
B = k´´
NMj
T (SSns)
(3.3)
Equation 3.3 is more common in industrial crystallizers where secondary nucleation mostly
occurs. The variable MT is the suspension density of crystals in mass per volume of so­
lution. k´´
N, j, and ns are again constants, where ns is in the range 2­4. Sometimes the
agitation rate, W, and its exponential factor i are added but in this case, it is included in
the constant k´´
N.
3.3
Growth kinetics
A simple power­law expression for crystal growth is shown in equation 3.4 (Myerson,
Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). kg and g are constants, where g is typically in the range 1­2.
G = kgSSg
(3.4)
The question of whether growth rate dispersion can be included in a potential model is
relevant here. Implementing growth rate dispersion is very difficult, which is why size­
dependant growth is often used. It is technically not correct, but size­dependent growth
can account for growth rate dispersion. There are different expressions for size­dependent
growth. An expression for linear dependency is shown in equation 3.5 (L. Rozsa, J. Rozsa,
and Kilpinen, 2018).
G = G0(1 + αL)
(3.5)
24
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:35==
3.4
Population balance in batch cooling crystallization
The population balance for batch cooling processes can be simplified to equation 3.6
when making a few assumptions (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019)s.
∂n
∂t + G(L)∂n
∂L = 0
(3.6)
It is assumed that the solution is well­mixed, the volume/mass is constant, and nucleation
occurs at size L=0 (negligible size). Additionally, there is assumed to be no agglomeration
or breakage, which is shown by the missing Birth and Death terms. There are various
ways of solving the population balance, one of which is the method of moments, where the
equation is transformed into a set of ordinary differential equations. Numerical methods
such as the finite difference method are also common and will be used in this case.
To solve the population balance, initial and boundary conditions are introduced. Because
the birth term is no longer part of the equation, it is included as a boundary condition, as
shown in equation 3.7.
n(0, t) =
B
G(0)
(3.7)
It is reasonable to assume that secondary nucleation is the only or dominating type of
nucleation in a seed crystallization, especially when the SS is maintained below 1.3. In
this case, it is enough to only include equation 3.3.
The initial condition is the CSD of the seeding slurry, which has to be measured or known
beforehand.
n(L, 0) = n0
(3.8)
Additionally to the number density, the mass is calculated throughout the process. This
is necessary as a way to follow the SS throughout the process, which is needed in the
kinetic expressions. The formula to calculate the mass is given by equation 3.9, where ρ
is the density, and kv is the volume factor.
m = ρkv
∫∞
0
n(L)L3 dL
(3.9)
Crystal growth dispersion is accounted for by making the growth rate dependent on size.
This is technically not the correct method but it is much simpler to implement than growth
rate dispersion (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). The growth rate expressions are
given by equation 3.4 and 3.5.
The mentioned conditions and expressions are enough to solve the population balance.
The equation is optimized by adjusting the parameters kN, j, sn, kg, g, and α to align the
outcome with experimental data.
Crystallization of Sugar
25
==PAGE:36==
4
Experimental Setups and Design of
Experiments
This section will introduce the equipment that has been used for the experiments. It will
include the small lab­scale batch crystallizer and the pilot plant batch crystallizer. The pilot
crystallizer is a complex unit that contains multiple parts. The goal was to commission it
and prepare it for experiments. Additionally, this section introduces the different PATs that
can be used to analyze the crystallizing process and products.
4.1
Lab­scale batch crystallizer ­ Setup
Figure 4.1 shows the lab­scale batch crystallizer’s setup. The primary equipment includes
a heat exchanger, a stirrer, a thermometer, and a tank reactor. The reactor can contain
approx. 1.4 liters. The reactor lid has a few openings that could theoretically be used to
insert measuring equipment, such as an FTIR or tubes that lead to an Ocelloscope. In
the early stages of the project, it was explored whether these devices could be attached.
Attaching the Ocelloscope directly was deemed unsuitable, as it would cause fouling in
the tubes and possibly block them. Installing an FTIR was also not possible as it was
impractical and it would probably not give accurate measurements if it remained in the
crystallizer throughout a whole experiment, due to fouling.
Figure 4.1: Lab­scale batch crystallizer in B228
The lab­scale crystallizer is not an ideal setup to run experiments. It is not vacuum­tight,
which makes vacuum crystallization impossible. The temperature inside the reactor can
not directly be controlled. The heat exchanger only controls the thermofluid temperature
in the heating jacket and there is no tool to set the temperature inside the reactor. The
temperature inside the reactor is controlled indirectly by measuring it manually and ad­
justing the thermofluid temperature. Additionally, the stirring rod has two very thin fins,
seen in figure C.2 in Appendix C, which requires a relatively high stirring rate compared to
the size of the reactor. This can potentially influence the crystallization as the flow is very
turbulent near the stirrer. Nevertheless, it is possible to perform cooling crystallization with
it, and due to the circumstances, only this setup was used when performing experiments.
26
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Pilot­plant batch crystallizer ­ Setup and Commissioning
The pilot­plant batch crystallizer, shown in figure 4.2, is situated in building 228 at DTU.
The main component is the jacketed reactor, which can hold up to 31 litres. Inside it, there
is a 3­blade stirrer that is powered by the blue motor on top and controlled by the light grey
box on the right of the picture. The dark grey unit to the left is the heat exchanger, which
heats/cools the thermofluid and circulates it through the jacket. It has two control mech­
anisms, where it can either control the temperature inside the reactor (cascade control)
or simply the thermofluid temperature in the jacket (internal control). Above the reactor,
there is a condenser and a collection tank for evaporation processes. The condenser and
the collection tank have multiple openings where vacuum pumps can be attached.
Figure 4.2: Pilot­plant batch crystallizer in B228
An important part of this project was to commission the pilot plant crystallizer. The com­
missioning was carried out in collaboration with the special course of another student.
The final report from the special course gives a detailed insight into how the unit operates
and is controlled (Strandberg, 2023). The most important points from the report and how
the unit could have been used for cooling and evaporative crystallization will be discussed
in the following paragraph.
At the beginning of the project, there was no cooling water for the condenser, the heat
exchanger was very slow at heating the thermofluid and the temperature would fluctuate.
Additionally, there were no pumps to decrease the pressure and the reactor still had some
openings that would not allow vacuum. At the end of the project, tubes for the cooling
water were installed for the condenser, openings were sealed off airtight, and up to 3
pumps can be attached that can decrease the pressure to approx. 0.3 bar. The problem
with the slow increase and fluctuating in pressure was initially solved, but later on, the
circulating pump broke down which made it impossible to turn on the the temperature
control. Because of this, it wasn’t possible to perform any experiments with the unit.
If the pump hadn’t broken down, the unit would have been able to perform both cooling and
evaporation crystallization. A cooling crystallization would have been relatively easy to
Crystallization of Sugar
27
==PAGE:38==
perform as it only requires changing the temperature and sample taking won’t disrupt the
process. An evaporative crystallization would be more difficult to carry out. As mentioned
in section 2.5, the pressure should be between 0.2 and 0.3 bar. This is achievable for the
2 small vacuum pumps, but it takes approx. 10 minutes to reach 0.3 bar.
During the crystallization, all openings should remain closed. This will become a problem
during sample taking, where the main opening is used. It would only have to be open for a
short time but since the vacuum pumps are very slow it would mean that for a considerable
amount of time, the pressure would be too high, depending on how often samples are
taken.
Temperature control would also have to be considered during this experiment. Normally
the temperature inside the reactor is easily controlled but during an evaporation, it must
be considered that there is an upper limit. This upper limit is the boiling point of water,
which in turn depends on the pressure. At 0.3 bar the boiling point is approx. 69 °C (The
Engineering ToolBox, 2010). This would be the operating temperature as the whole point
of this process is to evaporate the water. The cascade control should probably not be used
here as it is unknown how the unit would react if the temperature set­point were above
the boiling point. Instead, the internal control should be used and depending on how fast
the water should evaporate, the thermofluid temperature should be set accordingly. The
driving force of evaporation would be the temperature difference between the boiling point
of water and the thermofluid temperature.
Unfortunately, it was not possible to use the pilot­plant crystallizer because of the broken
pump in the heat exchanger. Before the pump broke down there were also a few missing
parts and the Ocelloscope was not available yet. Instead, only the lab­scale crystallizer
was used for simple cooling crystallization.
4.3
RePo Sucrometer
The Portable Refracto­Polarimeter (RePo Sucrometer) is a refractometer made specifi­
cally for analysing sugar solutions. It is a simple and fast method of analyzing the sugar
content of solutions. It can measure the sugar content in Brix and the composition of
sugar through the angle of rotation. For these experiments, only the Brix is important as
sucrose is the only used sugar type.
The sucrometer only requires 3 ml of liquid to analyze a sample. From time to time it has
to be calibrated with demineralized water. The accuracy for the Brix is ±0.2%­points and it
can measure between 0 and 85% Brix. A refractometer calculates the Brix by measuring
the bending of the light that is sent through it. The bending of the light changes with
temperature and the device specifies that it can accurately measure in the range of 15 °C
to 40 °C.
Even though the sucrometer is very simple and simultaneously quite precise, it has some
problems. During some of the preliminary experiments, it was revealed that the device is
very sensitive to changes in sample temperature. This is even though the specifications
say that it takes temperature fluctuations into account. A small experiment gave more
insight into how the sucrometer worked. A self­made sugar solution with Brix=67.6 was
made and heated up. Four samples were taken at different temperatures. Each sam­
ple was left in the sucrometer and a few measurements were taken while they cooled
down, until they reached approx. 24­26 °C. Table 4.1 shows the sample number and the
measured and sucrometer temperatures.
The measured temperature is measured manually with an external thermometer, while
28
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.1: Brix measurements from the sucrometer at different temperatures using a self­
made sugar solution of Brix = 67.6.
Sample
Measured Temp.
Sucrometer Temp.
Brix %
Error %­point
1
37.5
26.5
67.8
0.2
1
31.5
26.8
69.4
1.8
1
28
26.8
70.1
2.5
1
25.6
26.5
71
3.4
2
31
26.6
68.8
1.2
2
27.7
26.7
69.2
1.6
2
25.8
26.7
71.4
3.8
2
25.1
26.6
71.9
4.3
3
27.1
26.3
71.8
4.2
3
25.7
26.3
70.3
2.7
4
25.4
26
72.4
4.8
4
24.3
26
70
2.4
the sucrometer temperature is the measurement from the sucrometer itself. Firstly, the
results show that the sucrometer was not able to measure the temperature correctly, even
though the solution was left in the sucrometer for several minutes. Secondly, even though
every sample has the same composition of sugar it results in a wide range of Brix measure­
ments. Even though a sample is cooled down close to room temperature, the sucrometer
temperature and Brix are still off.
The same solution used in table 4.1, is left alone for a night to cool down. The next day
a sample was taken and the Brix was measured. Table 4.2 shows that the Brix is within
the specified ±0.2% of the self­made solution. This experiment doesn’t show exactly what
is wrong with the sucrometer, but it shows that it is only accurate when measuring near
room temperature and had some ”rest”.
Table 4.2: Brix measurements from the sucrometer at different temperatures using a self­
made sugar solution of Brix = 67.6.
Sample
Measured Temp.
Sucrometer Temp.
Brix %
Error %­point
1
23.7
24.5
67.8
0.2
1
23.6
24.5
67.8
0.2
1
23.6
24.5
67.7
0.1
As the results section will show later, the sucrometer turned out to have other inexplicable
issues that gave imprecise sugar concentration measurements.
4.4
Fourier­transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR)
Fourier­transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) is a method to analyse materials and so­
lutions through the use of infrared light. It is used to identify molecules or quantify the
amount of certain molecules. FTIR is based on the principles of infrared spectroscopy,
where samples are subjected to infrared light and the absorption of the light across a
range of wavelengths/frequencies is measured (Birkner and Wang, n.d.). The adsorption
Crystallization of Sugar
29
==PAGE:40==
of light differs across the infrared spectrum and every molecule has different frequencies
at which the absorption peaks. Before FTIR was used the absorption at each frequency
was measured individually, which was slow and less accurate than FTIR. FTIR modi­
fies the previous method by measuring the adsorption for all frequencies simultaneously
and then subjecting it to Fourier transformation, which gives one the intensity­frequency
spectrum.
For the analysis of sugar solutions, FTIR can be used for quantifying the amount of sugar
in a solution continuously and simply. To use FTIR for quantification one must first create
a calibration curve to adjust the FTIR to different sugar concentrations. The ParticleTech
software is then able to create a model that predicts the concentration of sugar samples.
FTIR probes are present in the DTU laboratories and were considered part of the ex­
periments. For various practical reasons, it wasn’t included in the lab­scale crystallized
setup.
4.5
Ocelloscope and seed analysis
For the crystal size measurements and analysis, an Ocelloscope by the company Part­
cleTech was available. An Ocelloscope takes high­quality pictures of a sample by scan­
ning through and then uses the accompanying software to measure, plot, and analyze the
detected particles (ParticleTech, 2023).
As a part of this project, it was originally planned that a new Ocelloscope would be pro­
vided by the company ParticleTech to be used in the experiments. Due to changing cir­
cumstances at ParticleTech, it wasn’t possible to get a new Ocelloscope delivered. Cor­
respondingly, the planned experiments had to be stalled until the Ocelloscope (also from
particleTech) at DTU was available.
Figure 4.3: Feret diameter definition (Sympatec, 2024)
The Ocelloscope was used to measure the size change throughout an experiment. As
explained in section 2.1.1, it is important to define the characteristic length of the crystals.
There are many ways to measure the size of crystals and the Ocelloscope uses the Feret
Diameter. The Feret Diameter is the length of a particle along a specific orientation (Sym­
patec, 2024). The length is measured along many different orientations, which gives a set
of Feret Diameters. The longest and shortest diameters are defined as FeretMaximum and
FeretMinimum, and an average of all the measured orientations is defined as FeretMean.
The Feret Diameters are plotted in a density graph The Ocelloscope also measures other
object features, such as the sphericity and 2­D surface area, but those won’t be used
here.
30
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Examples of inaccuracies with Ocelloscope image analysis. (Lewis et al.,
2015b)
Even though the Ocelloscope provides high­quality images and fast analysis of the crys­
tals, it can sometimes be difficult to get reliable data. The reliability of the data relies on
the accuracy of identifying crystals in the image. Figure 4.4 shows some of the problems
with identifying crystals. The colours on the image show the crystals that the software has
identified. In Figure 4.4(a) many of the crystals aren’t identified and in some cases, the
space between crystals is included. This is especially a problem when there are many
crystals present in the sample, which is why a low crystal density is preferable in the ex­
periments. Figure 4.4(b) is a zoomed­in picture, that shows how nonexisting crystals are
identified near the black lines. The black lines come from the merging of the pictures
the Ocelloscope makes. The software has difficulties in those areas but it can be cir­
cumvented by defining a lower limit for the crystal size. For the experiments the lower
limit is set to FeretMin > 2, which means that objects that have a FeretMin below 2 aren’t
included.
4.5.1
Seeding slurry analysis
To perform the crystallization, it is necessary to know the seeding crystal size needed in
equation 4.1. Figure 4.5 shows the population density distribution and table 4.3 shows the
characteristics of the distribution. The size will be used for equation 4.1, where the seeding
volume is calculated. It is also necessary to know the distribution so that it can be used
as an initial condition in the population balance model. For the slurry­volume equation,
the mean size is used and a skewed normal distribution function is constructed using the
mean, standard deviation, and skewness factor given by the Ocelloscope software.
Table 4.3
Mean
Median
StdDev
Skewness factor
D10
D50
D90
15.28 µm
13.29 µm
9.03
1.73
6.21 µm
13.29 µm
26.8 µm
Crystallization of Sugar
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.5: Population density graph of seeding slurry (Exp. ID: 2301)
4.6
Experimental procedure for lab­scale crystallizer
Because of complications with the pilot­scale crystallizer only experiments using the lab­
scale setup were made. The lab­scale crystallizer will be used to perform seeded batch
cooling crystallization. The purpose of the experiment is to monitor the size of crystals
and the supersaturation in the syrup. The supersaturation is monitored by measuring the
temperature and Brix.
The general set­up of the crystallizer is explained in the previous section. For the syrup,
a mixture of demineralized water and table sugar from a grocery store is used. Dem­
ineralized water is used because it has the closest resemblance to the water after the
purification step performed in sugar plants (NordicSugar, 2023). The sugar bought from
grocery stores has a very high purity and will not resemble the thick juice exiting the evap­
orators, which still contains impurities. This experiment therefore mostly resembles the
R­boiler pans from Figure 2.12, which uses redissolved sugar in the syrup.
The seeding slurry was provided by NordicSugar and contains very small crystals mixed
into a solution of 96% polyethylene glycol, 4% diethylene glycol, and 1% ethylene glycol.
Sugar has a very low solubility in glycols and is therefore not dissolved in the solution.
Equation 4.1 is used to calculate the necessary slurry volume to perform crystallization.
VSlurry[l] = 3[l/kg] ∗wK,Kristallfuss ∗mApparat[kg] ∗
(
dSlurry
dKristallfuss
)3
(4.1)
VSlurry is the necessary amount of seeding slurry in litres, wK,Kristallfuss is the desired
solid crystal mass fraction of the massecuite at the end of the process, mApparat is the
total weight of the syrup in kg, and dSlurry and dKristallfuss are the seed crystal size and
desired crystal size, respectively. It is not further specified what the crystal density, or
mass fraction inside the slurry is. It is also uncertain what specific process the equation
is used for. Most likely it is based on practical experience from industrial evaporation
32
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:43==
crystallization.
Performing experiments at various combinations of process conditions (SS, temperature,
stirring rate) would have been desirable for this project, but due to time constraints and dif­
ficulties in getting reliable data, only 2 experiments with different stirring rates are included
in the results.
The syrup for the experiments is prepared inside the crystallizer by dissolving sugar in
demineralized water. This step takes a very long time and is done the day before the
actual experiment. The solution is heated to approx. 70 °C to speed up the dissolution
of sugar. Equation 4.1 is then used to calculate the necessary amount of seeding slurry.
The seed crystal size is measured in section 4.5 and the other variables are shown in
the results 5. The seeding slurry container is turned upside down a few times to mix the
crystals. This is necessary because the crystals will fall to the bottom of the container
when resting for a long time, as shown in figure C.3 in Appendix C.
The seeding slurry is first diluted with a slightly oversaturated syrup and from there the
required volume is added to the crystallizer. The stirrer remains active while the slurry is
added. For the first two hours, samples are taken and the temperature is noted in 30­
minute intervals and afterwards in 1­hour intervals until 6 hours is reached in total. The
samples are extracted with a modified single­use pipette, where the tip has been cut off
to prevent clogging of the pipette. For every sample taken, one part (approx. 3ml) is used
in the Ocelloscope to measure the size and the other part (approx. 5ml) is added to a
tube and centrifuged to separate the crystals from the syrup. The centrifuge is operated
at 5000 rpm for 90 seconds.
The ”sugar segmentation” algorithm is used to analyze the sample in the Ocelloscope,
while the centrifuged syrup is inserted into a vial with demineralized water. The syrup
is mixed with water because it is in a supersaturated state at room temperature and nu­
cleation could occur. As explained in section 4.3 it is best to let the solution rest before
measuring the Brix, which is why it is first measured the day after. Throughout the ex­
periment, the temperature is reduced slightly every hour by adjusting the set point at the
heat exchanger. This is done to maintain the supersaturation in the syrup, which will de­
crease in sugar concentration due to the crystallization. The results of the experiments
are presented in the following section.
Crystallization of Sugar
33
==PAGE:44==
5
Batch Cooling Crystallization Results
In this section, the results from the two crystallization experiments will be presented. The
two experiments were performed nearly identically, only the stirring speed was changed.
Ideally, more variations of process conditions should have been tested, but these experi­
ments will suffice for applying the population balance model in the following chapter. It is
also worth mentioning that many preliminary experiments were performed before useful
results could be collected as crystallization is a rather sensitive process and difficult to
control.
The two experiments’ conditions can be seen in table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Experimental conditions
Experiment ID
ID_23_01
ID_25_01
Volume
1200 L
1200 L
Mass (m_apperat)
1.64 kg
1.64 kg
Brix*
71.91
71.91
Temperature range
43.0 ­ 44.9 °C
43.5 ­ 45.2 °C
d_slurry
15.3 μm
15.3 μm
d_product
550 μm
550 μm
Stirring speed
200 RPM
300 RPM
W_K, Kristallfuss
0.0274
0.0274
Slurry volume
0.0029 ml
0.0029 ml
Running time
6 h
6 h
In both cases, a solution is mixed with the desire to achieve 1.05 in supersaturation at
45 °C. The seeding slurry volume is calculated by choosing the desired crystal size and
mass fraction. The final crystal size is set to 550 m, which is a common size in the sugar
industry (NordicSugar, 2023). Additionally, the final mass fraction of solid crystals is set
to 0.027. This value is much lower than in the industry but is chosen to make it easier
for the Ocelloscope to identify the crystals. The chosen crystal size and mass fraction
are not based on a certain desire to achieve those specific set points, they are based on
experience from previous experiments to have easily identifiable crystals.
5.1
Crystallization with stirring at 200 RPM
Figure 5.1 shows the change in the key size characteristics of the crystal population. The
mean is the average size of the whole population, while D10, D50, and D90 are the 10th,
50th (median), and 90th percentile of the size of the population. The size characteris­
tics have some inconsistencies, but in general, they follow a trend. The 90th percentile
keeps increasing, while the mean and median increase in the beginning and then remain
relatively stable. The 10th percentile, on the other hand, doesn’t increase in size at all.
34
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.1: Key size characteristics of crystal population over time (Exp. ID: 2301)
Looking at the number of crystals throughout the experiment can give some insight into
the trends seen in the size characteristics of the population. Figure 5.2 shows the num­
ber of crystals identified by the Ocelloscope. It shows a clear growth in crystal numbers
around the 2­3 hour mark, but there are also significant fluctuations in the second half that
make the data more unreliable. The increase in crystals indicates that nucleation occurs,
especially between t=1.5h and t=3h. This would also explain that the size of the 10th
percentile doesn’t change, as there is a high influx of very small crystals.
Figure 5.2: Number of crystals in sample area (Exp. ID: 2301)
Figure 5.3 shows the CSD as a histogram at time t=0.5h, which is the first sample after
seeding, and Figure 5.4 shows the distribution at t=6h. These figures further support the
notion that nucleation occurs as the number of small crystals is higher at t=6h. Figures
D.7 and D.8 in Appendix D show the histograms for all samples. Looking at all the sam­
ple histograms, there is a strong indication that agglomeration and/or growth dispersion
occurs during the process. The number of small crystals is very high for all samples,
Crystallization of Sugar
35
==PAGE:46==
while the number in the bigger bins (size intervals in the histogram) remains between 100
and 200 per ml. Agglomeration decreases the number of crystals, which is why the num­
ber of big crystals remains low, while the newly formed small crystals haven’t existed for
long enough the be agglomerated. The possible agglomeration could indicate that the
nucleation rate is even higher than the previous graphs show.
Figure 5.3: Population histogram at t = 0.5h (Exp. ID: 2301)
Figure 5.4: Population histogram at t = 6h (Exp. ID: 2301)
Finally, the supersaturation, derived from the Brix and temperature measurements, is
shown in Figure 5.5. The plot includes the possible error from the sucrometer measure­
ment. The SS measurements align relatively well with the observations from the rest of
the data. The SS is above 1.2 at t=2h, which is the same time when there is a big surge
in the number of crystals in Figure 5.2. This is following the theory, which says that sec­
ondary nucleation occurs at SS>1.2 (M.Temerk, Z.El­Abdein, and Abdullah, 2014). From
the 3­hour mark onwards the SS is very close to 1 which is also shown in the number of
crystals, where the amount no longer surges.
36
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.5: Supersaturaion vs time (Exp. ID: 2301)
5.2
Crystallization with stirring at 300 RPM
The second experiment is performed under the same conditions, except for an increased
stirring rate at 300 rpm. Similar trends as in the earlier experiment can be seen in the key
characteristics in Figure 5.6. The 90th percentile increases continuously, while the mean
and median grow slightly and the 10th percentile remains constant. The growth pattern
for the mean and median are different as they grow more at the end and the median has
a steep drop in the last measurement. The main difference from the previous experiment
is the scale of the growth. The 90th percentile is just above 300 μm which is more than
twice the size of the 90th percentile in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.6: Key size characteristics of crystal population over time (Exp. ID: 2501)
The number of crystals in this experiment is much lower from the beginning and barely
grows with time. Additionally, there are significant fluctuations at the beginning of the
Crystallization of Sugar
37
==PAGE:48==
experiment. This indicates a much lower nucleation rate throughout the experiment but
also shows some unreliability of the Ocelloscope.
Figure 5.7: Number of crystals in sample area (Exp. ID: 2501)
The density distribution at t=0.5h is similar to the previous experiment but has a few larger
crystals. At t=6h the distribution is different from the previous experiment. There are a few
crystals that have achieved a significantly bigger size but they are also more dispersed.
The total number of crystals is not much higher after 6 hours but it might not be to lower nu­
cleation. Instead, the higher stirring rate could have induced more agglomeration, which
keeps the number of crystals low and simultaneously creates bigger crystals.
Figure 5.8: Population histogram at t = 0.5h (Exp. ID: 2501)
38
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.9: Population histogram at t = 6h (Exp. ID: 2501)
The supersaturation graphs do not give a clear indication of what phenomena are pre­
dominant in the process. As known, secondary nucleation occurs above SS=1.2. The
uncertainty in the measurements does not give a clear indication of where the supersat­
uration is at. Nevertheless, the histograms indicate that nucleation is occurring and the
supersaturation does not disprove that conclusion.
Figure 5.10: Supersaturaion vs time (Exp. ID: 2501)
5.3
Experimental results discussion
It was originally the plan to keep the supersaturation relatively low to prevent nucleation.
This was not achieved during the experiments. Already from the beginning, the super­
saturation was quite high in both cases. This can be explained by the long dissolving
phase that the massecuite is going through before the experiments start. While the sugar
is dissolving, the crystallizer is heated to roughly 70 °C to speed up the process. During
this time some of the water can evaporate as the lid has a few holes in it.
Crystallization of Sugar
39
==PAGE:50==
Other concerns made the experiments difficult to perform as well. The stirrer that is used in
the crystallizer has rather small fins and in some preliminary experiments, bigger crystals
would gather at the bottom. If it had bigger fins the stirring could be decreased while
keeping the solution mixed. Lower stirring rates would probably reduce agglomeration
and make the modelling easier in the following chapter.
During the process, fouling was occurring as well. Figure C.1 in Appendix C shows fouling
on the stirring rod and crystallizer walls. Even though it is only small amounts, parts can
break off, whereby big crystals can emerge.
Another big uncertainty is the seeding slurry that was used. The seeding crystals would
fall to the bottom of the container. It had to be shaken to mix it again but a lot of the
crystals were stuck to the bottom. This decreases the population density and there is
no guarantee that the two experiments had the same number of crystals inserted during
seeding. This could also explain the big difference in crystal population between the two
experiments. After just 30 minutes the first experiment had twice as many crystals as the
other. This might just be due to variations in the crystal seed population. It might also be
due to increased agglomeration but it is difficult to conclude with the known data.
The experiments also showed how difficult the acquisition of reliable data is. Both the
results from the Ocelloscope and the sucrometer fluctuate. Especially for the supersat­
uration the fluctuations play an important role as small deviations can have a big impact
on the phenomena in crystallization.
Overall, the experiments were still useful and provided the project with the necessary data
to continue. It must also be taken into account that the set­up wasn’t preferred and was
partially improvised due to problems with the pilot­plant crystallizer and time constraints.
40
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:51==
6
Population Balance Model Fitting
In this chapter the model presented in section 3.4 will be fitted to the experimental results
of the previous chapter. First, the model set­up is described and estimates of necessary
variables are made. Afterwards, the fitted models are compared to the experimental data,
evaluated, and discussed.
6.1
Model set up
The first principle from section 3.4 will be used here.
∂n
∂t + G(L)∂n
∂L = 0
(6.1)
The equation only accounts for nucleation and crystal growth, not agglomeration or break­
age. The partial differential equation will be solved in Matlab using numerical integration.
Subsequently, the model will be fitted to the two experiments, separately. There are mul­
tiple ways to solve PDEs numerically. For this case, the upwind scheme from the finite
difference method will be used (K., Schickel, and Braatz, 2022).
ni
j+1 = ni
j −∆t
∆LG(Li)ni
j −G(Li−1)ni−1
j
(6.2)
n(i,j) is the number density at time=j for the size L(i), ∆t and ∆L are the time and size
discretizations, and G(L) is the size­dependant growth rate. This scheme is specifically
designed for cases where the growth rate is dependent on the crystal size. ∆t and ∆L
are used to set up a uniform mesh that ranges from time=0 and size=0 to the end of the
experiment (tmax) and a finite size depending on how much the crystals grow (Lmax).
n(i, j) =


n(1, 1)
n(1, 2)
n(...)
n(1, tmax)
n(2, 1)
n(2, 2)
n(...)
n(2, tmax)
n(...)
n(...)
n(...)
n(...)
n(Lmax, 1)
n(Lmax, 2)
n(...)
n(Lmax, tmax))


(6.3)
The stability and accuracy of numerically solved equations are often considered. When
solving a PBE with size­dependant growth, the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy (CFL) condition
must be fulfilled. Upholding the CFL condition will ensure stability and errors in the inte­
gration. The CFL condition is given by the following expression (K., Schickel, and Braatz,
2022).
CFL = G(L)∆t
∆L
≤1
(6.4)
In order to uphold numerical stability and accuracy, the CFL must be below or equal to 1.
The CFL conditions can be upheld by choosing a ∆t and a ∆L that conforms to equation
6.4 for the highest possible growth rate GLmax.
Before the equation can be solved, an important estimation has to be made. The shape
factor is used when calculating the volume/mass of the solid crystals. Data from Bubník
Crystallization of Sugar
41
==PAGE:52==
and Kadlec’s article is used, where the dimensions of sugar crystals and their weights are
measured (Bubnik and Kadlec, 1992). The shape factor is dependent on the character­
istic length that is used. In this model, the mean diameter is used. Using the data from
the article the average diameter is calculated from the size measurements and a linear
regression against the weights is made.
m = kvρL3
(6.5)
The shape factor, kv, is estimated to be 0.568 for this model.
For the initial condition, a skewed population function is constructed using the values
from the Ocelloscope in table 4.3. The skewed population distribution is constructed like
a skewed probability density function but additionally multiplied by the population density
(number of crystals per volume).
n(L, 0) = Ncrystals ∗2 ∗PDF(L) ∗CDF(αL)
(6.6)
Where PDF is the probability density function, CDF is the cumulative probability function,
Ncrystals is the number of crystals per ml, and α is the skewness factor. The PDF and CDF
are calculated using an adjusted mean and standard deviation from table 4.3. To finalize
the initial condition, the population density must be estimated. For this, the slurry volume
equation is used, equation 4.1. Assuming that the equation is used for processes where
no nucleation occurs it can be used to estimate the crystal population density in the seed
slurry. A crystal volume balance from equation 4.1 is made.
VSlurry ∗Nseed,crystals ∗kv ∗d3
Kristallfuss = wK,Kristallfuss ∗mApparat
ρsuc
(6.7)
Solving for Nseed,crystals, the crystal density in the seed slurry is 1.04e+8 1/ml. The crystal
density in the crystallizer, Ncrystals, after the seeding slurry is added can be calculated.
Ncrystals = Vslurry ∗Nseed,crystals
Vm
(6.8)
The crystal density in the crystallizer after the seeding slurry is added is 250.62 1/ml.
To fit the model to the experimental data, an objective function must be defined that can
be optimized. To compare the model results to the experimental data, the model size
distribution is grouped into the same size bins (0­5, 5­10,..., (Lmax −5) −Lmax) as the
experimental distributions. This is done by integrating the model along the size domain
between the bin intervals. The size distributions are grouped like this at every time stamp
where the samples were taken as well. The outcome is a table that shows the population
density for every bin interval for all sample times. The objective function is then optimized
in Matlab using the ”lsqcurvefit” command, which finds the kinetic parameters that result
in the lowest square error between the two data sets.
The kinetic parameters that are adjusted are the ones from the kinetic expression in sec­
tion 3.4.
• Secondary nucleation: k´´
N, j, ns
• Growth: kg, g
42
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:53==
• Size dependency: α
The results and the evaluation of the fitted models are shown in the following section.
6.2
Model fitting ­ comparison to experimental data
6.2.1
Fitting for crystallization with stirring at 200 RPM
First, the model is fitted to experiment ID_23_01 where the stirring rate is 200 RPM. Ta­
ble 6.1 shows the initial and optimized parameters. The exponential parameters for the
supersaturation in the growth and nucleation terms, k´´
N and kg, are relatively large com­
pared to literature data (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019). In turn, the pre­exponential
parameters, k´´
N and kg, are relatively small. The parameter j, which is the exponent of
the solid sugar concentration in the nucleation expression, is very small. This could be
because the value of the sugar concentration is calculated in g/ml in the model. Due to
the unit, the value is consistently below 1 in the model. The size­dependency parameter
is positive, which will make the distribution broader with time.
Table 6.1: Initial and optimized parameters
Paramter
Initial guess
Optimized
k´´
N
100000
103.22
j
1
9.7e­04
ns
3
18.96
kg
5
0.260
g
1.5
28.66
α
0.02
0.026
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 show the size distributions in the form of a histogram for the fitted
model and the experimental data after 0.5h and 6h. Figure E.1 and E.2 in the Appendix
E show the histograms between those times. The first histogram shows a very poor fit to
the experimental data,which can be explained by the very low crystal concentration of the
initial condition (250 per ml).
Figure 6.1: Size distribution histogram ­ Model vs Experiment at y=0.5h (Exp. ID: 2301)
Crystallization of Sugar
43
==PAGE:54==
At the end of the process, the fit is much better. In figure 6.6 the model seems to over­
estimate the number of bigger crystals, but that is only the case for this sample. At other
times, it underestimates the number.
Figure 6.2: Size distribution histogram ­ Model vs Experiment at t=6h (Exp. ID: 2301)
Figure 6.3 compares the total number of crystals per ml. Here the model shows a decent
fit for all times, considering that the experimental data is fluctuating, making it difficult to
model it.
Figure 6.3: Number of crystals ­ Model vs Experiment (Exp. ID: 2301)
The supersaturation from the model is compared to the experiments in figure 6.4. During
the first 2 hours of the process, the model aligns very well with the samples. In general, the
model supersaturation behaves as one would expect from a typical crystallization process,
in the beginning, there are very small changes because the crystal surface area is very
small until the surface area increases and absorbs sugar from the solution at a faster rate.
The experiment shows that as well but the model still shows a high discrepancy after 2
44
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:55==
hours.
Figure 6.4: Supersaturation ­ Model vs Experiment (Exp. ID: 2301)
6.2.2
Fitting for crystallization with stirring at 300 RPM
The initial guesses for the second experiment remain the same. The optimized param­
eters strongly diverge from the previous model fitting. The pre­exponential parameters
and much bigger and the exponent parameters are much smaller. Additionally, α is very
close to zero, which would mean there is almost no size dependency in the growth rate.
Table 6.2: Initial and optimized parameters
Paramter
Initial guess
Optimized
k´´
N
100000
695.26
j
1
0.158
ns
3
1.036
kg
5
2.816
g
1.5
0.503
α
0.02
1.5e­07
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 show the size distributions after 0.5h and 6h. It is apparent that the
fit for this experiment is much worse and only gives accurate predictions for the smaller
crystals. The inaccurate prediction is present throughout the whole process and worsens
as bigger crystals emerge (See figures E.3 and E.4 in Appendix E).
Crystallization of Sugar
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.5: Size distribution histogram ­ Model vs Experiment at t=0.5h (Exp. ID: 2301)
Figure 6.6: Size distribution histogram ­ Model vs Experiment at t=6h (Exp. ID: 2301)
The crystal density per ml is very inaccurate as well. Only at the end does the predicted
crystal density come near the observed number. Looking at the distributions and total
crystal amount figures, it seems difficult for the model to simulate the observed growth
crystal size. This can be explained by the absence of agglomeration in the model. Simply
increasing the growth rate wouldn’t help as this would make the whole crystal population
move along the x­axis. Increasing the α value could create a ”tail” in the graph but a very
high size dependency would also be unrealistic.
46
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.7: Number of crystals ­ Model vs Experiment (Exp. ID: 2501)
The supersaturation partially aligns with the observed values. Even though it fits better
to observations, it also shows have bigger crystals aren’t created. If bigger crystals were
present, the supersaturation would fall since the higher surface area would absorb more
of the dissolved sugar.
Figure 6.8: Supersaturation ­ Model vs Experiment (Exp. ID: 2501)
6.3
Model evaluation and discussion
Table 6.3 gives a quick overview of how the models compare the experimental data. The
metrics confirm what can be seen in the size distributions.
The first model fitting was a reasonable success as shown the the R2 of 0.76. This is
considerably higher than the second model fit of 0.35, which should be deemed unsuc­
cessful. The model for low stirring has a higher MSE and RMSE, but this is due to the
scale of the values as the experiment for this model has a higher crystal density. The high
MSE can also be due to a few big outliers that can contribute a lot to the error because
Crystallization of Sugar
47
==PAGE:58==
Table 6.3: Evaluation of Models
Metric
Model (Stirring: 200RPM)
Model (Stirrng: 300RPM)
R^2
0.76
0.35
Mean Squared Error
4690.32
2862.14
Root Mean Squared Error
68.49
53.5
Mean Absolute Error
32.64
18.1
Normalized MSE
0.76
4.97
Normalized RMSE
0.87
2.23
they are squared. To compare the two models with each other the normalized MSE and
RMSE can be used. The normalized metrics are scaled to the average value of the ob­
served data. Here the model for low stirring shows a higher accuracy. It must be noted
that the high accuracy is partially due to the very low numbers of crystals in the bigger
size bins. It is very easy for the model to simply predict a value close to zero for the bigger
crystals which results in a small error throughout the process. It is very ”low­hanging fruit”
to predict the non­existence of bigger crystals.
The model for the first fit performs better in compliance with the observations at the end
of the process. This is probably due to the low initial crystal density right after seeding.
It is assumed that the crystal concentration is 250 per ml solution and already after 30
minutes is the crystal density at almost 3000 per ml.
One way to potentially improve the fit in the second experiment is by changing the model to
calculate the mass distribution along the size, instead of the crystal density. The objective
function tries to reduce the square error when comparing the model data with the observed
data. The model seems to favour compliance with the population density of the smaller
crystals because their values are much bigger. Transforming the model to a mass­based
model would give the bigger crystals more weight as they take up most of the mass in the
population.
There were many issues when performing the experiments that could result in unreliable
data, but these big differences in accuracy are most likely due to the limitations of the
model. It is known that high stirring increases agglomeration, which isn’t taken into ac­
count in the model. High stirring speed will also increase the growth rate, which can par­
tially explain the bigger crystals. The widening in the crystal distribution indicates a high
degree of agglomeration as well. Including agglomeration in the model can be difficult
and there are many ways to do it. Agglomeration depends on many process conditions
such as supersaturation, stirring, crystal density, viscosity, and more. Other studies see
an improvement in model performance when agglomeration is included (Mazzotti, Vetter,
and Ochsenbein, 2018).
The model assumes a size­dependent growth rate even though size­dependency in crys­
tal growth has generally been refuted. Nevertheless, in the first experiment, the size­
dependency helps the model in dispersing the crystal distribution when they grow. Even
though growth rate dispersion is responsible for the widening, size­dependency can ac­
count for it because they have the same effect. Outside the bounds of this experiment
though, size dependency might result in deviations from reality. The size dependency
will continuously predict higher and higher growth rates the bigger the crystals get, but
in growth rate dispersion the growth rate still has a limit. This is due to the cause of
growth rate dispersion, where different sizes in surface dislocations are responsible for
the growth rate differences. If bigger crystals were included in the model, the size de­
48
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:59==
pendency might result in unreasonable growth rates. In a study by Mazzotti et.al., there
is a clear improvement when including agglomeration (Mazzotti, Vetter, and Ochsenbein,
2018).
A major deviation from the theory that is occurring in the model is the nucleation. In the
models, the supersaturation doesn’t go above 1.2 at any point, but nucleation is still oc­
curring. The supersaturation in the model is mainly based on the initial concentration/SS
given from measurements. Since the SS measurements can deviate quite a lot, the model
is forced to produce nuclei at this lower SS.
Even though a reasonable model was created, which was the main objective of this
project, the usefulness of it at this point is very low. The model is based on lab­scale
experimental data which is not comparable to industrial crystallization. The experiments
were also made with pure sugar and didn’t contain impurities. In industrial practices, there
are impurities present that will influence the crystallization. Additionally, this model is only
compared to the data that it was fitted to and crystallization is a very sensitive process
where it is difficult to recreate data. More experimental data is needed to create a more
representative fit.
Crystallization of Sugar
49
==PAGE:60==
7
Conclusion
The overall aim of this project was to study crystallization in general and in the sugar
industry, perform experiments, and create a kinetic model to simulate them. Due to the
high production volume of sugar, it is suitable industry to focus on. Performing experi­
ments necessitates the design of experiments and the commissioning of the pilot plant
crystallizer.
The theoretical study of crystallization shows how complex and sensitive crystallization
processes are. Additionally, it is difficult to monitor the phenomena occurring in the crys­
tallizer. Predictive tools to control crystallization are necessary to improve crystallization
efficiency and reduce resource consumption during production.
The constructed population balance is a common model used in crystallization analysis.
It will be used to simulate the CSD throughout a crystallization. It is relatively simple
and accounts for secondary nucleation and growth. The expressions for nucleation and
growth are simple terms that are mainly based on the supersaturation in the solution.
Growth dispersion is indirectly accounted for by including size­dependent growth. A lin­
ear expression is chosen for the size dependency. The model assumes that there is no
breakage or agglomeration, a well­mixed solution, and a constant volume throughout the
process.
Commissioning the pilot plant crystallizer was one of the main objectives of this project.
Unfortunately, this wasn’t achieved due to the time­consuming construction of attach­
ments such as the cooling water supply for the condenser. Additionally, the pump broke
down which prevented cooling crystallization experiments. Instead of pilot­scale crystal­
lization, a lab­scale crystallizer was set up to perform and monitor cooling crystallization.
An Ocelloscope was used to track the size distributions, a thermometer tracked the tem­
perature, and a Refracto­Polarimeter measured the sugar concentration.
Two experiments are presented in the experimental section. One was performed with
stirring at 200 RPM and another with stirring at 300 RPM. Apart from the stirring, both
experiments were performed identically. A desire to keep the SS relatively low and stable
was not achieved. Both experiments showed the occurrence of crystal growth, nucleation
and growth dispersion. Additionally, there are good arguments that agglomeration oc­
curred as well. Especially at the higher stirring rate the results indicate a higher degree
of agglomeration. There were many issues with the data collection as they showed high
fluctuations and the seeding slurry was unreliable due to long storage.
In the last chapter, experimental data was used to fit the population balance model. The
finite difference method was used to solve the equation numerically.
The evaluation
showed that the model had a decent accuracy in predicting the outcome of the first ex­
periment, where the R2 had a value of 0.76. For the other experiment, the model was
much less accurate, where R2 was 0.35. The bad performance in the second experiment
is likely due to a higher degree of agglomeration.
Overall, this project delivered on its objective to create a model to simulate crystalliza­
tion processes. It still needs some refining and more experimental data to make it more
applicable.
50
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:61==
7.1
Future work
There are a few things that can be worked on if this project is continued. The first one
would be to continue the work on the pilot scale crystallizer to make it available for ex­
periments. This would also include testing other PATs and possibly automating some of
the data collection. The ability to crystallize under a vacuum is a perfect opportunity to
perform more relevant experiments as both the scale and method are closer to indus­
trial production. For the lab­scale crystallizer, more experiments with a higher variety of
process conditions would be interesting to study.
For the model, there are a few things that can be implemented to increase its accuracy.
One thing is to add agglomeration into the model which was a common occurrence in
the experiments. It would also be good to change the objective function to include more
things. Process conditions such as supersaturation and distributions based on crystal
mass could make the model more adaptable to variations in the experimental data.
The new implementations should be accompanied by relevant experiments, to test their
accuracy. The experimental data in this project was relatively scarce and more is needed
to accurately evaluate the model performance.
Crystallization of Sugar
51
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
International Sugar Organization (2021). The Sugar Market. URL: https://www.isosugar.
org/sugarsector/sugar#:~:text=Global%20beet%20sugar%20production%20totalled,
tonnes%2C%20up%200.155%20mln%20tonnes.
European Food Information Council (EUFIC) (2013). What is The Role of Sugar in the
Food Industry? URL: https://www.eufic.org/en/whats-in-food/article/sugars-from-
a-food-technology-perspective#:~:text=Technological%20applications%3A-,Sweetener,
sauces%2C%20toppings%20and%20flavoured%20syrups..
PharmaCentral (n.d.). Sucrose Excipient | Uses, Suppliers, and Specifications. URL: https:
//pharmacentral.com/product/sucrose-pharmaceutical-excipient/.
Ratledge, C. and B. Kristiansen (2006). Basic Biotechnology. Cambridge University Press,
pp. 433–456. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511802409.
Lund­Hansen, C. (2022). “Disse virksomheder er de største CO2­udledere i Danmark”.
In: Altinget.
CONCITO (n.d.). Den store Klimadatabase. URL: https://denstoreklimadatabase.dk/vare/
sukker-stoedt-melis-saccharose/ra00318.
Frenzel, D. S. (2020). “Crystallization Schemes in the Sugar Industry”. In: ChemBioEng
reviews. DOI: 10.1002/cben.202000010.
Meng, Y. et al. (2019). “Hybrid modeling based on mechanistic and data­driven approaches
for cane sugar crystallization”. In: Journal of food engineering. DOI: 10.1016/j.jfoodeng.
2019.03.026.
Georgieva, B. P. et al. (2003). “Modeling of Sugar Crystallization through Knowledge In­
tegration”. In: Engineering in Life Sciences. DOI: 10.1002/elsc.200390019.
Gillespie, C. (2018). Why Is Sucrose a Non­Reducing Sugar? URL: https://sciencing.com/
test-reducing-sugars-5529759.html.
Ward, John M. et al. (1997). “Sucrose Transport in Higher Plants”. In: International Review
of Cytology. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0074-7696(08)62135-X.
Davies, D. B. and J. C. Chrisofides (1987). “Comparison of intramolecular hydrogen­
bonding conformations of sucrose­containing oligosaccharides in solution and the solid
state”. In: Elsevier Science Pnblishers B.V.
Helmenstine, A. M. (2018). Molecular Formula for Sugar (Sucrose). URL: https://www.
thoughtco.com/sugar-molecular-formula-608480.
Doe, John (2016). Crystal structure determination of Sucrose. URL: http://imserc.northwestern.
edu/downloads/crystallography-report.pdf.
Mayer, D. (2007). Monoclinic crystal structure. URL: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Monoclinic.svg.
Südzucker (2020).
PubChem (2023). Sucrose. URL: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Sucrose#
section=Odor.
Bubnik, Z. and P. Kadlec (1992). “Sucrose crystal shape factors”. In: Zuckerindustrie.
Myerson, A. S., D. Erdemir, and A. Y. Lee (2019). Handbook of industrial Crystallization.
Cambridge University Press. DOI: 10.1017/9781139026949.
South­Eastern Finland University of Applied Sciences (2021). Supersaturation in crystal­
lization. URL: https://www.slideshare.net/Xamk/supersaturation-241555460.
SoliQz (n.d.). Types Of Crystallization. URL: https://www.soliqz.com/crystallization/types-
of-crystallization/.
52
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:63==
Clement, Karsten H. et al. (2017). Kemiske enhedsoperationer. Polyteknisk Forlag. ISBN:
9788750209416.
M.Temerk, Yassien, Osama Z.El­Abdein, and Ibrahim D. Abdullah (2014). “Sugar crystal­
lization in low temperatures: The theory and practice by advanced sugar crystallization
control program”. In: International Journal of Engineering and Technical Research.
Gautam, Anurag et al. (2021). “Recent Trends in Noble Metal Nanoparticles for Colorimet­
ric Chemical Sensing and Micro­Electronic Packaging Applications”. In: Metals. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.3390/met11020329.
Artusio, F., J. A. Gavira, and R. Pisano (2023). “Self­Assembled Monolayers As a Tool to
Investigate the Effect of Surface Chemistry on Protein Nucleation”. In: Crystal Growth
& Design. DOI: 10.1021/acs.cgd.2c01377.
Agrawal, S. G. and A. H. Paterson (2015). “Secondary Nucleation: Mechanisms and Mod­
els”. In: Chemical Engineering Communications. DOI: 10.1080/00986445.2014.969369.
Denk, E. G. and G. D. Botsaris (1972). “Fundamental studies in secondary nucleation
from solution”. In: Journal of Crystal Growth.
Rozsa, L., J. Rozsa, and S. Kilpinen (2018). “Crystal Growth and Crystallization Control
Tactics in Industrial Sugar Crystallizers”. In: International sugar journal.
Mettler­Toledo, LLC (n.d.). Supersaturation and Crystallization ­ The Driving Force For
Crystallization. URL: https://www.mt.com/us/en/home/applications/L1_AutoChem_
Applications/L2_Crystallization/Supersaturation_Application.html#overviewaf.
Lewis, A. et al. (2015a). Industrial Crystallization: Fundamentals and Applications. Chap. 6.
– (2015b). Industrial Crystallization: Fundamentals and Applications. Chap. 10.
GEA Process Engineering (2021). Mass Crystallization from solutions.
Whiting Equipment Canada Inc. (n.d.). Crystallization: An industrial process for producing
high­purity compounds from impure solutions with low energy input.
NordicSugar (2023). Process data from plant.
Landbrug og Fødevarer (2018). Dyrkning af sukkerroer. URL: https://lf.dk/viden-om/
landbrugsproduktion/planter/roer.
NordicSugar (2022a). From the beet to sugar.
Misra, V., S. Srivastava, and A. K. Mall (2022). Sugar Beet Cultivation, Management and
Processing. Springer. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-19-2730-0.
Prosenice, Cukrovar (n.d.). Den store Klimadatabase. URL: https://www.hps.cz/en/sugar-
production/.
NordicSugar (2022b).
Mazzotti, Marco, Thomas Vetter, and David R. Ochsenbein (2018). “Crystallization Pro­
cess Modeling. In Polymorphism in the Pharmaceutical Industry”. In: DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/9783527697847.ch10.
Strandberg, M. H. D. (2023). Commisioning Report for midiPilot. Tech. rep. DTU.
The Engineering ToolBox (2010). Water ­ Boiling Points at Vacuum Pressure. URL: https:
//www.engineeringtoolbox.com/water-evacuation-pressure-temperature-d_1686.html.
Birkner, N. and Q. Wang (n.d.). How an FTIR Spectrometer Operates. URL: https://
chem . libretexts . org / Bookshelves / Physical _ and _ Theoretical _ Chemistry _ Textbook _
Maps/Supplemental_Modules_(Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry)/Spectroscopy/
Vibrational_Spectroscopy/Infrared_Spectroscopy/How_an_FTIR_Spectrometer_Operates.
ParticleTech (2023). ParticleTech Analyser. URL: https://particletech.dk/particletechanalyser/.
Sympatec (2024). Particle Shape Analysis. URL: https://www.sympatec.com/en/particle-
measurement/glossary/particle-shape/.
K., Inguva P., K. C. Schickel, and R. D. Braatz (2022). “Efficient numerical schemes for
population balance models”. In: Elsevier. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.
2022.107808.
Crystallization of Sugar
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:65==
A
Sucrose
Figure A.1: Representation of a primitive monoclinic crystal structure (Mayer, 2007)
Table A.1: Specifications for EU­Grade 1 and EU­Grade 2 sugar (Südzucker, 2020)
Parameter
EU­Grade 1
EU­Grade 2
Method
Colour type
Max. 2 IU1
(max. 4 points)
Max. 4.5 IU
(max. 9 points)
ICUMSA2
Colour in solution
Mas. 22.5 IU
(max. 3 points)
Mas. 45 IU
(max. 6 points)
ICUMSA
Ash content
Max. 0.011%
max. 6 points)
Max. 0.027%
max. 15 points)
ICUMSA
Total points
Max. 8 points
Max. 22 points
Calculated
Table A.2: Chemical data on sucrose (PubChem, 2023)
Chemical formula
C12H22O11
Molar mass
342.3 g/mol
Density
1587 g/m3
Physical appearance
White, crystalline solid
Melting point
No melting point, decomposes at 186 °C
1IU = ICUMSA Unit
2International Commission for Uniform Methods of Sugar Analysis
Crystallization of Sugar
55
==PAGE:66==
B
Crystallization
Figure B.1: Schematic representation of Gibbs free energy change during cluster forma­
tion (r represents the size of a cluster, in this example a spherical cluster) (Gautam et al.,
2021)
Figure B.2: Pathways leading from solution to solid crystal: (a) supersaturated solution;
(b) ordered subcritical cluster of solute molecules, as proposed by the CNT; (c) liquid­like
cluster of solute molecules, a dense precursor as proposed by two­step nucleation theory;
(d) ordered crystalline nuclei; (e) solid crystal (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee, 2019)
56
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:67==
Figure B.3: Illustration of possible adsorption sites for new molecules on a crystal surface.
Site C is the most favourable, followed by B and then A (Myerson, Erdemir, and Lee,
2019).
Figure B.4: Development of a growth spiral from a screw dislocation (Myerson, Erdemir,
and Lee, 2019).
Crystallization of Sugar
57
==PAGE:68==
C
Experimental Design and
Commissioning
Figure C.1: Image of fouling inside the crystallizer while dissolving sugar.
Figure C.2: Image of stirrer inside the lab­scale crystallizer.
58
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:69==
Figure C.3: Separation of seed crystals from glycol solution.
Crystallization of Sugar
59
==PAGE:70==
D
Experimental Results
(a) t=0.5 h
(b) t=1 h
(c) t=1.5 h
(d) t=2 h
(e) t=3 h
(f) t=4 h
(g) t=5 h
(h) t=6 h
Figure D.1: Ocelloscope images at different times (stirring: 200 rpm).
60
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:71==
(a) t=0.5 h
(b) t=1 h
(c) t=1.5 h
(d) t=2 h
(e) t=3 h
(f) t=4 h
(g) t=5 h
(h) t=6 h
Figure D.2: Ocelloscope images at different times (stirring: 300 rpm).
Crystallization of Sugar
61
==PAGE:72==
(a) t=0.5 h
(b) t=1 h
(c) t=1.5 h
(d) t=2 h
Figure D.3: CSD at different times (stirring: 200 rpm).
62
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:73==
(a) t=3 h
(b) t=4 h
(c) t=5 h
(d) t=6 h
Figure D.4: CSD at different times (stirring: 200 rpm).
Crystallization of Sugar
63
==PAGE:74==
(a) t=0.5 h
(b) t=1 h
(c) t=1.5 h
(d) t=2 h
Figure D.5: CSD at different times (stirring: 300 rpm).
64
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:75==
(a) t=3 h
(b) t=4 h
(c) t=5 h
(d) t=6 h
Figure D.6: CSD at different times (stirring: 300 rpm).
(a) t=0.5 h
(b) t=1 h
(c) t=1.5 h
(d) t=2 h
Figure D.7: Histograms at different times (stirring: 200 rpm).
Crystallization of Sugar
65
==PAGE:76==
(a) t=3 h
(b) t=4 h
(c) t=5 h
(d) t=6 h
Figure D.8: Histograms at different times (stirring: 200 rpm).
(a) t=0.5 h
(b) t=1 h
(c) t=1.5 h
(d) t=2 h
Figure D.9: Histograms at different times (stirring: 300 rpm).
66
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:77==
(a) t=3 h
(b) t=4 h
(c) t=5 h
(d) t=6 h
Figure D.10: Histograms at different times (stirring: 300 rpm).
Crystallization of Sugar
67
==PAGE:78==
E
Model fitting
(a) t=0.5 h
(b) t=1 h
(c) t=1.5 h
(d) t=2 h
Figure E.1: Histograms at different times (stirring: 200 rpm).
68
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:79==
(a) t=3 h
(b) t=4 h
(c) t55 h
(d) t=6 h
Figure E.2: Histograms at different times (stirring: 200 rpm).
(a) t=0.5 h
(b) t=1 h
(c) t=1.5 h
(d) t=2 h
Figure E.3: Histograms at different times (stirring: 300 rpm).
Crystallization of Sugar
69
==PAGE:80==
(a) t=3 h
(b) t=4 h
(c) t=5 h
(d) t=6 h
Figure E.4: Histograms at different times (stirring: 300 rpm).
70
Crystallization of Sugar
==PAGE:81==
Crystallization of Sugar
71
==PAGE:82==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.kt.dtu.dk/
