==PAGE:1==
Maskless lithography for fabrication of 3D
interdigitated carbon microelectrodes for
on-chip capacitive energy storage
Rasmus Zarp Lintrup
Master Thesis
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Maskless lithography for fabrication of 3D interdigitated carbon micro-
electrodes for on-chip capacitive energy storage
Master Thesis
28th of February, 2024
By
Rasmus Zarp Lintrup- s184397
Supervisors: Professor Stephan Sylvest Keller, Associate professor Babak Rezaei
and PhD student Mohammad Ramezannezhad
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Rasmus Zarp Lintrup, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Physics, Akademivej, Building 451, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the department of Physics, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Rasmus Zarp Lintrup - s184397
Signature
Date
ii
28/02/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the design and fabrication of on-chip 3D interdigitated car-
bon microsupercapacitors (µSC), with a focus on enhancing capacitive energy stor-
age through increased electrode surface area, high electrode packing density and the
incorporation of pseudocapacitative materials. Four different designs are explored
with the carbon Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems (C-MEMS) technique and the
results were analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The carbon was
activated in an oxygen plasma before the functionality and capacitative energy stor-
age properties were tested electrochemically. A correlation between decreased charge
transfer- and electrolyte resistance was found with increased surface area and high
packing density respectively in accordance with related theory. The largest specific
capacitance shown by the 3D interdigitated carbon µSC systems was 167.5 µF/cm2
with a Coulomb eﬀiciency of 93.4%. Four different pseudocapacitative materials
were tested in order to increase the capacitative energy storage of the devices. The
materials were MnO2, RuO2, polianiline and polypyrrole. Among those RuO2 and
polypyrrole showed most promise with polypyrrole preforming best on the interdig-
itated carbon µSC’s. The optimal deposition time for polypyrrole was determined
and the device was tested electrochemically for its pseudocapacitatice energy storage
properties, which yielded a specific capacitance of 3.94 mF/cm2.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Thanks to my supervisors Stephan Sylvest Keller, Babak Rezaei and Mohammad
Ramezannezhad for supervising this project.
I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to Stephan for getting this project up and
running at short notice, as well as his great supervision and guidance throughout
this project.
I would like to sincerely thank Babak for training me in all I needed to carry out
my electrochemical experiments, as well as always being ready to help me with any
questions I might have and discuss problems.
I would like to thank Mohammad for optimizing the process flow I used to fabricate
my microsupercapacitors as well as for the great discussions regarding cleanroom
related processes.
Also I would like to thank the whole BioMic group in general for creating a great
working environment.
Finally I would like to thank the nanolab staff for training me on the needed equip-
ment and helping whenever I had any problems.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The microsupercapacitor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Aims and objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
8
2.1
Working principle of a supercapacitor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
C-MEMS fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Electrochemistry
14
3.1
Impedance spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Cyclic voltammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Galvanostatic charge discharge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Electrodeposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Electrode designs
18
4.1
Design considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Crossing suspended layer design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Extra pillar design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Parallel suspended layer design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Parallel plate supercapacitor design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Fabrication process
26
5.1
Pre processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Pyrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Post processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Fabrication results & discussion
29
7
Electrochemestry results & discussion
43
7.1
Characterization and electrodeposition methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
CONTENTS
v
==PAGE:8==
7.2
Functionality test of the bare carbon electrodes
. . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3
Test of interdigitated carbon microsupercapacitor . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.4
Electrodeposition and test of pseudocapacitative materials . . . . . .
54
7.5
Further discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8
Conclusion
65
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Bibliography
67
A Appendix: Process flow for 3 layer systems
77
B Appendix: Process flow for 4 layer systems
80
C Appendix: Surface area estimations
84
vi
CONTENTS
==PAGE:9==
1
|
Introduction
The consequences of mankind’s impact on the environment has started an energy
revolution as the world moves towards a more sustainable future.
Conventional
energy sources derived from fossil fuels such as oil, coal and natural gasses are the
biggest emitters of greenhouse gasses and continues to be the main source of energy.
Despite the massive improvements on renewable energy technology in recent decades
the use of fossil fuels is still rising as the worlds energy needs becomes larger due to
industrial expansion and a growing human population. Progress within sustainable
energy will in the coming years be instrumental in order to reach net zero carbon
emission so that the most catastrophic effects of climate change might be avoided
[1].
1.1
Motivation
One of the main points of interest when it comes to research in sustainable energy is
methods of energy storage. The most frequently used devices for storage of energy
derived from renewable sources are currently batteries, fuel cells and supercapacitors
(SC). While batteries have found the most commercial applications to date, its high
use of lithium comes with a lot of downsides as mining poses several environmental
challenges [2]. Both fuel cells and SCs are hot research topics and their respective
markets have been projected to grow significantly in the coming years [3][4].
The SC’s are devices that makes use of high surface area materials such as porous
carbons and extremely thin electrolytic dielectrics that grants them very high ca-
pacitances compared to conventional parallel plate- and electrolytic capacitors.
Figure 1.1 displays a Ragone plot showcasing the specific energy plotted against
the specific power for the three mentioned energy storage devices, as well as the
combustion engine, gas turbine and parallel capacitor.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Simplified Ragone plot of energy density against power density for
different electrochemical energy storage devices as well as the conventional capacitor,
combustion engines and gas turbines [5].
The plot makes clear the limitations of the electrochemical storage devices when
compared to their conventional counterparts, as none of them are capable of reach-
ing both the energy- and power density of the combustion engine and gas turbine
alone. The combustion engine and gas turbine are of course energy conversion sys-
tem, for which the high energy density is provided by fuels such as gasoline and
natural gasses. Combining the SC with a battery or fuel cell into a hybrid can
produce similar numbers to the conventional systems. A combination of batteries
and SC are standard and see’s use in for example electrical vehicles. The battery
will in this case be able to provide the high energy density needed to drive longer
distances without having to charge, while the SC will provide the power needed to
accelerate. SC’s have high charge/discharge rates and a long life span withstanding
up to 1,000,000 cycles. Additionally they have a relatively good energy density when
compared to the dielectric capacitor. These characteristics makes them suitable for
applications which rely on fast bursts of energy. Some more applications include
remote sensing, wind turbines, photovoltaic cells and various hybrid energy storage
systems. Activated carbons are often used as electrodes as they have a high elec-
trical conductivity and can be produced to have a high surface area with minimal
impact on the environment at a low cost.
1.2
The microsupercapacitor
Miniaturization of the SC has let to it becoming a stable in portable and micro-
electronic devices. Architectually there are two main type of microsupercapacitors
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:11==
(µSC), the sandwich type configuration with two thin film electrodes each on their
own substrate suspended in an electrolyte solution with a seperator in between (fig-
ure 1.2a) and the second are interdigitated electrodes (figure 1.2b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.2: (a) Schematic showing the sandwich configuration for a SC. The blue
color resembles an electrolyte and the green a separator.
(b) Schematic of the
interdigitated electrode configuration.
The interdigitated electrode configuration has the advantages of having both elec-
trodes in the same plane, which makes them more suitable for on-chip µSC fabrica-
tion, as well as the possibility to make 3D electrodes with high effective surface area,
which will enhance performance tremendously. A popular technique to achieving
3D interdigitated high surface area carbon electrodes is the carbon Micro Electro-
Mechanical Systems (C-MEMS) method. In C-MEMS a photoresist is patterned
through lithographic processes to form precursor structures to the carbon electrodes.
The precursor structures undergo pyrolysis forming pyrolytic carbons.
When it comes to SCs there are two ways of storing energy. The first is the electri-
cal double layer, where counter ions neutralize the polarized charge at the electrode
surface. The second is through pseudo capacitance where the charge is stored in the
bulk of a pseudocapacitative material due to fast redox reactions at the electrode
surface. These two types of energy storage will be discussed more in depth in the
theory chapter.
1.3
State of the art
Reviewing the literature reveals many different ways of fabricating interdigitated
electrodes with many different materials. A lot of the techniques are tailored to-
wards 2D electrodes where screen printing, inkjet printing, laser scribing and plasma
etching are among some of the popular methods [6][7][8][9].
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
==PAGE:12==
When it comes to 3D electrodes, two widely used techniques are 3D printing and
the carbon microelectromechanical systems (C-MEMS) method.
3D printing al-
lows for high complexity 3D pyrolytic carbon electrodes through techniques such as
Fused deposition modelling, inkjet printing, stereolithography and graphene oxide
dispersion [10][11][12]. C-MEMS enables fabrication high aspect ration high quality
carbon electrodes through patterning of photoresists such as SU-8. High aspect ratio
carbon pillars derived from SU-8 precursor structures was demonstrated by Wang
et al. [13] in 2005. The carbon was formed through a two step pyrolysis process and
the results are showcased in figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: (a) Precursor structures made from SU-8. (b) Carbon pillars after two
step pyrolysis process. Adapted from Wang et al. [13]
These kind of structures have been research by numerous research groups with one
of the promising applications being on-chip energy storage through the interdigi-
tated µSC. Amato et al. [14] reported dense high-aspect ratio 3D carbon pillars on
interdigitated microelectrode fingers derived from SU-8 through pyrolysis (figure 1.4
(a)). In this article the precursor structure pillars were approximately 24 µm tall
with shrinkage during pyrolysis reported to be around 50%. The shrinkage of the
diameter of the pillars varied from 40-50% depending on the start diameter for the
precursor pillar.
Similarly Beidaghi et al. [15] reported interdigitated carbon structures for µSC’s
with carbon pillars that measured approximately 140 µm in height and 80 µm in
diameter (figure 1.4b).
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.4:
(a) Interdigitated 3D carbon electrodes densely packed with high
aspect ratio [14]. (b) Interdigitated 3D carbon electrodes for µSC’s [15].
In an attempt to increase the surface area of the interdigitated electrodes, Hemanth
et al. [16][17] incorporated a suspended layer on top of the pillars derived from both
from SU-8 in one instance (figure (1.5)), but also a different epoxy resist, namely the
mr DWL resist, which is photo sensitive to light at longer wavelengths than SU-8.
Figure 1.5: (a) SU-8 pillar and suspended layer precursor structures. (b) Derived
carbon structures after pyrolysis [17].
In a recent study Mantis et al. [18] successfully fabricated interdigitated 3D carbon
µSC’s with a suspended layer derived from mr DWL epoxy resist (figure 1.6).
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.6: (a) Interdigitated carbon microelectrodes with a suspended layer going
across the fingers. (b) Interdigitated carbon microelectrodes with a suspended layer
parallel to the fingers [18].
Deposition of pseudocapacitative materials are of high interest, due to their ability
to improve the capacitance of the SC’s. Table 1.1 lists some of the reports demon-
strating increased capacitance through the addition of pseudocapacitative materials,
which include MnO2, RuO2, polyaniline (PANI) and polypyrrole (PPy).
Author
Materials
Fabrication
Deposition
Electrolye
Capacitance
Long et al. [19]
MnO2
Physical vapour deposition
Catalytic growth
0.5 M Na2SO4
20 mF/cm2
Eustache et al. [20]
MnO2
Photolithography
Electroplating
EMI TFSI
35 mF/cm2
Gheorghe et al. [21]
PANI
Screen printing
Electrodeposition
1 M HCl
N/A
Diao et al. [22]
PANI
Inkjet-printing
Inkjet-printing
N/A
554 F/cm3
Liu et al. [23]
RuO2
Photolithography
Electrodeposition
1 M HCl
40.7 mF/cm2
Beidaghi et al. [24]
PPy
C-mems
Electrodeposition
0.5 M H2SO4
157.64 mF/cm2
Beidaghi et al. [24]
MnO2
C-mems
Electrodeposition
0.5 M H2SO4
75 mF/cm2
Table 1.1: Table of reports showing pseudocapacitative interdigitated µSC’s for
different pseudocapacitative materials. In the table is the psuedocapacitative ma-
terial, the electrode fabrication method, the pseudocapacitative material deposition
method, the electrolyte used for electrochemical characterization and the reported
specific capacitance.
While pseudocapacitative interdigitated µSC are already a hot topic in research
there seems to be a distinct lack of research on pseudocapacitative enhancement of
energy storage for 3D interdigitated carbon µSC’s fabricated with C-MEMS. Two
reports on this from Beidaghi et al. [24] was included in table 1.1, however these are
among very few studies on the topic. For 3D interdigitated carbon µSC’s fabricated
with the addition of a suspended layer, there seem to be no reports of the addition
of pseudocapacitative materials.
1.4
Aims and objectives
The aims and objectives for the project are as follows:
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:15==
• Fabrication of on-chip 3D interdigitated carbon SC’s with a dual photoresist
process to increase the surface area at least two-fold compared to 2D configu-
rations.
• Enhancement of the electrode surface area through novel electrode designs and
fabrication processes.
• Characterization of the electrode functionality and SC’s capacitative energy
storage properties.
• Enhancement of capacitative energy storage properties through deposition of
pseudocapacitative materials.
The first iterations of the interdigitated electrodes will be modified versions of the
designs fabricated by Mantis et al. [18], with different packing densities in an at-
tempt to optimize the electrode surface area within a given footprint area. Following
iterations include novel designs and fabrication techniques to try and further improve
electrode surface area for enhanced capacitative energy storage.
The functionality of the interdigitated electrodes will be investigated electrochem-
ically through Cyclic voltammetry and electrical impedance spectroscopy. Subse-
quently the capacitative energy storage properties will be analyzed with galvanos-
tatic charge/discharge curves and cyclic voltammetry.
With the aim to increase the capacitance of the interdigitated µSC systems four
pseudocapacitative materials were deposited and tested.
The four materials are
MnO2, RuO2, PANI and PPy. The pseudocapacitative systems are evaluated elec-
trochemically with galvanostatic charge/discharge curves and cyclic voltammetry.
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
7
==PAGE:16==
2
|
Theory
The SC is a product of the conventional parallel plate capacitor and was made
possible due to the progress made in fabrication techniques. This chapter will go
through the working principle of the SC and some of the fabrication processes needed
to fabricate the on-chip µSC.
2.1
Working principle of a supercapacitor
Despite the architectural difference between the sandwich and interdigitated elec-
trode SC’s their working principle is the same.
2.1.1
Electrical double layer capacitor (EDLC)
The supercapacitor consists of two electrodes, made from high surface area materials
such as activated carbon, which stores the charge in the electrical double layer (EDL)
also known as the helmholtz double layer. The EDL appears at the interface between
the carbon electrodes and the surrounding electrolyte when a potential is applied to
the SC.
Figure 2.1: Simplified schematic of an EDL forming at the surface of a negatively
charged electrode[25].
The double layer consists of the charge of the now polarized electrode in the inner
Helmholtz plane (IHP), desolved and solvated ions of opposite charge at the outer
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
==PAGE:17==
Helmholtz plane (OHP) and a monolayer of solvent molecules in between. There
is no charge transfer between electrode and electrolyte, so the storage is purely
electrostatic. In the charged state the capacitance C is calculated as
C = Q
V ,
(2.1)
where Q is the accumulated charge and V is the applied voltage. This EDL config-
uration stores charge in a similar way to the parallel plate capacitor and thus the
standard equation for capacitance in capacitors
C = εrε0A
d
(2.2)
can be applied to the EDL of each of the SC’s electrodes. Here εr is the dielectric
constant of the electrolyte and ε0 is the dielectric constant of vacuum, A is the
total surface area of the electrode and d is the distance from the electrodes to the
counter ions, in other words often defined as the thickness of the helmholtz and
diffusion layer. This is a very small value, which is why capacitance is high. From
this equation it is clear that the SC has greatly enhanced capacity compared to
the conventional capacitor, due to the high surface area of the porous carbon and
the option of 3D electrode fabrication in addition to the extremely narrow distance
between the inner and outer Helmholtz plane, usually on the scale of 3-8 angstrom.
When the SC is in a charged state the two EDL’s can be described as two capacitors
in series and thus the total capacitance of the SC can be calculated as
1
C = 1
C+
+ 1
C−
.
(2.3)
It is evident that the electrode with the lowest electric double layer capacitance pre-
dominantly determines the capacitance of the combined cell. Even for a symmetric
SC, there will for the most part be a difference in electric double layer capacitance
between the two electrodes, however the total capacitance should be approximately
Ctot ≈1
2C+.
(2.4)
Aside from the electrode surface area and the distance d from electrode to counter
ions things like the precursor material to the carbon, choice of electrolyte and pseu-
docapacitance can also be optimized in order to enhance the SC’s capacitance[26].
Two of the main properties of the SC is its energy- and power density. The energy
stored in the SC is proportional to the capacitance and can be calculated as
E = 1
2CV 2.
(2.5)
The power of the SC capacitor can be found through considering the capacitor as a
circuit in series with external load resistance R and the contribution of the internal
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
9
==PAGE:18==
components being the equivalent series resistance ESR. If R=ESR we can find the
maximum power of the SC as
P =
V 2
4 · ESR.
(2.6)
2.1.2
Pseudocapacitance
Pseudocapacitance is a faradic phenomenon that arises when ions move through
the solvent monolayer at the electrode interface and are specifically adsorbed onto
the electrode. This reversible process is a non-chemical interaction through which a
charge transfer from the adsorbed ion to the electrode occurs.
Figure 2.2: Simplified schematic of pseudocapacitance caused by ions being specif-
ically adsorbed onto the electrode surface[25].
Pseudocapacitance can happen through the process of ultrafast redox reactions,
intercalation or electrosorbtion. In the case of the redox reaction we can look at
RuO2 as an example electrode material, where the reversible reaction is
RuO2 + xH+ + xe−↔RuO2−x(OH)x where 0 ≤x ≤2.
(2.7)
During charging H+ are donated from the electrolyte solution to the negative elec-
trode and enter the crystal lattice of the RuO2 and forms OH-groups, which bind
an electron creating a non chemical charge storage. When discharging the reverse
reaction occurs and the electron stored in the OH-groups travel as a current through
the external system[27].
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
==PAGE:19==
When conductive polymers are used as pseudocapacitative material the process of
storage is one of intercalation. Taking polypyrrole as an example, the reaction taking
place is
PPy + nH+ →PPy
(
H+)
n + ne−
(2.8)
Where an H+ ions are intercalated into the PPy lattice where it confines and stores
charge[28].
Since the ions can go into the electrode material through participation in a fast
redox reaction or intercalation, capacitance in pseudocapacitors can be 10-100 times
larger than that of the EDLC with the same electrode surface area[29].
2.2
C-MEMS fabrication
In order to fabricate the carbon electrodes, precursor structures are made in the
desired electrode design. These structures are then pyrolized at very high tempera-
tures forming pyrolytic carbon. This fabrication process has, aside from the energy
usage, little impact on the environment.
2.2.1
UV lithography with maskless aligner system
When making the cleanroom fabricated carbon electrodes the first steps involve sev-
eral lithographic processes in order to form the precursor structures. The precursor
structures constructed in this thesis are made with negative epoxy resists, which are
spun in 3-4 layers with soft bakes and UV exposures in between each layer.
When working with these epoxy resists a pre-exposure bake is done after coating
the substrate to evaporate some of the solvent from the resist in order to harden it a
bit. When the resist is cooled down it is exposed with the resist specific appropriate
wavelength in the maskless aligner system (MLA).
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.3: Schematic of an MLA system [30].
The MLA exposes a digital design which has been uploaded to the system by moving
the laser across the resist film in a raster scan pattern [31]. This type of exposure
system is preferable for research and development to the ones using a physical mask,
as it is possible to change the design of the exposed pattern digitally. When the
negative resists are exposed to the UV light the molecules cross link in the exposed
areas polymerizing the resist and making it insoluble, while the rest of the resist
remains soluble.
Figure 2.4: Example of cross linking in SU-8 epoxy resist. On the left is shown
the epoxy groups prior to UV light exposure. On the right are the activated epoxy
groups that can cross link making the epoxy resist insoluble. [32]
The subsequent softbake is done to enhance this polymerization, which further sta-
bilizes the precursor structures [33]. When all the layers has gone through these
steps the resist can be developed in an appropriate solvent, which removes all the
soluble resist leaving the precursor structures.
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
==PAGE:21==
2.2.2
Pyrolysis
The transformation from the polymer precursor structures to carbon is done with
a pyrolysis process where the polymer undergoes carbonization. There are several
phases in a carbonization process depending on the temperature during the pyrolysis.
Below 300 oC is the pre-carbonization phase where the remaining solvent and unre-
acted monomer is evaporated from the polymers. The first phase of carbonization
takes place between 300-500 oC, where the carbon network starts forming. Addition-
ally in this phase the halogens and heteroatoms are removed. In the second phase,
when the temperature is between 500-1200 oC, the rest of the hydrogen, oxygen and
nitrogen atoms are removed and the aromatic networks become interconnected [34].
Figure 2.5: Schematic showing the different phases of carbonization as a function
of temperature [35]
There are several parameters one can modify to adjust the properties of the py-
rolytic carbon. Prior to pyrolysis one can choose the polymer used in the precursor
structures to get different resulting carbons while the process parameters during
pyrolysis also can be changed to improve the properties of the carbon. These pa-
rameters include gas composition, maximum temperature and heating rate.
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
13
==PAGE:22==
3
|
Electrochemistry
This chapter goes over the electrochemical methods used for analyzing the the acti-
vated carbon- and pseudo µSC’s as well as the methods used for electro-deposition of
the four pseudo capacitative materials tested.In figure 3.1 is a schematic of the elec-
trochemical setup used for the measurements and electro-depositions. The working
electrode is the carbon structures connected through the gold pad and a metal pin,
the counter electrode is a platinum wire and the reference electrode is an Ag/AgCl
electrode.
Figure 3.1: Schematic showing the electrochemical setup used for characterization
of the carbon µSC’s and pseudocapacitative materials, as well as for the electro-
depositions of said pseudocapacitative materials.
Before any of the measurements or electro-depositions the electrodes were cleaned
and activated in an oxygen plasma chamber at 120 W for 75 s.
3.1
Impedance spectroscopy
Electrical Impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is performed on the crossing suspended
layer design, shown in the next chapter to show the link between charge transfer
resistance and the electrode surface area. With this method a small potential (mV-
range) sinusoidal AC signal is swept over a large range of frequencies (mHz-MHz).
The real and imaginary parts of the impedance are plotted and the Multitrace 4.5’s
equivalent circuit software is used to fit the data to a Nyquist plot (example in
figure 3.2). From the Nyquist plot the charge transfer resistance (Rct) and the ionic
resistance of the electrolyte (RΩ) can be extracted.
14
CHAPTER 3. ELECTROCHEMISTRY
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Schematic showing an EIS Nyquist [36].
3.2
Cyclic voltammetry
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is an electrochemical method whereby the applied voltage
is scanned back and forth in a chosen voltage window and the current is measured. In
order to check the quality of the carbon electrodes, CV is performed in a ferro/ferri
cyanide phosphate buffer solution using the 3-electrode setup shown in figure 3.1.
The ferro/ferri cyanide acts as a redox probe at the electrode interface and the result
is the characteristic graph in figure 3.3 from which one can read the peak currents.
Figure 3.3: Graph showing a typical CV measurment in ferro/ferri cyanide with
the oxidation- and reduction peak currents indicated.
The CV measurements are also used to test the properties of the electrode system as
CHAPTER 3. ELECTROCHEMISTRY
15
==PAGE:24==
a SC. This is done in a H2SO4 solution with the two electrode system that includes
the two terminals of the interdigitated µSC. In this setup both electrodes are con-
nected to the potentiostat, one being positive and the other negative. One property
of the ideal SC is that there are no chemical reactions resulting in a rectangular
output and in the presence of pesudocapacitance the output is changed. See figure
3.4.
Figure 3.4: Sketch of CV’s showcasing the ideal SC, the influence of the series
resistance and the impact of pseudocapacitance [36]
The area of the CV curve is related to the capacitance, which can be calculated as
C =
∫I(V )dV
2s∆V
,
(3.1)
where
∫I(V )dV is the voltammetric charge obtained by the integration of both the
positive and negative sweep, s is the scan rate and ∆V is the voltage window [37].
3.3
Galvanostatic charge discharge
Galvanostatic charge discharge (GCD) tests is a technique often employed for energy
storage devices such as the SC. The test is performed on a two electrode system with
one electrode acting as the negative electrode and the other as the positive. The
systems is charged and discharged at a chosen current and the voltage is measured
throughout. This method is an excellent way of testing the specific capacitance of
the SC which from the results of the GCD can be calculated as
C = ∆t · I
∆V · A,
(3.2)
where ∆t is the discharge time, I is the current, ∆V is the voltage window and A
is the footprint area of the electrodes [38]. When the specific capacitance has been
16
CHAPTER 3. ELECTROCHEMISTRY
==PAGE:25==
found equation 2.5 can be used to find the energy density
E = 1
2CV 2 = 1
2
∆t · I
∆V · A∆V 2 = ∆t · I · ∆V 2
2 · A
.
(3.3)
Using the energy density the power density can be calculated as
P = E
∆t = I · ∆V 2
2 · A
(3.4)
The coulombic eﬀiciency, the measure of how much of the energy transferred to the
system can be retracted, can also be determined from the GCD and is simply the
discharge time divided by the charge time
ηc = tdischarge
tcharge
.
(3.5)
3.4
Electrodeposition
Two methods will be used for the electrodepositions of the pseudocapacitative ma-
terials. The first method is chronopotentiommetry (CP) which is a technique where
a constant current is applied for a set amount of time. CP uses the 3-electrode setup
with the reference and counter shown in figure 3.1 with only only one electrode con-
nected for deposition at a time. The active area of the on chip SC is dispensed in
a solution containing the pseudocapacitative material of choice and the deposition
rate and amount deposited depends on the applied current and deposition time.
The other method employed is CV, which also uses the same 3-electrode setup with
one electrode connected for deposition. Here the the active electrode area is also
dispensed in a solution containing the relevant pseudocapacitative material. The
voltage window for the potential sweep is decided by finding the voltages for which
the peak currents occur and the deposition rate and amount of material deposited
depends on the scan rate and number of cycles.
CHAPTER 3. ELECTROCHEMISTRY
17
==PAGE:26==
4
|
Electrode designs
During this project four different electrode designs have been fabricated with varying
dimensions and surface areas for each. The mask designs were made for the UV
exposure process and outlined the areas to be exposed by the MLA. All digital
masks has been made using the Clewin5 software.
4.1
Design considerations
Each chip was diced to be 11.5x19.8 mm and the active area, which is also what is
changed from design to design, is 5x5 mm (figure 4.1 in order to fit the electrochem-
ical setup designed by associate professor Babak Rezaei prior to this project.
Figure 4.1: Layout of the chips fabricated during this project.
Mantis et al. [18] had previously successfully fabricated 3D interdigitated carbon
electrodes with the BioMic group. Two of his most successful design consisted of
fingers at the bottom, pillars in the second layer and then either a suspended layer
running across or parallel to the fingers. These two designs became the starting
points for this project and the crossing suspended layer- and parallel suspended layer
designs are modifications hereof. One problem with the suspended layer going across
the fingers is that the pulling of the pillars caused by shrinkage of the suspended
layer during pyrolysis can end up in a short circuit. This problem prompted the
addition of stabilizing structures at the ends of the suspended layer. Further more
the report concluded that there was an advantage to having the suspended layer
running across the fingers, as this design measured higher peak currents i ferro/ferri
cyanide CV’s than the parallel suspended layer counterpart with the same electrode
18
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRODE DESIGNS
==PAGE:27==
surface area. With this in mind an optimization of crossing suspended layer design
type was made, which is the extra pillar design presented in section 4.3.
4.2
Crossing suspended layer design
The crossing suspended layer design (CSL) shown in figure 4.2 consists of three
layers with interdigitated fingers going out from each electrode pad in the yellow
first layer, round pillars standing on the fingers in the black second layer and in the
third red a layer is suspended over the pillars.
Figure 4.2: Mask for the active area of the CSL design. The yellow shows the
fingers at the first layer, the black are the pillars at the second layer and the red is
the suspended layer at the top.
Each row of pillars are placed on every second finger such that no suspended layers
situated next to one another are supported by pillars belonging to the same electrode
and as such there are no short circuits in the design. On each end of the suspended
layers are three supportive pillars stood on isolated platforms. These structures are
there to relieve the main active area structures from the stress caused by shrink-
age during pyrolysis, which will pull the pillars at the ends of the suspended layers
towards the middle and this could cause a short circuit if not for the holding struc-
tures. Figure 4.3 showcases sectioned 3D renders of the main active area design (a)
and the supporting structures (b).
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRODE DESIGNS
19
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) 3D image of the CSL design. (b) 3D image of supporting structures
at the end of the suspended layer.
The CSL design was made in iterations with varying pitch between the different
structures, the dimension employed can be seen in table 4.1 below.
CSL100
CSL50
CSL30
Finger
Length [µm]
4900
Width [µm]
45
Pitch [µm]
145
95
75
Pillar
Diameter [µm]
40
Pitch [µm]
205
131
103
Suspended layer
Length [µm]
5245
5210
5230
Width [µm]
40
Pitch [µm]
140
90
70
Table 4.1: Dimension of the different structures in the digital mask for the precur-
sor structures in the CSL design. The pitch between the pillars is to the nearest,
which is the pillar on the adjacent finger.
4.3
Extra pillar design
The extra pillar design (EP) is similar to the CSL design, only it has free standing
pillars underneath the suspended layer to enhance the overall surface area. The
addition of the extra pillars also requires an extra layer with the new pillars being in
the second layer and the pillars supporting the suspended layer going through both
the second and third layer.
20
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRODE DESIGNS
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.4: Mask for the active area of the EP design. The yellow shows the
fingers at the first layer, the second (dark red) are the pillars not attached to the
suspended layer, the black are the pillars supporting the suspended layer and acts
as both second and third layer and the red is the suspended layer at the top.
For the fingers in the first layer, the suspended layer now in the Fourth as well as
the supportive structures at the ends of the suspended layer, the design is exactly
the same as for the CSL. Figure 4.5 showcases a 3D render of how the design is
intended to look, with the free standing pillars underneath the suspended layer.
Figure 4.5: 3D render of the EP design clearly showing the added free standing
pillars underneath the suspended layer.
The dimensions of the design (table 4.2) are similar to those of the CSL design with
the pitch between pillars being the only change, as the additional pillars makes the
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRODE DESIGNS
21
==PAGE:30==
proximity closer.
EP100
EP50
EP30
Finger
Length [µm]
4900
Width [µm]
45
Pitch [µm]
145
95
75
Pillar
Diameter [µm]
40
Pitch [µm]
145
95
75
Suspended layer
Length [µm]
5245
5210
5230
Width [µm]
40
Pitch [µm]
140
90
70
Table 4.2: Dimension of the different structures in the digital mask for the precur-
sor structures in the EP design.
4.4
Parallel suspended layer design
Having the suspended layer going parallel to the fingers in the first layer allows
for additional pillars without an extra layer and thus enhanced surface area. The
parallel suspended layer design (PSL) allows for as many pillars as the EP design,
while also extending all pillars to support the suspended layer, as short circuits are
not a worry between the pillars and the layer suspended directly above them. Figure
4.6 Shows the design with the yellow fingers in the first layer, the black pillars in
the second layer all supporting the third red suspended layer situated parallel to
the fingers. Additionally the support structures at ends of the suspended layer have
been omitted, due to the risk of a short circuit happening due to shrinkage during
pyrolysis have been eliminated, as the suspended layer will pull the pillar parallel
to fingers belonging to the same electrode.
22
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRODE DESIGNS
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.6: Mask for the active area of the PSL design. The yellow, black and red
structures belong to the first, second and third layer respectively.
A 3D render of the PSL design can be seen in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: 3D render of a section of the PSL design.
This design was also made in three different iterations, with the dimensions of each
iteration shown in table 4.3.
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRODE DESIGNS
23
==PAGE:32==
PSL100
PSL50
PSL30
Finger
Length [µm]
4900
Width [µm]
45
Pitch [µm]
145
95
75
Pillar
Diameter [µm]
40
Pitch [µm]
145
95
75
Suspended layer
Length [µm]
4840
4760
4840
Width [µm]
40
Pitch [µm]
145
95
75
Table 4.3: Dimension of the different structures in the digital mask for the precur-
sor structures in the PSL design.
4.5
Parallel plate supercapacitor design
The last design fabricated in this project is the parallel plate supercapacitor (PPS).
This design consists of two plates, one in the first and one in the third layer, with
pillars in between them. Just over half of the pillars support the suspended plate
and stand directly on the substrate while the rest stand on the plate in the first
layer under holes in the suspended plate, such that no short circuits occur. The
plate in the first layer runs straight out from the electrode pad and the plate in the
third layer is connected to its pad through supporting pillars.
Figure 4.8: Mask for the active area of the PPS design. The yellow, black and red
structures belong to the first, second and third layer respectively.
24
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRODE DESIGNS
==PAGE:33==
The 3D render of a section of the design in figure 4.9a shows how the main design
is supposed to look. This design was made to try and enhance the overall surface
area contribution from the first and suspended layer. A quick approximation made
Clewin5 on the PPS105 design gives a 35% increase in electrode surface area from
the fingers and suspended layer compared to those of PSL30. Due to the fewer
amount of pillars however, the total increase would only amount to approximately
3%.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: (a) 3D image of the PPS design. (b) 3D image of supporting structures
at the end of the suspended layer.
With such a large suspended area the stress caused by shrinkage during carboniza-
tion will be very big and therefore supporting pillars have been placed all around the
design to prevent the suspended layer from colliding with the free standing pillars
and coursing a short circuit. Figure 4.9b shows the supporting pillars at one of the
corners of the PPS design. The design was made in two iterations with varying hole
diameter and pitch, which dimensions can be seen in table 4.4 below. The pitch
between holes is for the holes in the same layer.
PPS140
PPS105
Holes
Diameter [µm]
140
105
Pitch [µm]
200
180
Pillar
Diameter [µm]
40
Pitch [µm]
141
127
Table 4.4: Dimension of the different structures in the digital mask for the precur-
sor structures in the PPS design.
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRODE DESIGNS
25
==PAGE:34==
5
|
Fabrication process
This section will go through the fabrication process used to make the carbon µSC’s
inside the cleanroom facilities at DTU. A detailed process flow with all parameters
can be found in the appendix. Figure 5.1 shows a schematic fo the steps in the
process flow for the 3-layer µSC systems. The overall process flow has previously
been optimizaed by PhD student Mohammad Ramezannezhad.
Figure 5.1:
Schematic showing the different steps in the process flow used to
fabricate the carbon µSC’s.
5.1
Pre processing
The substrates used for the fabrications are single side polished < 100 > 4 inch
silicon wafers with a thickness of 525 ± 20 µm taken out from the stock at DTU
Nanolab (5.1a). The first process step is deposition of SiO2 with a target thickness
of 600 nm (5.1b), which will act as an isolating layer between the substrate and
electrodes. Under other circumstances one would have to do an RCA clean of the
wafers prior to loading them in the furnace, however since the wafers are taken from
Nanolab’s stock and loaded straight into the oven, this cleaning step can be omitted.
26
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION PROCESS
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Lithography
Before the lithography steps the wafer is plasma cleaned in an oxygen plasma to get
rid of any particles that might cause comets or other defects in the resist films, as
well as precondition the surface by dehydrating it. The first layer of resist is of the
SU-8 2035 and is spun at 5000 rounds per minute (rpm) in order to reach a film
thickness of 15 µm (5.1d). The wafer is then softbaked at 50 oC for 15 minutes on
a programmable hotplate with a temperature ramping set to 2 oC/min for reduced
thermal stress in the resist film. After having cooled down the wafer is transferred
to the MLA, where it is exposed with a dose of 250 mJ/cm2 at a defocus of 0 (5.1e).
It is the softbaked again with the same parameters, only this time the bake duration
is 2 hours. During the post exposure bake the exposed pattern becomes visible in
the resist and the alignment marks can be used in the exposure of the next layer.
The next two resist layers follows similar process flows with different resists and
parameters for the processes. The second layer is spun with the more viscous SU-8
2075 resist to be 100 µm (5.1f) and exposed with a dose of 240 mJ/cm2 and defocus
10 (5.1g) while the third layer is spun with the mr DWL-40 resist to a thickness of 17
µm (5.1h) and exposed with a dose of 25 mJ/cm2 and a defocus of 0 (5.1i). The two
SU-8 series 1000 resists are both exposed with light at the wavelength 365 nm and
the mr DWL-40 is exposed at 405 nm, where the SU-8 resists practically have no
spectral sensitivity making it possible to crosslink the structures in the suspended
layer without affecting the underlying resist.
After the last post exposure bake the wafer is developed in Propylene glycol methyl
ether acetate (PGMEA) for a total of 50 minutes (5.1j) before the remaining pre-
cursor structures are exposed again in a flood exposure (5.1k) and baked at 90 0C
for 15 hours to further promote polymerization.
For the EP design which requires four layers of epoxy resist the process is the same,
but with four iterations of spin coating, exposing and baking. Here the first layer is
still the fingers, which are fabricated as before. The second layer is spun with the
SU-8 2075 resist to be 75 µm thick which is then baked, exposed with a dose of 240
mJ/cm2 and defocus 10 and then baked such that the pattern of the free standing
pillars becomes visible. The third layer is also of SU-8 2075 and is spun to be 30
µm. The pattern exposed in this layer are the free standing pillars and the dose of
250 mJ/cm2 and defocus of 10 is enough to polymerize the resist in both the third
and second layer. The fourth layer comprises the suspended layer and is made in
the same manner as the previous designs.
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION PROCESS
27
==PAGE:36==
5.3
Pyrolysis
When the precursor structures are done they undergo a pyrolysis process where they
are carbonized (5.1l). The atmosphere in the furnace is comprised of nitrogen gas
and a plot of the temperature during the process can be seen in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: The temperature at the different stages during the pyrolysis process.
The chamber is heated in three steps to reduce the induced thermal stress on the
structures and the process has preciously been optimized in the BioMic group to
achieve the desired porosity on the surface of the carbon structures.
5.4
Post processing
After the pyrolysis the wafer is plasma cleaned in an oxygen plasma (5.1m), which
removes any unwanted carbon residue that might cause a short circuit between the
electrodes and metal pads are deposited for better charge transfer. The electrode
pads are deposited with an electron beam evaporation process (5.1n) and are com-
prised of 30 nm of chromium, which acts as an adhesive layer and 200 nm of gold.
28
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION PROCESS
==PAGE:37==
6
|
Fabrication results &
discussion
In this chapter the results from cleanroom fabrications will be presented and dis-
cussed.
6.0.1
Characterization method
The results of the fabrication were analyzed using scanning electron microscopy
(SEM). Dimensions of the precursor and carbon structures were measured using
the SmartSEM software and images were taken to analyze whether the fabricated
structures turned out as intended both before and after pyrolysis.
6.0.2
1st fabrication
The first fabrication was a wafer with both the CSL and the PSL designs. The
dimensions of the fingers, pillars and suspended layer on this fabrication run were
slightly different than the ones presented in the design chapter, as they had a width
of 25, 20 and 20 µm respectively. The height of the layers remained the same as
presented earlier.
Figure 6.1: SEM image of the PSL design from the first fabrication run with pillars
having a diameter of 20 µm. Due to the high aspect ratio they are seen collapsing
on to one another after development.
The high aspect ratio of the pillars made them collapse on to each other after the
development as can be seen in figure 6.1. After this iteration the parameters were
changed to the ones showcased in the Electrode design chapter.
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
29
==PAGE:38==
6.0.3
Effect of exposure mode on MLA
On the MLA systems (HEIDELBERG INSTRUMENTS) there are two modes of
exposure for the users to choose from. The raster scan exposure is done in pixels
of 500X500 nm and the modes refer to how many lines each pixel is exposed with.
The quality mode exposes with 5 lines in each pixel giving an address grid of 100
nm with good averaging over the pixels therefore yielding minimum stripe stitching
effects. The fast mode exposes each pixel in with 2 lines leading to an address grid
of 250 nm and thus stitching effects will be more prominent. The fingers and pillars
do not suffer from the stitching, as they are not experiencing as much pull stress
during carbonization as the suspended layer, so there is no problem in running the
exposure for the first two layer on fast mode and saving the time. Due to the higher
stress in the suspended layer during pyrolysis the stitching becomes a significant
problem for the carbon structures. The first two cleanroom fabrications were made
with fast mode on all three layers and as a consequence hereof there are several
breakages in the suspended layer as shown in the SEM images below.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2: (a) Overview of the active area of in a CSL chip with all three layers
having been exposed on fast mode, with breakages in the suspended layer as a
consequence. (b) A zoom of the breakage in the suspended layer.
The broken suspended layers did not seem to course any electrical issues such as
short circuits, however it is still a failure in the fabrication and had the structures
been more compact it could start coursing problems.
All fabrications after the
second cleanroom iteration was therefore changed to use the quality exposure mode
for the suspended layer, to avoid this failure.
6.0.4
Shrinkage during pyrolysis
As compounds are removed from the structures during carbonization they start
shrinking in all dimensions. To get an accurate estimation of the electrode surface
30
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:39==
area we need to know by how much the different structures shrink and this can be
measured quite accurately in the SEM. Figure 6.3a-b show images taken to measure
the dimensions of the structures of the designs having three layers. The precursor
structures were measured at an angle θ=45o, as they were not cut into chips yet and
thus could not stand vertically in the SEM chamber. The actual dimension were
calculated from the measurements as D = Dmeasured
cos θ
.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.3: (a) SEM image zoomed in on a precursor pillar used for measuring
heights of the different layers (b) Image of carbon structures used for measuring
height of the various layers. (c) Bar graph showing the dimensions of structures
before and after pyrolysis as well as the nominal dimensions.
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
31
==PAGE:40==
The percentage with which each structural dimension shrunk during pyrolysis are
shown in table 6.1. The shrinkage of the structures are comparable with what has
been measured previously in the group, aside from the height of the interdigitated
fingers, which seems to have lost less thickness percentage wise than in previous
studies [39][40].
Finger h
Finger w
Pillar h
Pillar w
Sus layer h
Sus layer w
Shrinkage [%]
51.4
11.8
52.1
43.6
45.7
46.3
Table 6.1: The % shrinkage of the precursor structures to the carbon after pyrol-
ysis.
The measurements plotted in figure 6.3c are valid for all the designs, with the ex-
ceptions of the pillars in the EP design and the suspended layer in the PPS design
as these were respectively fabricated with different process parameters and design
dimensions. These differences in dimensions will be addressed when analysing each
design.
6.0.5
Crossing suspended layer design
The CSL design was the first to be fabricated with no failure after the diameter of
the pillars was changed from the 20 µm in the first iteration to 40 µm. The precursor
structures were well defined and the polymerization seemed to have been suﬀicient
in the pillars as they did not start deforming under the weight of the suspended
layer.
32
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.4: (a) SEM image showing an overview of the precursor structures of the
CSL100 design. (b) Overview of the carbon structures after pyrolysis of a CSL100
sample. SEM images of the carbon structures in the CSL100 (c), CSL50 (d) and
CSL30 (e) designs. (f) The stabilizing structures on the side after pyrolysis.
The side pillars that were meant to relieve the main active area of the stress caused
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
33
==PAGE:42==
by shrinkage during pyrolysis were succesful and while they were pulled towards the
middle by the suspended layer, very little deformation is seen in the pillars on the
first finger.
Furthermore there seem to be no short circuits caused by increasing the packing
density in the CSL100 design to the CSL50 and CSL30 designs.
6.0.6
Extra pillar design
The main concern with the EP design was whether or not the free standing pillars
underneath the suspended layer would cause a short circuit during the pyrolysis’
initial heating step, as it was unknown whether the SU-8 in the suspended layer
would get soft and collapse onto the pillars. This turned out not to be a problem
as can be seen from the SEM images in figure 6.5. 6.5a shows the developed SU-8
precursor structures with a well defined gap between the suspended layer and free
standing pillars with he same being true for the carbon structures seen in 6.5b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.5: SEM images of the precuresor structures (a) and the carbon structures
after pyrolysis (b) for the EP100 design.
A problem however arose in sides of the carbon structures in the fingers near the
pillars that are supposed to relieve the main active area from the stress caused by
the shrinkage of the suspended layer which is pulled down onto the free standing
pillars causing a short circuit of the system.
34
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6: Stabilizing side pillars of the EP50 (a) design compared to those of
the CSL100 (b) design.
If compared with the sides of the active area in the CSL design it seems that the
holding pillars are deformed much more in the EP design due to the shrinkage in
the suspended layer. Design wise the two should be the same, aside from the free
standing pillars, which should have no influence on the structural integrity of the
holding pillars and suspended layer.
To try and solve this issue another iteration of the EP design was made, this time
without the extra pillars on the four finger closest to each side. This design change
prevented the suspended layer from collapsing onto the extra pillars, however now
the supporting pillars in the main active area started deforming and collapsing onto
each other as showcased in figure 6.7.
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.7: SEM image of the precursor structures of the EP design having col-
lapsed onto one another.
One difference in the fabrication from the CSL design that might explain the results
lies with the lithography steps that creates the pillar layers. While the pillars holding
the suspended layer in the CSL design were spun to be 100 µm with one coating
the holding pillars in the EP design were exposed after two coatings, one that was
75 µm thick and the second being 30 µm. After the first spin coating bakes and
exposure was performed to make the free standing pillars. This extra step meant
that the first 75 µm resist had been baked for 9 hours instead of 5 when the exposure
of the holding pillars was done. If the resist had become too dry as a consequence it
could worsen the cross linking during exposure and ultimately weaken the structural
integrity of the resulting carbon pillars.
Another explanation could be found in the thickness of the holding pillar layer, which
for the EP design was spun with two coatings to be 105 µm thick, 5 µm thicker
than what was the case for the other designs. When imaged in the SEM the holding
pillars were even taller, measuring 111 µm which is approximately 10% taller than
in the other designs. The exposure dose was adjusted from 240 to 250 mJ/cm2,
but an even bigger dose might be needed to obtain suﬀicient polymerization for the
pillars to withhold their structural integrity after development. The simplest way to
fix this would be to optimize the two spin coatings that constitutes the pillar layer,
such that it becomes the same thickness as for the other designs. The other solution
would be to optimize the exposure dose to enhance cross linking, however et might
36
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:45==
just be that the aspect ratio of the pillars is too high and that is the reason why
they deform. Either way the baking times will definitely have to be looked at and
optimized.
The dimensions of the extra free standing pillars were also measured. The precursor
pillars had a height of 76.8 µm and the carbon structures post pyrolysis had a height
of 38.6 µm. Finally the holding carbon pillars had a height of 64.1 µm after pyrolysis.
6.0.7
Parallel Suspended layer design
As with the CSL design, the PSL design was successfully fabricated after changing
the pillar diameter to 40 µm. All the precursor structures were well defined and
as intended for the three packing densities PSL100, PSL50 and PSL30. Images of
PSL100 and PSL30 can be seen in figure 6.8.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.8: SEM images of the precursor structures for the PSL100 (a) and PSL30
(b) designs.
The advantage of the PSL design is that the the top layer only is suspended over
structures that belong to the same electrode, making it possible to fit more pillars
than in the CSL design. Additionally the shrinkage of the suspended layer only
pulls the pillars along the finger they are stood on, such that no extra stabilizing
structures are needed to prevent a short circuit.
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
37
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.9: SEM images of the PSL100 structures after pyrolysis (a-b) as well as
the PSL 50 (c) and PSL30 (d) structures.
38
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:47==
6.0.8
Parallel plate supercapacitor design
The PPS design was made to see if it was possible to gain electrode surface area by
greatly increasing the area covered by finger and suspended layer. The SEM image
in figure 6.10 shows a corner of the precursor structures and they turned out as
intended. The suspended layer covers the underlying first layer, but the two should
have similar sizes, with the suspended layer being slightly larger in the 2D plane.
In reality the suspended layer will have almost twice the surface area compared to
the first layer, as one side of the first layer is covering the substrate.
Figure 6.10:
SEM image of the PPS precursor structures showing one of the
corners.
The large suspended layer extending in all directions was put under a lot of stress
during pyrolysis and the supporting pillars on the sides did not provide enough
stability to keep the suspended layer from colliding with the pillars stood on the
first layer. Figure 6.11 shows an overview of the active area in the PPS sample after
carbonization and the failure at the edges of the structures.
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.11: SEM image of the PPS active area after pyrolysis showing the sus-
pended layer being broken in several places.
If zoomed in on, the middle of the active area looks as intended, but the corners
and sides of the structures are pulled towards the middle causing some of the pillars
to break, tearing the suspended layer apart and causing short circuits.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.12: (a) SEM image of the carbon structures in the middle of the PPC
design. (b) Carbon structures at the corner of the PPS design.
This design was never tested electrochemically, as it was deemed to be a failure. It
seems that the amount of supporting pillars needed would take up too much of the
40
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:49==
footprint area limiting the surface area of the electrode connected to the bottom
layer even more and thus causing the capacitance of the system to go down accord-
ing to equation 2.3.
Though the PPS design as it was intended has failed due to the large stress on
the suspended layers during the pyrolysis the electrode comprised of the first layer
and freestanding pillars would have turned out good, had the suspended layer not
collapsed onto the free standing pillars. As with the fingers in previous designs the
first layer did not shrink much in the plane due to the good adhesion with the sub-
strate and therefore maintained a high surface area. The design of this electrode
might prove useful in another type of SC where having one electrode have a larger
surface area than the other is desirable, namely the asymmetric hybrid SC (AHSC).
The AHSC consists of one electrode made with a form of carbon and one made
with or covered by a type of metal oxide or conductive polymer. In this case the
specific capacitance of the material in the latter electrode will have a higher specific
capacitance than the carbon electrode. The pseudocapacitative electrode thus need
to be smaller than the carbon [41]. Employing the high surface area bottom elec-
trode from the PPS design as the carbon electrode and making a pseudocapacitative
electrode with a smaller suspended layer that does not cause a short circuit under
carbonization might be a good system design for an AHSC.
6.0.9
Surface area after pyrolysis
Using the post pyrolysis dimensions measured with the SEM (figure 6.3c) an esti-
mation of the electrode surface areas for the CSL and PSL designs was made. The
equations used for the estimation can be found in appendix C.
CSL100
CSL50
CSL30
PSL100
PSL50
PSL30
Surface area [mm2]
18.4
27.9
37.2
19.6
31.2
43.8
Table 6.2: Estimated electrode surface area for the CSL and PSL interdigitaed
µSC systems.
Adding the surface area of the extra pillars in the EP design to the area calculated
for the CSL design we can get an estimation the EP electrode surface area (table
6.3). This is done for the iteration which had free standing pillars on all fingers.
EP100
EP50
EP30
Surface area [mm2]
19.9
31.2
42.8
Table 6.3: Estimated electrode surface area for the EP interdigitaed µSC systems.
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
41
==PAGE:50==
The approximations does not take the porosity of the carbon into account.
42
CHAPTER 6. FABRICATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:51==
7
|
Electrochemestry results &
discussion
This chapter goes over the results gathered from the electrochemical lab. All exper-
iments was done using the holder seen in the image below. The holder was designed
and printed by associate professor Babak Rezaei and can be seen in figure 7.1. The
setup includes a bottom part with a shallow rectangular hole that accommodates
the size of the chips and a top part with a chamber for electrolyte storage that fits
the active area of the SC’s. Just below the liquid chamber is a rigid gasket that
prevents any fluid from leaking. The top part also has two pins that go down to the
contact pads of the carbon electrodes, insuring that the device can be connected to
the potentiostat. When a sample has been placed in the designated spot the two
parts are screwed together with six screws. The setup also includes a lid through
which the platinum counter- and Ag/AgCl reference electrodes can be suspended
into the electrolyte.
Figure 7.1: Image of the printed setup used for electrochemical experiments.
7.1
Characterization and electrodeposition
methods
For all electrochemical measurements and electrodepositions 600 µL of the prepared
electrolyte or or solution was dispensed into the solution storage chamber prior to
starting the measurement or deposition.
For all depositions of pseudocapacitative materials the 3-electrode setup is used.
The depositions were done with only one terminal of the µSC connected per run, so
that the deposition did not happen on both carbon electrodes at the same time.
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
43
==PAGE:52==
7.1.1
Electrochemical characterization of bare carbon
electrodes
CV in ferro/ferri cyanide
CV was used employing the 3-electrode setup with one or both of the carbon elec-
trodes connected as working electrode.
A 10 mM ferro/ferri cyanide phosphate
buffer solution was prepared and used as electrolyte. The voltage window was -0.4-
0.8 V and it was swept over in steps of 10 mV. Three cycles were done with a scan
rate of 50 mV/s and the measurements from the last cycle is the one used for this
report.
EIS
For the EIS measurements the same setup and electrolyte solution as CV in ferro/-
ferri cyanide was used. The applied AC potential had an amplitude of 5 mV and
the frequency was scanned from 10 mV - 100 kV in 62 steps.
7.1.2
Electrochemical characterization capacitative energy
storage
GCD
GCD curves was retrieved using multi step potentiomety. The 2-electrode setup was
used connecting the two terminals of the interdigitated µSC to the potentiostat. One
as a positive and the other as a negative electrode. A 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte solution
was prepared and used for these measurements. For the most part the µSC were
tested in a voltage window of 1 V, but other potential ceilings were also tested.
The applied current for both charging and discharging was 36 or 90 µA (0.2 or 0.5
mA/cm 2 for the CSL100 chips) for the CSL designs and 100 or 40 µA (0.2 or 0.5
mA/cm 2 for the PSL100 chips) for the PSL designs.
CV in H2SO4
For the CV’s done in H2SO4 the same setup and electrolyte solution was used as for
the GCD curves. Here the voltage was scanned from 0-1 V at a scan rate of 5 mV/s
over 3 cycles. Once again the data from the last cycle is the one presented here.
7.1.3
Electrodeposition methods
MnO2 deposition
The deposition of MnO2 was done in a CV deposition. A solution of 5 mM KMnO4
was prepared in deionized water. The voltage window swept over was 0.3-0.6 V with
a scan rate of 25 mV/s scanned in steps of 10 mV. The deposition was done for 20
and 50 cycles.
RuO2 depositions
RuO2 was deposited galvanostatically using CP. An aqueous solution of 0.01 M
RuO2 was prepared in 0.1 M HCl. The current applied was tested at 2.25 mA, 0.9
44
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:53==
mA and 0.45 mA (25, 10 and 5 mA/cm2 for the CSL100 design) and the deposition
was done over 120 s.
Polyaniline deposition
The depostion of polyaniline was tested both CV and galvanostatically with Cp. An
aqueous solution of 0.1 M or 0.02 polyaniline in 1 M HClO4 was prepared. The CV
deposition was tested for both concentrations on polyaniline. The voltage window
for the deposition was -0.2-1 V and the scan rate was 25 mV/s in steps of 10 mV.
The number of cycles was 8.
The CP deposition was only done for the 0.1 M polyaniline solution. The current
applied was 0.9 µA (0.01 mA/cm2 for the CSL100 design) and the deposition was
tested for 300 and 600 s.
Polypyrrole depostion
The PPy deposition was done galvanostatically with CP. An aqueous solution of
0.05 M PPy in 0.5 LiClO4 was prepared. A current of 0.5 mA/cm2 was applied and
the deposition was tested for t = 180 s, 300 s, 420 s, 600 s, 900 s, 1200 s and 1800 s.
The PPy deposition was also done on the PSL 30, PSL50 and CSL30 samples with
0.5mA/cm2 for the respective systems.
7.2
Functionality test of the bare carbon
electrodes
7.2.1
Cyclic voltammetry in ferro/ferri cyanide
Prior to any measurements of the capacitative qualities of the µSC system or any
electrodeposition of pseudocapacitative materials the carbon electrodes were tested
through CV in a ferro/ferri cyanide phosphate buffer solution.
This measurement was done to check for short circuits by first using only one elec-
trode as working electrode and then both. The max current gets larger with in-
creased surface area, so if it did not increase when both electrodes were connected
the sample is short circuited. The voltage at which the current peak occurred was
also used as a tool to determine whether the properties of the activated carbon elec-
trodes matched those of previous chips and batches and confirm that the electrodes
are functional.
As the peak current scales with surface area of the electrodes this technique was also
used to validate the estimated surface areas of the CSL and PSL designs for their
different packing densities. Figure 7.2 shows the CV’s measured for the different
samples and there is a clear increase in the peak current from the lowest surface
area carbon electrode to the highest. All the cyclic voltammegrams seem to follow
the characteristic shape of ferro/ferri cyanide CV’s,
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
45
==PAGE:54==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.2: (a) CV’s of the three packing densities tested for the CSL design in 10
mM ferro/ferri cyanide phosphate buffer solution with a scan rate of 50 mV/s. (b)
CV’s of the three packing densities tested for the PSL design in 10 mM ferro/ferri
cyanide phosphate buffer solution with a scan rate of 50 mV/s.
The values of the baseline corrected oxidation peak currents for each design are
plotted in a bar plot in figure 7.3a and those values along with the baseline corrected
reduction peak currents can also be found in table 7.1 below. As expected the PSL
electrodes show higher peak currents than their CSL counterparts with the same
packing density due to the bigger electrode surface area.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.3: (a) The peak currents gathered from from the CV’s in Ferro/ferri
cyanide. The CSL peak currents are an average of the peak currents from the first
three chips tested, while for the PSL chips the peak currents were taken from the
measurements in figure 7.2b. (b) Linear relationship between electrode surface area
and Peak current.
46
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:55==
The relationship between the baseline corrected peak current and electrode sur-
face area is plotted in figure 7.3b showing a linear relationship between the surface
area and amount of redox reactions taking place at the electrode interface in the
ferro/ferri cyanide.
CSL100
CSL50
CSL30
PSL100
PSL50
PSL30
Oxidation peak current [µA]
467
592
730
515
654
799
Reduction peak current [µA]
455
582
723
497
660
743
Table 7.1: Basline corrected oxidative- and reduction peak current values from the
CV’s in figure 7.3a.
When sweeping the potential back and forth the Ferro/ferri cyanide engages in
a reversible redox reaction with the PBS ions which has formed an EDL at the
electrode surface.
By comparing the oxidation- and reduction peak currents we
can get an idea of whether the carbon electrodes can accommodate reversible redox
reactions.
If there is a big difference between the two peaks it can mean that
the electrodes prevents the reverse reaction from taking place. The two peaks are
generally close to each other in the cases of the measured electrodes, with the biggest
difference being a 7% for the PSL30 electrode.
An experiment with changing scan rate was conducted on a CSL100 sample. The
results of these CV scans are plotted in figure 7.4a. To investigate the reversibility
of the electron transfer process at the surface of the 3D activated carbon electrode
we look to the Randles-Sevcik equation which describes the diffusion controlled
reversible electron transfer at an electrode:
Ip = 2.69 × 105AD1/2n3/2ν1/2C.
(7.1)
Here Ip is the peak current intensity, A is the electrode surface area, D is the diffusion
coeﬀicient, n is number of electrons transferred in the redox event, C is the bulk
concentration and ν is the scan rate [10].
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
47
==PAGE:56==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.4: (a) CV done in 10 mM ferro/ferri cyanide with varying scan rate. (b)
Oxidation and reduction peak currents plotted with their respective linear correla-
tion with the squre root of the scan rate.
In figure 7.4b the Oxidation and reduction peak currents are plotted are plotted as a
function of the square root of the scan rate. The linear relationship between the two
parameters is in agreement with the Randles-Sevcik equation, which indicates that
the redox reactions at the electrode surface are predominantly diffusion controlled.
7.2.2
Electrical impedance spectroscopy
For the analysis of of the impedance data gathered it was fitted to a Nyquist plot
using the modified Randles circuit shown in figure 7.5. This equivalent circuit model
consists of the bulk capacitance (CB) and resistance (RB) in a parallel connection.
These components accounts for the properties of the bulk pyrolytic carbon as well as
any parasitic resistances that might be induced by the electrochemical setup. These
are connected in series with the resistance from the active electrolyte (RS) as well
as the parallel combination of the charge transfer resistance (Rct), the impedance
of the faradic reaction (ZW) from the ferro/ferri cyanide represented by the open
Warburg element and a constant phase element (CPEdl).
48
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:57==
Figure 7.5: Equivalent circuit featuring a modified Randles circuit with bulk ca-
pacitance and resistance (CB & RB)) of the pyrolytic carbon, series resistance of the
active electrolyte (RS), charge transfer resistance (Rct), impedance of the faradic
reaction (ZW) from the ferro/ferri cyanid and the a constant phase element (CPEdl).
The impedance spectra and corresponding Nyquist plot fit is plotted for CSL100,
CSL50 and CSL30. The most significant result extracted from the impedance spectra
analysis is the charge transfer resistance, which as expected is getting smaller with
increased electrode surface area.
Figure 7.6:
Plot showing the measured impedance spectra and corresponding
Nyquist fit for CSL100, CSL50 and CSL30.
CSL100
CSL50
CSL30
Charge transfer resistance [Ω]
131.3 ± 2.9
102.3 ± 2.5
82.36 ± 1.8
Table 7.2:
Values retrieved for charge transfer resistance from the impedance
spectra.
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
49
==PAGE:58==
7.3
Test of interdigitated carbon
microsupercapacitor
After having confirmed the functionality of the bare carbon electrodes, the samples
are tested as SC’s for their capacitive energy storage qualities.
The bare carbon interdigitaed µSC’s were tested as a two electrode system for all
packing densities of the CSL and PSL designs.
Figure 7.7 shows galvanostatic
charge/discharge curves for the CSL (a) and PSL (b) designs in a 1 V window
with an applied current of 0.036 and 0.04 mA respectively .
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.7: Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves with a voltage window of 1 V
for the different packing densities of the CSL (a) and PSL (b) designs. The applied
current for both charge and discharge was 0.036 mA for the CSL samples and 0.04
for the PSL samples.
The GCD’s show good correlation between the charge/discharge time and the elec-
trode surface area as well as packing density. The one outlier is the PSL50 sample,
which showed a shorter discharge time compared to the PSL100 sample. The carbon
must for some reason be of worse quality after the fabrication on this ample even
though it came from the same wafer as the other PSL samples. When looking back
at the CV done in ferro/ferri cyanide (figure 7.2b) the PSL50 did seem to behave a
little different to the other samples as it had a very high baseline correction to the
peak current.
Table 7.3 shows some of the key parameters for a SC calculated from the GCD’s. The
specific capacitance and energy density seem to depend highly on the surface area
and the electrode proximity to one another, while the power density is somewhat
constant for each design as the discharge current is constant. It is interesting however
50
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:59==
that the PSL samples have a larger power density that the CSL samples. Notably
the specific capacitance and energy density for the PSL100 sample is higher than for
the CSL50 despite having a lower electrode surface area. In general the PSL samples
seem to perform best with the PSL30 sample reaching a specific capacitance of 167.5
µF/cm2, which is slightly higher than what has previously been seen in the group
for cleanroom fabricated µSC’s [39]. Aside from the PSL50, which seems to be an
outlier in all measures but the power density, the coulomb eﬀiciency seems to get
better as the finger pitch moves from 100 µm to smaller packing densities.
CSL100
CSL50
CSL30
PSL100
PSL50
PSL30
Specific C [µF/cm2]
23.3
49.7
75.7
53
48.4
167.5
Energy density [µJ/cm2]
11.7
24.9
37.9
26.5
24.2
83.7
Power density [µW/cm2]
68.7
69.1
68.9
82.9
83.4
81.3
Coulomb Eff. [%]
81.0
87.8
87.3
78.0
80.6
93.4
Table 7.3: Key parameters of the bare carbon interdigitated µSC calculated from
the GCD data. The area specific parameters has been calculated using the footprint
area of the active area of the samples, including the both the area covered by carbon
and the gaps in between.
A CV was also performed on the CSL30 and PSL30 design in the voltage window 1
V with a scan rate of 5 mV/s. The results can be seen in figure 7.8.
Figure 7.8: CV from the CSL30 and PSL30 designs in a 1 V window with scan
rate 5 mV/s.
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
51
==PAGE:60==
From the CV it seems that the CSL30 sample shows more resistive properties than
the PSL30 and the PSL30 has a higher current density.
An experiment testing the significance of the packing density was also conducted
using the interdigitaed carbon µSC below. The design has the same surface area
as the CSL100 samples (18.4 mm2) and the same pitch between fingers, pillars and
suspended layer as the CSL50 samples.
Figure 7.9: SEM image of µSC system used for testing the effects of electrode
proximity.
Figure 7.10: GCD’s of the CSL100, design in figure 7.9 and CSL50 samples with
an applied current of 0.036 mA.
52
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:61==
The GCD of the density test structure can be seen compared to the GCD’s of
the CSL100 and CSL50 samples in figure 7.10. The specific capacitance for the
test structure is 48 µF/cm2 which is significantly better than that for the CSL100
sample despite the two having the same surface area and the CSL50 shows to only
have a slightly higher specific capacitance. The energy density of the test µSC is
24 µJ/cm2 and the power density is 68.6 µW/cm2 which seems to follow the same
design specific pattern as seen in the previous test.
An explanation as to why the capacitance has improved so much by decreasing
the interspace between the carbon electrodes might be found in the effect this has
on the electrolytes contribution to the resistance. A study from Pech et al. [42]
tested the significance of the interspace between the fingers in a interdigitated RuO2
µSC. Figure 7.11 shows how the electrolyte resistance decreases significantly as the
interspace between the planar electrode fingers is decreased.
Figure 7.11: plot of the theoretical ESR, electrolyte resistance (Re), current col-
lector resistance (Rcc) as well as experimentally optained values for the ESR. The
plot has been adapted from Pech et al. [42]
It has to be kept in mind that these are single measurements. From the results one
might be let to think that the surface area of the electrodes are of little significance
when it comes to the footprint specific capacitance, but this would be false.
It
is however interesting to note how much of a difference the interspace between
electrodes affects the electrolyte resistance.
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
53
==PAGE:62==
7.4
Electrodeposition and test of
pseudocapacitative materials
This section looks at the results of the electrodepositions of the four pseudocapaci-
tative materials. All the materials were tested on CSL100 samples.
Mno2
The CV deposition of MnO2 was tested for 20 and 50 cycles at a scan rate of 25
mV/s in the voltage window 0.3-0.6 V. The deposition of MnO2 can be seen on the
blue electrode in figure 7.12, while the other electrode has yet to go through the
deposition. The MnO2 samples was made with Pt pads instead of Au, as the initial
plan was to try and anneal the MnO2 into the carbon in which case the Au’s melting
point would be too low. This experiment was never done as the adhesion of the Pt
turned out to be too poor, making the deposition unreliable.
Figure 7.12:
Optical image of MnO2 deposited on one electrode giving it the
characteristic blue colour.
The GCD’s from the MnO2 samples can be seen in figure 7.13 and the key parameters
that was calculated from these measurements can be found in table 7.4.
54
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:63==
Number of CV deposition cycles
20 cycles
50 cycles
Specific C [µF/cm2]
30.2
67.2
Energy density [µJ/cm2]
15.1
33.6
Power density [µW/cm2]
68.6
68.6
Coulomb Eff. [%]
57.9
60.5
Table 7.4: Key parameters of the interdigitated µSC after MnO2 deposition.
Figure 7.13: GCD’s of the samples with 20 and 50 CV deposition cycles. The
applied current is 0.2 mA/cm2.
The specific capacitance increased a little with 20 cycles of MnO2 deposition and it
almost increased three-fold with 50 cycles of deposition. The power density is 68.6
µW/cm2 which is still very close to what was measured on the bare carbon CSL100
samples. The coulmob eﬀiciency has decreased drastically. It would probably be
possible to decrease it to the desired 80-90% vicinity by decreasing the voltage
window, However no further experiments was done with MnO2 samples due to the
diﬀiculties encountered with the adhesion of the Pt making annealing infeasible.
The CV depositions of MnO2 were discontinued due to the relatively low increase
in specific capacitance, the poor Coulomb eﬀiciency in the 1 V voltage window and
the already long deposition times of 20 minutes per electrode for 50 cycles.
RuO2
The galvanostatic RuO2 deposition was tested for applied currents of 25, 10 and 5
mA/cm2. For the 25 mA/cm2 the potential increased to upwards of 2.5-3 V after
around 100 s of deposition, which proved to be too high for the carbon pads that
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
55
==PAGE:64==
delaminated from the substrate and broke off from the fingers destroying the sample.
For the 100-200 s where deposition was taking place this current was too high and
the electrodes would have short circuited anyway due to the large amount of material
deposited, as can be seen in figure 7.14.
Figure 7.14: SEM image of the µSC after one electrode had RuO2 deposited for
100-200 s with a current density of 25 mA/cm2.
In the subsequent deposition at 10 mA/cm2 for 120 s the carbon pads broke again,
but the deposition for 120 s at 5 mA/cm2 went well, even though the potential still
came close to 2 V. Figure 7.15 shows an SEM image of of the RuO2 formation at the
electrode surface. It seems like the electrode is completely covered after 2 minutes
at this current density.
Figure 7.15: SEM image zoomed in on the RuO2 formation at the electrode surface.
56
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:65==
A GCD was performed on the RuO2 sample at 0.5 mA/cm2 with the results show-
cased in figure 7.16b. The specific capacitance was calculated to be 401.1 µF/cm2,
the energy density is 200.6 µJ/cm2, the power density 171.4 µW/cm2 and the
Coulomb eﬀiciency 90.0%. The in specific capacitance is almost 20 times that of the
bare CSL100 sample and there is an increase in coulomb eﬀiciency.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.16: GCD of the RuO2 with 120 s deposition at 5 mA/cm2. The GCD
was done with 0.5 mA/cm2 in a 1 V (a) and 1.2 V (b) potential window.
The good performance in the 1 V potential window prompted another GCD in the
1.2 V window (figure 7.16a). In this case the specific capacitance is 528.0 µF/cm2,
the energy density 264 µJ/cm2, the power density 246.9 µW/cm2 and the Coulomb
eﬀiciency 87.0%. By increasing the voltage window the specific capacitance increased
a good amount and the Coulomb eﬀiciency was still retained at a good level. A
slightly higher voltage drop is seen in the 1.2 V window, which let to the slight
decrease in Coulomb eﬀiciency, but that might we worth it to be able to supply
1.2 V per chip. An increase in power density was also seen with the bigger voltage
window.
Another deposition was tried for RuO2 with the same parameter, but a deposition
time of 300 s, but the carbon pad broke after 150 s due to the potential reaching
over 2 V.
The results from the one successful deposition of RuO2 are very promising and shows
that it potentially can be a very good pseudocapacitative material. The potential
applied during deposition however proved to be to much for the interdigitated µSC
systems leading to broken electrodes. The deposition would likely work on bigger
electrodes that can handle the large voltage. To try and make the deposition work
on the µSC systems one could add a passivation layer surrounding the active area,
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
57
==PAGE:66==
which might keep the carbon pads in place, though the breakage would probably
just happen elsewhere. The more likely solution is to decrease the applied current
even further and correspondingly increase deposition times.
Polyaniline
Polyaniline was deposited using both the galvanostatic and CV method. The solu-
tion for the CV method was tested at 0.1 and 0.02 M polyaniline, each for 8 cycles
at a scan rate of 25 mV/s. With the 0.1 M solution the electrodes short circuited
after the deposition on the first electrode, as the rate of deposition was very high.
The CV deposition with the 0.02 M solution also short circuited after deposition on
both electrodes. Figure 7.17a shows that the material is deposited very unevenly
using this method and 7.17b shows what looks to be a short circuit in the channel
between two finger. The channels were in general clean aside from under the sus-
pended layer, so a possible explanation could be poor adhesion of the polyaniline,
causing it to fall down to the channel from the suspended layer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.17: (a) SEM image of polyaniline deposited onto the carbon electrode
through CV deposition. (b) Polyaniline in the channel between two finger causing
a short circuit.
The galvanostatic deposition was only done with the 0.1 M solution at 10 µA/cm2
for 300 s. With this method there was no short circuit. The resulting formation of
polyaniline at the electrode surface can be seen in the SEM image in figure 7.18. A
Gcd was done in a 1 V window with an applied current of 0.5 mA/cm2. The results
of the GCD can be seen in figure 7.19a. The data shows that the performance is poor
with the specific capacitance being 34.3 µF/cm2, the energy density 17,1 µJ/cm2,
the power density 171.4 µW/cm2 and the Coulomb eﬀiciency 27.8%.
58
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:67==
Figure 7.18: SEM image zoomed in on the polyaniline formation at the electrode
surface.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.19: GCD of the polyaniline with 300 s deposition at 0.9 µA/cm2. The
GCD was done with 0.5 mA/cm2 in a 1 V (a) and 0.6 V (b) potential window.
Due to the bad Coulomb eﬀiciency another GCD was done with a voltage window
of 0.6 V. The resulting specific capacitance was 17.1 µF/cm2, lower than that of the
bare electrodes. The Coulomb eﬀiciency was still poor at 49.0%. On the basis of the
poor performance the polyaniline was deemed to not be a good pseudocapacitative
material for this type of interdigitated µSC.
Polypyrrole
The deposition of PPy was done galvanostatically at 0.5 mA/cm2. The deposition
was tested for 180 s, 300 s, 600 s, 900 s, 1200 s and 1800 s. The SEM images in
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
59
==PAGE:68==
figure 7.20 shows the PPy film at the surface of the electrode for deposition times
300 s (a), 600 s (b), 900 s (c) and 1800 s (c). From a-c there seems to be a nice
correlation between the size of the PPy cluster and the deposition time, while they
seem to get smaller again for the 1800 s deposition.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.20:
SEM images of the PPy film at the surface of the electrode for
deposition times 300 s (a), 600 s (b), 900 s (c) and 1800 s (c).
GCD’s were done for all the samples and the results are displayed in figure 7.21a.
The specific capacitances were plotted as a function of PPy deposition time in
figure 7.21b and the 0-1200 s show a linear increase in specific capacitance as the
deposition time is increased. The specific capacitance started decreasing with the
1800 s deposition time, possibly due to the PPy film getting too soft with too much
deposition inducing extra resistance at the pseudocapacitative electrode interface.
While the 1200 s deposition sample shows a better specific capacitance and Coulomb
eﬀiciency than the 900 s sample its GCD is also slightly deformed compared to the
others indicating that that the resistive behavior induced by a soft PPy film might
60
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:69==
be present in this sample as well.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.21: (a) GCD of all the PPy depositions at 0.5 mA/cm2 in a 1 V window.
(b) Specific capacitances of the PPy samples for each deposition time and a linear
fit for the 0-1200 s depositions with R2=0.9897.
Deposition time
900 s
1200 s
1800 s
Specific C [mF/cm2]
3.94
5.39
2.76
Specific E [mJ/cm2]
1.97
2.70
1.38
Specific P [muW/cm2]
171.4
171.4
171.6
Coulomb Eff. [%]
79.8
85.8
70.8
Table 7.5: Key parameters of the interdigitated ￿SC after PPy deposition.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.22: CV’s done in 1 M H2SO4 in a 0-1 V window with a scan rate of 5
mV/s for the 1200 s (a) and 1800 S (b) PPy samples.
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
61
==PAGE:70==
The CV’s for the samples with the two longest depositions are showcased in figure
7.22. The CV for the sample with 1200 s PPy deposition was very unstable. The
curve moves towards lower currents for each cycle, which could indicate that some
of the pseudocapacitative material is delaminating from the electrode or it could be
down to the resistive behavior of the PPy film. The CV of the 1800 s PPy sample
reveals a very resistive pseudocapacitor. The CV is again unstable with the curve
tending towards higher currents and looks to show more and more resistive behavior
with each cycle.
The CV’s for the rest of the PPy samples were all stable across three cycles and
can be seen in figure 7.23. The curves generally tend towards higher currents and
larger areas as the deposition time increases. The CV for the 900 s sample expresses
excellent peusdocapacitative behavior with a large curve area and not too much
distortion towards the higher potentials.
Figure 7.23: CV’s done in 1 M H2SO4 in a 0-1 V window with a scan rate of 5
mV/s for the 0-900 s PPy samples.
Due to the seemingly resistive and unstable behavior pseudocapacitative of the 1200s
deposition sample, the 900 s deposition time was chosen to be the optimum. The
PPy film for this deposition time was measured to be around 1-2 µm, which was
promising for the prospect of depositing PPy on the more densely packed interdig-
itated µSC’s. As such the 900s deposition was done on the PSL30 sample, which
had shown the best capacitative properties for the bare carbon interdigitated µSC
systems due to its large surface area and small interspace between electrodes. The
deposition failed as the fingers seemed to delaminate from the substrate and col-
62
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:71==
lapse onto one another causing a short circuit can be seen from figure 7.24a. The
deposition was subsequently done on the PSL50 sample but with the same result.
After the deposition had failed on the PSL samples in was tried on a CSL30 sample,
which once again ended with a short circuit due to the stabilizing structures on
the side delaminating and collapsing onto each other (figure 7.24b). It does also
seem like the fingers have moved slightly, but less than for the PSL samples and not
enough to seem to cause a short circuit.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.24:
(a) Short circuit of the PSL30 sample after PPy deposition due
to delamination of the fingers. (b) Short circuit of the CSL30 sample after PPy
deposition due to delamination of the stabilizing structures on the sides.
The reason for the delamination of the electrodes during deposition is unclear. A
possible explanation could be that the PPy slowly deposits underneath the fingers
progressively more as the deposition goes on, thus making the fingers delaminate
from the side and inwards. During optical analysis of the samples post deposition,
the PSL30 seemed to only have delaminated on a few fingers at first check in the
microscope. After rinsing the sample further with DI water however the image in
figure 7.24a was taken, where all fingers seem to have delaminated. These extra
delamination occurrences could be explained by PPy growing under the fingers,
making the adhesion to the substrate poor, which then causes delamination when
the structures are sprayed with DI water.
A last test for the PPy deposition was done in a 0.1 M PPy solution with the same
parameters as previously, but this did not result in in an improvement of the pseudo
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
63
==PAGE:72==
capacitative properties compared to the samples with depositions done in 0.05 M so-
lutions with the same deposition time, indicating that suﬀicient pseudocapacitative
material is present in the 0.05 M solution.
7.5
Further discussion
From the electrochemical measurements the addition of PPy as a pseudocapacita-
tive material seems to be the best way to optimize capacitance of the ones tested,
at least with the RuO2 deposition needing more optimization before potentially en-
hancing the capacitance as much as the PPy. The short circuit of the interdigitated
µSC’s during deposition on the more densely packed systems is however a problem,
as it prevents enhancement of the capacitance through increased surface area. It
seems that the PSL system is affected more severely in terms of displacement of the
electrode fingers than the CSL systems. This could be down to the suspended layer
going across the fingers provides some resistance preventing the fingers from moving
towards each other. This would also explain why it is the stabilizing structures at
the sides that collapse on to one another, as these are parallel with the suspended
layer. A possible solution to this problem could be to etch cavities in the substrate
for the fingers to be sat in. This would both make it harder for the structures to be
displaced towards each other, while also making the delamination less likely in the
first place. The second benefit comes from the assumption that the cavities would
be filled with carbon, making it much harder for the PPy to displace the carbon
and deposit underneath it.
64
CHAPTER 7. ELECTROCHEMESTRY RESULTS & DISCUSSION
==PAGE:73==
8
|
Conclusion
The fabrication of the on-chip 3D interdigitated SC systems with a dual photoresist
was successful for the first iterations, where designs previously used by the BioMic
group were modified resulting in the CSL and PSL designs. The addition of stabi-
lizing structures at the ends of the suspended layer in the CSL design was effective
in minimizing the deformation of the main active area caused by shrinkage in the
suspended layer. The attempt to further increase the electrode surface area of the
CSL design with the addition of free standing pillars underneath the suspended in
the EP design failed due to short circuits caused by failing structural integrity of
the stabilizing pillars at the ends of the suspended layer. The novel fabrication tech-
nique that partitioned the pillar layer into to two rounds of spin coating, softbakes
and exposure was however successful in incorporating the free standing pillars in
the parts of the active area, where structural integrity of the supporting pillars was
maintained. The PPS design was deemed infeasible for SC systems with symmetric
electrodes, however parts of the design might be useful in other applications such
as AHSC’s.
The functionality of the interdigitated carbon electrodes was characterized and the
and the effects of high packing density and increased surface area was found to lower
electrolyte and charge transfer resistances respectively, which is in agreement with
related theory.
The CSL and PSL designs were tested as interdigitated bare carbon µSC’s for their
capacitative storage performance with the best performing system being the PSL30
due to its high electrode surface area and packing density.
The PSL30 system
was measured to have a specific capacitance of 167.5 µF/cm2, which is slightly
higher than previous cleanroom fabricated µSC in the BioMic group. The energy-
and power densities for the system are 83.7 µJ/cm2 and 81.3 µW/cm2 respectively.
Additionally the PSL30 system showed the highest Coulomb eﬀiciency on 93.4%.
Four pseudo capacitative materials were tested for enhancement of the capacitative
storage on the CSL100 system with PPy showing the best results. A 900 s deposi-
tion was deemed to be the optimum showing a specific capacitance of 3.94 mF/cm2,
a energy density of 1.97 mJ/cm2 and a power density of 171.4 µW/cm2. The de-
position was also attempted on PSL30, PSL50 and CSL30 systems, but failed in all
cases due to delamination of the fingers from the substrate causing short circuits.
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
65
==PAGE:74==
8.1
Future work
The following list is a summary of suggested research to be conducted in the future
based on the work of this thesis.
• Optimize fabrication process for EP design for a functional µSC.
• Optimize and test part of the PPS design as a AHSC.
• Fabricate CSL and PSL design with higher packing densities for increased
capacitative energy storage.
• Further optimize the deposition of RuO2 as a pseudocapacitative material.
• Explore options to enable deposition of PPy on more densely packed systems
including suggested cavity solution.
66
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado. “Energy Mix”. In: Our World in Data
(2020). https://ourworldindata.org/energy-mix.
[2]
Reginald Davey. “Energy Storage Technologies and The Challenges to Face”.
In: AZoNano (2024). https://www.azonano.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=6513.
[3]
Fuel Cell Market Size & Trends. 2023. URL: https://www.grandviewresearch.
com/industry-analysis/fuel-cell-market.
[4]
Supercapacitor Market. 2022. URL: https://www.kingsresearch.com/supercapacitor-
market-252.
[5]
Dr. Martin Winter & Dr. Ralph J. Brodd. “What Are Batteries, Fuel Cells,
and Supercapacitors?” In: Chem. rev. 104 (2004), 4245−4269. DOI: https:
//pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/cr020730k.
[6]
Jui-Kung Chih et al. “High energy density of all-screen-printable solid-state
microsupercapacitors integrated by graphene/CNTs as hierarchical electrodes
†”. In: (2019). DOI: 10.1039/c9ta01460h.
[7]
Madhusudan Singh et al. “Inkjet printing-process and its applications”. In:
Advanced Materials 22 (6 Feb. 2010), pp. 673–685. ISSN: 09359648. DOI:
10.1002/ADMA.200901141.
[8]
Zhiwei Peng et al. “Flexible Boron-Doped Laser-Induced Graphene Microsu-
percapacitors”. In: ACS Nano 9 (6 June 2015), pp. 5868–5875. ISSN: 1936086X.
DOI: 10.1021/ACSNANO.5B00436. URL: www.acsnano.org5868.
[9]
Zhong-Shuai Wu, Khaled Parvez, and Xinliang Feng. “Photolithographic fabri-
cation of high-performance all-solid-state graphene-based planar micro-supercapacitors
with different interdigital fingers †”. In: (2014). DOI: 10.1039/c4ta00958d.
URL: www.rsc.org/MaterialsA.
[10]
Babak Rezaei et al. “Highly structured 3D pyrolytic carbon electrodes derived
from additive manufacturing technology”. In: Materials & Design 193 (Aug.
2020), p. 108834. ISSN: 0264-1275. DOI: 10.1016/J.MATDES.2020.108834.
[11]
S. Jose Lolly Maria nad Sreehari and Arun Aravind. “3D Printing of Super-
capacitor”. In: Springer Nature (2024), pp. 177–196. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-
99-3021-0_7.
[12]
Wenbo Li et al. “Printing assembly and structural regulation of graphene
towards three-dimensional flexible micro-supercapacitors †”. In: (2017). DOI:
10.1039/c7ta02041d.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
==PAGE:76==
[13]
Chunlei Wang et al. “A novel method for the fabrication of high-aspect ratio C-
MEMS structures”. In: Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 14.2 (2005),
pp. 348–358. DOI: 10.1109/JMEMS.2004.839312.
[14]
Letizia Amato et al. “Dense high-aspect ratio 3D carbon pillars on inter-
digitated microelectrode arrays”. In: Carbon 94 (2015), pp. 792–803. ISSN:
0008-6223. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2015.06.014. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0008622315005291.
[15]
Majid Beidaghi and Yury Gogotsi. “Capacitive energy storage in micro-scale
devices:Rrecent advances in design and fabrication of microsupercapacitors”.
In: Energy & Environmental Science 7 (2014), pp. 867–884. ISSN: 17545706
and 17545692. DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43526a.
[16]
Suhith Hemanth et al. “Suspended microstructures of epoxy based photoresists
fabricated with UV photolithography”. In: (2017). DOI: 10.1016/j.mee.2017.
01.026. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2017.01.026.
[17]
Suhith Hemanth, Claudia Caviglia, and Stephan Sylvest Keller. “Suspended
3D pyrolytic carbon microelectrodes for electrochemistry”. In: Carbon 121
(Sept. 2017), pp. 226–234. ISSN: 0008-6223. DOI: 10.1016/J.CARBON.2017.
05.090.
[18]
Ioannis Mantis et al. “Suspended highly 3D interdigitated carbon microelec-
trodes”. In: Carbon 179 (2021), pp. 579–589. ISSN: 00086223. DOI: 10.1016/
j.carbon.2021.04.069.
[19]
Xiao Long et al. “Facile fabrication of all-solid-state flexible interdigitated
MnO2 supercapacitor via in-situ catalytic solution route”. In: Journal of Power
Sources 325 (2016), pp. 264–272. ISSN: 0378-7753. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jpowsour.2016.06.024. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0378775316307261.
[20]
Etienne Eustache et al. “High Areal Energy 3D-Interdigitated Micro-Supercapacitors
in Aqueous and Ionic Liquid Electrolytes”. In: Advanced Materials Technolo-
gies 2.10 (2017), p. 1700126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.201700126.
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/admt.201700126. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/admt.201700126.
[21]
Marin Gheorghe et al. “Electrochemical deposition of polyaniline for superca-
pacitor applications”. In: 2022 IEEE 9th Electronics System-Integration Tech-
nology Conference (ESTC). 2022, pp. 106–109. DOI: 10.1109/ESTC55720.
2022.9939387.
[22]
Jianglin Diao et al. “Flexible Supercapacitor Based on Inkjet-Printed Graphene@Polyaniline
Nanocomposites with Ultrahigh Capacitance”. In: Macromolecular Materials
and Engineering 303.6 (2018), p. 1800092. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
mame.201800092. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:77==
mame.201800092. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
mame.201800092.
[23]
Chi-Chie Liu et al. “Planar ultracapacitors of miniature interdigital electrode
loaded with hydrous RuO2 and RuO2 nanorods”. In: Electrochimica Acta 55.20
(2010), pp. 5768–5774. ISSN: 0013-4686. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2010.05.015. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0013468610006924.
[24]
Majid Beidaghi and Chunlei Wang. “Recent advances in design and fabrica-
tion of on-chip micro-supercapacitors”. In: Energy Harvesting and Storage:
Materials, Devices, and Applications III. Ed. by Nibir K. Dhar, Priyalal S.
Wijewarnasuriya, and Achyut K. Dutta. Vol. 8377. International Society for
Optics and Photonics. SPIE, 2012, p. 837708. DOI: 10.1117/12.920819. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.920819.
[25]
Wikipedia contributors. Supercapacitor — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 21-February-2024]. 2024. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Supercapacitor&oldid=1207412372.
[26]
James C. Ellenbogen Marin S. Halper. Supercapacitors: A Brief Overview.
2006. URL: https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/pdf/06_0667.pdf.
[27]
Y. Gogotsi P. Simon. “Materials for electrochemical capacitors”. In: Nature
Mater 7 (2008), pp. 845–854. DOI: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/
nmat2297.
[28]
Majid Beidaghi and Chunlei Wang. “Micro-supercapacitors based on three
dimensional interdigital polypyrrole/C-MEMS electrodes”. In: Electrochimica
Acta 56 (2011), pp. 9508–9514. DOI: 10.1016/J.ELECTACTA.2011.08.054.
[29]
8. E. Conway. Electrochemical Supercapacitors Scientific Fundamentals and
Technological Applications. Springer Science+Business Media New York, 1999.
[30]
URL: https://heidelberg-instruments.com/core-technologies/maskless-laser-
lithography/.
[31]
MLA 150 THE ADVANCED MASKLESS ALIGNER. URL: https://heidelberg-
instruments.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/fact-sheet-MLA150.pdf.
[32]
Wikipedia contributors. Photopolymer — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 21-February-2024]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Photopolymer&oldid=1173475171.
[33]
SU-8. 2024. URL: https://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php?title=Specific_
Process_Knowledge/Lithography/SU-8.
[34]
Pyrolysis. 2024. URL: https://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php?title=
Specific_Process_Knowledge/Thermal_Process/Pyrolysis.
[35]
Letizia Amato. “Pyrolysed Carbon Scaffold for Bioelectrochemistry in Life
Science”. In: Technical University of Denmark (2013).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
==PAGE:78==
[36]
Ighalo J.O & Amaku J.F. et al Oyedotun K.O. “Advances in Supercapacitor
Development: Materials, Processes, and Applications”. In: Electron. Mater. 52
(2023), pp. 96–129. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-022-09987-9.
[37]
Majid Beidaghi, Wei Chen, and Chunlei Wang. “Electrochemically activated
carbon micro-electrode arrays for electrochemical micro-capacitors”. In: Jour-
nal of Power Sources 196 (4 Feb. 2011), pp. 2403–2409. ISSN: 0378-7753. DOI:
10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2010.09.050.
[38]
Sanliang Zhang and Ning Pan. “Supercapacitors performance evaluation”. In:
Advanced Energy Materials 5 (6 Mar. 2015). ISSN: 16146840. DOI: 10.1002/
AENM.201401401.
[39]
Ioannis Mantis. 3D Carbon Microelectrodes for Energy Storage in Microsuper-
capacitors. Master thesis. 2017.
[40]
Jens Munk Nielsen. Development of a silicon solar cell with inte-grated carbon
microsupercapacitor. Master thesis. 2023.
[41]
Subramani Kaipannan & Sathish Marappan. “Fabrication of 9.6 V High-
performance Asymmetric Supercapacitors Stack Based on Nickel Hexacyanoferrate-
derived Ni(OH)2 Nanosheets and Bio-derived Activated Carbon”. In: Scientific
reports. 9 (2019), pp. 1–12. DOI: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-
018-37566-8.
[42]
David Pech et al. “Influence of the configuration in planar interdigitated
electrochemical micro-capacitors”. In: Journal of Power Sources 230 (2013),
pp. 230–235. ISSN: 03787753. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.12.039.
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:79==
List of Figures
1.1
Simplified Ragone plot of energy density against power density for
different electrochemical energy storage devices as well as the con-
ventional capacitor, combustion engines and gas turbines [5]. . . . . .
2
1.2
(a) Schematic showing the sandwich configuration for a SC. The
blue color resembles an electrolyte and the green a separator. (b)
Schematic of the interdigitated electrode configuration. . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
(a) Precursor structures made from SU-8. (b) Carbon pillars after
two step pyrolysis process. Adapted from Wang et al. [13]
. . . . . .
4
1.4
(a) Interdigitated 3D carbon electrodes densely packed with high as-
pect ratio [14]. (b) Interdigitated 3D carbon electrodes for µSC’s
[15].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
(a) SU-8 pillar and suspended layer precursor structures. (b) Derived
carbon structures after pyrolysis [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
(a) Interdigitated carbon microelectrodes with a suspended layer go-
ing across the fingers. (b) Interdigitated carbon microelectrodes with
a suspended layer parallel to the fingers [18]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1
Simplified schematic of an EDL forming at the surface of a negatively
charged electrode[25]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Simplified schematic of pseudocapacitance caused by ions being specif-
ically adsorbed onto the electrode surface[25].
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Schematic of an MLA system [30].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Example of cross linking in SU-8 epoxy resist. On the left is shown
the epoxy groups prior to UV light exposure. On the right are the
activated epoxy groups that can cross link making the epoxy resist
insoluble. [32] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Schematic showing the different phases of carbonization as a function
of temperature [35] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1
Schematic showing the electrochemical setup used for characteriza-
tion of the carbon µSC’s and pseudocapacitative materials, as well
as for the electro-depositions of said pseudocapacitative materials. . .
14
3.2
Schematic showing an EIS Nyquist [36].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Graph showing a typical CV measurment in ferro/ferri cyanide with
the oxidation- and reduction peak currents indicated. . . . . . . . . .
15
LIST OF FIGURES
71
==PAGE:80==
3.4
Sketch of CV’s showcasing the ideal SC, the influence of the series
resistance and the impact of pseudocapacitance [36] . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1
Layout of the chips fabricated during this project. . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Mask for the active area of the CSL design. The yellow shows the
fingers at the first layer, the black are the pillars at the second layer
and the red is the suspended layer at the top. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
(a) 3D image of the CSL design. (b) 3D image of supporting struc-
tures at the end of the suspended layer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Mask for the active area of the EP design. The yellow shows the
fingers at the first layer, the second (dark red) are the pillars not
attached to the suspended layer, the black are the pillars supporting
the suspended layer and acts as both second and third layer and the
red is the suspended layer at the top. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5
3D render of the EP design clearly showing the added free standing
pillars underneath the suspended layer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
Mask for the active area of the PSL design. The yellow, black and
red structures belong to the first, second and third layer respectively.
23
4.7
3D render of a section of the PSL design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.8
Mask for the active area of the PPS design. The yellow, black and
red structures belong to the first, second and third layer respectively.
24
4.9
(a) 3D image of the PPS design. (b) 3D image of supporting struc-
tures at the end of the suspended layer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1
Schematic showing the different steps in the process flow used to
fabricate the carbon µSC’s.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
The temperature at the different stages during the pyrolysis process.
28
6.1
SEM image of the PSL design from the first fabrication run with
pillars having a diameter of 20 µm. Due to the high aspect ratio
they are seen collapsing on to one another after development.
. . . .
29
6.2
(a) Overview of the active area of in a CSL chip with all three layers
having been exposed on fast mode, with breakages in the suspended
layer as a consequence. (b) A zoom of the breakage in the suspended
layer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
(a) SEM image zoomed in on a precursor pillar used for measuring
heights of the different layers (b) Image of carbon structures used
for measuring height of the various layers. (c) Bar graph showing
the dimensions of structures before and after pyrolysis as well as the
nominal dimensions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
72
LIST OF FIGURES
==PAGE:81==
6.4
(a) SEM image showing an overview of the precursor structures of the
CSL100 design. (b) Overview of the carbon structures after pyrolysis
of a CSL100 sample. SEM images of the carbon structures in the
CSL100 (c), CSL50 (d) and CSL30 (e) designs. (f) The stabilizing
structures on the side after pyrolysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.5
SEM images of the precuresor structures (a) and the carbon struc-
tures after pyrolysis (b) for the EP100 design. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.6
Stabilizing side pillars of the EP50 (a) design compared to those of
the CSL100 (b) design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.7
SEM image of the precursor structures of the EP design having col-
lapsed onto one another. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.8
SEM images of the precursor structures for the PSL100 (a) and
PSL30 (b) designs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.9
SEM images of the PSL100 structures after pyrolysis (a-b) as well as
the PSL 50 (c) and PSL30 (d) structures.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.10 SEM image of the PPS precursor structures showing one of the corners. 39
6.11 SEM image of the PPS active area after pyrolysis showing the sus-
pended layer being broken in several places.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.12 (a) SEM image of the carbon structures in the middle of the PPC
design. (b) Carbon structures at the corner of the PPS design. . . . .
40
7.1
Image of the printed setup used for electrochemical experiments. . . .
43
7.2
(a) CV’s of the three packing densities tested for the CSL design in
10 mM ferro/ferri cyanide phosphate buffer solution with a scan rate
of 50 mV/s. (b) CV’s of the three packing densities tested for the
PSL design in 10 mM ferro/ferri cyanide phosphate buffer solution
with a scan rate of 50 mV/s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.3
(a) The peak currents gathered from from the CV’s in Ferro/ferri
cyanide. The CSL peak currents are an average of the peak currents
from the first three chips tested, while for the PSL chips the peak
currents were taken from the measurements in figure 7.2b. (b) Linear
relationship between electrode surface area and Peak current.
. . . .
46
7.4
(a) CV done in 10 mM ferro/ferri cyanide with varying scan rate. (b)
Oxidation and reduction peak currents plotted with their respective
linear correlation with the squre root of the scan rate. . . . . . . . . .
48
7.5
Equivalent circuit featuring a modified Randles circuit with bulk ca-
pacitance and resistance (CB & RB)) of the pyrolytic carbon, series
resistance of the active electrolyte (RS), charge transfer resistance
(Rct), impedance of the faradic reaction (ZW) from the ferro/ferri
cyanid and the a constant phase element (CPEdl). . . . . . . . . . . .
49
LIST OF FIGURES
73
==PAGE:82==
7.6
Plot showing the measured impedance spectra and corresponding
Nyquist fit for CSL100, CSL50 and CSL30. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.7
Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves with a voltage window of 1 V
for the different packing densities of the CSL (a) and PSL (b) designs.
The applied current for both charge and discharge was 0.036 mA for
the CSL samples and 0.04 for the PSL samples. . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.8
CV from the CSL30 and PSL30 designs in a 1 V window with scan
rate 5 mV/s.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.9
SEM image of µSC system used for testing the effects of electrode
proximity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.10 GCD’s of the CSL100, design in figure 7.9 and CSL50 samples with
an applied current of 0.036 mA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.11 plot of the theoretical ESR, electrolyte resistance (Re), current col-
lector resistance (Rcc) as well as experimentally optained values for
the ESR. The plot has been adapted from Pech et al. [42]
. . . . . .
53
7.12 Optical image of MnO2 deposited on one electrode giving it the char-
acteristic blue colour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.13 GCD’s of the samples with 20 and 50 CV deposition cycles. The
applied current is 0.2 mA/cm2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.14 SEM image of the µSC after one electrode had RuO2 deposited for
100-200 s with a current density of 25 mA/cm2. . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.15 SEM image zoomed in on the RuO2 formation at the electrode surface. 56
7.16 GCD of the RuO2 with 120 s deposition at 5 mA/cm2. The GCD was
done with 0.5 mA/cm2 in a 1 V (a) and 1.2 V (b) potential window. .
57
7.17 (a) SEM image of polyaniline deposited onto the carbon electrode
through CV deposition. (b) Polyaniline in the channel between two
finger causing a short circuit.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.18 SEM image zoomed in on the polyaniline formation at the electrode
surface.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.19 GCD of the polyaniline with 300 s deposition at 0.9 µA/cm2. The
GCD was done with 0.5 mA/cm2 in a 1 V (a) and 0.6 V (b) potential
window. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.20 SEM images of the PPy film at the surface of the electrode for depo-
sition times 300 s (a), 600 s (b), 900 s (c) and 1800 s (c). . . . . . . .
60
7.21 (a) GCD of all the PPy depositions at 0.5 mA/cm2 in a 1 V window.
(b) Specific capacitances of the PPy samples for each deposition time
and a linear fit for the 0-1200 s depositions with R2=0.9897. . . . . .
61
7.22 CV’s done in 1 M H2SO4 in a 0-1 V window with a scan rate of 5
mV/s for the 1200 s (a) and 1800 S (b) PPy samples. . . . . . . . . .
61
74
LIST OF FIGURES
==PAGE:83==
7.23 CV’s done in 1 M H2SO4 in a 0-1 V window with a scan rate of 5
mV/s for the 0-900 s PPy samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.24 (a) Short circuit of the PSL30 sample after PPy deposition due to
delamination of the fingers. (b) Short circuit of the CSL30 sample
after PPy deposition due to delamination of the stabilizing structures
on the sides. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
LIST OF FIGURES
75
==PAGE:84==
List of Tables
1.1
Table of reports showing pseudocapacitative interdigitated µSC’s for
different pseudocapacitative materials. In the table is the psuedo-
capacitative material, the electrode fabrication method, the pseu-
docapacitative material deposition method, the electrolyte used for
electrochemical characterization and the reported specific capacitance.
6
4.1
Dimension of the different structures in the digital mask for the pre-
cursor structures in the CSL design. The pitch between the pillars is
to the nearest, which is the pillar on the adjacent finger.
. . . . . . .
20
4.2
Dimension of the different structures in the digital mask for the pre-
cursor structures in the EP design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Dimension of the different structures in the digital mask for the pre-
cursor structures in the PSL design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Dimension of the different structures in the digital mask for the pre-
cursor structures in the PPS design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.1
The % shrinkage of the precursor structures to the carbon after py-
rolysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Estimated electrode surface area for the CSL and PSL interdigitaed
µSC systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Estimated electrode surface area for the EP interdigitaed µSC systems. 41
7.1
Basline corrected oxidative- and reduction peak current values from
the CV’s in figure 7.3a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Values retrieved for charge transfer resistance from the impedance
spectra.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.3
Key parameters of the bare carbon interdigitated µSC calculated
from the GCD data. The area specific parameters has been calculated
using the footprint area of the active area of the samples, including
the both the area covered by carbon and the gaps in between. . . . .
51
7.4
Key parameters of the interdigitated µSC after MnO2 deposition. . .
55
7.5
Key parameters of the interdigitated ￿SC after PPy deposition. . . . .
61
76
LIST OF TABLES
==PAGE:85==
A
|
Appendix: Process flow for 3
layer systems
On the following pages is the process flow usedto fabricate the 3 layer interdigitated
carbon µSC systems.
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX: PROCESS FLOW FOR 3 LAYER SYSTEMS
77
==PAGE:86==
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
1 Preparation 
All wafers 
1.1 Wafer 
selection 
Wafer stock 
Stock out 4” Si <100> SSP 525 +/-10 µm wafer  
 
2 SiO2 deposition 
All wafers 
2.1 SiO2 wet 
oxidation 
Furnace: 
Anneal-oxide 
(C1) 
Recipe: WET1100 
Oxidation time: 80 min 
Annealing time: 20 min 
Target thickness: 600±10nm 
Click here to enter text. 
3 Lithography 1st layer (SU-8) 
All wafers 
3.1 Surface 
treatment 
Plasma asher 2 
Recipe: 
O2 flow: 400 mL/min 
N2 flow: 70 mL/min 
Power: 1000 W 
Time: 60 minutes 
 
3.2 Preparation 
of syringe 
Fumehood 
Resist: SU-8 2035 
 
Fill syringe manually and 
store in designated cubbard. 
3.3 Spin coat 
RCD8 spinner 
Recipe: Biomic 2035 15um 2B 6inch 
Pressure: 1 bar 
Target thickness: 15 µm 
 
3.4 Soft bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 15 min 
 
3.5 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check pattern and alignment marks 
 
3.6 Exposure 
MLA1 
Dose: 250 mJ/𝑐𝑚2  
DF:0 
 
 
3.7 Post 
exposure 
bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 2 h 
 
4 Lithography 2nd layer (SU-8) 
All wafers 
4.1 Preparation 
of syringe 
Fumehood 
Resist: SU-8 2075 
 
Fill syringe manually and 
store in designated cubbard. 
4.2 Spin coat 
RCD8 spinner 
Recipe: Mohram 2075 100 um 
Target thickness: 100 µm 
Pressure: 2 bar 
 
4.3 Soft bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 5 hours 
 
4.4 Exposure 
MLA1 
Dose: 240 mJ/𝑐𝑚2  
DF:10 
 
4.5 Post 
exposure 
bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 2 h 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
5 Lithography 3rd layer (mr DWL) 
All wafers 
5.1 Spin coat 
RCD8 spinner 
Recipe: Suhem 17um mr-40 
Target thickness: 17 µm 
Pour from bottle. 
5.2 Soft bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 1 hour 
 
5.3  
5.4 Exposure 
 
MLA1 
 
Dose: 25 mJ/𝑐𝑚2  
DF:0 
 
 
5.5 Post 
exposure 
bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 1 h 
 
6 Development 
 
6.1 Development 
Developer: SU-8 
Solvent: PGMEA 
Time in first bath: 30 min 
Time in second bath: 30 min 
 IPA rinse: 5 minutes 
 
6.2 Hardbake 
exposure 
MA6 
Flood exposure 
4 x 250 mJ/𝑐𝑚2 
Time: 22.3 s per cycle 
Wait time: 30 s 
 
6.3 Hard bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  90 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 15 h 
 
7 Pyrolysis 
All wafers 
7.1 Pyrolysis 
Pyrolysis 
furnace 
Recipe: 3-stage-375-425-1050 
 
7.2 Furnace 
clean 
Pyrolysis 
furnace 
BioMic/BioMic_Clean60min 
 
 
8 Post processes  
All wafers 
8.1 Pasma clean 
Plasma asher 2 
Recipe: 
O2 flow: 20 mL/min 
N2 flow: 80 mL/min 
Power: 1000 W 
Time: 200 s 
 
8.2 Bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  90 𝑜C 
Time: 5 min 
 
8.3 Metal pad 
deposition 
Wordentec 
Process: e-beam deposition 
Material: 30 nm Cu 
Deposition rate: 1 Å/s 
Material: 200 nm Au 
Deposition rate: 5 Å/s 
Shadow mask 
8.4 Dicing 
Laser 
Micromachining 
Tool 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
B
|
Appendix: Process flow for 4
layer systems
On the following pages is the process flow usedto fabricate the 3 layer interdigitated
carbon µSC systems.
80
APPENDIX B. APPENDIX: PROCESS FLOW FOR 4 LAYER SYSTEMS
==PAGE:89==
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
1 Preparation 
All wafers 
1.1 Wafer 
selection 
Wafer stock 
Stock out 4” Si <100> SSP 525 +/-10 µm 
wafer  
 
2 SiO2 deposition 
All wafers 
2.1 SiO2 wet 
oxidation 
Furnace: Anneal-
oxide (C1) 
Recipe: WET1100 
Oxidation time: 80 min 
Annealing time: 20 min 
Target thickness: 600±10nm 
Click here to enter text. 
3 Lithography 1st layer (SU-8) 
All wafers 
3.1 Surface 
treatment 
Plasma asher 2 
Recipe: 
O2 flow: 400 mL/min 
N2 flow: 70 mL/min 
Power: 1000 W 
Time: 60 minutes 
 
3.2 Preparation 
of syringe 
Fumehood 
Resist: SU-8 2035 
 
Fill syringe manually and 
store in designated cubbard. 
3.3 Spin coat 
RCD8 spinner 
Recipe: Biomic 2035 15um 2B 6inch 
Pressure: 1 bar 
Target thickness: 15 µm 
 
3.4 Soft bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 15 min 
 
3.5 Inspection 
Optical microscope 
Check pattern and alignment marks 
 
3.6 Exposure 
MLA1 
Dose: 250 mJ/𝑐𝑚2  
DF:0 
 
 
3.7 Post 
exposure 
bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 2 h 
 
4 Lithography 2nd layer (SU-8) 
All wafers 
4.1 Preparation 
of syringe 
Fumehood 
Resist: SU-8 2075 
 
Fill syringe manually and 
store in designated cubbard. 
4.2 Spin coat 
RCD8 spinner 
Recipe: Mohram 2075 75 um 
Target thickness: 75 µm 
Pressure: 2 bar 
 
4.3 Soft bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 5 hours 
 
4.4 Exposure 
MLA1 
Dose: 240 mJ/𝑐𝑚2  
DF:10 
 
4.5 Post 
exposure 
bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 2 h 
 
4.6  
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
5 
Click here to enter text. 
Lithography 3rd 
layer (SU-8) 
 
 
5.1 Preparation 
of syringe 
Fumehood 
Resist: SU-8 2075 
 
Fill syringe manually and 
store in designated cubbard. 
5.2 Spin coat 
RCD8 spinner 
Recipe: Mohram 2075 30 um 
Target thickness: 30 µm 
Pressure: 2 bar 
 
5.3 Soft bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 2 hours 
 
5.4 Exposure 
MLA1 
Dose: 250 mJ/𝑐𝑚2  
DF:10 
 
5.5 Post 
exposure 
bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 2 h 
 
6 Lithography 4th layer (mr DWL) 
All wafers 
6.1 Spin coat 
RCD8 spinner 
Recipe: Suhem 17um mr-40 
Target thickness: 17 µm 
Pour from bottle. 
6.2 Soft bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 1 hour 
 
 
6.3 Exposure 
 
MLA1 
 
Dose: 25 mJ/𝑐𝑚2  
DF:0 
 
 
6.4 Post 
exposure 
bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  50 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 1 h 
 
7 Development 
 
7.1 Development 
Developer: SU-8 
Solvent: PGMEA 
Time in first bath: 30 min 
Time in second bath: 30 min 
 IPA rinse: 5 minutes 
 
7.2 Hardbake 
exposure 
MA6 
Flood exposure 
4 x 250 mJ/𝑐𝑚2 
Time: 22.3 s per cycle 
Wait time: 30 s 
 
7.3 Hard bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  90 𝑜C 
Temp. ramp: 2 𝑜C/min 
Time: 15 h 
 
8 Pyrolysis 
All wafers 
8.1 Pyrolysis 
Pyrolysis furnace 
Recipe: 3-stage-375-425-1050 
 
8.2 Furnace 
clean 
Pyrolysis furnace 
BioMic/BioMic_Clean60min 
 
 
9 Post processes  
All wafers 
9.1 Pasma clean 
Plasma asher 2 
Recipe: 
O2 flow: 20 mL/min 
N2 flow: 80 mL/min 
Power: 1000 W 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
Time: 200 s 
9.2 Bake 
Hotplate 
Temperature:  90 𝑜C 
Time: 5 min 
 
9.3 Metal pad 
deposition 
Wordentec 
Process: e-beam deposition 
Material: 30 nm Cu 
Deposition rate: 1 Å/s 
Material: 200 nm Au 
Deposition rate: 5 Å/s 
Shadow mask 
9.4 Dicing 
Laser 
Micromachining Tool 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
C
|
Appendix: Surface area esti-
mations
The dimensions measured with the SEM for the carbon structures was used for these
calculations.
CSL design
Total area of botteom layer
Af = nf · wf · lf + wsb · lsb −np · r2
p · π
(C.1)
Where nf is the number of fingers, wf is the width of the fingers, lf is the length of
the fingers, wsb is the width of the bottom stand for the side supporting structures,
lsb is the length of the bottom stand for the side supporting structures, np is the
number of pillars and rp is the radius of the pillars. The first term accounts for the
area of the fingers, the second the area of the stands for the supportive structures
and the third subtracts the area covered by pillars.
Total area of the pillars
Ap = np · 2 · π · rp · hp
(C.2)
where hp is the height of the pillars.
Total area of the suspended layer
As = 2 · ns · ws · ls −np · r2
p · π + 2 · ns · ws · hs
(C.3)
Where ns is the number of suspended layers, ws is the width of the suspended layers,
ls is the length of the suspended layers, hs is the height of the suspended layers, np
is the number of pillars and rp is the radius of the pillars. The first and third term
accounts for the area of the suspended layers and the second subtracts the area
covered by pillars.
The total estimated surface area of the CSL designs is then
ACSL = Af + Ap + As
(C.4)
PSL design
Total area of botteom layer
Af = nf · wf · lf −np · r2
p · π
(C.5)
84
APPENDIX C. APPENDIX: SURFACE AREA ESTIMATIONS
==PAGE:93==
Where nf is the number of fingers, wf is the width of the fingers, lf is the length of
the fingers, np is the number of pillars and rp is the radius of the pillars. The first
term accounts for the area of the fingers and the second subtracts the area covered
by pillars.
Total area of the pillars
Ap = np · 2 · π · rp · hp
(C.6)
where hp is the height of the pillars.
Total area of the suspended layer
As = 2 · ns · ws · ls −np · r2
p · π + 2 · ns · ws · hs
(C.7)
Where ns is the number of suspended layers, ws is the width of the suspended layers,
ls is the length of the suspended layers, hs is the height of the suspended layers, np
is the number of pillars and rp is the radius of the pillars. The first and third term
accounts for the area of the suspended layers and the second subtracts the area
covered by pillars.
The total estimated surface area of the PSL designs is then
APSL = Af + Ap + As
(C.8)
APPENDIX C. APPENDIX: SURFACE AREA ESTIMATIONS
85
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 451
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
