==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Critical parameter analysis for improved 
wind turbine ice accumulation 
predictions using CFD and field 
measurements
Anirudh Parakkunnath
DTU Wind-M-0821
March 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0821
March 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Taeseong Kim
Seungin Min
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Anirudh Parakkunnath
Title:
Critical parameter analysis for improved wind 
turbine ice accumulation predictions using CFD 
and field measurements
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Cold climatic conditions across many parts of the world have a huge potential to provide
wind energy. A significant proportion of the expansion of onshore wind farms is happening
in such cold climate sites. The humidity in the atmosphere in freezing temperatures have
been observed to cause ice accretion on the wind turbines.
The ice formation on the
turbines negatively impacts the performance of the turbine. It induces additional fatigue
loads and loss energy production, at times leading to a complete shutdown in cases of
severe icing. Hence, having a deeper knowledge is beneficial in wind farm planning and
control.
Numerical modelling tools aid in fast tracking the process of studying about ice accretion
on wind turbines. Numerical codes that are were initial made for fixed wing icing, have
been adopted to rotors. In this study a second generation icing code known as WISE(Wind
energy Icing Simulation code with performance Evaluation) was used to simulate a small
cylinder. This is a density based solver for calculating compressible flows. The study was
done for quasi-steady state simulation using Reynolds Average Simulations using k −ω
SST turbulence modelling. The quasi steady state approach to icing simulations was used,
as this method of simulation was able to resolve different parameters with various size
by giving a steady state solution to them. The WISE icing code is structured into four
modules where each module functions successively after the execution of the first module.
The four modules are 1) aerodynamic, 2)droplet trajectory, 3)thermodynamic and 4) Ice
growth modules. Each module executes in the same sequence.
This study aims to understand the importance of critical parameters and their influence in
the prediction on ice shape. Field data was used as input for the climatic conditions and
the ice thickness predicted was compared with field ice thickness observed. Five different
control parameters were studied. The results indicate that some of the parameters have a
much higher critical influence on the ice accretion compared to others. The results of this
study can be used as a basis for future numerical ice prediction studies.
As climate change continues to affect weather patterns, understanding and mitigating
the effects of icing on renewable energy sources becomes increasingly important. This
study not only contributes to the body of knowledge on wind turbine icing but also sets
the stage for future interdisciplinary research that combines meteorological data with
advanced simulation techniques.
Master Thesis
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
The last 5 months in this project have been challenging, yet insightful and steep learning
experience for me.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Taeseong Kim for his support during this course.
Your help in aligning my expectations and goals for this project has been extremely useful
and would like to thank you for that.
My co-supervisor, Seungin Min. Would like to thank you sincerely for all the help you
have provided. Your helping me understand the numerical simulation tool and guidance
when there have been problems with the results has been a backbone support for me.
To my friends and family, thank you all for your support!!
Anirudh Parakkunnath
iv
Master Thesis
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1.1
New installation outlook GWEC 2023-2027 [GW] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Cold climatic condition definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Probability of Ice-type formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Example of the three types of Ice shapes on a NACA 0012 airfoil experi-
mental study by [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Definition of Meteorological Icing, Instrumental Icing, Rotor Icing, Incuba-
tion, Accretion, Persistence and Ablation as per IEA Wind TCP 13 [6] . . .
4
1.6
Probability of Ice formation with temperature, [9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.7
Ice accretion on wind turbine blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8
Ice accretion on wind measurement instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.9
The distribution of the various causes for Wind turbine shutdown[16] . . . .
8
1.10 Ice accretion on wind turbine blades and anemometer for wind measure-
ment[19] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Structure of Wise code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Thermodynamic module flowchart [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Mesh interpolation upon ice thickness calculations from the cell centre [5] .
15
3.4
Measurement of ice thickness from experiment done by [4] and WISE sim-
ulation measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Structured grid around the cylinder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
O-type computational domain used in this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1
Ice distribution on the cylinder for varying mesh points on the wall boundary 19
4.2
(a)Convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and (b) Coeﬀicient of pressure on the
cylinder for varying mesh points
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
(a) Collection Eﬀiciency and (b) Ice thickness for different Mesh points . . .
21
4.4
Type of ice formation on the wall surface for different mesh points
. . . . .
21
4.5
Ice distribution on the cylinder for different computational domain sizes . .
22
4.6
(a)Convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and (b) Coeﬀicient of pressure on the
cylinder for different domain size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.7
The turbulent kinetic energy for different domain sizes . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.8
(a) Collection Eﬀiciency and (b) Ice thickness for different domain sizes
. .
24
4.9
Ice distribution over the cylinder wall for different MVDs
. . . . . . . . . .
25
4.10 (a)Convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and (b) Coeﬀicient of pressure on the
cylinder for different MVD values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.11 (a) Collection Eﬀiciency and (b) Ice thickness for different MVD sizes of
droplets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.12 Ice distribution on cylinder wall for different time step sizes . . . . . . . . .
28
4.13 (a)Convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and (b) Coeﬀicient of pressure on the
cylinder different time-step sizes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.14 (a) Collection Eﬀiciency and (b) Ice thickness for different computational
time-step sizes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.15 Ice distribution for different icing times
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.16 Ice growth for 3-shot case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.17 Comparison of simulated maximum ice thickness with Experiment results
for 1.5 hours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Master Thesis
v
==PAGE:6==
4.18 The final simulated ice shape for Climatic event 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.1 WISE simulation of Event 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.2 WISE simulation of Event 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.3 WISE simulation of Event 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.4 WISE simulation of Event 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.5 WISE simulation of Event 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.6 WISE simulation of Event 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.7 WISE simulation of Event 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.8 WISE simulation of Event 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
vi
Master Thesis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cold Climate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Impact of Icing on Wind Turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Project Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Ice accretion models - A Literature review
10
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Computation Method
11
3.1
Numerical Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Experimental data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Computational Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Selection of parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results and discussion: Critical parameters influencing prediction of ice
accretion
19
4.1
Effect of Mesh at boundary wall on ice accretion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Effect of domain size on ice accretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Effect of MVD size on Ice accretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Effect of computational time step on ice accretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Effect of number of shots on ice accretion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Defining the most suitable model and comparison with experimental case
.
33
5
Conclusion and Future Work
36
A Appendix
41
A.1 Climatic conditions from field data [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.2 WISE simulations of other climatic events using 1 hour icing time
. . . . .
41
Master Thesis
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Master Thesis
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Wind energy emerges as a pivotal element in the global shift from fossil fuels to sustainable
energy sources. Demonstrating a remarkable potential to spearhead this transformation,
wind energy is increasingly favoured to meet the world’s growing energy demands. As
a result, wind farms are expanding worldwide. Globally the power capacity from Wind
added to the power grid in 2022 is 77.6 GW [1]. It is estimated that as of 2015, 127 GW
of wind energy is generated from cold climate wind sites in Wallenius et al.[2] from cold
climates across Scandinavia, North America Europe and Asia. It was forecasted that by
the end of 2020, the cumulative capacity of wind in cold climates could increase to 187 GW,
which is a 30% share of global wind energy forecasted capacity. This is an indication of
the importance of the potential that cold climate sites offer in the development of onshore
wind energy.
Figure 1.1: New installation outlook GWEC 2023-2027 [GW]
In many northern European countries, it is now more favourable to establish more wind
farms in cold climate regions, as these regions experience higher winds and have lower
population density, making it easier for construction. To understand this potential that
cold climate sites offer, the International Energy Agency set up a Wind Program known
as Task 19 Wind Energy in Cold Climates. This program is an international collaboration
with many countries to gather information about wind energy in cold climates and to set
industry standards and guidelines for future applications.
The high winds in cold climate regions have the potential to expand the capacity of Wind
energy. However, operating wind turbines in cold climates presents significant challenges.
Atmospheric icing is one of the most common types of icing experienced in such regions.
Due to humidity, the supercooled water droplets upon interaction with any surface exposed
to the atmosphere tend to have ice formation.
Ice accretion on the turbine blades is
one of the primary issues experienced by wind turbines in cold regions, which not only
reduces their eﬀiciency but also impacts the overall structural stability of the turbine. This
makes managing and maintaining the wind turbines in such environments more complex,
underlining the need for innovative solutions to harness wind energy effectively in diverse
climatic conditions.
The icing accretion on wind turbines is estimated to be the cause of energy loss of up to
20% of its Annual Energy Production(AEP)[2]. In some cases of severe icing, the turbines
Master Thesis
1
==PAGE:10==
have had to be shut down. One such incident in the recent past is in February 2021, in
Texas, United States a wind farm had to be shut down due to severe icing. The shutdown
was blamed as the reason for having blackouts across Texas.
Hence, it is important to study icing events to gain a better understanding of ice formations
on turbines. Experimental studies for ice accretion are usually done in wind tunnels, with
controlled flow. They are usually done in scaled-down models of wind turbine blades. Such
wind tunnel experiments are costly and controlling the tunnel environment for below 0
degrees Celsius is a challenging task. Numerical modelling is a faster method to study
the icing events on turbines. Studies such as Baizhuma et al.[3] have developed numerical
methods to predict ice accretion shapes on Vertical Axis Wind Turbines, validating the
model with wind tunnel tests.
Many studies have been done to develop numerical models to predict ice accretion models.
Most of these studies validate their model with wind tunnel results. These experiments
are not exactly representative of real-world scenarios which have a higher turbulence flow.
This study uses a cylinder which is representative of any wind measurement equipment at
the hub of a turbine and ice modelling is done on the cylinder using the experimental data
from Montminy et al.[4]. This study aims to understand the important control parameters
for ice prediction using an icing code developed in DTU, called WISE(Wind turbine Icing
Simulation code with performance Evaluation)[5].
1.1
Cold Climate
Figure 1.2: Cold climatic condition definition
Cold climate (CC) weather condition is defined in the IEA report [6] as weather conditions,
where there is frequent occurrence of atmospheric icing or low temperatures, below the
operational limits of the turbine.
Cold climate conditions can be categorised as Icing
Climate (IC) and Low-Temperature Climate (LTC) as seen in Figure 1.4. A wind turbine
site will be classified as a CC site if it experiences only Icing climate, only Low-temperature
Climate or even both.
1.1.1
Icing Climate
When ice accretion happens on a surface, exposed to atmospheric conditions over a period
of time, it is defined as atmospheric icing. The density, shape and characteristics of the
ice formed on the surface can vary depending on the climatic conditions.
2
Master Thesis
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: Probability of Ice-type formation
Atmospheric icing can be broadly categorised into three types of icing depending on the
atmospheric conditions:
• Rime Ice - Rime ice is soft needle-like ice formation, that is formed when super-
cooled water droplets with low Mean Volume Diameter(MVD) and Liquid Water
Content (LWC) at temperatures below 0◦C, ice accretion, up to −20◦C collide with
a surface. The resulting ice formed is of very low density and has low adhesion to
the surface.
• Glaze Ice - Glaze ice is formed when the water droplets do not cool immediately
upon interacting with the surface. The water droplet hits the surface and forms a
thin water film which then freezes. The ice accredited is more dense and has high
adhesion to the surface. This type of ice accretion happens between 0◦C and −6◦C,
mostly in freezing rain conditions where the size of the droplets is relatively bigger
when compared to in Rime ice.
• Mixed Ice - Mixed ice is an intermediate form of ice accretion of the two types. It
occurs usually when the temperature is decreasing and there is a transition in the
atmospheric conditions from one condition to another
Figure 1.4: Example of the three types of Ice shapes on a NACA 0012 airfoil experimental
study by [7]
1.1.2
Icing definitions and evolution
The IEA Wind TCP 13 has described the evolution of an icing event as shown in Figure 1.5.
This description applies to all structures, wind turbines and measurement instruments that
are exposed to atmospheric icing.
Master Thesis
3
==PAGE:12==
The whole Icing events can be categorised into three parts, Incubation, Accretion and
Persistence/Ablation. Incubation is defined as the period when the atmospheric condi-
tions are favourable for icing to start and the time when ice formation starts. When the
atmospheric conditions are favourable for Icing to happen is defined as Meteorological
Icing. Instrumental Icing is the period when ice starts to be visible on Meteorological
instruments. Rotor Icing is the period when ice is visible on the rotor blade. Rotor Icing
is not equivalent to instrumental icing due to differences in geometry, dimension and flow
velocity. The period when active ice growth happens is defined as accretion. The total
time duration when the ice remains on a structure is defined as persistence. The final time
period when the ice starts to shed or melt from the icing surface is defined as Ablation.
Ablation also indicates the period between Meteorological Icing and Rotor/Instrument
Icing.
Figure 1.5: Definition of Meteorological Icing, Instrumental Icing, Rotor Icing, Incubation,
Accretion, Persistence and Ablation as per IEA Wind TCP 13 [6]
For a wind farm site to be categorised as a cold climate site, the site must experience mete-
orological icing for at least 0.5% annually and greater than 1.5% of the year instrumental
icing. Based on the duration of meteorological and instrumental icing in a year, IEA has
classified the cold climate site into five classes as shown in Table 1.1. Based on the IEA
Ice class of the site, an estimate of the loss in annual energy production(AEP) due to icing
is recommended for wind farm planning.
IEA Ice Class
Meteorological
Icing
% of year
Instrumental
Icing
% of year
Reduced Annual Production (% of year)
5
> 10
> 20
> 20
4
5 −10
10 −30
10 −25
3
3 −5
6 −15
3 −12
2
0.5 −3
1 −9
0.5 −5
1
0 −0.5
< 1.5
0 −0.5
Table 1.1: IEA Icing Climate classification
4
Master Thesis
==PAGE:13==
To give additional information on the icing conditions of a site for more detailed planning,
additional ice accumulated on a structure per unit of time is described as Icing Intensity.
The mass of ice accreted is defined as Ice Load.
1.1.3
Ice accretion process
The ice accretion is a complex process that starts when supercooled droplets interact with
a surface. Upon interaction, it undergoes heat exchange resulting in phase change. The
process has been formulated by Makkonen et al.[8] as shown in Equation 1.1 based on the
flux density of particles.
dM
t
= α1 ∗α2 ∗α3 ∗w ∗v ∗A
(1.1)
Where:
• α1 : collision eﬀiciency
• α2 : collection eﬀiciency
• α3 : accretion eﬀiciency
• v : particle velocity relative to the airfoil
• w : mass concentration of the water droplets in the air
• A : cross section area of the airfoil
Collision eﬀiciency, α1 denotes the ratio of the flux density of the particles coming in
contact with the surface to the maximum flux density. Collision eﬀiciency will always be
below 0 as the small particles will follow the streamlines and can avoid colliding with the
surface, while the larger particles collide with the surface.
Collection eﬀiciency, α2 denotes the flux density ratio of droplet particles that remain
attached to an object compared to those that merely collide with it. For instances involving
supercooled droplets that freeze upon impact (as seen in rime ice formation) or when
there’s a wet layer on the object causing the droplets to spread and adhere (as observed in
glaze ice conditions), α2 is assumed to be perfect, or 1, indicating every colliding particle
sticks. Conversely, when dealing with entirely solid particles, like dry snow, which has the
potential to bounce off the surface,α2 is effectively 0, suggesting no adherence.
Accretion eﬀiciency, α3 denotes the ratio of the rate of icing to the density of droplet par-
ticles. α3 value of 1 would signify a case where all the droplet particles freeze immediately,
which in atmospheric icing is typically observed in rime ice accretion. On the other hand,
an α3 = 0 would represent that no icing has occurred. For Glaze ice, this value would be
less than 1, as in glaze ice formation some droplet particles
1.1.4
Icing Parameters
In this section, the parameters related to atmospheric conditions are only discussed. These
parameters influence the ice accretion process. Other parameters such as chord length, flow
angle, and object profile also affect the ice accretion process.
Air temperature is directly related to the energy transfer required for a droplet to undergo
phase change and form ice. When the air temperature is very low in magnitude concerning
the surface temperature, the thermal heat transfer would be able to freeze all the droplets
due to the large temperature difference. Such cases usually result in the formation of
rime ice cases. When the ambient temperature is near the freezing point, the latent heat
would not be able to freeze all the water droplets immediately, leading to some droplets
Master Thesis
5
==PAGE:14==
remaining on the surface without undergoing phase change. This type of ice formation
tends to occur for glazed ice.
Figure 1.6: Probability of Ice formation with temperature, [9]
Wind speed affects the ice accretion rate on the surface and the ice type formed on the
surface. Higher velocity leads to a higher probability of droplet particle colliding with the
surface. This increases the collision eﬀiciency, which increases ice accretion. Equation 1.1
shows this direct relation.
Liquid Water Content(LWC) is a measure of the mass of water particles that are present
in a unit volume. It is measured in units g/m3. It is one of the critical atmospheric
parameters that affect the rate of ice accretion and also the type of ice formation. A
high LWC value implies a higher concentration of water droplets in the air, which has a
higher possibility form glaze ice as the large mass of water would require more latent heat
to undergo phase change[10]. On the other hand a low LWC value would tend to give
rime ice due to the lower density of droplet mass, increasing the ability of the droplet to
undergo phase change immediately due to a lower latent heat[10].
Median Volumetric Diameter is the median size of the supercooled water droplets. It is
measured in microns[µ]. The MVD is directly related to the inertial parameter of icing[11],
which is related to the collection eﬀiciency. Hence, a large MVD would result in an increase
in MVD which increases is ice mass accreted. This is analysed in detail in further sections.
1.2
Impact of Icing on Wind Turbines
Icing on wind turbines has a negative impact on the operation and safety of the turbines.
The impact on the turbine can be categorised into the following
• Power loss
• Mechanical component and structural fatigue
• Measurement errors
6
Master Thesis
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.7: Ice accretion on wind turbine blade
Figure 1.8: Ice accretion on wind measurement instruments
1.2.1
Power Loss
As the ice operates in meteorological icing conditions, the blade starts to have ice forma-
tion near its stagnation point as seen in Figure 1.7. Ice formation on the blade increases
the drag experienced by the blade. Along the length of the blade, the ice formation is
irregular as well. The ice mass accreted near the tip of the blade, is generally more than
the ice accretion near the hub of the blade. This is due to the fact that the rotational
speed is higher near the wing tip, hence having a higher particle velocity relative to the
airfoil. As shown in Equation 1.1, this directly increases the ice mass accretion on the
blade.
The ice accretion at the leading edge of the airfoil increases the chord length. The ex-
pectation was that lift force also increase, yielding better power production [12]. But this
was not the case. The formation of ice was seen to be increasing the drag coeﬀicient on the
blade [13]. The increase in drag, reduces the power production in the range of 20% and
50%, depending on the severity of the icing condition. The ice mass at the blade affects
the structural loading of the blade as well, in some cases weighing up to half of the blade
mass as discussed in Alsabagh et al.[14]. The ice formed on the blade increases the fatigue
loading of the blade. This leads to the shutdown of wind turbines. In Finland 72 wind
Master Thesis
7
==PAGE:16==
turbines had downtime due to icing [15]. As shown by Mustafa et al.[16] in Figure 1.9, 4%
of downtime was due to icing in Finland annually.
1.2.2
Mechanical component and structural fatigue
The ice mass is expected to increase linearly along the blade as the relative blade speed
also increases. But Seifert[17] showed that in some cases, the ice loses adhesion to the
surface and falls. It then grows again, leading to an uneven distribution of ice formation.
This forms unbalanced loads, which increases the fatigue load of the turbine [18]. Due to
this, the probability of failure of components also increases over its lifetime [19].
Figure 1.9: The distribution of the various causes for Wind turbine shutdown[16]
1.2.3
Measurement errors
Wind measurement is a critical aspect of wind turbine operation and planning. As seen in
Figure 1.8 and Figure 1.10, icing covers the critical measurement equipment as well. [20]
states that a small covering of ice on the anemometer, would result in an error of 30-40%
in the reading.
Figure 1.10: Ice accretion on wind turbine blades and anemometer for wind measure-
ment[19]
8
Master Thesis
==PAGE:17==
1.3
Project Scope
In Wind turbine systems, instrument icing and icing of structures such as the nacelle of
the turbine are regions that also experience severe icing apart from the blades. Most of
the widely used numerical models such as LEWICE, FENSAP-ICE and WISE are well-
validated for high Reynolds number flow conditions. The capability of the WISE tool for
low Reynolds number flows is not well documented.
In this project, we are using a numerical simulation tool called WISE to run ice simula-
tions on a cylinder. The instrument’s icing affects the measurement readings, which are
used to control the turbine. These components typically experience lower wind speeds
compared to the wingtip. This project aims to conduct a preliminary study that exam-
ines the importance of various computational parameters of the icing code. We will then
compare the model, using the best computational setting of the parameters selected, with
experimental data from Montminy et al.[4]. These data were collected from multiple wind
turbine sites located across Canada.
Master Thesis
9
==PAGE:18==
2
Ice accretion models - A Literature
review
2.1
Background
Numerical icing models have been widely used for icing studies over experimental studies.
To better understand ice shapes and the icing process, experimental studies are expen-
sive. It is diﬀicult to control the atmospheric parameters accurately and extracting the ice
shapes accurately is diﬀicult. The results from experimental studies are more complex to
analyse, as most experimental studies are performed in small-scale models. It has not been
completely studied as to how to compare small-scale studies with full-scale models. Hence,
numerical icing simulations have been preferred for icing studies over experimental studies.
The initial development of icing codes for numerical studies was mainly focused on un-
derstanding aeroplane wing icing for aviation safety. National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration (NASA), Oﬀice National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (ONERA),
Defense Research Agency (DRA), and Centro Italiano Richerche Aerospaziali (CIRA)
came together to develop one of the first ice accretion solvers which solved two-dimensional
problems of airfoil [21]. The icing code developed consisted of three parts a droplet tra-
jectory, an aerodynamic solver and a thermal solver. The results were fairly accurate for
rare ice cases but had discrepancies with other ice cases. The performance of the solver is
dependent on the user’s knowledge of icing. These methods were later converted for wind
turbine icing.
One of the early icing codes that was used for wind turbine icing problems was the Makko-
nen model[22]. It is an empirical model which is popular in the wind industry for its
simplicity. It used the Euler equation of the boundary layer to calculate the heat coef-
ficients in the front half of a rough cylinder. This was further developed into an icing
simulation tool known as TURBICE for Wind turbine applications [8]. The Lagrangian
approach was used for tracking the water droplets and the Messinger model[23] was used
for thermodynamic calculations. Jasinki et al.[24] developed a procedure to utilise icing
codes such as LEWICE[25] to obtain two-dimensional ice shapes of wind turbine blades.
Jansinski et al.[24] used FLUENT to solve the aerodynamic field using Reynolds Aver-
age Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations to solve the aerodynamic field and LEWICE([25]
to predict the lift and drag coeﬀicients of the blade. The LEWICE code was one of the
first numerical codes developed for prediction of ice accretion by NASA. The model was
effective only in the predictions of rime ice cases.
Since the 1990s, three-dimensional icing simulations have been made. Icing codes which
use the Reynolds Average Navier-Stokes (RANS) equation for aerodynamic field calcula-
tion, Eulerian equations for droplet field calculations and Messinger model for the phase
change have been utilised. The FENSAP-ICE [26] is one of the most widely used icing
simulation codes. The FENSAP-ICE model used in Reid et al.[26] used a one-equation
Spallart-Allmaras turbulence model [27] for turbulence calculation of the flow and a two-
phase Eulerian formulation for the droplet impingement calculations.
Reid et al.[26]
showed the application of the icing code for wind turbines on a National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL) Phase VI turbine.
10
Master Thesis
==PAGE:19==
3
Computation Method
In this study the second generation of Wind turbine Icing simulation code with perfor-
mance Evaluation(WISE) [5] is used. The structure of WISE is maintained the same as
in Son et al.[5]. It consists of four modules, as seen in Figure 3.1: 1. aerodynamic module,
2. droplet module, 3. thermodynamic module and 4. ice growth module.
Figure 3.1: Structure of Wise code
The aerodynamic module calculates the velocity vectors in the flow field. It uses a density-
based solver. Using the converged solution, the droplet trajectories are calculated using
the droplet field module. The droplet field module calculates the droplet’s interaction
with the surface. The thermodynamic module then performs thermodynamic calculations
and the ice growth module calculates the ice mass accreted and the ice shape on the sur-
face. After the simulation is run for a certain icing time, the solution from the ice growth
module is used for updating the grid for the next step of ice simulation. The WISE code
in each simulation run calculates the ice growth for a given icing time. The final ice shape
is calculated based on the number of times the user defines for the ice calculation, where
each time the grid has to be updated after following this process. The following sections
explain in greater detail the working of each module.
The ice thickness calculated is from the centre of each wall mesh as shown in Figure 3.3.
The new ice surface is calculated by interpolating the nodes along the surface normal
vectors, linearly to the ice thickness values found from Equation 3.12. After interpolation,
Master Thesis
11
==PAGE:20==
to continue the simulation for the next step of icing, the computational grid has to be
generated again using external meshing tools, where the interpolated surface is considered
as the new surface wall.
In this detailed analysis, the study utilises WISE version 2 for conducting simulations,
aiming to align computational models closely with experimental observations noted in [4].
This study evaluates the influence of critical modelling parameters on the formation of
ice on cylindrical structures, similar to those found in wind measuring devices and wind
turbine towers.
Key parameters under scrutiny include the refinement of the mesh structure, the spatial
domain size, the mean volume diameter (MVD) of water droplets contributing to icing, the
duration of icing events, computational resource allocation, and the implementation of sur-
face roughness models. This comprehensive comparison with the experimental data from
[4] is designed to enhance the accuracy of predictive models related to ice accumulation
on critical wind turbine components.
3.1
Numerical Method
3.1.1
Aerodynamic module
The aerodynamic module solves exclusively the aerodynamic solutions. A density-based
solver is used for calculations for compressible flows. Quasi-steady simulations using the
Reynolds Average Simulation type using k −ωSST for turbulence modelling are used. A
Quasi-steady simulation is used for predicting the velocity vectors as from [28] it has been
shown that it can accurately predict ice accretion on a surface. The difference between the
first generation of WISE and the second generation of WISE is mainly in the aerodynamic
module.
• 1st Version:
In the first version, a segregated compressible solver of OpenFOAM named rhoPim-
pleFoam was used. This solver is a widely used solver. But, over the course of this
study it was proving to be computationally expensive.
• 2nd Version:
In the second version, an implicit coupled solver developed by [29] was used. This
solver was computationally faster and it was able to predict converging vectors using
a relatively large time step than the rhoPimpleFoam solver.
Surface roughness calculation
During the ice accretion process as ice formation happens on the surface. The roughness
of the surface increases. As the surface roughness increases, the turbulent boundary layer
near the surface gets affected and influences the aerodynamics of the flow field. In k−ωSST
turbulence modelling this is included in the boundary condition values of k and ω. In this
study, the k −ω correction is done using the model developed by Knopp et al.[30]. The
advantage of this method is that as the surface roughness increases, it does not require
refinement of the grid at the surface.
ks = 0.00117ck∗
s,LWCk∗
s,V k∗
S,T
(3.1)
k∗
s,LWC = 0.5714 + 0.2457LWC + 1.2571LWC2
k∗
s,V = 0.4286 + 0.0044139V∞
k∗
s,T = 0.0467T∞−11.27
(3.2)
12
Master Thesis
==PAGE:21==
The roughness of the surface after ice accretion is defined as in Equation 3.1. It is a function
of the chord length[m], Liquid Water Content (LWC) [g/m3], atmospheric temperature[K]
and velocity [m/s] as shown in Equation 3.2. The ks value found in Equation 3.1 is used
for k and ω value correction as shown in [31].
3.1.2
Droplet Field module
A Eulerian formulation is used in the calculation of the droplet trajectory. In the WISE
code, the solution of the converged velocity vectors are used to calculate the droplet
trajectory. The converged velocity vectors are used in the mass conservation (Equation 3.3)
and momentum (Equation 3.4) equations in the matrix form.
∂¯ρd
∂t + ∇· (¯ρd⃗ud) = 0
(3.3)
∂¯ρd⃗ud
∂t
+ ∇· (¯ρd⃗ud⃗ud) = 3
4
¯ρdµaCDRed
ρwMV D2 (⃗ua −⃗ud) + ¯ρd⃗g
(
1 −ρa
ρw
)
(3.4)
The droplet is assumed to be in the shape of a sphere [28], So the drag, gravity and
buoyancy we substituted into a source term as shown in Equation 3.5.
CD =
24
Red (1 + 0.197 Red 0.63 + 2.6 × 10−4 Red 1.38)
(3.5)
Based on the relation between the velocity vectors and the surface normal vectors, the
boundary conditions [32] is used as shown in Equation 3.6 and Equation 3.7.
⃗ud, wall · ⃗n > 0,
⃗ud, wall = ⃗ud, wall ,
ρd, wall = ρd, wall
(3.6)
⃗ud, wall · ⃗n < 0,
⃗ud, wall = 0,
ρd, wall = 0
(3.7)
Based on the velocity vector computed and the density of the super-cooled water droplets,
the local collection eﬀiciency can be determined as shown in Equation 3.8[11]
β = ρd⃗ud, wall · ⃗n
LWC∞· V∞
(3.8)
3.1.3
Thermodynamic module
As the water droplet hits the surface, the water droplet runs along the surface due to
aerodynamic wall shear stresses. A phase change happens due to convective heat transfer
that turns the thin water film formed into ice. These phenomena are modelled by using
a Shallow Water Icing Model (SWIM), which was used by 2nd generation FENSAP-ICE
model. The water film formed is extremely thin and hence it can be assumed that the
water film thickness would have a linear distribution. As the running of the water on the
surface is propagated by the aerodynamic shear stress component, the average velocity of
the water film ¯Uf can be defined as shown in Equation 3.9, where ⃗τw is the average wall
shear stress of water on the surface.
¯Uf = hf
2µw
⃗τw
(3.9)
Master Thesis
13
==PAGE:22==
The model is governed by two governing equations, Equation 3.10 and Equation 3.11.
ρw
[∂hf
∂t + ∇·
(
hf ¯Uf
)]
= ˙mimp −˙mice
(3.10)
ρw
[∂hfcp,wTs
∂t
+ ∇·
(
hfcp,wTs ¯Uf
)]
= ˙eimp + ˙eice
(3.11)
As can be observed, there are two governing equations but there are three unknowns -
water film thickness, mass of ice and surface temperature. A set of conditional relation is
introduced which acts as a third governing equation providing compatibility to numerical
solution. Three conditional relations are as shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Thermodynamic module flowchart [5]
As seen in Figure 3.2, the module goes through a series of conditions that give a value
for one of the unknowns, reducing the number of unknowns in the equation to two and
making it possible to solve the governing equations.
• Water only - ˙mice = 0
In this case the temperature of the flow field is above 0 Celsius, making ice forma-
tion not possible. Hence, the water film thickness and the surface temperature are
calculated as there is no ice mass.
• Water and Ice - Ts = 0
In this case the surface temperature is 0 degrees Celsius. Hence, there is a possibility
for phase change of the water film to ice. Using Ts = 0 the PDEs are solved to
calculate the ice mass and water film thickness.
• Ice only - hf = 0
In this case, the flow field temperature is well below 0 degrees Celsius.
Hence,
there will be a phase change of the water film into ice. So in this case the water
film thickness is considered as 0 and the ice mass and surface temperature can be
calculated.
14
Master Thesis
==PAGE:23==
3.1.4
Ice Growth Module
One of the key solutions from the thermodynamic module is the ice accretion rate ( ˙mice).
In the ice growth module, the ice thickness is calculated using Equation 3.12. In this study
ρice = 920 kg/m3 is used.
ht =
˙mice∆t
ρice Asur
(3.12)
Figure 3.3: Mesh interpolation upon ice thickness calculations from the cell centre [5]
3.2
Experimental data
[4] conducted a study to validate a numerical ice accretion model with experimental data
taken from the hub of a wind turbine from various sites in Canada. The experiment was
done for eight different weather events. These different weather events have icing climates
with varying ice accretion rates making it useful for comparison with numerical results.
The different icing events conducted in the study, have varying temperatures as shown in
Table A.1.
In this study, for understanding the influence of the parameters, Event 4 is used as a
reference as this event has experimental ice thickness readings from a clean cylinder. For
the events, the initial field reading of the ice thickness does not start from zero.
To
compare with the other events, it is required to do multiple iterations of WISE simulations
using averaged conditions prior to the first measurement and continue modelling till the
Master Thesis
15
==PAGE:24==
computational ice thickness matches with the field result. As this was a very iterative
process with high chances of error (See Appendix A), it was avoided.
Icing Event
Mean Temperature [C]
Mean velocity [m/s]
Mean LWC [g/m3]
Event 4
−2.72925
11.606
0.230
Table 3.1: Climatic conditions of Event 4
3.2.1
Ice thickness measurement
The experiment measured the ice thickness by processing images taken at regular intervals
of 1-minute. The ice thickness is measured from the wall of the cylinder to the maximum
visible ice shape on the x-z plane. That is along the length of the cylinder as shown in
Figure 4.10a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Measurement of ice thickness from experiment done by [4] and WISE simula-
tion measurement
3.3
Computational Mesh
The numerical simulations were run on the OpenFOAM v2112 platform using parallel
computing[33]. The simulations were run using an O-type grid. Structured grids were
used for this study. Structured grid provide precise control of flow around objects with
high gradient flow [34]. For simulations that are not part of the mesh size parameter
analysis, y+ equal to 1 was maintained along the boundary wall. This computed to up
to 1400 points around the domain.
With a total height of 1.0, the domain size used
was 50 times the chord length. The total size of the computational mesh was 131,000
mesh cells. As icing phenomena happen at the wall boundary, it is important to have
good precision around the wall boundary layer. The influence of mesh refinement on icing
will be discussed in greater detail in further sections. A computational time step size of
0.0005s was used for time scaling. This time step size was found to be suﬀiciently accurate
in capture the flow around the cylinder.
k−ω SST turbulence modelling was used. This is a type of RAS simulation that is available
in OpenFOAM. The solver used is a block-coupled density-based solver developed by Oliani
et al.[29]. The solver solves the continuity, momentum and energy equations together in
a coupled manner. The turbulence equations are solved in a segregated manner using
16
Master Thesis
==PAGE:25==
the available OpenFOAM structure, allowing the user the option to choose their desired
models.
Figure 3.5: Structured grid around the cylinder
Figure 3.6: O-type computational domain used in this study
Master Thesis
17
==PAGE:26==
3.4
Selection of parameters
A total of five parameters were selected. To simulate the icing code for low wind speed
and a small geometry is challenging. The spatial discretization around the cylinder di-
rectly influences the ability of the code to capture the boundary layer formed around the
cylinder. Hence the influence of the resolution of the mesh around the cylinder on ice
accretion is studied. Similarly, the computational time step is also an important temporal
discretization parameter in modelling flows around an object. A large time step size can
give computational errors whereas a smaller one would increase the computational cost.
Hence, the computational time step was selected. Another computational parameter is
the size of the domain. A small domain would constrain the flow field, and too large of
a domain would increase the computational cost. The influence of the spatial distances
between boundary conditions is understood.
Apart from the computational parameters, the effect of MVD is selected. The size of the
droplets is unknown in field data. The change in MVD is known to affect the collection
eﬀiciency, which influences the ice mass accreted on the surface. Lastly, the influence of
reducing the icing time and increasing the number of shots is also studied.
18
Master Thesis
==PAGE:27==
4
Results and discussion: Critical
parameters influencing prediction of
ice accretion
In this chapter, the simulation results from studying the different parameters are discussed.
4.1
Effect of Mesh at boundary wall on ice accretion
The cylinder-shaped wall has a high-velocity flow gradient along the wall. At low Reynolds
numbers, the flow around the cylinder becomes complex. Hence, the importance of having
a good mesh resolution directly affects the solution. In the icing model, there are multiple
models whose behaviour to the number of nodes around the cylinder is studied in detail.
Figure 4.1: Ice distribution on the cylinder for varying mesh points on the wall boundary
Figure 4.1 shows the ice formation on the cylinder for increasing the number of nodes
on the cylinder. It can be observed that the ice accretion also increases as the number
of nodes increases. For a simulation with mesh nodes of 400 points, it can be observed
that the ice thickness is within the region of the experimental value, but the arc length of
the ice shape is very small. The arc length having ice formation increases as the number
of mesh points increases. Figure 4.2 shows the influence on the Coeﬀicient of pressure
and convective heat transfer coeﬀicient along the cylinder. It can be noticed that both
coeﬀicients have irregular spikes that are formed on the cylinder. This can be due to the
complex flow dynamics that occur near the boundary wall. However, as seen in Figure 4.2a
on increasing mesh points, the difference between the maximum and minimum value for
heat convective coeﬀicient increases. It slowly converges from 1000 points onwards. A
smaller variation of the convective coeﬀicient indicates a more stable heat transfer process
Master Thesis
19
==PAGE:28==
in the simulation [35]. But as there are fewer points, and a RAS turbulence scheme is
used, the possible reason for this stability can be associated with the high averaging of
local flow dynamics.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: (a)Convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and (b) Coeﬀicient of pressure on the
cylinder for varying mesh points
The same is also noticed in Figure 4.2b, where the variation of pressure coeﬀicient is much
less in the model having smaller mesh number. Indicating that the change in flow along
the cylinder is captured well by the coarse mesh.
The dominant effect in mesh resolution can be seen in the collection eﬀiciency as shown
in Figure 4.3a. A good mesh resolution has a better collection eﬀiciency, which results in
a much better ice-shape formation. In Figure 4.3a it is seen that the model with less than
1000 points has a low collection eﬀiciency. It does not improve much when increasing from
1000 to 1400. It is consistent and has a smooth curve. A small reduction in eﬀiciency is
observed around the arc length of 0.035m, this might be due to stagnation point at the
leading surface of the cylinder. However, for the 1800-point cylinder wall, irregular peaks
are observed near the flow stagnation region in the collection eﬀiciency. This would be
because by having a very fine mesh, the change in flow characteristics which are very local,
might be captured well leading to having these peaks near the stagnation points.
But, these peaks do not affect the ice growth. Figure 4.3b, it can be observed that for the
20
Master Thesis
==PAGE:29==
1800 point model the ice growth is smooth. From Figure 4.3b it can be observed that the
coarse mesh has a large peak in the values. Whereas, the finer meshes converge well and
have very similar ice thickness. The irregular peaks observed in the collection eﬀiciency
for 1800 point mesh do not affect the ice shape formation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) Collection Eﬀiciency and (b) Ice thickness for different Mesh points
Figure 4.4: Type of ice formation on the wall surface for different mesh points
Figure 4.4 show that all the models have modelled a Rime ice case. As per the WISE
Master Thesis
21
==PAGE:30==
model, a value of 3 in the ’surCond’ output variable indicates the modelling of rime ice.
Table 4.1 shows the maximum ice thickness of each case and compares it with the maximum
ice thickness from the Field study. From the table, it might seem as if the error is least
for the model with 600 points. But this is misleading as it can be seen in Figure 4.3b
that the maximum thickness is due to a large peak generated by the model. Models with
1400 and 1800 point can be considered for having closest value. The 1400 model is seen to
underestimate and the 1800 model overestimates. This might be due to other parameters
such as MVD and icing time that is influencing the estimation.
Maximum Ice
thickness [mm]
M = 400
1.9708
M = 600
2.17579
M = 1000
1.994
M = 1400
2.0375
M = 1800
2.4111
Experiment
2.27
Table 4.1: Maximum Ice thickness for simulations with increasing mesh resolution and
field results
4.2
Effect of domain size on ice accretion
Figure 4.5: Ice distribution on the cylinder for different computational domain sizes
In this section, the influence of domain size is analysed on the icing model.
The size
of the domain is known to have a direct influence on the aerodynamic characteristics
and heat transfer problems. Too small of a domain size would lead to having an effect
of constraining the flow field.
This would lead to inaccuracies in the simulations.
A
22
Master Thesis
==PAGE:31==
suﬀiciently large domain size would ideally not have any direct effect on the computational
field from the boundary conditions. As the size of the computational domain increases,
the computational cost also increases. This cost becomes an important consideration as
well for running simulations.
As a general rule of thumb, for aerodynamic simulations, it is recommended to maintain
a domain size that is 20 to 30 times the chord length in all directions. In this study, we
consider four different domain sizes of 20, 30, 40 and 50 times the chord length of the
cylinder.
Figure 4.5 shows the ice shape around the cylinder wall. The variation of the ice shape is
much less for increasing domain size. From visual interpretation, it can be observed that
the largest domain size of 50 times chord produces the smoothest ice shape.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: (a)Convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and (b) Coeﬀicient of pressure on the
cylinder for different domain size
Figure 4.6 shows the heat convective transfer and pressure coeﬀicients.
As these two
parameters represent the convergence of the aerodynamic flow it is important to see their
result. A smooth curve of the coeﬀicients indicates a stable solution field in the simulations.
In the Figure 4.6, it can be observed that the largest domain gives the most stable solution
for the flow around the cylinder. For the smaller domains, irregular peaks are formed
indicating small instabilities of the solution.
Master Thesis
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.7: The turbulent kinetic energy for different domain sizes
As the size of the domain has a direct influence on the flow field, it is important to consider
the stability of the turbulence as well. Figure 4.7 shows the ’k’ variable representing the
rate of the turbulent kinetic energy resolved at the boundary. All four domains seem to
resolve the turbulence around the boundary well. As the smallest domain size is 20 times
the chord, negligible influence is expected and Figure 4.7 aﬀirms that.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: (a) Collection Eﬀiciency and (b) Ice thickness for different domain sizes
24
Master Thesis
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.8 show the collection eﬀiciency and the ice thickness. A domain of size 20 times
the chord shows a small deviation in the curve. But the maximum values of collection
eﬀiciency and ice thickness are almost matching.
Table 4.2 shows that the error between the simulated cases is of the order 10−2. This im-
plies that having a domain size greater than 20 times the chord proves to be suﬀiciently big
enough to resolve flow field and predict the ice thickness. However, it is also observed that
the model largely underestimates the final ice thickness on comparison with experimental
data. This would possibly be largely due to other influencing parameters
Modelling cases
Maximum Ice
thickness [mm]
20C
2.0255
30C
2.0325
40C
2.0317
50C
2.023
Experiment
2.27
Table 4.2: Maximum ice thickness for different domain sizes and field result
4.3
Effect of MVD size on Ice accretion
Mean Volume Diameter (MVD) is one of the most important parameters in an icing model.
MVD provides the average size of the droplets. The size of the droplet directly affects
rate of ice accretion. Larger water droplets would lead to the possibility of having glaze
ice formation and small droplet size would have a higher probability of forming rime ice
type.
Figure 4.9: Ice distribution over the cylinder wall for different MVDs
Figure 4.9 shows the ice shape formed on the cylinder. It can be observed from figure that
Master Thesis
25
==PAGE:34==
as the size for water droplet increases, the ice accretion also increases.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: (a)Convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and (b) Coeﬀicient of pressure on the
cylinder for different MVD values
Figure 4.10 shows that the MVD does not affect the convective heat transfer coeﬀicient
and pressure coeﬀicient.
This is as expected as the MVD input is not a part of the
aerodynamic module. The influence of MVD would be seen in the implementation of the
droplet trajectory module, thermodynamic module and ice growth module.
26
Master Thesis
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.11 shows the collection eﬀiciency and the ice thickness along the cylinder wall.
From Figure 4.11a, it can be observed that as MVD size increases, the collection eﬀiciency
also increases. From Yee et al.[11], it is known the that diameter of the droplet influ-
ences the eﬀiciency. As the collection eﬀiciency increases, the ice growth also increases.
Figure 4.11b shows the same, whereas MVD size is increasing the ice growth increases.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: (a) Collection Eﬀiciency and (b) Ice thickness for different MVD sizes of
droplets
Master Thesis
27
==PAGE:36==
4.4
Effect of computational time step on ice accretion
The computational time step is an important parameter while running the simulations.
Icing inherently is a transient process, involving ice formation and growth. The super-
cooled water droplet undergoes phase change through the process of heat transfer and
time-dependent fluid surface interaction. A smaller time step would be able to calculate
the heat exchange and phase change with better precision, improving the accuracy of the
solution. A suitable time step ensures that the model can accurately capture the evolution
of ice formation on the surface and changes in surface roughness and shape.
In this study, a suitable time step for the model is also analysed. Ideally, it would be
beneficial to have an extremely small time step. However, the computational cost would
not be feasible as decreasing the time step would increase the number of iterations hence,
increasing the computational time.
Four different time steps are considered. Starting from a large time of 0.1s and decreasing
it by the order of 1 and for the fourth simulation, the time step is reduced by a factor of
two from 0.001s.
Figure 4.12: Ice distribution on cylinder wall for different time step sizes
Figure 4.12 shows the ice distribution on the cylinder wall. It can be seen that the large
time step has a very large distribution. As the time step decreases the ice distribution
seems to converge well.
Figure 4.13 shows the influence of the time step in capturing the flow field around the
cylinder. In Figure 4.13a, it can be seen that for the large time step size of 0.1s and
0.01s, the model is unable to calculate the coeﬀicient of pressure along the cylinder wall.
This implies that the pressure gradient is not resolved accurately, hence the ice accretion
prediction is not reliable for the two models.
28
Master Thesis
==PAGE:37==
It is observed that the other two models having a time step of 0.001s and 0.0005s show
stable solutions of the coeﬀicients. Indicating that the flow field is suﬀiciently resolved.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13: (a)Convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and (b) Coeﬀicient of pressure on the
cylinder different time-step sizes
To understand the impact on ice calculation Figure 4.14 is taken into consideration. For
the simulation case with a large time step of 0.1s, the collection eﬀiciency is seen to be
60%. The ice growth for the case is observed to be overestimated in comparison with
experimental data (4.3). It can be concluded that such a large time step yields poor ice
Master Thesis
29
==PAGE:38==
estimation, as the model is unable to capture the pressure gradient on the wall boundary.
Leading to an ice distribution that is distributed along the cylinder wall more than the
smaller time step cases. Hence, the ice thickness estimation can be disregarded as the
capability to capture the pressure gradient and flow characteristics for such a low Reynolds
number simulation is critical.
Considering the next smaller time steps, 0.01s and 0.001s. The two simulations produce
very similar solutions. Considering the convective coeﬀicients and pressure coeﬀicients,
it can be seen that the flow field solution is similar. The distribution of local collection
eﬀiciency and ice thickness are also very similar. The maximum ice thickness differs by
0.02 mm. This is a very small increase in ice accretion when decreasing the time step by
an order of 2. Whereas, for t = 0.0005s, the maximum ice thickness is seen to be 2.023
mm. The ice accretion is seen to increase by 0.043 mm.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14: (a) Collection Eﬀiciency and (b) Ice thickness for different computational
time-step sizes
The possible explanation for this could be due to the fine precision that a smaller time step
provides. Comparing the cases of 0.01s, 0.001s and 0.0005s in Figure 4.13 and Figure 4.14,
30
Master Thesis
==PAGE:39==
it can be observed that for the convective heat transfer coeﬀicient and pressure coeﬀicient,
the three cases converge well. Whereas considering collection eﬀiciency and ice thickness
distribution, there are differences in the solution. The local collection eﬀiciency improves
for the smaller time step of 0.0005s.
This variation of results from the aerodynamic module to the phase change calculation can
be due to the configuration of the modules. The aerodynamic module is a coupled solver
that solves all the Jacobian equations simultaneously[29]. As mentioned in the previous
section, the coupled solver allows the solution to be converging at a much larger time step.
Hence, reducing the number of iterations and the computational cost. However the other
modules, still require a smaller time step for local heat exchange and phase calculations.
Due to this, an improvement in results is observed for smaller time steps, with increasing
collection eﬀiciency and decreasing error with experimental results.
Modelling cases
Maximum Ice
thickness [mm]
t = 0.1s
2.407
t = 0.01s
1.961
t = 0.001s
1.9801
t = 0.0005s
2.023
Experiment
2.27
Table 4.3: Maximum Ice thickness for different time step sizes
4.5
Effect of number of shots on ice accretion
In all the above cases, the icing simulations have been run as single-shot cases with an
icing time of 30 minutes for all cases. In this section, the effect of this icing time and
multiple shots of icing is studied.
A total of three cases are analysed. 2 shot case implies an icing time of 15 minutes and 3
shot case implies an icing time of 10 minutes. For this analysis, an MVD size of 25 was
used. This was done based on the MVD parameter analysis, that an MVD of 25 had much
less error compared to an MVD of 20. This leads to an overestimation of results instead
of an underestimation as seen in the previous sections.
Figure 4.15 shows the ice thickness distribution for the three cases around the cylinder.
From Figure 4.15 it can be observed that multi-shot cases have much smoother ice distri-
bution around the stagnation point. By increasing the number of shots, the icing model
seems to capture the fluctuations in the flow based on the improved ice shape around the
stagnation point.
Master Thesis
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.15: Ice distribution for different icing times
Observing the maximum ice thickness in Table 4.4, it can be seen that all three cases
overestimate the final thickness by a significant error margin. This is expected due to the
increase in MVD size. However, it is also observed that as the number of shots increases,
the maximum ice thickness is also increasing. This possible explanation for this can be
due to the relation between the leading edge of the object and the collection eﬀiciency.
In the multi-shot case after the first shot, when proceeding for the second shot after
updating the grid; the leading edge profile changes due to ice growth. A small leading
edge would be formed which would influence the aerodynamic characteristic of the flow.
As the size of the chord is comparatively small compared to a general wind turbine blade,
a small ice accretion would influence the calculations. So after the first shot, the ice shape
would affect the pressure gradient, possibly resulting in a smaller stagnation region.
Bertin et al.[36] says that the roundness of an object at the leading edge affects the flow
around the object. A more round shape leading edge gives smoother flow around the
object delaying the flow separation that occurs at the stagnation point. As the leading
edge surface becomes narrower the flow separation is delayed and occurs much faster,
leading to a larger pressure gradient. So the roundness of the cylinder would provide a
stable stagnation point in a laminar flow field.
So comparing the three cases, the case with a total of 3 shots has the largest ice thickness.
For each shot after ice accretion, the arc length of the cylinder increases slightly. This
results in a small increase in surface length where the droplet can interact with the surface.
An increase in droplet impingement area would also increase the collection eﬀiciency. This
results in an increase of ice mass accreted as well on the cylinder. This possibly explains
the increase in ice thickness seen in Table 4.4.
32
Master Thesis
==PAGE:41==
IcingdT
Maximum Ice
thickness [mm]
3shot
2.89351
2shot
2.6918
1shot
2.6585
Experiment
2.27
Table 4.4: Maximum Ice thickness for simulation cases with multiple shots and Field result
Figure 4.16: Ice growth for 3-shot case
4.6
Defining the most suitable model and comparison with
experimental case
Based on the parametric analysis from previous sections, a suitable configuration of the
model can be proposed.
The resolution of the mesh around the boundary is a critical parameter. It was found that
it is important to maintain a y+ value equal to or less than 1. With a y+ value greater than
1, the ice distribution on the wall boundary was low and the thickness was underestimated.
Hence, in this case for a cylinder with a diameter of 2 cm, it is recommended to have at
least 1400 node points on the cylinder wall. It is possible to have more based on user
preference, however, it would increase the computational cost as well.
To ensure a stable flow field that is not constrained, the size of the domain is important.
It was found that a change in domain size did not affect the ice simulation by a high
margin. The change in maximum ice thickness magnitude was in the order of 10−2. On
increasing domain size improvement was observed in the stability of the heat convective
and press coeﬀicients. So depending on the computational power a user has, a suﬀiciently
large domain size is beneficial. From this analysis, the largest simulated domain size of 50
times chord is proposed for the computational domain.
Master Thesis
33
==PAGE:42==
The computational time step is seen to affect the accuracy significantly. A large time step
does not capture the flow characteristics accurately and creates an inaccurate solution.
A small time step is ideal. But, it increases the total computational time significantly.
To get a good ice thickness, the time step size of 0.0005s is proposed. It had a total
computational time of 6 hours on 6 computational nodes. The availability of up to 30
computational nodes aided in reducing the computational speed of the simulations.
The MVD is seen to be the most important parameter in icing simulations. The change in
MVD values by a magnitude of 5 had a significant change in ice thickness formation. Based
on the parametric analysis, the correct MVD value for the ice thickness was expected to
be between 20 and 25. Through interpolation and cross-checking with simulations, it was
found that an MVD of 23 gave the most accurate solution.
Using this, a comparative study was done, by selecting the experimental data of Event
4. Using an icing time of 30 minutes the simulations were done over three shots to see
the ice growth over time and its accuracy with experimental data. Figure 4.17 shows the
growth of ice over 1.5 hours of icing time simulation. As the number of shots increases, the
ice prediction is starting to underestimate. This possible reason for this underestimation
could be due to the comparatively large icing time that has been used. Montminy et al.[4]
have used an icing time of 1 minute in their LEWICE simulations. The 1-minute icing
time interval was able to capture the variability of ice growth from field data. Reducing
the icing time, has been observed in this study to increase the ice thickness prediction of
the WISE solver as seen in Table 4.4. This might lead to an overestimation of the ice
thickness value. The solution of simulation conducted by Montminy et al.[4] for the same
climatic event shows that the LEWICE model used, overestimates the ice thickness for all
models in the initial phase of icing.
Figure 4.17: Comparison of simulated maximum ice thickness with Experiment results for
1.5 hours
34
Master Thesis
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.18: The final simulated ice shape for Climatic event 4
The results from Figure 4.17 and Montminy et al.[4] give an insight into the importance
of icing time. For this simulation model, based on the recommendation given by [25] the
maximum recommended icing time is 111s. However, if this icing time is used, the number
of iterations of grid updating would also increase significantly. Finding the appropriate
icing time hence is a challenging aspect of icing simulations.
Master Thesis
35
==PAGE:44==
5
Conclusion and Future Work
Numerical modelling is an advantageous method to understand the icing phenomena on
surfaces due to atmospheric conditions. It allows a better understanding of the formation
of ice shapes under different conditions. This project deals with understanding the critical
parameters that affect ice predictions on a cylinder.
Experimental data was used to
compare the numerical predictions.
This project utilised the CFD icing code called WISE developed at DTU[5]. The icing
code is structured into four different modules, to model the different stages of ice accretion
on a surface. The first module, the aerodynamic module predicts the flow field around
the cylinder in the computational domain. The second module, the droplet field module,
uses the velocity vectors calculated from the aerodynamic module to calculate the droplet
trajectory. As the water droplets collide with the surface the phase change is calculated
by the thermodynamic module using the SWIM model to model the water film formed on
the surface. The thermodynamic module then calculates the ice accretion rate, which is
then used to predict the final ice shape in the last module.
It was observed that the performance of the aerodynamic module has a prominent influ-
ence from the computational parameters such as boundary mesh points and domain size.
The convergence of the Heat convective coeﬀicient and the pressure coeﬀicient along the
boundary wall were more affected by these control parameters. A suﬀiciently large domain
and maintaining a mesh resolution of 3.35e −05 (1400 nodes) improved the modelling of
the flow field, improving the ice predictions significantly. Using a coupled solver for the
aerodynamic solution meant that the flow field could converge at a large time step. A
large time step for phase change calculations and ice growth was observed to produce ice
predictions with more error. Decreasing the time step increased the computational time
as well. It was suggested during this study, that a time step size of 0.0005s would be
an ideal time step size as the accuracy of results was good and with the help of parallel
computing, the computational time was not long.
The effect of MVD on the icing simulation can be considered the most significant. The
change in MVD had a direct influence on the ice mass accreted on the cylinder. A large
MVD value showed a significantly large ice mass formed on the cylinder. This parameter
was one of the most sensitive parameters as a small change in value led to a large difference
in the ice formed. As experimental data from the field did not have an MVD value, getting
the precise MVD value for the model was critical and challenging.
Another critical parameter analysed in this study was the icing time of each shot. The
icing time affected the ability of the model to capture the variability of the field data. An
extended icing time tends to average the icing accretion rates out, suggesting the need for
careful consideration of this parameter to enhance the model.
From this study, it can be concluded that the critical parameters, MVD and icing time
are challenging to model accurately. When comparing with experimental data from real
wind turbine sites, the large variability of the data makes it challenging to accurately set
the values. This analysis was done for one climatic event. It is possible that the MVD
values may not be accurate for any other climatic event.
For future work, it would be beneficial to understand the effect of ice accretion on the
calculation of chords on the model after grid updating for the second shot. When the ice
36
Master Thesis
==PAGE:45==
thickness reaches a significant height, it becomes necessary to recalculate all chord-related
inputs to the icing code. A better understanding of how the size of the chord influences ice
accretion would be beneficial. As seen in Figure 4.17, the difference between the simulated
result and the field data is seen to deviate over time. By reducing this deviation it would
be possible to have a well-validated WISE model for low Reynolds flow as well.
Master Thesis
37
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
Global Wind Energy Council. “GWEC Global Wind Report 2023”. In: Global Wind
Energy Council: Bonn, Germany (2023).
[2]
Ville Lehtomaki. “Emerging from the cold”. In: Wind Power Mon 29 (2016).
[3]
Zhandos Baizhuma, Taeseong Kim, and Chankyu Son. “Numerical method to pre-
dict ice accretion shapes and performance penalties for rotating vertical axis wind
turbines under icing conditions”. In: Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial
Aerodynamics 216 (2021), p. 104708. issn: 0167-6105. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1016/j.jweia.2021.104708. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167610521001896.
[4]
Daryl Plante Montminy et al. “Validation of a numerical ice accretion model on a
wind turbine with high-resolution field data”. In: Cold Regions Science and Technol-
ogy 201 (2022), p. 103620.
[5]
Chankyu Son and Taeseong Kim. “Development of an icing simulation code for ro-
tating wind turbines”. In: Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics
203 (2020), p. 104239.
[6]
René Cattin et al. “13. WIND ENERGY PROJECTS IN COLD CLIMATES”. In:
().
[7]
Yiqiang Han, Jose Palacios, and Sven Schmitz. “Scaled ice accretion experiments
on a rotating wind turbine blade”. In: Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial
Aerodynamics 109 (2012), pp. 55–67. issn: 0167-6105. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1016/j.jweia.2012.06.001. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167610512001870.
[8]
Lasse Makkonen et al. “Modelling and prevention of ice accretion on wind turbines”.
In: Wind engineering 25.1 (2001), pp. 3–21.
[9]
Lorenzo Battisti. “Icing on Wind Turbines”. PhD thesis. Università degli Studi di
Udine, 2013.
[10]
Roger W Gent, Nicholas P Dart, and James T Cansdale. “Aircraft icing”. In: Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Phys-
ical and Engineering Sciences 358.1776 (2000), pp. 2873–2911.
[11]
Kwanjung Yee. “Numerical Modeling and Its Application to Inflight Icing”. In: Ice
Adhesion: Mechanism, Measurement and Mitigation (2020), pp. 607–667.
[12]
H. Seifert. “Additional Loads Caused by Ice on Rotor Blades During Operation.” In:
Proceedings. LIDO-Berichtsjahr=1990, 1990. url: https://elib.dlr.de/39886/.
[13]
L Talhaug et al. “Study on Wind Energy Projects in Cold Climates”. In: International
Energy Agency Programme, Helsinki (2005).
[14]
Abdel Salam Y Alsabagh et al. “A review of the effects of ice accretion on the
structural behavior of wind turbines”. In: Wind Engineering 37.1 (2013), pp. 59–70.
[15]
Anders Stenberg and Hannele Holttinen. “Analysing failure statistics of wind tur-
bines in Finland”. In: European Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition 2010,
EWEC 2010. European Wind Energy Association (EWEA). 2010, pp. 3985–3995.
[16]
Albara Mustafa, Abbas Barabadi, and Tore Markeset. “Risk assessment of wind farm
development in ice proven area”. In: POAC Conferences. 2019.
[17]
H Seifert. “Glacial period for rotor blades; Rotorblaetter, eiskalt erwischt”. In: DEWI-
Magazin 5 (1996).
[18]
Bengt Tammelin et al. “Wind energy production in cold climates (WECO): Project
report”. In: (2000).
38
Master Thesis
==PAGE:47==
[19]
E Echavarria et al. “Reliability of wind turbine technology through time”. In: (2008).
[20]
Timo Laakso et al. “State-of-the-art of wind energy in cold climates”. In: IEA annex
XIX 24 (2003), p. 53.
[21]
William B Wright, RW Gent, and Didier Guffond. DRA/NASA/ONERA collabora-
tion on icing research. Tech. rep. 1997.
[22]
Lasse Makkonen. “Heat transfer and icing of a rough cylinder”. In: Cold regions
science and technology 10.2 (1985), pp. 105–116.
[23]
Bernard L Messinger. “Equilibrium temperature of an unheated icing surface as a
function of air speed”. In: Journal of the aeronautical sciences 20.1 (1953), pp. 29–42.
[24]
William J Jasinski et al. “Wind turbine performance under icing conditions”. In:
(1998).
[25]
Gary A Ruff and Brian M Berkowitz. Users manual for the NASA Lewis ice accretion
prediction code (LEWICE). Tech. rep. 1990.
[26]
Thomas Reid et al. “FENSAP-ICE simulation of icing on wind turbine blades, part
1: performance degradation”. In: 51st AIAA aerospace sciences meeting including
the new horizons forum and aerospace exposition. 2013, p. 750.
[27]
Philippe Spalart and Steven Allmaras. “A one-equation turbulence model for aero-
dynamic flows”. In: 30th aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit. 1992, p. 439.
[28]
Gary A Ruff and Brian M Berkowitz. Users manual for the NASA Lewis ice accretion
prediction code (LEWICE). Tech. rep. 1990.
[29]
Stefano Oliani, Nicola Casari, and Mauro Carnevale. “ICSFoam: An OpenFOAM
library for implicit coupled simulations of high-speed flows”. In: Computer Physics
Communications 286 (2023), p. 108673.
[30]
Tobias Knopp, Bernhard Eisfeld, and Javier Bartolome Calvo. “A new extension for
k–ω turbulence models to account for wall roughness”. In: International Journal of
Heat and Fluid Flow 30.1 (2009), pp. 54–65.
[31]
B Aupoix. “Wall roughness modelling with kw STT model”. In: 10th International
ERCOFTAC Symposium on Engineering Turbulence Modelling and Measurements.
2014.
[32]
Yihua Cao, Q Zhang, and John Sheridan. “Numerical simulation of rime ice accre-
tions on an aerofoil using an Eulerian method”. In: The aeronautical journal 112.1131
(2008), pp. 243–249.
[33]
Christopher J Greenshields. “OpenFOAM programmer’s guide”. In: OpenFOAM
Foundation Ltd (2015).
[34]
Charles Hirsch. “Chapter 6 - Structured and Unstructured Grid Properties”. In:
Numerical Computation of Internal and External Flows (Second Edition). Ed. by
Charles Hirsch. Second Edition. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007, pp. 249–
277. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-075066594-0/50047-3.
[35]
Frank P Incropera et al. Fundamentals of heat and mass transfer. Vol. 6. Wiley New
York, 1996.
[36]
John J Bertin and Michael L Smith. “Aerodynamics for Engineers, Prentice-Hall”.
In: Inc., New Jersey (1998).
Master Thesis
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Master Thesis
==PAGE:49==
A
Appendix
A.1
Climatic conditions from field data [4]
Table A.1 shows all the climatic events and their mean temperature
Icing Event
Mean Temperature [C]
Mean wind velocity [m/s]
Mean LWC [g/m3]
Event 1
−3.32
18.869
0.066
Event 2
−3.29
8.671
0.238
Event 3
−5.2965
9.1035
0.181
Event 4
−2.72925
11.606
0.230
Event 5
−8.35
8.5246
0.0633
Event 6
−6.29247
11.24
0.1099
Event 7
−9.34
11.056
0.134128
Event 8
−1.84
10.724
0.10727
Table A.1: All available climatic conditions
A.2
WISE simulations of other climatic events using 1
hour icing time
Multiple climatic conditions were simulated over the duration of this project. An attempt
was made to validate the WISE model for multiple climatic events. To validate the model
with the field data, 1 hour icing time was chosen and simulated.
These results had converging issues as the ice kept growth happened due to poor mesh
quality in some cases (Figure A.5). Ice horns were observed when the orientation of the
wind changes, as seen in Figure A.4.
Figure A.1: WISE simulation of Event 1
Master Thesis
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.2: WISE simulation of Event 3
Figure A.3: WISE simulation of Event 5
42
Master Thesis
==PAGE:51==
Figure A.4: WISE simulation of Event 6
Figure A.5: WISE simulation of Event 7
Master Thesis
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.6: WISE simulation of Event 8
A.2.1
Comparison of Ice thickness with field data
The large time step size is seen to deviate by a large margin from the field data
Figure A.7: WISE simulation of Event 1
44
Master Thesis
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.8: WISE simulation of Event 6
Master Thesis
45
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
