==PAGE:1==
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Íris Björk Snorradóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Compute, Human­Centered Arti­
ficial Intelligence at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Íris Björk Snorradóttir ­ s212461
Signature
March 10, 2024
Date
ii
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Face verification often fails due to a large age difference between a person and their photo.
Advances in the field of simulating facial aging are also important when it comes to identi­
fying missing individuals that for example have been missing for a large period. This study
researches the possibility of using Latent Diffusion Models to perform age manipulation
of facial images, i.e. age regression and age progression. The use of Latent Diffusion
Models allows for customizing its conditioning procedure. The conditioning takes in labels
that will give the model more information about the input image and using inference does
have the option of manipulating the conditioning factor. The methods explored in the con­
dition procedure are MagFace face embeddings to preserve the identity of an individual
and a one­hot encoder to represent the age of the individual. This research shows that
a one­hot encoder can be used with success to perform age manipulation on individuals.
Taking a look at the evaluation procedure the model was able to generate images with
moderate visual quality and it was able to preserve identity for a range of ages. Estimating
the age of the generated images the data points from the age estimation of the generated
images and the real image database follow the same trend, having difficulty estimating
age for underrepresented ages. This study does show promising results in using Latent
Diffusion Models in the field of age simulation.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Íris Björk Snorradóttir, MSc Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
I would like to express how thankful I am for my supervisors for providing great help and
feedback that provided valuable support in the process of researching and writing this
thesis.
Marcel Grimmer, Supervisor
Christoph Busch, Supervisor
iv
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Latent diffusion model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The one­hot encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Facial embeddings as a factor in conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Data
10
4
Experiments and Results
15
4.1
Experiment 1: One­Hot Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Experiment 2: One­Hot Encoding and MagFace face embeddings
. . . . . 19
4.3
Experiment 3: MagFace face embeddings and scaled One­hot encoding . . 23
5
Evaluation
27
5.1
Age prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Visual Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
Identity preservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Future work and Limitations
38
6.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.2
Further work with one­hot encoder and MagFace face embeddings . . . . . 38
6.3
Different method for age conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7
Conclusion
40
Bibliography
42
A Repository
45
B Dissimilarity score distribution by Age Difference in Experiment 3
46
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The motivation for this work is that face verification often fails due to age difference in
photos being to large. It is known that facial aging will result in decreased performance of
face recognition systems. Therefor, it is important to keep evolving the systems to better
handle age variations to stand the test of time. Generative state­of­the­art models often
struggle with preserving the facial identity of individuals when simulating their age [1, 2,
3].
Face aging in humans happens as a result from physical, psychological, and social change,
which all affect the appearance of a human face. Aging appears in bone growth through­
out childhood and puberty, while it appears in skin­related effects as humans grow older.
Aging variations is also different for each individual and it can occur slowly from the age
20­60, and more rapidly when an individual is between 0­20 and 60+. Face aging also
depends on many other factors such as the environment that the individual is in while
growing up [4, 5].
The accuracy of face recognition systems decreases over time from when the reference
image was taken. When more than 10 years have passed the face recognition algorithms
start to fail in identifying individuals. Experiments have shown that age gaps when an in­
dividual is under 20 years of age and over 60 years the algorithm becomes more sensitive
to the age gap [6].
Advances in the field of simulating facial age for people could be important work when
identifying people who have been missing for a long period of time. This could also be
important in identifying fugitives that have been missing for some time. Building a system
that is highly robust to age variations does require a large dataset containing images of
individuals that have been photographed over many years [1].
There is a need to improve the simulation of facial aging for biometric systems and this
project’s goal is to explore Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) as a potential for this field of
study. The goal of this research is to address the following research questions:
1. How effective are Latent Diffusion Models in simulating facial aging?
2. How well can state­of­the­art facial recognition systems identify an individual over
time? Does the generated age­manipulated image represent the same person?
3. Can the model be used to improve age simulation concerning for example missing
persons/children?
4. How flexible is the model to variations in the input data, for example, ethnicity? Does
the model perform as well when looking at under­represented groups?
The method used in this work is a Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) proposed in the paper
High­Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models [7] and it’s repository is
used as a backbone for the LDM trained in this work. The conditioning of the model
will be changed to be conditioned on age using one­hot­encoding and MagFace face
embeddings. The methodology is explained in detail in Chapter 2.
The dataset used for training the model is a sub­sample of three databases: AgeDB [8],
MORPH Commercial Set [9], and a private database that is focused on children and young
adults that was provided by the Norwegian Biometrics Lab at the Norwegian University
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
1
==PAGE:10==
of Science and Technology. The data used for this research is explained in more detail
in Chapter 3. The experiments and results are reported in Chapter 4, with a section on
implementation details. The evaluation part of this work is split into three parts: Age
Prediction, Visual Quality and Identity Preservation. This is explained in more detail in
Chapter 5. Finally, Future work and Conclusion are reported in chapters 6 and 7.
2
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Related work
This section will discuss the related work that has been done in the field of Face Age
Manipulation and Latent Diffusion Models.
1.1.1
Face Age Manipulation with Conditional Generative Adversarial
Network
A lot of research has been done in the field of face age manipulation, both in images and
videos and by using many types of deep learning models.
In recent years generative adversarial networks (GANs) and conditional GANs (cGANs)
have been used to simulate facial aging. Those methods have delivered great results
but they still cannot meet some important requirements of face aging, that being image
quality, aging accuracy and preserving identity. When the age gap becomes too large it
generates blurry images. cGANs have been shown to struggle with maintaining a balance
between aging and preserving identity, which leads to the identity of the individual in the
generated image to be lost [10].
1.1.2
Face Aging impact on Recognition Systems
Age will change the appearance of a person through time, from infancy and to an old age,
this will result in reduced accuracy of face recognition [2].
Many things change the appearance of a person for many different reasons over time.
That can be for example wrinkles, skin texture, weight loss and gain and changes in the
shape of the face. All of those changes lead to the performance of a face recognition
system to decrease. One of the problems with studying the effects that aging has on
a persons appearance is that there are not many databases available with images of a
person aging which poses as a problem when training a model of a large scale [3].
Predicting how a person looked in the past and how they will look in the future is a chal­
lenge where it is important to preserve identity while manipulating the age of an individual.
The field of face aging manipulation still has a lot of challenges, one being data collection
[11].
1.1.3
Latent Diffusion Models
Latent Diffusion Models have been explored for various problems of the world and has
been proven successful [7]. Latent Diffusion Models have been used for creative use, for
example by using the conditioning ’text­to­image’. This allows for a user to write a text
and the model generates an image based on that text. The images generated from the
model are highly detailed and realistic. Figure 1.1 shows examples of images generated
from a text using a Latent Diffusion Model.
For photo editing, Latent Diffusion Models have been used to remove unwanted parts of an
image and reconstruct the image where the unwanted part was located. As seen in Figure
1.2, an item has been removed and the image has been reconstructed in great quality
using an inpainting model created and explained in a research report High­Resolution
Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models [7].
Latent Diffusion Models can be used to work towards solving some of the world’s prob­
lems, they have a lot of potential and use cases that maybe have not been thought of yet.
Figure 1.1 and 1.2 show examples of what the Latent Diffusion Model, which is used as
a backbone in this research, can do.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1:
Text­To­Image examples generated from Latent Diffusion Model from:
https://github.com/CompVis/latent­diffusion
Figure 1.2: Reconstruction algorithm generated example using Latent Diffusion Model
from: https://github.com/CompVis/latent­diffusion
4
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:13==
2
Methodology
This chapter is dedicated to diving into the methodology of the Latent Diffusion Model
used for this work. The methods used for the conditioning process of the model training
and age manipulation are explained.
2.1
Latent diffusion model
The model used in this work is a Latent Diffusion Model proposed in the paper High­
Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models [7]. Training a diffusion model
can be very costly in regard to computation time and energy resources. The model used,
makes use of an auto­encoding model which learns from a space that is perceptually
equivalent to the image space, but its computational complexity has been significantly
reduced.
Diffusion Models are probabilistic models that are designed to learn a distribution of data
p(x), where x is the input image. It works by gradually denoising a variable that is normally
distributed. The process is described visually in Figure 2.1.
Figure
2.1:
Latent
Diffusion
Model
Architecture
retrieved
from:
https://github.com/CompVis/latent­diffusion
The model starts by encoding a low­dimensional latent representation of an input image
using an encoder ε. The process works in the latent space which is defined by the encoder,
rather than working in the pixel space like traditional diffusion approaches do [12]. The
next step is adding Gaussian noise to the image, which is a part of the diffusion process.
The image goes from z to zT , where T represents the number of noising steps added
to the image. zT is then passed through the denoising process using the U­Net model,
which is the process that the model uses to learn the reconstruction from noise to image
domain. Finally, z is parsed to pixel space from the latent space using the decoder, D.
This model allows for conditioning, which in the case of this research will be conditioned
on the age of a person in the image. The conditioning procedure uses cross­attention
mechanisms for integrating and manipulating age information [7].
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
5
==PAGE:14==
The model gives options for different kinds of regularization, used to avoid high­variance
latent spaces. The chosen regularization is V Q −reg, which uses a vector quantization
layer inside of the decoder [13]. In Figure 2.2 the diffusion process of three randomly
selected facial images is shown.
Figure 2.2: Diffusion rows of three individuals
In Figure 2.3 the progressive rows where the denoising process takes place is visualized.
Figure 2.3: Progressive rows of three individuals
The repository for the recently published paper High­Resolution Image Synthesis with La­
tent Diffusion Models 1 was used as a backbone for this project, where the cross­attention
mechanism was customized to condition the facial image denoising process with a target
age. The repository for the previously mentioned paper was cloned and the architecture of
the model was used without any changes. Hyperparameter tuning was conducted, such
as learning rate, number of timesteps, attention resolution, batch size, and more that is
described in detail in Chapter 4. The conditioning design was created from scratch. The
1https://github.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion
6
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:15==
model is then trained on databases that are described in the Data chapter of this thesis.
Like other types of generative models, diffusion models are capable of modeling condi­
tional distributions of the form p(x|y), where x is the input image and y is the information
that is to be used for the conditioning. This allows for controlling the synthesis process
through the inputs y. In the case of this research, the code is changed to be condi­
tioned on age which will be detailed in the next sections. The conditioning mechanisms
are made more flexible by augmenting their underlying UNet backbone with the cross­
attention mechanism [14, 7].
The data used for the experiments are from three databases that all include manually
collected facial images. The title of the images includes the age of the individual when
the image was taken. The titles will be extracted and used as information for the con­
ditioning process. Two of these databases have been proven suitable when performing
experiments on age­invariant face verification, age estimation, and face age progression.
The criteria for choosing a dataset for this experiment is that there needs to be a large
amount of facial images in it and it needs to have an age label.
Generated images from the model will create a new dataset containing synthetic identities
with mated samples over a wide age range. The model was trained multiple times with
different conditioning techniques, databases, and hyperparameter tuning.
2.2
The one­hot encoder
For the age conditioning a method called one­hot­encoding was used, which is widely
known in machine learning practices. This is a process where categorical variables are
represented as binary vectors. The integer representation of the image label, which in this
case is the age of an individual. There the age variable is removed and a binary variable
is added for each unique integer value [15]. The one­hot encoding is implemented to
represent age from 1 ­ 101, that means that each age is transformed into a binary vector
of length 101.
Following is an example of how the one­hot encoding vector looks in the conditioning part
of the model for ages 1, 2, and 101.
Age 1:

100
0 0 · · · 0
|
{z
}
100 zeros

Age 2:

0
100
0 0 · · · 0
|
{z
}
99 zeros

...
...
Age 101:

0 0 · · · 0
|
{z
}
100 zeros
100

In Figure 2.4 the changes to the Latent Diffusion Model are demonstrated.
The one­hot encoded vector can be edited during the inference stage to manipulate the
age of an individual.
2.3
Facial embeddings as a factor in conditioning
This section goes into the role of facial embeddings in improving the performance of the
latent diffusion model. A facial embedding was added to the conditioning part of the
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure
2.4:
Latent
Diffusion
Model
Architecture
retrieved
from:
https://github.com/CompVis/latent­diffusion with changes to conditioning
model. A state­of­the­art facial recognition tool called MagFace was used to extract fa­
cial embeddings of the images in the database. MagFace was developed to enhance
face recognition systems by incorporating face quality assessment into the identity fea­
ture learning process [16]. By using these MagFace embedding techniques, the aim was
to enhance the model’s ability to process and recognize facial identity features to hope­
fully enhance its ability to preserve the identity of an individual as its age regresses or
progresses. By using MagFace it adds a new dimension of analysis to the model.
The integration of MagFace into the model involves extracting facial embeddings of all
images in the database. These embeddings were then concatenated with the one­hot­
encoded vector and used as inputs in the conditioning layer of the model. This guides the
model in generating and recognizing facial features.
For the model to be motivated enough to learn the age part of the conditioning, a scaled
version of the one­hot encoded vector is utilized. As part of this thesis, extensive hyperpa­
rameter tuning was conducted, leading to an empirically chosen scaling factor of X used
for the best­performing model. In the example below a scaling factor is set to 100.
Age 1:

100
0 0 · · · 0
|
{z
}
100 zeros

Age 2:

0
100
0 0 · · · 0
|
{z
}
99 zeros

...
...
Age 101:

0 0 · · · 0
|
{z
}
100 zeros
100

With this change, the design of the conditional process in the model architecture has been
changed as described in Figure 2.5
8
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:17==
Figure
2.5:
Latent
Diffusion
Model
Architecture
retrieved
from:
https://github.com/CompVis/latent­diffusion with changes to conditioning
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Data
A problem with training a model such as the Latent Diffusion Model based on facial images
and age labels is obtaining good enough data. A search was conducted to find databases
that include facial images as well as age labels. The premise of the data being good is
to have age labels, good visual quality, and diversity. It is not possible to find databases
where a subject has been photographed each year from age 1 to 101, which would of
course be ideal. The data used for this project are three databases all containing facial
images of people of different ages. Those databases are: AgeDB [8], MORPH Commer­
cial Set [9], and a private database that is focused on children and young adults that was
provided by a Norweigan Biometrics group.
The initial database used for training was a dataset called MORPH provided by super­
visors, with age labels. There are approximately 160K facial images of real individuals
in this database. The issue with this dataset is that the age groups 1­20 and 60­101 are
very underrepresented, which is a problem when training a model from ages 1 ­ 101 which
highly depends on the age information. Figure 3.1 shows how the age is distributed in the
MORPH database.
Figure 3.1: Distribution of Age for the MORPH Database
There are 0 images for the age group 1­10 and only 4 for 81­101, which is a problem for
this large of a database. When taking a quick look into the database another problem was
a misrepresentation of the age information, some images were clearly of a person over
50 but got the label 10. This among other things was the reason for filtering out images
in the database, which will be explained better later on in this chapter.
An open­source database called AgeDB was added to the dataset. The version of AgeDB
used has 12.240 images collected from recognizable people, such as actors, scientists,
politicians, etc. Every image is labeled with age and gender, just like the previously men­
tioned MORPH database [8].
10
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: Distribution of Age for the AgeDB Database
As shown in Figure 3.2, there is a bit more diversity in age, but age groups 1­20 and 70­
101 are still underrepresented. After manually inspecting the database it does contain a
lot of images of bad quality and some even seem to be of oil paintings.
The last database added to the mix is a private database provided by a Norweigan bio­
metrics groups. This database is focused on images of children and young adults. It
contains images of 47 subjects, some taken over the span of 10 years for the same sub­
ject. In total, it has 491 facial images with age labels. This database was added to get
more quantity of the underrepresented groups.
This gives more diversity to the database. The AgeDB database and the private database
were a good addition in the sense of how good the range is of age for some of the indi­
viduals. In table 3.1 an overview of all databases can be seen.
Table 3.1: Database overview
Database Name
No. of images
MORPH
160.000
AgeDB
12.240
Private database
491
Total
172.731
Together the images add up to approx. 173K facial images with labels. As you can see in
Figure 3.4 the age groups 1­20 and 60­101 are still very unrepresented. With more facial
images from all the databases, it gives a good option to filter the data.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3: Distribution of Age for the private Database
Figure 3.4: Distribution of Age for all databases combined
Filtering the data was done to even out the age distribution a bit, it will not be completely
equal between all age groups since the data is not large and diverse enough. First, the de­
cision was made to filter down to 50K images. The largest age groups got the most of the
cut. The filtering had to be done with a bit of manual work where the more sensitive ages
were looked through and images of bad quality or misrepresentation were removed. The
original databases are large therefore the filtering could not be done completely manually.
The distribution of the final database used for training in Experiment 2 and Experiment 3
can be seen in Figure 3.5.
12
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.5: Distribution of Age for all databases combined after filtering
Following are some images from the databases used along with the subject’s age, the title
of the images are where the label for conditioning is created, and from which database it
originates. Only samples from two of the databases are shown since approval to show
images from the private database has not been given.
Figure 3.6: Examples from MORPH Database
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.7: Examples from AgeDB
14
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:23==
4
Experiments and Results
This part of the thesis goes into the experiments done in this study using a Latent Diffusion
Model. This has been a process of testing and trying out different methods to simulate
aging while preserving identity and keeping visual quality. This chapter goes into what
was done for each experiment, how the model was configured, model performances, and
results.
4.1
Experiment 1: One­Hot Encoding
In the first experiment, the idea of using one­hot encoding to manipulate the age of the
subjects. One­hot encoding allows for categorization in a binary format, and that makes
for straightforward manipulation of age characteristics in the generated images.
4.1.1
Model Configuration
In this section, we will take a look at the configurations for the model training for Experi­
ment 1. It is to be noted that each parameter in the configuration was specifically chosen
to give the best results and the model was trained with different parameter values a bunch
of times before choosing these parameter values.
• Optimizer and Learning Rate: The model uses the AdamW optimizer and the
learning rate is set at 2.0 × 10−6, the learning rate was chosen to be this low to
ensure gradual model updates.
• Model and Training Parameters:
– ‘linear_start‘ and ‘linear_end‘ were configured at 0.0015 and 0.0195 to repre­
sent the linear progression of the noise schedule.
– The timestamps are set to 1000, which allows for a gradual denoising process.
– Specific keys for stages (’first_stage_key’ as image and ’cond_stage_key’ as
age) were used to distinguish between the image and age data, this allows for
the manipulation to be targeted to the one­hot encoding of the age.
• UNet Configuration:
– The UNet is configured with an image_size of 64 and model_channels of 224,
this maintains the image quality while processing.
– Attention mechanisms set with attention_resolutions at levels 8, 4, and 2, en­
abling the model to focus on various details of the image that are important for
age information and manipulation.
– A context_dim is set to 101 which aligns with the one­hot encoding dimensions
since the size of each one­hot encoded vector is 101, representing age 1­101.
• First Stage and Conditional Stage Configurations:
– The first stage of the model uses a VQModelInterface for initial image encoding.
– The conditional stage uses a customized embedder, AgeEmbedder, with an
embed_dim of 101, matching the one­hot encoding dimensionality.
– Cross­attention mechanisms are used for integrating and manipulating age in­
formation for the conditioning.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
15
==PAGE:24==
• Data and Training:
– The dataset was split 80/20 between training and validation sets.
– The batch_size is set to 3 and num_workers is set to 0, since the computational
constraints are set to a single GPU and access to limited memory.
This experiment was run for the first version of the database, which is explained in detail
in the Data chapter of this project. The model ran for 14 days and only managed to train
up to 31 epochs. However, the database used is substantially larger than the second
version of the database. Given how long the training ran it trained it managed to train for
fewer epochs than the upcoming Experiments.
4.1.2
Model Performance
To understand how the model is performing a few graphs are created to demonstrate the
(i) validation loss at each epoch boundary, (ii) average training loss per epoch, and (iii)
validation loss and training loss for each epoch.
In Figure 4.1 the validation loss at each epoch boundary is plotted.
Figure 4.1: Validation loss and validation loss EMA per epoch in Experiment 1
The above Figure demonstrates the performance of the model on unseen data, this type
of plot can tell about whether or not the model is over­fitting. Within the first few epochs, it
can be observed that the validation loss is decreasing rapidly, going from 0.170 to 0.160,
which indicates that the model is quickly learning from the training data. As the training
process continues, the decline in the validation loss slows down, and it can also be seen
that there is more variability from epoch to epoch. This could be because of how stochastic
the training process can be using AdamW for optimization.
16
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.2: Average training loss per epoch in Experiment 1
Figure 4.2 shows, like the validation loss, a fast decrease in the training loss in the first few
epochs. This indicates fast learning of the data in the first few epochs. The fluctuations
in the training loss as the training continues could be because of the small batch size, in
this case the batch size is 3, which is not possible to increase considering the memory
limitations of servers used for this project. The graph shows that the loss has not stabilized
at the end of the epochs, which could indicate that there is a need to train for more epochs.
In Figure 4.3, the training loss and validation loss are plotted on the same graph.
Figure 4.3: Average training loss and validation loss per epoch in Experiment 1
The validation loss is the validation loss at the end of each epoch and the training loss
is the average training loss per epoch. Both the losses show a downward trend which
shows that the model is learning. The training loss takes a peak at the last epoch, it is
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
17
==PAGE:26==
still lower than the past two peaks so if the model had been trained for more epochs we
could have seen it go down again. The positive point to take from this image is that both
the validation and training loss show a downward trend, indicating that there is no clear
sign of overfitting.
4.1.3
Model Results
While the one­hot encoding worked well with manipulating age, it led to a compromise in
preserving the subject’s identities. The generated age­manipulated images did not just
change in terms of age appearance but also underwent complete identity transforma­
tions, presenting entirely different individuals. This experiment showed the limitations of
using one­hot encoding for age manipulation by itself. In addition to the failure to preserve
identity, it also shows limitations in the age manipulation process when it comes to the
youngest (1­10 years of age) and oldest age groups (70+ years of age). The model’s
performance in accurately manipulating ages within these age ranges was notably poorer
compared to other age groups. This suggests a potential imbalance or insufficiency in the
dataset for these age groups.
Following are visualizations from sampling from the model where the one­hot encoded
conditioning factor is manipulated. It is to be noted that in the first part of the results and
the last part, the model inference is not performing well, as has been discussed. The blue
dots on the sampled images conclude that the model has not been trained for enough
epochs. But since the preliminary results show that we need to go in another direction
already it was decided to stop training for this version of the conditioning.
Figure 4.4: Subject 1: Input image and generated images from Experiment 1
Figure 4.5: Subject 2: Input image and generated images from Experiment 1
Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.5 shows the input image and the age of the individual. The
images on the right show the generated images from the model where the age has been
18
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:27==
manipulated, the manipulated age can be seen under each image. As can be seen in the
figures, the first and last age groups are not of great quality and represent their target age.
The most noticeable about these sampled images is how the model is not preserving the
identity, it is not even holding on to the gender or ethnicity of the subjects. However, the
visuals show how the age regression and progression are shown to be effective in some
way, which is a positive realization.
Even though the one­hot encoding did not perform well in preserving the identity of the
individual when sampling from the model for different ages, the model performs very well
in reconstructing images, of great quality, even after training only for a few epochs.
Figure 4.6: Reconstruction after training for 1 epoch
Figure 4.7: Reconstruction after training for 22 epoch
4.2
Experiment 2: One­Hot Encoding and MagFace face
embeddings
Since the one­hot encoding as a standalone in conditioning did not work well in preserving
the identity of an individual as their age progresses or regresses in the inference stage,
an additional conditioning factor is added to model input.
Building on the first experiment, an open­source MagFace face embeddings were con­
catenated with the one­hot encoded vector in the conditioning input to enhance identity
preservation while manipulating age. MagFace, known for its robust facial recognition,
was expected to hold on to the identity as the age was adjusted. This was done by con­
catenating the one­hot encoded vectors to the MagFace facial embeddings.
This model was trained for approximately 7 days and trained for 86 epochs. It trained for
a lot more epochs in a lot shorter time than Experiment 1. This is mostly because the
second version of the database, used in Experiment 2, is a lot smaller than the database
previously used.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2.1
Model Configuration
The model configurations for Experiment 2 are much like the model configuration in Ex­
periment 1, except for changes in the conditioning.
• Optimizer and Learning Rate: The model uses the AdamW optimizer and the
learning rate is set at 2.0 × 10−6, the learning rate was chosen to be this low to
ensure gradual model updates.
• Model and Training Parameters:
– ‘linear_start‘ and ‘linear_end‘ were configured at 0.0015 and 0.0195 to repre­
sent the linear progression of the noise schedule.
– The timestamps are set to 1000, which allows for a gradual denoising process.
– Specific keys for stages (’first_stage_key’ as image and ’cond_stage_key’ as
age) were used to distinguish between the image and age data, this allows for
the manipulation to be targeted to the one­hot encoding of the age.
– Conditioning keys are set to process ’age’ data, where the ’age’ data is the
concatenated vector from MagFace face embeddings and the one­hot encoder.
• UNet Configuration:
– The UNet is configured with an image_size of 64 and model_channels of 224,
this maintains the image quality while processing.
– Attention mechanisms set with attention_resolutions at levels 8, 4, and 2, en­
abling the model to focus on various details of the image that are important for
age information and manipulation.
– A context_dim is set to 613 which aligns with the conditioning dimensions, since
the size of each one­hot encoded vector is 101 and MagFace are 512.
• First Stage and Conditional Stage Configurations:
– The first stage of the model uses a VQModelInterface for initial image encoding.
– The conditional stage uses a customized embedder, AgeEmbedder, with an
embed_dim of 613, matching the conditioning vector dimensionality.
– The AgeEmbedder conducts concatenation of one­hot encoding (101­dimensional
vector) and MagFace embeddings (512­dimensional vector).
• Data and Training:
– The dataset was split 80/20 between training and validation sets.
– The batch_size is set to 3 and num_workers is set to 0, since the computational
constraints are set to a single GPU and access to limited memory.
– An additional set was created for testing, a test set that has never been seen
by the model.
4.2.2
Model Performance
To be able to compare the performance of this experiment to the experiment the same vi­
sualizations are created, which are (i) validation loss at each epoch boundary, (ii) average
training loss per epoch, and (iii) validation loss and training loss for each epoch.
Figure 4.8 shows the validation loss at the end of each epoch.
20
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.8: Validation loss and validation loss EMA per epoch in Experiment 2
The above figure, like in Experiment 1, demonstrates the performance of the model on
unseen data, this type of plot can tell about whether or not the model is overfitting. Within
the first few epochs, it can be observed that the validation loss is decreasing rapidly, which
indicates that the model is quickly learning from the training data. As the training process
continues, the decline in the validation loss slows down. This figure shows that in this
experiment the model is closer to converging than in Experiment 1.
Figure 4.9: Average training loss per epoch in Experiment 2
In Figure 4.9, the first epochs of the model show that it is learning rapidly since its training
loss is declining rapidly. It shows a lot of fluctuations as in the first experiment. The model
is however still showing a downward trend, the peaks in the fluctuations are going down
over time. This shows that the model is still learning even though the learning is volatile.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.10: Average training loss and validation loss per epoch in Experiment 2
Figure 4.10 shows that neither the validation nor training loss shows a clear upward trend
towards the end of the training which indicates that there is no clear sign of overfitting.
4.2.3
Model Results
This approach improved identity preservation significantly, with subjects remaining rec­
ognizable across a range of ages. However, a challenge was encountered when using
age progression and regression, which indicates that there is a need for more work on
this. When doing an inference using the trained model, it shows no attempt to do age
progression or regression. This does hint at the fact that the model conditioning is not
working as it should. Looking at how the vector with the conditioning is created, a first
clue might be that the MagFace facial embeddings are overshadowing the one­hot en­
coded information, since it is of much greater value than the one­hot encoder. Following
are visualizations from the inference done on the trained model.
Figure 4.11: Subject 3: Input image and generated images from Experiment 2
22
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.12: Subject 4: Input image and generated images from Experiment 2
In Figures 4.11 and 4.12, you can see how the identity is very well preserved across
selected ages from 1 ­ 100. However, the age progression and regression show to not
be working at all by doing visual analysis. There are not shown to be any issues with the
underrepresented ages but that is most likely because the MagFace embeddings are so
large when compared to the one­hot encoded vector.
4.3
Experiment 3: MagFace face embeddings and scaled
One­hot encoding
Experiment 1 worked with age progression and regression and not the preservation of
identity and Experiment 2 worked with preserving identity and not with age regression
and progression. It was decided for its simplicity to try to keep that method and make
changes to the sizes of the values either from the MagFace face embeddings or the one­
hot encoder.
To confirm the hunch that the reason for the age progression and regression did not work
for Experiment 2 was because of the numerical magnitude of the MagFace face em­
bedding versus the one­hot encoded vector, it was decided to begin with scaling up the
one­hot encoded vector. Another way could be to scale down and normalize the Mag­
Face face embeddings, which will be further discussed in the Future Work chapter of this
thesis.
Scaling up by 1000 was first chosen to figure out if that would make any difference. Scaling
up in this instance means simply multiplying the one­hot encoded vector by a scaling
factor. It made a lot of difference but it did confuse the model training, the results were
bad, but did hint of an age regression and progression. Taking the scaling factor down to
100 made a lot of difference, in the first epochs of the training it did show that the identity
preservation and the age progression and regression were both working.
4.3.1
Model Configuration
The model configuration of this Experiment was the same as in Experiment 2, except for
the conditioning to be scaled up by 100 in the one­hot encoded part of the conditioning.
The model was trained for 10 days using version 2 of the database, it trained up to almost
50 epochs.
4.3.2
Model Results
To be able to compare the performance of this experiment to the experiment the same vi­
sualizations are created, which are (i) validation loss at each epoch boundary, (ii) average
training loss per epoch, and (iii) validation loss and training loss for each epoch.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.13: Validation loss and validation loss EMA per epoch in Experiment 3
Figure 4.13 shows the validation loss and the Exponential Moving Average (EMA) valida­
tion loss. Looking at the EMA there is a downward trend through to the last epoch, even
though it is quite volatile. This figure doesn’t show any clear sign of overfitting.
Figure 4.14: Average training loss per epoch in Experiment 3
Figure 4.14 shows the average training loss per epoch. It does have an overall downward
trend although it fluctuates, indicating that the model is still learning. The graph shows that
the model could be at its best around 30 epochs, which might indicate that the model is
reaching its limit in reducing the loss on the training dataset. It might suggest that utilizing
early stopping would have been a good option here.
24
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.15: Average training loss and validation loss per epoch in Experiment 3
Figure 4.15 shows the average training loss per epoch and the validation loss at the end
of each epoch for Experiment 3. Both the losses show an overall downward trend. The
validation loss does not show a clear sign of an upward trend towards the end so there is
no clear sign of overfitting.
4.3.3
Model Results
Now finally the most important things of the entire project are working, that is age pro­
gression and regression and identity preservation. Samples from the model trained in
Experiment 3 can be seen in Figure 4.16 and 4.17
Figure 4.16: Subject 5: Input image and generated images from Experiment 3
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.17: Subject 6: Input image and generated images from Experiment 3
From the above result images, it can be seen that the model is definitely holding on to
the identity of a person and doing age regression and progression. However, the problem
with the underrepresented groups is still visible, which was expected since the database
has not been changed and the under­representation in the original set is still there. It does
show the promise of using Latent Diffusion Models for age manipulation.
26
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:35==
5
Evaluation
In this chapter, the evaluation of the models is conducted. Experiment 3 showed the most
promising results and will be the one that is mostly discussed in this chapter. However,
when other experiments are evaluated it will be noted. This chapter is split into four parts:
1. Age prediction: Where the age of the generated facial images of the subjects are
evaluated. This evaluation is performed on Experiment 1 and Experiment 3. It is
also performed on the original database to use as a comparison.
2. Visual quality: Here the visual quality of the evaluated images are evaluated. This
evaluation is done on all experiments.
3. Identity preservation: Here the identity of the generated is evaluated in a three­step
process by comparing two images of the same subject. This is done to evaluate how
the model performs in holding on to identity when the age of a subject is manipulated.
This evaluation is done for Experiment 2 and Experiment 3.
4. Comparison of other methods: Here other methods that have aimed for similar re­
sults are explored. Each of the other evaluation method will be compared to other
age manipulation methods.
5.1
Age prediction
The age prediction is performed by an open­source model called Cognitec age estimation.
The generated data was collected and sent to an outside organization. The results of
running this evaluation give a lot of information, for example, predicted gender, ethnicity,
age, artifacts, and more. The feature of interest for this evaluation is age so that needed
to be extracted from the results. What it gives is a prediction of the age of the individual
in the generated image and from that you can see how well the model did in generating
data for a specific age.
For experiment 2 this part of the evaluation does not apply since the model does not
manipulate the age of the subject.
The age estimation was done for the original images in Database 2, generated images
from Experiment 1 and Experiment 3. To see how the models perform in generating facial
images for a range of ages the Mean Squared Error (MSE) is calculated using equation
5.1 [17].
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(5.1)
The MSE is calculated for the age estimations for Database 2 to use to compare to the
experiments. The MSE calculates the distance between the estimated age and real age
for each of the data points. Higher MSE values imply more error whereas lower MSE
implies less error. By calculating and visualizing the age estimation for Database 2, the
performance of the age estimation model can be seen to give a fair evaluation of the
generated images in the experiments.
The red dashed line in Figure 5.1 shows where the data should lie if the estimated age
was the same as the real age of the subject. From the image, it can be seen that the
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1: Real age vs. estimated age of Database 2
estimated ages are following the red line. There are a few outliers, for example, the dot
in the plot where the real age is around 65 and the estimated age is 20. However, for
the youngest ages, age group 1­20, the age estimation is overestimating the age of the
subject, estimating that the subject is older than it is. For the oldest age groups, age group
70­101, the model underestimates the age of the subject, estimating that the subject is
younger than it is.
The Mean Squared Error (MSE) of 26.76 is quite high, which could indicate that the orig­
inal database has images with characteristics that could be confusing the age estimation
model.
5.1.1
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 has a lot fewer data points than Database 2. Figure 5.2 shows the generated
age versus the estimated age.
The figure shows that the age estimation model has trouble estimating the age of the
underrepresented groups. The distribution of the data points behaves similarly to the
distribution of Database 2, seen in Figure 5.1. Where the younger ages, group 1­20, are
estimated to be older than their manipulated age and the older ages, group 70­101, are
estimated to be younger than their manipulated age. The age groups in between, age
group 20­70, do follow and are close to the red line, representing correct estimation.
The calculated MSE is 470.24, which is a high number, a lot higher than for Database 2.
The data points for the underrepresented ages are very far from the correct estimation
line, which has a big impact on the MSE. For the generated images the ratio between
the underrepresented age groups and other age groups is more equal, since the gener­
ated images have an equal amount of generated images for each age, this does have a
negative impact on the MSE calculation.
5.1.2
Experiment 3
Figure 5.3 shows the generated age versus the estimated age from the age estimation
model from the dataset created from Experiment 3.
This figure, like other figures in this section, shows that the age estimation model has trou­
28
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.2: Generated age vs. estimated age from Experiment 1
ble estimating the age of the underrepresented groups. The data points behave similarly
as for Database 2 and Experiment 1, where the younger ages, group 1­20, are estimated
to be older then their generated age and the older ages, group 70­101, are estimated to
be younger than their generated age. The age groups in between, age group 20­70, do
follow and are close to the red line, representing correct estimation.
The calculated MSE is 353.19 which is a high number, but it is lower than for experiment
1. This could, like in Experiment 1, be due to the fact that the generated images have an
equal amount for each age, which leads to the age estimation model having trouble esti­
mating the age for a lot more images in the underrepresented groups than for Database
2.
5.1.3
Discussion
Figure 5.4 shows the calculated MSE value for each dataset in this part of the evaluation.
This image gives clarity of how different the calculated MSE values are between each of
the databases, Database 2, generated images from Experiment 1 and 3.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.3: Generated age vs. estimated age from Experiment 3
Figure 5.4: MSE value for each dataset
The calculated MSE is a lot lower for the original images, Database 2. The original images
does have a lot fewer images in the underrepresented age groups than other age groups,
which is where the model struggles the most to estimate the age. While for Experiment
1 and 3 the ratio is equal between each age groups, so the proportion of images that the
age estimation model struggles with is a lot larger. This could be one of the reasons why
the MSE is so much higher for the databases with the generated images.
From this it can be seen that the performance in generating images for a range of ages is
a lot better in Experiment 3 than Experiment 1.
5.2
Visual Quality
To estimate visual quality a metric called Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) is used. It
evaluates the quality of images generated by models, specifically developed to evaluate
30
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:39==
the performance of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). The metric measures the
distance between feature vectors that are calculated for real facial images and the gener­
ated facial images from the Latent Diffusion Model. The FID score indicates how similar
the two datasets are, where lower numbers indicate more similarity and higher numbers
indicate less similarity. A perfect score that indicates that the two groups of images are
identical would be the score of 0.0. The score is calculated using a top­performing deep
learning model known as Inception V3 which is used for image classification [18, 19].
5.2.1
Experiment 1
The FID score calculated for Experiment 1 was done for all age groups together and
resulted in a score of 80.17. This high of a score shows that there definitely is room
for improvement in visual quality. However, the underrepresented groups are likely to
pull the score up since those images are not of great quality. This indicates that there
is a rather big visual difference between the generated images and the original images.
This score could also be improved by increasing the test dataset and decreasing the
underrepresented ages. The score also indicates that there is at least some similarity in
the datasets and the generated images are definitely of a face of a person.
5.2.2
Experiment 2
The FID score for Experiment 2 was 43.34, which shows improvement from Experiment
1. The for this FID score to be lower is most likely due to the fact that the model is not
performing age manipulation, which means that the generated images for the underrep­
resented groups are not a problem for the model. The images are of great quality for the
underrepresented groups even though age manipulation is not performed.
5.2.3
Experiment 3
The FID score was calculated for Experiment 3, which includes MagFace face embed­
dings and scaled one­hot encoded vector. The calculated score for all age groups to­
gether is 58.49. This shows that the visual quality is not great, but it is understandable
since the underrepresented groups are likely to pull up the overall score, indicating less
quality. This score shows that there is room for improvement but the model is learning
features of importance from the database, which is a good indication.
The database used in this project does not have a large quantity of images for the under­
represented groups, so it is not viable to split between ages or age groups to calculate
the FID score, since the calculation will not have diverse enough data and would be very
sensitive to each image, giving an unfairly high or low number.
5.2.4
Discussion
Figure 5.5 shows the FID score for each experiment.
These scores show that Experiment 2 has the lowest FID score, which indicates that
the generated images in Experiment 2 are closest to the real images compared to the
other experiments. Experiment 1 has the highest FID score, indicating that the generated
images from Experiment 2 are the furthest from the real images.
Experiment 2 was expected to have the highest FID score since for that experiment there
is no problem when it comes to the underrepresented age groups. Visually, a big propor­
tion of the generated images from Experiment 2 are of good quality.
This shows that the reason for the high FID is not only due to the issue of underrepresented
groups. Overall, the scores are not going to go lower without changing methods, adding
images to the database, and training the model for a longer period.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.5: FID score for each experiment
5.3
Identity preservation
To evaluate the models performance of preserving identity of the subjects, a state­of­the
art facial recognition system is used to compute a similarity score. The similarity score is
calculated between the subject’s original facial image and their generated facial image for
each age on the age range 1­101. Doing this evaluation on experiment 1 does not apply
since that experiment does not preserve identity.
This evaluation is done in three parts:
1. The first part is to calculate the similarity score between the original facial image
of a subject and the generated image with the same corresponding age. This will
establish a baseline for the similarity score.
2. The second part is to compare the original facial image and the corresponding gen­
erated image for all other ages.
3. The third part is to calculate an optimal threshold value for the face recognition
process. This is done to evaluate whether or not an individual would pass a face
recognition procedure.
The tools used in this part of the evaluation are open­source, state­of­the­art facial recog­
nition systems. Many different open­source options could have been used, but the ones
chosen are because of their ease of use and how accurate they are proven to be. The
tool that was used is a face recognition framework for Python called Deepface. It is a
hybrid face recognition framework that allows the user to choose which state­of­the­art
models are used for face detection and face recognition [20]. For this project, only the
DeepFace verify function is used and it is selected to make use of RetinaFace and Arc­
Face. RetinaFace is a state­of­the­art face detection algorithm that is used in the Deep­
face framework [20], [21]. RetinaFace is used to detect faces and align them before they
are verified against each other. Additive Angular Margin Loss (ArcFace) is a great tool
for Deep Face Recognition, and in this project, it is used for comparing the images. The
Deepface framework is implemented to use ArcFace using a ResNet34 backbone [22].
The threshold for the face recognition system is set to match the guidelines provided by
FRONTEX [23], to simulate real­life face recognition systems. In more detail, the thresh­
32
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:41==
old is set to have the False Mated Rate (FMR) equal to 0.1%. This means that around
0.1% of the non­mated scores should be accepted into the system.
• Mated samples: Comparison between two images of individuals with the same iden­
tity.
• Nonmated samples: Comparison between two images of individuals with a different
identity.
The face recognition system used gives scores of dissimilarity. Meaning that non­mated
scores are higher than the mated ones.
5.3.1
Experiment 2
For the first part of this evaluation, the dissimilarity score has been calculated between
the original facial image and the generated image with the corresponding age.
Figure 5.6: Dissimilarity score for 8 subjects where the generated age is equal to the real
age
Figure 5.6 the dissimilarity score can be seen where the original image of 8 subjects is
compared to the generated image of the corresponding subject where the real age and
manipulated age are the same. This shows how the face recognition system calculates
the dissimilarity where the images are of the same age.
For scores closer to zero the images are identical and as the scores grow higher the
images become more dissimilar. For experiment 2 the dissimilarity score ranges from
0.115 to 0.262. For the higher scores, this could indicate that for some of the subjects,
the generated images are not of as good quality as other subjects. However, this shows
how similar the generated images are to their original image of the same age.
Even though the second part of the evaluation does not give a lot of information regarding
how well the model performs with manipulating age, since Experiment 2 does not perform
age manipulation as expected, visualizing how the scores are distributed throughout the
generated database can give information on the quality of the images.
In Figure 5.7 all 8 subjects can be seen plotted together, each line represents a subject
and its dissimilarity score between the original image for that subject and the generated
image for corresponding subjects where age manipulation has been performed. There
are many spikes in the data points and taking a closer look because some images are of
lower quality. However, the lines in the figure for the subject show no trends through the
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.7: dissimilarity score ordered by Generated Age for 8 subjects
age ranges which is likely due to the fact that the model does not attempt to manipulate
the age.
Figure 5.8: Generated images from Experiment 2 that are of low quality
The images shown in Figure 5.8 are a few of the images that are causing the spike in
Figure 5.7. It would have been ideal to remove those images from the generated database
or rerun the sampling for those subjects.
5.3.2
Experiment 3
The identity preservation evaluation was done more extensively on Experiment 3, which
is the experiment that holds on to identity and manipulates the age of the subject. For
this part of the evaluation, a threshold is established and set to match the FRONTEX
guidelines. First, a plot is created that shows the Kernel Distribution Estimation (KDE)
where mated and non­mated scores are plotted together, showing their comparison score.
This can be seen in Figure 5.9.
For the threshold to match the FRONTEX guidelines the system should only accept around
0.1% of the non­mated scores. To see more clearly that the threshold in Figure 5.9 is ac­
ceptable, the false and true negatives, and the false and true positives can be seen in a
confusion matrix in Figure 5.10. The values in the confusion matrix are given in percent­
ages. This gives the threshold value of 0.55.
In the following visualizations, the threshold that has been established will be included.
Figure 5.11 shows the distribution of the dissimilarity scores for all subjects where the
34
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.9: KDE for mated and non­mated scores for Experiment 3
Figure 5.10: Confusion Matrix for mated and non­mated scores in Experiment 3. Numbers
showed in percentages.
manipulated age is equal to the real age.
Figure 5.11 shows that the dissimilarity scores range from 0.16 to 0.52. For this range of
scores, all individuals will be correctly verified in the face recognition procedure.
Figure 5.12: Dissimilarity score for 6 subjects in Experiment 3. With threshold value at
0.55
Figure 5.12 shows 6 subjects, the subjects were selected based on their average dissim­
ilarity score being the lowest. The plot groups together age groups at a 5­year intervals
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.11: Dissimilarity score for all subjects where the generated age is equal to the
real age. Threshold set to 0.55
and takes the average dissimilarity score for the group. The figure shows how only one
subject would not be correctly verified two times at the age 81­85 and 91­95. The figure
does show a trend where the face recognition system has a harder time verifying individu­
als in the underrepresented age groups, more specifically for the oldest age groups. The
trend that the distribution shows can be seen more clearly in Appendix B.
The data points in Figure 5.13 show the dissimilarity scores for the same subjects as in
Figure 5.12. The x­axis in the figure represents the distance in age:
Age Distance = Manipulated age −Real age
(5.2)
Where Manipulated age is the age of the individual generated by the model and Real age
is the age of the individual in the input image. The right side of the subplots is where
age progression has been performed on the input image and the left side is where age
regression has been performed on the input image. All subplots show the same trend,
when the distance between the ages is greater the face recognition system has a harder
time verifying the individual.
5.3.3
Discussion
A threshold was not established for Experiment 2 since there were too few data points
and setting a threshold from those scores would have given an unfair evaluation when
compared to Experiment 3.
Figure 5.14 shows the confusion matrix for the dissimilarity score for Experiment 2. Set­
ting a threshold for this experiment would have given a 100% in true positives and true
negatives.
36
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.13: Dissimilarity score ordered by Distance between real age and manipulated
age for 6 subjects in Experiment 3
Figure 5.14: Confusion Matrix for mated and non­mated scores in Experiment 2. Numbers
showed in percentages.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
37
==PAGE:46==
6
Future work and Limitations
There are a lot more things that can be done to improve the model. All the way from data
collection to model configuration and conditioning. In this chapter, I will go over the steps
that I would take if I were to have the time to work on this for a longer period of time.
The age estimation part of the evaluation chapter had its limitations since the age esti­
mation process was performed by an outside source. The database had to be handed
in pretty early where the data collected from Experiment 1 had not been fully done. That
made for a not fair evaluation of that Experiment. It would have been interesting to do
the age estimation on Experiment 2 as well. Stating that the model did not perform age
manipulation was only done by visual inspection, it would have been helpful to get the
results from the age estimation model to confirm that with numerical data.
6.1
Data collection
Next steps would be to collect more good data, this would be a very good step in the
model training where the underrepresented groups would be more populated. Gaining
this data would be time­consuming but would result in a better­trained model, especially
for the underrepresented groups. I would also like to add more diversity to the data by
adding more variety of subjects, that be subject’s ethnicity and more. Going more into
exploring future work and what databases are available it would have been great to put
more effort into it at the beginning of the work instead of just using what was convenient
and already in hand. Following are two databases that I would consider to add into the
final database, something that would even out the age distribution to get more good qual­
ity reconstructions from the underrepresented age groups.
The model has shown not to work as well for subjects that are female and not Caucasian.
It would make a lot of difference to different ethnicities by adding more data that rep­
resents those groups of people. There are more available open­source databases that
include facial images with age information. One example is the IMDB­WIKI database that
has 500K+ face images with age and gender information. This database includes 100K
most popular actors according to IMDb and a collection of facial images of them from dif­
ferent ages [24]. This database might add more diversity to the database.
Another great database to add to the dataset for this work would be the MRCD database
which includes facial images of children of four races (Asian, Black, White, and Indian).
The dataset has 64.965 images of people of the age 0­20 [25]. In terms of using this work
as an addition to create better reconstructions of for example missing children, it would
make the most difference in populating the 0­20 age groups more.
6.2
Further work with one­hot encoder and MagFace face
embeddings
For the one­hot encoder, this method has shown the potential to work with great success.
To figure out exactly how to scale the one­hot encoding vector could be a time­consuming
process where the evaluation process is conducted for each type of scaling factor. An­
other way that was considered was, instead of scaling up the one­hot encoded vector,
38
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:47==
scale down and normalize the MagFace face embedding vector instead. This would be
the first step I would take since it takes minimal effort to see results.
Doing normalization for the MagFace face embeddings would however make for a longer
training time, because the conditioning takes longer time for each subject’s data vector.
To prevent longer training time, it would probably be better to extract, scale down and
normalize the MagFace face embeddings before the model is trained, and then feed the
pre­processed data to the model.
6.3
Different method for age conditioning
What I would start with next is to implement another and more sophisticated way of con­
ditioning with age, that would be used instead of the one­hot encoder. This means using
an age estimation model with a feature layer where the age information is extracted from
an image. That feature vector containing the age estimation will be used instead of the
one­hot encoder. Using an age estimation model to extract age information to be used
to train the model has a lot of advantages, for example, it could improve accuracy using
continuous age features and it can capture the essence of aging more precisely than cat­
egorical representations.
This could be implemented by first extracting age information for a specific age group and
several subjects. Then take the average from it and use that to represent the entire age
group. This will be done for each age group. This would then create a vector that would
be concatenated with the MagFace face embeddings instead of the now­implemented
one­hot encoded vector.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
39
==PAGE:48==
7
Conclusion
This study addressed in the beginning the need for improving simulation of facial aging
and a Latent Diffusion Model was explored as potential for this field of study. If we go
through the research questions addressed in the Introduction:
1. How effective are Latent Diffusion Models in simulating facial aging?
2. How well can state­of­the­art facial recognition systems identify an individual over
time?
3. Can the model be used to improve age simulation in relation to for example missing
persons/children?
4. How flexible is the model to variations in the input data, for example ethnicity’s?
Does the model perform as well when looking at under­represented groups?
The Latent Diffusion Model used in this study does prove to be effective in simulating facial
aging, confirmed by Experiment 1 and Experiment 3. Using a simple method such as one­
hot encoding did perform well when simulating age, but a more sophisticated method such
as extracting the feature layer that holds age information of age estimation models could
prove to be more effective, which is a subject for exploring in future work of this study.
The identity preservation evaluation did show that state­of­the­art facial recognition sys­
tems can identify individuals over time. By looking at the visualizations it can be seen
that when the distance from the real age and the manipulated age becomes larger face
recognition system starts to struggle. For identity preservation, Figure B.1 in Appendix B
shows that the face recognition system starts to lose confidence as the age gap becomes
greater.
When we look at whether or not the model can be used to improve age simulation in
relation to missing persons/children, we can see that the model could have the potential
to do so. But to investigate this part in more detail there needs to be changes to the
database, more data for younger ages needs to be added. Since the quantity of images
at the age range 1­20 is too small the model could not be trained with good enough data.
Which means that this part is still an open challenge.
To look at how flexible the model is to variations to the input data. If we look into ethnicity,
the model inference stage was highly influenced by the data it was trained on. Since the
database was lacking in images of for example African­American women, the model did
not perform well in sampling for that group. The database has a great quality of African­
American men, when sampling using a woman of African­American descent it confused
the model and generated some images of a male.
When looking at other underrepresented groups, that being age groups 1­20 and 60­101,
it also reflects the quality of the data the model is trained on. Results show that the model
did not perform as well when sampling data for those age groups, either making a person
older than it is for the youngest age groups or younger than it is for the older age groups.
There are a lot of things that could have been done better in this study for example keeping
track of the sampled data from the Experiments, that would have made the Evaluation
process more smooth. Maybe it would have been fairer to pick the subjects for Figure 5.12
40
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:49==
randomly and not based on their average dissimilarity score being the lowest. However,
overall this study was completed with good results.
This study does give valuable insights into the field of facial aging simulation. By go­
ing over the future work to take this research to the next level would be data collection,
improvements to the face embeddings, and different methods for extracting age informa­
tion. This study shows that Latent Diffusion Models can be used in simulating facial aging
while preserving identity and keeping good visual quality. If the challenges in this work
are addressed, this research will provide great advances in this field.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
41
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[1]
Sudipta Banerjee et al. Identity­Preserving Aging of Face Images via Latent Diffu­
sion Models. 2023. arXiv: 2307.08585 [cs.CV].
[2]
Patrick Grother, Mei Ngan, and Kayee Hanaoka. Face Recognition Vendor Test Part
3: Demographic Effects. en. 2019­12­19 2019. DOI: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.
IR.8280.
[3]
Anil K. Jain, Arun A. Ross, and Karthik Nandakumar. Introduction to Biometrics.
Undetermined. Springer US. ISBN: 978­0­387­77325­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-
77326-1.
[4]
Hayati Yassin, Sanual Hoque, and Farzin Deravi. “Impact Of Age And Ageing On
Face Recognition Performance”. In: 2019 IEEE Asia­Pacific Conference on Com­
puter Science and Data Engineering (CSDE). 2019, pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.1109/CSDE48274.
2019.9162417.
[5]
Matthew Sparkes. “Face recognition struggles to recognise us after five years of
ageing”. In: New Scientist (Aug. 2022). Accessed: 2023­09­30. URL: https://www.
newscientist.com/article/2334375-face-recognition-struggles-to-recognise-us-after-
five-years-of-ageing/.
[6]
Marcel Grimmer et al. Time flies by: Analyzing the Impact of Face Ageing on the
Recognition Performance with Synthetic Data. 2022. arXiv: 2208.08207 [cs.CV].
[7]
Robin Rombach et al. High­Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Mod­
els. 2022. arXiv: 2112.10752 [cs.CV].
[8]
Stylianos Moschoglou et al. “Agedb: the first manually collected, in­the­wild age
database”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshop. Vol. 2. 3. 2017, p. 5.
[9]
University of North Carolina Wilmington. “MORPH Facial recognition database”. In:
URL: https://uncw.edu/myuncw/research/innovation-commercialization/technology-
portfolio/morph.
[10]
Zhizhong Huang et al. “PFA­GAN: Progressive Face Aging With Generative Adver­
sarial Network”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 16
(2021), pp. 2031–2045. DOI: 10.1109/tifs.2020.3047753. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1109%2Ftifs.2020.3047753.
[11]
Z. Zhang, Y. Song, and H. Qi. “Age Progression/Regression by Conditional Adver­
sarial Autoencoder”. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society, July 2017,
pp. 4352–4360. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.463. URL: https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.
org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.463.
[12]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. “Denoising diffusion probabilistic mod­
els”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), pp. 6840–
6851.
[13]
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and koray kavukcuoglu koray. “Neural Dis­
crete Representation Learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. Ed. by I. Guyon et al. Vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL: https://
proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/7a98af17e63a0ac09ce2e96d03992fbc-
Paper.pdf.
[14]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
42
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:51==
[15]
Jason Brownlee. Why One­Hot Encode Data in Machine Learning? Accessed: 2023­
12­06. 2021. URL: https://machinelearningmastery.com/why-one-hot-encode-data-
in-machine-learning/.
[16]
Qiang Meng et al. MagFace: A Universal Representation for Face Recognition and
Quality Assessment. 2021. arXiv: 2103.06627 [cs.CV].
[17]
Data Basecamp. Mean Squared Error (MSE) verstehen: Eine Schlüsselzahl im Ma­
chine Learning. Available online. Accessed: 2024­03­08. Dec. 2023. URL: https:
//databasecamp.de/en/statistics/mean-squared-error.
[18]
J. Kumar Sharma. Frechet Inception Distance (FID) for Evaluating GANs. https:
//medium.com/@jkumarsharma998/frechet- inception- distance- fid- for- evaluating-
gans-7bb953ca2ed4. Accessed: 2024­03­03. 2023.
[19]
Jason Brownlee. “How to Implement the Frechet Inception Distance (FID) for Evalu­
ating GANs”. In: (2019). Accessed: 03­03­2024. URL: https://machinelearningmastery.
com/how-to-implement-the-frechet-inception-distance-fid-from-scratch/.
[20]
Sefik Ilkin Serengil and Alper Ozpinar. “LightFace: A Hybrid Deep Face Recognition
Framework”. In: 2020 Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications Confer­
ence (ASYU). IEEE. 2020, pp. 23–27. DOI: 10.1109/ASYU50717.2020.9259802.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/ASYU50717.2020.9259802.
[21]
Jiankang Deng et al. “RetinaFace: Single­Shot Multi­Level Face Localisation in the
Wild”. In: 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). 2020, pp. 5202–5211. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00525.
[22]
Jiankang Deng et al. “ArcFace: Additive Angular Margin Loss for Deep Face Recog­
nition”. In: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). 2019, pp. 4685–4694. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00482.
[23]
FRONTEX. FRONTEX Website. (Online). http://frontex.europa.eu. 2023. URL: http:
//frontex.europa.eu.
[24]
Rasmus Rothe, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. “Deep expectation of real and
apparent age from a single image without facial landmarks”. In: International Journal
of Computer Vision 126.2­4 (2018), pp. 144–157.
[25]
Neeta Nain Praveen Kumar Chandaliya. “ChildGAN: Face aging and rejuvenation
to find missing children”. In: Pattern Recognition. Vol. 129. 2022, p. 108761.
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:53==
A
Repository
The repository for this project can be found in the link below. This repository includes the
generated images from the Experiments, all codes that were used for visualisations as
well as the whole code for the model.
GitHub repository
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
45
==PAGE:54==
B
Dissimilarity score distribution by Age
Difference in Experiment 3
Figure B.1 shows the trend in the data points from Experiment 3 when ordered by age
distance defined in equation 5.2.
Figure B.1: Dissimilarity score for all subjects in Experiment 3
This figure shows a heart­shaped trend, indicating that a larger age difference results in
less confidence for the face recognition system to verify the individual.
46
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
==PAGE:55==
Age manipulation with Latent Diffusion Models
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
