==PAGE:1==
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡
Criticality
Applications
on
TSN┬¡Enabled
ADAS Platforms
Master Thesis
Thomas Mattsson ┬¡ s175206
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled
ADAS Platforms
Master Thesis
By Thomas Mattsson ┬¡ s175206
February, 2024
Copyright:
Reproduction of this thesis in whole or in part must include the customary bibli┬¡
ographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5 months at DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathe┬¡
matics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a knowledge in the areas of computer science, especially in
areas of meta┬¡heuristic algorithms.
Thomas Mattsson ┬¡ s175206
Signature
Date
ii
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
25/02/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Cars today feature many safety and driver aid features, which are part of something called Γא¥Ad┬¡
vanced Driver Assistance SystemΓא¥ or ADAS for short. Modern ADAS system are more complex
than ever, which means that the real┬¡time scheduling algorithms used in these systems are also
getting more and more complex. In order to improve the performance of the scheduling algo┬¡
rithms, there is a need for ADAS system data about the task scheduling used while operating
a the vehicle, however this information is hard to come by, since it is proprietary information
owned by the car manufactures. This there is a need to be able to create this data synthetically,
so it can be used to train the scheduling algorithms.
This thesis proposes a system that if, given an ADAS configuration model and configurable
parameters as input and produces a task set of TT and ET┬¡tasks, that are all assigned to the
cores of that model such that the average utilization is as close to the desired utilization set in
the input by using Simulated Annealing to manipulate the tasks and core assignments. It also
generates task chain by using Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing.
Additionally. this thesis also investigates the use of different meta┬¡heuristic algorithms, such as
Hill Climbing and Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing, with regards to their performance in generating
tasks compared to Simulated Annealing.
Several experiments are also performed using different fitness functions and model sizes.
The tool proposed in this thesis generally succeeds in producing a task┬¡set with task┬¡to┬¡core as┬¡
signments that that satisfies all constraints in the input┬¡file when using Simulated Annealing, but
the other two algorithms cannot find a solution for large task┬¡sets of 2000. Simulated Annealing
has inconsistent at larger task sizes, and perhaps needs more parameter tuning.
Different types and sizes of platform models are tested, and Hill Climbing and Steepest Ascent
show that their performance is the most stable across model types, whereas Simulated Anneal┬¡
ing is more affected. All three algorithms show significant performance hits on model where not
all cores can be assigned both TT and ET┬¡tasks.
When increasing task sizes, the algorithms show a tendency compensate by aggressively re┬¡
ducing the WCET values of the tasks, which in the worst cases can lead to task┬¡sets where
half the WCET values are Γאש1Γאש. Experiments using a fitness function that penalizes solutions with
many duplicates show significant performance degradation to the point of not being able to find
good solutions. This problem of low WCET values can be mitigated by using period values over
10000.
Chains are generated with multiple of the same tasks in a row. Using penalties in the fitness
function add a lot of overhead even on small chains, and therefore it is perhaps more advanta┬¡
geous to fix these subjectively undesirable characteristics with a deterministic post processing
step.
More research and information is needed about what a Γא¥goodΓא¥ solution should look like, so that
a fitness function can be designed with more focus on important meta┬¡aspects of the task┬¡set
values such as WCET variance and duplicates. It is also the hope of the author that the tool be
further build upon by adding schedulers and realistic TSN communication.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
[Paul Pop], [Thesis supervisor]
I am grateful to for the opportunity to work on this project with you as a supervisor. You help
throughout this duration of writing this thesis has been invaluable.
[Silviu S. Craciunas], [Company contact at TTTech]
I has been an exiting experience to be able to work on this problem with TTTech. Thank you for
allowing me to work on this problem. It has been very exciting. Thank you for all you help with
my technical and domain specific questions.
iv
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem formulation
3
2.1
Original problem description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Scoping of this thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Model
6
3.1
Overview of the hardware model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Overview of the application model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Overview of the configuration model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Solution
12
4.1
Model initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Task set generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Experiments and Results
26
5.1
Experiment setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Test: Task generation meta┬¡heuristic algorithms compared . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Test: Model configurations compared
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Test: WCET variance in fitness function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Test: Chain generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Discussion and conclusion
38
A Explanation of input and output files
43
A.1 Parameters file explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.2 Platform configuration file explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.3 Task set output file explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B Pseudo code for basic Hill Climbing used in this thesis
54
B.1 Pseudo code for basic Hill Climbing for task generation used in this thesis . . . .
54
B.2 Pseudo code for Simulated Annealing for chain generation used in this thesis . .
55
C Standard configuration files
57
C.1 Configuration file 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
C.2 Configuration file 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
C.3 Configuration file 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
C.4 Configuration file 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
C.5 Configuration file 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The thought of autonomous vehicles is an old one. Some historians believe the first concept of
an autonomous vehicle to be from an illustration of a self┬¡steering cart by Leonardo Da Vinci [1],
which would predate the automobile by hundreds of years. While this might be an interesting
bit of information, it probably is not representative of what most people think when they hear
the term Γא¥autonomous vehicleΓא¥. In the context of modern cars, many people would probably
think of a car from Tesla, who, with their advertised Autopilot feature [2], have been one of
the loudest voices in the conversation around autonomous vehicles [3]. Despite their name,
TeslaΓאשs Autopilot and Full Self┬¡Driving, are not, by TeslaΓאשs own admission, real autonomous full
self driving systems, but rather a series of driver assistance features that still require a person
behind the wheel [2].
What Tesla is offering in their cars, is a subset of what is more generally called Γא¥Advanced
Driver┬¡Assistance SystemΓא¥ or ADAS for short. ADAS is not unique to Tesla and has actually
been in cars since the 1970s [4]. ADAS is a set of technologies that are designed to help
drivers operate the vehicle safely. This can take many forms, from ABS breaks to self┬¡driving.
While some ADAS technologies can function and be activated without the need of a computer
system, such as ABS breaks on a fully non┬¡computerized car, in the scope of this thesis, the
term ADAS will refer to of what is known as an ADAS Platform. In short, an ADAS platform is
a digital system that, among other things, deals with various inputs from different sensors of a
car, and can then activate the different driver assistance functions.
For modern cars with various sensors, such as cameras or radar, each of these sensors is
providing critical data streams that must be integrated and analyzed continuously and accurately
by the ADAS system in order to ensure safe operation of the vehicle. ADAS systems are so┬¡
called real┬¡time systems, since they need to react to incoming data from sensors in a timely
manner in order to ensure safety [5]. In a real┬¡time system, the results produced need to be
logically correct, but also produced within a set time. Additionally, the system needs to react
to external events while running, further increasing the the complexity [6]. In order to achieve
this, real┬¡time systems need to be predictable, which is the ability of the system to predict and
guarantee, based on information it has about the tasks it needs to do, that all timing constraints
will be met [3].
Task scheduling is a critical aspect of managing these requirements in real┬¡time systems, and
decisions about scheduling tasks need to be done on line during system execution [6]. ADAS
systems and applications are getting getting more and more complex. This complexity brings
with it a need for even more advanced scheduling algorithms, which in itself is already a chal┬¡
lenge, since scheduling┬¡problems by themselves are, in their general formΓאת NP┬¡complete [7].
Adding to that challenge, is the fact that, based on some accounts, there is a lack of realistic
benchmarks for testing new algorithms and scheduling strategies, due to intellectual property
concerns by the stakeholders [8].
Some solutions have been proposed that try to generate these realistic benchmarks, such as
by Mclean et al. [9], but there is a lot unexplored when trying to synthetically generate realistic
benchmarks. These benchmarks need to also be relevant for an ever wider range of ADAS
platforms and architecture configurations, as technology progresses. For this reason, a solution
needs to be able to work with a wide variety of configurations and still produce satisfactory
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
1
==PAGE:10==
results. Therefore, this thesis proposes a system that can model ADAS systems and also use
meta┬¡heuristic algorithms to do task generation and core assignment in the model. Additionally,
this thesis aims to investigate the use of meta┬¡heuristic algorithms to generate tasks and task┬¡
to┬¡core assignments, and help to find relevant characteristics that could be used to guide in
development of a system that can produce realistic benchmarks.
2
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:11==
2
Problem formulation
This chapter will first give an overview of the original problem description of this thesis, as
originally presented to me by TTTech and my supervisor. Also, it will present the scoping of
what is included in this thesis from the original problem description and what was changed due
to time restrictions. Lastly, a detailed outline of the problem that will be addressed in this thesis.
2.1
Original problem description
The original problem description, provided by TTTech, had two main objectives for this thesis:
To create a tool, that could generate random test cases, which also had to be able to model
the complex optimization landscape of an ADAS domain in a configurable way, and devise a
strategy of how to use optimization methodology to offer a simplified or approximate solution
that could be used to evaluate the generated test scenarios. Constraints regarding the TSN
communications needed to be factored into the solution and the TT and ET┬¡tasks needed to
efficiently utilize the underlying hardware resources, while maintaining their criticality levels.
Additionally, realistic constraints with regards to, for instance, task chains latency and timing,
needed to be considered.
The deliverables described by the original TTTech problem description were:
Γאó A system that can accept a model of an ADAS platform and a list of parameters and in turn
generate a random set of TT and ET┬¡tasks with values derived from the given parameters.
Γאó A non┬¡trivial heuristic to find core assignments and a schedule for each core, for both TT
and ET┬¡tasks which satisfies their respective constraints.
Γאó A heuristic for scheduling task chains to increase the probability that task chains are
schedulable in the overall found schedule.
Γאó A model that can represent a realistic TSN communication backbone that can be used in
the scheduling of task chains to better take communication delay into account.
2.2
Scoping of this thesis
Given the complexity of the deliverables, such as modeling the ADAS platform based on the
desired parameters, and the fact that devising a good heuristic for task┬¡to┬¡core assignment and
scheduling requires extensive testing, some heuristic strategies may yield undesirable results
and thus might require refinement. It was not in the scope of this thesis to satisfy all of the
deliverables. As such, the scope of deliverables needed to be redefined and thus there have
been two significant changes:
The most significant change in scope, is that scheduling has been removed from the deliv┬¡
erables. The added complexity of having to also consider scheduability when designing the
models, the task generation tool and the heuristics for the task generation, would not allow for
this thesis to be done within the allotted time. This is a significant omission, but it was necessary
to better allow for more refinement on the other deliverables.
The next most significant change, is that the TSN communication backbone will be abstracted
away. This was excluded because, while it is an important constraint, the work required of
implementing or modelling a real TSN communication backbone would be extensive in context
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
3
==PAGE:12==
of the limited time frame. Also, since communication in this thesis is only relevant when trying
to schedule task chains, the inclusion of TSN communication is less relevant since scheduling
is not considered. Instead, a communication delay, calculated based on assumptions of ADAS
networking, will be used to represent the potential impact of network communication on a given
task set.
With these changes to the scope, the nature of what is to be delivered in this thesis also changes.
More focus will be put on the model, how it is designed and implemented, and how the differ┬¡
ent input and output files are structured. The task generation tool should be a robust piece
of software and should be able to serve as a foundation for further work, where networking
and schedulers can be added in an obvious place. As for task generation, one of the biggest
unforeseen difficulties with generating tasks and assigning them to cores, was that one of the
constraints that needed to be satisfied was the utilization of each core. Just generating an initial
task┬¡to┬¡core assignment, with a desired utilization, required a heuristic search algorithm and a
non┬¡trivial amount of processing time. Thus, a pivot was made to focus on the task generation
aspect of this thesis, meaning that the characteristics of an initial task┬¡set and task┬¡to┬¡core as┬¡
signment would be a bigger part of the deliverables than initially outlined by the original project
description.
2.3
Outline
For this thesis, the objective is to design and implement a software system for the purpose of
using meta┬¡heuristic optimization to generate a task set consisting of TT and ET┬¡tasks, based on
an configurable list of parameters and a simplified model of an ADAS platform. In particular, the
meta┬¡heuristic optimization will be used to change the WCETs and the core assignments of the
tasks in order to achieve utilization of each core as close as possible to the desired parameter┬¡
set value. Secondly, meta┬¡heuristic optimization will also be used to randomly generate task
chains based on a parameter┬¡set rule set. This thesis will investigate if two different meta┬¡
heuristic algorithms, Simulated Annealing (SA) and Hill Climbing (HC), are appropriate to use
for solving this problem. Additionally, the effect on the running time and quality of result, by
changing key parameters of the input, such as the size of the model, the number of tasks, and
the period sizes, will be investigated.
The input to this problem is a model of an ADAS platform, called the platform model and a list
of parameters. With these two inputs, the system is to procure an output that includes:
Γאó A set of N ET and M TT┬¡tasks, all assigned to a core in the platform model.
Γאó A set of task chains.
The output has to also conform to these constraints:
Γאó All tasks are assigned to a core in a model that mirrors the input file. However, each task
should also have a list of other cores it can be assigned to, such that the output could be
used in another system, where tasks are reassigned to determine schedulability.
Γאó The period and WCET values of the tasks, and their task┬¡to┬¡core assignment, should be
such that the delta between the average core utilization and the desired utilization value
is minimized.
Γאó The task chains should be generated based on the parameters set in the input and the
difference between the desired properties of the chains and the properties of the generated
chains, should be minimized.
4
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:13==
Γאó All the values of the tasks, such as WCET, period and deadline, have to be within their
individual constraints.
Additionally, this thesis seeks to determine the quality and characteristics of the generated so┬¡
lutions experimentally, for the purpose that these findings can be used to potentially generate
better initial solutions for a meta┬¡heuristic based tool as described in section 2.1.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Model
ADAS architecture, as illustrated in figure 3.1, generally consists of different end┬¡systems, or
hosts, that in turn have a varying number of CPUs, GPUs and SoCs. Additionally, the different
hosts can all potentially be running different operating systems. This is then all tied together
by a real┬¡time communication backbone, usually PCI┬¡e or Ethernet. When working on the task
generation for this thesis, I need to be able to simulate an ADAS system, so that task assign┬¡
ment, scheduling etc. all are representative of the actual domain where they would run. This
means that the different components of the ADAS system need to be modelled in an abstract
way, that preserves the essential properties of the ADAS architecture and the components,
but does away with out┬¡of┬¡scope complexity. In this thesis there are three models: the hard┬¡
ware model, the application model and the configuration model. The following is an overview
of these models and the different assumptions and abstractions, I have made when modelling
the different components and parts of the systems.
Figure 3.1: Overview of an ADAS platform. Illustration provided by TTTech.
3.1
Overview of the hardware model
The Γא¥hardware modelΓא¥ is a model of the hardware architecture, meaning the CPUs, GPUs, com┬¡
munication backbone etc. This section will explain how each hardware component is modelled
in the system and the thought process of what information was included and what was excluded.
For the most part, the explanation of the components in this section will also be how the Java
classes of these components are modelled, but for the most part, this section will not include
any implementation specific attributes.
6
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:15==
3.1.1
Platform model
All the models of the CPUs, Chains, etc. need to be contained in a single entity, in this thesis, the
Γא¥platform modelΓא¥ serves that function and is an abstraction of the entire ADAS architecture. The
model is comprised a list of End┬¡systems, a list of Task Chains, and a Network Topology. The
platform model contains most of what is featured in figure 3.1, with the three notable exceptions
being operating systems and the differentiation of CPUs and GPUs.
Operating systems have been abstracted away, since, in the context of task scheduling, the
main difference across operating systems would be the scheduler, and I have determined
that using different schedulers on different end┬¡systems, other than a sound default choice for
scheduling TT and ET┬¡tasks, would be out of scope for this thesis.
The Platform model also does not contain any GPUs or SoCs═╛ these are all called CPUS. For
the purposes of this thesis, there is no need to distinguish between different processor units,
since they in the TTTech project description, are only differentiated by their micro┬¡tick value and
end┬¡system association, and are thus, in all other regards, are the same.
3.1.2
End┬¡systems and CPUs
An end┬¡system represents an independent system in the platform model, meaning a system
that would have its own OS and up to several CPUs. The different end┬¡systems are connected
via a communication backbone. For this thesis, an end system is simply modelled as having
a list of CPUs. An argument could be made that end┬¡systems could be abstracted away, and
just having the CPUs be linked together via the communication backbone would be sufficient,
but the end┬¡systems where kept for flexibility in possible further work on this thesis. Addition┬¡
ally, for modelling and simulating various communication delays, such as propagation delay.
I have determined that there should be a difference in communication between two different
end┬¡systems, that are typically connected via. Ethernet, and two CPUs that would usually have
much faster communication. This will be expanded on later in the section on communication.
Similarly to the end┬¡systems, the CPU model is, in this thesis, represented by just a list of cores.
This could be expanded in the future, if different CPUs in a given system would need different
properties.
3.1.3
Cores
Cores are the smallest hardware component included in this model. They are also the most
significant, because they contain the most information with regards to assigning and scheduling
tasks. As per TTTech project description, the cores are represented by a micro┬¡tick value, in the
range of 100s of microseconds. The micro┬¡tick can be thought of as the smallest unit of time
with regards to scheduling tasks, meaning that a task has to execute for a least one micro┬¡tick.
Each core also has a schedule type, which determines what type of task that is reserved to only
be able to run that core. There are three possible values: Γא¥TTΓא¥, Γא¥ETΓא¥, and Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥. Read as
being reserved for only TT┬¡tasks, ET┬¡tasks, or a mix of both.
3.1.4
Communication backbone
The different components in an ADAS system all need to communicate with each other, which
means that the hardware model has to account for this. Especially for task┬¡scheduling, there
needs to be a network that can handle real┬¡time communication. The TTTech project descrip┬¡
tion presents certain specifications of a TSN network, such as ΓאשIEEE 802.1QbvΓאש [10] and ΓאשIEEE
802.1.As┬¡revΓאש [11], that should be met as to meet one of the constraints that exists when schedul┬¡
ing task chains. However, do to the complexity of implementing a model of a TSN network with
these correctness conditions, I determined it to be out of scope of this thesis. As a result, the
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
7
==PAGE:16==
model for the communication backbone is two┬¡fold: a model of a network topology, that has
a list of switches, each of which is connected to one or more end┬¡systems, so that a network
topology can be modelled. Additionally, there is a definition of a lower bound for communica┬¡
tion delay in a chain, based on sensible assumptions, to give an estimate of the communication
delay that a scheduler would need to take into account.
A switch is represented as two lists: one list contains the different end┬¡systems that are con┬¡
nected to that switch and the other list represents the other switches that are connected to the
switch. With this model, it is possible to make a simple representation of any desired network
topology, such as a ring or star topology.
To best represent a realistic communication delay for tasks in a task chain, there are several
aspects of the network communication that must be considered. First there is the port delay
for the different devices, which is a value that can be looked up, but is not available to me.
Secondly, there is the propagation delay, which is the time it takes a single bit to travel through
a cable. This could be calculated, if the precise length and type of cable were known. Since I
donΓאשt have the information needed to give a precise number, propagation and port delays will be
given a default delay of 20 ┬╡s per task chain. There is also a forwarding delay, which is the time
it takes a switch to forward the data, but this value is very dependent on the model of switch
used. After deliberation with TTTech, I will be assuming the forwarding delay to be 1 ┬╡s per
switch used in the task chain network route. Lastly, the transmission time must be considered,
the transmission time is the time it takes to transfer a message from the switch onto the link
and can be calculated by using d =
bΓטק8
sΓטק109 , where d is the duration of the transmission, b is the
size of the data frame in bytes and s is the link speed. Every transmission will use standard
values: the link speed will be 1 Gbps for every link in the system, and every data frame will
be the maximum size standard Ethernet frame, which is 1518 bytes [12]. This means that the
transmission delay for a message in ┬╡s is:
1518 Γטק8
1 Γטק109 = 0, 000012144s Γיט12┬╡s
Thus, for each task chain, a communication delay will be calculated using this definition:
Definition 1. For every task chain T, there will exist a route rT , which will be defined as a
ordered list of switches of size n called sT that communication need to go through. The total
communication delay in ┬╡s for a task chain T is given as:
12 Γטק(n + 1) + 1 Γטקn + 10
3.2
Overview of the application model
The application model is so called because it models the applications that would run on the
ADAS system. Specific applications are abstracted away, and instead in this thesis, there are
two main things things to consider in the application model: tasks and task chains. This section
will explain how these are modelled and the decision making process behind it.
3.2.1
Tasks
There are two types of tasks that need to be represented in the model: TT┬¡tasks and ET┬¡tasks.
Since they are similar, there is a big overlap in what is needed to represent them, but there are
of course some important differences, that require consideration. For the purpose of clarity, I
will present each task type in two different sections, so to better highlight the differences.
8
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:17==
TT┬¡tasks
In the system, a TT┬¡task is represented by the following values: ID, Name Period, Deadline,
WCET, CPU ID, Core ID, Max Jitter, Core Affinity, Deadline Type, Offset, and Priority.
ID and Name are for identifying unique tasks in the model, since two tasks can have the same
values, there is a need for a unique ID. The name is not unique, but could be used to give the
user information about the type of task being run, perhaps Γא¥CAM12Γא¥ could be a task number 12
that has to do with camera.
With regards to Period, WCET and deadline, for this project, these have some specific proper┬¡
ties: For all tasks, it is the case that period is a positive integer with a minimum value of Γאש1Γאש and
is selected at random for each task from the Γאשparameters.jsonΓאש file, as described in appendix
A.1. For a given task, deadline is either implicit, meaning the same as the period of that task, or
arbitrary, which for TT┬¡tasks means that it is a percentage of the task period, up to 100%. The
type of deadline that a task has is represented by the Deadline Type field, which has informa┬¡
tion about whether the deadline is implicit or arbitrary, but also what percentage of the period
the deadline should be, when the deadline type is arbitrary. The deadline type and percentage
value is set the Γאשparameters.jsonΓאש file, and is the same for all TT┬¡tasks when set.
WCET is also a positive integer between 1 and the period of a given task. The WCET value for
a task is calculated using a heuristics┬¡based algorithm, which is described in chapter 4
Each task has a core ID and a CPU ID, that describe what core and CPU the task is assigned
to. This along with the core affinity of the task, is used for the task┬¡set generation, for calculating
utilization of a given core, and also for making sure that a task is not assigned to a core that is
reserved for a different type of task. The core affinity, is represented as a list of core IDs, that
describes what cores this task can be assigned to. If the list is empty, the task can be assigned
to any core in the system, if the list contains just core ID it means that the core can only be run
by that core, and if the list contains more than one core, it can be run on any of the cores in the
list. For a more detailed explanation, refer to appendix A.3.
A TT┬¡task also contains the values for offset, sometimes called release time, and jitter. Both
offset and jitter are non┬¡negative integers, which, depending of the parameters set in the Γאשpa┬¡
rameters.jsonΓאש file, are either Γאש0Γאש or a percentage of the period of a given task. In appendix A.1,
there is a detailed explanation of how this is set and calculated.
Lastly, there is there is the priority, which is used in when scheduling tasks, to determine the
order in which tasks are selected for scheduling. In this thesis, all TT┬¡tasks share the same
highest priority of Γאש1Γאש.
ET┬¡tasks
ET┬¡tasks have mostly the same values as TT┬¡tasks. Period, Deadline, WCET, CPU ID, Core
ID, Max Jitter, Core Affinity, Deadline Type, and Priority are all the same with the exception that
period is called MIT in the ET┬¡task model, but it is functionally the same. Also, ET┬¡tasks have
rules for deadline and priority. The deadline on ET┬¡tasks can be more than the MIT of that task,
which is different from TT┬¡tasks, where the deadline can only be as high as the period. ET┬¡tasks
have lower priorities that TT┬¡tasks, but are not all the same value. For this thesis all ET┬¡task
priorities are set to Γאש┬¡1Γאש, since scheduling is not a part of this system, so specific priorities are
not needed, and a ΓאשjokerΓאש value was used. Offset is not in the ET┬¡task model, since that only
exists for TT┬¡tasks.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
9
==PAGE:18==
3.2.2
Task Chains
Task chains are modelled as a list of tasks, where the order of the list reflects the order that the
tasks need to be executed. The list can have the same task in it multiple times. Chains also
have a priority, like both ET and TT┬¡tasks. Lastly, they have a maximum latency of the chain,
which represents a time┬¡budget for the chain. A chain has to have all of its tasks executed within
the maximum latency.
3.3
Overview of the configuration model
Ultimately, this thesis is about creating a system that can generate task┬¡sets of TT and ET┬¡tasks,
based on a desired configuration, such that they can be used to train scheduling algorithms.
This means that there also has to exist a model of these configuration parameters and, more
importantly, there needs to be a model of the generated task sets that the system will produce.
This section will describe the how the configuration parameters are interpreted and represented
in the model, and also how a task┬¡set is represented in the output. Additionally, this section will
also serve as a brief overview of the 3 files that make up the configuration model. Note that this
section will discuss important thoughts behind the models and give a general understanding
of them, but not the specific semantics of the files. For a reading guide and full explanation of
every parameter and field of all 3 files, refer to appendix A.
3.3.1
Parameters
The main configuration model is a file called Γאשparameters.jsonΓאש and is based on values provided
by TTTech. This file is where you change the parameters of the task set that you want to create.
The table is divided into four different sections: environment, system, task and chain.
The environment section is information about how the system architecture should look, in regard
to the amount of CPUs and cores. If no additional architecture configuration file exits, then an
architecture will be constructed from these values. At the time of hand┬¡in, this configuration
is homogeneous, meaning the cores will be equally divided among the CPUs on a Γא¥best┬¡effortΓא¥
basis. A simple network topology will also be created with every CPU belonging to a single end┬¡
system all of with are connected to the same switch, in a star network topology. The ΓאשSchedule
TypeΓאש will be applied to every core in the system and micro tick values will be applied based
on a rule┬¡set described in detail in appendix A.1. If an architecture configuration file is also
provided, then every field except ΓאשPreemptibleΓאש will be ignored, and the architecture will mirror
the architecture configuration file.
The system section is pretty simple, it describes how many tasks are to be in the application
model, and also what the desired utilization per core should be for the produced task set. The
last field is a probability distribution of the different period values that the tasks are assigned.
[1000, 0.2], would mean that there is a 20% chance for tasks to assigned a period of 1000.
In the task section, there are three fields Γאשallowed jitterΓאש, Γאשrelease┬¡timeΓאש and Γאשdeadline typeΓאש. In
short, the first two describe what percentage of tasks that will have Γאש0Γאש as jitter and release┬¡time
and what percentage will have some integer value based on a percentage of a tasks period.
Deadline type is to set what type of deadline all tasks should have, either implicit or arbitrary, and,
if arbitrary is chosen, what range of percentages the deadline should be randomly picked from.
Γא¥arbitrary;50,150Γא¥ would mean that all tasks would have a deadline that is picked randomly from
50% to 150% of the period. As explained previously, TT┬¡tasks cannot have a deadline higher
than the period, so no matter how high that second number, TT┬¡tasks are capped at 100%.
Γא¥implicitΓא¥ would mean that all tasks have their deadline set to equal their period.
10
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:19==
The last section describes how many chains and what parameters they should be created from
by the system. ΓאשNum of chainsΓאש refers to the amount of chains the system will create. ΓאשNum
of tasks in chainsΓאש is the upper bound for how many tasks can be in a chain. ΓאשNum of lowΓאש
is the upper bound of how many times the period of a task can be higher that the previous
task in the chain. ΓאשNum of highΓאש is the opposite. ΓאשNum of host transitionsΓאש is the upper bound
of how many times a task in the chain is on a different end┬¡system than the previous task.
For a more detailed explanation, see appendix A.1. ΓאשLatency tightnessΓאש is sets how much the
latency of chains will be. For example, if the latency tightness is Γאש50Γאש, then the latency of each
chain will be 50% between the lower and upper bound for the possible latency of that particular
chain. The system will always adhere to the amount of chains and the tightness parameter, but
the remaining parameters are on a Γא¥best┬¡effortΓא¥ basis, as not all chains should have the same
characteristics and also not all chain configurations are possible depending on the task set that
has been created. The chains are created based on a heuristics┬¡algorithm.
An example of a parameters file can be found in appendix A.1.1.
3.3.2
Architecture configuration
The architecture configuration exits in the file called Γאשconfig.xmlΓאש and is a XML model of a desired
architecture and network topology. It is structured much like section 3.1 meaning that there is a
ΓאשPlatform modelΓאש that contains a list of ΓאשEnd┬¡systemsΓאש each of witch contain a number of CPUS
and cores. Other than names and IDs, there is also information about each cores schedule type
and micro┬¡tick values. The topology is also modelled in this file and is as described previously,
a list of switches that each contain their respective list of end┬¡systems and switches they have
connections to. For an explanation of the file and also an example file, see appendix A.2.
3.3.3
Task set
The final output of the system is to be a set of tasks and task chains that then need to be used
by other systems to train scheduling algorithms. The output file is and XML file called Γאשtask┬¡setΓאש.
At the top of the file, the model includes utilization figures, that are calculated as a sum of the
utilization of all the cores, split into TT and ET utilization. There is also a figure that represents
the cost function that the underlying task generation heuristic uses, called ΓאשFitnessΓאש. The list of
tasks is ordered by their ID. For a more in depth look at the fitness of the solution, there is also
a list of the cores and their respective utilization. The idea being that if a cores is over or under
utilized it would be hard to make out by the total fitness figure at the top. The task chains are
presented with their names, priorities, fitness and latency. Each task in the chain is labeled as a
ΓאשrunnableΓאש, and contains the name of the task in question. The naming conventions and layout
of this model where adapted from previous work on task generation and scheduling, that was
shared with me by my supervisor, for better consistency an possible interoperability with other
such projects. An example task set can be seen in appendix A.3.1.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
11
==PAGE:20==
4
Solution
As mentioned in chapter 1, this thesis proposes a toll that can model a configurable ADAS
system and then assign a given number of TT and ET┬¡tasks to the cores in the model, using
meta┬¡heuristic algorithms. This chapter will give a detailed overview of the important compo┬¡
nents of this proposed tool, along with the meta┬¡heuristic algorithms and techniques that were
tested and ultimately chosen for the solution. The three main components of the solution, that
this thesis proposes are: Model initialization, task generation using meta┬¡heuristics, and chain
generation using meta heuristics. For each of these areas, the current version of the solution,
along with information about major previous iterations, will be presented. I created the solution
in Java, but the functions and algorithms will be presented in pseudo code. Note that the term
ΓאשalgorithmΓאש will be used loosely throughout this chapter.
4.1
Model initialization
When it comes to initializing the platform model, I believe the most interesting component is
the function that generates a platform model based solely on the parameters file. It makes it
possible to quickly try different task sets on different sizes of model, without having to provide
your own. This is great for types of testing, where the scale and number of cores are the most
important factor.
The model initialization function, as seen in ΓאשAlgorithm 1Γאש, starts with reading the amount of
hosts specified in the Γאשparameters.jsonΓאש file, and creates that amount of hosts with distinct IDs═╛
lines 1 through 4. Each host, or end┬¡system as theyΓאשre called in the program, is then assigned
a single CPU, and each CPU is given a unique letter ID═╛ lines 5 through 10. When this setup
is done, the function needs to assign a number of cores to each CPU, which is done in an
homogeneous manner, such that all CPUs have the same amount of cores. If all CPUs can
have the same amount of cores, then lines 11 through 19 creates them and assigns them. If
the amount of cores cannot be equally divided, then lines 21 through 36 assigns each CPU one
core at a time, in order, until no cores are left. At lines 39 to 41, the platform model is created
and returned.
Algorithm 1 Create Platform Model from Parameters
Input: parameters.json file
Output: platformModel : PlatformModel
1: endSystems ΓזנArrayList<EndSystem>()
2: for i Γזנ0 to NUMBER_OF_HOSTS do
3:
endSystems.add(new EndSystem(Γא¥ESΓא¥ + i))
4: end for
5: for each es ΓטטendSystems do
6:
cpuList ΓזנArrayList<CPU>()
7:
cpu ΓזנCPU(Γא¥CpuΓא¥ + indexOf(es) + 1, ASCIIToChar(64 + indexOf(es) + 1)) Γקד65 is ΓאשAΓאש in
ASCII
8:
cpuList.add(cpu)
9:
es.setCpuList(cpuList)
10: end for
11: if NUM_OF_CORES % NUMBER_OF_HOSTS = 0 then
12
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:21==
12:
for each es ΓטטendSystems do
13:
coreList ΓזנArrayList<Core>()
14:
for i Γזנ0 to NUM_OF_CORES / NUMBER_OF_HOSTS do
15:
core Γזנnew Core(Γא¥CoreΓא¥ + (i + 1), es.cpus[0].id + (i + 1), Γטע1, TTET)
16:
coreList.add(core)
17:
end for
18:
es.cpus[0].cores ΓזנcoreList
19:
end for
20: else
21:
remainder ΓזנNUM_OF_CORES % NUMBER_OF_HOSTS
22:
coreMap ΓזנHashMap<Integer, Integer>()
23:
for i Γזנ0 to NUMBER_OF_HOSTS do
24:
if i < remainder then
25:
coreMap.put(i, 1 + (NUM_OF_CORES ┬¡ remainder)/NUMBER_OF_HOSTS)
26:
else
27:
coreMap.put(i, (NUM_OF_CORES ┬¡ remainder)/NUMBER_OF_HOSTS)
28:
end if
29:
end for
30:
for i Γזנ0 to NUMBER_OF_HOSTS do
31:
coreList ΓזנArrayList<Core>()
32:
for j Γזנ0 to coreMap.get(i) do
33:
core Γזנnew Core(Γא¥CoreΓא¥ + (j + 1), endSystems[i].cpus[0].id + (j + 1), Γטע1, TTET)
34:
coreList.add(core)
35:
end for
36:
endSystems[i].cpus[0].cores ΓזנcoreList
37:
end for
38: end if
39: platformModel Γזנnew PlatformModel()
40: platformModel.endSystemList ΓזנendSystems
41: return platformModel
4.2
Task set generation
When choosing what meta┬¡heuristic algorithms to test and investigate for the purpose of gen┬¡
erating task sets, there were some unanswered questions, such as how different strategies
would behave in this domain and how big the solutions space would be.Γא¥ Therefore, multiple
meta┬¡heuristic algorithms were investigated and tested, in multiple different iterations, in order
to arrive at the final solution that this thesis presents. This section will give an overview of the
different solutions and the considerations behind their development.
4.2.1
Hill climbing
Hill Climbing, HC for short, is a heuristic search algorithm used in optimization problems to find
the peak of a solution space. It starts with an initial solution and iteratively explores neighboring
solutions, with the goal of moving towards the solution with the best fitness. Depending on
the specific version of HC, at each step, the algorithm compares the current solution with its
neighbors and selects one that improves the fitness function.
HC was the first algorithm chosen to be used in the system. The reason for this, was the sim┬¡
plicity and the ease of understanding of the algorithm, which would make it faster to develop a
prototype of the system. While these are good attributes, HC does have a major drawback, in
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
13
==PAGE:22==
that it can get stuck on local optima in the solution space where it cannot find a better neigh┬¡
bour, and it then terminates without finding the optimal solution. This is, of course, undesirable,
but in the context of generating an initial solution which could be used as starting point for an
optimization strategy as described in the original project description in section 2.1, there is the
possibility that a local optima could be good enough for the initial task┬¡to┬¡core assignment of
the output, and that finding a good enough local optima, would be faster than finding an optimal
solution.
When using HC, it would also be prudent to test and evaluate different variations of HC, such
as Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing (SAHC), where the algorithm evaluates all its neighbours and
chooses the best one. Therefore, both basic HC and SAHC were used and implemented in this
thesis for the purpose of testing the two variations of the HC algorithm on different problem┬¡
sizes, with the goal of seeing if there are important differences that would make one better than
the other for this problem.
Since both HC and SAHC are very similar, only the pseudo code for SAHC will be explained in
this section. The pseudo code for the basic HC used in this thesis can be seen in appendix B.1.
The pseudo code for the SAHC implementation can be seen in Algorithm 2. The code starts with
an initial solution which then has its fitness calculated and is set as the current solution. At lines
5 through 8, the initial solution is tested to determine whether it is an optimal solution, and if so,
the rest of the algorithms would be bypassed. At line 9, the loop begins and a neighbourhood
function is called which returns a list of neighbours and not just a single neighbour. Line 11 is
where there is a difference between simple HC and SAHC: SAHC finds the best neighbour in the
entire neighbour list, whereas simple HC looks through the list and selects the first neighbour
that is better than the current solution. The rest of the algorithm is rather straightforward, with
lines 13 through 15 being where the algorithm does not find a better neighbour and is at a local
optima. It breaks the loop and returns the solution. Lines 16 through 18 shows where an optimal
solution is found, then the loop is also broken the solution returned. Finally, lines 19 through 21
is where the algorithms climbs and accepts a new better solution and does the loop again.
Algorithm 2 Modify Tasks Using Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing
Input: initialSolution : PlatformModel
Output: bestSolution : PlatformModel
1: bool Γזנtrue
2: currentSolution ΓזנinitialSolution
3: currentSolution.fitness ΓזנcalculateFitness(currentSolution))
4: bestSolution Γזנnull
5: if currentSolution.fitness = 0 then
6:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution)
7:
bool Γזנfalse
8: end if
9: while bool do
10:
neighbours ΓזנgenerateCandidateMoves(currentSolution)
11:
bestNeighbour Γזנmin(for each n in neighbours ┬¡> calculateFitness(n))
12:
bestNeighbour.fitness ΓזנcalculateFitness(bestNeighbour)
13:
if currentSolution.fitness < bestNeighbour.fitness then
14:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution
15:
break
16:
else if bestNeighbour.fitness = 0 then
14
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:23==
17:
bestSolution ΓזנbestNeighbour
18:
break
19:
else
20:
currentSolution ΓזנbestNeighbour
21:
end if
22: end while
23: return bestSolution
4.2.2
Simulated annealing
Simulated Annealing, SA for short, proposed in 1983 by Kirkpatrick et al. [13], is an alternative
optimization strategy, that can address the limitations of HC. SA was inspired by the metallur┬¡
gical annealing processes from which it also got its name. It introduces a probabilistic element
to the search for optimal solutions. Unlike HCΓאשs deterministic approach, SA allows occasional
acceptance of worse solutions, making it possible to escape from local optima. This charac┬¡
teristic can make SA more versatile in traversing complex solution spaces. In contrast to HC,
which, like described earlier, may prematurely find and terminate at a sub┬¡optimal solution, SA
balances exploration in the beginning and becomes more selective over the course of its run,
which helps it explore more of the solution space.
Because of SAΓאשs adaptability and global exploration capability, this is the other meta┬¡heuristic
algorithm that I chose to use in the system, since it has the potential to overcome the challenges
of HC, especially in larger solution spaces. Based on this, I think that using both HC and SA as
the meta┬¡heuristic algorithms in the system is relevant. Comparing their performance across
different problem configurations could also lead to some valuable insight about which strategy
is most suitable for this domain.
The SA algorithm used in this thesis for task generation is presented in Algorithm 3. It starts
with the input, which is an initial solution. It then sets the initial solution as the current solution
and calculates the fitness. Then the parameters for the SA algorithm are set:
Γאó T is the initial temperature, which has the function of acting as a control parameter that
determines the likelihood of accepting worse solutions at the start of the algorithm. A
higher initial temperature allows the algorithm to explore a broader range of solutions,
including those that are worse than the current solution, to avoid getting trapped in local
optima early on.
Γאó Tmin is the temperature when the algorithm will stop.
Γאó alpha is part of the cooling strategy and is multiplied with the temperature at the end of
every loop, such that the temperature decreases.
Γאó ΓאשnumIterationΓאש is the amount of iterations the algorithm will do at a given temperature. A
higher value will result in more thorough exploration, but longer run times.
Γאó ΓאשminFitnessΓאש is the best fitness found so far. Initially it is set to the lowest possible number
in Java.
Γאó ΓאשbestSolutionΓאש is the best solution found, and will be the one returned when the algorithm
is done.
Next, at line 9 and 10 there are two loops, the outer loop is dependent on the temperature and
the inner loop is dependent on the ΓאשnumIterationΓאש parameter set as explained earlier. Lines 11
through 15 is the condition that checks for a optimal solution, meaning the fitness is equal to
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
15
==PAGE:24==
0. Next, at lines 17 through 20, the algorithm checks for the best solution that it has come
across and sets it equal to ΓאשbestSolutionΓאש. At line 21, the neighbourhood function is used to
generate a neighbouring solution, which then has its fitness calculated. Then, the Acceptance
Probability, also called the metropolis acceptance criterion, is calculated on lines 23 and 24. A
key characteristic of this function is that as the temperature T decreases, or as the difference
in fitness increases (making the new solution worse relative to the current one), the probability
of accepting the new solution decreases. This is what allows SA to accept bad solution in the
beginning, but go towards only accepting good solutions later in the run [14]. At lines 25 through
29, if a solution is better that the previous, it will be accepted or if the acceptance probability
is less than a randomly generated value between 0 and 1, it is also accepted. Line 31 shows
the cooling strategy, with T = T Γטקalpha, which is one of the more basic variants of a cooling
strategy. Many others exist [15], and could be experimented on, but this is out of the scope of
this thesis.
SA has a pretty standard implementation and it is mainly differentiated and customized by tuning
the parameters at the start or tuning the cooling strategy. For this thesis, these parameters were
manually tuned, based on informal experimentation, in order to find parameters that worked the
best for the workloads in this thesis. There are ways of automating this and using optimization
strategies, to find the best parameters for a given problem, such as using genetic programming
[16].
Algorithm 3 Modify Tasks Using Simulated Annealing
Input: initialSolution : PlatformModel
Output: bestSolution : PlatformModel
1: currentSolution ΓזנinitialSolution
2: currentSolution.fitness ΓזנcalculateFitness(currentSolution)
3: T Γזנ100
4: Tmin Γזנ0.001
5: alpha Γזנ0.9
6: numIterations Γזנ100
7: minFitness ΓזנΓט₧
8: bestSolution Γזנnull
9: while T > Tmin do
10:
for i Γזנ0 to numIterations do
11:
if calculateFitness(currentSolution) = 0 then
ΓקדOptimal solution
12:
minFitness ΓזנcurrentSolution.fitness
13:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution
14:
T Γזנ0
15:
break
16:
end if
17:
if currentSolution.fitness < minFitness then
ΓקדSet best solution visited so far
18:
minFitness ΓזנcurrentSolution.fitness
19:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution
20:
end if
21:
newSolution ΓזנgenerateCandidateMove(currentSolution)
22:
newSolution.fitness ΓזנcalculateFitness(newSolution)
23:
probabilityFunction Γזנ(newSolution┬¡fitness ΓטעcurrentSolution.fitness)/T
24:
ap Γזנexp(ΓטעprobabilityFunction)
25:
if newSolution.fitness < currentSolution.fitness then
ΓקדAccept better solution
16
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:25==
26:
currentSolution ΓזנnewSolution
27:
else if ap < Random(0, 1) then
ΓקדAccept worse solution
28:
currentSolution ΓזנnewSolution
29:
end if
30:
end for
31:
T ΓזנT ├ק alpha
32: end while
33: return bestSolution
4.2.3
Neighbourhood function
A neighborhood function, also sometimes called a Γא¥permutation functionΓא¥, is a needed compo┬¡
nent of optimization algorithms like HC and SA. It is responsible for defining the set of neighbor┬¡
ing solutions that are accessible from the current solution within a solution space. Generally,
the function will manipulate the current solution slightly in some way, an thus identify nearby
candidate solutions. Depending on whether HC or SA is used, one or more of these candidate
solutions are then assessed by the fitness function, and this allows the algorithms to make in┬¡
formed decisions on whether to accept a neighbour or to move away from a neighbour. The
effectiveness of the neighborhood function influences the meta┬¡heuristic algorithmΓאשs ability to
navigate the solution space efficiently, impacting the speed and the likelihood of discovering
optimal solutions in complex optimization problems.
For this thesis and the constraints outlined in section 2.3, the main values of generated tasks
that are of importance to satisfying the constraints are: periods/MITs, WCETs and task┬¡to┬¡core
assignment. Since the brief from TTTech specified that periods/MITs of each task are to be
selected randomly from a distribution of preset values, the only two values that can be changed
and still affect the average core utilization are the WCETs and the task┬¡to┬¡core assignment.
For the neighbourhood function, an interesting thing to investigate is what kind of manipulation
of the current solution yields the most desirable results. An early version of the neighbourhood
function developed for this thesis used a naive manipulation strategy that involved changing the
WCET value or core assignment of a random tasks. This does work, but there is the size of the
problem and the number of permutations to consider, especially if using HC or SAHC, where all
neighbours have to be generated. The upper bound of tasks to be used is 1000 each of both ET
and TT┬¡tasks. If each taskΓאשs WCET can be raised or lowered and each task can be reassigned
to all other available cores, for an 8 core system with 2000 tasks, a rough estimate the number
of neighbours would be: 2 Γטק2000 + (8 Γטע1) Γטק2000 = 18000. Generating that many neighbours
and calculating their fitness for each iteration of HC or SA would be resource intensive. Later
iterations of the neighbourhood function mitigated this issue in two ways: first by either raising or
lowering the WCET of a task, depending on the utilization of the core that the task is assigned
to. Additionally, instead of a task being reassigned to every valid core, and have all these
option be neighbours, a task is only reassigned to the least utilized core, in a hope that this will
generally balance the average core utilization. An updated equation for the worst case amount
of neighbours created using the same model as before is : 1 Γטק2000 + 1 Γטק2000 = 4000.
In addition to the efforts to minimize the amount of neighbours created═╛ specifically for SA, the
current iteration of the neighbourhood function does not select a task to manipulate at ran┬¡
dom, but rather it selects a random task from the Γאשworst utilizedΓאש core, meaning the core with
the highest delta from the desired utilization. HC and SAHC does not do this, since for their
neighbourhood manipulates every task and selects one.
In Algorithm 4, the current version of the neighbourhood function used in SA is shown. It begins
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
17
==PAGE:26==
at lines 2 and 3 where the algorithm accepts something called ΓארmoveTypeProbabilitySplitΓאש, which
is a user specified value that determines the probability of what type of manipulation should be
done to the a task in order to make a new neighbour. This is usually set to 75% probability of
changing the WCET value of a task, and a 25% probability that a task will be reassigned.
Line 4 is where an ideal random task is selected, meaning a task from the worst utilised core,
as descried earlier. The pseudo code of this can be seen in Algorithm 5.
Line 5 and 6 load the desired utilization values from the parameters file.
Line 7 produces a list of cores that are compatible with the chosen task, meaning that the core
has the same schedule type. Line 8 finds the core that the task will be reassigned to, should it
be reassigned. This is done by finding the least utilized core as explained earlier.
Lines 9 through 22 represents the process of changing a WCET for the task. 10┬¡15 is for TT
tasks and 16┬¡22 is for ET tasks. Looking at line 11, the TT┬¡utilization of the core of selected
task is compared to the desired TT┬¡utilization defined earlier. If the utilization is higher than that
desired utilization, the WCET of the task is lowered (line 12) and if the utilization is lower than
the desired utilization, the WCET of the task is raised (line 14). WCETs are raised or lowered
by choosing a random WCET value between the current WCET and the upper or lower limit of
WCETs, which is 1 or the period of the task.
If a task is to be reassigned, it is then moved on line 24.
Algorithm 5 starts with calculating the percentage of TT tasks, and it uses this for the random
function that determiners if a TT or ET task should be returned. Meaning if there is 75% of TT
tasks in the model, then 75% of the time, a random TT task will be returned. on lines 5 and 7,
the worst core is found, by the process explained earlier, and a random task from that core is
returned.
Algorithm 4 Task Generation Neighbourhood Function for SA
Input: currentSolution : PlatformModel
Output: bestSolution : PlatformModel
1: candidate ΓזנCurrent solution
2: moveDice Γזנrandom(0, 1)
3: moveProbabilitySplit Γזנ0.75
4: task ΓזנgetIdealRandomTask(candidate)
5: TT_UTIL ΓזנDesired TT_UTIL from parameters file
6: ET_UTIL ΓזנDesired ET_UTIL from parameters file
7: validCores ΓזנgetCoresWithCompatibleScheduleType(task)
8: coreIdToMoveTo ΓזנgetLeastUtilizedCore(validCores)
9: if moveDice ΓיñmoveProbabilitySplit then
ΓקדChange WCET of task
10:
if task is of type ΓאשTTtaskΓאש then
11:
if candidate.coreByTaskId(task.id).TTUtil > TT_UTIL then
ΓקדLower WCET
12:
task.newWCET ΓזנrandomWCET Γטט[1..oldWCET]
13:
else if candidate.coreByTaskId(task.id).TTUtil < TT_UTIL then
ΓקדRaise WCET
14:
task.newWCET ΓזנrandomWCET Γטט[oldWCET..task.period]
15:
end if
16:
else if task is of type ΓאשETtaskΓאש then
17:
if candidate.coreByTaskId(task.id).ETUtil > ET_UTIL then
ΓקדLower WCET
18:
task.newWCET ΓזנrandomWCET Γטט[1..oldWCET]
18
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:27==
19:
else if candidate.coreByTaskId(task.id).ETUtil < ET_UTIL then
ΓקדRaise WCET
20:
task.newWCET ΓזנrandomWCET Γטט[oldWCET..task.period]
21:
end if
22:
end if
23: else
ΓקדReassign task to another core
24:
moveTask(task, coreIdToMoveTo)
25: end if
26: return candidate
Algorithm 5 Get Ideal Random Task
Input: PlatformModel
Output: Task from the core with the biggest utilization delta
1: percentageOfTTTasks ΓזנPercentage of TT tasks out of all tasks in the model
2: TT_UTIL ΓזנDesired TT_UTIL from parameters file
3: ET_UTIL ΓזנDesired ET_UTIL from parameters file
4: if rand(0, 1) <= percentageOfTTTasks then
ΓקדReturn a random TT task
5:
worstTTCore ΓזנgetCoreWithBiggestUtilDelta(TT_UTIL)
return worstTTCore.getRandomTask()
6: else
ΓקדReturn a random ET task
7:
worstETCore ΓזנgetCoreWithBiggestUtilDelta(ET_UTIL)
return worstETCore.getRandomTask()
8: end if
4.2.4
Fitness function
A fitness function is a very important component in optimization algorithms, including HC and
SA. It serves as a quantitative measure to evaluate the quality or suitability of a solution within
a given problem space. The primary purpose of the fitness function is to assign a numerical
value, known as the fitness score, to each potential solution, indicating how well it satisfies the
objectives or criteria of the optimization problem. The fitness score helps guide the optimiza┬¡
tion algorithm in its search for an optimal solution by distinguishing between better and worse
solutions within the solution space. The design of an effective fitness function is crucial for
the success of meta┬¡heuristic algorithms, influencing their ability to navigate the solution space
efficiently and converge towards solutions that meet or exceed the specified criteria.
For this tool, the primary goal of the fitness function is assessing the delta of the average core
utilization and the desired core utilization. This will guide the algorithms to try to minimize that
delta and thus create a output file which satisfies that constraint. However, there are several
other qualities that the fitness function could assess, and after some informal experimentation
with the fitness function, several additions to the fitness function were added. The first addition
was that Γא¥badlyΓא¥ utilized cores, meaning utilization very close to 0 or over 1, were given a extra
penalty, so that the fitness function would be able to better converge towards solution were all
cores were at least theoretically schedulable. Another addition that was made, was to make the
fitness function assess the variance of WCET values used in the task set because initial testing
showed that solutions had the tendency to have many repeated numbers, with the WCETs
especially trending toward the lower value limit of 1, which was a clear bias in the created
WCETs.
The current implementation of the task generation fitness function can be seen in Algorithm 6.
Going through the algorithm: a fitness score is initialized with the value 0 at line 1, and the
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
19
==PAGE:28==
desired TT and ET utilization is loaded from the parameters file at lines 2 and 3. All cores in the
model are looped through and at lines 6 and 9, the utilization delta is added to the fitness value
for both TT and ET utilization respectively.
At line 12 each core in the model is then looped through again, and, at lines 14 and 16, a penalty
value is added to the fitness function if the utilization of a core is less than 0, 01 or more than
0, 99. At line 19 the aforementioned variance penalty is added.
The two helper methods for bad utilization penalty and for variance penalty can be seen in
Algorithm 7 and 8 respectively. Going through Algorithm 7, it returns either a penalty of 5, if the
core is not utilized at all, or, if the core has a utilization over 1, it returns the utilization multiplied
by 5 plus 1 as a penalty to be added to the fitness value. Algorithm 8 gets all the WCET values
and groups them by how many occurrences they have in the task set. If any WCET value occurs
more than 5% of the WCETS values, the amount of occurrences will be added to the fitness
value, though for small task sets, a penalty will be added if a WCET occurs more than once.
Algorithm 6 Task Generation Fitness Function
Input: candidate : PlatformModel
Output: fitness : double
1: fitness Γזנ0
2: TT_UTIL ΓזנDesired TT_UTIL from parameters file
3: ET_UTIL ΓזנDesired ET_UTIL from parameters file
4: for each c in candidate.cores do
5:
if c.scheduleType is TT then
6:
fitness Γזנfitness + |c.TTUtil ┬¡ TT_UTIL|
7:
end if
8:
if c.scheduleType is ET then
9:
fitness Γזנfitness + |c.ETUtil ┬¡ ET_UTIL|
10:
end if
11: end for
12: for each c in candidate.cores do
13:
if isWithinPenaltyValue(c.ETUtil) and c.scheduleType is ET then
14:
fitness Γזנfitness + calculateBadUtilPenalty(c.ETUtil)
15:
else if isWithinPenaltyValue(c.TTUtil) and c.scheduleType is TT then
16:
fitness Γזנfitness + calculateBadUtilPenalty(c.TTUtil)
17:
end if
18: end for
19: fitness Γזנfitness + calculateVariancePenalty(candidate)
20: return fitness
Algorithm 7 Calculate Bad Utilization Penalty
Input: util : double
Output: penalty : double
1: return max(5, 5 ├ק util + 1)
Algorithm 8 Calculate Variance Penalty
Input: candidate : PlatformModel
20
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:29==
Output: penalty : int
1: wcets Γזנlist of WCETs from all tasks in candidate
2: penalty Γזנ0
3: sameWCETsAllowed Γזנmax(wcets.size() ├ק 0.05, 1)
4: occurrences Γזנgroup wcets by value and count occurrences
5: for each wcet Γטטwcets do
6:
if occurrences.get(wcet) > sameWCETsAllowed then
7:
penalty Γזנpenalty + occurrences.get(wcet)
8:
end if
9: end for
10: return penalty
4.3
Chains
Task chains need to be generated in a different way than task sets and this warranted a dif┬¡
ferent set of considerations. The first consideration I had, was if I should use a deterministic
algorithm or a meta┬¡heuristic one, I decided on using a meta┬¡heuristic based approach instead
of a deterministic for two reasons:
Γאó The chains need to comply with several parameters and there are many Γא¥correctΓא¥ ways
of creating a chain, thus it is difficult to formulate a plan for how a deterministic algorithm
should work without all the chains being similar to each other. Using a meta┬¡heuristic
based approach should allow the algorithm to explore the solution space more randomly
without bias.
Γאó The chains are not being scheduled in this thesis, and so the generated chains, much
like the generated tasks, are to be an initial configuration, that should be manipulated
be another system. Thus, evaluating the actual Γא¥qualityΓא¥ of the chains with respect to
scheduling is not possible, and any chain generated is to be manipulated anyway. If long
chains are to be generated═╛ as the solution space gets larger, a heuristic approach is able
to terminate with solutions that might not satisfy all criteria, but are still good enough for
the propose of the system.
This section will give an overview of the different components of the meta┬¡heuristic approach
and why they were chosen.
4.3.1
Hill climbing
When deciding on what meta┬¡heuristic algorithm to use, both HC, Steepest Ascent HC and SA
were shortly tested and compared, to see what kind of performance each of them had. The
comparison showed that HC was generally the fastest, but it had the worst results. SA was
almost as fast, and had much better results, but still not optimal. Steepest Ascent HC was the
slowest, often needing 2┬¡3 times as long, but generally produced optimal chains. Based on
this, I decided on using Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing as the main algorithm for generating task
chains, even though it was slower, so that the system had the best output possible. For large
input values, I will still be comparing Steepest Ascent HC and SA. A pseudo code version of the
chain generation algorithm based on SA along with its neighbourhood function can be seen in
appendix B.2.
The algorithm for generating chains using SAHC is shown in Algorithm 9. The structure of the
algorithm is of course the same as Algorithm 2, since they are both SAHC algorithm and work
the same way. The only difference is in the neighbourhood function and the fitness function that
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
21
==PAGE:30==
will both be explained in the next sections.
Algorithm 9 Assign Chain Tasks and Values Using Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing
Input: chain : Chain, latency : double
Output: bestSolution : Chain
1: bool Γזנtrue
2: currentSolution Γזנchain
3: currentSolution.tasks ΓזנsetInitialChainTasks(currentSolution))
4: currentSolution.fitness ΓזנcalculateChainFitness(currentSolution))
5: bestSolution Γזנnull
6: if currentSolution.fitness = 0 then
ΓקדInitial solution is optimal
7:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution
8:
bool Γזנfalse
9: end if
10: while bool do
11:
neighbours ΓזנgenerateCandidateMoves(currentSolution)
12:
bestNeighbour Γזנmin(for each n in neighbours ┬¡> calculateChainFitness(n))
13:
if currentSolution.fitness < bestNeighbour.fitness then
ΓקדTop of hill
14:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution
15:
break
16:
else if bestNeighbour.fitness = 0 then
ΓקדSolution is optimal
17:
bestSolution ΓזנbestNeighbour
18:
break
19:
else
20:
currentSolution ΓזנbestNeighbour
ΓקדClimb
21:
end if
22: end while
23: bestSolution.calculateAndSetLatency(latency)
24: return bestSolution
4.3.2
Neighbourhood function
There are two main changeable characteristics of a task chain: the order of the tasks in the
chain, and the tasks that are included in the chain. The neighbourhood function needs to ma┬¡
nipulate these characteristics, by either swapping the order of two random tasks in the chain,
or replacing a task in the chain, with a random valid task from the platform model. For HC, the
neighbourhood function needs to do multiple permutations of this, but it does not scale well to
do all possible permutations, since the number of neighbours of the task order of a given chain
of size n is n!. For the first neighbourhood function that I tested, each task in the chain was
swapped with another random task in the chain just once, which means that there were only n
neighbours for a chain of size n. This was later expanded so that each task in the chain was
also swapped with its immediate neighbours, such that task number i in the chain was swapped
with number i+1 and iΓטע1. Preliminary testing showed that this performed better than the initial
neighbourhood function, meaning an good solution was found faster even though more neigh┬¡
bours are considered. Additionally, the neighbourhood function replaces each task in the chain
with a random task from the platform model once, such that the total amount of neighbours
generated from a chain of size n is (n Γטק3) Γטע2 + n.
The current neighbourhood function can be seen in Algorithm 10. The lines 3 through 7 are
where each task in the chain is, in turn, replaced with a random task from the model. Lines
22
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:31==
8 through 23 are, as describes earlier, where each task is swapped with a random task in the
chain, the previous task in the chain and the next task in the chain. All of these changes are
added to the neighbours list as new candidate chains and the list is returned.
Algorithm 10 Chain Generation Neighbourhood Function for SAHC
Input: currentSolution : Chain
Output: neighbours : List of Chain
1: neighbours Γזנempty list
2: candidateChain ΓזנcurrentSolution
3: for i Γזנ0 to candidateChain.size do
ΓקדReplace tasks
4:
newRandomTask Γזנa random TT task from model
5:
replace candidateChain.tasks[random(0, candidateChain.size)] with newRandomTask
6:
neighbours.add(candidateChain)
7: end for
8: for i Γזנ0 to chainSize Γטע1 do
ΓקדSwap every task with a random one
9:
b Γזנrandom(0, candidateChain.size
10:
swap i and b in candidateChain
11:
neighbours.add(candidateChain)
12: end for
13: for i Γזנ0 to chainSize Γטע1 do
ΓקדSwap every task with next task in list
14:
b Γזנi + 1
15:
swap i and b in candidateChain
ΓקדUsing min(b, candidateChain.size)
16:
neighbours.add(candidateChain)
17: end for
18: for i Γזנ0 to chainSize Γטע1 do
ΓקדSwap every task with previous task in list
19:
candidateChain ΓזנcurrentSolution)
20:
b Γזנi Γטע1
21:
swap i and b in candidateChain
ΓקדUsing max(0, b)
22:
neighbours.add(candidateChain)
23: end for
24: return neighbours
4.3.3
Fitness function
As explained before, the quality of a task chain is hard to quantify when not doing scheduling.
With this in mind, the fitness function for chains in this thesis is a measure of how well they
satisfy the constraints that are set in the parameters file. Each chain is given a set of constraints
with regards to period transitions and host transitions, as an example if a chain is generated
with 2 host transitions, but the desired number is 3, then a penalty of (3 Γטע2) Γטק3 = 3 is given.
Additionally, to make chains where there are not too many repeat tasks, another penalty is given
is a chain has too many of the same task═╛ a different penalty is given is the same tasks is more
than once in a row and if more than a percentage of tasks is the same tasks. This can be seen in
Algorithm 11, where lines 2 through 4 calculate how many host and period transitions the given
chain has, and then in lines 5, 8 and 11, these values are compared with the desired values that
the chains of the task set should have. The delta between the actual and desired values are
added to the fitness value. Host transitions are more important constraint to satisfy than than
period transitions, and therefor the delta between desired and actual number of host transitions
is multiplied by 3 before its added to the fitness value. On line 14 a variance penalty is added
to the fitness value═╛ the variance penalty algorithm is can be seen in Algorithm 12.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
23
==PAGE:32==
For the variance penalty of Algorithm 12, there are three factors that determine if a chain gets
a penalty based on variance:
Γאó Two or more of the same task in a row give a penalty, as seen on lines 7 through 3.
Γאó If 25% of the tasks in a chain are duplicates, a penalty of the amount of duplicates will be
given. For instance if a chain 20 tasks only had 14 unique tasks in it, a penalty of 6 would
be added to the fitness value. This is seen on lines 14 through 18.
Γאó Any one task must not be more than 25% of the task chain. This gives a penalty of 5, as
seen on lines 20 and 21.
Algorithm 11 Calculate Fitness of a Chain
Input: chain : Chain
Output: fitness : double
1: fitness Γזנ0
2: actualNumHostTransitions ΓזנcalculateHostTransitions(chain)
3: actualLowToHighPeriodTransitions ΓזנcalculatePeriodTransitions(chain, LOWHIGH)
4: actualHighToLowPeriodTransitions ΓזנcalculatePeriodTransitions(chain, HIGHLOW)
5: if chain.desiredNumHostTransitions ╠╕= actualNumHostTransitions then
6:
fitness Γזנfitness + |chain.desiredNumHostTransitions ΓטעactualNumHostTransitions| ├ק 3
7: end if
8: if chain.desiredLowToHighPeriodTransitions ╠╕= actualLowToHighPeriodTransitions then
9:
fitness Γזנfitness+|chain.desiredLowToHighPeriodTransitionsΓטעactualLowToHighPeriodTransitions|
10: end if
11: if chain.desiredHighToLowPeriodTransitions ╠╕= actualHighToLowPeriodTransitions then
12:
fitness Γזנfitness+|chain.desiredHighToLowPeriodTransitionsΓטעactuafHighToLowPeriodTransitions|
13: end if
14: fitness Γזנfitness + calculateChainVariancePenalty(chain)
15: return fitness
Algorithm 12 Calculate Chain Variance Penalty
Input: chain : Chain
Output: penalty : double
1: penalty Γזנ0
2: taskIds Γזנlist of all task IDs in chain
3: taskIdset Γזנset of all task IDs in chain
4: occurrences Γזנgroup taskIds by value and count occurrences
5: difference Γזנ|taskIds.size ΓטעtaskIdset.size|
6: maxDuplicatesAllowed Γזנmax(taskIds.size ├ק 0.25, 1)
7: if taskIds.size ΓיÑ2 then
8:
for i Γזנ0 to taskIds.size Γטע1 do
Γקד2 or more of same tasks in a row
9:
if taskIds[i] = taskIds[i + 1] then
10:
penalty Γזנpenalty + 1
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end if
14: difference Γזנ|taskIds.size ΓטעtaskIdset.size|
15: maxDuplicatesAllowed Γזנmax(taskIds.size ├ק 0.25, 1)
24
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:33==
16: if difference ΓיÑmaxDuplicatesAllowed then
ΓקדMax 25% total duplicates
17:
penalty Γזנpenalty + difference
18: end if
19: for taskId : taskIdset do
20:
if occurrences[taskId] > max(taskIds.size ├ק 0.25, 1) then
ΓקדSingle task max 25%
21:
penalty Γזנpenalty + 5
22:
end if
23: end for
24: return penalty
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
25
==PAGE:34==
5
Experiments and Results
5.1
Experiment setup
Hardware
All tests were run either exclusively on the Macbook or the desktop. No collection of data or
graph in will feature data mixed from both.
Computer 1
Γאó Computer ┬¡ Apple Macbook Air (2020)
Γאó Processor ┬¡ Apple M1 (8 core)1
Γאó RAM ┬¡ 16 GB
Computer 2
Γאó Computer ┬¡ Windows Desktop
Γאó Processor ┬¡ Intel Core i5 6600K 3,5 GHz
Γאó RAM ┬¡ 16 GB
5.1.1
Test cases and files
All parameter, configuration and task set files used for all testing will be included in a zipped
folder with this thesis called Γא¥files.zipΓא¥. All the files used can be found in a folder named Γא¥test
filesΓא¥ a list with all full file┬¡names and test case names can be found. This section will also
introduce the standard configuration files that will be used across testing. Note that all the con┬¡
figuration files described here will not include the topology information in the XML files available
in appendix C. For all instances, a basic star network topology is used, unless otherwise noted.
Configuration file 1
Configuration file 1 is a model of a system that looks like figure 3.1 in section 3. It is 3 end┬¡
systems each 1 CPU and with 4 cores. In figure 3.1 one end┬¡system has two GPU cores. In
this model, 2 cores on one end┬¡system will be ET only. The rest will be TT and ET. The file can
be seen in appendix C.1.
Configuration file 2
Configuration file 2 is a small system of only 2 cores. This small model will challenge the neigh┬¡
bourhood function, since there are so few cores to assign tasks to. Also for large task sets, the
algorithms might struggle with fitting all tasks on just two cores. The file can be seen in appendix
C.2.
Configuration file 3
Configuration file 3 is a big system with 6 end┬¡systems and 12 CPUs with 48 cores spread
amongst the cores. There system is homogeneous with respects to schedule type, so all cores
are TT and ET. This model is included to test the fitness function when few tasks need to be
assigned to many cores. Also to see how the number of cores affect the run time. The file can
be seen in appendix C.3.
Configuration file 4
Configuration file 4 is the same as file 1, but all cores are TT and ET. This is to see if completely
homogeneous models behave differently. The file can be seen in appendix C.4.
1The manufacturer does not list the clock speed for this processor.
26
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:35==
Configuration file 5
Configuration file 5 is the same with regards to cores and CPUs as 1 and 4, but is the schedule┬¡
type for the cores is heterogeneous, such that 5 cores are only TT, 5 cores are only TT and 2
are TT and ET. This will help to test if heterogeneous models behave differently. The file can
be seen in appendix C.5.
5.2
Test: Task generation meta┬¡heuristic algorithms compared
This test is a comparison of the three meta┬¡heuristic algorithms for task generation discussed
in section 4.2, for the purposes of seeing how they handle increasingly larger task sets. For this
test, each algorithm is run on 5 different sizes of task┬¡sets: 100, 200, 500, 1000 and 2000, all
equally split with regards to TT and ET tasks. Each task┬¡set size is run 10 times and an average
of these runs used as the final time and fitness values. There is a 10 minute time limit where a
run will be terminated. The test is using configuration file 4.
Figure 5.1: All algorithms run on configuration 4. Average of 10 runs. Fitness capped at 1000.
p0 = 100 tasks, p2 = 200 tasks, p3 = 500 tasks, p4= 1000 tasks and p5 = 2000 tasks.
Looking at the results in Figure 5.1, it shows that while SA has the best overall performance,
it is not the fastest at smaller task┬¡set sizes of 100 and 200. However, the time taken for SA
scales linearly with the size of the input, meaning that with a doubling of the input, it doubles the
time taken. This is as opposed to HC and SAHC, which both look to be scaling exponentially
with the size of the input, already reaching the 10 minute time limit at 1000 tasks. For very
small inputs, as mentioned before, SAHC and HC are better than SA, and the best performer
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
27
==PAGE:36==
for 100 tasks is HC, which is probably because it has to less fitness assessments than SAHC.
Bot score badly for 1000 and 2000 tasks, the but SAHC is consistently better than HC as the
task┬¡set size increases. While not shown in Figure 5.1 for readability reasons: at 2000 tasks,
SAHC has a fitness values about 1000 lower than HC.
Also not shown in Figure 5.1 is the inconstant performance of SA on larger task sets. Looking
more detailed results from the SA test in Figure 5.2, it can be see that it finds a near┬¡zero solution
in half the runs and it has a fitness closer to 100 in the other half. This indicates that parameters
of the SA algorithm are perhaps not tuned very well for larger task┬¡sets. More manual tuning
could be necessary or an automatic parameter optimization strategy could be used, as alluded
to in section 4.2.2.
Figure 5.2: SA algorithm run 10 times on configuration 4. p0 = 100 tasks, p2 = 200 tasks, p3 =
500 tasks, p4= 1000 tasks and p5 = 2000 tasks.
Figure 5.3 shows how the fitness score of the different algorithms changes over the course of a
run. The run shown is a single 500 task run, it was chosen because all three algorithms did, on
average, find an optimal solutions during the 10 run test. It can be seen that both HC and SAHC
trend toward zero on a pretty steep slope. SA meanwhile follows standard HC pretty closely,
but then never finds a optimal solution that would make it stop, and it then continues for 4 times
as many iterations exploring the solution space. Interestingly, even though SA, by far, did the
most exploring of the solutions space, it also was by far the quickest at 58 seconds versus the
130 and 279 seconds respectively of the other two algorithms used. The explanation for this
is that SA neighbourhood function only generates one neighbour that the fitness function then
assesses. For HC and SAHC, all possible neighbours are generated and either some or all
of them, depending on the algorithm, are assessed by the fitness function. This is even more
clearly show in figure 5.4, where SAHC hit the time limit of 10 minutes only after 154 iterations,
while SA manages over 12000 in half the that time.
It is very clear from this test that SA is generally the best performer in terms of speed, when it
comes to scaling up the amount of tasks in the task┬¡set. It is however not consistent in finding
an optimal solution at larger task┬¡set sizes, with large variations from run to run. Additionally, it
rarely finds a optimal solution of fitness 0, but some near┬¡zero solution, which means it spends
many more iterations than need be. This indicates that there is a need for a better definition
28
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.3: The fitness value for every iteration of the three algorithms run on configuration 4
with 500 tasks. Time limit was 10 minutes.
Figure 5.4: The fitness value for every iteration of the SA and SAHC algorithms run on config┬¡
uration 4 with 2000 tasks. Time limit was 10 minutes.
of what an optimal solution is, than what is used in this thesis. Or maybe instead of a fitness
having to be 0 for the solution to be accepted as optimal, the fitness value should maybe just be
near 0. HC and SAHC are fast and good and finding optimal solutions at small task┬¡set sizes,
but perform poorly at larger sizes. Their need to generate and assess so many neighbours
slows them down substantially. This could be perhaps be mitigated by using a variant of HC,
with the same neighbourhood function as SA, where only a single neighbour is generated and
assessed.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
29
==PAGE:38==
5.3
Test: Model configurations compared
The purpose of this test is to better understand how the system behaves when using different
platform models. It was run using all five configuration models each subjected to three different
task┬¡set sizes of 100, 500 and 1000 tasks, equally split between TT and ET types. There was
a 10 minute time limit for each run.
Simulated annealing
Looking at figure 5.5, it can be seen that for 100 tasks, the algorithm found a good solution with
a fitness of near 0 every time, no matter the platform model. Not surprisingly, the best result
was with configuration file 2, which is the small 2 core model, finding an optimal solution model
almost instantly. For all runs with only 100 tasks, the algorithm found a near zero solution,
except for for configuration file 3 which has 48 cores, where the fitness was 2,19 and it took
seconds. The rest of the runs with 100 tasks took 10 seconds or less each. Looking at the
500 task runs, all but one were completed with a fitness near zero, expect for configuration file
2. This indicates, that for very small models, the algorithms struggles with allocating a large
number of tasks, such that the utilization is at the desired amount. The time taken for the other
500 task runs is, relative to each other, similar to the 100 task run, meaning that the longest run
is still configuration 3, and 1, 4 and 5 are took near or under half the time as 3. For the 1000 task
run, there are two configuration files, where a near┬¡zero fitness was not achieved: 2 and 5. For
2, it is likely the same reason as before, but 5 has so far had pretty good results. Configuration
file 5 has the same amount of cores as 1 and 4, but is heterogeneous in its schedule┬¡types.
This could indicate, that a heterogeneous model is harder for the algorithm, when scaled up to
many tasks.
Figure 5.5: Simulated Annealing run on 5 different model configurations. P1 = 100 tasks, p2 =
500 tasks and p3 = 1000 tasks.
Hill climbing
The same test with basic Hill Climbing, as seen on figure 5.6, found an optimal solution for all
the 100 task runs, regardless of the configuration file. This is a better result than Simulated
Annealing, and can probability be attributed to the fact that HC usually tests more neighbours
than SA, before committing to one. For small task sizes then, HC looks to be better than SA
when confronted with different model configurations. Looking at the 500 task runs, a trend
begins to show, as all the runs ended in an optimal solution, with times that are all in the 300┬¡400
30
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:39==
seconds range. This further indicates, that the basic HC algorithm is not sensitive to different
configuration models. For the 1000 tasks runs, every run hit the 10 minute time limit, meaning
none of the runs ended in a local optima, but all fitness values are grouped together except for
configuration file 5, which has a significantly higher value. This mirrors the SA results, where
configuration 5 only showed problems at 1000 tasks.
Figure 5.6: Hill Climbing run on 5 different model configurations. P1 = 100 tasks, p2 = 500 tasks
and p3 = 1000 tasks.
Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing
Figure 5.7 shows the Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing results, and it almost across the board
performs better than basic HC, except for configuration file 3, which for SAHC takes longer to
solve. This is to be expected, since with 48 cores there are many more moves for the fitness
function to evaluate, which is necessary for SAHC to function. For the 1000 task runs, the
time limit was hit on every configuration file, but the fitness values are much better than basic
HC. Config file 5 again has the worst fitness value, followed by config 3. Config 1, 2 and 3
are not grouped as close together as with basic HC, with config 2 being the best result. This
could indicate that SAHC is better at assigning many tasks to only a few cores. This could be
explained by the fact that SAHC evaluates many more neighbours in its operation, and for a
system of only 2 cores, there are not that many possible neighbours with regards to reassigning
tasks, so the SAHC focuses more changing WCET values.
Follow up testing of heterogeneous model
A clear oddity of this test was how configuration 5 suddenly became the worst performer in
all three algorithms when doing the 1000 task run. Another test was conceived to run only
configuration 5, but this time for up to 20 minutes and for up to 2000 tasks. Additionally, each
run would be repeated 3 times, to better mitigate the risk of a result being skewed by a Γאשlucky
runΓאש. When looking at the results of this follow up test in Figure 5.8, several things are of note.
SA finished with a near zero fitness for a run of 1000, which it did not do in the previous 500 or
1000 task run in Figure 5.5. This indicates that the SA algorithm might need more parameter┬¡
tuning for larger task sets, to be more consistent. For the 2000 task run, SA finishes with a
average fitness of 146 and a time of 340 seconds, which is a better result than both HC and
SAHC managed for all 1000 task runs in figures 5.6, 5.7. Normal HC did get a better score with
the 1000 task run when given 20 minutes, which indicates that given enough time it will find a
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.7: Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing run on 5 different model configurations. P1 = 100
tasks, p2 = 500 tasks and p3 = 1000 tasks.
good solution, but the fitness is still close to 1000, and for 2000 tasks the fitness is closing in
on 5000, making basic HC not viable for large task sets it seems. SAHC did find a much better
solution than before, with a fitness of 8, when running 1000 tasks for 20 minutes, and its 2000
task run is also almost 1000 points better than standard HC.
This testing on different configuration files brings to light two main observations. The first obser┬¡
vation is that SA is the most susceptible to inconsistent performance when subjected to different
models, especially the 2┬¡core model was comparably harder for SA than for HC and SAHC. HC
and SAHC where both more consistent across models, with HC being the most consistent═╛ only
showing significant performance┬¡difference with a 1000 tasks on configuration model 5. SAHC
was similar to HC, but struggled with the 48 core, possibly because of its need to assess every
single neighbour. The second observation is that all three algorithms struggle to scale with a
heterogeneous model, such as configuration 5. Given more time, SA did seem to handle it the
best, but had issues with consistency.
5.4
Test: WCET variance in fitness function
The goal of the the tool is to have the average utilization of all the cores be as close to the one
specified in the input as possible. As already mentioned, there are two ways that the tool can
change utilization of any given core: either change the WCET values of the tasks assigned to
that core, or move a task to or from that core. This test has the purpose of investigating the
characteristics of all the WCET values in the output and to see how variance penalty effects the
performance of the algorithm and the quality the solution it produces.
The first test aims to see how the a WCET variance penalty affects the performance pf the
algorithm. This was done by running the tool on different task┬¡set sizes and using three different
versions of the fitness function:
Γאó The current version of the fitness function, with its current variance penalty that penalizes
a solution if any single WCET value is used for more than 5% of tasks. The number of
32
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.8: Configuration 5 with 20 minute time limit and average of three runs. p1 = 1000
tasks, p2 = 2000 tasks.
occurrences of the infringing WCET value is added to the fitness function as a penalty.
Γאó The current fitness function, but with a variant of the variance penalty, where a solution is
penalized only if the number of unique WCET values is less than 95%. The penalty is the
size of the infraction, meaning that if a solution has only 93% unique WCET value, then
the integer value representing 2% of the task┬¡set size is added as a penalty.
Γאó The current fitness function, but with no variance penalties.
All tests were run using SA and five different task┬¡set sized of 100, 250, 500, 1000 and 2000.
Looking at Figure 5.9, it can be seen that using different variance penalties does indeed affect
the output. The runs with the lowest fitness value are the ones using the fitness function without
variance penalties. The current fitness function was second best, and in last place were the
runs using the variant fitness function. This is to be expected, sine the solution space is larger
when using a fitness function with less constraints. The more interesting information is what
characteristics the different WCET values exhibit.
Calculating the average WCET and the WCET variance for these runs═╛ we see in Figure 5.10
that as the task┬¡set size grows, the average WCET value and variance trends towards lower
values.
The utilization of a core is a function of both the WCET and the period of the task, but since we
cannot, in this thesis, change the periods of the tasks once they have been set, only the WCET
values are changed. And since the initial randomly generated platform model and task┬¡set, that
the SA algorithm then modifies, generally has a utilization that is too large. The SA algorithm
perhaps overcompensates with aggressively lowering the WCETs, thus lowering the utilization,
at a cost of lower variance and WCET values.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.9: Variance run using SA on configuration 4 with 20 minute time limit and average of
3 runs. p1 = 100 tasks, p2 = 250 tasks, p3 = 500 tasks, p4 = 1000 tasks and p5 = 2000 tasks.
(a) Average WCET values
(b) WCET variance
Figure 5.10: WCET variance and average.
In these first runs, all periods were in the tens of thousands, meaning the range for possible
WCET values was large and thus the solution space is bigger. If we were to change the possible
periods, the solution space should shrink. Looking at Figure 5.11, it shows another set of runs,
where periods are an order of magnitude smaller. It is clear to see, when comparing to Figure
5.9, that the runs using variance penalties in their fitness function have much worse fitness
values compared to when periods were larger.
The run with no variance penalties does still find near┬¡zero solutions in the same time as before,
but looking at the sample from those results in Figure 5.12, the output file shows a pattern of
many WCET values of 1 and the a few large values. So while the fitness is low, the quality of
the solution, it could be argued, is not good.
The results of this experiment clearly show that assessing for variance and limiting WCET du┬¡
plicates in the fitness function, makes it harder to find a good solution. The question is then if
it is worth doing? Figure 5.12 shows an undesirable result that shows what can happen at with
not variance penalties for smaller periods. This result would indicate that assessing variance is
needed, but there is also the problem than none of the runs using the variance┬¡aware fitness
34
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.11: Variance run using SA and smaller periods on configuration 4 with 20 minute time
limit and average of 3 runs. p1 = 100 tasks, p2 = 250 tasks, p3 = 500 tasks, p4 = 1000 tasks
and p5 = 2000 tasks.
Figure 5.12: Sample of the top of the file Γא¥task_set_gen_SA_VAR_param5_none__seed_2.xmlΓא¥.
Of 2000 tasks, 757 have a WCET of 1.
functions were able to find an optimal solution. For inputs with smaller periods, and therefore
a smaller solution space, it comes down to the desire for speed versus non┬¡repetitive WCET
values. When using larger periods, both the current and the none┬¡variance aware fitness func┬¡
tions found near┬¡optimal solutions, but when taking a look at the average WCET and the WCET
variance in Table 5.1, there is not a noticeable difference. This indicates that when using these
larger periods in the tens of thousands, then using a variance┬¡aware fitness function might be
unnecessary. Especially since the variance penalty seems to be less reliable in finding a good
solution.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
35
==PAGE:44==
File
Fitness
Time
WCET Variance
Average WCET
SA_VAR_param5_current__seed_0
0,95
316
4521134
510
SA_VAR_param5_current__seed_1
84,9
321
8239020
720
SA_VAR_param5_current__seed_2
3,01
320
4380258
532
SA_VAR_param5_none__seed_0
0,38
301
3540706
458
SA_VAR_param5_none__seed_1
0,36
305
4100628
473
SA_VAR_param5_none__seed_2
0,76
297
4542027
477
Table 5.1: Specific runs of the two different fitness functions
The bottom line is that variance is an important factor to consider when designing the fitness
function, but it can affect the reliability and functionally of the tool, which means that the impor┬¡
tance of WCET variance should be evaluated carefully.
5.5
Test: Chain generation
For this test chains were generated at varying difficulties and SA and HC were both used.
The results mirror what was already shown in task generation: SA is faster than HC at higher
difficulties (more period and host transitions, and longer chains). This can be seen in Figure
5.13.
Figure 5.13: SA and HC for chain generation
The fitness function of the chain generation algorithms assesses if the chains conforms to the
constraints regarding number of period and host transitions. It is easy to objectivity assess if
these constraints are met or not, by simply counting the number of transitions in a generated
chain and comparing it with the desired amount. But when generating chains, the order of the
tasks must also be considered, since it is an important aspect of the chain. Adding to this, there
are some subjective qualities of the order of tasks that must be considered, such as the allowed
number of duplicates or if the same task may show in the list twice in a row. The following is a
test of two different fitness functions:
Γאó The current chain fitness function that in addition to assessing the correct number of period
and host transitions, also penalises chains if: any task appears twice or more in a row, if
36
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:45==
more that 25% of tasks are duplicates and if any one task is more than 25% of the task
list.
Γאó A variant of the current fitness function that is the same as the current with regards to
period and host transition, but does not assess anything else.
The results can also be seen in Figure 5.13, and it can be seen that adding duplication penalties
(marked Γא¥current) to the fitness function does worsen the fitness for SA, and the algorithm cannot
find a good solution. Whereas no assessment of duplicated (marked Γא¥noneΓא¥) generally has
lower fitness. However looking at Figure 5.14 the quality of the Γא¥noneΓא¥ solution, they feature
more repeated tasks and several of the same tasks in a row. Perhaps this is easy to fix in a
post processing step, rather than using the fitness function to address it.
Figure 5.14: Example of multiple of the same task in a row in a Γא¥noneΓא¥ run
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
37
==PAGE:46==
6
Discussion and conclusion
This thesis proposed a tool that could take a customizable platform model and a list of param┬¡
eters as input, it should produce a list of tasks and task chains as an output. All tasks should
be assigned to the various cores of the given platform model. This should be done in such a
way that the average utilization of the cores match the utilization specified in the input and a list
of task chains should be created, also matching the parameters. In these aspects, the solution
that this thesis presents, does satisfy all constraints. However, there are areas of needed im┬¡
provement before it can be properly used in conjunction with other such task┬¡generation tools
in further development of creating realistic synthetic task┬¡sets for ADAS.
Creating task┬¡sets that satisfy the constraint of all cores being at a given utilization does not cur┬¡
rently scale well and it can take several minutes to generate a large task┬¡set. As with any other
system, speed is of course desirable and so this tool should be made to run faster, since the
ambition would be to add additional functionality for future work. More pre and post processing
could be used to reduce the workload of the meta heuristic workload, and more determinis┬¡
tic steps before and after could be an answer to speed up the tool. For instance, instead of
using the fitness function to assess variance across WCETs in task┬¡sets and the tasks IDs in
task chains, which adds work to every iteration. A simple post processing step of removing
predictable and predetermined bad patterns of repetitiveness could be used. Reevaluating the
generation of the initial task values and core assignments, before the meta┬¡heuristic algorithms
start, could also help if better start values could be determined.
As for the meta┬¡heuristic algorithms used in this thesis, there are some clear takeaways. Both
Hill Climbing and Steepest Ascent Hill Climbing had fast and consistently good performance for
task sets of less than 200 tasks, but they did not scale well and were rendered unusable on larger
task┬¡sets. Overall, I found them ill┬¡suited for the using in this domain. In contrast, simulated
annealing was shown in the various experiments of this thesis to have the best performance
when compared to HC and SAHC, but it was inconsistent in its performance. I think that there
is definitely room for much more parameter tuning of the Simulated Annealing algorithm used in
this thesis, and perhaps automatic parameter optimization techniques should be implemented.
The fitness function used in this thesis does work, but it lacks domain specific knowledge in
what a good solution would look like other than just being based on the desired utilization.
The subjective quality of how random the WCET values should be and how much the fitness
function should be used to ensure that quality needs to be better defined. It would be interesting
to investigate and define meta┬¡constraints that the different task values should conform to with
respect to each other, such as task WCET variance or task chain variance.
Using a variance┬¡aware fitness function resulted in worse performance, and was generally not
useful with periods of over 10000. But not using one at periods of under 10000, resulted in
outputs where almost half of the WCET values were 1, which is undesirable. Using the variance┬¡
aware fitness function with low periods made it it much harder to find a good solution, and
therefore the importance of unique and different WCET values in an output needs to be carefully
evaluated because of this large performance penalty.
For future work, the first issue to address would be the investigation into the characteristics of
what makes a Γאשgood solutionΓאש and use this information in a improved fitness function, so that a
38
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:47==
meta┬¡heuristic algorithm would be guided better in the solution space. Speculatively, this would
most likely need to use proprietary schedule and task data from auto┬¡motive vendors and create
a ΓאשfingerprintΓאש of what a good solution looks like, which the fitness function could compare against
and assign a score to a solution.
There is also the issue of scheduling, which the tool in this thesis does not do. Therefore, adding
scheduling capability and introducing a heuristic for assessing the scheduability of a generated
task┬¡set like in the original TTTech project description would be an ideal addition to the tool in
this thesis. Alternatively, this tool could be used in its current form and its output could be fed
to another tool which then tries to to schedule the generated tasks.
Lastly, while this thesis proposes an equation for an assumed lower bound of communication
delay between the end systems in its model, the utility of this tool would be greatly increased if
true TSN communication could be modelled.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
39
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
Moseo Galileo. LeonardoΓאשs Γא£AutomobileΓא¥ ┬¡ Museo Galileo. URL: https://www.museogalileo.
it/en/museum/explore/temporary-exhibitions/275-leonardo-s-automobile-en.html (vis┬¡
ited on 16/01/2024).
[2]
Tesla. Autopilot and Full Self┬¡Driving Capability. 2024. URL: https://www.tesla.com/
support/autopilot (visited on 16/01/2024).
[3]
Erin Marquis. Celebrate With Us: Elon Has Been Promising Self┬¡Driving Cars For Ten
Years. June 2023. URL: https : / / jalopnik . com / elon - musk - tesla - self - driving - cars -
anniversary-autopilot-1850432357 (visited on 16/01/2024).
[4]
Marco Galvani. Γא£History and future of driver assistanceΓא¥. In: IEEE Instrumentation amp═╛
Measurement Magazine 22.1 (2019), pp. 11Γאף16. ISSN: 1941┬¡0123. DOI: 10.1109/mim.
2019.8633345. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIM.2019.8633345.
[5]
Adnan Shaout, Dominic Colella and S. Awad. Γא£Advanced Driver Assistance Systems ┬¡
Past, present and futureΓא¥. In: 2011 seventh International Computer Engineering Confer┬¡
ence (ICENCOΓאש2011). IEEE, Dec. 2011. DOI: 10.1109/icenco.2011.6153935. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICENCO.2011.6153935.
[6]
Giorgio C. Buttazzo. Hard Real┬¡Time Computing Systems: Predictable Scheduling Al┬¡
gorithms and Applications. Springer US, 2011. ISBN: 9781461406761. DOI: 10.1007/978-
1-4614-0676-1. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-0676-1.
[7]
Michael R Garey and David S Johnson. Computers and intractability. New York, NY: W.H.
Freeman, Apr. 1979.
[8]
Simon Kramer, Dirk Ziegenbein and Arne Hamann. In: Real World Automotive Bench┬¡
marks For Free (2015). URL: https://www.ecrts.org/forum/viewtopic3edd-2.html?f=
20&t=23&sid=d74079af129d5480a5ac4fd1778eecc1 (visited on 14/02/2024).
[9]
Shane D. McLean et al. Γא£Mapping and Scheduling Automotive Applications on ADAS Plat┬¡
forms using MetaheuristicsΓא¥. In: 2020 25th IEEE International Conference on Emerging
Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA). Vol. 1. 2020, pp. 329Γאף336. DOI: 10.1109/
ETFA46521.2020.9212029.
[10]
IEEE. 802.1Qbv ┬¡ Enhancements for Scheduled Traffic. Ed. by Tony Jeffree. Nov. 2016.
URL: https://www.ieee802.org/1/pages/802.1bv.html (visited on 07/02/2024).
[11]
IEEE. P802.1AS┬¡Rev Γאף Timing and Synchronization for Time┬¡Sensitive Applications. Ed.
by Geoff Garner. Oct. 2019. URL: https://1.ieee802.org/tsn/802-1as-rev/ (visited on
07/02/2024).
[12]
Wikipedia contributors. Maximum transmission unit Γאפ Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
2024. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maximum_transmission_unit&
oldid=1195403692 (visited on 07/02/2024).
[13]
S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt and M. P. Vecchi. Γא£Optimization by Simulated AnnealingΓא¥. In:
Science 220.4598 (May 1983), pp. 671Γאף680. ISSN: 1095┬¡9203. DOI: 10.1126/science.220.
4598.671. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.220.4598.671.
[14]
Mykel J Kochenderfer and Tim A Wheeler. Algorithms for Optimization. The MIT Press.
London, England: MIT Press, Mar. 2019, p. 128.
[15]
Yaghout Nourani and Bjarne Andresen. Γא£A comparison of simulated annealing cooling
strategiesΓא¥. In: Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 31.41 (Oct. 1998), pp. 8373Γאף
8385. ISSN: 1361┬¡6447. DOI: 10.1088/0305-4470/31/41/011. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/0305-4470/31/41/011.
40
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:49==
[16]
Pablo CABRERA┬¡GUERRERO et al. Γא£Improving Simulated Annealing Performance by
means of Automatic Parameter TuningΓא¥. In: Studies in Informatics and Control 24.4 (Dec.
2015). ISSN: 1841┬¡429X. DOI: 10.24846/v24i4y201506. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.24846/
v24i4y201506.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:51==
A
Explanation of input and output files
A.1
Parameters file explanation
The following is an explanation of the Γאשparameters.jsonΓאש file used to set the parameters of the
system and the output file.
Field
Explanation
Note
Environment
Container for environment
variables.
number_of_hosts
Number of hosts (CPUs) that
you want in the system
architecture. When applied,
each CPU will be be assigned
its own end┬¡system.
Will be overwritten if a
config.xml file is used.
schedule_type
Sets the desired schedule type
for all the cores in the system.
The cores will then only be
able to be assigned the type of
task that matches the
schedule type. Should be
given as string, either Γא¥TT +
ETΓא¥, Γא¥TTΓא¥ or Γא¥ETΓא¥.
Will be overwritten if a
config.xml file is used.
preemptible
Sets if tasks are preemptible
or not. If a task is preemptible,
then itΓאשs execution is allowed
to be pause, in order for the
resource to do other work.
num_of_cores
Sets the number of desired
cores. The cores are allocated
to the CPUs using following
algorithm: Given n CPUs and
m cores: initially add x amout
of cores to each CPU where
x =
m
GCD(m,n). If any cores
remain unallocated, assign
unallocated cores one at a
time to each CPU, in order
from lowest ID and going in
ascending order.
Will be overwritten if a
config.xml file is used.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
43
==PAGE:52==
Field
Explanation
Note
microtick_values
Sets the micro┬¡tick values.
The array has two functions: If
the number of values in the
array is equal to the number of
cores, then each core is
assigned a micro┬¡tick from the
array in ascending order of
core ID, starting from array[0].
If the two numbers are not the
same, then each core is
assigned a random value from
the array using a uniform
probability distribution.
Will be overwritten if a
config.xml file is used.
System
Container for system variables
tt_utilization
Sets the desired TT┬¡utilization
for each core in the system.
et_utilization
Sets the desired ET┬¡utilization
for each core in the system.
num_of_tt_tasks
Sets the desired amount of TT
tasks.
In range from 0┬¡1000.
num_of_et_tasks
Sets the desired amount of ET
tasks.
In range from 0┬¡1000.
periods
Sets and describe the
probability distribution of the
period values that a given task
can have.
The probability values (the
double values) have to sum to
1.
Task
Container for task variables
allowed_jitter
Sets the maximum jitter for
tasks. The array has 3 values:
percentage of tasks that will
have unrestricted jitter (range:
0 ┬¡ period, randomly chosen),
percentage of tasks to have a
jitter of 0, and percentage of
tasks to have a jitter of 10% of
the task period.
The probability values (the
double values) have to sum to
1.
release_time
Sets the offset/release time
values for tasks. The arrays
has 2 values: percentage of
tasks to have an release time
of 0, and the percentage of
tasks to have a randomly
generated release time
between 0┬¡10% of the task
period.
The probability values (the
double values) have to sum to
1.
44
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:53==
Field
Explanation
Note
deadline_type
Sets the range of deadline
values. Arbitrary means that
deadline values can be
anything within the allowed
range (0 ┬¡ period for TT┬¡task,
and 0 ┬¡ no limit for ET┬¡tasks).
Implicit means that deadline
equals period. The value is
applied to all tasks. If an upper
bound of over 100 is entered,
then all TT tasks will be give
the upper bound of 100 and
ET task will be given the upper
bound that is entered.
String is formatted as follows:
Γא¥<arbitrary>or<implicit>═╛<lower
bound>,<upper bound>Γא¥. The
upper and lower bounds are
given as a percentage of the
period. For example 75 would
be 75% of the period.
Chain
Container for chain variables
num_of_chains
Sets the number of chains that
will be generated.
num_of_tasks_in_chain
Sets the upper bound for the
number of tasks per chain.
The number will be randomly
chosen between 1 and this
value for each chain.
num_of_low
Sets the upper bound for the
number of low┬¡to┬¡high period
transitions. This is the amount
of times in the task sequence
of the chain that the period
value is raised from one task
to another.
The number will be randomly
chosen between 0 and this
value for each chain.
num_of_high
Sets the upper bound for the
number of high┬¡to┬¡low period
transitions. The is the amount
of times in the task sequence
of the chain that the period
value is lowered from one task
to another.
The number will be randomly
chosen between 0 and this
value for each chain.
num_of_host_transitions
Sets the upper bound for the
number of host transitions.
This is the number of times in
the task chain where a the
next task is on a different host
(end┬¡system) than the
previous.
In this thesis, it only counts as
a host transition when tasks in
the chain sequence are on
different end┬¡systems,
meaning that they would pass
through a switch. Switching to
a different core or a CPU on
the same end┬¡system does not
count as host transition. The
number will be randomly
chosen between 0 and this
value for each chain.
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
45
==PAGE:54==
Field
Explanation
Note
latency_tightness
Sets the desired latency
tightness. A task chain has a
latency, which is the amount of
time it has to be completed in
when trying to schedule
execution of the chain. The
lower bound of the latency for
a given task chain is the sum
of all the WCETs of the tasks
in the chain. The upper bound
is defined as 2 times the sum
of all periods in the chains
times 2 times the sum of
WCETS. The latency tightness
is a integer in the range 0┬¡100,
where 0 represents the lower
bound and 100 represents the
upper bound. Every number in
between represents a place on
the number line between lower
bound and upper bound. For
example 50 would be 50% of
the distance between the
lower bound and upper bound.
The formula used is:
((upper_bound ┬¡ lower_bound)
* tightness) + lower_bound.
Table A.1: An explanation of the parameters.json file.
46
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:55==
A.1.1
Parameters file example
This is an example of a parameters file:
1 {
2
Γא¥ environment Γא¥ :
{
3
Γא¥number_of_hostsΓא¥ :
2 ,
4
Γא¥ schedule_type Γא¥ :
Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥ ,
5
Γא¥ preemptible Γא¥ :
true ,
6
Γא¥num_of_coresΓא¥ :
4 ,
7
Γא¥ microtick_values Γא¥ :
[ 100 ,
200 ,
300 ,
400 ,
500 ]
8
} ,
9
Γא¥ system Γא¥ :
{
10
Γא¥ t t _ u t i l i z a t i o n Γא¥ :
0 . 7 ,
11
Γא¥ e t _ u t i l i z a t i o n Γא¥ :
0 . 7 ,
12
Γא¥num_of_tt_tasksΓא¥ :
500 ,
13
Γא¥num_of_et_tasksΓא¥ :
100 ,
14
Γא¥ periods Γא¥ :
15
[ [ 1000 ,
0 . 2 ] ,
16
[ 2000 ,
0 . 2 ] ,
17
[ 3000 ,
0 . 4 ] ,
18
[ 4000 ,
0 . 1 ] ,
19
[ 5000 ,
0 . 1 ]
20
]
21
} ,
22
Γא¥ task Γא¥ :
{
23
Γא¥ allowed_jitter Γא¥ :
[ 0 . 05 ,
0 . 85 ,
0 . 10 ] ,
24
Γא¥ release_time Γא¥ :
[ 0 . 9 ,
0 . 1 ] ,
25
Γא¥ deadline_type Γא¥ :
Γא¥ arbitrary ; 50 , 150Γא¥
26
} ,
27
Γא¥ chain Γא¥ :
{
28
Γא¥num_of_chainsΓא¥ :
10 ,
29
Γא¥num_of_tasks_in_chainΓא¥ :
30 ,
30
Γא¥num_of_lowΓא¥ :
4 ,
31
Γא¥num_of_highΓא¥ :
4 ,
32
Γא¥ num_of_host_transitions Γא¥ :
5 ,
33
Γא¥ latency_tightness Γא¥ :
50
34
}
35 }
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
47
==PAGE:56==
A.2
Platform configuration file explanation
The configuration file is an XML file. In order of appearance from top to bottom, the following
is an explanation of the different objects, their fields, and the semantics. Note that all names in
the model are case┬¡sensitive, and should be input exactly as in the example in appendix A.2.1
Platform model
Everything in the XML is wrapped in the ΓאשPlatformModelΓאש object. It has no values of its own but
contains a list of end┬¡systems object and a topology object.
End┬¡system
The ΓאשEndSystemΓאש object is a representation of an system with an arbitrary number of CPUs and
cores. To that effect, it contains a list of CPUS. It has a non┬¡optional parameter of ΓאשEndSystem
idΓאש, which is a unique id, used mainly for the network topology. There is no naming convention,
and any string will work.
CPU
The ΓאשCPUΓאש object is a representation a any processor unit. It contains a list of cores. The CPU
object has 2 non┬¡optional fields: ΓאשCpu idΓאש and ΓאשNameΓאש. The former as a unique id, that is used
in the task generation system. The other is a name, that is displayed in the task set output file,
for ease of reading. The naming convention for CPUs is by using letters starting with Γא¥AΓא¥.
Core
The ΓאשCoreΓאש object is Γא¥the bottomΓא¥ of this part of the model, as it does not contain any more objects
within it. It contains four parameters: ΓאשCore idΓאש, ΓאשNameΓאש, ΓאשMicroTickΓאש, and ΓאשScheduleTypeΓאש. Core
id and name have the same properties as with CPU. Micro┬¡tick is read as an integer, and will set
the micro┬¡tick for that core to that value. Schedule type is read and unmarshalled to an enum
in the system═╛ it has three possible values: Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥, Γא¥TTΓא¥, and Γא¥ETΓא¥. The naming convention
for cores is by using the letter of the CPUs its part of, and then adding the a number, starting
from 1, such that Γא¥A3Γא¥ would be the 3rd core og CPU Γא¥AΓא¥.
Topology
The ΓאשTopologyΓאש object is for storing the information about the network topology that is to be used.
I contains a list of ΓאשSwitchΓאש objects.
Switch
A ΓאשSwitchΓאש object stores the model of the connections between the different end┬¡systems and
also connections to other between the switches. A switch has a non┬¡optional ΓאשidΓאש parameter, that
is used by the system. The switch contains two lists: ΓאשsystemsΓאש and ΓאשconnectionsΓאש. Systems is a
list of IDs of the end┬¡systems that are connected to the switch. All of these end┬¡system can then
communicate with each other only by going trough this one switch. The other list, ΓאשconnectionsΓאש,
is a list of the switches that are connected to the this switch. That means that eventual network┬¡
routing has to happen by looking through these lists for every switch, and determining a valid
route. It also means, that for this current implementation, it is possible to make a topology where
a switch, and by extension an end┬¡system, is isolated from other switches and end┬¡systems.
This will result in error, so care must be used to ensure that all switches have a route to all other
switches.
48
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:57==
A.2.1
Example of platform configuration model
This is an example of a configuration file with 3 end┬¡systems with 4, 2, and 1 CPUs respec┬¡
tively. The topology represents ring topology of 3 switches, each with one of the end┬¡systems
connected to it.
1
<?xml version=Γא¥ 1.0 Γא¥ encoding=Γא¥UTF-8 Γא¥?>
2
<PlatformModel>
3
<EndSystem id = Γא¥ES1Γא¥>
4
<Cpu id = Γא¥AΓא¥ Name = Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
5
<Core id = Γא¥A1Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
6
<Core id = Γא¥A2Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
7
<Core id = Γא¥A3Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
8
<Core id = Γא¥A4Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
9
</Cpu>
10
<Cpu id = Γא¥BΓא¥ Name = Γא¥Cpu 2Γא¥>
11
<Core id = Γא¥B1Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
12
<Core id = Γא¥B2Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
13
<Core id = Γא¥B3Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
14
<Core id = Γא¥B4Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
15
</Cpu>
16
<Cpu id = Γא¥CΓא¥ Name = Γא¥Cpu 3Γא¥>
17
<Core id = Γא¥C1Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
18
<Core id = Γא¥C2Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
19
<Core id = Γא¥C3Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
20
<Core id = Γא¥C4Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
21
</Cpu>
22
<Cpu id = Γא¥DΓא¥ Name = Γא¥Cpu 4Γא¥>
23
<Core id = Γא¥D1Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
24
<Core id = Γא¥D2Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
25
<Core id = Γא¥D3Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
26
<Core id = Γא¥D4Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
27
</Cpu>
28
</EndSystem>
29
<EndSystem id = Γא¥ES2Γא¥>
30
<Cpu id = Γא¥EΓא¥ Name = Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
31
<Core id = Γא¥E1Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
32
<Core id = Γא¥E2Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
33
</Cpu>
34
<Cpu id = Γא¥FΓא¥ Name = Γא¥Cpu 2Γא¥>
35
<Core id = Γא¥F1Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT +
ETΓא¥/>
36
<Core id = Γא¥F2Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT +
ETΓא¥/>
37
</Cpu>
38
</EndSystem>
39
<EndSystem id = Γא¥ES3Γא¥>
40
<Cpu id = Γא¥GΓא¥ Name = Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
49
==PAGE:58==
41
<Core id = Γא¥G1Γא¥ Name = Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick = Γא¥5Γא¥ ScheduleType = Γא¥TT + ET
Γא¥/>
42
</Cpu>
43
</EndSystem>
44
<Topology>
45
<Switch id = Γא¥S1Γא¥>
46
<systems>
47
<EndsystemId>ES1</EndsystemId>
48
</systems>
49
<connections>
50
<connection>S2</ connection>
51
<connection>S3</ connection>
52
</ connections>
53
</Switch>
54
<Switch id = Γא¥S2Γא¥>
55
<systems>
56
<EndsystemId>ES2</EndsystemId>
57
</systems>
58
<connections>
59
<connection>S1</ connection>
60
<connection>S3</ connection>
61
</ connections>
62
</Switch>
63
<Switch id = Γא¥S3Γא¥>
64
<systems>
65
<EndsystemId>ES3</EndsystemId>
66
</systems>
67
<connections>
68
<connection>S1</ connection>
69
<connection>S2</ connection>
70
</ connections>
71
</Switch>
72
</Topology>
73
</PlatformModel>
Listing A.1: Architecture configuration XML file
A.3
Task set output file explanation
The task set list XML file is the output the output of the system and it represents a set of tasks,
chains and other information, that can be used as an input file in a task schedule system. These
are the different parts of the file and their meaning:
Task┬¡set
Everything in the XML file is contained within the ΓאשTasksetΓאש object. The task┬¡set object has 3
parameters: ΓאשTotalTTUtilΓאש, ΓאשTotalETUtilΓאש, and ΓאשFitnessΓאש. The first values are the total utilization of
the entire task set for TT tasks and ET tasks respectively. The fitness parameter represents the
fitness value that the fitness function in the system determined for this task┬¡set.
Task
The task object is the main event of this file, and consist of a number of parameters, that mirror
the model of the tasks as modelled in the system.
Do to the use of polymorphism in the system, there are two different types of task object in the
file, namely TT and ET tasks. They are differentiated by ET tasks not having an offset value,
by the task type being marked Γא¥TTΓא¥ or Γא¥ETΓא¥ and by ET tasks having an MIT value instead of a
period value. Otherwise they are the same. The parameters are in order: ΓאשIdΓאש, ΓאשNameΓאש, ΓאשTypeΓאש,
50
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:59==
ΓאשWCETΓאש, ΓאשPeriodΓאש/ΓאשMITΓאש, ΓאשDeadlineΓאש, ΓאשMaxJitterΓאש, ΓאשOffsetΓאש (TT only), ΓאשPriorityΓאש, ΓאשCpuIdΓאש, ΓאשCoreIdΓאש, and
ΓאשCoreAffinityΓאש.
IDs are unique and are created as an ascending list of numbers. The names are create from the
IDs and are simply Γא¥TaskΓא¥ followed by the ID. They could follow any other naming convention
as long as no duplicate names.
Type is do denote whether a task is a TT task or an ET task.
WCET, Deadline and Period or MIT depending on the task type are all integers and have a lower
bound of Γאש1Γאש.
MaxJitter and Offset is either Γאש0Γאש or a specific integer that is calculated as a percentage of the
period.
Priority is always the highest value of Γאש1Γאש for TT Tasks and currently Γאש┬¡1Γאש for ET tasks. Γאש┬¡1Γאש in this
context is like a joker value, since the system does not propose priority values yet.
CPU ID and Core ID both have naming convention as discussed in section A.2. However, the
representation here is to be read together with the core affinity value. The output file is not
supposed to be a file where all the tasks are already assigned to cores, which is also not the
case here even though it may look like it. The CPU and Core IDs that are listed on the tasks
are where the tasks were assigned when the fitness and utilization values where calculated.
Additionally, the chains are also constructed with these assignments in mind when dealing with
host transitions. But most tasks can still freely be assigned to other cores by a scheduler. The
way to read the assignment of tasks is by using the Core Affinity value. If the core affinity is an
empty array, then the task can be assigned to any valid core with a compatible schedule type.
If the array has only one value, then the task can only be run on that core. And if the array has
more than one value, then the task can be run on any core in the core affinity array.
Core affinity is, as described before, an array with either 0, 1 or multiple core IDs in it. Addition┬¡
ally, any core ID in the core affinity array is guaranteed to be compatible with the task type of
that task.
Core
The core object is for ease of reading and evaluating the task generation of the system. If
another system were to read these files, they should just be ignored. The object has the ID and
name of the core and then the utilization of the TT and ET tasks assigned to that core. This is
because the stated utilization values in the parameters file, refer to the desired utilization per
core.
Chain
The chain object has 4 parameters and also contains a list of runnables. The ΓאשLatencyΓאש param┬¡
eter is the time limit for the execution of the entire chain, and it has had the tightens parameter
applied that was discussed in section A.1. Priority is similar to other priority values discussed
previously and is Γאש┬¡1Γאש, because currently the the system does not set priorities and Γאש┬¡1Γאש is a joker
value, meaning it could be anything. The name parameter is not used for any function as of
yet, but is still non┬¡optional. The fitness parameter is the fitness rating that the system assigned
this chain when it was created using a heuristic. A fitness of Γאש0Γאש would mean that there were no
penalties given, and the chain satisfies all constraints that were set for it. The list of ΓאשRunnableΓאש
are just task┬¡names of the tasks that need to be run. The reason for the name ΓאשRunnableΓאש and
the choice of using task names as the identifying marker for tasks in the chain came from other
examples of task generation outputs that were shared with med, and I wanted the naming to be
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
51
==PAGE:60==
consistent for interoperability reasons.
52
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:61==
A.3.1
Example of a task set output file
Example of a task set output with 10 TT tasks and 5 ET tasks. There are also 2 chains. Not
this was not run on the example parameter or platform configuration files.
1
<?xml version=Γא¥ 1.0 Γא¥ encoding=Γא¥UTF-8 Γא¥ standalone=Γא¥noΓא¥?>
2
<Taskset TotalTTUtil=Γא¥ 2.087 Γא¥ TotalETUtil=Γא¥ 1.643 Γא¥ Fitness=Γא¥ 0.0800 Γא¥>
3
<Task Id=Γא¥1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task1Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥727Γא¥ Period=Γא¥3000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥2153Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥BΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥B1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥ [
B1] Γא¥/>
4
<Task Id=Γא¥2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task2Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥2164Γא¥ Period=Γא¥3000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥2937Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥AΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥A1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥
[ ] Γא¥/>
5
<Task Id=Γא¥3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task3Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥122Γא¥ Period=Γא¥2000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥1302Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥BΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥B1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥
[ ] Γא¥/>
6
<Task Id=Γא¥4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task4Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥132Γא¥ Period=Γא¥2000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥1205Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥BΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥B1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥
[ ] Γא¥/>
7
<Task Id=Γא¥5Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task5Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥637Γא¥ Period=Γא¥5000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥2854Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥AΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥A2Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥
[ ] Γא¥/>
8
<Task Id=Γא¥6Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task6Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥1Γא¥ Period=Γא¥1000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥800Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥AΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥A2Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥
[ ] Γא¥/>
9
<Task Id=Γא¥7Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task7Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥1668Γא¥ Period=Γא¥5000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥2506Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥123Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥BΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥B1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=
Γא¥ [ ] Γא¥/>
10
<Task Id=Γא¥8Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task8Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥2638Γא¥ Period=Γא¥5000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥3863Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥AΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥A2Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥ [
A2] Γא¥/>
11
<Task Id=Γא¥9Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task9Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥33Γא¥ Period=Γא¥5000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥3955Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥BΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥B1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥
[ ] Γא¥/>
12
<Task Id=Γא¥10Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task10Γא¥ Type=Γא¥TTΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥1Γא¥ Period=Γא¥5000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥2689Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Offset=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥AΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥A2Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥ [
A2] Γא¥/>
13
<Task Id=Γא¥11Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task11Γא¥ Type=Γא¥ETΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥470Γא¥ MIT=Γא¥3000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥3594Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥ -1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥BΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥B1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥ [ ] Γא¥/>
14
<Task Id=Γא¥12Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task12Γא¥ Type=Γא¥ETΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥1574Γא¥ MIT=Γא¥3000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥4075Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥ -1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥BΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥B2Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥ [ ] Γא¥/>
15
<Task Id=Γא¥13Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task13Γא¥ Type=Γא¥ETΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥88Γא¥ MIT=Γא¥1000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥994Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥ -1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥AΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥A1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥ [A1] Γא¥/>
16
<Task Id=Γא¥14Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task14Γא¥ Type=Γא¥ETΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥2080Γא¥ MIT=Γא¥3000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥2124Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥ -1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥AΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥A1Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥ [A1] Γא¥/>
17
<Task Id=Γא¥15Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Task15Γא¥ Type=Γא¥ETΓא¥ WCET=Γא¥902Γא¥ MIT=Γא¥5000Γא¥ Deadline=Γא¥4008Γא¥
MaxJitter=Γא¥0Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥ -1Γא¥ CpuId=Γא¥BΓא¥ CoreId=Γא¥B2Γא¥ CoreAffinity=Γא¥ [ ] Γא¥/>
18
<Core Id=Γא¥A1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ TTUtil=Γא¥ 0.721 Γא¥ ETUtil=Γא¥ 0.781 Γא¥/>
19
<Core Id=Γא¥A2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ TTUtil=Γא¥ 0.656 Γא¥ ETUtil=Γא¥ 0.0 Γא¥/>
20
<Core Id=Γא¥B1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ TTUtil=Γא¥ 0.71 Γא¥ ETUtil=Γא¥ 0.157 Γא¥/>
21
<Core Id=Γא¥B2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ TTUtil=Γא¥ 0.0 Γא¥ ETUtil=Γא¥ 0.705 Γא¥/>
22
<Chain Latency=Γא¥85764Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥ -1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Chain1Γא¥ Fitness=Γא¥ 0.0 Γא¥>
23
<Runnable Name=Γא¥Task2Γא¥/>
24
</Chain>
25
<Chain Latency=Γא¥334868Γא¥ Priority=Γא¥ -1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Chain2Γא¥ Fitness=Γא¥ 0.0 Γא¥>
26
<Runnable Name=Γא¥Task7Γא¥/>
27
</Chain>
28
</Taskset>
Listing A.2: Task set output XML file
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
53
==PAGE:62==
B
Pseudo code for basic Hill Climbing used
in this thesis
B.1
Pseudo code for basic Hill Climbing for task generation used
in this thesis
Algorithm 13 Modify Tasks Using Basic Hill Climbing
Input: initialSolution : PlatformModel
Output: bestSolution : PlatformModel
1: bool Γזנtrue
2: currentSolution ΓזנinitialSolution
3: currentSolution.fitness ΓזנcalculateFitness(currentSolution)
4: bestSolution Γזנnull
5: if currentSolution.fitness = 0 then
ΓקדInitial solution is optimal solution
6:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution
7:
bool Γזנfalse
8: end if
9: while bool do
10:
neighbours ΓזנgenerateCandidateMoves(currentSolution)
11:
Shuffle neighbours
12:
firstBetterNeighbour Γזנnull
13:
for each n in neighbours do
14:
fitness ΓזנcalculateFitness(n)
15:
if fitness < currentSolution.fitness then
16:
firstBetterNeighbour Γזנn
17:
firstBetterNeighbour.fitness ΓזנcalculateFitness(firstBetterNeighbour)
18:
break
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
if firstBetterNeighbour is null then
ΓקדTop of Hill
22:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution
23:
break
24:
else if firstBetterNeighbour.fitness = 0 then
ΓקדOptimal Solution
25:
bestSolution ΓזנfirstBetterNeighbour
26:
break
27:
else
ΓקדClimb
28:
currentSolution ΓזנfirstBetterNeighbour
29:
end if
30: end while
return bestSolution
54
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:63==
B.2
Pseudo code for Simulated Annealing for chain generation
used in this thesis
Algorithm 14 Assign Chain Tasks and Values Using Simulated Annealing
Input: initialSolution : Chain, latency : double
Output: bestSolution : Chain
1: currentSolution ΓזנinitialSolution
2: currentSolution.tasks ΓזנsetInitialChainTasks(currentSolution))
3: currentSolution.fitness ΓזנcalculateChainFitness(currentSolution))
4: T Γזנ1000
5: Tmin Γזנ0.001
6: alpha Γזנ0.99
7: numIterations Γזנ100
8: minFitness ΓזנΓט₧
9: bestSolution Γזנnull
10: while T > Tmin do
11:
for i Γזנ0 to numIterations Γטע1 do
12:
if calculateChainFitness(currentSolution) = 0 then
ΓקדOptimal solution
13:
minFitness ΓזנcurrentSolution.fitness
14:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution)
15:
T Γזנ0
16:
break
17:
end if
18:
if currentSolution.fitness < minFitness then
ΓקדSet best solution visited so far
19:
minFitness ΓזנcurrentSolution.fitness
20:
bestSolution ΓזנcurrentSolution
21:
end if
22:
newSolution ΓזנgenerateCandidateMove(currentSolution)
23:
newSolution.fitness ΓזנcalculateChainFitness(newSolution)
24:
probabilityFunction Γזנ(newSolution┬¡fitness ΓטעcurrentSolution.fitness)/T
25:
ap Γזנexp(ΓטעprobabilityFunction)
26:
if newSolution.fitness < currentSolution.fitness then
ΓקדAccept better solution
27:
currentSolution ΓזנnewSolution
28:
else if ap < random(0, 1) then
ΓקדAccept worse solution
29:
currentSolution ΓזנnewSolution
30:
end if
31:
end for
32:
T ΓזנT ├ק alpha
33: end while
34: bestSolution.calculateAndSetLatency(latency)
35: return bestSolution
Algorithm 15 Chain Generation Neighbourhood Function for SA
Input: initialChain : Chain
Output: bestChain : Chain
1: currentChain ΓזנinitialChain
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
55
==PAGE:64==
2: diceMove Γזנrandom(0, 1)
3: if diceMove Γיñ0.5 then
ΓקדReplace task in list with random task
4:
newRandomTask Γזנa random TT task from model
5:
replace chain.tasks[random(0, chain.size)] with newRandomTask
6: else
ΓקדSwap two tasks in chain
7:
a Γזנrandom(0, chain.size)
8:
b Γזנrandom(0, chain.size)
9:
swap a and b in chain
10: end if
11: return chain
56
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:65==
C
Standard configuration files
C.1
Configuration file 1
1
<PlatformModel>
2
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES1Γא¥>
3
<Cpu id=Γא¥AΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
4
<Core id=Γא¥A1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
5
<Core id=Γא¥A2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
6
<Core id=Γא¥A3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
7
<Core id=Γא¥A4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
8
</Cpu>
9
</EndSystem>
10
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES2Γא¥>
11
<Cpu id=Γא¥BΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
12
<Core id=Γא¥B1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
13
<Core id=Γא¥B2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
14
<Core id=Γא¥B3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
15
<Core id=Γא¥B4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
16
</Cpu>
17
</EndSystem>
18
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES3Γא¥>
19
<Cpu id=Γא¥CΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
20
<Core id=Γא¥C1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
21
<Core id=Γא¥C2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
22
<Core id=Γא¥C3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
23
<Core id=Γא¥C4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
24
</Cpu>
25
</EndSystem>
26
</PlatformModel>
Listing C.1: Configuration file 1
C.2
Configuration file 2
1
<PlatformModel>
2
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES1Γא¥>
3
<Cpu id=Γא¥AΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
4
<Core id=Γא¥A1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
5
<Core id=Γא¥A2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
6
</Cpu>
7
</EndSystem>
8
</PlatformModel>
Listing C.2: Configuration file 2
C.3
Configuration file 3
1
<PlatformModel>
2
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES1Γא¥>
3
<Cpu id=Γא¥AΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
4
<Core id=Γא¥A1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
5
<Core id=Γא¥A2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
6
<Core id=Γא¥A3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
7
<Core id=Γא¥A4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
57
==PAGE:66==
8
</Cpu>
9
<Cpu id=Γא¥BΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 2Γא¥>
10
<Core id=Γא¥B1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
11
<Core id=Γא¥B2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
12
<Core id=Γא¥B3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
13
<Core id=Γא¥B4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
14
</Cpu>
15
</EndSystem>
16
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES2Γא¥>
17
<Cpu id=Γא¥CΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
18
<Core id=Γא¥C1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
19
<Core id=Γא¥C2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
20
<Core id=Γא¥C3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
21
<Core id=Γא¥C4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
22
</Cpu>
23
<Cpu id=Γא¥DΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 2Γא¥>
24
<Core id=Γא¥D1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
25
<Core id=Γא¥D2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
26
<Core id=Γא¥D3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
27
<Core id=Γא¥D4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
28
</Cpu>
29
</EndSystem>
30
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES3Γא¥>
31
<Cpu id=Γא¥EΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
32
<Core id=Γא¥E1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
33
<Core id=Γא¥E2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
34
<Core id=Γא¥E3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
35
<Core id=Γא¥E4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
36
</Cpu>
37
<Cpu id=Γא¥FΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 2Γא¥>
38
<Core id=Γא¥F1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
39
<Core id=Γא¥F2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
40
<Core id=Γא¥F3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
41
<Core id=Γא¥F4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
42
</Cpu>
43
</EndSystem>
44
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES4Γא¥>
45
<Cpu id=Γא¥GΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
46
<Core id=Γא¥G1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
47
<Core id=Γא¥G2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
48
<Core id=Γא¥G3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
49
<Core id=Γא¥G4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
50
</Cpu>
51
<Cpu id=Γא¥HΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 2Γא¥>
52
<Core id=Γא¥H1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
53
<Core id=Γא¥H2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
54
<Core id=Γא¥H3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
55
<Core id=Γא¥H4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
56
</Cpu>
57
</EndSystem>
58
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES5Γא¥>
59
<Cpu id=Γא¥ I Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
60
<Core id=Γא¥ I1 Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
61
<Core id=Γא¥ I2 Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
62
<Core id=Γא¥ I3 Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
63
<Core id=Γא¥ I4 Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
64
</Cpu>
65
<Cpu id=Γא¥JΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 2Γא¥>
66
<Core id=Γא¥J1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
58
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:67==
67
<Core id=Γא¥J2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
68
<Core id=Γא¥J3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
69
<Core id=Γא¥J4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
70
</Cpu>
71
</EndSystem>
72
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES6Γא¥>
73
<Cpu id=Γא¥KΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
74
<Core id=Γא¥K1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
75
<Core id=Γא¥K2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
76
<Core id=Γא¥K3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
77
<Core id=Γא¥K4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
78
</Cpu>
79
<Cpu id=Γא¥LΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 2Γא¥>
80
<Core id=Γא¥L1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
81
<Core id=Γא¥L2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
82
<Core id=Γא¥L3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
83
<Core id=Γא¥L4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
84
</Cpu>
85
</EndSystem>
86
</PlatformModel>
Listing C.3: Configuration file 3
C.4
Configuration file 4
1
<PlatformModel>
2
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES1Γא¥>
3
<Cpu id=Γא¥AΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
4
<Core id=Γא¥A1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
5
<Core id=Γא¥A2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
6
<Core id=Γא¥A3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
7
<Core id=Γא¥A4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
8
</Cpu>
9
</EndSystem>
10
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES2Γא¥>
11
<Cpu id=Γא¥BΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
12
<Core id=Γא¥B1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
13
<Core id=Γא¥B2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
14
<Core id=Γא¥B3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
15
<Core id=Γא¥B4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
16
</Cpu>
17
</EndSystem>
18
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES3Γא¥>
19
<Cpu id=Γא¥CΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
20
<Core id=Γא¥C1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
21
<Core id=Γא¥C2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
22
<Core id=Γא¥C3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
23
<Core id=Γא¥C4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
24
</Cpu>
25
</EndSystem>
26
</PlatformModel>
Listing C.4: Configuration file 4
C.5
Configuration file 5
1
<PlatformModel>
2
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES1Γא¥>
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
59
==PAGE:68==
3
<Cpu id=Γא¥AΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
4
<Core id=Γא¥A1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
5
<Core id=Γא¥A2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
6
<Core id=Γא¥A3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
7
<Core id=Γא¥A4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
8
</Cpu>
9
</EndSystem>
10
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES2Γא¥>
11
<Cpu id=Γא¥BΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
12
<Core id=Γא¥B1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TTΓא¥/>
13
<Core id=Γא¥B2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
14
<Core id=Γא¥B3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥TT + ETΓא¥/>
15
<Core id=Γא¥B4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
16
</Cpu>
17
</EndSystem>
18
<EndSystem id=Γא¥ES3Γא¥>
19
<Cpu id=Γא¥CΓא¥ Name=Γא¥Cpu 1Γא¥>
20
<Core id=Γא¥C1Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 1Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
21
<Core id=Γא¥C2Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 2Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
22
<Core id=Γא¥C3Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 3Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
23
<Core id=Γא¥C4Γא¥ Name=Γא¥Core 4Γא¥ MicroTick=Γא¥10Γא¥ ScheduleType=Γא¥ETΓא¥/>
24
</Cpu>
25
</EndSystem>
26
</PlatformModel>
Listing C.5: Configuration file 5
60
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
==PAGE:69==
Generation of Realistic Test Cases for Mixed┬¡Criticality Applications on TSN┬¡Enabled ADAS Platforms
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
