==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Ability of Campylobacter to persist in a viable
but nonculturable state (VBNC)
Agnes Sigrid Bjørnstad, s183469
30 ECTS
Supervisors
Researcher, Nao Takeuchi-Storm
Senior Researcher, Brian Lassen
Senior Researcher, Annette Nygaard Jensen
Technical University of Denmark
National Food Institute
Food Microbiology and Hygiene
February 26, 2024
==PAGE:2==
2024
Preface and acknowledgement
This thesis is the product of 30 ECTS, as the final product of the masters in Biotechnology
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), National Food Institute. The project was
carried out at the research group Food Microbiology and Hygiene, from September 2023
to February 2024. Prior to this thesis, a special course presented as a literature study
was conducted in collaboration with the research group. With a great focus on the viable
but nonculturable state of C. jejuni. Parts of the experimental work for this thesis were
conducted in collaboration with Sofie Pauly Kofoed Mose, for both our theses. First, I would
like to thank my supervisors, Nao Takeuchi-Storm, Brian Lassen, and Annette Nygaard
Jensen, for letting me do the project and for guidance through it through weekly meetings.
Furthermore, I would like to thank the laboratory technicians Pia Engelsmann, Margrethe
Carlsen, and Resadije Idrizi for helping me in the laboratory and for always answering all my
stupid questions. I would like to thank Sofie for the collaboration of joyful and fascinating
experimental work for both of our theses.
Master thesis
==PAGE:3==
2024
Abstract
Campylobacter species are one of the leading causes of food-borne gastrointestinal infections
with poultry meat serving as the primary source of transmission. Detection of Campylobacter
is currently dependent on culturing methods.
Hence, when exposed to environmental
stressors, Campylobacter can adopt a survival state known as viable but nonculturable
(VBNC). The VBNC state challenges the detection of the bacteria, as it cannot be cultured
using conventional media. Despite being unable to grow, the VBNC cells remain metabolically
active and retain membrane integrity. VBNC bacteria have been found to resuscitate when
exposed to favorable conditions, posing a risk to human health. Thus, alternative non-
culturing dependent methods have been investigated, to determine VBNC bacteria.
This study assessed the combination of propidium monoazide (PMA) and quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) ability to differentiate viable and heat-inactivated C.
jejuni cells. The differentiation was obtained using a PMA concentration of at 20 µM. A
standard curve for C. jejuni cells with PMA-qPCR was established to quantify viable cells
from unknown samples. Additionally, the LIVE/DEAD BacLight membrane integrity method
was tested, where a ratio of (1:2) of the two DNA binding dyes, SYTO 9 and propidium iodide
(PI), was applied. The LIVE/DEAD BacLight ineffectively distinguished the viable and
heat-inactivated C. jejuni cells. This may be attributed to the dye ratio utilized. Therefore,
further investigation is needed.
Various environmental stressors were investigated to assess the potential induction of the
VBNC state. Desiccation for 48 h of C. jejuni in 0.9% NaCl resulted in VBNC cells. Osmotic
stress by 7% NaCl and tap water, indicated to induce the VBNC state of C. jejuni after
7 days of incubation. C. jejuni was exposed to nutrient deprivation by incubation in 0.9%
NaCl over a 14-day period, where VBNC cells were observed. The addition of chicken juice
to the bacterial solutions to simulate a dirty environment containing nutrients, showed an
increase in viable cells when exposed to the stressors compared to without chicken juice. The
formation of VBNC C. jejuni cells indicate that the environment at the broiler farm can
induce the VBNC state of C. jejuni. The formation of the VBNC cells can potentially lead
to underestimation by traditional culturing-dependent methods.
Master thesis
==PAGE:4==
2024
Dansk resume
Campylobacter er en af de førende årsager til fødevarebårne mave-tarm infektioner, hvor
kylling er den primære smittekilde. Hvis Campylobacter udsættes for miljømæssig stress, kan
de gå ind i et overlevelsesstadie„ hvor de er levedygtige men ikke kan dyrkes. I dette stadie er
Campylobacter stadig metabolisk aktiv og bevarer celle membranens integritet. Cellerne kan
dog ikke dyrkes, og derved undgår de påvisning ved de traditionelle dyrkningsmetoder der
anvendes i fødevareindustrien. Forskning har påvist at celler i dette overlevelsesstadie, kan
genoplive og forårsage sygdom hvis de eksponeres for favorable forhold, hvilket derved udgør
en risiko med menneskets sundhed. Derfor søges efter metoder til påvisning af Campylobacter
der ikke er dyrkningsbaseret.
Dette studie undersøgte brugen af propidium monoazide (PMA) og kvantitativ polymerase
kædereaktion (qPCR), til at påvise levedygtige men ikke dyrkningsbare Campylobacter celler,
samt at adskille levedygtige og varmebehandlede (døde) celler, ved brug af PMA med en
koncentration på 20 µM. Derudover blev en standardkurve etableret for metoden, til at kunne
kvantificere levedygtige celler i en ukendt prøve. LIVE/DEAD BacLight er en metode der er
baseret på membran integritet, hvor to fluorescens farver SYTO 9 og propidium iodide (PI)
farver henholdsvis levedygtige og døde celler. Denne metode blev undersøgt ved at adskille
levedygtige og varmebehandlede Campylobacter celler, hvor farve forholdene var 1:2 (SYTO
9:PI). Det var dog ikke muligt at adskille cellerne, dette kan skyldes farve forholdene og skal
derved undersøges nærmere.
Dette studie testede tilstedeværelsen af bakterier i overlevelsesstadiet (levedygtige men ikke
dyrkningsbare), ved at udsætte C. jejuni celler for forskellige miljømæssige stress faktorer.
Her blev det observeret at C. jejuni gik ind i overlevelsesstadiet ved udtørring i 0.9% NaCl
over 48 timer. C. jejuni blev også udsat for osmotisk stress, hvor C. jejuni blev udsat for
7% NaCl og vand fra hanen. Resultaterne indikerer at overlevelsesstadiet blev observeret
efter 7 dages inkubation. Derudover blev C. jejuni udsat for et forsøg hvor bakterien blev
udsat for mangel på næringsstoffer over 14 dage. C. jejuni blev inkuberet i 0.9% NaCl, og
efter 14 dage blev levedygtige men ikke dyrkningsbare bakterier observeret. Det blev også
observeret at tilføjelsen af kyllingesaft i de forskellige forsøg, havde en positiv indvirkning på
levedygtigheden af C. jejuni celler. Mængden af levedygtige celler faldt langsommere over tid,
sammenlignet med opløsninger uden kyllingesaft. De observerede resultater indikerer at de
miljømæssige forhold Campylobacter bliver udsat for på kyllingegården og gennem fødevare
forarbejdning kan inducere overlevelsesstadiet.
Master thesis
==PAGE:5==
2024
Contents
1
Abbreviations
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
Aim of the study and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Background and theory
3
3.1
Campylobacter jejuni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Reservoir and transmission routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
The viable but nonculturable state of C. jejuni
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Detection of C. jejuni by non culturing-dependent methods . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4.1
PMA-qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4.2
LIVE/DEAD BacLight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Materials and methods
10
4.1
Bacterial strains and cultivation conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
Bacterial stock solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3
Preparation of dilutions to the standard curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.4
PMA treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.5
DNA extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5.1
Boiling lysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5.2
DNA extraction with DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5.3
DNA extraction with QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit . . . . . . . .
13
4.6
Real-time quantitative PCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.7
LIVE/DEAD BacLight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.8
Environmental stressors inducing the VBNC state in C. jejuni . . . . . . . .
16
4.8.1
Preparation of chicken juice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.8.2
Desiccation of C. jejuni
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.8.2.1
Desiccation trial of C. jejuni
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.8.2.2
Desiccation of C. jejuni with chicken juice . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.8.3
Osmotic stress of C. jejuni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.8.4
Nutrient deprivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.9
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.9.1
PMA efficiency and standard curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.9.2
Converting Ct values to Log CFU/mL and standard deviations . . . .
21
5
Results
22
5.1
DNA extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
PMA efficiency and standard curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
LIVE/DEAD BacLight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
Environmental stressors inducing the VBNC state in C. jejuni . . . . . . . .
29
Master thesis
==PAGE:6==
2024
5.4.1
Desiccation of C. jejuni
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.1.1
Desiccation trial of C. jejuni
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.1.2
Desiccation of C. jejuni with chicken juice . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4.2
Osmotic stress of C. jejuni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4.3
Nutrient deprivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Discussion
36
6.1
DNA extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
PMA-qPCR efficiency and standard curve
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
LIVE/DEAD BacLight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Evaluation of environmental stressors inducing the VBNC state in C. jejuni
39
7
Conclusion
44
8
Future perspectives
45
9
References
46
10 Appendix
52
10.1 Standard curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10.2 Amplification IAC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
10.3 Humidity chart from chicken farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
10.4 Desiccation assay BA plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10.5 Osmotic stress bar plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
10.6 Osmotic stress BA plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Master thesis
==PAGE:7==
2024
1
Abbreviations
BA
:
Blood Agar
CFU
:
Colonony-forming unit
Ct
:
Threshold cycle
DC
:
Heat-inactivated control
DTU
:
Technical University of Denmark
EFSA
:
European Food Safety Authority
IAC
:
Internal Amplification Control
mCCDA
:
Modified charcoal cefoperazone deoxycholate agar
NaCl
:
Sodium chloride
NDC
:
Non dye control
NG
:
No growth
OD
:
Optical density
ON
:
Overnight
PI
:
Propidium iodide
PMA
:
Propidium monoazide
qPCR
:
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction
RH
:
Relative humidity
Saline
:
0.9% (w/v) NaCl
SD
:
Standard deviation
VBNC
:
Viable but nonculturable
VC
:
Viable control
WHO
:
World Health Organization
Master thesis
1 of 60
==PAGE:8==
2024
2
Introduction
Campylobacter is the most commonly reported cause of human foodborne gastroenteritis, called
campylobacteriosis [1]. In 2021, there were 127,840 confirmed cases of campylobacteriosis in
the European Union [2]. The symptoms of campylobacteriosis are characterized by diarrhea,
vomiting, cramps, and fever, with the possibility of developing severe diseases such as
Guillain-Barre syndrome [1, 3]. The main transmission route of Campylobacter is through
poultry meat, as poultry is a major reservoir of Campylobacter. Poultry is estimated to be
responsible for up to 30% of foodborne human infections, where Campylobacter jejuni is the
primary species causing infections [1]. Effective methods to diminish Campylobacter in the
broiler production are needed. Therefore, a partnership between DTU, Danpo, and Thor
Ice was established on a joint project, SafeChicken, to investigate methods and technologies
to potentially reduce Campylobacter in the broiler production [4]. Campylobacter has the
ability to enter a viable but nonculturable state (VBNC), possibly as a survival strategy when
exposed to stressors. Furthermore, Campylobacter in the VBNC state, may be undetected
when using conventional culturing methods, as it will not multiply and create colonies in
culture media [5, 6, 7]. VBNC Campylobacter can potentially resuscitate when exposed to
favorable conditions and regain pathogenicity, thereby posing a risk to human health [8].
Potential methods for the detection of Campylobacter in its VBNC state have been suggested
through research. PMA-qPCR combines propidium monoazide (PMA) and quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). It is a non-culturing dependent method where PMA, an
intercalating dye, penetrates damaged cell membranes and binds to the DNA of dead cells.
The binding inhibits the amplification of DNA from dead cells, but viable, and VBNC cells
will be detected [5, 9]. LIVE/DEAD BacLight is a non culturing-dependent staining method.
It combines two fluorescence dyes, SYTO 9 and propidium iodide (PI). The combination
enables direct enumeration and differentiation of viable and injured/dead cells with the use
of fluorescence microscopy or flow cytometry [5].
2.1
Aim of the study and objectives
The overall aim of the study was to investigate and provide insight if C. jejuni has the
potential to persist in the broiler farm environment by entering a VBNC state. C. jejuni
were exposed to various simulations of environmental stressors to investigate which factors
induce the VBNC state of C. jejuni using PMA-qPCR.
To explore the overall aim of the study, six study objectives were formulated:
• To assess PMA-qPCR’s ability to differentiate viable and heat-inactivated C. jejuni
cells.
• To produce and verify a standard curve for the PMA-qPCR method using live and
heat-inactivated C. jejuni cells both treated and non-treated with PMA.
Master thesis
2 of 60
==PAGE:9==
2024
• To assess LIVE/DEAD BacLight’s ability to differentiate viable and heat-inactivated
C. jejuni cells.
• To investigate the potential induction of the VBNC state in C. jejuni through desicca-
tion.
• To test if osmotic stress can induce the VBNC state in C. jejuni.
• To investigate whether nutrient deprivation can induce the VBNC state in C. jejuni.
3
Background and theory
For the past five years, 3,740-5,389 cases of Campylobacter infections have been registered in
Denmark every year [10, 11]. Camppylobacter is the highest registered gastrointestinal bac-
terium in Denmark, compared to other gastrointestinal pathogens such as Salmonella, STEC,
Yersinia enterocolitica, Shigella and Listeria (figure 1). A substantial increase in Salmonella
cases was registered in 2008, where the number of registered cases exceeded the registered
cases of Campylobacter, due to a long-lasting outbreak. Nevertheless, Campylobacter have
been the dominating cause of gastroenteritis for the last 10 years in Denmark [2, 11, 12].
Foodborne gastroenteritis caused by Campylobacter spp. is considered highly underreported,
as it is usually self-limiting. The infectious dose is as low as 500 colony-forming units (CFU),
to cause infection. There are 16 species of the Campylobacter genera, where C. jejuni and C.
coli are the most common species causing infections in humans. C. jejuni is estimated to
cause 95% of the campylobacteriosis cases [1, 13, 14, 15].
Master thesis
3 of 60
==PAGE:10==
2024
Figure 1: Number of laboratory registered cases of gastrointestinal bacterial infections in Denmark in
years 2001-2022. Campylobacter (blue), Salmonella (orange), STEC (grey), Yersinia enterocolitica (yellow),
Shigella (pink) and Listeria (green).
Numbers are from Statens Serum Institut [11].
3.1
Campylobacter jejuni
C. jejuni is a Gram-negative, spiral-shaped bacterium. It is non-sporeforming and can have
a single flagellum or bipolar flagella [2, 16]. It is a microaerophilic bacterium, signifying
it requires 5-10% oxygen to thrive. C. jejuni is classified as thermophilic and has optimal
growth at temperatures between 37 ℃and 42 ℃, but does not grow at temperatures below 30
℃[1, 2, 17]. C. jejuni is considered to be a bacterium that is sensitive to changes in oxygen,
pH, desiccation, acids, salts, disinfectants, nutrient deprivation, osmotic stress, and the
fluctuation of temperatures [14, 16]. Despite the high sensitivity to environmental conditions,
C. jejuni is highly prevalent in poultry farms and food processing environments, which include
aerobic environments, refrigeration, freezing, scalding, and use of antimicrobials. The ability
of C. jejuni to survive makes the elimination of the bacteria in the food industry a challenge
[1, 8, 16].
3.2
Reservoir and transmission routes
C. jejuni is often found in warm-blooded animals, such as cows, sheep, birds, and poultry.
The animals are considered reservoirs for the pathogen, where C. jejuni rarely causes disease
symptoms. Birds and poultry have a higher metabolic temperature, around 42 ℃, facilitating
the growth of C. jejuni. It mainly colonizes the small intestine and ceca of the animals and
makes the bacterium detectable in the feces [2, 14, 18, 19].
Master thesis
4 of 60
==PAGE:11==
2024
The typical transmission route of C. jejuni is foodborne transmission, which is considered the
main route to human infections. It covers contaminated or undercooked food, unpasteurized
milk, dairy products, and cross-contamination, for instance, through the slaughtering process.
Suggested transmission routes can be seen illustrated in figure 2, where the thickness of the
arrows illustrates the relevance of the transmission routes. The transmission routes also
include waterborne transmission contaminated by animal feces, contact with infected pets,
and livestock as C. jejuni resides in the intestinal tract of these animals, and person-to-person
contact with an infected person with poor hygiene [2, 8, 18, 20].
The introduction of C. jejuni into poultry flocks is not fully understood. It is suggested
that the most common cause of the introduction of C. jejuni to commercially reared flocks,
is through horizontal transfer. C. jejuni is ubiquitous in the environment, therefore it can
easily be introduced into the poultry house through various means, like through routine
management and maintenance of the flock. The organic/free-range broiler flocks have a higher
percentage of positive Campylobacter cases than conventional flocks in Denmark [10, 18, 21].
However, when a chicken within a broiler flock is first detected positive, the bacterium will
transmit rapidly within days, and most of the birds will get infected with Campylobacter.
This often spreads through feces. Furthermore, the season is considered a factor, as more
cases of Campylobacter positive flocks are registered in the summertime [18].
Figure 2: The transmission routes of C. jejuni. The arrow size represents the relevance of the transmission
route. Figure inspired from EFSA, Story map on Campylobacter [2], created in BioRender.
Master thesis
5 of 60
==PAGE:12==
2024
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) [2] suggests prevention measures such as good
hygiene at the manufacturing and food distribution levels. Furthermore, that the consumer
handles the food properly to avoid cross-contamination. At farm level, EFSA suggests
slaughtering the chickens at a younger age (35 days) and dedicated changing facilities for the
farm workers together with specific indoor clothes and footwear. The Danish Veterinary and
Food Administration has initiated an action plan from year 2022-2026 for Campylobacter in
broilers, food products, and the environment to reduce the occurrence of Campylobacter in
food and in the environment. This type of action plan has been implemented in the early
years [22]. However, an increase in reported Campylobacter human cases is still seen yearly
[1, 2].
A variety of prevention strategies and interventions are used against C. jejuni in food
processing and industry. These include scalding, freezing, chilling, and the use of antimicrobials
that are used as treatments in the processing plant [1]. Furthermore, food preservatives are
also used, where Sodium Chloride (NaCl) is frequently utilized. The high salt concentrations
expose food-borne pathogens such as C. jejuni, for osmotic stress, which studies of model
bacteria have shown can lead to rapid efflux of cellular water, dehydration, and membrane
distortion [23, 24]. Both through food processing and at a chicken stable, C. jejuni can
get exposed to desiccation. Desiccation can occur when C. jejuni is exposed to air-drying,
particularly if it remains in a water droplet in the chicken stable, that gradually evaporates
over time. This drying process can have various effects on C. jejuni. Studies with model
bacteria have shown that desiccation can lead to shrinkage of the capsular layer, shrinkage
in the volume, and potentially alter cell morphology. The intracellular salt concentrations
might increase, and the pili and membrane may be altered or damaged due to desiccation
[25]. As a response to the environmental stressors, C. jejuni can enter the VBNC state [1].
3.3
The viable but nonculturable state of C. jejuni
Certain bacterial species, including species belonging to the Campylobacter genera, have been
discovered to enter the VBNC state [8, 6]. Previously, the VBNC state was described as a
dormant state, but the metabolic activity in the VBNC state is measurable compared to the
dormant state [6, 26]. C. jejuni can enter the VBNC state, where it is not able to grow in
the laboratories and is thus not detectable when using traditional culturing methods [8]. The
VBNC state of C. jejuni was first described by Rollins and Colwell in 1986 [27]. Up until
2020, 85 bacterial species have been reported to be capable of entering the VBNC state when
exposed to stressful conditions [8].
Stressful environmental conditions, such as temperature and pH fluctuations have been
demonstrated to induce the VBNC state in C. jeuni. For instance, prolonged incubation at 4
℃resulted in the development of VBNC C. jejuni [3, 28]. Osmotic shock, desiccation, and
nutrient deprivation have also been identified to induce the VBNC in C. jejuni. C. jejuni is
sensitive to high concentrations of NaCl but can tolerate it to some extent. The ability to
Master thesis
6 of 60
==PAGE:13==
2024
tolerate and grow in NaCl has shown to be temperature-dependent. Research has reported
that C. jejuni can survive longer at 4.5% (w/v) NaCl at 4 ℃compared to a temperature at
42 ℃[1, 29].
Numerous genes contribute to the induction of the VBNC state in C. jejuni. A down-
regulation in the transcription of virulence-associated genes such as cdtA, cdtB, cdtC, flaA,
flaB, cadF and ciaB have been observed for C. jejuni in the VBNC state. The genes are
associated with adhesion and invasion in the intestinal tract of the host. Despite these
genes being downregulated, they are still maintained in the VBNC bacteria [3, 30]. Research
suggests that C. jejuni down-regulates possible genes, such as virulence genes, to conserve
energy for metabolism [1, 30].
Environmental stressors have previously been reported to promote upregulation of virulence
gene expression in various pathogens. This adaptive response has also been observed for C.
jejuni, as a response to nutrient deprivation among other stressors. If the stress persists C.
jejuni may eventually entering the VBNC state [28, 31, 32]. Studies have demonstrated that
C. jejuni switch morphological appearance from spiral shape to coccoid form when entering
the VBNC state [3, 28].
The VBNC cells are suggested to be avirulent when being the VBNC, as a result of the
reduced rate of gene expression and protein translation. Furthermore, VBNC cells can be
dormant for several months and then resuscitated when exposed to favorable conditions,
regaining pathogenicity [6, 8]. VBNC cells have been demonstrated to resuscitate only within
a limited period of a certain time, the resuscitation window. The resuscitation window has
been shown to be related to the age of the VBNC cells. If the cells do not enter favorable
conditions within the resuscitation window, they lose the ability and will at some point die
[5, 33]. It has been reported that VBNC C. jejuni have been resuscitated in mouse intestines
and embryonated eggs [33].
C. jejuni have adopted other survival mechanisms to overcome environmental stressors
than the VBNC state. There have been suggested mechanisms, such as the development
of aerotolerance and biofilm formation [1]. As C. jejuni is a microaerophilic bacterium
that thrives best in low oxygen levels, aerotolerance enables it to survive in oxygen-rich
environments. Furthermore, C. jejuni can develop biofilm formation. A biofilm is a bacterial
community that is encapsulated by a matrix produced by the bacteria that adhere to surfaces
and the bacteria. The biofilm protects the bacteria from environmental stressors such as
antimicrobials, disinfectants, and dehydration. Research suggests biofilm formation is a
survival strategy contributing to its ability to persist in the environment. Research indicates
that the ability of C. jejuni to form biofilms is strengthened when food or organic components
in food are present, such as chicken meat exudate (chicken juice) [1, 34].
Master thesis
7 of 60
==PAGE:14==
2024
3.4
Detection of C. jejuni by non culturing-dependent methods
3.4.1
PMA-qPCR
The detection method for Campylobacter in food processing heavily relies on traditional
culturing methods, where CFU are quantified by plating on selective media and incubated
at microaerobic atmosphere with elevated temperatures. Although the culturing-dependent
methods are cost-effective and simple, they require detectable growth to confirm the presence
of the pathogen, a requirement that is not met by VBNC C. jejuni [35, 36]. A suggested
method for detection of VBNC C. jejuni, is the use of PMA in conjunction with qPCR.
Unlike the traditional culturing methods that rely on culturability, this approach evaluates
the viability based on membrane integrity [8].
PMA, a derivative of propidium iodide, can pass through the cell membrane of dead cells.
It binds strongly and irreversibly with a covalent bond to the double-stranded DNA when
exposed to light (465-475 nm) [37]. The structural characteristics and positive charge of
PMA, prevent it from passing through the intact membranes of viable cells. When PMA
binds to DNA, it prevents amplification from the DNA polymerase through qPCR analysis.
Which leads to the assumption that the binding of PMA ensures only PCR products from
viable cells [8, 38, 39]. An illustration of PMA-qPCR is shown in figure 3.
qPCR provides real-time quantification of amplified DNA. A fluorescence signal is measured
through each cycle to monitor real-time amplification of the DNA. Upon reaching a prede-
termined threshold (Ct value), the initial amount of DNA in the sample can be quantified.
qPCR can not differentiate viable cells from non-viable cells alone, and therefore, PMA is
used as a supplement to enable differentiation and reduce overestimation [39, 40].
Figure 3: The PMA enters the dead cells through the compromised cell membrane and binds to DNA
upon photoactivation. The binding inhibits the DNA polymerase from amplifying the DNA of the dead cells,
resulting in the polymerase only amplifies DNA from the viable cells [5, 8].
Figure from special course: Viable but not culturable stage of Campylobacter bacteria, created by Agnes Sigrid
Bjørnstad, inspired by figure 2 in Dong et al. 2020 [5]. Created in BioRender.
3.4.2
LIVE/DEAD BacLight
LIVE/DEAD BacLight is a staining method that, in combination with traditional culturing-
dependent methods, can detect VBNC cells. LIVE/DEAD BacLight can be used to distinguish
viable and dead cells based on the membrane integrity using two nucleic acid fluorescent
stains. SYTO 9, a green dye that permeates the cell membrane of both intact and injured
Master thesis
8 of 60
==PAGE:15==
2024
cells, upon binding of DNA will fluorescence green. PI is a red dye, that penetrates the
membrane of only the injured cells and binds DNA, producing red fluorescence [5, 41, 42].
When both dyes are present in the injured cell, PI establishes a stronger affinity to the DNA
and outcompetes SYTO 9. The fluorescence can then be examined using a fluorescence
microscope or flow cytometry [5, 43]. The method is illustrated in figure 4.
Figure 4: SYTO 9 penetrates the membrane of both live and injured cells, emitting green fluorescence. PI
penetrates the compromised membrane of injured/dead cells, emitting red fluorescence. The fluorescence can
be examined using fluorescent microscopy or flow cytometry. Figure from special course: Viable but not
culturable stage of Campylobacter bacteria, created by Agnes Sigrid Bjørnstad, inspired by figure 2 in Dong et
al. 2020 [5]. Created in BioRender.
Master thesis
9 of 60
==PAGE:16==
2024
4
Materials and methods
The experimental work of this study consisted of assessing three DNA extraction methods,
along with PMA-qPCR and LIVE/DEAD BacLight for detection of C. jejuni. Additionally,
investigation of the influence of environmental stressors on the viability of C. jejuni such as
desiccation, osmotic stress, and nutrient deprivation. Creation of the standard curve from
PMA-qPCR, DNA extraction trials, and LIVE/DEAD BacLight assay were conducted in
collaboration with Sofie Pauly Kofoed Mose, with the purpose of producing a standard curve
for the PMA-qPCR method and to test the LIVE/DEAD BacLight method for both our
theses.
4.1
Bacterial strains and cultivation conditions
The bacterial strains used in the project were Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni ATCC
33560 and Escherichia coli ATCC 11229.
The bacterial strains were thawed from -80 ℃cryo-stocks stored in lysogeny broth with 15%
glycerol. The C. jejuni strain was streaked on selective media, modified charcoal cefoperazone
deoxycholate agar (mCCDA, CCDA agar plate, SSI Diagnostica, Denmark), and incubated
for 72 hours at 41.5 ℃at microaerobic conditions. One C. jejuni colony was transferred
to blood agar (BA, TSA agar plate with 5% bovine blood, SSI Diagnostica, Denmark) and
incubated overnight (ON) at 41.5 ℃at microaerobic conditions. E. coli was thawed from -80
℃and streaked on BA and incubated at 37 ℃ON.
4.2
Bacterial stock solution
The bacterial stock solutions were prepared by 1 mL saline (0.9% (w/v) NaCl) was poured
on the BA plate containing the bacterial colonies (section 4.1). The colonies were mixed with
the liquid using a Drigalski spatula. The bacterial solution was collected and diluted with
saline to obtain an OD600=0.6 ∼1.0x109 CFU/mL.
The bacterial concentration of the working stock was confirmed by making a 10-fold dilution
series in saline. The dilutions 10-5-10-7 were plated on BA and incubated for 48 hours at 41.5
℃at microaerobic conditions to count CFU/mL.
4.3
Preparation of dilutions to the standard curve
To create a standard curve and investigate PMA-qPCR’s ability to differentiate viable
and heat-inactivated cells a 10-fold dilution series of C. jejuni was made (section 4.2), the
procedure can be seen in figure 5. From the dilutions 10-2-10-9, 4x900 µL of each dilution were
transferred to Eppendorf tubes, resulting in four rows with tubes. Half of them were heated
in a heat block at 90℃for 15 minutes. Resulting in two rows of Eppendorf tubes (10-2-10-9)
as dead cell control (heat-inactivated) and two rows of tubes as live (viable) cell control. The
Master thesis
10 of 60
==PAGE:17==
2024
PMA treatment can be found in section 4.4. From the heat-inactivated cells, 100 µL from
10-1 and 10-3 were plated on BA and incubated at 41.5 ℃at microaerobic conditions ON, to
ensure heat-inactivation was achieved.
Figure 5: Workflow of the 10-fold dilution series for the standard curve. Created in BioRender.
Likewise, a control sample of E. coli was prepared by a 10-fold dilution series. Dilutions
10-5-10-9 were plated on BA and incubated ON at 37 ℃to count CFU/mL. Sample 10-3 was
centrifuged at 7,500 x g for 7 min, the supernatant was removed, and the sample was stored
at -20 ℃until DNA extraction.
4.4
PMA treatment
From the solution to be tested, 900 µL was transferred to an Eppendorf tube, where 100 µL
PMA (VWR International, US, Avantor) was added to obtain a final PMA concentration
at 20 µM [8, 44]. The tube was shaken at room temperature at 150 rpm for five minutes
in the dark and afterward exposed to light in a LED Active Blue instrument (IB Applied
Science) for photo-crosslinking for 15 min. The tube was centrifuged at 7,500 x g for 7 min,
and supernatant was discarded to remove the excess PMA. The PMA-treated sample was
stored at -20 ℃until DNA extraction. The procedure of the PMA-qPCR procedure can be
seen in figure 6.
Likewise, the PMA-treated sample described above, a non-treated sample was collected, as a
control. Where 100 µL saline was added instead of PMA and followed the same procedure as
the PMA-treated sample.
Master thesis
11 of 60
==PAGE:18==
2024
Figure 6: Workflow for the PMA-qPCR procedure. The figure is inspired by the product information of
PMA from the Biotium instruction manual [37].
4.5
DNA extraction
Three DNA extraction methods were tested to determine which was most suitable for further
experiments with PMA-qPCR. Boiling lysis and two extraction kits from Qiagen: DNeasy
Blood & Tissue Kit and QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit. The extraction methods were
tested with C. jejuni samples at concentrations of 107 and 106 CFU/mL. These samples
consisted of both a PMA-treated and non-treated representative (section 4.4). Prior DNA
extraction, the frozen samples, including both PMA-treated and non-treated, were thawed at
room temperature.
4.5.1
Boiling lysis
For the samples to be extracted, 200 µL of 10X TE buffer was added to the bacterial pellets
and vortexed. The tubes were heated at 100 ℃for 10 min. Lids were kept shut with a constant
pressure to secure the lids did not open under the heating. The tubes were centrifuged at
10.000 x g for 5 min. The supernatant was transferred to another Eppendorf tube. The DNA
was stored at -20 ℃until qPCR analysis (section 4.6).
Master thesis
12 of 60
==PAGE:19==
2024
4.5.2
DNA extraction with DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit
For the samples to be extracted, 180 µL Buffer ATL was added to each sample. 25 µL
Proteinase K was added to the samples and vortexed. The samples were heated to 56 ℃
for 60 min and vortexed for 15 seconds. 200 µL Buffer AL was added and vortexed. 200
µL ethanol (96-98%) was added and vortexed. The lysate from the tubes was added to the
spin columns, placed in a 2 mL collection tube, and centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 rpm.
The filtrate liquid in the spin columns after the centrifugation was discarded. This process
was repeated until all the lysate had been through the spin columns. 500 µL AW1 Buffer
was added to the spin columns and centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 rpm. The spin columns
were placed in a new 2 mL collection tube, and 500 µL AW2 Buffer was added, and the
samples were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 3 min. The spin columns were transferred to an
Eppendorf tube, and 100 µL of AE Buffer was added. The tubes were incubated for 1 min at
room temperature and were then centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 2 min. The DNA was stored
at -20 ℃until qPCR analysis (section 4.6).
4.5.3
DNA extraction with QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit
For the samples to be extracted, 1 mL InhibitEX Buffer was added to each sample and
vortexed. The samples were heated to 70 ℃for 10 min and then vortexed. The samples were
centrifuged 1 min at 10,000 rpm. 25 µL Proteinase K was added to new Eppendorf tubes.
600 µL supernatant from the sample tubes was transferred to the Eppendorf tubes containing
Proteinase K. 600 µL buffer AL was added to the tubes and vortexed for 15 seconds. The
tubes were incubated at 70 ℃for 10 min. 600 µL 90% ethanol was added to each tube and
vortexed. The lysate from the tubes was added to the QIAmp spin columns, placed in a 2
mL collection tube, and centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 rpm. The filtrate liquid in the spin
columns after the centrifugation was discarded. This process was repeated until all the lysate
had been through the spin columns. 500 µL AW1 Buffer was added to the spin columns and
centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 rpm. The spin columns were placed in a new 2 mL collection
tube and 500 µL AW2 Buffer was added. The samples were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 3
min. The spin columns were transferred to an Eppendorf tube, and 100 µL of ATE Buffer was
added. The tubes were incubated for 1 min at room temperature and were then centrifuged
at 14,000 rpm for 2 min. The DNA was stored at -20 ℃until qPCR analysis (section 4.6).
4.6
Real-time quantitative PCR
The primers and probes used for the qPCR in this study are shown in table 1. The primers for
C. jejuni targets the 16s rRNA [45]. Two TagMan probes are used, where the Campy LNA
(locked nucleic acid) probe for C. jeuni creates a FAM (6-Carboxyfluorescein) signal, and the
IAC probe creates a HEX (Hexachlorofluorescein) signal in the qPCR analysis. To ensure and
Master thesis
13 of 60
==PAGE:20==
2024
monitor the efficiency of the qPCR reaction, an Internal Amplification Control (IAC) was
included with a corresponding probe. The IAC serves as an internal amplification reference
of the qPCR and is proposed as a requirement when PCR testing foodborne pathogens [46].
The composition of the master mix is shown in table 2. Fifteen µL master mix was added
to the wells of a MicroAmp Fast optical 96-well Reaction Plate (Applied Biosystems, Life
Technologies, Singapore). Ten µL of the DNA sample (template) was added to the wells in
duplicates and mixed by pipetting. Positive controls of C. jejuni, one negative control of E.
coli, and two non-template controls (PCR water) were also included. The MicroAmp plate
was covered with an optical adhesive cover (Applied Biosystems, Life Technologies, Singapore)
and centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 2 min. The PCR cycles were run in a QuantStudio 5 (Applied
Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). The cycle profile was initial denaturation at 95
℃for 3 min, followed by a total of 40 cycles of 95 ℃for 15 sec, then 60 ℃for 60 sec, and
afterward 72 ℃for 30 sec. The data collection was performed in the exponential phase of
the process. The fluorescence measurements were obtained and analyzed using QuantStudio
Design & Analysis Software 2.7.0.
Table 1: Primers and probes used in the study. IAC (Internal Amplification Control) was included to secure
successful amplification of the PCR process.
Primers and probes
Sequence
Ref.
Forward primer OT-1559
5’-CTG CTT AAC ACA AGT TGA GTA GG-3’
[47]
Reverse primer 18-1
5’-TTC CTT AGG TAC CGT CAG AA-3’
[47]
Campy LNA probe
5’-[6FAM]CA[+T]CC[+T]CCACGCGGCG[+T]
TGC[BHQ1]
[47]
IAC
5’-CTG CTT AAC ACA AGT TGA GTA GGC
AAC TCA GGT GTC CTC ATG AAT T...G AA-3’
IAC probe
5’-[HEX]TTCATGAGGACACCTGAGTTG[BHQ1]
[47]
Master thesis
14 of 60
==PAGE:21==
2024
Table 2: qPCR master mix reagents and the volumes pr sample. The primers were diluted with PCR water
and probes with TE buffer. The qPCR was run with 10 µL template.
Reagent
µL per sample
Water
2.22
Merck, Germany
Buffer for Tth DNA polymerase (10x)
2.50
Roche Diagnostics
Germany
MgCl2 (25mM)
2.50
Roche Diagnostics
Germany
Glycerol
2.00
Merck, Germany
dNTP (12.5 mM)
1.20
Thermo Fisher
Scientific, US
Forward primer OT-1559 (10 pmol/µL)
1.25
TAG Copenhagen A/S
Denmark
Reverse primer18-1 (10 pmol/µL)
1.25
TAG Copenhagen A/S
Denmark
Campy LNA probe (5 pmol/µL)
0.38
Merck, Germany
IAC probe (6 pmol/µL)
0.25
Merck, Germany
BSA
0.25
Roche Diagnostics
Germany
Tth enzyme (polymerase) (12.2 U/mol)
0.20
Roche Diagnostics
Germany
IAC (100 pmol/µL)
1.00 (10-9 dilution used)
TAG Copenhagen A/S
Denmark
4.7
LIVE/DEAD BacLight
A bacterial stock solution of C. jejuni was prepared as described in sections: 4.1 and 4.2.
From the stock solution, 2x1 mL was added to two Eppendorf tubes. One of the tubes was
heat treated at 90 ℃for 15 min to ensure heat-inactivated cells. 300 µL from the viable
cells and 300 µL from the heat-inactivated cells were added to a new Eppendorf tube. The
tube was vortexed thoroughly. A 10-fold dilution series (100-10-4) was made for both viable,
heat-inactivated and mixed cells. 100 µL of the bacterial cell suspensions were added to a
sterile flat bottom 96-well polystyrene microplate (In Vitro, Denmark) in triplicates.
The stains used were from the LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit L7012 (Molecular
Probes, Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Eugene, Oreg.). The SYTO 9 (3.34mM) and
PI (20mM) were mixed in 1:2 ratio [42], 10 µL SYTO 9 were mixed with 20 µL PI. The dye
mixture was added to a 5 mL filter sterilized dH2O and mixed by vortexing. 100 µL of the dye
mixture was added to each well and mixed by pipetting. Viable (live) and heat-inactivated
(dead) cell controls were added by adding 100 µL of viable and heat-inactivated cells to
Master thesis
15 of 60
==PAGE:22==
2024
separate wells in the microplate. For the viable control (VC), 3 µL of SYTO 9 was mixed
with 500 µL filter sterilized dH2O. 100 µL of the dye was added to the viable control and
mixed. The same was conducted with PI and added to the heat-inactivated control (DC). A
non-dyed control (NDC) was added, where the 10-fold dilution series of viable cells (100-10-4)
was added to the microplate without adding the dyes. The setup in the microplate can be
seen illustrated in figure 7.
The microplate containing the samples was incubated at room temperature in the dark for
15 min. The plate was inspected with no lid, by confocal microscopy at 60x magnification
using an ImageXpress Micro Confocal & MetaXpress 6 (Molecular Devices) microscope. The
inspection was done using FITC or Cy5 filters, or no filter, for the visualization of viable
and heat-inactivated cells, respectively. Images were taken at room temperature with the
MetaXpress software (Molecular Devices LCC) with laser-based focusing to define offset and
utilize the auto-exposure settings. The images were taken with only one filter at a time, and
then the MetaXpress software was used to overlay the images, to enable showing both stains.
The images were taken with help from the laboratory.
Figure 7: The positions of the LIVE/DEAD BacLight samples in the 96-well microplate. The numbers
correspond to 10-fold dilution series of C. jejuni. Viable cells (blue), heat-inactivated cells (red) and mix
(50:50) of viable and heat-inactivated cells (purple). Viable control (VC), heat-inactivated control (DC) and
non-dye control (NDC).
4.8
Environmental stressors inducing the VBNC state in C. jejuni
4.8.1
Preparation of chicken juice
Chicken juice was prepared for the assays to mimic the nutrient source environment at the
chicken stable with organic material from chickens. Commercially frozen chicken thighs were
thawed at room temperature ON in a plastic bag. The chicken juice was collected and stored
at -80 ℃for 48 h. The chicken juice was thawed at -4 ℃and centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10
min to eliminate large particles. To sterilize the chicken juice, it was filtrated using a 0.45
Master thesis
16 of 60
==PAGE:23==
2024
µm filter. The optical density (OD) of the chicken juice was measured and the chicken juice
was stored at -20 ℃until use [48].
4.8.2
Desiccation of C. jejuni
4.8.2.1
Desiccation trial of C. jejuni
Prior to the arrival of a new flock of chickens to the stable, it gets washed and disinfected
followed by heating to a minimum of 25 ℃[49]. It was assumed that C. jejuni could be left
in a droplet at the stable after washing to desiccate. Therefore, the effect of desiccation of C.
jejuni was investigated. As a preliminary experiment, 1 mL of saline was added to an empty
Petri dish at room temperature to observe the desiccation of the liquid.
To investigate if C. jejuni would survive to fully dry out and to test if it was possible to get
qPCR results from the desiccation, a bacterial stock solution of C. jejuni was prepared as
described in sections 4.1 and 4.2.
From the C. jejuni stock solution (109 CFU/mL), 500 µL was transferred to two empty Petri
dishes (plates) ( 55 mm) and 1 mL onto two other empty Petri dishes. The dishes were
then swirled to distribute the contents on the bottom.
The setup and workflow of the assay are illustrated in figure 8. One of the plates containing
500 µL bacterial solution and one of the plates containing 1 mL, were placed together in
an anaerobic jar. The lids for the Petri dishes were set at an angle on the lower plate to
allow a gradual evaporation. To ensure optimal microaerobic conditions for Campylobacter,
CampyGen Compact sheets (Fisher Scientific, Thermo Scientific, Denmark) were placed in
an anaerobic jar together with the Petri dishes. The same setup was repeated with the other
500 µL and 1 mL plates, where a glass beaker ( 106 mm) containing 1 L distilled water was
placed inside the jar to increase humidity. The plates were incubated inside the jars at 41.5
℃for 48 h. The stock solution of C. jejuni was kept at 4 ℃(±3 ℃) for 48 h as a control.
Figure 8: Desiccation assay, incubated at 41.5 ℃for 48 h until the solutions were completely desiccated.
A glass beaker with water was placed together with two of the plates through incubation. Figure created in
BioRender.
Master thesis
17 of 60
==PAGE:24==
2024
After 48 hours, 10 mL of saline was added to each plate together with 5 g sterilized glass
beads. The plates were shaken at 150 rpm for 10 min with saline and glass beads. The
bacterial solutions were transferred from the plates to 15 mL tubes. 1 mL was transferred
from the control tube to a new 15 mL Falcon tube, and saline was added to obtain the same
volume as the tubes from the plates. The tubes were centrifuged at 7,500 x g for 7 min. The
supernatant was discarded and 2.5 mL saline was added to the pellet and vortexed for 30 sec.
A 10-fold dilution series was made for each solution and was plated on BA and incubated
at microaerobic conditions at 41.5 ℃ON. A 10-fold dilution series and plating were also
performed for the control (109 CFU/mL).
Each solution, including the control, was treated with PMA and non-treated following the
procedure in section 4.4. The samples were stored at -20 ℃until DNA extraction, using
the QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit, following the procedure in section 4.5.3. Followed by
qPCR analysis described in section 4.6.
4.8.2.2
Desiccation of C. jejuni with chicken juice
A similar desiccation assay was performed with the addition of chicken juice to simulate the
farm environment. Therefore, the following procedure is the same as in section 4.8.2.1, where
the differences are described below. The bacterial stock solution of C. jejuni was divided into
two tubes, and chicken juice was added to obtain a bacterial solution containing 5% chicken
juice. Saline was added to the other tube to obtain equal volumes.
The assay was performed with duplicates. 1 mL from each tube (with and without chicken
juice) was added to two empty Petri dishes (plates). The plates were placed in an anaerobic
jar, with the lid of the jar half open to ensure atmospheric conditions. An illustration of the
experimental setup can be seen in figure 9. Together with the plates, the tubes containing
the bacterial stock solutions (with and without chicken juice) were placed within the jar with
no lid on as controls, to not desiccate (the controls are not demonstrated in the illustration,
but appear in the incubation setup picture in figure 9). A glass beaker ( 69 mm) with
250 mL water, was placed inside the jar to increase humidity. The humidity was monitored
using a data logger (Tinyview Plus TV-1500, Gemini Data Loggers) during the assay. The
measurements were initiated with reference to a broiler farm’s chicken stable, wherein a chart
illustrating % relative humidity (%RH) measurements within the stable is provided. The
chart can be seen in appendix 10.3. At the chicken farm, the humidity in the chicken stable
is monitored and maintained at 49-70% from the introduction of a flock at week 1 until week
5. The jar with the samples was incubated for 48 h at 25 ℃until the plates were completely
desiccated. The retrieval of the desiccated C. jejuni cells follows as described in section
4.8.2.1. After retrieval of the cells, 100µL from each solution and the controls, was plated on
BA and incubated at 41.5 ℃at microaerobic conditions ON, to register growth.
Master thesis
18 of 60
==PAGE:25==
2024
Figure 9: Desiccation assay, left for incubation at 25℃for 48 h until the solutions were completely desiccated.
The controls incubated together with the plates in the jar. A glass beaker with water and a data logger was
placed together with the plates and control tubes through incubation. The experimental procedure follows as in
figure 8, at the arrow stating "For all samples". Figure created with BioRender and Powerpoint.
4.8.3
Osmotic stress of C. jejuni
The potential induction of the VBNC state of C. jejuni through osmotic stress was investigated.
The assay was performed with biological duplicates; therefore, two bacterial stock solutions
of C. jejuni were prepared as described in sections 4.1 and 4.2 and the duplicate assay was
performed simultaneously. An illustration of the assay is shown in figure 10.
The bacterial stock solution was divided into 3 tubes. The tubes were centrifuged at 7,500 x
g for 7 min and supernatant was discarded. In one of the tubes, 10 mL 7% (w/v) NaCl was
added. For the second tube, 10 mL tap water (from DTU, Lyngby) was added, and for the
third tube, 10 mL of saline solution was added. The tube containing the saline solution was
divided into two tubes. In one of the tubes, 500 µL chicken juice (section 4.8.1) was added,
so the solution contained 9.09% chicken juice. In the other tube 500 µL saline was added to
obtain equal volumes. All the tubes were incubated at room temperature (∼20 ℃) with
the lid off to ensure atmospheric conditions. A box with holes at the side was placed over
the tubes to prevent contamination. Samples for PMA treatment (following the procedure
described in section 4.4) were collected after 0 h, 5 h, 24 h, 48 h, and 7 days. 100 µL from
each tube was plated at every sample time on BA and incubated ON at 41.5 ℃microaerobic
conditions to register growth. The PMA-treated and non-treated samples were stored at -20
℃until DNA extraction, using the QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit, following the procedure
in section 4.5.3, followed by qPCR analysis described in section 4.6. When the samples were
collected after 5 h, 5 mL saline was added to the tubes containing only the saline solution
and saline with chicken juice to ensure enough bacterial solution for the rest of the sample
times, this dilution was corrected in the data processing.
Master thesis
19 of 60
==PAGE:26==
2024
Figure 10: Osmotic stress assay, the experimental workflow. C. jejuni was incubated in four different
solutions. A: 7% (w/v) NaCl, B: tap water, C: saline and D: saline with chicken juice. The tubes were left
for incubation at room temperature for 7 days. Figure created in BioRender.
4.8.4
Nutrient deprivation
The influence of nutrient deprivation of C. jejuni was investigated by incubation in 0.9%
NaCl, with and without chicken juice. C. jejuni was cultivated and a bacterial stock solution
was prepared, following the procedure in sections: 4.1 and 4.2. The bacterial stock solution
was divided into two tubes. Chicken juice was added to one of the tubes to obtain a solution
with 5% chicken juice. Saline was added to the other tube to obtain the same volume in both
tubes. The tubes were incubated at 25 ℃with no lid on to ensure atmospheric conditions.
Samples were collected after 2, 7, and 14 days. The samples were treated with PMA following
the procedure described in section 4.4. At every sampling time, 100 µL from both tubes were
plated on BA and incubated ON at 41.5 ℃at microaerobic conditions to register growth The
PMA-treated and non-treated samples were stored at -20 ℃until DNA extraction, using
the QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit, following the procedure in section 4.5.3, followed by
qPCR analysis described in section 4.6.
4.9
Data processing
The bacterial stock solutions were plated, to confirm the bacterial concentrations. CFU/mL
was calculated from the plate counts using plates with 1-300 colonies; the results from plate
counts are not included in this study.
Cells were assumed viable based on retained membrane integrity. Therefore, for a sample that
was treated with PMA (+PMA) and returned a signal in the qPCR analysis, were assumed as
viable cells. The corresponding sample, that was not treated with PMA (-PMA) and returned
Master thesis
20 of 60
==PAGE:27==
2024
a signal in the qPCR analysis, was considered a mixture of viable and dead/non-viable cells
(all cells). If a sample was treated with PMA and did not return a signal from the qPCR
analysis, but the corresponding non-PMA treated sample returned a signal, the cells were
considered dead/non-viable. A PMA-treated sample that returned a signal from the qPCR
analysis and did not show growth at BA incubated ON at 41.5 ℃microaerobic conditions
were assumed as VBNC cells.
The Ct values used in the data through this study are all based on an average of duplicate
determination, except for the DNA extraction experiment where the DNeasy Blood & Tissue
Kit and Boiling lysis were analyzed by qPCR as a single trial. The QIAmp Fast DNA Stool
Mini Kit was tested with duplicates. All plots and calculations were made using Microsoft
Excel.
4.9.1
PMA efficiency and standard curve
To determine if PMA inhibited the amplification of the DNA from the viable cells, the delta
Ct (dCT) was calculated with the equation [37]:
dCt = CtPMA−treated −Ctuntreated
(1)
According to the Biotium PMA product information [37], the live (viable) cell control should
have a dCt close to 0 (±1), indicating the PMA treatment did not affect the amplification of
DNA from the viable cells.
The standard curve was created by the Ct values for the 10-fold dilution series of the PMA-
treated C. jejuni cells were plotted against calculated Log CFU/mL. A linear regression was
obtained from the standard curve. The Efficiency of the qPCR reaction for the standard
curve was calculated from the slope using the following equation [50]:
Efficiency = 10
−1
slope −1
(2)
An efficiency was accepted between 90-110%, and R2 coefficient (coefficient of determination)
was considered acceptable >0.98 to ensure reliable results [50, 51, 52].
The limit of detection (LOD) was estimated as the lowest concentration of C. jejuni that
could be detected using qPCR from the serial dilutions. The limit of quantification (LOQ),
was estimated as the lowest concentration of C. jejuni that could be quantified and included
in the linear regression for the standard curve. Both values were estimated from the standard
curve [50].
4.9.2
Converting Ct values to Log CFU/mL and standard deviations
For the environmental stressors assays performed in this study, a sample from the standard
curve was included in the qPCR runs, and the threshold of the qPCR analysis was adjusted
to the same as in the standard curve: 8176.147 ∆Rn. The Ct values were converted to
Log CFU/mL by inserting the Ct value from the unknown sample into the linear regression
Master thesis
21 of 60
==PAGE:28==
2024
obtained from the standard curve, then isolating for x (Log CFU/mL) [50].
Standard deviations (SD) were calculated using Excel for samples performed with biological
duplicates.
5
Results
5.1
DNA extraction
Three DNA extraction methods were tested to find the best suited for the PMA-qPCR
process. The Ct values for the three tested DNA extracted methods are shown in table 3. The
boiling lysis did not return any Ct values besides from the dead 107 CFU/mL PMA-treated
sample, where a Ct value was observed. For the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit, the Ct was
undetermined for the living 107 sample, which was expected to give a value. Additionally, a
Ct value was observed for the dead 107 PMA treated sample, which was unexpected. For the
stool kit, Ct values were observed for all the samples except the dead PMA-treated samples,
where no Ct was expected. Overall, the Ct values for the Blood & Tissue Kit were lower
compared to the Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit, indicating a higher concentration of the target
DNA. The IAC Ct values (HEX signal) were acceptable for all samples, the results are not
included.
Table 3: The values in the table are Ct values for the three tested DNA extraction methods (QIAmp Fast
DNA Stool Mini Kit, DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit, and Boiling lysis). The samples are dilutions of C. jejuni,
107 and 106 CFU/mL, viable cells and dead (heat-inactivated) cells both treated with PMA and non-PMA
treated. ’Undetermined’ means the signal did not surpass the threshold within the cycles, not returning a
value.
Sample (CFU/mL)
PMA
Stool Mini Kit
Blood & Tissue Kit
Boiling lysis
Viable 107
-
16.37
Undetermined
Undetermined
Viable 106
-
20.13
17.08
Undetermined
Viable 107
+
17.90
15.94
Undetermined
Viable 106
+
21.35
18.26
Undetermined
Dead 107
-
21.33
13.67
Undetermined
Dead 106
-
24.35
17.00
Undetermined
Dead 107
+
Undetermined
26.41
38.64
Dead 106
+
Undetermined
Undetermined
Undetermined
Based on this result, the QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit was selected for DNA extraction
further in the project.
5.2
PMA efficiency and standard curve
The efficiency and effect of PMA were investigated on a 10-fold dilution series of C. jejuni.
An overview of the dilutions and the samples can be seen in table 4, indicating if PMA was
Master thesis
22 of 60
==PAGE:29==
2024
applied. The Ct values are included in the table, revealing that PMA successfully inhibited the
DNA amplification of the dead (heat-inactivated) -PMA cells (D10-x PMA), which is evident
from the fact that all Ct values were undetermined. Ct values were determined for the dead
cells non-PMA treated for the 105-107 CFU/mL. From the dead cells, 106 and 108 CFU/mL
were plated to test if the inactivation was obtained. No growth was observed on the plates.
For both non-heat treated +PMA and -PMA, Ct values were determined for samples 104-107
CFU/mL. No Ct values were determined for samples below, 104 CFU/mL. The negative
control, E. coli, returned undetermined Ct, together with the process control for the DNA
extraction. Furthermore, the Ct values for the IAC, all returned acceptable, ensuring a reliable
qPCR run. The amplification plot for the IAC runs (HEX signal) can be seen in appendix 10.2.
Master thesis
23 of 60
==PAGE:30==
2024
Table 4: A 10-fold dilution series of heat-inactivated (dead) and non-heat treated (viable) C. jejuni cells
treated with PMA and non-treated with corresponding Ct value from qPCR. ’Undetermined’ means the signal
did not surpass the threshold within the cycle. A negative control (E. coli) and process control that contains
no DNA is included.
Sample name
CFU/mL
Heat-treated
PMA
Ct value
D10-2
107
+
-
20.6
D10-3
106
+
-
23.7
D10-4
105
+
-
26.1
D10-5
104
+
-
Undetermined
D10-6
103
+
-
Undetermined
D10-7
102
+
-
Undetermined
D10-8
101
+
-
Undetermined
D10-2 PMA
107
+
+
Undetermined
D10-3 PMA
106
+
+
Undetermined
D10-4 PMA
105
+
+
Undetermined
D10-5 PMA
104
+
+
Undetermined
D10-6 PMA
103
+
+
Undetermined
D10-7 PMA
102
+
+
Undetermined
D10-8 PMA
101
+
+
Undetermined
L10-2
107
-
-
15.0
L10-3
106
-
-
16.8
L10-4
105
-
-
21.8
L10-5
104
-
-
24.4
L10-6
103
-
-
Undetermined
L10-7
102
-
-
Undetermined
L10-8
101
-
-
Undetermined
L10-2 PMA
107
-
+
15.3
L10-3 PMA
106
-
+
19.8
L10-4 PMA
105
-
+
21.0
L10-5 PMA
104
-
+
26.5
L10-6 PMA
103
-
+
Undetermined
L10-7 PMA
102
-
+
Undetermined
L10-8 PMA
101
-
+
Undetermined
E. coli 10-3
106
-
-
Undetermined
Process control
None
None
-
Undetermined
The dCt was calculated (table 5) using equation 1 for the non-heat treated samples to
determine if PMA affected the amplification of the DNA. The dCt for the non-heat treated
samples should be 0 (±1) [37], where two of the samples were not within the range, both had
a dCt above 1.
Master thesis
24 of 60
==PAGE:31==
2024
Table 5: The calculated dCt for the non-heat treated samples that returned a Ct value from the qPCR
analysis. The dCt should be 0 (±1).
Sample
CFU/mL
Ct (+PMA)
Ct (-PMA)
dCt
L10-2
107
15.3
15.0
0.3
L10-3
106
19.8
16.8
3.0
L10-4
105
21.0
21.8
-0.8
L10-5
104
26.5
24.4
2.1
Through this study, the standard curve samples were run through the qPCR analysis three
times. The Ct values for the 10-fold dilution series of the non-heat treated +PMA C. jejuni
cells (considered viable) were plotted against Log CFU/mL. CFU/mL was calculated from
plate counts of 102-104 CFU/mL, followed by log transformation. A linear regression was
obtained from the standard curve, and the efficiency was calculated. Following, one of the
standard curves was selected. For the standard curve (figure 11), the efficiency was calculated
using equation 2. The standard curve has an efficiency of 93.2%, which was considered
acceptable. The R2 value of the curve was 0.949. The LOD and LOQ, were both detected
to be 2.39 Log CFU/mL, as the lowest estimated concentration of C. jejuni that could be
detected and quantified using qPCR from serial dilutions [50].
The additional standard curves can be seen in appendix 10.1, where 21A has an efficiency of
76% and R2 of 0.92 and 21B has an efficiency of 84.2% and R2 of 0.97.
Figure 11: The standard curve was made from calculated Log CFU/mL against the Ct values from the
non-heat treated +PMA 10-fold dilution series samples of C. jejuni.
Figure 12 illustrates the amplification plots for the qPCR standard curve analysis. It can be
observed that there are exponential phases at the non-heat treated -PMA cells DNA (figure
12A), at the non-heat-treated +PMA (figure 12B), and the heat-inactivated -PMA cells DNA
Master thesis
25 of 60
==PAGE:32==
2024
(figure 12C), which was expected. No exponential phases are observed for the heat-inactivated
+PMA cells DNA (figure 12D), which indicates inhibition of amplification by PMA. For
the non-heat treated -PMA (figure 12A) and +PMA (figure 12B), it can be observed that
the amplification of the 104 CFU/mL was reduced for the +PMA sample compared to the
-PMA. Furthermore, non-heat treated +PMA amplifications cross the threshold at later
cycles compared to the non-heat treated -PMA, indicating inhibition of the DNA of the
non-heat treated +PMA (viable) cells in the samples. The amplification was not observed for
any samples below 104 CFU/mL, for both non-heat-treated -PMA (figure 12A) and +PMA
(figure 12B).
Figure 12: Amplification plots for the standard curve (FAM signal), all samples were run in duplicates. The
black horizontal line represents the threshold. A: amplification plot of the non-heat treated -PMA cells DNA.
B: amplification plot of the non-heat treated +PMA cells DNA. C: amplification plot of the heat-inactivated
-PMA cells DNA. D: amplification plot of the heat-inactivated +PMA cells DNA.
5.3
LIVE/DEAD BacLight
Ten-fold dilution series of C. jejuni was investigated by the LIVE/DEAD BacLight method.
Figure 13 shows fluorescence microscopy images of one 96-well plate containing stained C.
jejuni cells, using a LIVE/DEAD BacLight Viability kit. Figure 13A is taken with the FITC
filter, figure 13B is taken with the Cy5 filter, and figure 13C is an overlay of two images with
each filter where the contrast/intensity was increased. The positions of the samples were
shown in an illustration in figure 7. The assay consisted of three groups of C. jejuni cells:
Master thesis
26 of 60
==PAGE:33==
2024
viable (blue square), heat-inactivated (red square), and a mix of viable and heat-inactivated
(50:50) (purple square). The described groups were stained with a solution (1:2) of SYTO
9 and PI. Three controls were constructed: a viable cell control (VC), stained with SYTO
9, a heat-inactivated control (DC), stained with PI, and a non-dye control (10-fold dilution
series). The VC and DC were non-diluted C. jejuni cells (109 CFU/mL). The composition of
cells is the same in both figure 13A, B, and C. Nothing was added to well E09.
Green fluorescence emitted by the SYTO 9 dye can be observed in figure 13A. Green
fluorescence was prominently visible in the first column of the viable and heat-inactivated
cells and in the first column of the mixed cells. The VC exhibited the most intense green
fluorescence. A weak green fluorescence in the second column (10-1) was be observed for the
heat-inactivated cells. Red fluorescence emitted by the PI dye can be seen in figure 13B. Red
fluorescence was prominently visible in the first column of the viable and heat-inactivated cells.
Where the fluorescence appeared more intense at the viable cells. A weaker red fluorescence
appeared in the first column of the mixed cells, compared to the viable and heat-inactivated.
Red fluorescent was observed for the DC, but did not appear as intense as the VC with the
FITC filter (figure 13A). Both SYTO 9 and PI can be seen in figure 13C. Both green and
red fluorescence was observed at the NDC, which was not observed in figure 13A and B.
Red fluorescence was observed in the VC where PI was not added. Green fluorescence was
observed in the DC, where SYTO 9 was not added. A mix of red and green fluorescence was
observed in the first column (blue and red squares), and at the first column of the mixed cells
(purple square), which is consistent with the observations from figure 13A and B. Prominently
red fluorescence was observed in the second column (10-1), especially at the heat-inactivated
cells. Green and red fluorescence was observed in columns 10-2-10-4, for all cell groups (figure
13D), whereas no fluorescence was observed in figure 13A and B.
Master thesis
27 of 60
==PAGE:34==
2024
Figure 13: Fluorescence microscopy images of 10-fold dilution series of C. jejuni, stained with SYTO 9 and
PI. A: emission of SYTO 9 (FITC filter), B: emission of PI (Cy5 filter), C: emission of SYTO 9 and PI
(FITC and Cy5 image overlay). Blue: viable cells, red: heat-inactivated (dead) cells, purple; viable and dead
cells (50:50), VC: viable cell control, DC: dead cell control, NDC: Non-dye control.
Master thesis
28 of 60
==PAGE:35==
2024
5.4
Environmental stressors inducing the VBNC state in C. jejuni
The Ct values from the qPCR analysis were converted to Log CFU/mL by using the standard
curve from section 5.2.
5.4.1
Desiccation of C. jejuni
5.4.1.1
Desiccation trial of C. jejuni
This study has investigated the potential induction of the VBNC state in C. jejuni through
desiccation.
As a preliminary experiment, 1 mL of saline was left on an empty Petri dish at room
temperature. After 4 days, the plate was dried out, and salt crystals were left on the plate.
Therefore desiccation with C. jejuni solutions were performed within this time frame.
A desiccation assay was conducted as a trial to investigate if C. jejuni would survive des-
iccation and investigate if the assay would generate results from the qPCR analysis. The
PMA-qPCR estimated Log CFU/mL are shown in figure 14. From the figure, the presence
of both viable (+PMA) and non-viable cells was observed, with a majority of non-viable
cells. Viable cells were observed for the sample of 1 mL with water present (incubation with
a glass beaker with water). This was not observed for the 1 mL sample without the water
present. Viable cells were detected in the sample with a 500µL volume and no water present.
No viable cells were observed for the 500µL sample where water was present. The control
was the bacterial stock solution, which was kept at 4 ℃(±3 ℃) for 48 hours, where it was
observed that almost all the detected cells were viable. No growth was observed for any of
the desiccated samples.
Master thesis
29 of 60
==PAGE:36==
2024
Figure 14: Desiccation assay. Log CFU/mL estimated by PMA-qPCR of the tested samples. Sample names
correspond to the different volumes added to the plates, with and without the glass beaker with water. -PMA
(dark blue), +PMA (light blue). NG means no growth was observed after plating on BA.
5.4.1.2
Desiccation of C. jejuni with chicken juice
To further investigate the effect of desiccation on C. jejuni an assay was conducted with
the addition of chicken juice to examine the potential influence of a nutrient source during
desiccation. During the assay, the average humidity recorded was 60.7 %RH, which was within
the established acceptable range (49-70%) for this experiment. However, the measurements
(figure 15) revealed that the humidity levels were inconsistent, failing to replicate the conditions
at the stable. An increase to 100 % RH followed by a sudden and steep decline was observed
(figure 15). Subsequently, the RH stabilized at ∼30 %RH, which was not within the range.
The sudden increase, followed by a steep decline, was due to the lid of the jar by mistake was
closed and, when noticed, opened again and closed on half.
Master thesis
30 of 60
==PAGE:37==
2024
Figure 15: Humudity graph over the desiccation trial. The x-axis shows the time over 48 hours, the y-axis
shows %RH.
Figure 16 shows the calculated Log CFU/mL results from the assay; the sample names
correspond to the solution they were incubated in. The addition of chicken juice seemed
to influence the viability of C. jejuni through desiccation, as a higher number of viable
cells (+PMA) were detected compared to the solution without chicken juice. In the samples
containing 0.9% NaCl and 5% chicken juice, the proportion of viable cells was observed to be
2.8 (SD=0.5) Log CFU/mL compared to 5.4 (SD=0.3) Log CFU/mL of all cells (-PMA).
Whereas the proportion of viable cells in the sample containing only C. jejuni and 0.9 NaCl
had 2.1 (SD=0.1) Log CFU/mL compared to 5.3 (SD=0.2) Log CFU/mL of all cells. No clear
reduction in viable cells was observed from the controls, except from the control containing
chicken juice, where it was noticeable that more cells were found viable compared to all cells.
No growth was observed on the plates from the desiccation samples, besides one of the samples
containing chicken juice (duplicates) where colonies were observed. Growth was observed
for the controls. Contamination was noticed on plates with samples from the 0.9% NaCl
with 5% chicken juice. White colonies were seen on the BA plates after incubation together
with colonies looking like C. jejuni. The contamination was investigated with the help from
laboratory technicians who performed Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time of
flight (MALDI-TOF) on the different colonies on the plates. The colonies consisted of C.
jejuni and an undetectable bacterium. It was assumed that the contamination did not affect
the further analysis. Pictures of the plates are shown in the appendix 10.4.
Master thesis
31 of 60
==PAGE:38==
2024
Figure 16: Desiccation assay of C. jejuni. Log CFU/mL estimated by PMA-qPCR in 0.9% NaCl (saline)
with and without chicken juice. -PMA (dark blue), +PMA (light blue). The error bars show SD.
5.4.2
Osmotic stress of C. jejuni
This study has investigated the potential induction of the VBNC state in C. jejuni by osmotic
stress. An assay with C. jejuni incubated in 7% NaCl, tap water, 0.9% NaCl, and 0.9% NaCl
with chicken juice was performed. Figure 17, shows the calculated Log CFU/mL for the
viable (+PMA) cells over time for the four different solutions. A reduction in the viable cells
within the time frame (0-168 h) was observed for all the tested solutions. For 7% NaCl, a
slight reduction of viable cells was observed between 0 to 5 h, compared to the other solutions.
No reduction of viable cells between 5 h to 24 h was observed. This was followed by reduction
in viable cells (figure 17A). For tap water (figure 17B) there was observed a reduction of
viable cells between 0 and 5 h. No difference in cell count was observed between 5 and 24 h.
A noticeable increase in viable cells between 24 h to 48 h was observed, followed by a decrease.
For 7% NaCl and tap water, no growth was observed after 7 days (168 h), indicating the
presence of VBNC cells, as PMA-qPCR detected a signal. Pictures of the BA plates can be
seen in appendix 10.6. For the 0.9% NaCl solution, an exponential reduction over time was
observed (figure 17D). For the 0.9% NaCl with chicken juice solution, the reduction did not
follow an exponential reduction (figure 17C). The cell count of viable cells decreased slowly
compared to the 0.9% NaCl solution.
Master thesis
32 of 60
==PAGE:39==
2024
Figure 17: Osmotic stress assay. LOG CFU/mL estimated by PMA-qPCR of +PMA cells (viable) over
time for the four different solutions with C. jejuni. A: 7% NaCl, B: tap water, C: 0.9% NaCl with chicken
juice, and D: 0.9% NaCl (saline). The dashed lines represent the biological duplicates, and the full line is the
average of the duplicates. NG means no growth was observed on BA incubated at 41.5 ℃at microaerobic
conditions ON.
Figure 18 illustrates the estimated Log CFU/mL for all cells (-PMA) compared to viable
cells (+PMA)) at the different sampling times. For C. jejuni in 7% NaCl (figure 18A) and in
tap water (figure 18B). The amount of all cells (viable and dead) was higher compared to
the amount of viable cells at all sampling times for the tested solutions. The bar plots of all
cells compared to viable cells for 0.9% NaCl and 0.9% NaCl with chicken juice can be seen in
appendix 10.5.
Figure 18: Log CFU/mL estimated by PMA-qPCR at sampling times in A: 7% (w/v) NaCl, B: tap water.
-PMA (dark blue), +PMA (light blue). NG means no growth was observed on BA incubated at 41.5 ℃at
microaerobic conditions ON. Error bars show SD.
Master thesis
33 of 60
==PAGE:40==
2024
5.4.3
Nutrient deprivation
This study has investigated the potential induction of the VBNC state in C. jejuni by nutrient
deprivation. C. jejuni was incubated in 0.9% NaCl and 0.9% NaCl with 5% chicken juice
over a 14-day period. Figure 19, shows the estimated Log CFU/mL (+PMA and -PMA) for
the solutions over time. The assay revealed a higher number of viable cells in the solution
0.9% NaCl with chicken juice compared to without chicken juice. A decrease in viable cells
between day 2 to 7 was observed in the 0.9% NaCl sample (3.5 Log CFU/ml reduction).
Subsequently, between day 7 to 14, the viable cells decreased slowly by ∼0.7 Log CFU/mL.
In contrast, the sample 0.9% NaCl with chicken juice decreased between day 2 to day 7 by 2.6
Log CFU/mL, followed by an increase between day 7 to day 14, with 0.2 Log CFU/mL. On
day 14, 2.8 Log CFU/mL was detected in the 0.9% NaCl sample, whereas 4.3 Log CFU/mL
was detected for the 0.9% NaCl with chicken juice (figure 19). No growth was observed on
day 14 for both solutions (0.9% NaCl and 0.9% NaCl with chicken juice).
Figure 19: Log CFU/mL of C. jejuni estimated by PMA-qPCR in 0.9% NaCl with and without chicken juice
over 14 days (time). 0.9% NaCl +PMA (full line - dark blue), 0.9% NaCl -PMA (dashed line - dark blue),
0.9% NaCl with chicken juice +PMA (full line - light blue), 0.9% NaCl with chicken juice -PMA (dashed line
- light blue). NG means no growth was observed on BA incubated at 41.5 ℃at microaerobic conditions ON.
The tubes with the bacterial solutions were left in the incubator at 25℃for one month with
no lid on to ensure atmospheric conditions. The liquid had evaporated, so it was not possible
to take a sample after one month. In the tube with 0.9% NaCl and chicken juice, a yellow
color was noticed on the side of the tube, in the liquid and yellow precipitate. In the tube
Master thesis
34 of 60
==PAGE:41==
2024
with 0.9% NaCl (saline) without chicken juice, a yellow precipitate was noticed, and a light
yellow color of the liquid was observed. The tubes are shown in figure 20.
Figure 20: Tubes from nutrient deprivation assay of C. jejuni after one month. The tube with 0.9% NaCl
and 5% chicken juice is on the left, and the tube with 0.9% NaCl and no chicken juice is on the right.
Master thesis
35 of 60
==PAGE:42==
2024
6
Discussion
6.1
DNA extraction
Three DNA extraction methods were evaluated for this study, with the aim of finding the most
suitable method for PMA-qPCR analysis. The boiling lysis method did return undetermined
as Ct values for almost all samples assessed. Besides, a Ct value was observed for one dead
PMA-treated sample. Suggesting that PMA did not inhibit the amplification as expected [8].
Lv et al. 2020 [8] suggested that the DNA extraction method could influence the sensitivity
and specificity of the qPCR. They successfully created similar standard curves using both a
boiling method and an extraction kit. In contrast, in this study, the boiling lysis failed to
produce Ct values for any of the other samples, which contrasts with the results observed
in the Lv et al. 2020 study. For the Blood & Tissue Kit, the Ct value for one of the living
samples was undetermined, where a value was expected. Additionally, the determined Ct
values were lower compared to those from the Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit, indicating a higher
amount of target DNA in the samples. Nevertheless, the QIAmp DNA stool mini kit was
selected for further DNA extraction in the study. The kit was assessed to be most suitable
for the study due to its faster extraction process compared to the Blood & Tissue Kit, and
Ct values were obtained for samples as expected. The findings were based on a single trial
with no duplicates (except for the Stool kit). The results may not deliver reliable insight into
the methods. Further trials should be conducted to provide reliable evidence to conclude
which DNA extraction method is best suited for facilitating the PMA-qPCR process within
the aim of this study.
6.2
PMA-qPCR efficiency and standard curve
The standard curve was produced with a 10-fold dilution series of a pure culture of C. jejuni.
Three standard curves were made over three trials with the same set of extracted samples.
Both the efficiency and R2 coefficient are important parameters for the reliability and perfor-
mance of the qPCR analysis. The efficiency is considered a significant factor in relation to
the quantification of DNA in the unknown sample and should be between 90-100%. The R2
coefficient is a measure of the correlation between the Ct values and known Log CFU/mL
and is acceptable if above 0.98 [50, 52]. For the three standard curves, the selected standard
curve has an efficiency of 93.2% and R2 at 0.95 (figure 11). The R2 coefficient is below
the acceptable, but the efficiency is within the expected range. In comparison, the param-
eters for the two other standard curves were both below the acceptable limits (appendix
10.1). Therefore, the standard curve with the highest efficiency was selected as the quantifica-
tion of unknown samples was weighted highly in relation to the purpose of the rest of the study.
This study wanted to assess PMA-qPCR’s ability to differentiate viable and heat-inactivated
C. jejuni cells. This was conducted with a 10-fold dilution series with non-heat treated
and heat-inactivated cells, where half was treated with 20µM PMA, and the other half was
Master thesis
36 of 60
==PAGE:43==
2024
diluted with saline to obtain equal volumes. The results showed that PMA successfully
inhibited the amplification of DNA from heat-inactivated (dead) +PMA cells (table 4 and
figure 12), as no samples reached the threshold. Compared to the heat-inactivated -PMA
cells, where amplification was observed. Josefsen et al. 2010 [44] reported that the use of
23.81 µM (10 µg/mL) PMA achieved 100% inhibition of amplification by PMA treatment
of heat-inactivated cells, as was also observed in this study. Moreover, from the results in
this study, the amplification of DNA from non-heat treated +PMA samples was reduced
(inhibited) compared to the non-heat treated -PMA samples. This was observed for the
sample 104 CFU/mL, which emitted a lower fluorescence signal through the cycles, and the
amplification reached the threshold at a later cycle. This may result from the PMA inhibiting
damaged cells or the PMA concentration being excessive, delaying the amplification when
compared to the non-heat treated -PMA samples. Two of the dCt values for the non-heat
treated cells (considered viable) were determined to be above the expected (should be 0 ±1).
Indicating that PMA affects the viable cells which will lead to an underestimation of the
viable cells. Earlier studies have shown that excessive PMA concentrations can inhibit the
amplification of viable cells, and therefore lead to an underestimation of viable cells [53]. The
PMA concentration for this study was inspired by Josefsen et al. 2010 [44] and Lv et al. 2020
[8]. Lv et al. 2020 investigated different concentrations of PMA on C. jejuni and observed no
significant differences in the amplification of dead cells treated with 20 µM or 50 µM PMA.
They therefore chose 20 µM PMA, as it could effectively inhibit amplification of DNA from
dead C. jejuni cells, without significantly affecting DNA amplification from the viable cells.
As was observed in this study, Josefsen et al. 2010 [44] also noticed a reduction in the signal
from qPCR amplification in PMA-treated samples compared to untreated. However, Nocker
et al. 2006 [54] reported that viable cells with intact cell membranes did not take up PMA.
It was only internalized by cells with compromised membranes. Their study involved testing
different concentrations of PMA, including higher concentrations than the one used in this
study. Suggesting that the viable cells in this study did not internalize PMA when having
intact membranes.
Various studies claim that the combination of PMA and qPCR can detect viable cells, but
Trinh et al. 2022 [55] describe three criteria to evaluate the viability of a bacterial pathogen:
culturability, metabolic activity, and membrane integrity. Where the culturability cannot
evaluate VBNC cells, the two other applications have evolved. Josefsen et al. 2010 [44]
describe that the definition of viability can be distinguished in many ways, such as having
an intact membrane, active metabolism, culturability, and the ability to sustain a proton
gradient across the inner and outer cell regions. They suggest that the PMA-qPCR method
may be supplemented with other compounds that can improve the distinguishing of viability.
The addition of a supplement, such as a dye or glucose, for uptake, could evaluate an
active metabolism. This approach might help to ensure the detection of only viable cells by
preventing the detection of dead cells with intact membranes that otherwise may would be
detected as viable [55].
For this study, the viability of cells was evaluated on the intact membrane as it is essential
Master thesis
37 of 60
==PAGE:44==
2024
for maintaining cellular integrity. It was assumed that PMA only penetrates when the cell
has a compromised membrane, enabling differentiation of viable and non-viable C. jejuni [54].
This study differentiated the viable and heat-inactivated cells with the use of PMA-qPCR,
although the PMA did not assess metabolic activity.
6.3
LIVE/DEAD BacLight
The LIVE/DEAD BacLight assay was based on its potential, as through a previous literature
study, was found to be a promising method for the detection of VBNC C. jejuni cells in
combination with flow cytometry. The assay was a trial of the method, that aimed to assess
its efficacy to differentiate viable and heat-inactivated C. jejuni. Previous studies have shown
to be able to detect VBNC cells using LIVE/DEAD staining in combination with culturing
dependent methods [26]. The observed result in this study was unexpected, as extensive
green and red fluorescence was observed (figure 13C). This observation might be noise or
background fluorescence as the intensity was increased. The extensive fluorescence makes
distinguishing between viable and heat-inactivated cells difficult. The SYTO 9 (green) was
expected to dye all cells, whether they were viable or dead, due to heat-inactivation. PI (red)
penetrates the membrane of dead cells and has a stronger affinity for the nucleic acids than
SYTO 9, displacing the SYTO 9 molecule [43]. Both green and red fluorescent were observed
(figure 13C) in wells where viable cells were expected and in wells with only heat-inactivated
cells. This could potentially lead to an overestimation of viable cells. Braun et al. 2019
[26] describe how it is almost impossible to prepare a live cell control that does not contain
also dead cells. As a result, a small signal of dead cells will always be present, which will
fluorescence red due to dual staining. Conversely, the heat-inactivated cells were not expected
to exhibit green fluorescence, indicating the PI dye did not outcompete the SYTO 9 dye. If
this is the case, it might be due to the ratio of the stains used. A 1:2 (SYTO 9:PI) ratio
was chosen inspired by Magajna et al. 2015 [42], that successfully stained and discriminated
C. jejuni cells in combination with confocal microscopy. However, our result may indicate
that a higher ratio of PI or lower SYTO 9 is needed. The product information for the
LIVE/DEAD BacLight viability kit (Molecular Probes) [56] suggests a 1:1 ratio of the dyes.
This would provide a good discrimination between viable and dead cells for most applications.
Experimenting with the dye ratios to optimize staining for specific purposes is advisable.
The result of this study was not as expected. Further research using this method would
require a workload compared to the PMA-qPCR method that was established successfully.
The LIVE/DEAD BacLight assay was conducted as a single trial, therefore, repeating the
assay would give valuable insight into whether the observed result was based on an error or
if further improvements of the protocol are needed. Further testing and optimization of the
LIVE/DEAD BacLight protocol are necessary, as the technology and method were not firmly
established in the laboratory.
Master thesis
38 of 60
==PAGE:45==
2024
6.4
Evaluation of environmental stressors inducing the VBNC state
in C. jejuni
C. jejuni is exposed to various environmental stressors throughout the food industry. Desic-
cation and hyperosmolarity, among others, are strategies used in food processing to control
foodborne pathogens [57]. Foodborne pathogens like C. jejuni have evolved survival strategies
to persist and remain prevalent.
Upon a new flock of chickens is introduced to the stable, the area undergoes cleaning and
washing, resulting in a moist environment, where the water is evaporating. If C. jejuni is
present, it may end up in water droplets and subsequently desiccate. The influence of the
desiccation on C. jejuni was therefore investigated.
A preliminary experiment was conducted where 1 mL saline was added to an empty Petri
dish and left to see how long it would take to desiccate. Once the saline had completely
evaporated, small salt crystals were observed on the plate. Illustrating the concentration of
salt increases as the liquid evaporates. The gradual increase of salt concentration creates a
hyperosmotic environment.
For the desiccation trial where different volumes were tested to desiccate with and without a
glass beaker with water present, where viable cells were detected in only two samples. The
desiccation was conducted at 41.5 ℃at microaerobic conditions. The presence of water as a
humidity source did not seem to have an effect, as viable cells were detected both with and
without water present. However, the trial was only performed once and was set up as a trial
to investigate whether it would provide any viable cell results. Therefore, no conclusions can
be made about whether the presence of the water had an effect on the viability of the cells,
as the humidity throughout the trial was not monitored. Additionally, no growth of colonies
on BA was observed for any of the samples, except for the control which did not desiccate.
Based on these results it seems that the desiccation likely induced the VBNC state in C. jejuni.
To further investigate the impact of desiccation of C. jejuni, a desiccation assay with chicken
juice was designed. The chicken juice was added to simulate the organic material that might
remain in the chicken stable after a potential wash/cleaning. The plates and controls were
incubated at atmospheric conditions at 25 ℃, to simulate the conditions in the chicken
stable. A datalogger was used to monitor the humidity throughout the assay. The logged
% RH was unstable in the setup and failed to stay within the observed humidity range
(49-70%) recorded at the chicken stable (appendix 10.3). Silva et al. 2011 [58] described that
Campylobacter are sensitive to low humidity environments. Furthermore, De Cesare et al.
2003 [59], studied the survival and persistence of C. jejuni and Salmonella serotypes under
organic loads (nutrient-rich) on food contact surfaces. They reported that the duration of the
lag phase (the initial phase preceding bacterial growth, after adjustment to the environment)
was affected by both the contact surface and the suspended medium. They also suspected that
the rate of drying might have an impact on the phase. Where the drying rate is influenced
Master thesis
39 of 60
==PAGE:46==
2024
by temperature, air circulation, and relative humidity. They describe that the observation
may indicate that the relative humidity, in combination with the temperature, affects the lag
phase for bacterial growth of C. jejuni. This has also been suggested in a previous study
where C. jejuni could be recovered from eggshell surfaces after an extended period of time
when the relative humidity was increased, and the temperature was decreased compared to
lower humidity and higher temperature [59]. Further investigations are needed to determine
whether maintaining the humidity between 49-70% impacts the survival of C. jejuni, as
previous research suggests relative humidity has an impact.
The desiccation assay with chicken juice showed that in the control with 5% chicken juice,
a higher number of viable (+PMA) C. jejuni were detected compared to all cells (-PMA),
where all cells are assumed to be a combination of viable and dead cells. This imbalance of
viable and all cells might be due to uncertainty, such as human error or uncertainty of lab
equipment. The addition of chicken juice seemed to positively affect the number of viable
cells compared to the samples lacking chicken juice. After desiccation, the cells were retrieved,
and plating was conducted. No growth was observed for the desiccated solutions without
chicken juice, but a signal was still obtained from PMA-qPCR. The detected viable cells
(+PMA) are assumed VBNC [8]. For the desiccated solution with 5% chicken juice, growth
was observed for sample 2 (one of the duplicates), but not for sample 1. This indicates that
the addition of chicken juice may extend the survival of C. jejuni, and more cells can maintain
viability. This observation was supported by the higher number of viable cells detected by
PMA-qPCR compared to the solution without chicken juice. Growth was observed after
plating for the controls that were subjected to the same incubation conditions but were not
subjected to desiccation. These observations indicate that desiccation for 48 h in saline
with and without 5% chicken juice, induced the VBNC state in C. jejuni. A higher number
of viable cells were detected by PMA-qPCR in the desiccation assay with chicken juice
compared to the initial desiccation trial. The desiccation with chicken juice was conducted
at 25 ℃under atmospheric conditions, whereas the desiccation trial was at 41.5 ℃under
microaerobic conditions. This might indicate that survival from desiccation is affected by the
temperature and oxygen level. These parameters were not investigated through this study,
but from the results, a higher number of viable C. jejuni cells were observed when incubated
at lower temperatures and atmospheric conditions. The desiccation of C. jejuni at different
temperatures and oxygen levels must be investigated further to address the effect of the
parameters fully.
As in the desiccation assay with chicken juice, the same pattern was observed for the nutrient
deprivation assay. The presence of 5% chicken juice in the solution led to a higher detection
of viable cells. A smaller decrease in viable cells between day 2 to day 7 was recorded for the
solution with chicken juice compared with the solution without. The reduction of viable cells
between the two samples (with and without chicken juice) is slight at first but, after 7 days,
is more noticeable. Nonetheless, no samples were collected between day 2 and 7. This may
Master thesis
40 of 60
==PAGE:47==
2024
have missed the opportunity to monitor the development of the viable cells closer. A slight
increase was observed in the solution with chicken juice between day 7 to day 14, though this
might be due to an uncertainty in measurements. Therefore, it would be ideal and valuable
to collect additional samples between days 7 and 14 to monitor development and identify the
point where the cells enter the VBNC state. No growth after plating was observed for any of
the solutions after 14 days, but viable cells were detected by PMA-qPCR, indicating VBNC
C. jejuni cells.
When comparing the viable cells from the solutions with and without chicken juice, a difference
of approximately 1.5 Log CFU/mL was detected for the viable C. jejuni after 14 days. This
may suggest that the addition of chicken juice extended the survival of C. jejuni cells [48].
Birk et al. 2004 [48] suggested that chicken juice consists of protective compounds such as
lipids and peptides, as they observed that it prolonged the viability of C. jejuni compared
to conventional laboratory media. It is important to note that chicken juice is an organic
substance obtained from thawed commercially frozen chicken; the composition of compounds
and nutrients can vary, so it cannot be assumed that it consists of the same composition
consistently [48].
After leaving the tubes with C. jejuni in saline and saline with 5% chicken juice for a month,
a yellow layer was noticed on the sides of the tube within the tube with chicken juice (figure
20). Brown et al. 2014 [34] found that chicken juice enhances C. jejuni’s biofilm formation.
They observed that the addition of 5% chicken juice to brucella broth increased the biofilm
formation compared to brucella broth alone. This could explain the layer on the side of the
tube, as a similar layer was not observed in the tube without chicken juice. The layer could
also be due to the addition of an organic material. Furhter research is necessary to be able
to confirm or not if biofilm was observed.
This study investigated the effects of a hyper-osmotic and hypo-osmotic environment on C.
jejuni to assess whether these stressors could induce the VBNC state in C. jejuni. Previous
studies have shown that osmotic stress caused by high concentrations of NaCl could induce
the VBNC state in C. jejuni. Lv et al. 2020 [8], found that incubation of C. jejuni in 7%
(w/v) NaCl lost the ability to culture completely after 24 h at 37 ℃. In this study, the ability
of C. jejuni to grow on BA was lost after 7 days of incubation in 7% (w/v) NaCl at room
temperature. C. jejuni may have entered the VBNC state earlier, but samples were not
gathered between 48 hours and 7 days. The reduction of viable cells between 0 to 48 h was
slower for the 7% NaCl solution, compared to 0.9% NaCl with and without chicken juice.
This might be due to a kind of shock state, where C. jejuni adapts a survival mode when
exposed to osmotic stress. Doyle et al. 1982 [29] found that C. jejuni survived longer when
incubated in 4.5% (w/v) NaCl at 25 ℃compared when incubated at 42 ℃, and even longer
when incubated at 4 ℃. This aligns with the observations in this study that the point for
induction of the VBNC state in C. jejuni was prolonged compared to the observations by
Lv et al. 2020 [8]. This suggests that the induction of the VBNC state through osmotic
stress in C. jejuni is temperature dependent. Furthermore, the results indicate that osmotic
Master thesis
41 of 60
==PAGE:48==
2024
stress does induce the VBNC state in C. jejuni as no growth was observed after 7 days in
7% (w/v) NaCl, but a signal was still obtained by PMA-qPCR. This could also be due to
nutrient deprivation stress, as no nutrients were present in the solution. However, growth was
observed for the 0.9% NaCl solution despite the lack of nutrients. In the nutrient deprivation
assay, the VBNC state was observed after 14 days of incubation. This indicates that the
inability to grow after 7 days in 7% (w/v) NaCl, could be due to the high concentration of
NaCl and not the lack of nutrients, or possibly a combination of both factors.
It has been suggested that C. jejuni can survive in natural water, by entering the VBNC
state [60]. The chickens at the broiler farm drink tap water in which C. jejuni may survive.
It was investigated if C. jejuni could persist in tap water by entering the VBNC state. The
composition of the tap water used in this study is not fully understood. It was tapped from
the laboratory at DTU Lyngby and is, therefore, according to Lyngby-Taarbæk kommune
ground water, classified as hard water. Meaning that it contains a high concentration of
calcium and magnesium [61]. A noticeable unexpected increase of viable cells was detected
after 48 hours from the tap water solutions. The increase was unexpected as nutrients and
conditions were not provided to support growth. As the assay was performed with biological
duplicates and both samples showed an increase, the assay should be repeated to monitor
if the same trend is observed. Furthermore, tap water varies across regions in Denmark.
Conducting the assay with tap water from a broiler farm would provide valuable insights, as
it would simulate the original environment more accurately. Additionally, VBNC cells were
determined after 7 days, similar to the findings with 7% (w/v) NaCl solution. Indicating
that C. jejuni can survive in the tap water by entering the VBNC state.
It is important to mention that the assays were conducted with pure cultures, which may not
fully represent the findings when collecting samples from a broiler farm. Therefore, the C.
jejuni strains found in the field may not respond to the environmental stressors as observed
in this study. However, for the environmental stressors assessed in this study, it was observed
that desiccation, osmotic stress, and nutrient deprivation indicate to induce the VBNC state
in C. jejuni. Assuming the VBNC state is reached when PMA-treated cells showed a signal
in the qPCR analysis and no growth was observed when cultured on BA ON at microaerobic
conditions. Plate counts were not conducted when collecting samples and treating them
with PMA. The accurate proportion of VBNC cells through the assays was therefore not
determined which otherwise would have given valuable insights into the VBNC state over
time.
VBNC cells were detected through this study, measured by PMA-qPCR in combination with
plating where no growth of colonies was observed. The VBNC C. jejuni were assumed to
be induced by the assayed environmental stressors. The induction of VBNC C. jejuni by
the stressors indicate that C. jejuni can persist in the broiler farm by entering the VBNC
state. This suggests when using culturing-dependent methods to detect C. jejuni in the
food industry, the bacterium will avoid detection resulting in under-estimation. Moreover,
Master thesis
42 of 60
==PAGE:49==
2024
the VBNC C. jejuni may resuscitate and regain pathogenicity upon exposure to favorable
conditions. In a previous study, Baffone et al. 2006 [62] observed that VBNC C. jejuni
regained pathogenicity after in vivo passage in a mouse model. This observation suggests that
if VBNC C. jejuni enter a human gut, the bacteria could possibly resuscitate and proliferate
causing an intestinal infection [62].
Master thesis
43 of 60
==PAGE:50==
2024
7
Conclusion
This study assessed PMA-qPCR’s ability to differentiate viable and heat-inactivated cells. It
was found that the use of PMA made the differentiation possible, though PMA concentration
optimization may be needed. Likewise, a standard curve for the PMA-qPCR protocol was
established, enabling the quantification of viable cells and VBNC cells in an unknown sample
in combination with culturing. The LIVE/DEAD BacLight protocol, failed to differentiate
viable and heat-inactivated cells. The SYTO 9 and PI ratio needs more experimental trials,
together with more insight into the method and microscope.
VBNC C. jejuni cells were observed after desiccation with and without chicken juice, where the
addition of chicken juice indicated higher viability of C. jejuni. The results from incubation of
C. jejuni in osmotic stress environments (7% (w/v) NaCl and tap water) indicated to induce
the VBNC state in C. jejuni within 7 days. C. jejuni may have entered the VBNC state
earlier, but this was not observed due to sampling limitations. VBNC C. jejuni cells were
observed after 14 days of incubation in a nutrient-deprived environment (0.9% NaCl), but also
in 0.9% NaCl with 5% chicken juice. Enhanced viability was observed with the addition of
chicken juice, suggesting chicken juice contains protective compounds. These findings indicate
that C. jejuni can persist in a chicken broiler farm for several days by entering the VBNC
state, but further testing is needed to confirm the assumption. PMA-qPCR successfully
detected VBNC C. jejuni cells, presenting a promising method for detection in the food
industry to avoid underestimation through the traditional culturing-dependent methods.
Master thesis
44 of 60
==PAGE:51==
2024
8
Future perspectives
A PMA-qPCR protocol was established for the detection of VBNC C. jejuni.
Further
optimization of the PMA concentration may be needed to enhance the efficiency further.
VBNC C. jejuni were detected after exposure to environmental stressors. Prolonging the
duration of the assays would be interesting and may enable the determination of C. jejuni
persistence in the VBNC state. To deepen the understanding of the VBNC state in C. jejuni,
future studies could investigate the ability to resuscitate in resuscitation models. This could
give a further perspective if VBNC C. jejuni can regain pathogenicity after entering the
VBNC state. This may also asses the viability of the cells, as cell viability can be defined
in various ways. This study evaluated the viability of cells based on membrane integrity.
Whereas, other studies have evaluated viability based on other factors, such as the ability
to metabolize compounds. A further understanding of the viable/live aspect of cells could
give valuable insights in relation to detecting viable bacteria. Moreover, conducting plate
counts when collecting samples for PMA-qPCR would be valuable. This approach would
enable quantification of the VBNC cell count, providing a more precise assessment of the
proportion of cells that enter the VBNC state upon exposure to tested conditions over time.
The LIVE/DEAD BacLight assay, while promising, did not provide valuable results related
to the assessment of differentiation of viable and heat-inactivated cells. Further testing and
experimenting with the dye ratios is needed, to obtain a clear discrimination of C. jejuni
cells and enable insight into the suitability of the LIVE/DEAD BacLight method compared
to the PMA-qPCR method.
While this study concentrated on pure cultures of a single strain of C. jejuni, previous research
has shown strain-dependent variations in the VBNC state of C. jejuni. Therefore, examining
different strains from the field (broiler farm) under environmental stressors would provide
valuable insights into the stress response.
Master thesis
45 of 60
==PAGE:52==
2024
9
References
[1] D. Pokhrel, H. T. Thames, L. Zhang, T. T. Dinh, W. Schilling, S. B. White, R. Ra-
machandran, and A. Theradiyil Sukumaran, “Roles of Aerotolerance, Biofilm Formation,
and Viable but Non-Culturable State in the Survival of Campylobacter jejuni in Poultry
Processing Environments,” Microorganisms, vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 1–19, 2022.
[2] European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), “Story map on Campylobacter,” 2022.
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/, Accessed: 2023-11-22.
[3] W. Chaisowwong, A. Kusumoto, M. Hashimoto, and T. Harada, “Physiological Charac-
terization of Campylobacter jejuni under Cold Stresses Conditions : Its Potential for
Public Threat,” Journal of Veterinary Medical Science, vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 43–50, 2012.
[4] “DTU Projects (DTU Orbit), SafeChicken - Increased food safety of chicken
meat
via
methods
to
reduce
Campylobacter
in
the
broiler
production.”
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/projects/safechicken, Accessed: 2024-01-19.
[5] K. Dong, H. Pan, D. Yang, L. Rao, L. Zhao, Y. Wang, and X. Liao, “Induction, detec-
tion, formation, and resuscitation of viable but non-culturable state microorganisms.,”
Comprehensive reviews in food science and food safety, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 149–183, 2020.
[6] T. Ramamurthy, A. Ghosh, G. P. Pazhani, and S. Shinoda, “Current perspectives on
viable but non-culturable (VBNC) pathogenic bacteria,” Frontiers in Public Health,
vol. 2, no. JUL, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[7] L. S. Santos, D. A. Rossi, R. F. Braz, B. B. Fonseca, M. Guidotti-Takeuchi, R. N. Alves,
M. E. Beletti, H. O. Almeida-Souza, L. P. Maia, P. d. S. Santos, J. B. de Souza, and
R. T. de Melo, “Roles of viable but non-culturable state in the survival of Campylobacter
jejuni,” Frontiers in cellular and infection microbiology, vol. 13, no. March, pp. 1–14,
2023.
[8] R. Lv, K. Wang, J. Feng, D. D. Heeney, D. Liu, and X. Lu, “Detection and Quantification
of Viable but Non-culturable Campylobacter jejuni,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 10,
no. January, pp. 1–8, 2020.
[9] S. Lee and S. Bae, “Molecular viability testing of viable but non-culturable bacteria
induced by antibiotic exposure,” Microbial Biotechnology, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1008–1016,
2018.
[10] Anonymous, “Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark 2022,” tech. rep., National Food
Institute, Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[11] Statens
Serum
Institut
(SSI),
“Overvågning
i
tal,
grafer
og
kort,”
2023.
https://statistik.ssi.dk/, Accessed: 2023-11-28.
Master thesis
46 of 60
==PAGE:53==
2024
[12] Anonymous, “Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark 2008,” tech. rep., 2009.
[13] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), “Campylobacteriosis CDC Yel-
low Book 2024,” 2024.
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2024/infections-
diseases/campylobacteriosis, Accessed: 2024-02-20.
[14] E. Hrustemović, F. Čaklovica, and J. Ðeđibegović, “Food Pathogen of Chicken Meat
Campylobacter spp.: A Review,” AgroLife Scientific Journal, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 80–85,
2022.
[15] S. M. Pires and J. Christensen, “Source attribution of Campylobacter infections in
Denmark: technical report.,” tech. rep., 2017.
[16] V. Patrone, R. Campana, L. Vallorani, S. Dominici, S. Federici, L. Casadei, A. M.
Gioacchini, V. Stocchi, and W. Baffone, “CadF expression in Campylobacter jejuni
strains incubated under low-temperature water microcosm conditions which induce
the viable but non-culturable (VBNC) state,” Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, International
Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology, vol. 103, no. 5, pp. 979–988, 2013.
[17] D. Hofreuter, “Defining the metabolic requirements for the growth and colonization
apacity of Campylobacter jejuni,” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, vol. 4,
no. SEP, pp. 1–19, 2014.
[18] N. R. Thornval and J. Hoorfar, “Progress in detection of Campylobacter in the food
production chain,” Current Opinion in Food Science, vol. 39, pp. 16–21, 2021.
[19] S. Chagneau, M. L. Gaucher, P. Fravalo, W. P. Thériault, and A. Thibodeau, “Intestinal
Colonization of Campylobacter jejuni and Its Hepatic Dissemination Are Associated with
Local and Systemic Immune Responses in Broiler Chickens,” Microorganisms, vol. 11,
no. 7, pp. 1–17, 2023.
[20] K. A. Borges, I. C. Cisco, T. Q. Furian, D. C. Tedesco, L. B. Rodrigues, V. P. do Nasci-
mento, and L. R. dos Santos, “Detection and quantification of Campylobacter spp.
In Brazilian poultry processing plants,” Journal of Infection in Developing Countries,
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 109–113, 2020.
[21] D. G. Newell and C. Fearnley, “Sources of Campylobacter colonization in broiler chickens,”
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 4343–4351, 2003.
[22] Fødevarestyrelsen, “Handlingsplan for Campylobacter i slagtekyllinger, fødevarer og
miljø 2022-2026,” tech. rep., 2022.
[23] S. H. Kim, R. Chelliah, S. R. Ramakrishnan, A. S. Perumal, W. S. Bang, M. Rubab,
E. B. M. Daliri, K. Barathikannan, F. Elahi, E. Park, H. Y. Jo, S. B. Hwang, and D. H.
Oh, “Review on Stress Tolerance in Campylobacter jejuni,” Frontiers in Cellular and
Infection Microbiology, vol. 10, no. February, pp. 1–17, 2021.
Master thesis
47 of 60
==PAGE:54==
2024
[24] A. Cameron, E. Frirdich, S. Huynh, C. T. Parker, and E. C. Gaynor, “Hyperosmotic
Stress Response of Campylobacter jejuni,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 194, no. 22,
pp. 6116–6130, 2012.
[25] M. Potts, S. M. Slaughter, F. U. Hunneke, J. F. Garst, and R. F. Helm, “Desiccation
tolerance of prokaryotes: Application of principles to human cells,” Integrative and
Comparative Biology, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 800–809, 2005.
[26] R. S. Braun, N. Mendis, L. Li, and S. P. Faucher, “Quantification of viable but non-
culturable cells of Legionella pneumophila,” in Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1921,
pp. 45–53, 2019.
[27] D. M. Rollins and R. R. Colwell, “Viable but nonculturable stage of Campylobacter jejuni
and its role in survival in the natural aquatic environment,” Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 531–538, 1986.
[28] D. N. Jackson, B. Davis, S. M. Tirado, M. Duggal, J. K. Van Frankenhuyzen, D. Deaville,
M. A. Wijesinghe, M. Tessaro, and J. T. Trevors, “Survival mechanisms and culturability
of Campylobacter jejuni under stress conditions,” Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, International
Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology, vol. 96, no. 4, pp. 377–394, 2009.
[29] M. P. Doyle and D. J. Roman, “Response of Campylobacter jejuni to sodium chloride,”
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 561–565, 1982.
[30] B. Moen, A. Oust, Langsrud, N. Dorrell, G. L. Marsden, J. Hinds, A. Kohler, B. W.
Wren, and K. Rudi, “Explorative multifactor approach for investigating global survival
mechanisms of campylobacter jejuni under environmental conditions,” Applied and
Environmental Microbiology, vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 2086–2094, 2005.
[31] Y. U. E. Ma, I. Hanning, and M. Slavik, “Stress-induced adaptive tolerance response
and virulence gene expression in Campylobacter jejuni,” Journal of Food Safety, vol. 29,
no. 2009, pp. 126–143, 2008.
[32] X. T. Bui, K. Qvortrup, A. Wolff, D. D. Bang, and C. Creuzenet, “Effect of environmental
stress factors on the uptake and survival of Campylobacter jejuni in Acanthamoeba
castellanii,” BMC Microbiology, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2012.
[33] D. Pinto, M. A. Santos, and L. Chambel, “Thirty years of viable but nonculturable state
research: Unsolved molecular mechanisms,” Critical Reviews in Microbiology, vol. 41,
no. 1, pp. 61–76, 2015.
[34] H. L. Brown, M. Reuter, L. J. Salt, K. L. Cross, R. P. Betts, and A. H. van Vliet,
“Chicken juice enhances surface attachment and biofilm formation of Campylobacter
jejuni,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 80, no. 22, pp. 7053–7060, 2014.
Master thesis
48 of 60
==PAGE:55==
2024
[35] ISO (2023), “ISO 10272-1:2017 - Microbiology of the food chain – Horizontal method for
detection and enumeration of Campylobacter spp.,” Dansk Standard, pp. 1–38, 2023.
[36] M. F. Peruzy, Y. T. R. Proroga, F. Capuano, F. Corrado, S. Santonicola, D. De Medici,
E. Delibato, and N. Murru, “Detection and quantification of campylobacter in foods:
New analytic approaches to detect and quantify campylobacter spp. in food samples,”
Italian Journal of Food Safety, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 88–92, 2020.
[37] Biotium (Glowing Products for Science), “PMA (Propidium Monoazide) Product Infor-
mation,” 2023.
[38] A. G. Castro, E. M. Dorneles, E. L. Santos, T. M. Alves, G. R. Silva, T. C. Figueiredo,
D. C. Assis, A. P. Lage, and S. V. Cançado, “Viability of Campylobacter spp. in frozen
and chilled broiler carcasses according to real-time PCR with propidium monoazide
pretreatment,” Poultry Science, vol. 97, no. 5, pp. 1706–1711, 2018.
[39] A. Banihashemi, M. I. Van Dyke, and P. M. Huck, “Long-amplicon propidium monoazide-
PCR enumeration assay to detect viable Campylobacter and Salmonella,” Journal of
Applied Microbiology, vol. 113, no. 4, pp. 863–873, 2012.
[40] M. Arya, I. S. Shergill, M. Williamson, L. Gommersall, N. Arya, and H. R. Patel, “Basic
principles of real-time quantitative PCR,” Expert Review of Molecular Diagnostics, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 209–219, 2005.
[41] J. L. Alonso, S. Mascellaro, Y. Moreno, M. A. Ferrús, and J. Hernández, “Double-
staining method for differentiation of morphological changes and membrane integrity
of Campylobacter coli cells,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 68, no. 10,
pp. 5151–5154, 2002.
[42] B. Magajna and H. Schraft, “Evaluation of propidium monoazide and quantitative PCR
to quantify viable Campylobacter jejuni biofilm and planktonic cells in log phase and in a
viable but nonculturable state,” Journal of Food Protection, vol. 78, no. 7, pp. 1303–1311,
2015.
[43] P. Stiefel, S. Schmidt-Emrich, K. Maniura-Weber, and Q. Ren, “Critical aspects of using
bacterial cell viability assays with the fluorophores SYTO9 and propidium iodide,” BMC
Microbiology, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2015.
[44] M. H. Josefsen, C. Löfström, T. B. Hansen, L. S. Christensen, J. E. Olsen, and J. Hoorfar,
“Rapid quantification of viable Campylobacter bacteria on chicken carcasses, using real-
time pcr and propidium monoazide treatment, as a tool for quantitative risk assessment,”
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 76, no. 15, pp. 5097–5104, 2010.
Master thesis
49 of 60
==PAGE:56==
2024
[45] P. S. Lübeck, P. Wolffs, S. L. On, P. Ahrens, P. Rådström, and J. Hoorfar, “Toward an
international standard for PCR-based detection of food-borne thermotolerant campy-
lobacters: Assay development and analytical validation,” Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 5664–5669, 2003.
[46] J. Hoorfar, B. Malorny, A. Abdulmawjood, N. Cook, M. Wagner, and P. Fach, “Practical
Considerations in Design of Internal Amplification Controls for Diagnostic PCR Assays,”
Journal of Clinical Microbiology, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1863–1868, 2004.
[47] M. H. Josefsen, N. R. Jacobsen, and J. Hoorfar, “Enrichment followed by quantitative
PCR both for rapid detection and as a tool for quantitative risk assessment of food-borne
thermotolerant campylobacters,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 70, no. 6,
pp. 3588–3592, 2004.
[48] T. Birk, H. Ingmer, M. T. Andersen, K. Jørgensen, and L. Brøndsted, “Chicken juice, a
food-based model system suitable to study survival of Campylobacter jejuni,” Letters in
Applied Microbiology, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 66–71, 2004.
[49] Assured Chicken Quality Programme (ACQP), “Procedurebeskrivelser Økologiske og
Fritgående kyllinger,” 2016.
[50] P. Kralik and M. Ricchi, “A basic guide to real time PCR in microbial diagnostics:
Definitions, parameters, and everything,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 8, no. FEB,
pp. 1–9, 2017.
[51] N. J. Krüger, C. Buhler, A. N. Iwobi, I. Huber, L. Ellerbroek, B. Appel, and K. Stingl,
“"Limits of control" - Crucial parameters for a reliable quantification of viable Campy-
lobacter by Real-Time PCR,” PLoS ONE, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[52] G. Johnson, T. Nolan, and S. A. Bustin, “Real-time quantitative PCR, pathogen detection
and MIQE,” Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 943, pp. 1–16, 2013.
[53] S. J. Zhang, L. L. Wang, S. Y. Lu, P. Hu, Y. S. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Z. Chang, F. F. Zhai,
Z. S. Liu, Z. H. Li, and H. L. Ren, “A novel, rapid, and simple PMA-qPCR method for
detection and counting of viable Brucella organisms,” Journal of Veterinary Research
(Poland), vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 253–261, 2020.
[54] A. Nocker, C. Y. Cheung, and A. K. Camper, “Comparison of propidium monoazide
with ethidium monoazide for differentiation of live vs. dead bacteria by selective removal
of DNA from dead cells,” Journal of Microbiological Methods, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 310–320,
2006.
[55] K. T. L. Trinh and N. Y. Lee, “Recent Methods for the Viability Assessment of Bacterial
Pathogens: Advances, Challenges, and Future Perspectives,” Pathogens, vol. 11, no. 9,
pp. 1–18, 2022.
Master thesis
50 of 60
==PAGE:57==
2024
[56] Molecular Probes (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific), “LIVE/DEAD Baclight Bacte-
rial Viability Kits Product Information,” 2004.
[57] C. M. Burgess, A. Gianotti, N. Gruzdev, J. Holah, S. Knøchel, A. Lehner, E. Margas,
S. S. Esser, S. Sela Saldinger, and O. Tresse, “The response of foodborne pathogens
to osmotic and desiccation stresses in the food chain,” International Journal of Food
Microbiology, vol. 221, pp. 37–53, 2016.
[58] J. Silva, D. Leite, M. Fernandes, C. Mena, P. A. Gibbs, and P. Teixeira, “Campylobacter
spp. As a foodborne pathogen: A review,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 2, no. SEP,
pp. 1–12, 2011.
[59] A. De Cesare, B. W. Sheldon, K. S. Smith, and L. A. Jaykus, “Survival and persistence
of Campylobacter and Salmonella species under various organic loads on food contact
surfaces,” Journal of Food Protection, vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 1587–1594, 2003.
[60] C. Bronowski, K. Mustafa, I. Goodhead, C. E. James, C. Nelson, A. Lucaci, P. Wigley,
T. J. Humphrey, N. J. Williams, and C. Winstanley, “Campylobacter jejuni transcriptome
changes during loss of culturability in water,” PLoS ONE, vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 1–22, 2017.
[61] “Vandkvalitet, 2024. Lyngby-Taarbæk Forsyning.” https://ltf.dk/drikkevand/vandkvalitet/,
Accessed: 2024-02-10.
[62] W. Baffone, A. Casaroli, B. Citterio, L. Pierfelici, R. Campana, E. Vittoria,
E. Guaglianone, and G. Donelli, “Campylobacter jejuni loss of culturability in aqueous
microcosms and ability to resuscitate in a mouse model,” International Journal of Food
Microbiology, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 83–91, 2006.
Master thesis
51 of 60
==PAGE:58==
2024
10
Appendix
10.1
Standard curves
Figure 21: Standard curves made from Ct values from the viable PMA-treated samples. A: Efficiency=76%.
B: Efficiency=84.2%
Master thesis
52 of 60
==PAGE:59==
2024
10.2
Amplification IAC
Figure 22: IAC amplification plot (HEX signal), black line shows threshold
Master thesis
53 of 60
==PAGE:60==
2024
10.3
Humidity chart from chicken farm
Figure 23: chart from the chicken farm in Kolding showing the % relative humidity in stable and the actual
measurements of the humidity within 5 weeks.
Master thesis
54 of 60
==PAGE:61==
2024
10.4
Desiccation assay BA plates
Figure 24: BA plates from desiccation assay with chicken juice
Master thesis
55 of 60
==PAGE:62==
2024
10.5
Osmotic stress bar plots
Master thesis
56 of 60
==PAGE:63==
2024
10.6
Osmotic stress BA plates
Master thesis
57 of 60
==PAGE:64==
2024
Master thesis
58 of 60
==PAGE:65==
2024
Master thesis
59 of 60
==PAGE:66==
2024
Master thesis
60 of 60
