==PAGE:1==
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device
for intestinal modelling
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
Master Thesis
February, 2024
Author
Christian Swedenborg Sandholm
Head supervisor
Martin Dufva
Additional supervisors
Hakan Gürbüz
Alexander Jönsson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Image of custom insert using fluorescence microscopy. Christian Sand­
holm, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
0.1
Abstract
A better understanding of fluidic shear stress as a driving force behind intestinal cell differ­
entiation is required to further the organ­on­chip field. Cell seeding density was previously
shown to possibly prime the monolayer for 3D maturation prior to flow. This is investigated
herein by use of a novel 3D­printed insert for a 12­well plate that, when placed on an or­
bital rocker, is capable of applying apical shear stress and basolateral mixing to a culture
embedded in a soft matrix. This method was used to grow Caco­2 cells for 11 days on
a thin gelatin membrane under low bilateral mixing, and it was shown that this is enough
to speed up tight­junction formation when compared to static culture. This minimal level
of shear stress resulted in cultures with highly heterogeneous cell densities and sporadic
formation of huge cells that were over 100µm in diameter. No dependency on cell seed­
ing density was observed, but this may be because of culture conditions. Further, the
potential shear stress that this setup can reliably deliver was estimated to be between
1.4 −3 dyn· cm−2, and it was shown that RNA of sequencing quality could be extracted
from the membranes, allowing the future study on the effect of laminar shear stress on
Caco­2 cells.
ii
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:5==
0.2
Sammenfatning
En bedre forståelse af fluidisk skærspænding som drivkraft bag differentiering af tarm­
celler er nødvendig for at fremme organ­on­chip­feltet. Heri præsenteres et nyt 3D­printet
indsats til en 12­brøndsplade, der, når den placeres på en orbitalblander, er i stand til at
påføre strømningsfriktion på den apikale overflade og samtidigt blande det basolaterale
rum. Denne metode blev brugt til at dyrke Caco­2­celler i 11 dage på en tynd gelatin­
membran ved lav bilateral blanding i det apikale rum, og det blev vist, at dette er nok
til at fremskynde dannelsen af tight­junctions når man sammenligner med statisk kultur.
Dette minimale niveau af strømningsfriktion resulterede i meget heterogene kulturer med
sporadisk dannelse af store celler, der var over 100µm i diameter. Desuden blev den
potentielle strømningsfriktion, som denne opsætning pålideligt kan levere, estimeret til at
være mellem 1.4 −3 dyn·cm−2. Det blev samtidigt vist at RNA af sekventeringskvalitet
kunne oprenses fra membranerne. Tilsammen tillader dette fremtidig undersøgelse af
virkningen af laminar strømningsfriktion på Caco­2­celler.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I wanted to thank Martin for your guidance along the entire process, especially for our
conversations on the interpretations of my results.
Many thanks to Hakan for helping me even when you were most busy, whether it be
teaching me how work in the cell lab or helping me with the microscope. It has not gone
unnoticed.
Thank you Alex for designing the insert and printing the first batch, it really helped me
getting started.
Finally, I wanted to thank Helene for taking care of my cell culture while I was away.
Thank you for the past 6 months,
Christian
iv
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:7==
Contents
0.1
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
0.2
Sammenfatning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
The human gastrointestinal tract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
The brush border is the site of nutrient absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Intestinal cells are found within a complex extracellular network . . . . . . .
4
2.4
The intestinal stem cell niche . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
The Caco­2 cell line
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Culturing cells in the third dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.7
Intestinal 3D cultures in literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Drivers for differentiation of Caco­2 3D morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.9
Using rocking inserts to induce 3D morphogenisis in Caco­2 cultures . . . . 14
3
Materials and Methods
17
3.1
Microscopy imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Design and fabrication of inserts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Determining autofluorescence of BioMed Black . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Cell culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Membrane preparation and cell seeding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.6
Application of shear stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.7
Barrier thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.8
Particle imaging velocimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.9
Fixation of cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.10 Immunostaining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.11 RNA­purification and cDNA library preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.12 Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results and discussion
21
4.1
Characterization of inserts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Autofluorescence of BioMed Black . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Gel membrane thickness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Cell culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
RNA purification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.6
Particle imaging velocimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
35
A Appendix
41
A.1 Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
S
Supporting information
45
S.1 Videos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
It has long been recognized that animal studies are not only highly unethical but also not
nearly as predictive of human efficacy and toxicity as one would otherwise have assumed,
given the sheer scale of such studies conducted. It has also been acknowledged that while
animal testing can effectively predict toxicities involving mechanisms conserved through­
out nature, those that are more complex, human­specific or even specific to a certain
ethnic group will be difficult, if not impossible to predict. On average, just 72% of toxicities
encountered during clinical testing are found in preclinical testing [1][2], and these include
toxicities that are related to the primary pharmacological effect.
Back in 1997, Trisha Gura [3] criticized the predictability of animal models, but admitted
that no better alternative existed at the time. The world of drug development has since
been in a constant state of change, which culminated in the signing of the FDA moderniza­
tion act 2.0 by the Biden administration in December of 2022. This act effectively removed
the strict requirement for preclinical animal testing before clinical testing, opening up new
avenues for pharmaceutical companies to stroll [4]. One of the principle ways of capi­
talizing on this change is by developing new human­relevant in­vitro models that employ
human cells, such as organoids or microphysiological systems (MPS) [5][6]. One of the
people at the absolute forefront of MPS evolution, Donald Ingber, recently published a
comprehensive review wherein he gave three reasons for why MPS technologies have
progressed as far as they have; advances in microfabrication, tissue engineering and our
understanding of stem cell biology [7]. This study will deal with the latter, focusing on ex­
panding our understanding of the stem­cell­like properties of the cancerous Caco­2 cell.
At the border between MPS and organoid cultures exists rocking hanging inserts that, just
like MPS, can exert fluidic shear upon cells, but without pumps. Using such a setup, Asli
Dogan and Martin Dufva observed a dependency on cell density for 3D maturation not
previously described [8]. While, at least part of the mechanism behind flow­induced 3D
maturation in Caco­2 cells was established in 2019 [9], the effect of seeding cell density
remains far less well understood, partly because most MPS systems require very high
seeding densities [8]. Understanding how cell seeding density impacts 3D maturation in
Caco­2 cells could prove critical in rational design of in­vitro devices for preclinical studies.
The purpose of this study is to fabricate and operate a new flow device to reproduce the
results obtained by Dogan and Dufva. From this it will hopefully be possible to gain a bet­
ter understanding of the practicalities of using orbital rockers to induce flow, and a clearer
view of Caco­2 cell biology in the otherwise very muddy water [10] that is microfluidics.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
2.1
The human gastrointestinal tract
While the biology of the human gastrointestinal tract (GIT) is not the main focus of this
study, it is the focus of the model. Therefore it is necessary to provide a context in which
the design choices and shortcomings of this novel device can be appreciated.
The GIT is the passageway that leads from the mouth to the anus, and includes all major
organs of the digestive system. The GIT can be divided into a lower and an upper section,
and it is the intestines found in the lower GIT that are relevant to this study. From a phys­
iological perspective, the intestine are supplied with blood from the superior mesenteric
artery, which is subsequently drained through the portal vein so that any absorbed com­
pounds can be filtered by the liver before entering the systemic circulation. The intestines
are also highly innervated and lined with both extrinsic and intrinsic nerves. The intrin­
sic nerves are stimulated by chemoreceptors and stretch receptors, while the extrinsic
nerves are stimulated outside of the GIT. Both the extrinsic and intrinsic innervation con­
trol intestinal motility, being responsible for both peristaltic movements and segmentation
contractions. [11]
While the blood supply and innervation is similar throughout the lower GIT, the physio­
logical function varies. Therefore, the lower GIT is divided into the large intestine (colon)
and the small intestine. It is the small intestine which is the focus of this study. The small
intestine is further subdivided into the duodenum, jejunum and ileum. From a histological
perspective, the small intestine is composed of four layers; the mucosa, the submucosa,
muscularis propria and the serosa. The muscularis propria is responsible for gut motility.
The mucosa is the site of absorption and thus the most important from a drug develop­
ment standpoint. [12]
The small intestine is the site of nutrient and metabolite absorption. To be fit for this
function, the luminal side of the small intestine is covered in macroscopic (0.5−1mm [11])
finger­like protrusions, known as villi, that dramatically increase the surface area available
for absorption. At the foot of each villi, the epithelium is folded inwards to form a small
(0.3 −0.5 mm [12]) pocket called a crypt. The epithelium is formed from a single layer of
epithelial cells. Several distinct cell types are found within this layer; enterocytes, gob­
let cells, paneth cells, enteroendocrine cells (EECs), tuft cells and intestinal stem cells
(ISCs). Villi and crypt structure along with the spatial organisation of important cells is
shown in figure 2.1
2
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Cellular organisation in the small intestine. The epithelium is formed from
a single layer of epithelial cells. This is divided up into two distinct sections; crypt and
villi. Several distinct cell types are found within this layer; enterocytes (7), goblet cells (4),
paneth cells (2), enteroendocrine cells (EECs) (6), tuft cells (5) and intestinal stem cells
(ISCs) (1). Apoptotic epithelial cells (8) pinch off into the lumen. Basolateral fibroblasts
are also shown (3). Mucus layer is omitted. Figure was made in InkScape with inspiration
from Creff, J. et al. 2021 [13]
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
3
==PAGE:12==
The major cell type is the enterocyte, which is responsible for nutrient uptake and makes
up the majority of the epithelial cell lining. Absorption is facilitated by a highly ordered
arrangement of macroscopic (1 −3 mm [14]) villi that project out, and, when viewed from
the apical side, appear to be arranged in a distinct hexagonal shape.
ISCs are found at the base of each crypt, where they continuously divide and differenti­
ate as they are pushed further up towards the crypt opening by newly formed cells. This
means that the epithelium is in a constant state of renewal, shedding roughly 1400 cells
per villus per day [12]. The stem cells give rise to all of the epithelial cell lines seen on
figure 2.1 [15].
The remaining cells of the epithelium all serve a secretory role. Goblet cells are secretory
cells responsible for the formation of the protective mucus layer that covers the epithelium
[15]. Paneth cells are situated among the ISCs at the base of the crypt, and are responsi­
ble for secreting immunomodulatory and antimicrobial factors [16]. Enteroendocrine cells
make up the enteric endocrine system, which responds to chemoreceptors found within
these cells. Many EECs have microvilli, why they have an appearance not unlike that
of enterocytes. The enteric endocrine system however employs many functionally dis­
tinct EECs to carry out its many functions, some of which do not even make contact with
the gut lumen [17]. The final cell lineage, the tuft cell, is far less well studied [18], but
is known to play a role in intestinal type 2 immunity through IL­25 specific activation of
group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) [19]. While other cell types are found within other
superstructures of the intestine, these are rarely included in intestinal models and will thus
not be considered here, neither will cells of the immune system.
2.2
The brush border is the site of nutrient absorption
The villi of the mucosa wall are not the sole adaptation of this section of the intestine that
increase the surface area available for absorption. At the apical side of the enterocytes
is found an array of membrane protrusions called microvilli which are collectively known
as the brush border. Microvilli are supported by actin bundles held together by a number
of proteins, including villin. Individual microvilli are held together through intermicrovillar
adhesive proteins that allow the brush­border to become a highly ordered structure. [14]
Ordered microvilli of similar length probably also serves as a barrier against luminal mi­
crobes. Another layer of protection is the palette of transmembrane mucin proteins that
when anchored to the membrane of the microvilli form the glycocalyx [20].
Because microvilli cover the apical side of the enterocytes, the majority of the informa­
tion that the cell gains about the luminal environment will originate in the microvilli. This
includes mechanical sensing of fluidic shear stress that can bend microvilli [21]. This
phenomenon has been shown to induce formation of vacuoles in Caco­2 cells through
components of the non­canonical autophagy pathway [22]. Autophagy induced by lam­
inar flow has been shown to inhibit Hippo/Yap1 signalling in endothelial cells, but this
mechanism might differ in epithelial cells [23].
The unique location of the brush border allows it to form a reservoir of enzymes and
membrane­associated molecules needed for nutrient absorption[14]. This makes entero­
cytes the cells responsible for absorption of nutrients from the luminal environment.
2.3
Intestinal cells are found within a complex extracellular
network
Cells in tissues are found within a complex extracellular environment comprising of di­
verse proteins and glycans. This network is known as the extracellular matrix (ECM) and
provides both mechanical, structural and chemical functionality. Because the functional
requirements varies between tissues, so does the composition of the ECM [24]. The envi­
4
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:13==
ronment surrounding intestinal enterocytes is highly active and supports the high turnover
rate of these cells. This environment is further complicated by being sandwiched between
basolateral secretory fibroblasts and apical mucus and bacteria, all of which takes place
in a soup of dietary substances, enzymes and antigens.
The mucosal epithelial cells reside on the basement membrane. This membrane is com­
posed of laminin, collagen of type I, III, IV and VI [25], nidogen­1, fibronectin and heparan
sulphate. [26] Laminin is a highly abundant protein in the basement membrane where it
is found as a sheet­like layer upon which epithelial cells reside. Laminin contains different
domains and so serves multiple functions. One such domain binds collagen and together
they form a tough layer that provides tensile strength. Other domains bind nidogen­1
which facilitates collagen crosslinking, or cell­surface integrins that anchors the cells to the
basement membrane. Fibronectin also enables cell­ECM interactions, but is mostly found
Figure 2.2:
Basement membrane of the
small intestine. Top: Epithelial cells are at­
tached to the basement membrane at the
villi. The green and orange lines represent
the collagen­rich basement membrane. No­
tice the lack of laminin (blue lines), promoting
anoikis.
Bottom:
The secretory action cells in the
basement membrane of the crypt means that
this area is rich in laminins (blue lines). This
has been linked to the stem­cell niche main­
tenance [25].
Indicator in top right corner
shows the position of the two boxes along the
villi. Figure was made in InkScape.
at the basement of the crypts.
Another
component of the membrane that binds
laminin is the proteoglycan, heparan sul­
phate, which traps water molecules and
thus functions as a hydrogel that provides
compressive strength. [24]
The different basement membrane con­
stituents are not evenly distributed. Laminins
α1, α2 and α1β1γ1 are enriched at the
crypt base where they serve important
functions in maintaining the stem cell
niche.
This can be seen on figure 2.2,
where these are represented in blue. The
absense of laminins at the villi tip promotes
detachment­induced apoptosis (anoikis).
[25] There is evidence for the existence of
a collagen stiffness gradient between the
mucosa and submucosa, and ISCs gener­
ally proliferate faster on stiff matrices while
they differentiate better in soft matrices
[27]. ECM stiffness is sensed by the Hippo
signalling pathway, which recognizes ten­
sion and conformation of the F­actin cy­
toskeleton.
This pathway acts through
YAP/TAZ mediated activation of trancrip­
tion factor TEAD. Knowledge of the molec­
ular mechanism remains incomplete, but
on hard matrices, hippo signalling will be
turned off, allowing YAP/TAZ to enter the
nucleus and activate proliferative genes
under control of TEAD. YAP/TAZ can be
activated by other pathways also, such as
autophagy (see section 2.2) and Wnt (see
figure 2.4). [28]
While epithelial cells are attached basolat­
erally to the ECM, they are also attached
paracellularly to one another through junc­
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
5
==PAGE:14==
tions. Although desmosomes, adherens junctions and tightjunction are primarily intracel­
lular structures, they have great implications for the workings of the extracellular environ­
ment. The apically­facing tight junctions create a semipermeable membrane that effec­
tively inhibits diffusion of larger compounds and selectively limits diffusion of ions. Tight
junctions connect integral membrane proteins to the actin cytoskeleton through densely
packed peripheral proteins such as Zonula Occludens proteins ZO­1, ­2 and ­3. [29]
Tight­junctions are crucial to any intestinal model because they severely limit the chemi­
cal space in which orally absorbed drugs can be chosen from. Other than tight­junctions,
diffusion is further limited by the basement membrane [30] and by the mucus layer. Yet,
Caco­2 cells do not secrete mucus when grown in a traditional transwell setup, which is
currently the most popular intestinal model [31].
The mucus layer thickness must be tightly controlled in order not to hinder absorption of
nutrients while remaining an effective barrier against luminal microbes. The mucus layer
is therefore approximately 20 −100 microns thick [32] and just covers the tip of the villi,
but will mostly fill the luminal space between them.
Mucus is mostly water (>98%), but the major protein content in the small intestinal mucus
is MUC2. MUC2 is secreted by goblet cells and form very large polymers that protect the
epithelium. This highly glycosylated protein is protected from host proteases, but will be
digested by the array of carbohydrate­specific enzymes located in the genome of com­
mensal bacteria. Some pathogens can also cleave MUC2, but the epithelium has other
measures to deal with them. Goblet secretions are mixed with paneth secretions that con­
tain antibacterial peptides and lysozyme as well as with IgA from plasma cells. [33] Thus,
the interplay between the epithelial cell lines, fibroblasts, submucosal cells and luminal
commensal and pathogenic bacteria lays the foundation for a highly complex environment.
At the heart of this complex machinery sits the stem cell. Stem cells are supported by their
local environment, and understanding this environment is therefore key to increasing the
cellular diversity and in­vivo relevancy in MPS.
2.4
The intestinal stem cell niche
The spatial organisation of the different epithelial and mesenchymal cells as well as their
interactions with the ECM creates pockets within the mucosa wherein stem cells can main­
tain their proliferative function. This is known as the stem cell niche. It is the local diffusion
gradients of important signalling compounds and direct cell­cell and cell­ECM interactions
that shape this niche. Because orderly cell proliferation, differentiation and death are all
critical functions of the intestinal mucosa, maintenance of the stem cell niche becomes
the heart of this machinery. [34] As the stem cells proliferate, some of them will be pushed
out of the niche. This is visualised on figure 2.3. Cells will continue dividing, but will also
begin differentiating into the epithelial cell lineages of the mucosa within what is known as
the transit­amplifying zone. The paneth cell is the most important cell providing prolifera­
tive signals, and the border of the niche can be defined as existing after the final paneth
cell. The cell neighboring the last paneth cell is called the +4 cell, and has been shown to
exhibit some interesting properties, including improved radiation resistance [35]. This is
visualized on figure 2.3 (2). As the cells are pushed out of the niche and are exposed to
signals driving differentiation (see the arrows on figure 2.3), they will eventually lose their
stem­ness, but even at the border of the stem cell niche, the cells will display a certain
degree of plasticity [35]. The true cycling stem cells can however be identified by their
expression of LGR5 [36]. There are a number of signalling pathways known to be impli­
cated in the control of the stem cell niche and the terminal differentiation of their progenitor
cells. As can be seen on figure 2.3, the fate of the cells is the result of a battle between
the signals driving differentiation and those that drive proliferation.
6
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Signalling gradients driving the mucosal stem cell niche. On the right: 4
different cell types are highlighted within the epithelium; (1) transit amplifying cells, (2) +4
cells that neighbour paneth cells (3) and intestinal stem cells (4) intermingled with paneth
cells. On the left, the different concentration gradients of ligands or receptors. Gradients
are both formed by diffusion and differential expression. Anti­BMP (Gremlin, Chordin and
Noggin), Wnt, Notch and EphB are expressed in the crypts, whereas Ephrin­B, BMPs
and Hedgehog are expressed primarily within the villi. The length of expression gradients
are an artistic choice and not necessarily accurate, although some gradients such as
Wnt/EphB and Notch/Paneth cells are directly related (see body text). Figure was made
in InkScape with inspiration from Meran, L. et al. 2017 [25]
2.4.1
Signals originating in the crypts
The most important of the proliferative signals is the Wnt pathway. The Wnt family of sig­
nalling proteins is a secreted palmyolated protein that binds Wnt receptors. Wnt signalling
takes place through 19 different Wnt proteins, at least 10 different Wnt­specific receptors
and signal through two distinct pathways[37]. Wnt proteins are highly conserved and are
thought to at least be somewhat promiscuous, but the two principle pathways control­
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
7
==PAGE:16==
ling the stem cell niche seem to act through specific ligands. Signalling within the crypt
happens through two distinct, yet connected pathways known as the canonical and non­
canonical pathway. These are known to use Wnt3A and Wnt5A, respectively [37].
Figure 2.4:
The canonical Wnt pathway.
Wnt3A binds the Frizzled receptor.
This
induces phosphorylation of LRP5/6 and a
conformational change in the APC complex
that blocks βTrCP association and abol­
ishes ubiquitination (not shown), allowing β­
catenin to translocate to the nucleus where it
replaces Groucho (not shown) and activates
TCF, the master switch of the Wnt pathway.
The APC complex consists of many proteins,
including DVL, Axin, CKI, GSK3 and APC.
YAP/TAZ also participates in this complex,
but upon activation, YAP/TAZ are freed and
can relocate to the nucleus [28]. LGR5 can
also bind activated LRP5/6, but this is not
shown here. Figure was made in InkScape.
Inspiration drawn from Lodish, H. et al. 2021
[38] and Hernandez, F. et al. 2020 [37].
The canonical pathway is by far the best
understood.
Activation of the canonical
Wnt pathway happens through Wnt bind­
ing to the extracellular domain of Friz­
zled class receptors.
As seen in fig­
ure 2.4, Wnt acts through the intracellu­
lar regulater, adenomatous polyposis coli
(APC) which leads to the translocation of
β­catenin to the nucleus where it will ac­
tivate genes under control of T­cell factor
(TCF). This signal can be further propa­
gated by binding of R­spondin 3 to LGR5
in cycling stem cells, which can then as­
sociate with activated LRP5/6­2P [39][27].
In the absence of Wnt, the APC complex
in combination with βTrCP instead ubiqui­
tinate β­catenin to target it for the protea­
some. Activation of the canonical pathway
leads to activation of a number of prolifera­
tive genes, which is why the regulatory ma­
chinery controlling β­catenin is often faulty
in cancer of the intestine.
The non­canonical Wnt pathway is actu­
ally a group of different signalling pathways
that are activated by Wnt, but do not lead
to the stabilization of β­catenin in the nu­
cleus. Two branches of this group have
been well described [40]. These both use
Frizzled receptors and RAR­Related Or­
phan Receptor (ROR) co­receptor instead
of LRP5/6 of the canonical pathway, but
their downstream signalling is not as well
defined as the canonical pathway.
The
branches are known as the Wnt/Planar
Cell Polarity (WNT/PCP) and the Wnt/Cal­
cium pathway. Activation of the Wnt/PCP
pathway stimulates Disheveled (DVL) to
form a complex with Daam­1 which fur­
ther triggers RhoA, RHO and ROCK to
control cytoskeletal rearrangement. DVL
also triggers RAC and JNK which leads to
activation of genes under control of AP­1
[41]. Activation of transcription factor AP­
1 leads to trancription of genes involved in
cell motility and cell polarity, which is why this pathway is often dysregulated in metastatic
cancers [40][41].
8
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:17==
In the Wnt/Calcium branch, Wnt signalling instead activates Phospholipase C (PLP), lead­
ing to formation of inositol(1,4,5)­triphosphates (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG), which
causes intracellular release of Ca2­ions, further propagating the signal. This activates
Calcineurin and Calmodulin. Calcineurin activation leads to activation of nemo­like ki­
nase which antagonizes β­catenin in the canonical Wnt pathway. Calmodulin activation
instead leads to translocation of NFAT to the nucleus, activating genes involved in tissue
homeostasis and ventral cell fate [41].
Wnt signalling is therefore a very complex process that can lead to activation of many
genes involved in processes that are central to crypt homeostasis, including proliferation,
motility, polarity, cytoskeletal rearrangement and cell­cell signalling. It should therefore
come as no surprise that the Wnt pathway is thought to be one of the principle pathways
involved in regulating monolayer differentiation in MPS (see section 2.8.1). However, as
seen on figure 2.3, Wnt is not the only signalling pathway of importance within the crypt.
Notch signalling is another major pathway driving stem cell proliferation and subsequent
differentiation, but unlike Wnt, notch signalling requires direct cell­cell interaction. Notch
receptors 1 and 2 are activated by the membrane associated ligands delta­like 1 through
4 (Dll1­4) in the intestinal crypts [42]. This leads to release of the Notch intracellular do­
main which translocates to the nucleus and where it recruits a transcriptional co­activator
complex which activates Notch target genes. One of these genes, Hes1, is known to
suppress secretory cell lineage differentiation, leading cells to differentiate into absorp­
tive cells instead [43]. Dll1 and Dll4 are known to be expressed by paneth cells, but not
exclusively [42]. The primary function of Notch signalling within the ISC niche is to drive
proliferation [25], but Notch signalling has also been shown to halt proliferation in different
contexts [44].
2.4.2
Signals originating in the villi
The Eph/Ephrin pathway is responsible for the downwards migration of paneth cells along
the crypt­villi axis towards the basement of the crypt. TCF and by extension Wnt is a
transcriptional regulator of receptors EphB2 and EphB3, and thus receptor expression
is highest within the crypt [45]. Ephrin is a membrane­bound ligand which is expressed
in differentiated enterocytes, which means that the there exists an Eph/Ephrin gradient
along the crypt­villi axis controlling cell positioning that restrict Paneth cells and ISCs to
the crypt.
Differentiation of cells within the transit­amplifying zone is driven by opposite gradients
that work against the proliferative signals of the crypt. Bone Morphology Proteins (BMPs)
are expressed in the villi and are suppressed towards the crypt. Mechanistically, BMP4
suppresses β­catenin translocation through PTEN expression [46]. PTEN suppresses ki­
nase Akt­dependent dephosphorylation of GSK3­β of the APC complex (see figure 2.4)
and, possibly, also suppression of direct Akt­mediated β­catenin phosphorylation [47].
Because PTEN acts on PI3, it might also suppress the Wnt/PCP pathway. The result of
this is that BMP4 signalling decreases cell growth. Additionally BMP4 itself is suppressed
by Noggin, Gremlin and Chordin which is secreted in a niche­protective manner by stro­
mal cells [25]. Thus, gradients are established both by diffusion of ligand and antagonist,
leading to a controlled area of BMP­receptor signalling.
The final pathway that will be covered here is Hedgehog signalling. The intestinal hedge­
hog pathway has 2 ligands, Indian Hedehog and Sonic Hedgehog that interact with 2
receptors, Patched 1 and Patched 2, and three effectors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Following
binding of Hedgehog to Patched 1, the suppressive action of Gli upon a number of genes
is reverted to an activating one. The mechanics of this involves a change in the proteolytic
processing of Gli that requires formation of a primary cilia [48]. The end result however,
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
9
==PAGE:18==
is that a number of genes that promote stromal niche formation are activated. Hedgehog
proteins are secreted by differentiated epithelial and act on mesenchymal cells, that in
turn support the ISC niche [25].
Although there are other pathways known to be involved, a full review is not within the
scope of this section. It should however be noted that YAP/TAZ is likely to play an impor­
tant role as well, but this pathway is covered in section 2.3. The aforementioned pathways
are those that have been shown to have some relevance when trying to model the intri­
cate 3D structure of the mucosa using cell­lines and MPS technology. One of, if not the
singular most important cell line used in gut models is the Caco­2 cell.
2.5
The Caco­2 cell line
The Caco­2 (Cancer coli­2) cell line was originally isolated in the 1970s from a human
colonic adenocarcinoma. Many such cell lines were investigated for their use in cancer
development research, but the Caco­2 line proved useful because of its ability to differenti­
ate spontaneously after reaching confluence. Like many other colorectal cancers, Caco­2
cells express both YAP and TAZ [49], a property that is associated with a worse prognosis
[50].
Given the high passage­number that this cell line has gone through over the past decades,
it should come as no surprise that it is no longer completely homogeneous. There now
exists many different Caco­2 strains in labs all over the world, and it has been recognised
that cells of higher­passage number typically grow faster and tend to form more multilay­
ers when seeded on permeable membranes [51][52].
Caco­2 cells differentiate into small intestinal­like cells and show a phenotype that can be
described as a combination of the colonocyte and enterocyte phenotype [53]. This differ­
entiation is driven by an extensive change in the expression profile as cells engage in cell­
cell signalling. A number of regulatory pathways including Wnt, Notch, Hedgehog (Hh),
Myc and Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) have been shown to be implicated in this
[44]. Towards confluence, cells will downregulate Myc and arrest in G0/G1 [54], thus halt­
ing uncontrolled growth, which is otherwise perhaps the most notable hallmark of cancer.
Cell­cell recognition through Notch­Delta signalling can promote cell­cycle exit and is likely
one of the main drivers for the switch of the transcriptional programme [44][43]. Fully dif­
ferentiated Caco­2 cells grown in monolayers show many structural similarities to healthy
enterocytes; they show apical­basal polarity, are connected through tight­junctions and
acquire the typical apical brush­border with microvilli. This is accompanied by expres­
sion of many drug­development relevant proteins such as transporters, efflux pumps and
metabolic enzymes. This has earned them the spot as the golden standard in industry
as a tool to predict absorption and toxicity of new drugs, as well as in research within
numerous fields.
Just as Caco­2 cells appear to switch to a secondary, distinct phenotype upon reaching
confluence, they may also switch to a third, stem­cell­like transcriptional programme that,
under the right conditions, can mimic organized tissue. This can be achieved by growing
the cells in 3 dimensions, a problem that can be approached from many different angles.
2.6
Culturing cells in the third dimension
It has long been recognised that culturing cells from multicellular organisms on hard sur­
faces such as glass is not representative of the conditions that these cells experience
when situated within organs and barrier tissue. Despite this, the simplicity of 2D culture
means that it remains by far the most popular technique. Caco­2 cells in intestinal models
are traditionally cultured on a flat permeable membrane in an insert, such as a transwell
system, in which the cell layer separates two compartments from one another. Once the
10
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:19==
cells reach confluence they spontaneously, albeit slowly, differentiate to form a tightly in­
terconnected layer over a period of around 3 weeks.
The insert is typically constructed from materials such as polyester or polycarbonate.
While these materials are very useful from a fabrication standpoint, they do not share
many of the material properties seen in the extracellular matrix (ECM) surrounding cells
growing under physiological conditions. These materials are typically several orders of
magnitudes stiffer than the physiological matrix, as measured by tensile and elastic mod­
ulus [55]. This impenetrable surface forces the cells to grow outwards, become flat and
adopt an apical­basal polarity. While this may be sufficient for simple 2D permeation as­
says, it does not promote formation of the superstructures seen in the small intestine.
It is important to realise that static cultures do not attempt to model any of the various
mechanical stresses that are exerted upon cells in living tissue. It has been shown that
basolateral flow is a critical promoter of differentiation in Caco­2 cells [9] [56]. Further,
inserts based on stiff polymers limit any mechanotransduction, also known to promote
differentiation of Caco­2 cells [57]. In addition to mechanical properties, it is important to
consider biological properties. The absence of any biomaterials that can be remodelled
by extracellular matrix metalloproteinases hinders migration and limits both cell­cell and
cell­ECM communication, especially if no integrin binding sites are present [30]. In­vitro
tissue functionalization therefore necessitates careful selection of ECM components and
physical growing conditions.
2.7
Intestinal 3D cultures in literature
There are many examples in literature of attempts to promote villi morphogenisis and dif­
ferentiation into the four major cell types found in the intestine. Both using primary cells
or established cell lines such as Caco­2. A major breakthrough came in 2009 with the
description of intestinal organoids [58]. While this model uses crypt­derived Lgr5+ mouse
stem cells, it was shown that by adding several signalling­ and growth factors, differen­
tiation of single cells into organized intestinal organoids with internal villi­like structures
could be achieved. It should be stressed that these cell multilayers are not villi, as they
are not innervated and do not receive their oxygen from a central arteriole. However,
these spherical organoids had a luminal core that stained positive for markers of goblet,
paneth, enteroendocrine and enterocytes. Such organoid systems are inherently hetero­
geneous and it would be very difficult to add extra layers of complexity [13]. Instead,
improved bioengineered systems have since been developed.
For example, laser ablation can be used to create molds for a hydrogel matrices of that
can be seeded with cells after the fact. This method does not drive any additional differ­
entiation such as mucus production or tissue organization. Additionally, cells will typically
degrade such structures quite rapidly through the use of MMPs, which reinforces the no­
tion that simply seeding in preformed structured is not sufficient [59]. Synthetic matrices
can be used to limit degradation, but the overlying issues persist. It is possible to emulate
in­vivo kinetics better by injecting growth factors, cytokines and metabolites into either the
apical or basal chamber to form a differentiation gradient. This has been used to create
stable cultures with primary human intestinal stem cells [27] with highly ordered and dif­
ferentiated tissue. However, using primary human cells in an already complex scaffold
approach will limit the usability of such systems.
In 2012, Kim, et al. demonstrated that Caco­2 cells can spontaneously organize to form
villi­like multilayers with crypts if exposed to apical and basolateral flow [57]. The archi­
tecture of villi formed during spontaneous morphogenisis is not to the same standard as
those achieved with microfabrication. Effectively, this means that they are both less de­
fined and smaller than those found in native tissue [60]. The advantage of this approach
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
11
==PAGE:20==
being fewer fabrication steps. A year later this setup was proven to reach similar levels of
differentiation as the organoid system using only serum for growth­ and signalling factors
[56]. This also marked the first time that a stable co­culture of villous Caco­2 cells and
probiotic bacteria was achieved. This was later expanded to include anaerobes [61]. The
same setup was used to demonstrate that basolateral flow can promote villi formation by
washing away signalling compounds [9]. Yet, this paints an incomplete picture, as baso­
lateral flow is not necessary for spontaneous villi morphogenisis [62].
While the gut­on­a­chip microfluidic devices employ cell lines, they still suffer from com­
plicated fabrication techniques and high operational costs. Instead, increasing focus has
been given to transwell inserts [60] [8] [63]. The addition of basolateral flow or mixing in
transwell inserts allows this robust and simple technique to reach new heights, both figu­
ratively and literally in the shape of villi. However, because transwell inserts can be grown
with more variable seeding densities than perfused systems, a dependency on seeding
density was found, which there currently does not exist a satisfactory explanation for [8].
2.8
Drivers for differentiation of Caco­2 3D morphology
Based on the work described within aforementioned studies, it is possible to sum up the
known factors that influence differentiation. This section will deal exclusively with Caco­2.
This is an effect of the cancerous nature of this cell line, which means that many cellular
signalling events are likely to behave differently. Translation of findings is therefore difficult
unless the underlying mechanism is understood, which is rarely the case.
2.8.1
The flow effect
The effect of flow on epithelial differentiation and crypt­villi morphogenisis was first demon­
strated with the gut­on­a­chip microfluidic system [57] [56]. In 2019, the same model was
used to elucidate a mechanism behind this phenomenon [9]. Unsurprisingly, the addi­
tion of flow helps establish diffusion gradients that allow for differential expression within
different regions of the epithelium. This effect was shown to be highly pronounced for
proteins such as dickkopf­1 (DKK1) that are antagonists of Wnt co­receptor LRP5/6 [64].
Caco­2 cells express Wnt in a constitutive manner, as is common among colon cancers
[65]. The mechanism of morphogenisis involves basolateral flow washing away DKK1,
but the palmyolated Wnt will associate with the membrane instead and thus be able to
bind Frizzled/LRP5/6. LRP5/6 is essential for activation of the Wnt/β­catenin pathway in
healthy cells, but not in Caco­2. This is due to a truncation of both β­catenin and APC,
which leads to a non­functional destruction complex [44] (see figure 2.4). This is thought
to lead to increased Wnt sensitivity [65], but as demonstrated by Shin, W. et al. 2019, the
inhibitory pathway is still functional [9]. It is not exactly clear what downstream molecular
mechanism is responsible for this however. Interestingly, a number of Wnt antagonists
were able to induce loss of 3D morphology, including DKKL1, which has been shown to
have no effect on β­catenin stabilization [66]. The induction of 3D morphogenisis was
followed by a 66­fold upregulation of Frizzled9. Frizzled9 is normally expressed in mes­
enchymal stem cells of the bone marrow and placenta, and can both activate the canonical
pathway through Wnt2 and Wnt8, but also the non­canonical pathway through Wnt7a [67].
This opens up the possibility that the non­canonical pathway may also be at play, but the
downstream signalling events remain unknown.
large basolateral volumes that act as a sink for Wnt agonists can probably function in a
similar way to flow, but neither this nor basolateral flow is actually necessary for villi mor­
phogenisis, as shown by Delon, L. et al. 2019 [62] by use of a Hele­Shaw cell culture
device. This device also allowed the study of different levels of shear stress, and found
that markers for mucin production, tight junction formation and villi morphogenisis were
dependent upon the level of apical shear stress. While mechanisms involving epithelial
12
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:21==
cells sensing and responding to apical shear stress have been described (see section
2.2), this has not been coupled to this level of differentiation.
Despite these advances in driving differentiation using flow, it is important to keep in mind
that, although individual studies may present promising results, the flow effect is much
less pronounced across literature. In a recent literature review on expression levels of a
number of biomarkers, only CYP3A4 expression was shown to be consistently and sig­
nificantly upregulated in Caco­2 cells under flow [10]. Even though biomarker expression
is not the sole factor determining the usefulness of MPS, it does convey that, with re­
spect to drug­development, the gain from growing cells under flow alone is expected to
be relatively modest.
2.8.2
The extracellular matrix
As described in section 2.6, not only the mechanical properties of the ECM, but also the
physical and biological properties play important roles in cell differentiation. The original
gut­on­a­chip model used a rat collagen I and matrigel mixture for the experiment and
polyester membrane in transwell setup coated with the same mixture as control [57]. Ma­
trigel is a complex mixture of ECM proteins that have been extracted from mouse sarcoma
cells. Matrigel primarily consists of collagen IV and laminin/enactin, but also contains fi­
bronectin and fibrinogen as well as proteoglycans such as heparan sulphate [68]. Matrigel
mixture also contains a plethora of growth factors including basic fibroblast growth factor,
transforming growth factor beta (TGF­β) and epidermal growth factor (EGF), [69]. This
covers the important ECM constituents of the basement membrane described in section
2.3, and it is therefore no surprise that Caco­2 cells do well in Matrigel. Subsequent ex­
periments using the same setup used very similar matrices [57][61], but Shin et al. opted
for an uncoated membrane in transwell setup as control [9]. Delon, L. et al. 2019 used
matrigel­coated glass, choosing to omit collagen I, when they demonstrated formation of
highly differentiated epithelial layers without basolateral mixing [62].
The previously covered microfabrication technique used to fabricate villi­like structures
used a mixture of polyethylene glycol (PEG) and collagen [59], but had no indication of
this driving differentiation. Dogan and Dufva used enzymatically crosslinked gelatin mem­
branes in their inserts [70], thus omitting most of the important characteristics highlighted
earlier. Gelatin is denatured collagen, which is functionally very similar to collagen, but
during the denaturing process it adopts a new conformation and behaves slightly differ­
ently [71]. Enzymatically cross­linking this material at the concentration used should result
in a malleable matrix that is firm enough to promote YAP/TAZ nuclear translocation [72].
3D morphology was obtained in some areas of the insert, but not consistently over the
entire membrane [8]. While it seems unlikely that the ECM constituents played a role in
this pattern, the membrane was of uneven thickness. The experiments by Dogan and
Dufva show that the complex and expensive ECMs like matrigel are not necessary for dif­
ferentiation of Caco­2 cell monolayers under flow. This has the added benefit of avoiding
uncertainties associated with batch­to­batch variation in matrigel.
2.8.3
Cell seeding density
Most perfused cell cultures seed at a high cell density. 1.5×105 cells cm−2 is the most
widely used seeding density in literature, and also the original one used by Kim, et al.
2012 [57][56][73][22][9], but an even higher density of 2×105 cells cm−2 is also seen
[62][74]. Consequently, the effects of seeding density in perfusion cultures have not been
studied to the same degree as those of perfusion itself. Comparing seeding density be­
tween different experiment is complicated by the fact that the level of shear force also
impacts differentiation[62]. Therefore such a study should be carried out using the same
setup with different cell seeding densities. Such an approach has been used to show
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
13
==PAGE:22==
that cell seeding density effects the ability of the cells to respond to flow [8]. Three dif­
ferent densities (5×104, 8×104 and 1×105 cells cm−2) were tested, and it was shown
that only the high initial seeding density of 1×105 cells cm−2 was able to form villi­like
protrusions. This is despite the fact that all cultures were allowed to reach confluence
before applying flow, meaning that all would be at similar cell densities. It was suggested
that the difference in morphology might be caused by a prolonged proliferation phase that
leads to formation of a contact­inhibited 2D monolayer consisting of highly­specialized
enterocytes[8]. It was noted that trans­epithelial electric resistence (TEER) values varied
between the three groups, with the low seeding density exhibiting significantly higher re­
sistance (450Ω· cm−2) than the low seeding density (330Ω· cm−2). This could be caused
by the increased surface area of the villi­like protrusions in the 3D culture combined with
shear drag forces pulling on the epithelium. This claim is strengthened by the fact that
difference in TEER is also observed in microperfused culture when compared with static
culture with similar seeding density [57], suggesting that seeding density only indirectly
influences TEER.
These are the 3 drivers for Caco­2 differentiation that will be discussed here, but as men­
tioned earlier, it is also possible to establish artificial morphogen gradients. This method
represents yet another step up in terms of complexity and cost, while building upon mod­
els that are already limited by exactly that. In the pursuit of in­vivo­relevant models it is
important not to lose focus on the purpose and increase the complexity of such an en­
deavour to a point where it is neither usable in industry nor research [6]. Instead, a com­
promise should be found between complexity and robustness. Here, research generally
favors complexity while industry currently weights robustness and ease­of­use higher [75].
Rocking inserts could be a way to merge those visions.
2.9
Using rocking inserts to induce 3D morphogenisis in
Caco­2 cultures
Figure 2.5: Render of insert setup on rocker
viewed from above. Inserts (grey) are placed
in wells (white), filled with media (purple) and
placed on an orbital rocker. This is a single
frame, see Appendix S.1.1 for the whole an­
imation. Renderered in blender 4.0.
Intestinal OOC models are usually con­
structed without vascularization or immune
interactions in mind, and are thus found
at the lower end of the OOC complexity
spectrum. Therefore, a simpler model has
the potential to replace perfused models
without any real loss of functionality.
To
this end, Caco­2 cells can be cultured in
hanging inserts that can be slotted into well
plates and placed on a rocking platform.
Dogan and Dufva used a 2­dimensional
rocker to create a bidirectional flow and
induce a high level of shear stress (1.3
dyn·cm−2) [8]. This method applies apical
shear stress and basolateral mixing with­
out using a perfused system, thus lowering
complexity and saving media. 2­D rock­
ers have been used to simulate perfusion
in other studies, but these did not include
complete basolateral mixing [76]. Instead
of using 2­D rockers, an orbital (3D) rocker
can be used to create unilateral flow in a
trapezoid toroid, similarly to swirling liquid
14
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:23==
around the outer ring of a two­chambered glass (see figure 2.5 and accompanying video
in supplementary information S.1.1). While the fluid mechanics in such a setup remain
highly complex within the center [77], the unilateral flow in the outer ring can translate into
laminar flow. It has previously been shown that endothelial cells respond similarly to lam­
inar flow and orbital shear stress, but only in the outer edge of the well surface [78]. This
provides some evidence that these conditions are experienced similarly from a biological
perspective, even if this situation is not entirely analogous.
The inner column of the hanging insert can be functionalized to measure TEER while cells
are cultured in the outer ring. Cutouts can be integrated into the bottom of the outer ring
and a gelatin membrane can cover these up, where it will create a seal that separates
the bottom of the well in which it is placed within from the inner insert. This effectively
replaces the filter of a traditional transwell setup. This can be seen on figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Render of hanging insert setup. Inserts (black) are placed within a 12­well
plate (white). Plate has been cut in half for illustrative purposes. Right insert: Complete
insert showing the surface structure. Left insert: An insert cut in half to show the inner
workings of the insert. Cutouts in the bottom of the inserts are filled with a gelatin mem­
brane (purple) whereupon cells are seeded. The middle channel allows for easy access
to change media, but it could also be used to measure TEER. Media (not shown) fills bot­
tom of the well and half of the inner insert. Image rendered in Blender 4.0. Insert model
was designed and provided by Alexander Jönsson.
Caco­2 cells can be seeded on top of the membrane where they will grow and form the
characteristic monolayer described in section 2.5. Upon confluency, plates are moved
to a 3D rocker to allow the media to flow around the outer ring of the apical side. The
motion of the rocker will mix the media in the basolateral compartment, inducing apical
mechanosensing and Wnt­agonist diffusion. Combined with the soft gelatin membrane
that supports 3D maturation [8], this should provide the cells with enough cues to re­
program them and promote the establishment of their own morphogen gradients. The
inherent modularity of this setup means that it can be used effectively for static conditions
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
15
==PAGE:24==
and dynamic conditions, abolishing the need to use transwell systems as controls for flow
devices is often done (see section 2.8.3).
Inserts of this type have to be small, yet intricate, biocompatible and sterilizable. Stere­
olitography (SLA) is a technology that is capable of meeting these requirements [8]. A
wide variety of inks are available for SLA, including inks that are supposedly both bio­
compatible and compatible with fluorescence imaging. Biocompatibility can be increased
by including less cytotoxic components in the ink, or potentially cytotoxic materials can
be leached out after postcuring [79]. The insert architecture allows for direct imaging of
membrane using brightfield microscope. Many photoabsorbers exhibit autofluorescence
in short wavelengths, which blocks several common stains (including DAPI and GFP)
[79][80]. Such materials have limited use in fluorescence imaging. Therefore, poten­
tial resin autofluorescence should be investigated if one plans to carry out fluorescence
imaging within the constructs. Fluorescence imaging is perhaps the most useful tool to
investigate 3D morphology in this setting, because important structural elements can be
stained, which will provide detail about the spatial organization of the cells that cannot be
gathered from brightfield imaging.
Imaging is not sufficient to gain a deeper understanding behind the events preceding and
following villi morphogenisis. Instead, RNA­sequencing (RNA­seq) can be used to take
a snapshot of the inner workings of the cell. There are many platforms available that can
perform RNA­seq, but Oxford Nanopore Technologies has developed the platform that
has been used in the most peer­reviwed articles [81]. The combination of whole­mRNA
sequencing using nanopore and fluorescence imaging has the potential to shed light on
the cell­density­dependent factors that govern commitment to 3D­morphology.
16
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:25==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Microscopy imaging
Brightfield images were taken with a Zeiass Primovert microscope (Carl Zeiss Microimag­
ing GmbH) with Plan­achromat 4×/0.10 and Plan­achromat 10×/0.30.
Fluorescence
imaging was carried out using a Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 epifluorescence microscope (Carl
Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH) using LD Epiplan­NEOFLUAR 20×/0.4 Korr M27 and LD
Plan­NEOFLUAR 40×/0.6 Korr M27. Images were obtained using ZEN Pro 3.2 image
software (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH).
3.2
Design and fabrication of inserts
Inserts were designed by Alexander Jönsson in Fusion 360 and .STL files were uploaded
to a Form 3B stereolithography (SLA) 3D printer (Formlabs) with PreForm (Formlabs).
Inserts were printed with BioMed Black resin (Formlabs), washed for 20 minutes with 2­
propanol (VWR Chemicals) using Form Wash (Formlabs) and postcured in a Form Cure
(Formlabs) using 60°C setting for 30 min. Inserts were freed from their scaffold and steam
autoclaved for 1 hour at 121°C or ∼15 bar (VAPOUR­LineLite; VWR). A second set of
inserts were printed for autofluorescence experiment using BioMed Clear resin (Formlabs)
following the same protocol.
3.3
Determining autofluorescence of BioMed Black
Two sets of inserts printed from BioMed Black and BioMed clear (n=6 total) were dip­
casted in a 15% gelatin solution using technique described in section 3.5.
3.4
Cell culture
Caco­2 cells (passage 70­80, HTB­37; ATCC) were cultured in complete epithelial growth
medium (Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium with high­glucose; Sigma­Aldrich with 10%
(v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS, Hyclone, CA), 1% P/S (penicillin (100 U/mL) and strepto­
mycin (100µg/mL);Sigma­Aldrich) and 1% (v/v) NEAA (nonessential amino acids; Gibco,
Fischer Scientific) in T­75 cell culture flasks (Fischer Scientific). Cells were cultured in an
incubator at 37°C, 100% humidity and 5% CO2. Complete growth medium was replaced
every 2 days. Subculturing was performed upon 90% confluency using
trypsin­ethylenediamuntetraacetic acid (EDTA) for 5 minutes. Cells were counted prior to
seeding with NucleoCounter NC­200 (ChemoMetec) using ia1­Cassette (ChemoMetec)
and analysed using NucleoView NC­200 Software (ChemoMetec).
3.5
Membrane preparation and cell seeding
The gelatin membrane in the inserts was prepared using the dip casting technique. 15%
(w/v) gelatin (Sigma Aldrich) solution in phosphate buffered saline (PBS; Thermo Fischer)
was sterilized using 1% (v/v) chloroform (VWR Chemicals) and heated to 37°C. Inserts
were carefully dipped in the warm gelatin solution, which was kept on a 45°C heating block
(Temperature Module GEN 2; Opentrons), placed in 12­well plates (Thermo­Fischer) and
chilled at 5°C for 5 min. 600µL 15% (w/v) sterile­filtered (0.22µm ) microbial transglutam­
inase (mTG; Activa TI, Ajinomoto) was added to each well and 400µL was added to the
membrane before the plate with inserts was incubated for 30 min at 37°C. mTG solution
(top and bottom) was replaced with 1mL PBS and stored in fridge until further use.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
17
==PAGE:26==
Membranes were seeded by removing PBS, adding 1mL complete medium to the bottom
compartment and 1mL cell suspension to the top compartment (either 5×104 or 1×105
cells cm−2). The cells were seeded according to the experimental plan on figure 3.1 and
cultured under the same culture conditions as the initial culture.
Control 1
Sequencing
Sequencing
(Upon conluency)
Imaging
Control 2
Flow 2
Flow 1
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
100 100 100 100
100 100 100 100
100 100 100
X
100
100 100 100 100
X
50
50
50
50
100 100 100 100
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
100 100 100 100
50
50
50
50
X
Figure 3.1: Overview of experimental setup.
Numbers in wells represent either high
(100K) or low (50K) cell density. Color scheme is explained on figure. Figure was made
in Inkscape.
3.6
Application of shear stress
Upon ∼90% confluency, plates were moved to an orbital rocker (Signature 3D Rotator
Waver; VWR) set to a 5°tilt at 15 rpm. Culture proceeded for 11 days using these settings
without changing any other culture conditions.
3.7
Barrier thickness
Barrier thickness was measured by dip­casting gels in a 10% gelatin solution (n=6) or a
15% gelatin solution (n=8) containing 1:1000 diluted 1.1 µm red fluorescent dyed polystyrene
beads (1% g cm−3 solids, #R0100, Fluoro­Max, Thermo­Fischer). The membrane was
treated using the procedure described in section 3.5, but was not seeded with cells.
Layer height was determined using Fluorescence imaging (LD Plan­NEOFLUAR 40×/0.6
Korr M27; Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 epifluorescence microscope, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging
GmbH) at 635nm by a light­emitting diode with the 38­HE filter set (Carl Zeiss MicroImag­
ing GmbH) by applying the Z­height measurement function in the ZEN Pro 3.2 software
18
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:27==
(Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH) to measure the distance between when particles first
came into focus and when they left focus (see figure A.1).
3.8
Particle imaging velocimetry
Inserts were dip­casted in 15% gelatin solution, inserted in a 12­well plate (Thermo­
Scientific) and put on an orbital rocker (Signature 3D Rotator Waver; VWR) using settings
ranging from 15­30 rpm and 5­20°tilt. Apical and basolateral chamber were filled with
300µL and 1mL PBS, respectively. An LED light with an adjustable collimation adapter
lens (Thorlabs; SM2F32­A) was placed beneath the well plate and a sheet of paper was
sandwiched in between. A camera (iPhone 11; Apple) was secured to the rocker, facing
down, allowing it to track the movement of the liquid in the insert. Insert was imaged (4K,
60Hz) after 15µL 9­13µm glass hollow spheres solution (≈15g/L in demineralised water;
LaVision GmbH) were pipetted into the apical side. A prior experiment used 15µL 55µm
polyamide bead solution (15g/L in PBS; LaVision) and 1mL apical volume to characterize
the flow in a setup more similar to the one used during culture. This setup did not light the
12­well plate from the bottom. Each combination of settings was filmed for 10 seconds
and the maximum flow velocity was determined by following particles within this timeframe
using equation 3.1;
vmax = 2π · F
r
(3.1)
where F is the number rotations per second and r is the radius of the lane that the particles
followed (6mm). Reynold’s number (Re) was estimated using equation 3.2;
Re = ρ · v · DH
µ
(3.2)
where v is the fluid velocity, ρ is the density (1007·kg·m−3; PBS), µ is the dynamic viscosity
(9.3·10−3kg·m·s−1) and DH is the hydraulic diameter. Hydraulic diameter was calculated
using equation 3.3;
DH = 4A
P
(3.3)
where A is the cross­sectional area of the fluid and P is the wetted perimeter. Both were
estimated by assuming the cross­sectional area of the fluid volume being constant and
of trapezoid shape with a fluid volume of 300µ. To our knowledge, no equation to esti­
mate shear stress in orbital rocker models have been described in literature. Conversely,
equation 3.4 based on Stoke’s second problem has been used to describe orbital shaker
models [77][82][83];
τ = α ·
√
ρ · µ · (2 · π · F)3
(3.4)
where τ is the shear stress measured in dyn · cm−2 and α is the radius of the rotational
force. This equation does not account for the effect of tilt, and when used to describe
an orbital shaker, it relies on assumptions about the fluid flow that do not apply to that
situation, and may yield results that are off by a factor of 10 compared to more sophisti­
cated simulation based methods [77]. Therefore, estimating shear stress directly from the
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
19
==PAGE:28==
observed flow velocity may be more desirable. This can be estimated using the Darcy­
Weisbach friction factor expressed in terms of mean wall shear stress, see equation 3.5
below;
τ = 1
8 · fDρv2
(3.5)
where v is the fluid velocity and ρ is the density, fD is the Darcy friction factor. Assuming
fully developed laminar flow in a closed pipe with a square cross­sectional area, a friction
factor of f = 60
Re can be employed [84].
3.9
Fixation of cells
Media was removed and membranes were washed with PBS before
300µL 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA in PBS; Thermo­Scientific) was applied. After 10 min­
utes, excess PFA was removed and membranes were stored at 4°C in PBS until staining.
3.10
Immunostaining
Membranes were incubated with 300µL 1:1000 diluted primary anti­ZO­1 monoclonal rab­
bit antibody (Invitrogen; HL1185) overnight. Membranes were washed with PBS and
stained with 300µL PBS solution containing 1:1000 Alexa Fluor Plus 488­labeled anti­
rabbit monoclonal goat antibody (Invitrogen; A32731), 1:1000 Alexa Fluor Plus 555­conjugated
phalloidin (Thermo Fischer Scientific; A30106) and 1:1000 Hoechst 33342 (10 mg/mL)
was added and incubated for 90 min at room temperature on orbital shaker. Membranes
were washed with PBS and stored at 4°C overnight before analysis.
3.11
RNA­purification and cDNA library preparation
Cell­laden membranes washed with 400µL RLT lysis buffer (Qiagen) and stored at ­20°C
until RNA isolation. Lysates were thawed and RNA was isolated using Qiagen RNEasy
Kit and manufacturers protocol. RNA concentration was measured on Nanodrop 1000
spectrometer (Thermo Fischer). RNA integrity number (RIN) was calculated on 2100 Bio­
analyzer (Agilent) using Agilent 2100 Expert Software B.02.11 and the Agilent RNA 6000
Nano Kit following manufacturers protocol. A barcoded cDNA­library was synthesized
using a PCR­cDNA Barcoding Kit (SQK­PCB111.24; Nanopore) following manufacturers
protocol.
3.12
Statistics
Data from autofluorescence experiment and membrane thickness experiment is presented
as mean±standard deviation. Sample size is provided as n. p­value was calculated using
Welsch T­test. R2 and standard deviation of the residuals on figure 4.10 was calculated
with Maples Fit function.
20
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:29==
4
Results and discussion
4.1
Characterization of inserts
Insert was created by Alexander Jöhnsson in Fusion 360 and printed using SLA technol­
ogy. The printing success was 100% using both BioMed Black (n≈50) and BioMed Clear
(n= 9). Technical drawings of the insert can be found on figure 4.1. It should be noted
that the entire culture area is 24mm2 × 4 = 96mm2, but when calculating seeding density,
the entire 102.64mm2 surface area is used.
2mm
7mm
24mm2
Figure 4.1: Technical drawings of insert. A: Wireframe sketch showing insert in its entirety.
B: Side profile inside a 12­well plate, including distance between well bottom and gel. C:
Bottom view including size of gel area and width of the slit. Figure was made in Fusion
360 and edited in GIMP 2.1 and Inkscape.
A pilot project revealed that the gelatin membranes were very delicate and had a 10­day
survival rate of measly 8% (n=12) when cultured on the 3D rocker. Issues were thought
to stem from partly solidified gelatin and excessive bubble formation during the casting
process. To combat this, dip casting was carried out on a heating block where mixture was
allowed to rest to allow bubbles to escape the gel surface before casting. This increased
the survival rate to 25%, a value that is arguably still too low for a scalable and robust
method. The orbital rocker performed well and could handle up to 4×12 =48 inserts at
once, which within the framework of OOC, would be considered high­throughput [85][86].
The dip­casting technique is laborious and the scalability of this system suffers because
of it. This is unfortunate because scalability would otherwise be an advantage of using a
simple system. While other casting methods were tested, no better solution was found.
4.2
Autofluorescence of BioMed Black
BioMed Clear has previously been shown to exhibit autofluorescence in the 488nm range,
which interferes with dyes that fluoresce in that spectrum. This includes AlexaFluor­488,
which is used in this report as a secondary antibody to label ZO­1. The two materials
were compared to understand if this issue persists with BioMed Black. Figure 4.2 shows
the same insert printed in BioMed Black (A) and BioMed Clear (B) as a composite image
using brightfield and emission at 488nm. The average intensity at 488nm can be seen on
(C).
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.2: Autofluorescence experiment. Inserts printed from BioMed Black (A) and
BioMed Clear (B) were dip­casted in 15% gelatin and photographed with brightfield and
fluorescence imaging at 488nm. Picture A and B are both composites of the fluores­
cence and the brightfield photographs using the exact same settings. Picture C is a bar
chart showing the mean intensity of the emission measured at 488nm. Mean intensity is
calculated over the entire picture and is a value extracted by ZEN Pro. The error bars
show standard deviation, and the two groups were shown to have different means (n=6,
p=0.001). As can be seen from the 3 figures, BioMed Black exhibits a much lower aut­
ofluorescence in the 488nm­range, which, unlike BioMed Clear, allows this material to be
used for imaging within the green spectrum. Figure C was made in RStudio using data
which can be found in table A.1.
There is a stark contrast between figure 4.2 A and B, which reveals that BioMed Clear
fluoresces strongly at 488nm, while there is no visible fluorescence in BioMed Black.
This is quantified on figure 4.2 C, where it can be seen that there is an almost 5­fold
difference in mean emission intensity at 488nm between the two materials, and that this
difference is statistically significant. Taken together, this means that BioMed Black should
be compatible with fluorescence microscopy at this wavelength, and that it is the best
material choice for this purpose.
4.3
Gel membrane thickness
Characterising the insert is not sufficient to understand the environment that the cells grow
in. The gelatin membrane is critical to the function of the insert, and one of the most impor­
tant characteristics of the membrane is the thickness. This is because the membrane not
only acts as the seeding area for the cells, but also as a barrier for diffusion of metabolites
and signalling compounds (see section 2.8). Thus, any discussion of cellular morphology
necessitates an understanding of the cellular environment, including the membrane ge­
ometry. Membrane thickness was measured by incorporating fluorescent beads into the
gelatin before casting. A fluorescence microscope was then used to determine the dis­
tance between the plane when beads came into and subsequently left focus. The result of
this can be seen on figure 4.3. Gel thickness was measured both in 10% (n=6) and 15%
(n=6) gelatin membranes, because these were the concentrations used during the pilot
experiment and the final experiment. Figure 4.3 A is a 3­dimensional heatmap showing
the fluorescence intensity along the membrane. Figure 4.3 B contains 4 bar charts that
show the relationship between gel thickness and gelatin content in the middle and edge
of the gel.
22
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.3: Gel thickness measurements. A: 3D graph showing the fluorescence intensity
(Z) along the xy­position (µm) of the insert in a 15% gelatin membrane. Higher peaks in­
dicate higher fluorescence intensity, which is caused by a higher concentration of beads
in that xy­column. The concentration in each column, and therefore the peak height, can
therefore be coupled to thickness, but the z­axis does not represent direct thickness mea­
surements. Image was created in ZEN Pro 3.2. B: Barchart showing mean membrane
thickness from direct measurements in the middle area and in the edge area of gels using
10% and 15% gelatin. Data shows that there is a significant (p= 0.001) difference between
the mean thickness at the edge and in the middle of the gel, in both gel concentrations.
There is also a difference between the thickness of the middle area of the 10% and 15%
gels, but at a p= 0.1 level. Error bars indicate standard deviation, and as can be judged
from these there is a very high variance in the thickness, especially in the edge of the gel.
X­axis: Area of investigation. Y­axis: Gel thickness (µm). Chart was made in RStudio.
Complete data set can be found in Table A.2
Figure 4.3 A shows fluorescence intensity from which gel thickness can be inferred. The
peak in the central section is a result of the dip­casting technique, where a hole is poked
in the membrane prior to cross­linking, which breaks the surface tension and causes the
gel to contract to the edge. It can be seen that the gel is thicker all along the insert­gel
border, but that the extend of this varies. This variation is supported by the large standard
deviation in most of the groups in figure 4.3 B. Mean membrane thickness in the 10% gel
was found to be 166±62 µm at the edge of the gel and 70.6±35.4 µm at the center of
the gel. This difference is significant (p=0.001) and the large variance in the data is likely
due to the human factor of dip cast technique. In the 15% gel, mean membrane thickness
was measured as 165±86 µm at the edge of the gel and 46±17 µm at the center of the
gel. This difference is significant (p<0.001), and while the thickness at the edge is nearly
identical between the two concentrations, the middle thickness is not (p<0.1). This may be
caused by increased surface tension with increasing gelatin concentration. These results
are similar to what was previously demonstrated by Dogan and Dufva, 2023 [8], although
they describe an insert with a lip­less 4mm slit instead of the 2mm slit found on the insert
described herein (see figure 4.1). The main difference seems to be that this new insert
architecture resulted in a more extreme deviation between the two areas of investigation.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
23
==PAGE:32==
4.4
Cell culture
48 inserts were fabricated and dip casted. The dip­cast success rate was 92% (n=52)
and of the 48 intact inserts, a further 92% (n=48) were watertight, as measured by the
ability of the inserts to prevent spillage into the well 24 hours after casting. Inserts were
seeded with ∼90% confluent Caco­2 cells (passage 77) at two cell densities (5×104 and
1×105 cells cm−2) according to the experimental plan (see Figure 3.1). Cells were grown
in inserts for 5 days before the lower cell seeding density group reached confluency and
half (n=24) were transferred to an orbital rocker were they were kept for 11 days. After
11 days, only 25% (n=40) of the membranes were watertight. The rest were damaged
either by the membrane becoming dislodged or punctured (see Figure A.2). Dislodging
may have been caused by a number of things, including pipetting, handling or even the
induction of flow. High membrane flexibility may have caused sagging, which in turn could
have increased drag forces on the membrane, causing it to be dislodged from the correct
position during media change or while under flow. Punctures may have been the result
of contact with pipette tips, or because the surface was weakened by large bubbles that
formed during casting. It is possible that thicker gels may be more sturdy, and, given the
high variance in gel thickness between the inserts, it seems plausible that only inserts with
a particular thick membrane survived the entire duration of the experiment. To investigate
this further, cells would have to be cultured on fluorescent microbead­loaded membranes.
Culture was ended after 11 days, as this was the point at which the maturation seemed to
have stopped. This was determined by looking for multilayers using brightfield microscopy
(see figure 4.4). At day 11, similar multilayer densities were observed in both the control
group and the flow group and at both cell seeding densities (see figure 4.5 A). The nature
of the dark spots was verified using a 10× objective and the result of this can be seen
on figure 4.5 B. Here the dark spots appear as small cell clumps that are attached to
the matrix and protrude out of the monolayer, confirming that these are in fact live cells.
Multilayers formed primarily towards the edge of the gel, but not consistently. All mem­
branes showed high heterogeneity with areas containing many multilayers and areas with
primarily very flat growth displaying classical cobblestone morphology. Cell density also
seemed to vary greatly with some areas being highly confluent and others more less de­
void of cells entirely. It was noticed that some cells appeared to grow to much greater
sizes than normal, with multiple cells reaching over 100 microns in diameter. This was
further investigated using fluorescence microscopy.
24
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.4: Brightfield images (4×) of same area of membrane during an 8­day timespan.
All images were taken of a specific area of a high cell density (1×105 cells cm−2) cell
membrane. A: Day 3. B: Day 5. C: Day 7. D: Day 10. Culture was stopped on day 11.
The large, blurry dark spots are the result of condensation forming on the inside of the
wellplate lid. Scale bar represents 300µm.
Figure 4.5: Brightfield images on day 10. A: 4× image of high density control (1×105
cells cm−2). Scale bar represents 300µm. B: 10× image of high density membrane
under flow (1×105 cells cm−2). Here it can be seen that the small dark spots seen on the
4× objective are in fact small cell clumps that protrude out of the monolayer. Scale bar
represents 100µm.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
25
==PAGE:34==
4.4.1
Fluorescence microscopy
Following cell culture, intact membranes (n=12) were fixed and stained for DNA (blue),
actin (orange) and Zonula Occludens­1 (ZO­1; green). As can be seen on figure 4.6, all
stains worked and revealed distinct differences in cell morphology and expression of the
chosen markers. Static cells grew in a classical cobblestone pattern with limited ZO­1
expression. Conversely, images reveal a much more defined expression pattern of tight­
junction marker ZO­1 in cultures that grew under flow. These cells express ZO­1 at the
border between the cells, and as such this indicates more functional tight­junctions than
the sporadic signal measured in the static samples.
Figure 4.6: Fluorescent images (10×) of membranes 11 days after confluency. Blue stain
is nuclei (DNA; Hoechst), orange is cytoskeleton (Actin; phalloidin) and green is tight­
junctions (ZO­1; labeled antibody). A: Static control, low seeding density (5×104 cells
cm−2). Top right: Static control, high seeding density (1×105 cells cm−2). Bottom left:
Flow, low seeding density (5×104 cells cm−2). Bottom right: Flow, high seeding density.
As can be seen on several images, the insert is black, meaning that there is very little
autofluorescence originating from the insert.
It is difficult to accurately assess differences within the two groups. On figure 4.6, the high
seeding cell density appears to have a slightly stronger ZO­1 signal, but when including
only the ZO­1 channel (figure 4.8 and replicates (figure A.3)), this pattern becomes dif­
ficult to argue for. There does seem to be a tendency of the highest ZO­1 expression
to be in the middle of the gel. This difference is however very difficult to quantify, and
could simply be a result of the two areas being situated in different Z­planes. Therefore,
no dependency on seeding density is observed. There is also no visible difference in
barrier height between the two groups, which means that the results obtained by Dogan
26
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:35==
and Dufva [8] could not be replicated using this setup. Notably, the maturation in the Z­
direction could not be replicated in any of the cases, meaning that it is very possible that
this setup was not capable of recapitulating the same level of flow. Still, the effect of flow
on ZO­1 expression remains clear, although expression is not homogeneous throughout
the culture. In fact, the cultures under flow stand out by being highly heterogeneous both
in ZO­1 expression and cell morphology. This is exemplified on figure 4.6 where the ZO­1
expression is overlaid nuclei and actin staining for all 4 cultures, and on figure 4.7 A and
B where the heterogeneity of static and flow conditions are compared using 5× magni­
fication. Both dynamic and static cultures exhibit a heterogeneous growth pattern with
some areas displaying flat cobblestone morphology separated by areas of the huge­cell­
phenotype and still other areas devoid of cells entirely. In the flow condition, these rafts
of cobblestone morphology seem to be smaller and separated by larger gaps of either
huge cells or empty areas. A more detailed view of the huge cell morphology can be seen
figure 4.7 C, and the combination of brightfield and Hoechst seen on figure 4.7 E high­
lights the areas of very low growth. Here, the protruding cell clumps that primarily line the
edges of the membrane can also be seen, confirming that these are intact cells that grow
in multilayers.
Figure 4.7: Fluorescent images. Channels: (1) Blue: DNA, (2) Orange: Actin, (3) green:
ZO­1 and (4) Brightfield. A: high density control under 5× magnification using channel (1)
and (2). High density dynamic under 5× magnification using channel (1) and (2). C: High
density dynamic under 10× magnification using channel (1) and (2) highlighting the huge­
cell morphology D: High density dynamic under 10× magnification using channel (1), (2)
and (3) showing the very high levels of morphological heterogeneity present within this
culture, which would complicate RNA­seq. High density dynamic under 5× magnification
using channel (1) and (4) where the protruding cell clumps seen on earlier brightfield
images during culture are confirmed to contain intact nuclei.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.8: ZO­1 expression quantified using fluores­
cence microscopy and 5× magnification. There is a
clear difference in expression between static cultures
(A and B) and dynamic cultures (C and D). There does
not seem to be a dependency on seeding density in
either condition.
Caco­2 cells are known to grow
to larger sizes when cultured un­
der flow, but not to the extent ob­
served here.
Because cell size
does not usually vary as much
as seen here, it is not a value
that is often reported on, but it
can be judged from stained tight­
junctions on pictures supplied by
other researchers. Values rang­
ing from 15µm[9], 25µm [8] [62]
[57] [56] up to 50µm [87] [88] have
been reported previously under
dynamic conditions, but in this
case the huge cell morphology
was also detected in static sam­
ples, although they were neither
as pronounced nor as numerable
as the dynamic condition.
The
only other description of the huge­
cell morphology are by Neumann,
D. (unpublished work)[89], an­
other student from the same lab. Here, an increase in cell size through several rounds
of passaging under flow was observed, and a differential expression between these and
static cells was demonstrated. RNAseq revealed that several hepatocyte markers were
significantly upregulated, and it was suspected that this may have been the result of a
contamination. However, given that the experiment in question used passage 11 Caco­
2 cells, and a similar phenotype was observed here using passage 77, this seems less
likely. YAP/TAZ has been hypothesized to regulate cell volume through cortical tension
at the G1/S checkpoint. This was postulated after a strong correlation between YAP/­
TAZ activity, cell volume and cell tension was found in knockout experiments with human
embryonic kidney cells [90]. Interestingly, one of the most significantly and highly differ­
entially expressed genes in cultures under flow from Neumanns experiment, solute carrier
2 family member 3 (Glut3), has previously been shown to have expression profiles that
positively correlate with Yap expression in colorectal cancer [91]. Although this does not
provide any information about its subcellular location, it could suggest that Yap is more
active in these Caco­2 cells under flow, providing a possible explanation for the increased
cell size.
While it was the plan to carry out RNAseq on these samples as well, not only did so many
of the gelatin membranes break that it would no longer be possible, the cultures also
exhibited such a high degree of heterogeneity that, even if the experiments were to be
repeated, it would be difficult to determine much from the results of such an experiment.
An example of the extreme heterogeneity observed within the samples can be seen on
figure 4.7 F, where huge and regular cells exist in areas of flat and 3D morphology with
with low and high ZO­1 expression, all in a very small area. Heterogeneity may be an
effect of incomplete maturation caused by ending the culture too early. It proved very
difficult to asses maturation using brightfield microscopy, and multilayer growth may not
be the best method of determining this. It would be interesting to investigate if a more
homogeneous expression pattern could be obtained by extending the culture period.
28
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:37==
4.5
RNA purification
Even though RNA­seq could not be performed, RNA was still isolated directly from a
small number of cell­laden inserts (n=8) in order to prove the viability of this technique.
While some membranes were broken and could not be properly handled (n=3), the intact
membranes (n=5) yielded RNA concentrations of 30 −80ng·µL−1 after purification, all
of which was enough for the 20ng·µL−1 total RNA requirement for cDNA preparation.
RNA quality was measured by absorbance at 260 and 280nm, with all samples having
260/280 values between 2.08 −2.38, which is above 2 and below 3.0, a range that has
been established through experience at the laboratory. RNA­integrity was estimated by
RIN­2 values, and all were calculated to be above 8.5, which for similar reasons is the
cutoff used for quality control within the lab. A barcoded cDNA­library was synthesized
from the RNA samples, but it was never sequenced. Taken together, this shows that
sufficient RNA of sequencing quality can be harvested from a single insert.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
29
==PAGE:38==
4.6
Particle imaging velocimetry
Because RNA­seq could not be performed, and in order to try to understand some of the
culture conditions that led to this result, the nature of the flow was investigated. Gradients
of cell­cell or cell­ECM interactions and secreted compounds form the basis of differen­
tiation (see figure 2.3), and since the latter depend on local diffusion, it is possible that
uneven or even turbulent flow could explain some of the observed morphological hetero­
geneity. Flow was analysed using particle imaging velocimetry (PIV). Imaging revealed
that the conditions under which the cell culture experiment had been carried out did not
result in orbital fluid flow, but rather limited bidirectional mixing. However, this could be
fixed by decreasing the apical volume from 1000µL to 300µL and increasing the tilt to
above 13°. Stills from the videos taken can be seen on 4.9, where particles are circled
in red and their direction of movement is shown with white arrows. The accompanying
videos can be found in supporting material S.1.2 and S.1.3.
Figure 4.9: Stills from particle image velocimetry. A: Insert is lit from the top and placed
directly on rocker. Apical volume (1mL), tilt angle (5°) and rotational speed (15 rpm) all
match the settings used in the cell culture. B: Insert is lit from the bottom and placed on
3D rocker. Liquid is moving in the direction indicated by the arrows and particles such as
the ones circled were tracked. Apical volume is 300µL, tilt angle is 13° and speed is 15
rpm. Examples of particles are highlighted with red circles, and the white arrows indicate
in which direction these particles moved. Images were edited in Inkscape.
To investigate the effect of tilt and rotation speed further, the inserts were imaged at 7
different tilt angles and 4 different rotation speeds. In 6 of these combinations, the flow
speed could not be determined because the camera was unable to keep the particles
in focus at high speeds. In a further 13 combinations, the speed could be determined,
but the liquid did not flow evenly. This happened mainly at lower tilt angles, where the 3D
rocker was unable to keep a steady pace. This left 9 combinations of settings in which the
flow speed could be determined and appeared to be constant. Reynold’s numbers (Re)
were calculated for all combinations by assuming the liquid to have a trapezoid cross­
section. All settings gave Re « 2000 (see table A.3), meaning flow can be assumed to be
laminar. It should be noted that only 9 of the combinations appeared to exhibit constant
flow speed, and as such Re values are only accurate for this subset.
Results show that a particle velocity of ≈0.8−2 cm·s−1 can be reliably achieved using this
30
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:39==
setup, but inadequate image quality meant that flow at high rotational speeds could not be
measured. Instead these were estimated based on an assumed linear relationship, see
figure 4.10. Additionally, shear force was calculated from the flow speed using the Darcy­
Weisbach equation (equation 3.5). Here shear stress values of ≈1.4 −3.5 dyn·cm−2,
possibly up to ≈6.5 dyn·cm−2 could be reached. Flow speeds and shear stress values
can be found in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Flow speeds and shear stress at different tilt and rotational speed settings using
300µL fluid volume. Left: Observed flow speeds. Right: Calculated shear stress values
using eq 3.5. Cells with a grey background either exhibited a jagged movement or they
did not stay in their lane, while cells with a white background did. Light­grey cell coloration
indicates that the flow speed was almost constant. Some values could not be estimated
(NE) due to inadequate image quality. Values in cursive are estimated based on figure
4.10. Error is standard error of the residuals.
Particle velocity (cm⋅s-1)
RPM
15
20
25
30
5
0.09
0.19
0.19
0.38
7
0.19
0.30
0.26
0.56
10
0.45
0.94
0.75
NE
13
0.83
1.13
1.32
1.58±0.05
15
0.98
1.66
1.89
2.41±0.18
17
1.06
1.32
1.89
2.25±0.12
19
NE
1.51
2.03
NE
Tilt
Shear stress (dyn⋅cm-2)
RPM
15
20
25
30
5
0.16
0.31
0.31
0.62
7
0.31
0.50
0.44
0.93
10
0.75
1.55
1.24
NE
13
1.36
1.86
2.17
4.33±0.14
15
1.61
2.73
3.10
6.62±0.49
17
1.74
2.17
3.10
6.175±0.33
19
NE
2.48
3.42
NE
Tilt
Figure 4.10: Relationship between particle
velocity and rotational speed for fixed an­
gles.
Assuming linear relationship.
Esti­
mated points are marked with discs. R2 was
adjusted based on sample size.
Made in
Maple 2022.
Dogan and Dufva previously reported flow­
induced maturation in Caco­2 cells at 1.3
dyn·cm−2 in a 2D­rocker setup using 16
rpm and 7° inclination.
This value was
also determined from a PIV experiment [8].
Delon et al. reported maturation already
at 0.007 dyn·cm−2 in a perfused model.
Shear stress was calculated mathemati­
cally.
Shin et al showed differential ex­
pression at 0.02 dyn·cm−2 in both apical
and basolateral compartment using Caco­
2 cells. Shear stress was calculated using
a simulation based approach [9]. Kim et
al observed increased columnar cell height
when increasing shear stress from 0.02
dyn·cm−2 to 0.06 dyn·cm−2 in a very sim­
ilar setup to shin et al.
This paper also
claimed that this is on the same scale as
physiological shear stress in the human in­
testine, which is thought to be ≈0.002 −
0.08 dyn·cm−2.[57] Kulthong et al exposed
Caco­2 cells to both 0.02 and 0.002 dyn·cm−2 in a perfused system and showed differen­
tial expression that was comparable between the two speeds [87]. Therefore, even in the
event that the the shear stress calculations in table 4.1 are off by more than an order of
magnitude, they would still be high enough to be relevant within this context. It should be
noted that all but one of the above papers describe perfused models that can be assumed
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
31
==PAGE:40==
to have a more even flow and shear stress. The only other model of the above that uses
a rocker is the one described by Dogan and Dufva. While they assumed laminar flow
(Re= 1213), a highly heterogeneous cell morphology was also obtained with some areas
growing very flat and others growing in protruding cell clumps. Above perfusion models
claim to exert cells to a physiological level of shear stress, although it is not clear what
this entails. Certainly, physiological conditions do not result in constant and even flow
over the entire epithelial surface, as flow is heavily influenced by the presence of mature
villi [92], digesta [93] and mucus [21]. Thus, the term physiological has, in this context,
become synonymous with what works in an in­vitro setting. There is therefore nothing
inherently wrong with weak bidirectional mixing as a means to promote differentiation in
epithelial cells, in fact it is not unthinkable that it could model the effect of peristalsis better
than continuous flow. It is however very difficult accurately asses shear stress within this
context, which is the value primarily used to compare results.
The level of basolateral flow was not determined, but because this section is assumed to
experience turbulent flow [77], it would be very difficult to assess this accurately. Regard­
less, the nature of the basolateral flow would play a less pronounced role, and it is incor­
porated mainly to allow for removal of basolaterally secreted Wnt­agonists such as DKK1
(see section 2.8.1 and figure 2.4). Still, it should be confirmed that liquid is not trapped in
the small gap between the insert and well bottom, but is able to move Wnt­agonists away
from the membrane and out to the outer edge of the insert, so that this area can act as
a sink. It is also possible that the membrane thickness too could influence the diffusion
of signalling compounds, which could help explain the multilayer morphology observed
around the edge of the membrane, where the membrane is significantly thicker. It was
first postulated that the thick cell layers in this section could be the result of increased
local seeding density through a mechanism where the cells that during seeding end up
outside of the membrane roll down onto the membrane, causing the edges to receive cells
from a larger area. However, the fact that the cell clumps observed here are ubiquitous
along the entire edge speaks against this hypothesis, because the area that could effec­
tively supply cells to the membrane during seeding would be much smaller in between the
membranes than along the sides. A way to decrease the concave nature of the gel and
prevent sagging could be to reduce the width of the aperture. This may also decrease
thickness variation and enhance the survivability of the gels, which would in turn ease the
workload required to cast membranes and carry out experiments. The collagenous part
of the native epithelial basement membrane is only 0 −3µm in healthy individuals [94],
so increasing the membrane thickness further might negatively affect diffusion properties,
which could impact differentiation. Higher level of differentiation has been demonstrated
in membranes with over 100 micron average thickness [8]. Still, thickening the membrane
further to enable the development of a more robust method may come at the expense of
decreased in­vivo relevance, but it is likely a necessary step to create a truly scalable
method that is capable of high­throughput.
32
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:41==
5
Conclusion
A custom insert was successfully fabricated and used to culture Caco­2 cells in a soft
gelatin matrix. This process suffered from fragile gelatin membranes, likely caused by
the membrane middle thickness being less than 50 microns. The low membrane survival
rate forced the scope of the project to be narrowed, and while it was still possible to show
differential tight­junction formation between the static and dynamic groups using fluores­
cence microscopy, the results obtained by Dogan and Dufva related to seeding density
could not be replicated. Instead, a huge­cell morphology first observed by Neumann was
replicated. It is not known what drove the formation of this cell type. Similar cells were
observed in the static control, but their formation seemed to be enhanced by flow. The
nature of the flow was investigated using particle imaging velocimetry, and was found to
be much less pronounced than initially assumed. It is possible that turbulent bilateral mix­
ing as opposed to laminar shear stress may have caused uneven flow that subsequently
led to a heterogeneous tight junction formation observed in cultures under flow, but it was
not possible to investigate this further. Heterogeneity may also simply be the result of a
short (11­day) culture period. A protocol to purify RNA of sequencing quality directly from
membrane­grown cultures was developed and the shear stress for all possible settings
on the 3D rocker was calculated. Thus, although it could not be achieved here, the foun­
dation for investigating flow­induced differential gene expression in this insert has been
laid.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Harry Olson et al. “Concordance of the Toxicity of Pharmaceuticals in Humans and
in Animals”. In: Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 32.1 (Aug. 2000), pp. 56–
67. ISSN: 02732300. DOI: 10.1006/rtph.2000.1399.
[2]
William R. Foster et al. “A Retrospective Analysis of Toxicogenomics in the Safety
Assessment of Drug Candidates”. In: Toxicologic Pathology 35.5 (Aug. 2007), pp. 621–
635. ISSN: 0192­6233. DOI: 10.1080/01926230701419063.
[3]
Trisha Gura. “Systems for Identifying New Drugs Are Often Faulty”. In: Science
278.5340 (Nov. 1997), pp. 1041–1042. ISSN: 0036­8075. DOI: 10.1126/science.
278.5340.1041.
[4]
Jason J. Han. “FDA Modernization Act 2.0 allows for alternatives to animal testing”.
In: Artificial Organs 47.3 (Mar. 2023), pp. 449–450. ISSN: 0160­564X. DOI: 10.1111/
aor.14503.
[5]
Donald E. Ingber. “Is it Time for Reviewer 3 to Request Human Organ Chip Ex­
periments Instead of Animal Validation Studies?” In: Advanced Science 7.22 (Nov.
2020). ISSN: 2198­3844. DOI: 10.1002/advs.202002030.
[6]
Chao Ma et al. “Organ­on­a­Chip: A New Paradigm for Drug Development”. In:
Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 42.2 (Feb. 2021), pp. 119–133. ISSN: 01656147.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2020.11.009.
[7]
Donald E. Ingber. “Human organs­on­chips for disease modelling, drug develop­
ment and personalized medicine”. In: Nature Reviews Genetics 23.8 (Aug. 2022),
pp. 467–491. ISSN: 1471­0056. DOI: 10.1038/s41576-022-00466-9.
[8]
Asli Aybike Dogan and Martin Dufva. “Heterogenous morphogenesis of Caco­2 cells
reveals that flow induces three­dimensional growth and maturation at high initial
seeding cell densities”. In: Biotechnology and Bioengineering 120.6 (June 2023),
pp. 1667–1677. ISSN: 10970290. DOI: 10.1002/bit.28362.
[9]
Woojung Shin et al. “Human Intestinal Morphogenesis Controlled by Transepithe­
lial Morphogen Gradient and Flow­Dependent Physical Cues in a Microengineered
Gut­on­a­Chip”. In: iScience 15 (May 2019), pp. 391–406. ISSN: 25890042. DOI:
10.1016/j.isci.2019.04.037.
[10]
Martin Dufva. “A quantitative meta­analysis comparing cell models in perfused or­
gan on a chip with static cell cultures”. In: Scientific Reports 13.1 (Dec. 2023). ISSN:
20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-35043-5.
[11]
Jørgen Warberg and Andreas Kjær. Humanbiologi ­ en grundbog. 2nd ed. Vol. 1.
2800 Lyngby: Polyteknisk Forlag, 2018, pp. 239–288. ISBN: 978­87­502­1111­2.
[12]
Jacob Campbell, James Berry, and Yu Liang. “Anatomy and Physiology of the Small
Intestine”. In: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 2 Volume Set. Elsevier,
2019, pp. 817–841. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-323-40232-3.00071-6.
[13]
Justine Creff, Laurent Malaquin, and Arnaud Besson. “In vitro models of intestinal
epithelium: Toward bioengineered systems”. In: Journal of Tissue Engineering 12
(Jan. 2021), p. 204173142098520. ISSN: 2041­7314. DOI: 10.1177/2041731420985202.
[14]
Scott W. Crawley, Mark S. Mooseker, and Matthew J. Tyska. “Shaping the intestinal
brush border”. In: Journal of Cell Biology 207.4 (Nov. 2014), pp. 441–451. ISSN:
1540­8140. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201407015.
[15]
G M H Birchenough et al. “New developments in goblet cell mucus secretion and
function”. In: Mucosal Immunology 8.4 (July 2015), pp. 712–719. ISSN: 19330219.
DOI: 10.1038/mi.2015.32.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
35
==PAGE:44==
[16]
Shiloh R. Lueschow and Steven J. McElroy. “The Paneth Cell: The Curator and
Defender of the Immature Small Intestine”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 11 (Apr.
2020). ISSN: 1664­3224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00587.
[17]
Fiona M. Gribble and Frank Reimann. “Enteroendocrine Cells: Chemosensors in the
Intestinal Epithelium”. In: Annual Review of Physiology 78.1 (Feb. 2016), pp. 277–
299. ISSN: 0066­4278. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-021115-105439.
[18]
François Gerbe, Catherine Legraverend, and Philippe Jay. “The intestinal epithe­
lium tuft cells: specification and function”. In: Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
69.17 (Sept. 2012), pp. 2907–2917. ISSN: 1420­682X. DOI: 10.1007/s00018-012-
0984-7.
[19]
Christoph Schneider, Claire E. O’Leary, and Richard M. Locksley. “Regulation of
immune responses by tuft cells”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 19.9 (Sept. 2019),
pp. 584–593. ISSN: 1474­1733. DOI: 10.1038/s41577-019-0176-x.
[20]
Delphine Delacour et al. “Plasticity of the brush border — the yin and yang of intesti­
nal homeostasis”. In: Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology 13.3 (Mar.
2016), pp. 161–174. ISSN: 1759­5045. DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2016.5.
[21]
P. Guo, A. M. Weinstein, and S. Weinbaum. “A hydrodynamic mechanosensory
hypothesis for brush border microvilli”. In: American Journal of Physiology­Renal
Physiology 279.4 (Oct. 2000), F698–F712. ISSN: 1931­857X. DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.
2000.279.4.F698.
[22]
Sun Wook Kim et al. “Shear stress induces noncanonical autophagy in intestinal ep­
ithelial monolayers”. In: Molecular Biology of the Cell 28.22 (Nov. 2017), pp. 3043–
3056. ISSN: 1059­1524. DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e17-01-0021.
[23]
Ping Yuan et al. “Laminar flow inhibits the Hippo/YAP pathway via autophagy and
SIRT1­mediated deacetylation against atherosclerosis”. In: Cell Death & Disease
11.2 (Feb. 2020), p. 141. ISSN: 2041­4889. DOI: 10.1038/s41419-020-2343-1.
[24]
Frederick J. Schoen and Richard N. Mitchell. “Tissues, the Extracellular Matrix, and
Cell–Biomaterial Interactions”. In: Biomaterials Science. Elsevier, 2013, pp. 452–
474. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-087780-8.00039-5.
[25]
Laween Meran, Anna Baulies, and Vivian S.W. Li. Intestinal Stem Cell Niche: The
Extracellular Matrix and Cellular Components. 2017. DOI: 10.1155/2017/7970385.
[26]
Michael Göke and Daniel K. Podolsky. “1 Regulation of the mucosal epithelial bar­
rier”. In: Baillière’s Clinical Gastroenterology 10.3 (Sept. 1996), pp. 393–405. ISSN:
09503528. DOI: 10.1016/S0950-3528(96)90049-4.
[27]
Yuli Wang et al. “Formation of Human Colonic Crypt Array by Application of Chem­
ical Gradients Across a Shaped Epithelial Monolayer”. In: Cellular and Molecular
Gastroenterology and Hepatology 5.2 (2018), pp. 113–130. ISSN: 2352345X. DOI:
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2017.10.007.
[28]
Antonio Totaro, Tito Panciera, and Stefano Piccolo. “YAP/TAZ upstream signals and
downstream responses”. In: Nature Cell Biology 20.8 (Aug. 2018), pp. 888–899.
ISSN: 1465­7392. DOI: 10.1038/s41556-018-0142-z.
[29]
Emily Steed, Maria S. Balda, and Karl Matter. “Dynamics and functions of tight junc­
tions”. In: Trends in Cell Biology 20.3 (Mar. 2010), pp. 142–149. ISSN: 09628924.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2009.12.002.
[30]
Brendon M. Baker and Christopher S. Chen. Deconstructing the third dimension­
how 3D culture microenvironments alter cellular cues. July 2012. DOI: 10.1242/jcs.
079509.
[31]
Florence Delie and Werner Rubas. A human colonic cell line sharing similarities with
enterocytes as a model to examine oral absorption: Advantages and limitations of
the Caco­2 model. 1997. DOI: 10.1615/critrevtherdrugcarriersyst.v14.i3.20.
36
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:45==
[32]
Abhinav Sharma et al. “In Vitro Reconstitution of an Intestinal Mucus Layer Shows
That Cations and pH Control the Pore Structure That Regulates Its Permeability and
Barrier Function”. In: ACS Applied Bio Materials 3.5 (May 2020), pp. 2897–2909.
ISSN: 2576­6422. DOI: 10.1021/acsabm.9b00851.
[33]
Thaher Pelaseyed et al. “The mucus and mucins of the goblet cells and entero­
cytes provide the first defense line of the gastrointestinal tract and interact with the
immune system”. In: Immunological Reviews 260.1 (July 2014), pp. 8–20. ISSN:
0105­2896. DOI: 10.1111/imr.12182.
[34]
Tzung­Hai Yen and Nicholas A Wright. “The Gastrointestinal Tract Stem Cell Niche”.
In: Stem Cell Reviews (2006). ISSN: 1558­6804.
[35]
Helmuth Gehart and Hans Clevers. Tales from the crypt: new insights into intestinal
stem cells. Jan. 2019. DOI: 10.1038/s41575-018-0081-y.
[36]
Nick Barker et al. “Identification of stem cells in small intestine and colon by marker
gene Lgr5”. In: Nature 449.7165 (Oct. 2007), pp. 1003–1007. ISSN: 0028­0836.
DOI: 10.1038/nature06196.
[37]
Eric Flores­Hernández et al. “Canonical and non­canonical Wnt signaling are simul­
taneously activated by Wnts in colon cancer cells”. In: Cellular Signalling 72 (Aug.
2020). ISSN: 18733913. DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2020.109636.
[38]
Harvey Lodish, Arnold Berk, and Chris Kaiser. Molecular Cell Biology. 9th ed. New
York: Macmillan Learning, 2021.
[39]
Jurian Schuijers and Hans Clevers. “Adult mammalian stem cells: the role of Wnt,
Lgr5 and R­spondins”. In: The EMBO Journal 31.12 (June 2012), pp. 2685–2696.
ISSN: 02614189. DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.149.
[40]
G Corda and A Sala. “Non­canonical WNT/PCP signalling in cancer: Fzd6 takes
centre stage”. In: Oncogenesis 6.7 (July 2017), e364–e364. ISSN: 2157­9024. DOI:
10.1038/oncsis.2017.69.
[41]
Malvina Koni, Veronica Pinnarò, and Maria Felice Brizzi. The wnt signalling path­
way: A tailored target in cancer. Oct. 2020. DOI: 10.3390/ijms21207697.
[42]
Elise S. Demitrack and Linda C. Samuelson. Notch regulation of gastrointestinal
stem cells. Sept. 2016. DOI: 10.1113/JP271667.
[43]
Silvia Fre et al. “Notch signals control the fate of immature progenitor cells in the
intestine”. In: Nature 435.7044 (June 2005), pp. 964–968. ISSN: 00280836. DOI:
10.1038/nature03589.
[44]
Annika M Sääf et al. “Parallels between Global Transcriptional Programs of Polar­
izing Caco­2 Intestinal Epithelial Cells In Vitro and Gene Expression Programs in
Normal Colon and Colon Cancer □D”. In: Molecular Biology of the Cell 18 (2007),
pp. 4245–4260. DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E07-04. URL: http://www.molbiolcell.org/cgi/
doi/10.1091/mbc.E07-04.
[45]
Eduard Batlle et al. “β­Catenin and TCF Mediate Cell Positioning in the Intestinal Ep­
ithelium by Controlling the Expression of EphB/EphrinB”. In: Cell 111.2 (Oct. 2002),
pp. 251–263. ISSN: 00928674. DOI: 10.1016/S0092-8674(02)01015-2.
[46]
Xi C He et al. “BMP signaling inhibits intestinal stem cell self­renewal through sup­
pression of Wnt–β­catenin signaling”. In: Nature Genetics 36.10 (Oct. 2004), pp. 1117–
1121. ISSN: 1061­4036. DOI: 10.1038/ng1430.
[47]
Hasan Korkaya et al. “Regulation of Mammary Stem/Progenitor Cells by PTEN/Akt/β­
Catenin Signaling”. In: PLoS Biology 7.6 (June 2009), e1000121. ISSN: 1545­7885.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000121.
[48]
Fiona Bangs and Kathryn V. Anderson. “Primary Cilia and Mammalian Hedge­
hog Signaling”. In: Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 9.5 (May 2017),
a028175. ISSN: 1943­0264. DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a028175.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
37
==PAGE:46==
[49]
Sepideh Fallah and Jean￿François Beaulieu. “Differential influence of <scp>YAP1</scp>
and <scp>TAZ</scp> on differentiation of intestinal epithelial cell: A review”. In:
The Anatomical Record 306.5 (May 2023), pp. 1054–1061. ISSN: 1932­8486. DOI:
10.1002/ar.24996.
[50]
Lijuan Wang et al. “Overexpression of YAP and TAZ Is an Independent Predictor
of Prognosis in Colorectal Cancer and Related to the Proliferation and Metastasis
of Colon Cancer Cells”. In: PLoS ONE 8.6 (June 2013), e65539. ISSN: 1932­6203.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065539.
[51]
Y. Sambuy et al. “The Caco­2 cell line as a model of the intestinal barrier: influence
of cell and culture­related factors on Caco­2 cell functional characteristics”. In: Cell
Biology and Toxicology 21.1 (Jan. 2005), pp. 1–26. ISSN: 0742­2091. DOI: 10.1007/
s10565-005-0085-6.
[52]
Tor Lea. “Caco­2 Cell Line”. In: The Impact of Food Bioactives on Health. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 103–111. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 319-
16104-4{\_}10.
[53]
M.J. Engle, G.S. Goetz, and D.H. Alpers. “Caco­2 cells express a combination of
colonocyte and enterocyte phenotypes”. In: Journal of Cellular Physiology 174.3
(Mar. 1998), pp. 362–369. ISSN: 0021­9541. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4652(199803)
174:3<362::AID-JCP10>3.0.CO;2-B.
[54]
Bruno Daniele Leoni et al. “Differentiation of Caco­2 cells requires both transcrip­
tional and post­translational down­regulation of Myc”. In: Differentiation 83.3 (Mar.
2012), pp. 116–127. ISSN: 03014681. DOI: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.10.005.
[55]
Jianyu Li, Zhigang Suo, and Joost J. Vlassak. “Stiff, strong, and tough hydrogels
with good chemical stability”. In: J. Mater. Chem. B 2.39 (2014), pp. 6708–6713.
ISSN: 2050­750X. DOI: 10.1039/C4TB01194E.
[56]
Hyun Jung Kim and Donald E. Ingber. “Gut­on­a­Chip microenvironment induces
human intestinal cells to undergo villus differentiation”. In: Integrative Biology 5.9
(2013), p. 1130. ISSN: 1757­9694. DOI: 10.1039/c3ib40126j.
[57]
Hyun Jung Kim et al. “Human gut­on­a­chip inhabited by microbial flora that expe­
riences intestinal peristalsis­like motions and flow”. In: Lab on a Chip 12.12 (June
2012), pp. 2165–2174. ISSN: 14730189. DOI: 10.1039/c2lc40074j.
[58]
Toshiro Sato et al. “Single Lgr5 stem cells build crypt­villus structures in vitro with­
out a mesenchymal niche”. In: Nature 459.7244 (May 2009), pp. 262–265. ISSN:
00280836. DOI: 10.1038/nature07935.
[59]
Jong Hwan Sung et al. “Microscale 3­D hydrogel scaffold for biomimetic gastroin­
testinal (GI) tract model”. In: Lab Chip 11.3 (2011), pp. 389–392. ISSN: 1473­0197.
DOI: 10.1039/C0LC00273A.
[60]
Woojung Shin and Hyun Jung Kim. 3D in vitro morphogenesis of human intestinal
epithelium in a gut­on­a­chip or a hybrid chip with a cell culture insert. Mar. 2022.
DOI: 10.1038/s41596-021-00674-3.
[61]
Sasan Jalili­Firoozinezhad et al. “A complex human gut microbiome cultured in an
anaerobic intestine­on­a­chip”. In: Nature Biomedical Engineering 3.7 (May 2019),
pp. 520–531. ISSN: 2157­846X. DOI: 10.1038/s41551-019-0397-0.
[62]
Ludivine C. Delon et al. “A systematic investigation of the effect of the fluid shear
stress on Caco­2 cells towards the optimization of epithelial organ­on­chip models”.
In: Biomaterials 225 (Dec. 2019), p. 119521. ISSN: 01429612. DOI: 10.1016/j.
biomaterials.2019.119521.
[63]
Hyeon Beom Chong et al. “Multiplex recreation of human intestinal morphogenesis
on a multi­well insert platform by basolateral convective flow”. In: Lab on a Chip
21.17 (2021), pp. 3316–3327. ISSN: 1473­0197. DOI: 10.1039/D1LC00404B.
38
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:47==
[64]
Zhihong Cheng et al. “Crystal structures of the extracellular domain of LRP6 and its
complex with DKK1”. In: Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 18.11 (Nov. 2011),
pp. 1204–1210. ISSN: 1545­9993. DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2139.
[65]
Oksana Voloshanenko et al. “Wnt secretion is required to maintain high levels of Wnt
activity in colon cancer cells”. In: Nature Communications 4.1 (Oct. 2013), p. 2610.
ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms3610.
[66]
Olga Dakhova et al. “Dickkopf­Like1 Regulates Postpubertal Spermatocyte Apop­
tosis and Testosterone Production”. In: Endocrinology 150.1 (Jan. 2009), pp. 404–
412. ISSN: 0013­7227. DOI: 10.1210/en.2008-0673.
[67]
Venkata Lokesh Battula et al. “Prospective isolation and characterization of mes­
enchymal stem cells from human placenta using a frizzled­9­specific monoclonal
antibody”. In: Differentiation 76.4 (Apr. 2008), pp. 326–336. ISSN: 03014681. DOI:
10.1111/j.1432-0436.2007.00225.x.
[68]
Hynda K. Kleinman et al. “Isolation and characterization of type IV procollagen,
laminin, and heparan sulfate proteoglycan from the EHS sarcoma”. In: Biochemistry
21.24 (Nov. 1982), pp. 6188–6193. ISSN: 0006­2960. DOI: 10.1021/bi00267a025.
[69]
Chris S. Hughes, Lynne M. Postovit, and Gilles A. Lajoie. “Matrigel: A complex pro­
tein mixture required for optimal growth of cell culture”. In: PROTEOMICS 10.9 (May
2010), pp. 1886–1890. ISSN: 16159853. DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200900758.
[70]
Asli Aybike Dogan and Martin Dufva. “Customized 3D­printed stackable cell culture
inserts tailored with bioactive membranes”. In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (Mar. 2022),
p. 3694. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-07739-7.
[71]
Natalia Davidenko et al. “Evaluation of cell binding to collagen and gelatin: a study of
the effect of 2D and 3D architecture and surface chemistry”. In: Journal of Materials
Science: Materials in Medicine 27.10 (Oct. 2016), p. 148. ISSN: 0957­4530. DOI:
10.1007/s10856-016-5763-9.
[72]
Bo Cheng et al. “Predicting YAP/TAZ nuclear translocation in response to ECM
mechanosensing”. In: Biophysical Journal 122.1 (Jan. 2023), pp. 43–53. ISSN:
00063495. DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2022.11.2943.
[73]
Hyun Jung Kim et al. “Co­culture of Living Microbiome with Microengineered Hu­
man Intestinal Villi in a Gut­on­a­Chip Microfluidic Device”. In: Journal of Visualized
Experiments 114 (Aug. 2016). ISSN: 1940­087X. DOI: 10.3791/54344.
[74]
Ludivine C. Delon et al. “Unlocking the Potential of Organ￿on￿Chip Models through
Pumpless and Tubeless Microfluidics”. In: Advanced Healthcare Materials 9.11 (June
2020). ISSN: 2192­2640. DOI: 10.1002/adhm.201901784.
[75]
Mathias Busek et al. “Academic User View: Organ­on­a­Chip Technology”. In: Biosen­
sors 12.2 (Feb. 2022), p. 126. ISSN: 2079­6374. DOI: 10.3390/bios12020126.
[76]
Sebastiaan J. Trietsch et al. “Membrane­free culture and real­time barrier integrity
assessment of perfused intestinal epithelium tubes”. In: Nature Communications
8.1 (Aug. 2017), p. 262. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00259-3.
[77]
Christina M. Warboys, Mean Ghim, and Peter D. Weinberg. “Understanding mechanobi­
ology in cultured endothelium: A review of the orbital shaker method”. In: Atheroscle­
rosis 285 (June 2019), pp. 170–177. ISSN: 00219150. DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.
2019.04.210.
[78]
Alan Dardik et al. “Differential effects of orbital and laminar shear stress on endothe­
lial cells”. In: Journal of Vascular Surgery 41.5 (May 2005), pp. 869–880. ISSN:
07415214. DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2005.01.020.
[79]
Hannah.B. Musgrove, Megan.A. Catterton, and Rebecca.R. Pompano. “Applied tu­
torial for the design and fabrication of biomicrofluidic devices by resin 3D printing”.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
39
==PAGE:48==
In: Analytica Chimica Acta 1209 (May 2022), p. 339842. ISSN: 00032670. DOI:
10.1016/j.aca.2022.339842.
[80]
Hua Gong et al. “Custom 3D printer and resin for 18 µm × 20 µm microfluidic flow
channels”. In: Lab on a Chip 17.17 (2017), pp. 2899–2909. ISSN: 1473­0197. DOI:
10.1039/C7LC00644F.
[81]
Yunhao Wang et al. “Nanopore sequencing technology, bioinformatics and appli­
cations”. In: Nature Biotechnology 39.11 (Nov. 2021), pp. 1348–1365. ISSN: 1087­
0156. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-021-01108-x.
[82]
K Ley et al. “Shear­dependent inhibition of granulocyte adhesion to cultured en­
dothelium by dextran sulfate”. In: Blood 73.5 (Apr. 1989), pp. 1324–1330. ISSN:
0006­4971. DOI: 10.1182/blood.V73.5.1324.1324.
[83]
Larry W. Kraiss et al. “Fluid flow activates a regulator of translation, p70/p85 S6
kinase, in human endothelial cells”. In: American Journal of Physiology­Heart and
Circulatory Physiology 278.5 (May 2000), H1537–H1544. ISSN: 0363­6135. DOI:
10.1152/ajpheart.2000.278.5.H1537.
[84]
Bahman Zohuri. Thermal­Hydraulic Analysis of Nuclear Reactors. 2nd ed. Albu­
querque: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 160–161. ISBN: 978­3­319­
53828­0. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-53829-7.
[85]
Chak Ming Leung et al. “A guide to the organ­on­a­chip”. In: Nature Reviews Meth­
ods Primers 2.1 (May 2022), p. 33. ISSN: 2662­8449. DOI: 10.1038/s43586-022-
00118-6.
[86]
Denise Marrero et al. “Gut­on­a­chip: Mimicking and monitoring the human intes­
tine”. In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics 181 (June 2021), p. 113156. ISSN: 09565663.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2021.113156.
[87]
Kornphimol Kulthong et al. “Transcriptome comparisons of in vitro intestinal epithe­
lia grown under static and microfluidic gut­on­chip conditions with in vivo human
epithelia”. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (Feb. 2021), p. 3234. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI:
10.1038/s41598-021-82853-6.
[88]
Chiara A. M. Fois et al. “Dynamic flow and shear stress as key parameters for intesti­
nal cells morphology and polarization in an organ­on­a­chip model”. In: Biomedical
Microdevices 23.4 (Dec. 2021), p. 55. ISSN: 1387­2176. DOI: 10.1007/s10544-021-
00591-y.
[89]
Dana Julia Neumann. Caco­2 cells show altered gene expression after culture for
multiple passaging cycles under flow.
[90]
Nicolas A. Perez­Gonzalez et al. “YAP and TAZ regulate cell volume”. In: Journal of
Cell Biology 218.10 (Oct. 2019), pp. 3472–3488. ISSN: 0021­9525. DOI: 10.1083/
jcb.201902067.
[91]
Linhua Jiang et al. “YAP promotes the proliferation and migration of colorectal can­
cer cells through the Glut3/AMPK signaling pathway”. In: Oncology Letters 21.4
(Feb. 2021), p. 312. ISSN: 1792­1074. DOI: 10.3892/ol.2021.12573.
[92]
Y. F. Lim et al. “Flow and mixing by small intestine villi”. In: Food & Function 6.6
(2015), pp. 1787–1795. ISSN: 2042­6496. DOI: 10.1039/C5FO00285K.
[93]
R. G. Lentle and P. W. M. Janssen. “Physical characteristics of digesta and their
influence on flow and mixing in the mammalian intestine: a review”. In: Journal of
Comparative Physiology B 178.6 (Aug. 2008), pp. 673–690. ISSN: 0174­1578. DOI:
10.1007/s00360-008-0264-x.
[94]
A Gledhill and F M Cole. “Significance of basement membrane thickening in the
human colon.” In: Gut 25.10 (Oct. 1984), pp. 1085–1088. ISSN: 0017­5749. DOI:
10.1136/gut.25.10.1085.
40
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:49==
A
Appendix
A.1
Figures
A.1.1
Figure A1
Figure A.1: Measuring barrier height using Fluorescent imaging. Left: Fluorescent beads
embedded in membrane as they first come into focus. Right: Fluorescent beads in the
same gel as they leave focus. The barrier height is measured as the difference in Z­value
between these Z­slices. Images captured using LD Plan­NEOFLUAR 40×/0.6 Korr M27;
Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 epifluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH)
A.1.2
Figure A2
Figure A.2: Brightfield images (4×) of broken membranes. A: A membrane that has been
dislodged from its original position. B: A membrane that has been punctured. These are
the two most prevalent damages seen on the membranes. Both images were taken upon
confluency. Scale bar represents 300µm.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
41
==PAGE:50==
A.1.3
Figure A3
Figure A.3: Composite fluorescence images using 3×3 images of 10× magnification
showing ZO­1 expression. 3 replicates (horizontal) of 4 different groups (vertical). Low
signal/noise ratio in some images means that a signifant part of the image has been re­
moved in order to highlight what little signal is present.
42
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:51==
A.2
Tables
A.2.1
Table A1
Table A.1: Complete data from autofluorescence experiment. BioMed Black is labeled
as ”black” and BioMed Clear is labeled as ”Clear”. Values indicate mean fluorescence
intensity.
Black
Clear
73
342
75
377
74
354
A.2.2
Table A2
Table A.2: Complete data from membrane thickness experiment.
All data is in µm
Edge
Middle
100
109
126
63
156
69
55
134
173
65
152
60
150
23
56
42
214
202
240
200
145
208
204
278
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
43
==PAGE:52==
A.2.3
Table A3
Table A.3: Calculated Reynold’s numbers at different RPM and tilt (°) settings. A DH
of 4.235mm was used. Cells with a grey background did not show constant flow speed
(either particles exhibited a jagged movement or they did not stay in their lane), while cells
with a white background did. Light­grey cell coloration indicates that the flow speed was
very close to being constant. The grey Re values can therefore not be assumed to be
accurate. For some settings, the camera was unable to capture the particles for a long
enough duration to measure the flow speed, and these have not been estimated (NE). For
the highest rotational speed, Re was calculated based on an assumed linear relationship
between flow speed and rpm for constant tilt. These values are given in cursive, but it is
not known if these particles exhibited even flow.
Reynold’s number
RPM
15
20
25
30
5
0.43
0.86
0.86
1.73
7
0.86
1.38
1.21
2.59
10
2.07
4.32
3.46
NE
13
3.80
5.19
6.05
12.08±0.38
15
4.50
7.61
8.64
18.42±1.38
17
4.84
6.05
8.64
17.20±0.92
19
NE
6.92
9.51
NE
Tilt
44
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
==PAGE:53==
S
Supporting information
S.1
Videos
Because only a select few PDF readers support embedded video, videos have instead
been included as supporting information that should be available in handin. If not, then
feel free to contact s183494@student.dk and I will supply them.
S.1.1
Video S1
Video S1: Render of insert in 12­well plate that moves on a simulated 3D rocker. Inserts
are grey, plate is white and media is purple. Media does not have fluid physics. Video is
only supposed to give an idea of what the experimental setup looks like, and cannot be
used to estimate any physical parameters. Rendered in blender 4.0
S.1.2
Video S2
Video S2: Flow speed experiment using equal volume and rotatory settings used in cell
culture experiment. The liquid volume is too large and hinders the flow. This can be seen
from the particles moving back and forth in the water column without ever performing an
entire lap. Particles that settle on the bottom barely move at all.
S.1.3
Video S3
Video S3: Flow speed experiment using bottom­lit 12­well plate, 300µL liquid, 15rpm and
13 degrees tilt. Particles can be seen moving around in the entire insert. Shear stress
was calculated to be 0.298dyn · cm−2. Large objects that move in the opposite direction
of flow speed are bubbles.
Characterisation of a high­throughput flow device for intestinal modelling
45
