==PAGE:1==
Network Dynamics and Graph­Based Mobility
Analysis in Copenhagen’s Multimodal Transport
MSc Thesis
DTU Management, Transportation Science
==PAGE:2==
Network Dynamics and Graph­Based Mobility Analysis in Copenhagen’s Multimodal Trans­
port
MSc Thesis
April, 2024
By
Ion Cararus
Mihai Nipomici
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This project has been conducted over the period of six months at the Technical University of Den­
mark, DTU, in fulfillment for the degree in Masters of Science in Engineering. The project fol­
lowed the requirements for getting an MSc. in Engineering diploma. The work done was equiva­
lent to 32.2 ECTS each from September 25, 2023, until April 1, 2024.
The topic of this project was defined by us after a few recurring meetings with our supervisor
Filipe Rodriguez, having the goal of investigating the multimodality of the transportation system in
Copenhagen by employing a data­driven approach to uncoverer accessibility and mobility patterns
using traditional methods as well as Graph networks.
Our motivation was driven by urban transportation’s crucial role in daily commutes and the broader
implications for city living. We aim to critically evaluate and suggest improvements for Copen­
hagen’s transportation infrastructure knowing that millions of residents rely on a city’s multimodal
transportation network for efficient movement. Our findings and suggestions are intended to con­
tribute to the broader discussion on making urban mobility more efficient, inclusive, and sus­
tainable, providing a roadmap for future enhancements to benefit both residents and visitors of
Copenhagen.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the area of statistics, machine learning, and
graph theory.
Ion Cararus ­ s213209
Signature
Date
Mihai Nipomici ­ s184432
Signature
Date
ii
01/04/2024
01/04/2024
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Over half of the global population lives in cities, which play a pivotal role in human movement,
making them a very complex mobility network spanning from pedestrian walkways and bike lanes
to complex highways, metro and railway systems. The integration of diverse transport modes
serves as a foundation for urban mobility and is essential to ensure the smooth and fast circulation
of people, dynamically adjusting and keeping city life active at all times. To keep this movement
active and dynamic, urban planners and policymakers should be supported by data­driven analyses.
This master’s thesis provides this necessary support by carrying out an in­depth analysis of Copen­
hagen’s multimodal transport system, namely of bike and car­sharing rides alongside public trans­
port itinerary equivalent for each trip. We are applying a wide range of traditional data science
tools as well as Graph Theory to discover patterns in urban mobility.
To learn more about the underlying pattern of the data, we implement various statistical and visu­
alization techniques explained in the exploratory data analysis part. It also helps us to set further
research direction. Our Graph­based analysis transforms individual trips into a network of zones
(nodes) connected by trips (edges), making it possible to visualize and quantify actual routes and
infer their directionality, gaining a holistic view of passenger flow in Copenhagen. By applying
metrics such as centrality measures, we identify key nodes such as major transport hubs which are
critical for the traffic flow and the network’s efficiency. This way we can study the structure and
dynamics of transportation systems of various sizes and connectivities, which make graph analysis
very robust and efficient.
After diligent research, we discovered key patterns in car and bike usage. Frequent cyclists, are
faster but also cover more distance than their counterparts indicating their propensity towards the
efficiency and flexibility of a bicycle. Despite traffic peaks, cars are considerably faster than public
transport, whereas bikes compete on short distances and lose in the long run. The graph analysis
uncovered that the bike­sharing network is mostly condensed in the city center and residential areas
around it whereas the car­sharing one still dense in the center is also spread wider including zones
like Kastrup Airport and the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) campus as two of the busiest
hubs. We provide a detailed examination of the roles that various zones, ranging from central areas
to peripheral neighborhoods play in facilitating urban flow. We try to understand the implication of
bicycles in the first and last­mile part of the whole trip. Comparison to public transport itineraries
demonstrates its great efficiency in the center and zones with direct access to S­train and Metro
stations. At the same time, we unearthed its vulnerabilities which concern the zones without direct
access to those stations. Some of the centrally located zones are the entire Sydhavn, Islands Brygge,
and all zones east of Christianshavn. Granular route investigation with graph analysis reveals that
the majority of the most preferred and efficient routes point to the need for changes in public
transport, highlighting the directness and flexibility of shared mobility services.
Finally, our data­driven research strongly supports the expansion of the M4 metro line and the
construction of the proposed M5 line, emphasizing these developments as key to improving city­
wide access and transportation efficiency. We also pinpoint limitations and suggest further research
avenues.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis was conducted under the supervision of Filipe Rodriguez from Intelligent Transporta­
tion Systems at the Department of Technology, Management, and Economics Transportation Sci­
ence, DTU. We want to deeply thank him for his help and support whenever we needed it.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Free Floating Shared Services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Public Transport Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Graph­Based Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theoretical Background
6
3.1
Basics of Graph Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Application Programming Interface (API) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Statistical Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Tests for Normality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Pairwise Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.7
Evaluation Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Exploratory and Confirmatory Data Analysis
19
4.1
Share Now
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
GreenMobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Donkey Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
EDA key takeaways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Feature Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
36
5.1
Spacial Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Graph Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Discussion
65
6.1
Limitations and Mitigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.2
Suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
Conclusion
68
References
70
A Appendix
74
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The city, a complex system, presents a rich field for scholarly inquiry from varied disciplines, as
highlighted by Michael Batty in The New Science of Cities [1]. This interdisciplinarity transcends
mere tool and method borrowing, inviting a multifaceted exploration of urban phenomena. Such
an approach reveals the city’s true complexity, emphasizing the critical interplay of its components
rather than viewing them in isolation. Recognizing cities as more than their individual elements,
the interaction among these components unveils the essence of urban life. In our increasingly ur­
banized world, understanding these dynamics is key to designing cities that are not only functional
but also conducive to human well­being. Castells’ concept of the ”space of flows” [2] encapsu­
lates this evolving urban landscape, highlighting the importance of capturing the dynamics and
interconnections within cities.
Applying complex systems theory to urban studies has opened new avenues for research, from the
fractal analysis of urban areas [3] to investigations into urban spatial organization and evolution
[4]. Viewing cities through the lens of networks offers a powerful framework for analyzing urban
structures and dynamics. This approach models cities as networks of interconnected components,
such as intersections and streets, allowing for the replication of urban structures in a planar network
[5] or through space syntax theory, which, despite its insights into spatial relations, has limitations
in capturing cities’ morphological characteristics [6].
This thesis adopts a novel approach to studying urban transportation networks by employing the
primal network representation. Here, Copenhagen’s diverse urban zones, such as Nørreport, Tivoli,
Central Station, and the airport, are conceptualized as nodes, meanwhile, the trips facilitated by
shared mobility services like ShareNow, Green Mobility, and Donkey Republic, as well as public
transport journeys alternative for each of the subsequent trips, serve as the connecting edges. This
framing allows for a comprehensive analysis and comparison of urban mobility across various
layers, by fusing each mode’s strengths to offer insights into the interconnected nature of the city’s
transport infrastructure.
Leveraging extensive datasets from shared mobility providers and public transportation, the thesis
embarks on a meticulous data­cleaning process, exploratory and confirmatory data analysis (EDA­
CDA), and pattern identification within the mobility ecosystem of Copenhagen. The employment
of network science principles facilitates a deeper understanding of the city’s transportation dynam­
ics, emphasizing the significance of topological properties, centrality metrics, and growth pro­
cesses within this context [7, 8, 9, 10]. This research also examines the accessibility, mobility,
urban vitality, and resilience of transportation networks. [11, 12, 13].
Lastly, this research will enhance the understanding of multimodal transportation networks in
Copenhagen, address critical aspects of multimodal transport infrastructure characterization, and
leverage large­scale data for revealing urban mobility and development patterns. The results from
this research will further facilitate towards tackling the challenges associated with multimodal
transportation planning, such as coordination among various transport modes, and extension of the
current network. [14]. The data­driven conclusions and results are designed to spot improvements
in urban infrastructure for all means of transportation and assess livability conditions, thereby pro­
viding valuable resources for researchers, urban planners, and policymakers [15, 16].
The milestones of the project are to:
1. Meticulously clean and explore the data through traditional tools and statistical analysis
1
==PAGE:8==
2. Extract the equivalent public transport journey for each trip within the dataset provided, and
conduct a comparative analysis of these alongside the original data
3. Conduct an in­depth graph analysis to uncover underlying patterns in general mobility within
Copenhagen
The report is categorized as follows. In Section 2 we deliver ideas we were inspired by. Section
3 introduces the reader to the fundamental concepts of Graph theory, statistical analysis, and other
relevant essentials to comprehend the theory behind this thesis. In Section 4 we explore explain
and test our data in detail. In Section 5 we convey all of our findings concerning mobility patterns
in Copenhagen. Section 5 is intended to discuss our findings and future work.
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Related Work
This literature review explores the integration of shared mobility into urban transport systems,
focusing on the impact of bike­sharing and car­sharing services on city­wide mobility patterns.
It covers advancements in data analysis methodologies applied to urban transport studies, with a
special emphasis on graph theory and its application in understanding complex mobility networks.
2.1
Free Floating Shared Services
Studies suggest a positive environmental and societal effect after exploring the impact of car shar­
ing on urban mobility. Car sharing addresses parking and congestion issues and contributes to
reducing the number of private vehicles, thus mitigating air pollution[17]. With personal vehicles
being unused most of the time, sharing increases their utilization, leading to a decline in car pro­
duction and benefits the environment[18]. Research indicates that each shared vehicle can replace
multiple privately owned cars, highlighting car sharing’s role in complementing public transport
by providing flexibility and equal comfort[19].
Numerous papers address the topic of such services in different regions and contexts. 137 papers
about car­sharing services have been organized and classified and only 19% of them cover the
topic of free­floating car sharing ­ the type of service where the user picks up an available car from
the designated area and drops it off elsewhere (where it is allowed by the car company) [20]. The
same authors mention that most of the papers address user behavior, business optimization, and
demand analysis.
Giordano et al. analyze the case of Car2Go, a free­floating car­sharing service that is present in
Europe, across multiple cities [21]. They analyze the data collected over 14 months both from a
temporal and spatial perspective. Spatial analysis reveals that from city to city the rental depar­
tures might be concentrated in one area or oppositely concentrated around a location. The authors
investigate the hourly, weekly, and monthly patterns of usage for each of the selected 23 cities.
Multiple variables distributions are investigated. They find high deviations from the mean in the
peak hours during working days and they argue that the service is mostly used for commuting.
This outcome contradicts the findings on user groups and usage patterns for a similar service in
Switzerland, where 45% of the people would ride for shopping or leisure, while only a few percent
would use it for commuting. [22].
Other articles compare car sharing with bike sharing, a service that operates similarly for bike
rentals. Users of both services were surveyed to reveal their travel behaviors and overall profiles.
Along with the data from service providers, differences in age, frequency, and socioeconomic
profiles of the members of the two groups have been found [23]. This goes in line with the article
by Picasso et al. [24] who studied the preference of young people for bike­sharing with respect to
car­sharing. Other studies show that in large cities people use bike­sharing for commuting during
morning peak hours [25], which resembles the car­sharing pattern. Moreover, research conducted
in Turin, Italy, argues that there is a strong complementarity between the two services [26].
However, some papers provide strong evidence in favor of car­sharing services as a means of
commuting. Furthermore, it is not only argued that alternative ways of transportation alleviate the
burden of owning a car[27], but also these new options complement the public transportation[28].
From another standpoint, there are articles suggesting that bike­sharing is associated not only with
a decline in driving but also with diminished train and bus usage[29].
3
==PAGE:10==
2.2
Public Transport Comparison
The research on the preferences of public transport users is limited. A study on the Copenhagen
Greater Area public transport choice model shows that travelers prefer trains over buses. It is
also argued that transfer locations and parking availability, both for cars and bikes, are relevant
for users. The authors suggest integrating data from GPS systems to assess network attributes for
future work [30].
Yigitcanlar, Sipe, Evans, and Pitot employ a Geographic Information System (GIS) to model the
accessibility index for land use and public transportation [31]. They implement color­coding that
visually ranges the accessibility levels. The authors analyze both public transport travel time and
walking distance time. They outline the model methodology and its utility demonstrating the po­
tential use cases for it. The article highlights the relevance of such models in reflecting the patterns
in urban areas transportation.
Scheurer investigates Copenhagen’s public transport accessibility strengths and weaknesses. The
author focuses on spatial analysis of accessibility and finds that 75% of the residents have access to
bus, train, or metro stations within walking distance proximity [32]. Other accessibility indicators
are analyzed. Particularly, closeness centrality, a measure that averages the values of the time taken
to commute from one node to another, positions Copenhagen in fifth place in an eleven European
cities rating of accessibility. The network density index puts Copenhagen’s public transport system
in a better light showing that on average less than 1 transfer is needed to reach any destination within
the covered area. The same paper sheds light on the network coverage indicator that measures
the proportion of the population residing in a defined proximity to a public transport station. It
is worth mentioning that the article sets different proximity thresholds for buses and trains, but
without stating the underlying definition algorithm.
2.3
Graph­Based Analysis
Using Graph Theory is a very robust way to analyze and paint a realistic picture of mobility flows.
This paper by Martínez Márquez and Patanè[33] explores urban mobility through graph­based
models, constructing and analyzing Region Adjacency and Origin­Destination graphs. They apply
centrality metrics such as closeness, betweenness, and PageRank to identify critical nodes within
urban mobility networks. They also introduce the Perron vector to analyze mobility networks’
structure. In the paper, they discuss that visually representing traffic flows can be useful to local­
ize and determine traffic patterns or zones with the highest or lowest traffic values. Apart from
visualizations, the node centrality metrics offer additional analytical tools for examining the net­
work’s structure. For example, closeness centrality can be employed to identify stations that have
the best connection to the entire network when it comes to minimizing a certain parameter, be it the
total distance or travel time for instance. The betweenness centrality can measure how vulnerable a
particular node is to disruptions in traffic[34, 35]. To assess the dynamic mobility flow, PageRank
can be used to find which roads or stations are the most popular. By analyzing these centralities
within Region Adjacency and Origin­Destination graphs, they can identify which regions are key
for maintaining efficient movement across the city, providing insights into network vulnerability
and optimization opportunities.
In their study, Tian et al.[36] develop a road traffic­weighted network model that integrates road
lengths and capacities, offering a framework for analyzing urban road traffic with the help of graph
theory. As they say, edge weighting adds more realism to the modeling of transportation networks
by capturing the static characteristics of roads, such as lengths, capacities, and speed limits. Unlike
dynamic edge weighting, this approach provides a picture of the network’s fundamental features
and capacity, allowing for a more detailed understanding of its operational dynamics[36, 37].
Subsequently, the research emphasizes the importance of static weights in route planning and traffic
4
==PAGE:11==
forecasting, including real­world restrictions and conditions in the network model[38]. With the
application of centrality metrics to weighted graphs, the framework identifies crucial infrastructure
components for maintaining network connectivity and efficiency[34, 35].
Graph­based metrics such as density, average clustering, local and global efficiency, and the prop­
erty of being strongly connected are pivotal in analyzing the robustness and efficiency of trans­
portation networks. According to Newman [39] density is important in understanding the intercon­
nectedness within a network, with a denser graph indicating a potentially more robust and efficient
system. This is also reflected in the work of Barthelemy [7], who highlights that higher density
may lead to reduced travel times because of the possibility of taking multiple pathways. Watts
and Strogatz’s [40] introduce the average clustering coefficient which provides insights into the
network’s redundancy and resilience, suggesting that a network with higher clustering is better at
handling disruptions. Latora and Marchiori [41] discuss local and global efficiency as measures of
a network’s resilience and overall information exchange capacity, respectively, indicating a well­
functioning system even when facing localized disruptions. Newman’s [39] further discussion on
strongly connected components accentuates the need to provide extensive network coverage, en­
suring no part of the system is isolated, making it possible to reach a location from anywhere. Fur­
thermore, the average shortest path length, both weighted and unweighted, is an important indicator
of a network’s navigability and efficiency, providing information about the practical performance
and structural properties of the system.
The Louvain method for community detection is an important component in the analysis of com­
plex networks, offering a powerful tool for identifying naturally occurring groups or communities
within various types of networks, including transportation systems. According to Adam, Delvenne,
and Thomas[42], the multi­scale Louvain approach improves this process by adjusting to various
resolutions, demonstrating robust results in identifying community structures in complex urban
networks like Brussels. This approach not only identifies communities within a given network but
also assesses the quality of these communities in terms of the internal density of connections versus
external links. The results from the aforementioned paper underscore the method’s capability to
detect meaningful communities across different scales, offering a nuanced view of urban mobility.
Considering the above­listed studies one can outline that there is research covering the demand
and usage patterns for a single means of transportation. On the other hand, articles present the
pairwise comparison between one and another. The methodology varies from online surveys of
the customers to augmented data provided by service providers. It is worth mentioning that spatial
and temporal analysis have been identified to have an important weight in the selected references.
The literature review presented in this chapter and the current ongoing research within the area
of transportation networks serve as a foundation and starting point for our analysis in this thesis.
Based on the suggestions for future work of these articles, there emerges the need to come up with
a comprehensive, integrated, and unified research approach that would cover all transportation
means (to the extent of available data) using combined methodologies in order to analyze network
and mobility patterns from different perspectives.
5
==PAGE:12==
3
Theoretical Background
As a first step before diving into the multimodality analysis of Copehnagen’s shared transporta­
tion system, we will shortly lay down the necessary fundamentals of graph theory essential for
understanding the analysis conducted in this thesis, focusing on its application to multimodal trans­
portation networks. For a very deep understanding of all theoretical graph concepts, we advise the
reader to refer to the powerful book ”Graph Representation Learning” by William L. Hamilton
[43]. Furthermore, for a practical exploration of graph concepts in action, we recommend referring
to the next great book ”Hands­On Graph Neural Networks Using Python” by Maxime Labonne
[44] for comprehensive examples and implementations. We will also introduce the theory behind
other relevant tools we use during our research.
3.1
Basics of Graph Theory
Graphs are everywhere, acting as a key language for describing the complexity of various systems
we encounter. Essentially, a graph is a collection of points, or nodes, with lines, or edges, con­
necting them to depict relationships. In the field of biology, nodes could represent proteins, with
edges showing the different ways these proteins interact, like kinetic interactions.
What makes graphs so useful is their focus on how things are connected rather than on the things
themselves, coupled with their broad applicability. This same idea of graphs is applied across
different areas, be it social networks, the way drugs interact with proteins, how atoms bond in
molecules, or the links in a telecommunications network, to name just a few.
But graphs aren’t just a theoretical concept. They form a solid mathematical base that helps us dive
deep into, understand, and draw insights from the complex systems we see in the real world. Over
the last few decades, there’s been a surge in the amount of graph­structured data available, thanks to
huge social networks, scientific projects to map out interaction networks, databases of molecular
structures, and the interconnected world of web devices. This wealth of graph data opens up a
lot of doors for research, especially when we look at transportation systems. In such graphs, the
nodes could be bus stops or train stations, and the edges would represent the routes that connect
these stops or stations. This setup helps us better understand how transportation networks operate,
from the flow of traffic to how well different parts of the network connect. The real task is in
leveraging this data to its full potential, to improve how we understand and manage these complex
transportation systems.
3.1.1
Basic Definitions
A graph G is formally defined as an ordered pair (V, E), where V represents a set of vertices and
E a set of edges, with each edge being a tuple (v, w) indicating a connection between vertices v
and w that are elements of V . To effectively represent this structure, one commonly used method
is through an adjacency matrix A ∈R|V |×|V |.
In constructing an adjacency matrix, we first assign an order to the nodes in the graph, allowing
each node to correspond to a specific row and column within the matrix. The presence or absence of
an edge between any two nodes u and v is then indicated by the entries of this matrix: A[u, v] = 1
if the edge (u, v) belongs to the set of edges E, and A[u, v] = 0 if there is no direct connection
between u and v.
For graphs characterized by undirected edges, the adjacency matrix A is symmetrical, meaning
that A[u, v] = A[v, u] for all u, v ∈V . This symmetry arises because an undirected edge implies
a bidirectional relationship between nodes. Conversely, in directed graphs where the direction
6
==PAGE:13==
of an edge is significant, the adjacency matrix does not inherently possess this symmetry, as the
relationship between nodes u and v may not be reciprocal.
Moreover, graphs can incorporate weighted edges, extending the binary representation in the ad­
jacency matrix to include arbitrary real values. These weights can signify various attributes of the
connections, such as the strength or capacity of the link between nodes. For instance, in a graph
representing a city’s public transportation system, the weight associated with an edge could reflect
the frequency of service or travel time between two stations, thereby adding more features to the
network’s functionality beyond simple connectivity.
A[u, v] =
(
weight(u, v)
if (u, v) ∈E
0
otherwise
(3.1)
This equation showcases how weighted graphs generalize the concept of adjacency matrices, al­
lowing for a richer representation of graph­based data.[45]
Vertices
The vertices or nodes of a graph represent entities within the network, such as intersections in a
transportation system or stations in a subway network.
Edges
Edges or links represent the connections between the vertices. In the context of transportation, an
edge could represent a road between two intersections or a subway line connecting two stations.
3.1.2
Types of Graphs
Directed vs. Undirected Graphs
In an undirected graph, edges have no direction, implying a bidirectional relationship between
nodes. In a directed graph (or digraph), edges have a direction, representing a one­way relationship.
This distinction is crucial in transportation networks, where some paths may be one­way (directed)
and others two­way (undirected). [46] Figure 5.12 depicts the graphical representation of both
directed and undirected graphs.
(a) Undirected graph with three vertices and three
edges
(b) Directed graph with three vertices and four
edges(double arrow counts for two)
Figure 3.1: Basic representations of graphs.[47]
Weighted Graphs
7
==PAGE:14==
In a weighted graph, edges are assigned a weight, W = {wij} often used to represent a quantity
such as distance, time, or cost associated with the connection between nodes. This concept is
particularly relevant for analyzing transportation networks, where weights can represent travel
time or distance between nodes:
wij = 1/dij
or
wij = 1/tij,
(3.2)
where dij and tij denote distance and time, respectively. [46]
Multilayer Graphs
A multilayer graph consists of multiple layers of graphs, where each layer represents a different
type of relationship or interaction. In the context of multimodal transportation, different layers can
represent different modes of transportation, such as bus, bike, and pedestrian paths, allowing for a
comprehensive analysis of the network. [48]
3.1.3
Graph Metrics and Properties
Node Degree
The degree of a vertex, often represented as du for a given node u within the set of vertices V ,
quantifies the number of edges incident to a node. This can be mathematically represented as:
du =
X
v∈V
A[u, v]
(3.3)
where A[u, v] is the adjacency matrix entry that represents the edge between nodes u and v. The
degree du effectively counts how many connections or relationships a particular node has within
the graph, serving as a fundamental and insightful statistic in the analysis of network structures.
In the context of directed graphs, the notion of degree bifurcates into two distinct categories: the
indegree (din
u ), which counts the number of incoming edges to a node, and the outdegree (dout
u ),
which counts the number of outgoing edges from a node. These can be represented as follows:
din
u =
X
v∈V
A[v, u]
and
dout
u
=
X
v∈V
A[u, v]
(3.4)
For weighted graphs, the degree concept extends to account for the sum of edge weights incident
to a node, providing a more nuanced measure of connectivity that reflects the intensity or capacity
of connections in addition to their mere presence.
The degree concept helps in identifying key nodes in the network, such as major transportation
hubs. [49]
Path and Cycle
A path in a graph is a sequence of vertices where each adjacent pair is connected by an edge. A
cycle is a path that starts and ends at the same vertex, with no other repetitions. Understanding
paths and cycles is essential for route planning and detecting potential bottlenecks in transportation
networks. [45]
Graph density
Graph density is a crucial metric in network analysis because it provides insight into how densely
connected a graph is. It is defined as the ratio of the number of edges (m) in the graph to the
maximum possible number of edges among nodes. For undirected graphs, the density (D) is
calculated as:
8
==PAGE:15==
D =
2m
n(n −1)
(3.5)
where n is the number of nodes. In directed graphs, the formula is:
D =
m
n(n −1)
(3.6)
reflecting the directionality of connections. A graph’s density ranges from 0, indicating no edges,
to 1, indicating a complete graph where every possible pair of nodes is connected. Notably, graphs
with self­loops or multigraphs can have a density exceeding 1 due to the additional edges counted.
This measure is vital for assessing the connectivity and potential efficiency of networks, including
transportation systems, where a higher density might indicate more robust and accessible connec­
tions.
Connectivity
A graph is said to be connected if there is a path between every pair of vertices. In a directed graph,
strong connectivity requires a path in each direction between every pair of nodes. Connectivity
analysis is vital for assessing the robustness and efficiency of transportation networks. [46]
Efficiency
Global efficiency measures the network’s overall efficiency in transmitting information or navigat­
ing between all pairs of nodes. It is calculated as the average inverse shortest path distance between
all node pairs, providing insight into the network’s capacity for swift and direct communication
across its entirety [41].
Local efficiency, on the other hand, focuses on the network’s resilience to node failures by assessing
how well each node’s neighbors communicate with each other when that node is removed. This is
achieved by calculating the global efficiency of the subgraph induced by each node’s neighbors,
thereby evaluating the network’s redundancy at a local level[41].
The distinction between local and global efficiency is pivotal. While global efficiency highlights
the network’s overall connectivity and speed of information flow, local efficiency offers insights
into the network’s robustness and its ability to maintain functionality despite disruptions.
3.1.4
Centrality Measures
Centrality metrics, such as degree centrality, closeness centrality, betweenness centrality, and
eigenvector centrality, quantify the importance of nodes within a network. These metrics are in­
strumental in identifying critical nodes in transportation networks, such as major transit hubs or
critical intersections. [46]
Degree Centrality
Degree centrality is a fundamental measure in graph theory that quantifies the importance or in­
fluence of a vertex within a network. The degree centrality of a vertex is based on the number
of connections it has to other vertices. For an undirected graph, this is simply the number of
edges incident to the vertex. In the context of directed graphs, degree centrality can be divided
into in­degree centrality (the number of incoming edges) and out­degree centrality (the number of
outgoing edges).
For an undirected graph, the degree centrality (CD(v)) of a vertex v can be defined as:
CD(v) = deg(v)
N −1
(3.7)
9
==PAGE:16==
where deg(v) is the degree of vertex v, and N is the total number of vertices in the graph. The
denominator (N −1) normalizes the degree centrality, allowing for comparison across different­
sized networks by limiting the centrality value between 0 and 1.
In directed graphs, the in­degree and out­degree centralities are calculated separately but follow a
similar normalization:
CDin(v) = degin(v)
N −1
and
CDout(v) = degout(v)
N −1
(3.8)
where degin(v) and degout(v) are the in­degree and out­degree of vertex v, respectively.
Degree centrality is a straightforward yet powerful measure of the immediate influence of a node
within a network. Nodes with higher degree centrality are considered more central, as they have
direct connections with many other nodes. In transportation networks, for instance, a high degree
centrality could indicate a major hub or intersection that connects with many routes, highlighting
its critical role in the network’s connectivity and flow.
This centrality measure, while useful, does not account for the global structure of the network — it
focuses solely on the immediate connections of a node. Therefore, it is often used in conjunction
with other centrality measures to provide a comprehensive view of a node’s importance within a
network.
Betweenness Centrality and Edge Betweenness Centrality
Betweenness centrality is a measure of centrality in a graph based on shortest paths. For any node
v, betweenness centrality quantifies the number of times v acts as a bridge along the shortest path
between two other nodes. This measure reflects the frequency with which a node lies on the paths
traversed by others to reach their destinations, highlighting its role in facilitating communication
or movement within the network.
Node Betweenness Centrality
The betweenness centrality of a node v is given by the formula:
CB(v) =
X
s̸=v̸=t∈V
σst(v)
σst
(3.9)
where V is the set of nodes, σst is the total number of shortest paths from node s to node t, and
σst(v) is the number of those paths that pass through v.
Edge Betweenness Centrality
Similarly, edge betweenness centrality measures the importance of an edge in facilitating commu­
nication or movement within the network, and is defined as the sum of the fraction of all­pairs
shortest paths that pass through an edge e:
CB(e) =
X
s̸=t∈V
σst(e)
σst
(3.10)
where σst(e) is the number of shortest paths from s to t passing through edge e, and σst is again
the number of all shortest paths between s and t. This measure is crucial for understanding the
load that an edge bears in terms of controlling flow in a network.
If the number of nodes n is too high, a sample of size k ≤n can be selected. Parameters such
as k, normalization, and weight can modify the computation of edge betweenness centrality. For
instance, using k node samples can estimate betweenness centrality for large graphs. Normalization
10
==PAGE:17==
adjusts the centrality values to fall between 0 and 1, allowing for comparison across networks of
different sizes. Weighted edges can be used to calculate shortest paths based on distances, costs,
or other metrics, offering insights into weighted networks.
Applications and Implications
Both node and edge betweenness centrality are instrumental in identifying bottlenecks within a net­
work and understanding the flow dynamics. High betweenness centrality indicates critical nodes
or edges that, if removed, could significantly impact communication or transport efficiency within
the network. In transportation networks, these metrics can help in optimizing route planning, en­
hancing network resilience, and informing infrastructure development strategies.
Closeness Centrality
Closeness centrality is a measure within graph theory that quantifies how close a node is to all
other nodes in the network. The idea hinges on the average length of the shortest path from the
node in question to every other node in the graph. This centrality measure provides insight into
how easily a node can reach other nodes, making it a key metric for understanding the efficiency
and influence of a node within the network.
Formally, the closeness centrality (CC(v)) of a node v is defined as the reciprocal of the sum of
the shortest path distances from v to all other nodes (N) in the network:
CC(v) =
1
P
u∈V \{v} d(v, u)
(3.11)
where d(v, u) represents the shortest path distance between nodes v and u. To facilitate comparison
across graphs of different sizes, closeness centrality is often normalized by the factor N−1
|V |−1, where
|V | is the total number of nodes in the graph, making the measure independent of the graph size:
CC(v)norm =
N −1
P
u∈V \{v} d(v, u)
(3.12)
Nodes with high closeness centrality are typically well­positioned within the network, allowing
for rapid dissemination of information or resources to other nodes. This makes closeness central­
ity particularly relevant in networks where interaction speed or efficiency is paramount, such as
transportation or communication networks.
Eigenvector Centrality
Eigenvector centrality extends the concept of node importance by considering not only the number
of connections a node has but also the significance of those connections. A node is considered
highly central if it is connected to other nodes that are themselves central within the network. This
recursive definition is captured mathematically by associating with each node a score proportional
to the sum of the scores of its neighbors:
CE(v) = 1
λ
X
u∈V
A[u, v] · CE(u)
(3.13)
where λ is a constant, A[u, v] represents the adjacency matrix of the graph, and CE(u) is the
eigenvector centrality score of node u. The centrality scores are essentially the components of
the principal eigenvector of the adjacency matrix A, highlighting nodes that are not only well­
connected but also linked to well­connected neighbors.
In sum, closeness centrality emphasizes the efficiency of a node in reaching others, and eigenvec­
tor centrality emphasizes the value of a node’s connections in terms of network influence. Each
11
==PAGE:18==
measure provides a distinct lens through which to view and analyze the roles of nodes in a network,
offering comprehensive insights into the structure and dynamics of complex systems.
Clustering Coefficient
Clustering coefficients provide insight into the degree of cohesiveness in a network, quantifying
how closely nodes tend to cluster together. This concept is essential in understanding the local
structure of networks, particularly in transportation systems where nodes represent junctions or
stops and edges represent paths or routes connecting them.
The clustering coefficient for a node u in an unweighted graph is calculated as the ratio of the
actual number of triangles passing through u to the total possible number of triangles that could
potentially pass through u. This can be represented as:
C(u) =
2T(u)
du(du −1)
(3.14)
where T(u) is the number of triangles through node u and du is the degree of u [50]. This measure
highlights how interconnected a node’s neighbors are, providing insights into network redundancy
and resilience.
For weighted graphs, the clustering coefficient is defined differently, considering the geometric
average of the subgraph edge weights. The weights wij of the edges are normalized by the maxi­
mum weight wmax in the network, adjusting the clustering coefficient to accommodate the strength
of connections:
Cw(u) =
1
du(du −1)
X
ij
( ˆwij)
1
3
(3.15)
where ˆwij =
wij
wmax is the normalized weight [51]. This adaptation allows for the inclusion of inter­
action intensity in the clustering calculation, extending its applicability to networks with varying
edge weight significances.
For directed graphs, clustering is adjusted to account for the directionality of connections:
cu =
T(u)
2(dtot(u)(dtot(u) −1) −2d↔(u))
(3.16)
Here, T(u) counts the directed triangles through node u, dtot(u) combines the in­degree and out­
degree of u, and d↔(u) refers to the reciprocal degree of u [52]. This adjustment allows for the
application of clustering coefficients in directed networks, enhancing the understanding of complex
transportation systems where direction especially matters.
Average Clustering Coefficient
The average clustering coefficient extends the concept of node clustering to the whole network.
It is the mean of the clustering coefficients of all nodes in the graph, providing a macroscopic
measure of network cohesiveness:
C = 1
N
X
u∈V
C(u)
(3.17)
This measure is particularly useful in comparing the overall tendency of clustering across different
networks or subnetworks, indicating the general level of connectedness and potential for efficient
local navigation within the network [52].
12
==PAGE:19==
Both clustering and average clustering coefficients serve as crucial tools in the analysis of network
structures, offering insights into the complexity and robustness of systems like transportation net­
works. They illuminate how well the network facilitates connectivity at both local and global
scales, impacting the efficiency and reliability of transportation [53].
3.1.5
Graph Algorithms
Several algorithms are foundational for analyzing graphs, particularly in the context of transporta­
tion networks:
Shortest Path Algorithms such as Dijkstra’s algorithm and the Bellman­Ford algorithm are piv­
otal for identifying the quickest routes between nodes. These algorithms play a crucial role in
optimizing transportation routes, directly impacting metrics like closeness and load centrality by
determining the shortest paths and facilitating efficient network navigation. [54]
Network Flow Algorithms, including the Ford­Fulkerson algorithm, are essential for maximizing
the flow within a network. This is particularly relevant in transportation systems where managing
capacities and ensuring optimal flow are key. Such algorithms influence the understanding of load
centrality by optimizing how traffic or resources move through pivotal network points.[54]
Both algorithm types are foundational in enhancing the efficiency and capacity of transportation
networks, aligning closely with the objectives of centrality measures to improve network under­
standing and optimization.
Clustering Algorithms, particularly the Girvan­Newman algorithm, are crucial for uncovering
community structures within networks. By detecting clusters or tightly knit groups of nodes, these
algorithms aid in identifying regions within urban or transportation networks that are closely in­
terconnected. This analysis complements the understanding provided by clustering coefficients,
bridging the gap between theoretical network metrics and practical applications for city planning
and network optimization. The Girvan­Newman algorithm, for instance, leverages edge between­
ness centrality to iteratively remove edges, thereby revealing the underlying community structure
[55].
Louvain Community Detection Algorithm
The Louvain Community Detection Algorithm is a straightforward and effective method for find­
ing communities within networks by looking at how tightly nodes group together. This method
starts by treating each node as its own community. It then checks if moving a node to a different
community makes the network’s structure more tightly­knit, a measure known as modularity.
The calculation for deciding whether a node should move to a different community is as follows:
∆Q = ki,in
2m −γ
Σtot · ki
2m2

(3.18)
This equation considers m as the total edge weight in the network, ki,in as the sum of edge weights
connecting node i to its new community, ki as the total edge weights connected to node i, Σtot as
the total edge weights connected to the new community, and γ as a special number used to adjust
the calculation [56] [57].
For networks where the direction of connection matters (directed networks), the formula changes
slightly:
∆Q = ki,in
m −γ
kout
i
· Σin
tot + kin
i · Σout
tot
m2

(3.19)
13
==PAGE:20==
This version of the equation also takes into account whether connections go into or out of node i
and the community it might join [58].
The algorithm repeats this process until no changes make the network structure tighter. After that,
it groups the communities it found into new, larger nodes and examines the larger picture of the
network’s community structure. This process continues until the network cannot be organized into
tighter communities.
This theoretical foundation provides all the necessary tools for the subsequent analysis of Copen­
hagen’s multimodal transportation network, employing graph theory principles and algorithms to
uncover insights into the city’s mobility patterns and infrastructure.
3.2
Clustering
Clustering is an unsupervised machine learning technique that considers a dataset of points and as­
signs each to a unique group such that points within the same group exhibit more similar properties
than those in other groups [59]. Many clustering algorithms depend on the strategies employed to
address the problem of grouping data points to the samples. In chapter 4 we have implemented
the K­Means algorithm, which essentially partitions n observations into k clusters. It aims at min­
imizing the within­cluster sum of squares (WCSS), the objective function, for each cluster Ci. In
its mathematical form, it can be represented as:
WCSS =
k
X
i=1
X
x∈Ci
||x −µi||2
minWCSS
(3.20)
where µi is the cluster center (its coordinates) and ||x −µi||2 is the Euclidean distance calculated
as:
v
u
u
t
n
X
i
(x −µi)2
(3.21)
Below we describe the algorithm, its limitations, and tools to mitigate those constraints.
• Step 1: Defining the initial number of clusters ­ k.
k points are chosen as cluster centers, hereafter referred to as centroids. The initial number
of clusters normally is small.
• Step 2: Assigning the points to their nearest centroids.
The Euclidean distance from a given point to all centroids is calculated and the one yield­
ing the minimum value is selected. The process covers all the points and then WCSS is
calculated.
• Step 3: Recomputing the centroids and iterate.
All distances are recalculated for a new selection of centroids and the first two steps are
repeated until the inertia is minimized.
Despite its widespread use, K­Means has limitations, including sensitivity to initial cluster centers,
difficulty in clustering data with non­globular shapes or data highly correlated, and the requirement
to specify the number of clusters k in advance. Other models, like Gaussian Mixture Models, do
not require strict requirements for the shape of the clusters, but they are more computationally
complex.
Two approaches that mitigate the issue of a fixed initial number of clusters are the Elbow Method
and the Silhouette Score are two approaches to mitigate the latter issue.
14
==PAGE:21==
• The Elbow Method involves plotting the WCSS against the number of clusters and identi­
fying the ”elbow” point where the rate of decrease sharply changes, suggesting a suitable
k.
• On the other hand, the Silhouette Score assesses the clustering quality by measuring how
similar an object is to its own cluster compared to other clusters, with a higher score indi­
cating better­defined clusters. The Silhouette Score is calculated using the formula
s =
b −a
max(a, b)
(3.22)
where a is the mean distance between a sample and all other points in the same class, and
b is the mean distance between a sample and all other points in the nearest cluster that the
sample is not a part of.
3.3
Application Programming Interface (API)
An Application Programming Interface (API) is a set of protocols, routines, and tools for building
software applications[60]. APIs specify how software components should interact, serving as a
bridge between different software systems and enabling them to communicate with each other. It
facilitates the exchange of data and the execution of operations across disparate systems, enabling
the integration of external services or data into applications. For example, consider an API as
a library’s catalog system: it allows users (applications) to query the library’s database (external
service) to retrieve or manipulate in formation efficiently.
In the context of this thesis, we used the Open Trip Planner (OTP) REST API to extract pub­
lic transport equivalent routes for each bike and car trip in our datasets. OTP is an open­source,
multi­modal trip planning and analysis tool that enables us to compute routes for various trans­
portation modes, including public transit, bicycling, driving, and walking [61]. By utilizing the
OTP API, we can obtain valuable insights into the comparative efficiency and feasibility of differ­
ent transportation options for a given route, enriching our analysis and understanding of sustainable
mobility patterns [62].
3.4
Statistical Terminology
3.4.1
Inter Quartile Range
The Interquartile Range (IQR) serves as a crucial measure of variability and is particularly useful
for identifying and removing outliers within data sets. The IQR is defined as the difference between
the third quartile (Q3) and the first quartile (Q1) in a data set, effectively capturing the spread of
the middle 50% of the values[63].
IQR = Q3 −Q1
(3.23)
Quartiles divide a rank­ordered data set into four equal parts. The first quartile (Q1) is the median
of the lower half of the data set, and the third quartile (Q3) is the median of the upper half of the
data set. The IQR focuses on the central tendency of the data, providing a measure that is less
sensitive to extreme values or outliers compared to the range.
Outliers are observations that lie at an abnormal distance from other values in the data. The IQR
is used to detect outliers by defining thresholds. An observation is often considered an outlier
if it is below (Q1 −1.5 × IQR) or above (Q3 + 1.5 × IQR). These thresholds are not fixed
rules but guidelines that can be adjusted based on the context of the data analysis. An illustrative
representation can be seen below in Figure 3.2
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: Inter Quartile Range[64]
In the context of this report, the IQR is employed as a tool to detect and eliminate outliers from the
data. By removing these outliers, the analysis can focus on the data that represent the core behavior
of the system under study, improving the reliability and accuracy of statistical conclusions.
3.4.2
Hypothesis Testing
Hypothesis testing is a statistical method that allows researchers to make inferences about popula­
tion parameters. The process involves proposing two competing hypotheses: the null hypothesis
(H0), which represents a default position or status quo, and the alternative hypothesis (H1 or Ha),
which represents a new claim we aim to support with evidence.
3.4.3
Process of Hypothesis Testing
The general steps in hypothesis testing are as follows:
1. Formulate the null and alternative hypotheses.
2. Choose a significance level (α), which is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis
when it is true.
3. Calculate an appropriate test statistic based on the sample data.
4. Determine the p­value, which is the probability of observing the test statistic or something
more extreme under the assumption that the null hypothesis is true.
5. Compare the p­value to the significance level to decide whether to reject or fail to reject the
null hypothesis.
3.5
Tests for Normality
Tests for normality are statistical procedures used to determine if a dataset is well­modeled by a
normal distribution. These tests are crucial in deciding whether parametric or non­parametric tests
should be used in the analysis of data.
3.5.1
Shapiro­Wilk Test
The Shapiro­Wilk test is a popular test for normality that evaluates how well the data sample
matches the normal distribution. The null hypothesis for the test is that the data are normally
distributed.
W = (Pn
i=1 aix(i))2
Pn
i=1(xi −¯x)2
(3.24)
where x(i) are the ordered sample values, ai are constants generated from the means, variances,
and covariances of the normal distribution, n is the sample size, and ¯x is the sample mean. A
significant result from the Shapiro­Wilk test indicates a deviation from normality [65]. A limitation
16
==PAGE:23==
of the Shapiro­Wilk Test is that it may not be very accurate for large sample sizes, typically when
the sample size exceeds 500.
3.6
Pairwise Tests
Pairwise tests are statistical methods used to compare two groups or treatments to determine if
there is a statistically significant difference between them. These tests can be categorized into
parametric and non­parametric tests, and the choice between them depends on the underlying data
distribution and whether the data are paired or unpaired [66].
3.6.1
Parametric Tests
Parametric tests assume that the data follow a certain distribution, typically the normal distribution.
They are powerful and provide precise estimates if the assumptions are met. A common example
is the paired t­test, used to compare the means of two related groups.
t =
¯d
sd/√n
(3.25)
where ¯d is the mean difference between the paired observations, sd is the standard deviation of the
differences, and n is the number of pairs [67].
3.6.2
Non­Parametric Tests
Non­parametric tests do not assume a specific data distribution, making them more robust to viola­
tions of parametric test assumptions. They are particularly useful when dealing with small sample
sizes or when the data do not meet the assumptions required for parametric testing.
Wilcoxon Signed­Rank Test
The Wilcoxon signed­rank test is a non­parametric alternative to the paired t­test, used when the
differences within paired observations do not follow a normal distribution.
W =
n
X
i=1
[sgn(di) · rank(|di|)]
(3.26)
where di = x2,i −x1,i is the difference within the i­th pair, sgn is the sign function, and rank
assigns ranks to the absolute differences. The test statistic W is the sum of the signed ranks, and
it is used to assess whether the median of the differences is significantly different from zero [67].
Mann­Whitney U Test
The Mann­Whitney U test is used for comparing two independent groups when the data are un­
paired and do not follow a normal distribution. It is a non­parametric alternative to the independent
samples t­test.
U = n1 · n2 + n1(n1 + 1)
2
−R1
(3.27)
where n1 and n2 are the sample sizes for the two groups, and R1 is the sum of the ranks in the first
group. The U statistic measures the difference in rank between the two groups, and a significant
result indicates a difference in the distributions of the two groups [68].
3.6.3
Analysis of Paired Observations
In studies where each subject serves as their own control, such as comparing trip durations by
different modes of transport for the same route, paired observations are analyzed to control for
variability between subjects and to focus on the treatment effect [68].
17
==PAGE:24==
Paired Samples and Repeated Measures
Paired samples analysis focuses on the differences within pairs of observations, while repeated
measures analysis extends this concept to more than two conditions. Both analyses account for the
correlation between measurements from the same subject, which is crucial for accurate statistical
modeling [68].
3.7
Evaluation Metrics
Evaluation metrics are used to interpret the results of statistical tests and to measure the effect size
of the findings.
3.7.1
Bonferroni Correction
The Bonferroni correction is a method to adjust the significance level when multiple comparisons
are made, to control the family­wise error rate. It is a conservative method that divides the desired
overall alpha level by the number of comparisons.
αadjusted = α
k
(3.28)
where α is the original significance level and k is the number of comparisons. The adjusted alpha
level is then used to assess the significance of each individual test [69].
3.7.2
Cohen’s d
Cohen’s d is a measure of effect size used to indicate the standardized difference between two
means. It is defined as the difference between two means divided by a standard deviation for the
data.
d = ¯x1 −¯x2
s
(3.29)
where ¯x1 and ¯x2 are the sample means of the two groups, and s is the pooled standard deviation.
Cohen’s d is widely used in the social sciences to quantify differences between groups. A Cohen’s
d of 0.2 is considered a ’small’ effect size, 0.5 a ’medium’ effect size, and 0.8 a ’large’ effect size
according to Cohen’s conventions [70].
3.7.3
Hedges’ g
Hedges’ g quantifies the standardized difference between two means, adjusting for bias in small
samples. It is calculated as:
J = 1 −
3
4(n1 + n2) −9
(3.30)
g = ¯x1 −¯x2
spooled
× J
(3.31)
where ¯x1 and ¯x2 are the means for the two groups, spooled is the pooled standard deviation, n1
and n2 are the sample sizes, and J is the correction factor that adjusts for small sample size bias.
Hedges’ g is similar to Cohen’s d but provides a more accurate estimate of effect size, especially
for small sample sizes [71].
18
==PAGE:25==
4
Exploratory and Confirmatory Data
Analysis
Our data source consists of three main datasets. Two of them contain information about car­sharing
rides ­ one for GreenMobility [72] and another for SHARE NOW [73]. The third dataset lists the
bike trips offered by Donkey Republic[74]. We have made use of 2 auxiliary files ­ the shape file
and the hub file that are going to be described at a later stage when we analyze the main datasets
individually. Below we provide details about each dataset in their raw forms. Further, we would
address each of them in particular for the reader to be able to follow the same exploratory sequence
as the authors have done.
Metric/Description
ShareNow
GreenMobility
Donkey Republic
Service provided
Car sharing
Car sharing
Bike sharing
Number of dimensions
17
24
5
Number of records
366419
169126
279860
Time period
Aug 2017 ­ May 2018
Jul 2017 ­ Oct 2017
Mar 2018 ­ Apr 2019
Auxiliary dataset
Shape­file
Shape­file
Shape­file, Hub­file
Table 4.1: Raw datasets overview
As it can be noted in Table 4.1 above, we also used auxiliary data sources ­ shape­file and hub­file.
These files provide a mapping of ZoneIDs and ZoneDescriptions that we discuss in detail in 5.1.
Essentially, exploratory data analysis (EDA) refers to a set of steps that help one answer research
questions. This statistical approach includes but is not limited to looking for patterns, differences,
and inconsistencies. Confirmatory data analysis helps one with making informed conclusions
about the data and validating the findings from EDA, thus augmenting it Downey [75].
Henceforth, we are going to explore each dataset following the next sequence:
1. Initial descriptive statistics
Present the structure of the dataset: the number of observations (rows) and dimensions
(columns), the types of variables (e.g., continuous, categorical), and a brief description of
each variable with statistical summaries, including measures of central tendency (mean, me­
dian), dispersion (variance, standard deviation, range).
2. Data cleaning and preprocessing
Including but not limited to handling missing values, correcting errors, removing duplicates,
or transforming variables. Employs visual methods ­ histograms, scatter plots, etc.
3. Outlier detection
Using statistical tests, visual methods, or clustering techniques. Remove, drop, or transform
if outliers are found. Iterates the previous step.
4. Intermediary descriptive statistics and assumptions about data
Assumptions about the data. This may include normality tests, homoscedasticity tests, or
independence tests.
5. Estimation and hypothesis testing
Estimate the size of the effect and the likelihood of it being due to chance.
19
==PAGE:26==
4.1
Share Now
Share Now is a company headquartered in Berlin, Germany. It was present in Copenhagen, Den­
mark, and offered free­floating car­sharing services to registered persons (users can easily find,
book, and unlock cars through the app, and access the fleet), however at they left Denmark af­
ter February 2024 SHARE NOW [73]. We used their trip dataset for our research following the
non­disclosure agreement.
4.1.1
Initial descriptive statistics: Share Now
The dataset on Share Now trips, hereafter referred to as ShareNow contains 366419 records and
17 dimensions (columns). Below we provide a tabular description of dimensions that we used
throughout the analysis process. Some of them have been dropped. It must be noted that throughout
the EDA process, additional dimensions have been introduced ­ one set taken from the API and
the other ­ by the authors.
Dimension
Description
Type
TripID
the assigned IDof the trip
numerical
CarID
the car ID
text
UserID
the assigned ShareNow User ID
text
LatitudeStart
The latitude of the starting location
numerical coordinate
LongitudeStart
The longitude of the starting location
numerical coordinate
LatitudeEnd
The latitude of the stop location
numerical coordinate
LongitudeEnd
The longitude of the stop location
numerical coordinate
StartTime
The time the trip started at
date/time
EndTime
The time the trip stopped at
date/time
Age
User age
numerical
Gender
User gender
categorical (M/F)
KmDriven
The traveled distance (by odometer)
numerical (in km)
Table 4.2: ShareNow overview
With the help of pandas data analysis library in Python (programming language) we have gener­
ated the descriptive statistics on the numerical dimensions for the SN dataset. It is a widely used
approach in initial data exploration Downey [75]. We present that summary in the Table 4.3 below.
There are no missing values in the SN dataset. One can notice that there are values (highlighted)
that cannot occur physically. These must be measurement errors. As minimum values for the bat­
tery level at the start and the end of the trip (BatteryStart, BatteryEnd) we find negative 1. Since it
is impossible to deplete the car’s battery beyond zero, these records have been removed. Inspect­
ing KmDriven we observe not only a high discrepancy between the mean and median, but also
extreme high and low bounds ­ 17771 km (maximum value) and negative 19183 km (minimum
value). Clearly, such measurement inaccuracies are unfeasible; therefore, we have excluded them
from consideration. Likewise, we spot negative minimum values for TripDurationHours, TripDu­
rationMinutes, and AvgSpeed. At this point, we can assert that the average age of Share Now users
is 33 years with half of them falling in the 18 −31 age bracket. The average duration of a trip is
almost 35 minutes and 50% of them are completed in under 25 minutes.
Considering the insights above we proceed to the second EDA step ­ data cleaning and preparation.
20
==PAGE:27==
Dimension
Mean
Std Dev
Min
25%
Median
75%
Max
Age
33.13
9.61
18.00
26.00
31.00
39.00
89.00
KmDriven
7.83
98.39
­19183.00
4.00
6.00
10.00
17771.00
TripDurationMinutes
34.83
65.41
­35.32
17.23
24.38
34.10
9161.22
AvgSpeed
15.86
117.64
­25250.42
10.13
14.36
19.78
38820.15
Table 4.3: Summary statistics of SN data
4.1.2
Data cleaning and processing
Following the above findings we dropped the records with negative KmDriven and those exceeding
350 km (because this is the maximum range of a car SHARE NOW [73]). We also excluded the
trips with negative time duration, those with negative battery levels, those with average speed
exceeding 100 km/h, and those that took more than 6 hours to complete. Overall 13741 rows have
been discarded.
Dimension
Mean
Std Dev
Min
25%
Median
75%
Max
Age
33.10
9.58
18.00
26.00
31.00
39.00
89.00
KmDriven
8.13
8.28
1.00
4.00
6.00
10.00
236.00
TripDurationMinutes
31.65
31.99
1.27
17.62
24.58
34.05
359.98
AvgSpeed
16.32
8.79
0.17
10.53
14.62
20.00
98.96
Table 4.4: Summary statistics of SN data (Updated)
4.1.3
Outlier detection
Despite having partially addressed the topic of outliers in the preceding subsection, our goal is to
analyze the dataset deeper. We have employed advanced visualization techniques such as box­and­
whisker plots and histograms. Figure A.4 in the Appendix, displays 3 histograms and 3 box­and­
whisker plots for KmDriven, TripDurationMinutes, and AvgSpeed. One can notice that the data is
skewed with most of the trips below 50 km, trip duration under 100 minutes, and average speed
less than 45 km/h. This directs us to the idea that SN data can be divided into short trips and long
trips. Indeed, 85% of the trips display the aforementioned properties as shown in Table 4.5 below.
It is worth noting that there are fewer outliers for KmDriven and AvgSpeed and there are no outliers
for TripDurationMinutes for short trips as seen in the figure 4.4.
Figure 4.1: Data distribution and IQR for 85% of trips by duration.
It should be highlighted that the minimum average trip distance is 1 km. Given that an individual
can typically walk this distance relatively shortly under normal conditions, a compromise has been
reached regarding the threshold at which a trip is deemed valid. Since SN rounds these dimensions
21
==PAGE:28==
to the nearest whole number, we set the validation threshold at 3 km. This distance usually takes
half an hour to complete by walking and thus it is not representative for commuting purposes.
Dimension
Mean
Std Dev
Min
25%
Median
75%
Max
KmDriven
6.36
4.45
1.00
3.00
5.00
8.00
50.00
TripDurationHours
0.38
0.14
0.02
0.28
0.37
0.48
0.69
TripDurationMinutes
22.86
8.53
1.27
16.50
22.47
29.03
41.63
AvgSpeed
16.58
8.70
1.44
10.85
14.85
20.17
98.96
Table 4.5: Top 85% trips sliced by duration.
Subsequently, we focus on analyzing the accessibility compared to public transportation by con­
sidering short trips. Trips longer than 40 km are beyond Copenhagen Greater Area public trans­
portation coverage and thus are outside our scope. However, we keep both categories at this stage
to learn more about data patterns in free­floating car­sharing rides.
4.1.4
Assumptions about data and patterns
After dropping unfeasible records we are interested in analyzing the trends SN data displays. We
grouped the age dimension in 5 bins: 18 −29, 30 −39, 40 −49, 50 −59, and 60 −90. One can
notice in Figure 4.2 that most of the SN trips are made by people younger than 30 years, however,
they tend to drive shorter distances figure 4.2a, while doing it faster on average (figure 4.2b).
(a) Average trip distance by age group
(b) Average speed by age group
Figure 4.2: Population insights by age group
Persons older than 50 exhibit an opposite pattern ­ on average they make longer trips, but they
drive slower. This can be explained by two factors. First, there are fewer users older than 50 years
overall as shown in Table 4.6 and they are more likely to own a car. Second, elderly individuals
tend to be more cautious. We have assessed the correlation between age and driving speed and
have obtained a low negative statistically significant value of −0.06.
We have also focused on evaluating the temporal trends in SN data. Particularly, we assessed
the daily demand for trips across weekdays and hours of the day. Figure 4.3a reveals that SN
22
==PAGE:29==
Age Bracket
Number of users
18­29
10635
30­39
7758
40­49
4411
50­59
1886
60­90
443
Table 4.6: Number of users by age bracket
users drive less frequently on Monday and Sunday, on average 1104 and 1185 rides, respectively.
However, the Sunday trips are the longest with a value averaging 8.49 km per ride. The demand
for free­floating car sharing peaks on Fridays and Saturdays ­ with 1400 rides per day on average,
yet the average traveled distance is lower than on Mondays. Upon examining the hourly patterns
in figure 4.3b we have discovered that the service experiences its peak usage between 16:00 and
18:00, with 104 trips starting at or after 17:00 each day on average. This indicates that people take
SN cars to commute from work at the end of business day. For granular overview please see the
figure A.16 in the appendix.
(a) Average number of daily trips
and traveled distance
(b) Average number of trips at each hour of the
day
Figure 4.3: Temporal patterns of trips
We have also investigated the frequency of usage per customer. In the table 4.7 below we have
found that on average the SN driver made 14 trips in the specified time frame. However, 75%
made 13 trips or less, while the maximum is at 788 rides. This hints at the fact that there are people
who use the service frequently and persons who take SN cars occasionally. In the Tables A.5 and
A.6 in the Appendix we provide an extract of the most frequent and occasional SN users.
mean
std
min
25%
50%
75%
max
Number of trips
14
30
1
2
5
13
788
AvgTripDuration (min)
38.75
31.99
2.92
23.58
29.83
40.61
359.37
AvgTripDistance (km)
9.93
8.61
1.00
5.39
7.50
11.33
236.00
Table 4.7: Descriptive statistics of SN users trips per customer.
23
==PAGE:30==
4.2
GreenMobility
GreenMobility provides free­float car­sharing services in several cities across Europe. They have
been present in Copenhagen since 2016 GreenMobility [72]. Their business model is identical to
the one of Share Now and thus we would limit the company presentation to this.
4.2.1
Initial descriptive statistics: GreenMobility
GreenMobility, hereafter referred to as GM, provided us with a similar, yet not identical dataset
on the trips taken by their users. Below we list only the dimensions that have been used in the
analysis. Part of them has been dropped to be consistent with the previously introduced data source.
Similarly to the part for ShareNow, we have introduced auxiliary dimensions that enhance the
analysis and help us decide how to clean the data robustly.
Dimension
Description
Type
TripID
the assigned IDof the trip
numerical
CarID
the car ID
text
UserID
the assigned ShareNow User ID
text
LatitudeStart
The latitude of the starting location
numerical coordinate
LongitudeStart
The longitude of the starting location
numerical coordinate
LatitudeEnd
The latitude of the stop location
numerical coordinate
LongitudeEnd
The longitude of the stop location
numerical coordinate
StartTime
The time the trip started at
date/time
EndTime
The time the trip stopped at
date/time
Age
User age
numerical
Gender
User gender
categorical (M/F)
KmDriven
The traveled distance (by odometer)
numerical (in km)
Table 4.8: GreenMobility overview
As in the previous section we have extracted the descriptive statistics on the numerical dimensions
for GM data. There are 58686 missing values for a subset of the dimensions, hence we drop them.
We observe in Table 4.9 below that there are negative values, which we highlighted, for average
speed and trip duration. This explains the high standard deviation relative to the respective means.
Following the same reasoning as for SN data ­ we omit them from our further analysis. We note that
the minimum age is null, which clearly is a data collection error. We exclude all 50 null entries for
age. Another interesting finding at this point is that the standard deviation for KmDriven is greater
than its mean. Thus we advance to the next phase of our analysis of the GM dataset.
Dimension
Mean
Std Dev
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
Age
31.43
11.88
0.00
22.00
28.00
38.00
93.00
KmDriven
14.23
16.22
0.54
3.19
6.98
19.05
102.00
TripDurationHours
0.84
8.41
­0.00
0.25
0.42
0.65
2210.30
TripDurationMinutes
50.40
504.73
­0.03
15.20
25.32
39.27
132617.73
AvgSpeed
14.32
31.65
­4870.51
6.66
11.88
18.47
7076.26
Table 4.9: Descriptive Statistics of GM data
4.2.2
Data cleaning and processing
We keep the trips where KmDriven is greater than 3 to be consistent with the SN approach. Addi­
tionally, we drop the records where the average speed exceeds 100 km/h, because these values are
unfeasible.
24
==PAGE:31==
Dimension
Mean
Std Dev
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
Age
31.86
11.68
18.00
22.00
28.00
39.00
93.00
KmDriven
7.15
3.76
3.00
4.35
6.12
8.78
38.20
TripDurationHours
0.80
9.60
0.04
0.33
0.48
0.68
2210.30
TripDurationMinutes
47.73
575.75
2.58
19.65
28.77
41.00
132617.73
AvgSpeed
15.51
8.71
0.00
9.43
14.05
19.96
88.99
Table 4.10: GN Descriptive Statistics (Updated)
We acknowledge that GM trips are prominently short, with a maximum travel distance of 38.2 km.
As it can be seen in the Table 4.10 there are extreme values for Trip Duration, which we highlighted.
We then inspect the distribution and plot a box­and­whisker visualization for TripDurationMinutes.
Keeping the data below the 90% quantile of trip duration we are left with no outliers, and thus we
ensure a more accurate representation of GN dimensions’ typical values.
Figure 4.4: Data distribution and IQR for 90% of the trips by duration.
4.2.3
Assumptions about data and patterns
Similarly to SN, we are interested in learning more about the population patterns in GM. Green
Mobility’s customer base as provided by our dataset is much smaller than that of Share Now, which
one can learn from the table 4.11 below.
Age group
Number of users
18­29
3777
30­39
1998
40­49
1654
50­59
943
60­90
277
Table 4.11: Number of GM users by age group
Keeping the same age grouping as in the approach for SN, we have found that the people older
than 50 years tend to drive longer distances ­ 8.32 km per trip on average and at a higher speed ­
17.31 km/h, they are followed at driving speed by youngsters with ages between 18 and 29 years.
As it can be observed in subfigure 4.5a, KmDriven in the GM dataset exhibits the same pattern as
in ShareNow.
25
==PAGE:32==
(a) Average trip distance by age group
(b) Average speed by age group
Figure 4.5: Population insights by age group
For consistency, we assess the average daily demand for GM rides for each day of the week and
each hour of the day. Hourly usage follows a similar trend as SN data, with an average peak of
55 cars departing after 17:00. However, in the morning time, as we can notice in Figure 4.6b the
interval 08:00 ­ 09:00 displays increased demand, on average 42 cars. Figure 4.6a shows that on
Mondays and Sundays, people make the longest trips averaging 7.04 km, yet the busiest day is
Friday, with almost 800 cars taken. It is worth mentioning that the feasible data for GreenMobility
is comprised of short trips, not exceeding 40 km. All these findings hint that people, as in SN’s case,
use the service for commuting to or from work, thus it is necessary to conduct a cross­comparison
with public transport. For granular overview please see the figure A.17 in the appendix.
(a) Average number of daily trips
and traveled distance
(b) Average number of trips at each hour of the
day
Figure 4.6: Temporal patterns of trips
26
==PAGE:33==
In line with the approach for SN, we have analyzed the distribution per user of the number of trips,
distance traveled, and time duration. We have found similar results to the SN part.
mean
std
min
25%
50%
75%
max
Number of trips
8
19
1
1
3
7
332
Time (min)
28.41
8.79
5.18
22.22
27.82
33.71
57.85
Trip (km)
7.50
3.55
3.00
5.00
6.69
9.00
31.50
Table 4.12: Descriptive statistics of GM users trips per customer.
We notice that 75% of the users make 7 trips or less, while the maximum is 332. It confirms that
the dataset contains frequent and occasional users. Yet, the available data is limited and we discuss
that in section 4.4. In Tables A.7 and A.8 we summarize the top and bottom 15 users by the number
of trips made.
4.3
Donkey Republic
Donkey Republic provides its users with unparalleled access to Copenhagen’s largest collection
of rental pedal and electric bikes. This method is economical, easy, and a convenient mode of
transportation around the city. One can simply download the app and become a user [74].
4.3.1
Initial descriptive statistics: Donkey Republic
For Donkey Republic, hereafter referred to as DR, we have used 2 data sources ­ the trip rentals and
the hubs file. The hubs file describes the locations where users pick up and drop off the cars across
the city. There are 1266 unique records for HubID, HubName, HubLongitude, and HubLatitude.
We have combined this information with the rental data and provide an overview in Table 4.13
below:
Dimension
Description
Type
UserID
the assigned DR User ID
numerical
LatitudeStart
The latitude of the starting location
numerical coordinate
LongitudeStart
The longitude of the starting location
numerical coordinate
LatitudeEnd
The latitude of the stop location
numerical coordinate
LongitudeEnd
The longitude of the stop location
numerical coordinate
StartTime
The time the trip started at
date/time
EndTime
The time the trip stopped at
date/time
HubName
The name of the location
text
Table 4.13: DonkeyRepublic overview
The DR dataset consists of fewer dimensions. As in the case of ShareNow and GreenMobility we
have guided ourselves on Chapter 8 of Data Science in Theory and Practice [76]. We identified
18567 missing values for drop­off locations, making it impossible to reconstruct the itinerary of
these bike rides. We have excluded them from further analysis as these records are most proba­
bly data collection errors, for example, if the user books the bike and accidentally starts the ride
and then cancels it, without even moving the bike from its original place. We have investigated
where those trips have their start locations and we identified that most of them are in the center of
Copenhagen as seen in the table A.4.
4.3.2
Data cleaning and processing
After dropping the invalid records mentioned above, we observe there are trips with negative time
duration, which we also exclude. The summary statistics are provided in the Table below:
27
==PAGE:34==
Dimension
Mean
Std Dev
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
TripDurationMinutes
566.33
1546.58
0.27
25.79
221.06
591.80
126554.99
TripDurationHours
9.44
25.78
0.00
0.43
3.68
9.86
2109.25
Table 4.14: Descriptive Statistics for DR
As we can see, half of the bike trips take a bit less than 4 hours. However, the minimum is almost
null, while the maximum value is extremely high. There are clear outliers. A possible cause of this
is the pricing model of DR. For instance, users can opt for a Lease Plan [74], which allows one to
keep a bike for up to 7 days. So, despite the high time count, the customer, might not drive at all.
In fact, 82.77% of the trips take less than 12 hours.
Figure 4.7: Data distribution for DR trip duration less than 12 hours.
4.3.3
Assumptions about data and patterns
There have been identified 81419 DR customers. However, the dataset does not contain informa­
tion about age as we have seen for the previous datasets. We have investigated the usage patterns
across days of the week and hours of the day. As mentioned previously, DR does not provide us
with data on distance traveled, therefore we introduced an auxiliary dimension HaversineDistance
A.1 to be able to analyze trip patterns. We refer to the Haversine distance in the context of bike
rides henceforth.
(a) Average number of daily trips
(b) Average number of trips at each hour of the
day
Figure 4.8: Temporal patterns of trips for DR
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.8a displays a rather similar pattern to SN. One can notice that over the week the demand
tends to grow peaking on Saturdays, with an average of 650 trips. In the case of DR trips, we are
not provided with information about the traveled distance by odometer. However, we discuss the
solution we found in section 4.5. The other Figure 4.8b shows us that the highest demand for bike
rides happens in the morning hours between 08:00­10:00, with the maximum value of 61 reached
at 09:00. For granular overview please see the figure A.18 in the appendix.
4.4
EDA key takeaways
We have learned that there are short and long trips both for cars and bikes. We would consider
short trips further in our analysis. Short trips are rides defined as those that do not exceed 40 km
for cars, and those taking less than 2 hours to complete for bikes.
We have revealed the population patterns for SN and GM. Most users are part of the 18­29 years
age group. People in this group tend to make the shortest distances per trip, however, the average
speed of commuting is high when compared to other groups.
Friday is the second most demanded day of the week for SN and DR trips, while for GM it is the
peak. Sunday is the day when people make the longest trips on average.
We found that most car trips begin between 17:00 ­ 18:00, while for bikes this interval is 09:00 ­ 10:00.
Morning hours display a local spike for car rides between 08:00 and 09:00, yet the demand is higher
at the end of the business day.
Across all 3 datasets, we determined that most customers use the services occasionally, yet some
people travel frequently.
It must be noted that we have had available data for 7 months in the case of ShareNow, and a bit
more than 1 year for Donkey Republic, thus it makes it difficult for one to capture the true picture
of users’ behavior. We expect that in the presence of a larger dataset, the discrepancy would be
lower.
Given that ShareNow and GreenMobility display similar trends we merge them in a unified dataset.
Considering the above findings we proceed further with trip and user segmentation to get more
insights into the underlying patterns of our data.
4.5
Feature Engineering
We combined the datasets of ShareNow and GreenMobility. We have also introduced an auxiliary
dimension ­ Haversine distance, which calculates the shortest distance between 2 points on Earth
considering its curvature as illustrated in Table A.1 in the Appendix. We hypothesize that there are
trips that start and end in the same location or in its proximity. In this case, we are dealing with a
round trip, otherwise ­ a one­way.
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.9: The relationship between KmDriven and HaversineDistance.
In the scatter plot 4.9 above one can notice that there are trips for which the Haversine distance is
close to zero. This means that the end and start locations of those observations are close. To label
the data points into round­trip or one­way we employ the K­Means clustering algorithm.
4.5.1
Kmeans Clustering
Using the Elbow method on the K­means algorithm we learn that the car trips can be segmented
into 2 categories as depicted in Figure 4.10. However, the data has not allowed us to run the same
algorithm for DR data, because there is no data for traveled distance and hence we have nothing
to juxtapose against Haversine distance.
(a) Optimal number of clusters
for car trips segmentation
(b) Labeled data: one­way vs round­trips
Figure 4.10: Trip segmentation using K­Means and Elbow method
Figure 4.10b presents the data points labeled as round­trips and one­way. We can see that the
identified one­way trips match our expectation ­ the longer the traveled distance, the further away
the start and end location i.e. Haversine Distance. We have tried other algorithms in order to
address the round­trips and thus minimize their weight in the final selected set for comparison
with public transport. However, considering the fact that DR misses the KmDriven dimension, we
resort to an educated approach by defining thresholds. For bikes we consider as round trips the
ones who start and end in the same zone, while for cars we impose a limit on the deviation from
CarDistanceKm auxiliary dimension listed in A.1.
30
==PAGE:37==
We take a similar approach in segmenting customers by usage frequency of the service. We find 3
clusters as seen in the figure 4.11 and then take an educated approach by considering the following
thresholds: up to 10 ­ occasional user, between 10 and 39 ­ moderately active users, and above 40
­ active users.
(a) Bike optimal number of clusters
(b) Car optimal number of clusters
Figure 4.11: Identifying the Optimal Number of Clusters for User Groups Using the Elbow Method.
4.5.2
Auxiliary dataset
Similarly to Yigitcanlar et al. [31] we have augmented our datasets with results extracted from the
geographic information system (GIS) ­ Open Trip Planner ­ discussed in the next subsection. To
render the graphical display we used an auxiliary vector data format called shapefile. It represents
the boundaries of Copenhagen Greater Area and stores the shapes, locations, and polygons of the
zones we analyze.
Our shapefile is made up of 8 other files with different extensions that are used for different map­
ping purposes. Below we list the ones that we particularly used in our approach:
• .shp ­ this file stores the geometry of the feature.
• .shx ­ it is an index file for querying and geometry searching.
• .dbf ­ contains stored tabular data related to the features in the .shp file.
• .cpg ­ specifies the code page (for character encoding) used for attribute data
• .prj ­ contains the coordinate system and projection information.
In order to link the coordinates for LatitudeStart, LatitudeEnd, LongitudeStart, and LongitudeEnd
from our datasets with the shapefile we have designed a special mapping function. It takes as inputs
the geographical coordinates, converts them into WGS84 (World Geodetic System 1984)[77], and
returns the zone name and zoneID if it is within the boundaries of a polygon present in the shapefile.
4.5.3
Public Transport Trip Equivalent
In our thesis, we conducted a comparable comparison between public transport and shared mobility
providers in Copenhagen using the Open Trip Planner (OTP) API, which enabled us to simulate
and extract equivalent public transport routes for each bike and car within our datasets. Table 4.15
presents the extracted data below.
31
==PAGE:38==
Dimension
Description
Type
Pub. Transport Trip Duration
equivalent total trip duration in minutes
numerical
Pub. Transport Distance
trip distance in km
numerical
Pub. Transport Walking Time
total walking time of the trip
numerical
Pub Transport Changes
number of transport means changes
numerical
Pickup Station Proximity
distance in meters to station at trip start
numerical
Dropoff Station Proximity
distance in meters from station at trip end
numerical
Table 4.15: Extracted Data from the Open Trip Planner
Given that our data spans from 2017­2019, we faced a substantial challenge when trying to extract
the exact itinerary from that much in the past. As a result, we chose a workaround, utilizing more
recent public transportation data from October 2023 ­ when we pulled the itineraries, carefully
aligning it with equivalent weekdays and hours to mirror our historical trips as closely as possible.
However, this approach has its drawbacks, which introduce a temporal shift and translate past
trips into current transit information. For example, the M3[78] and M4[78] metro lines, crucial
for the current public transport network in inner Copenhagen, were not operational back then.
This discrepancy suggests that our comparative analysis, while still insightful, may reflect public
transportation as more accessible and efficient than it historically was.
Another limitation is, when extracting the public transport trip equivalent, we assume that the
start and end locations directly correspond to the users’ initial starting and ending points for their
journeys. In reality, users might have had to walk a certain distance to reach or leave these bikes or
cars, which our method does not account for because we lack the data. When a user books a shared
vehicle, the journey recorded begins from the moment they start driving or cycling. In contrast,
the public transport itinerary generated from our data starts from the vehicle’s pickup location,
adding walking time to the nearest station, which could unintentionally make public transport less
efficient. This oversight essentially points towards the ”first and last mile” of the trip, which is a
critical component in evaluating the total time.
To address this limitation, one could argue that while our analysis may not capture the complete
door­to­door travel time for shared mobility users, it still provides valuable insights into the com­
parative accessibility and effectiveness of different transport modes. We are also aggregating our
data per zone given by the Copenhagen GIS auxiliary dataset introduced at the beginning of this
chapter. Because we are mostly interested in mobility across different zones rather than granular
individual tris, these limitations will be smoothed out and have a smaller impact on the accuracy
of the results.
Moreover, acknowledging this gap highlights an area for future research: the integration of detailed
user movement patterns before and after using shared mobility options. This approach could offer
a more nuanced understanding of the real­world experience of multimodal travel, supporting the
development of more user­centered urban transport strategies.
Despite these limitations, using the OTP API for this comparative analysis remains highly valuable,
still because it provides the current picture of Copenhagen’s public transport network, enabling us
to evaluate the relative accessibility and effectiveness of car and bike sharing concerning current
public transportation routes. This comparison increases our understanding of current mobility
trends and offers important insights into possible changes in urban mobility preferences, the use
of infrastructure over time, and the remaining vulnerabilities in the public transport network.
32
==PAGE:39==
4.6
Statistical Analysis
This is the chapter in which we will discuss the statistical analysis
4.6.1
Hypothesis Testing
In our study, we looked into how different types of users—Active, Moderately Active, and Occa­
sional use the bike and car­sharing service. In this section, we will perform hypothesis testing to
test the difference between these three user groups for distance and speed. At the same time, we
are curious to investigate if there are statistically significant differences in trip duration between
shared services and public transport at different levels of change in transport. Moreover, we are
testing the trip duration of both services against public transport during and outside morning and
afternoon rush hours. Given the data did not follow a normal distribution, we chose nonparametric
tests, specifically the Mann­Whitney U test for unpaired data and Wilcoxon W for paired data, to
see if the differences we are observing are statistically significant. To ensure our findings are solid,
we adjusted our p­values using the Bonferroni correction method, which helps us avoid false pos­
itives when we’re making multiple comparisons. We also measured the effect sizes using Hedges’
g or Cohen’s d, to understand not just if differences exist, but how big those differences are. The
distributions for each statistical test can be visually inspected in Figures A.8 A.9 A.10 and A.11
from the Appendix.
Analyzing the results from Table 4.16 one can state that there is statistical significance in traveled
distance between groups for bikes and cars besides between Moderately Active and Occasional
cyclists. The adjusted p­value here is 1.0, and the effect size is almost negligible. This suggests
that in terms of distance traveled, they behave similarly.
If we compare the effect size of active and moderately active users for both data groups, we can see
that active cyclists cover significantly longer distances but with a small effect size, suggesting that
the difference is not so large in practice. On the other hand, active car users cover shorter distances
with a medium to large effect size.
Regarding Active vs. Occasional Users, both modes indicate that active users travel further than
occasional users. However, the effect size difference between bikes and cars suggests varying
degrees of this behavior across the two modes, with the car group being more prominent.
User Category Comparison
Mode
p­corr (Bonferroni)
Hedges’ g
Active vs. Moderately Active
Bike
<0.001
0.0847
Active vs. Occasional
Bike
<0.001
0.0954
Moderately Active vs. Occasional
Bike
1
0.0025
Active vs. Moderately Active
Car
<0.001
­0.8247
Active vs. Occasional
Car
<0.001
0.4081
Moderately Active vs. Occasional
Car
<0.001
1.4399
Table 4.16: Non­Parametric Pairwise comparisons of distances across user categories for bikes
and cars, showing Bonferroni corrected p­values and Hedges’ g effect sizes.
In Table 4.17 we can confirm that there is a statistically significant difference between all cate­
gories of users for both bicycles and cars with respect to the average travel speed. In all tests, the
occasional users are the slowest with notable effect sizes. This can potentially mean that they are
new to the service, have less experience from fewer interactions, and decide to be more cautious
and ensure safety by being slower.
The only notable difference between cyclists and drivers can be observed between active and mod­
erately active users. The data suggests active users are faster with a moderate difference for bikes,
33
==PAGE:40==
whereas active drivers tend to be significantly slower than moderately active ones. The latter be­
havior cannot be fully understood and interpreted suggesting more research would be needed.
User Category Comparison
Mode
p­corr (Bonferroni)
Hedges’ g
Active vs. Moderately Active
Bike
<0.001
0.3132
Active vs. Occasional
Bike
<0.001
0.8251
Moderately Active vs. Occasional
Bike
<0.001
0.4878
Active vs. Moderately Active
Car
<0.001
­0.7974
Active vs. Occasional
Car
<0.001
0.4855
Moderately Active vs. Occasional
Car
<0.001
1.5075
Table 4.17: Non­Parametric Pairwise comparisons of speed across user categories for bikes and
cars, showing Bonferroni corrected p­values and Hedges’ g effect sizes.
The findings from the speed analysis complement those of the distance analysis, painting a com­
prehensive picture of biking and driving behavior across user categories. Active cyclists not only
cover longer distances but also do so at higher speeds, whereas occasional users are more careful
and slow. For car users, on the other hand, moderately active ones tend to cover more distance and
faster.
Table 4.18, showcases that there is a statistically significant difference between cars and public
transport duration across all change levels, with cars consistently beating public transport. The
effect sizes increase with the number of changes, being the highest at 3 changes (Cohen’s d = ­
1.356), concluding that as the complexity of the public transport route increases, cars significantly
outperform public transport in terms of travel duration.
Bicycles on the other hand, statistically differ only at no changes but with a very small effect
size suggesting the difference might not be significantly impactful in practice. As the number
of changes increases to 1 and 2, this difference becomes less pronounced, reflected by p­values
above the threshold of 0.05, indicating an inconsistent speed benefit of public transport over cy­
cling, rejecting our null hypothesis that there is statistical significance in differences between these
groups.
Mode Comparison
Changes
p­value
Cohen’s d
Bike
vs
PubT
0
<0.001
0.081
1
0.174
0.017
2
0.057
0.117
Car
vs
PubT
0
<0.001
­0.273
1
<0.001
­0.674
2
<0.001
­1.163
3
<0.001
­1.356
Table 4.18: Non­Parametric Paired comparisons of trip durations between bike and public transport
(PubT) and between car and public transport across different levels of transport changes. The table
presents the p­values and Cohen’s d to highlight the statistical differences.
Table 4.19 showcases that both bicycles and cars are statistically significant in their trip durations
during and outside rush hours when compared to public transport. Bicycles are slower than public
transport in general as observed as well from the previous test in change comparison but with a
very small effect size again. Cars significantly beat public transport in trip duration during and
34
==PAGE:41==
outside rush hours but with a smaller effect size in the rush hour meaning traffic jams slow them
down a little but not enough for the public transport to take over.
We also compare bikes and cars to themselves but between rush hours. The tests show that there
is no statistical significance in trip duration for bicycles with a p­value way above the threshold
of 0.05. The effect size hints there is almost no difference between their means as well. The
biking trip duration pattern is not influenced by the rush hours. However, in Figure A.11a from the
Appendix, there is a strange peak in trip duration in the hour interval 9­13 but no changes in trip
distance compared to other hour intervals. We cannot explain this behavior, but one assumption
could be that city explorers or tourists rent the bicycles. Since they have no set destination in mind,
they take their time to enjoy the city and its wonders. Nevertheless, more research is needed to
investigate this assumption.
Conversely, cars are statistically significant between rush hours, with a small to medium effect size
in the benefit of non­rush hours.
Comparison
Mode
p­value
Cohen’s d
Bike vs Public Transport
Rush Hour
<0.001
0.040
Bike vs Public Transport
Non­Rush Hour
<0.001
0.087
Non­Rush Hours vs Rush Hours (Bike)
N/A
0.794
­0.001
Car vs Public Transport
Rush Hour
<0.001
­0.239
Car vs Public Transport
Non­Rush Hour
<0.001
­0.445
Non­Rush Hours vs Rush Hours (Car)
N/A
<0.001
­0.261
Table 4.19: Comparative analysis of trip durations for bikes and cars versus public transport, as
well as between the same mode. showing p­values and Cohen’s d effect sizes during rush hours(6­
9, 15­18) and non­rush hour periods.
35
==PAGE:42==
5
Results
Our results section is split into two parts: Spacial Insights findings which contains insightful results
in the form of map plots, heatmaps for bicycles, cars, and a comparison to public transport, and
Graph Analysis which uncovers patterns in mobility. We separate them because spatial insights
from EDA and Graph­based Analysis are fundamentally different types of analysis, each requiring
a distinct approach and methodology. EDA focuses on summarizing the main characteristics of the
data, through visual means such as map plots in our case providing a general understanding of the
data distribution, relationships, and potential outliers. On the other hand, Graph­based Analysis
dives deeper into the intricate connections and structures within the data, representing Copenhagen
zones as nodes and the trips between them as edges, facilitating the discovery of communities,
influential nodes, network dynamics and not only.
5.1
Spacial Insights
To make our analysis more feasible and insightful, we aggregated the start and end locations for
each trip into zones that are defined through the Geographic Information System (GIS) data in­
troduced before, enabling us to accurately represent and analyze the zones within Copenhagen.
This way we are shifting our focus toward analyzing mobility between zones rather than the very
messy granular view of each trip gaining a holistic view of the general flow of mobility across
Copenhagen, allowing for a more strategic analysis and the possibility of actionable insights into
the city’s commuting patterns and infrastructure needs.
5.1.1
Zones Popularity
Visualizations explanation
In the upcoming figures, we use a consistent visual scheme to represent the spatial distribution of
mobility patterns across Copenhagen. The figures feature a color gradient containing nine distinct
steps, transitioning from brighter shades to a deep blue that quantitatively reflects the range within
each zone, with lighter colors indicating lower values and darker shades representing higher values
or differences. The legend at the top right of each figure provides specific value ranges correspond­
ing to each color, offering a precise understanding of the data presented. Additionally, the plots
incorporate distinctive markers to represent transportation nodes: red circles for S­train stops and
blue circles for Metro stops, enabling the reader to immediately identify these stations. Each shape
within the plot corresponds to a unique zone in Copenhagen according to GIS as described above.
Figure 5.1 showcases bike trips starting and ending in each respective zone. We can instantly
observe a higher concentration of trips in the center, residential areas like Sydhavn, and leisure
zones like Refshaleøen. As we move away from the central zones, the number of trips decreases
gradually.
The table 5.1 illustrates Copenhagen’s most frequented zones with Rundetårn, Gammelholm, and
Kgs. Nytorv are popular both as a starting and ending points. In general, the images and data
suggest consistent zone accessibility counts for both starting and ending trips in the same zones,
indicating a steady flow of bicycle traffic in and out.
36
==PAGE:43==
(a) Bicycles Start Zone Counts
(b) Bicycles End Zone Counts
Figure 5.1: Starting zone and ending zone trips count for bicycles.
Start Zone
Count
End Zone
Count
Rundetårn
2763
Kgs. Nytorv
2235
Gammelholm
2562
Rundetårn
2156
Kgs. Nytorv
2431
Gammelholm
2133
Rådhuspladsen
2382
Rådhuspladsen
2054
Amagertorv
2099
Amagertorv
1935
Vesterbro N
1838
Nørreport
1874
Nørreport
1766
Vesterbro N
1822
Ydre Nørrebro SV
1727
Ydre Nørrebro SV
1798
Vesterbro NØ
1717
Vesterbro Midt
1700
Indre Nørrebro Ø
1670
Indre Nørrebro Ø
1628
Table 5.1: Ten most popular Bike Trip Start and End Zones.
Table 5.2 shows the ten most and least popular zones. We can observe a drastic difference be­
tween Rundetårn in the very center with 4919 total trips and Vestamager Ø in Tårnby in the south
of Copenhagen with only 2 trips, emphasizing dense activity in central Copenhagen and minimal
engagement in outer regions. Another reason for the extremely low number of trips in these zones
could be our data­cleaning where we removed round trips and trips shorter than two hours because
they were out of our research scope. Nevertheless, these low observations should be kept even
though they behave as outliers because including zones with only a few trips in the analysis pro­
vides a complete picture of shared bike usage across Copenhagen, highlighting both popular and
underutilized areas. This approach offers insights into the full extent of urban mobility, identifying
37
==PAGE:44==
potential opportunities for service expansion.
Top 10 Zones by Total Counts
Least 10 Zones by Total Counts
Zone Name
Counts
Zone Name
Counts
Rundetårn
4919
Friheden V
5
Gammelholm
4695
Vanløse Syd SØ
4
Kgs. Nytorv
4666
Strandpromenaden
4
Rådhuspladsen
4436
Tårnby Ø
4
Amagertorv
4034
Tømmerup­Viberup N
4
Vesterbro N
3660
Nordhavn N
3
Nørreport
3640
Tømmerup­Viberup V
3
Ydre Nørrebro SV
3525
DTU S
2
Vesterbro Midt
3316
Ydre Østerbro SV
2
Indre Nørrebro Ø
3298
Vestamager Ø
2
Table 5.2: Bicycles Top 10 and Least 10 Zones by Total Counts
The cars counts distribution across zones is somewhat different from that of bikes. In Figure 5.2
we can see the starting and ending zone counts which still show a high density in the center but
also other key hubs such as the Airport or the Technical University of Denmark campus.
The data from Table 5.3 and visual representation in Figure 5.2 uncover a distinct pattern in car
travel within Copenhagen, highlighting the significant role of Kastrup Airport (Lufthavn Udenrigs)
as both a primary departure and arrival point. Furthermore, the consistency between start and end
counts across zones like DTU, Sydhavn Ø, and Ørestaden Metrostation not only reflects a balanced
distribution of car trips but also reveals the importance of these key areas beyond the city center,
such as educational institutions and major residential and commercial hubs. This distribution con­
trasts with bicycle traffic, emphasizing the broader geographical spread of car trips and their role
in connecting peripheral areas with the city’s core.
38
==PAGE:45==
(a) Cars Start Zone Counts
(b) Cars End Zone Counts
Figure 5.2: Starting zone and ending zone trips count for bicycles.
Start Zone
Count
End Zone
Count
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
10835
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
9701
Sydhavn Ø
6763
Sydhavn Ø
6941
DTU S
6243
DTU S
6495
Dronningens Tværgade
6049
Dronningens Tværgade
6008
Ørestaden Metrostation
5386
Ørestaden Metrostation
5388
Indre Østerbro N
5039
Indre Østerbro N
4696
Christianshavn S
4309
Vesterport Station V
4127
Vesterport Station V
4238
Christianshavn S
4100
Vesterbro N
3967
DTU N
3941
Sundbyøster Nord V
3925
Sundbyøster Nord V
3903
Table 5.3: Top 10 Car Trip Zones by Start and End Counts
5.1.2
Public Transport Trip Duration Comparison
Bicycles
As explained in the Feature Engineering subsection from Chapter 4 ­ EDA, we have obtained the
public transport alternative for each trip for both bicycles and car data. For each starting and ending
zone, we aggregated the data and computed the average trip duration difference by subtracting the
trip alternative duration by public transport from the actual trip duration for bicycles and cars.
For this part, it is particularly important to remember and account for the limitations described in
Feature Engineering.
Below in Figure 5.3, one can visually inspect the differences that range from negative values such
as ­51 minutes indicating an advantage for public transportation to +30 minutes indicating an ad­
vantage for the bicycles for that zone, respectively. Comparing Figure 5.3a and Figure 5.3b, one
can conclude that in general there is not a big discrepancy in trip duration difference between public
transport and bikes for the starting zone or ending zone. The zones that differ the most are exactly
39
==PAGE:46==
those with very few trips, most of which are displayed in Table 5.2. While these data points are
included for completeness, their low frequency means they should be considered outliers, limiting
their impact on the overall trip duration comparison analysis.
(a) Bicycles Start Zone Duration Difference
(b) Bicycles End Zone Duration Difference
Figure 5.3: Trip duration difference between public transport and bicycles for each starting and
ending zone.
To accurately capture the dynamics between public transport and individual transportation modes
like bikes and cars across different zones, we used a weighted mean approach for trip difference
over start and end zones. This method, represented by the formula below, considers the varying
number of trips across zones. It assigns proportional significance to each zone based on its pop­
ularity level, ensuring that zones with higher traffic have a greater impact on the overall average.
The weighted mean of trip duration differences, denoted as WM, is calculated as follows:
WM = (Ds × Ns) + (De × Ne)
Ntotal
(5.1)
In this formula, Ds and De represent the trip duration differences for the starting and ending zones
relative to public transport alternatives, respectively. Ns and Ne denote the number of trips starting
and ending in each zone, while Ntotal is the total count of trips for that zone, the sum of Ns and
Ne.
40
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.4: Weighted Average of Trip Duration Differences Between Public Transport and Bike
Trips Across Zones
After visually inspecting Figure 5.4 and the data from Table 5.4, which include the weighted dif­
ferences, we can conclude that, in general, public transport outpaces biking in efficiency across
most of the zones, and with a drastic difference, particularly in zones lying further away from the
city center. These zones often benefit from access to direct public transport lines, including S­train
stations, leading to noticeable time savings. For instance, Charlotelund S, Kastrup by NØ, but also
more popular zones such as Vestamager Metrostation and Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs demonstrate
the effectiveness of public transport for reaching outlying areas or major transit points. Closer to
the city center, the gap between biking and public transport times tightens significantly. For zones
where the public transport advantage is less than 2 minutes, we consider travel times practically
equivalent, highlighting the competitiveness of biking in densely urban areas. However, in key
central hubs like Central Station ­ Københavns Hovedbanegård, Vesterport Station Ø, and Chris­
tianshavn S, public transport times are slightly quicker by over 3 minutes compared to bikes but
also faster than their adjacent zones. This observation emphasizes that such well­connected zones
are pivotal in a city’s transport network, ensuring that large masses of people can reach quickly and
efficiently their destinations, which is especially important in busy, central areas such as these.
On the other hand, biking proves to be faster in zones like Amager Fælled Nord and Nordhavn S,
suggesting bikes are more suited for mobility in the city center or shorter, more direct routes. At the
same time, if we look at the data from Table 5.4 for zones with biking advantage and visually inspect
them in Figure 5.4, we can instantly observe that most of them like Fisketorvet, Christianshavn N
or Sydhavn Ø do not have direct access to a S­Train or Metro station, pointing out the vulnerabilities
of public transport in those areas.
41
==PAGE:48==
Public Transport Advantage
Biking Advantage
Zone Name
Mean
Difference
Total
Trips
Zone Name
Mean
Difference
Total
Trips
Charlottenlund S
­27.99
44
Amager Fælled nord
7.20
1052
Kastrup by NØ
­24.15
122
Christianshavn N
6.21
411
DTU N
­21.47
43
Nordhavn S
5.33
1855
Kastrup SØ
­18.73
119
DR­byen
4.41
1206
Hellerup Midt Ø
­16.17
137
Frederiksberg Vest Midt SØ
4.00
54
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
­15.65
386
Sundbyøster Nord NØ
3.94
211
Vestamager Metrostation
­12.83
569
Fisketorvet
3.91
2951
Vanløse Syd Ø
­11.97
187
Sydhavn Ø
3.68
2646
Bispebjerg NØ
­11.84
44
Christianshavn midt
3.62
1463
Ørestaden Metrostation
­10.81
619
Indre Østerbro SØ
2.98
132
Table 5.4: Public Transport vs. Biking: Top 10 Zones by Weighted Time Difference Advantage
(Trips > 40 for statistical reliance)
Cars
We employ the same approach for analyzing the comparison between public transport trip duration
and cars. Because there are almost no notable differences between the starting and ending zone
differences, we decided to only focus on the weighted average across zones given by Equation 5.1,
and can be visualized in Figure 5.5. Additionally, for a more granular inspection of the differences
between specific zones, the reader is advised to refer to Figure A.5 from the Appendix.
Figure 5.5: Weighted Average of Trip Duration Differences Between Public Transport and Car
Trips Across Zones
42
==PAGE:49==
After inspecting Figure 5.5 and Table 5.5 which showcases the weighted differences, we conclude
that cars are generally much faster than public transport in many zones, especially evident in the
outskirts of the city. This advantage is particularly striking in areas without direct access to ro­
bust public transport infrastructure. Zones like the entire Dragør area, Avedøre Holme Ø and Høje
Gladsaxe SV, as well as DTU and Herlev midt NØ, stand out as excellent examples where cars dra­
matically outpace public transport, highlighting their flexibility and time efficiency in less densely
connected regions. For comparison, we can observe on the map that some of the zones in the direct
vicinity of S­Train public transport stations such as Ballerup N, Klampemborg, or Hellerup Midt
Ø considerably compete with cars in their speed, especially if these trips are towards or from the
city center.
As we get closer to the city center, the gap between car travel and public transport begins to shrink
noticeably. This close difference demonstrates how strong the transportation system is in central
Copenhagen and how it can keep up with the convenience of shared car mobility.
However, a reversed phenomenon is observed in key central zones, where public transport is be­
coming faster than car travel, with over 2 minutes for Østerport Station. Significant areas such
as Central Station ­ Københavns Hovedbanegård, Vesterport, and Nørreport further demonstrate
the effectiveness of public transportation in the city center, where its speed advantage becomes
apparent. This change emphasizes again how vital these interconnected hubs are to the urban
transportation system inside Copenhagen.
Public Transport Advantage
Car Advantage
Zone Name
Mean
Difference
Total
Trips
Zone Name
Mean
Difference
Total
Trips
Østerport Station
­2.16
1290
Avedøre Holme Ø
18.04
525
Frederiksberg Vest N V
­1.77
260
Høje Gladsaxe SV
17.59
300
Københavns Hovedbanegård
­1.35
4190
DTU S
16.84
12738
Nørreport
­0.86
3774
Herlev midt NØ
16.38
3492
Tivoli
­0.53
567
Albertslund syd NØ
16.38
40
Vesterport Station Ø
­0.46
1687
Hvidovre
Hospital
og Risbjerg Midt NØ
15.27
2792
Valby NNØ
­0.44
3799
Ingeniørhøjskolen N
15.08
1957
Hellerup Midt Ø
­0.32
2447
Kongens Lyngby N
14.82
307
Vesterport Station V
­0.05
8365
Glostrup syd N
14.61
1223
Frederiksberg Øst S Ø
0.03
4753
Skovlunde N
14.38
378
Table 5.5: Public Transport vs. Car: Top 10 Zones by Time Difference Advantage
Our results show distinct mobility patterns: bikes are competitive in central areas and quicker in
those central zones with poor access to robust public transport infrastructure, but cars have an
advantage in the peripheries. As you get closer to the center, the difference in speed between
these modes and public transport gets smaller, pointing to a balanced urban transport system. This
analysis underscores the necessity for a multimodal transport strategy that balances the strengths of
each mode while meeting the particular needs of both central and peripheral urban areas ensuring
accessible and efficient movement for everyone.
5.1.3
The First and Last­Mile Problem
Investigating the implications of bike trips for addressing the first and last­mile problem is crucial
for enhancing urban mobility and accessibility, leading to an integrated multimodal transportation
network. First and last­mile connectivity refers to the essential segment of a journey that is usually
43
==PAGE:50==
overlooked but connects an individual’s starting point or final destination to a major transportation
hub, such as a bus station, metro station, or transit center.
We aggregated our data and computed the average proximity of a zone using the same weighted ap­
proach from Equation 5.1, and the results can be visually investigated in Figure 5.6 which illustrates
some exciting patterns. We can observe that most of the peripheral zones that intersect directly with
S­train stations exhibit very low proximity values averaging up to 350 meters, a walkable distance
of up to 4 minutes. This phenomenon wanes as we get closer to the city center. Because bike us­
age is very popular in the center and mostly for shorter distances, these observations lead us to the
following assumption: users residing in zones further from the city’s heart tend to use shared bikes
as a vital link in their commute, specifically for cycling to and from major public transport stations
as part of their journey to or from the city center. This trend underscores the shared bikes’ role
in enabling last­mile connectivity, particularly in peripheral areas where distances to transit hubs
can be efficiently bridged by cycling. Consequently, this preliminary analysis highlights a pattern
of reliance on bicycles to solve the first and last­mile problem, reflecting an integrated approach
to urban mobility where cycling complements public transport by closing the gap between transit
nodes and final destinations besides its vitality in central areas.
Figure 5.6: Weighted Average Distance Proximity to the Public Station for each Zone in Bicycle
Network.
For a more granular inspection of the top 15 zones with the lowest and highest proximity values,
44
==PAGE:51==
please refer to the Tables A.3, A.2 from the Appendix.
The car­sharing trips are not representative of the first and last­mile problem because there are
significantly more parking spaces for bikes near public transport stations than there are for cars.
Moreover, most car­sharing companies tend to cover areas with dense populations, but the same
goes for location of the stations themselves. Thus, we did not include the results in the main body
of our research. However, for completeness, we attached the illustration in the Appendix (Figure
A.6).
5.1.4
Heatmaps Pattern Exploration
To dive deeper into our analysis we decided to cherry­pick certain popular zones and areas of
interest from both bike and shared car datasets and explore mobility patterns through the lens of
heatmaps.
Bicycle Heatmaps
(a) Start Locations of Morning Arrivals at Central
Station (6­9 AM)
(b) End Locations of Morning Departures from
Central Station (6­9 AM)
(c) Start Locations of Afternoon Arrivals at Central
Station (3­6 PM)
(d) End Locations of Afternoon Departures from
Central Station (3­6 PM)
Figure 5.7: Comparative Heatmaps of Trip Origins and Destinations Associated with Central Sta­
tion During Morning and Afternoon Peaks for Bikes
Because the Central Station is the biggest and one of the most connected stations in Copenhagen,
we want to explore how cyclists interact with it during morning and afternoon peak hours. In
45
==PAGE:52==
the morning, we can observe in Figure 5.7a that users start their trips from primarily residential
areas in close vicinity like Vesterport, Nørrebro, Islands Brygge but also from the very center and
Sydhavn as well. This observation suggests users use the Central Station as a key hub in continuing
their journey to their workplace. On the other hand, in Figure 5.7b we can observe that the users
who start from Central Station in the morning, tend to commute to the city’s core, Islands Brygge,
where many businesses operate. Also, the data shows, that commuters do not prefer to take very
long trips, suggesting they might be using the bikes for last­mile connectivity. From the evening
interaction with the Central Station in the bottom row of Figure 5.7 we can observe a similar pattern
for both trips that start and end at the station. There is a clear pathway spanning from the Nørrebro
neighborhood to the center and Christiania. There is also a high density in Vesterport but also
around Frederiksberg Centret where one of the biggest malls is located.
(a) Start Locations of Arrivals at Nørreport ­ Run­
detårn
(b) End Locations of Departures from Nørreport ­
Rundetårn
(c) Start Locations of Arrivals at Gammelholm
(d) End Locations of Departures from Gammel­
holm
Figure 5.8: Comparative Heatmaps of Trip Origins and Destinations Associated with Nørreport
and Rundetårn (top) and Gammelholm (bottom) for Bikes (Short Trips only, Haversine Distance
<=2km)
Rundetårn and Gammelholm are the two most accessed zones in Copenhagen by cyclists of Don­
key Republic, while Nørreport is an important and busy transportation hub. Since Rundetårn and
Nørreport are in the exact vicinity with the Nørreport Station being at the border of both, the deci­
46
==PAGE:53==
sion was made to aggregate the mobilities to capture the full picture from that area. Moreover, we
were interested in exploring only the short trips around the areas. We can see in both rows of Figure
5.8 that for the same zone, the patterns are close to identical regardless if the trip started or ended
in those particular zones. For Nørreport ­ Rundetårn there is mobility towards Nørrebro, Meat
Pack district in Vesterbro, and obviously around the busiest and most iconic parts of Copenhagen
like Tivoli, Nyhavn, Christiania. For Gammelholm, one can notice more movement towards the
West in the same zones, however, there is no tendency to bike across the canal towards Christiania,
possibly because the distance is walkable and very picturesque. One can also observe that there is
a lot of interaction between Nørreport ­ Rundetårn and Gammelholm.
Cars Heatmaps
Given that The Technical University of Denmark and the Airport are amongst the most frequented
zones given by the data from Table 5.3, we would like to explore their mobility patterns. Because
the entire DTU campus contains two zones North and South, we decided to aggregate them to
highlight the full picture of mobility involving DTU. In Figure 5.9 one can observe that there
is almost no difference in mobility patterns of trips that start and end at DTU. This leads us to
the assumption that almost the same users use shared cars to commute to DTU and home. The
highest concentrations can be observed in the center with neighborhoods like Nørrebro, Østerport,
and Sydhavn. Curious enough, there is significant mobility between the two campuses of DTU,
namely Ballerup­Lyngby, and within the campus itself. The latter one is more surprising but also
understandable because if one is to walk from one side of the campus to the other it would take
up to 25 minutes which is a considerable amount of walking time. Thus, users recur to alternative
ways to commute faster on campus such as shared cars.
(a) Start Locations of all Arrivals at DTU
(b) End Locations of all Departures from DTU
Figure 5.9: Comparative Heatmaps of Trip Origins and Destinations Associated with The Techni­
cal University of Denmark
If we are to further break down the mobility associated with DTU during morning and afternoon
peak hours, in Figure 5.10 we observe an interesting seasonality. There is a higher density of trips
going to DTU in the morning and coming from DTU in the afternoon. On the other hand, there
is considerably decreased mobility from DTU in the morning and a slightly higher movement to
DTU in the afternoon. One can still see that regardless of the hour, there is consistent intra­campus
mobility.
47
==PAGE:54==
(a) Start Locations of Morning Arrivals at DTU (6­9
AM)
(b) End Locations of Morning Departures from
DTU (6­9 AM)
(c) Start Locations of Afternoon Arrivals at DTU
(3­6 PM)
(d) End Locations of Afternoon Departures from
DTU (3­6 PM)
Figure 5.10: Comparative Heatmaps of Trip Origins and Destinations Associated with The Tech­
nical University of Denmark During Morning and Afternoon Peaks for Cars
Figure 5.11 shows that the Airport is extremely connected with the majority of residential areas
in Copenhagen. One can notice high densities in Vesterbro, Sydhavn, Islands Brygge, Nørrebro,
Østerport, and others. Even though the airport is well­connected by all means of transportation,
it is still the most popular hub for car usage. This emphasizes people rely on flexibility, speed,
comfort, and luggage transportation when choosing a shared car over public transport.
Additional heatmaps can be investigated in the Appendix A
48
==PAGE:55==
(a) Start Locations of all Arrivals at the Airport
(b) End Locations of all Departures from the Airport
Figure 5.11: Comparative Heatmaps of Trip Origins and Destinations Associated with Copen­
hagen’s Airport (CPH)
5.2
Graph Analysis
In this section we delve into the analysis of urban mobility within Copenhagen through the con­
struction of two directed graphs; one graph represents bike­sharing data, and the other reflects
car­sharing data. The nodes in these graphs were constructed following the previous approach by
aggregating the start and end location for each individual trip into zones with the help of the Geo­
graphic Information System (GIS). This zonal approach simplifies the complexity of our analysis,
making it more feasible and insightful. Edges in these graphs represent trips made between these
zones, offering a directed perspective on mobility patterns between different areas of the city.
5.2.1
Graph Overview and Metrics
Below, in Figure 5.12a and Figure 5.12b one can see the graph representation of both networks. To
manage the vast amount of data from bike and car­sharing trips in our study, we specifically chose
to include only the edges with total trips above the 95th percentile for bikes and the 99th percentile
for cars in these visualizations. We applied the 95th percentile threshold for bikes and the 99th
for cars in visualizations due to their trip volume differences, ensuring the graphs highlight main
patterns without the distraction of less frequent data points. A lower threshold for bikes captures
their less dense network, while a higher one for cars focuses on major routes without clutter. These
thresholds were set after visually inspecting the networks to balance detail and clarity, effectively
spotlighting the most significant relationships. To further enhance the visualizations, each node
was placed in the center of its respective polygon, color­coded, and resized according to the total
number of trips associated with each, providing a direct visual correlation between node size and
trip frequency. Additionally, the edges were color­coded based on the average trip duration dif­
ference between bikes/cars and public transport equivalents to highlight the connections between
each zone better. This coding scheme illustrates the relative efficiency of each mode of transport,
with negative values indicating routes where public transport is faster and positive values where
bikes or cars are faster, respectively.
49
==PAGE:56==
(a) Bike network representation of edges above 95th percentile for Total Trips
(b) Bike network representation of edges above 99th percentile for Total Trips
Figure 5.12: Comparative visualizations of urban mobility networks in Copenhagen.
50
==PAGE:57==
The comparison between bicycle and car transportation networks, as summarized in Table 5.6,
provides insightful observations into the structural differences and complexities related to each
mode of transport through the lens of metrics, which include the number of nodes, edges, density,
average clustering, and local and global efficiency and if the network is strongly connected. We
are also computing both the weighted and unweighted average shortes path lengths.
Metric
Bicycle Graph
Car Graph
Number of Nodes
219
303
Number of Edges
13,515
54,354
Density
0.283
0.594
Average Clustering
0.686
0.778
Local Efficiency
0.863
0.915
Global Efficiency
0.669
0.848
Strongly Connected
True
True
Avg shortest path length(weighted)
5.456 km
8.235 km
Avg shortest path length(unweighted)
1.828
1.406
Table 5.6: Summary of Graph Metrics for Bike and Car Data
The bicycle network consists of 219 nodes and 13,515 edges, while the car network is denser with
303 nodes and 54,354 edges. This discrepancy in the number of nodes and edges between the two
networks comes directly from the data volume, which includes nearly three times more car trips.
The car network has a density of 0.594 compared to the bicycle network of 0.283. In other words,
only about 59.4% and 28.3% of all possible directed connections between zones (nodes) are ac­
tually realized in the form of trips. This difference suggests that, on average, the zones in the car
network are more interconnected compared to those in the bicycle network, which is due to the
broader accessibility and reach of car travel, including more direct routes and connections not fea­
sible for bicycles, especially between peripheral zones and long­distance trips. For example, if we
take a look again at Figure 5.12, we can observe a lot of interconnectedness between the Airport,
DTU zones, and the rest of the city. On the contrary, these links are completely missing or are very
sparse for the bicycle network which is concentrated more in the center with shorter trips.
Even though the bike network is more sparse, in the context of a transportation network, this is
a relatively high density, suggesting that the bike network in Copenhagen is quite interconnected
facilitating efficient bike mobility across many areas of Copenhagen.
The average clustering coefficient is another important metric, reflecting the degree to which nodes
in a network tend to cluster together. A higher average clustering coefficient (closer to 1) suggests
that the network tends to form tightly knit groups, where nodes are likely to be connected to each
other. The car graph has an average clustering coefficient of 0.778, while the bicycle graph’s
coefficient is 0.686. This indicates that, while both networks tend towards clustering, the car net­
work tends to have more tightly connected clusters which is again attributed to the fact that the car
network is more accessible and easier to reach some critical hubs such as the airport.
The local efficiency for bicycles and cars are 0.863 and 0.915, respectively, suggesting that car net­
works maintain high efficiency in localized neighborhoods, even when direct routes are disrupted.
Conversely, the bicycle network, while still efficient, shows slightly lower local efficiency, indi­
cating a denser or more redundant road network for cars. On a broader scale, global efficiency
metrics, 0.669 for bicycles and 0.848 for cars reveal that the car network facilitates more efficient
overall navigation across the entire network, highlighting better connectivity between distant areas
compared to the bicycle network.
51
==PAGE:58==
These two efficiency metrics not only highlight the structural and functional diversity between the
bicycle and car networks but also emphasize their respective roles in urban mobility, where the car
network’s infrastructure supports faster and more direct travel and the bicycle network prioritizes
route accessibility.
When it comes to connectedness, both networks are strongly connected which implies that there is
a path between any starting zone to any other zone within the system, adhering to the directionality
of the edges. Because our graphs possess this property it is possible to compute the average shortest
path length of the entire network.
We used two methods: one where we added the ”Average distance” between nodes as a weight
on each edge, and another without applying any weight. By applying the weight we got a more
concrete understanding of the spatial layout and connectivity of the network reflecting the typical
travel distance within the system. On the other hand, removing the weight from the calculation
reflects the average number of edges(steps) that need to be traversed to get from one node to another
across the entire network. This unweighted average gives us insight into the structural connectivity
of the graph rather than the physical distances between nodes. As we can observe in Table 5.6, on
average, to get from one zone to any other in the bike­sharing network, a cyclist would need to travel
about 5.456 kilometers. This relatively short distance reflects the compactness and accessibility
of the bike network, suggesting that bike­sharing is a convenient option for covering moderate
distances within the city. The average shortest path length of 8.236 kilometers in the car­sharing
network indicates that car trips cover longer distances than bike trips. This is not surprising, given
cars are often used for longer commutes and can access different areas that may not be as easily
reachable by bikes. Similar conclusions can be drawn from the unweighted analysis where for
bikes, on average, it takes slightly less than two edges (steps) to travel between any two nodes in
the bike­sharing network, whereas the car­sharing zones are very well­connected, often requiring
just one or a bit more steps to move between any two zones.
The differences in average shortest path lengths between bikes and cars can also reflect the suit­
ability of each mode for different types of trips within the urban environment. Bikes are more
suited for shorter, possibly more direct routes, while cars are typically used for longer distances
while requiring fewer edges to complete a trip which implies more advanced accessibility.
5.2.2
Popular Routes
Figure 5.13 and Figure 5.14, showcase the 15 most popular routes for bikes and cars within Copen­
hagen, revealing distinct cyclist and motorist preferences. For bicycles, the frequent travel between
Gammelholm and Fisketorvet, as well as the active movement in and around central neighborhoods
like Vesterbro, Indre Nørrebro, and Rundetårn, highlight the cyclists’ preference for routes that con­
nect key urban areas and popular destinations like the mall. At the same time, when contrasting it
to public transport, as described in Chapter 4 EDA one can observe that it is more convenient and
faster to commute by bike between these zones because of the direct bike roads that connect them.
For example, when looking at the public transport alternative average number of changes and trip
duration difference for these frequent trips in Table 5.7, we can clearly observe that the two most
popular Trips between Gammelholm and Fisketorvet are not very accessible by public transport
having an average of 0.559, more than twice above the overall average of 0.2. The same pattern is
observed for the route between Islands Brygge and Christianhavn. What is even more striking is
that for these three particular routes, the time it takes by bike is considerably lower than the public
transport reaching up to over 11 minutes, whereas the average across all routes is ­2.82 minutes,
meaning public transport is faster in general. Out of all the popular routes, only three are in the
negative zone with the majority still above average. Given these observations, most probably, the
popularity of these routes is directly influenced by the poor availability of direct public transport
routes but also the comparative speed advantage of bike trips in terms of trip duration.
52
==PAGE:59==
A thing which should not be forgotten is the discrepancy between the timeframe when these trips
happened and the time when public transport alternatives were extracted. We recommend going
back to Chapter 4 if there is a need to revisit the details.
Figure 5.13: 15 Most Popular Bike Routes. Edges are color coded by Average Trip Duration
Difference
53
==PAGE:60==
Route
Avg Pub
Transport
Changes
Avg Trip
Duration
Difference
Total
Trips
Gammelholm ­> Fisketorvet
0.559
11.34
136
Fisketorvet ­> Gammelholm
0.430
9.91
135
Vesterbro NØ ­> Indre Nørrebro NØ
0.098
5.07
112
Gammelholm ­> Vesterbro Midt
0.019
1.64
107
Rundetårn ­> Ydre Nørrebro SV
0.000
­5.04
105
Rådhuspladsen ­> Vesterbro N
0.000
­1.51
96
Vesterbro NØ ­> Kgs. Nytorv
0.000
0.51
96
Ydre Nørrebro SV ­> Rundetårn
0.000
0.13
93
Rådhuspladsen ­> Fisketorvet
0.000
1.33
93
Nordhavn S ­> Østerport Station
0.000
10.34
91
Islands Brygge S ­> Christianshavn midt
0.589
10.95
90
Dronningens Tværgade ­> Ydre Nørrebro SV
0.011
9.22
89
Vesterbro N ­> Amagertorv
0.000
0.93
88
Ydre Nørrebro SV ­> Nørreport
0.000
­2.62
87
Kgs. Nytorv ­> Indre Nørrebro NNØ
0.000
1.97
87
Table 5.7: 15 Most Popular Bike Routes with Total Trips, equivalent Average Public Transport
Changes, and Average Trip Duration Difference. The overall number of changes across the entire
dataset is 0.2 and the trip difference is ­2.82 min. Only cells where both are above their mean are
colored.
On the other hand, car routes exhibit a different pattern by having a significant concentration of
trips originating from the airport ­ ”Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs” towards diverse zones such as
”Sydhavn Ø” and ”Amager Fælled nord”, indicating a strong connection between the airport and
residential or business districts. At the same time, in the northern part of Copenhagen, one can
observe a lot of mobility between the Technical University of Denmark campus and the inner city,
but also to the second DTU campus in Ballerup under the name of Ingeniørhøjskolen SØ, indicating
it is an important hub in Copenhagen mobility. The heavy use of these routes shows that drivers
prefer quick trips to areas both inside and outside the city center that otherwise take a long time or
involve multiple changes by public transport, supported by the data from Table 5.8. For instance,
the majority of journeys involving the airport besides ”Langebro N” are not very accessible by
public transport which is reflected in the equivalent average number of changes being way above
the overall mean of 0.365 for the dataset, pointing towards a strong tendency to avoid complicated
public transport routes. Moreover, the difference in average trip duration significantly illustrates
the time advantage of using cars, with savings like 21.54 minutes over public transport for specific
routes. While the broader data set suggests cars are generally faster by an average of 4.51 minutes
across all routes, these certain car routes surpass that drastically, providing substantial efficiency.
To compare with the route to and from ”Langebro N”, if there is direct access to public transport
without changes, then the trip difference is not noticeable highlighting the importance of direct and
robust public transport connections.
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.14: 15 Most Popular Car Routes. Edges are color­coded by Average Trip Duration Dif­
ference
Route
Avg Pub
Transport
Changes
Avg Trip
Duration
Difference
Total
Trips
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs ­> Sydhavn Ø
0.943
21.54
513
Sydhavn Ø ­> Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
0.862
20.06
486
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs ­> Amager Fælled nord
0.581
21.19
267
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs ­> Langebro N
0.043
2.13
254
Sydhavn Ø ­> Ørestaden Metrostation
0.059
10.70
236
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs ­> Vesterbro N
0.714
7.01
231
Ørestaden Metrostation ­> Sydhavn Ø
0.185
11.72
229
DTU S ­> Indre Østerbro N
0.598
17.15
224
Ingeniørhøjskolen SØ ­> DTU S
0.009
17.42
211
Sydhavn S ­> Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
0.736
16.78
208
Ørestaden Metrostation ­> Sundbyøster Nord V
0.067
7.08
208
Langebro N ­> Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
0.030
0.44
199
Indre Nørrebro NNØ ­> DTU S
0.015
14.32
199
DTU S ­> Ingeniørhøjskolen SØ
0.000
18.99
198
DTU S ­> Indre Nørrebro NNØ
0.021
18.15
189
Table 5.8: Popular Car Routes, equivalent Average Public Transport Changes, and Average Trip
Duration Difference. The overall number of changes across the entire dataset 0.365, and the trip
difference is 4.51 min in favor of cars. Only cells where both are above their mean are colored.
55
==PAGE:62==
5.2.3
Analysis of Time Discrepancy Results
Expanding on our findings from Subsections 5.1.2 and 5.2.2 we aim to delve deeper into exploring
15 routes with the highest trip duration discrepancy, especially where shared mobilities win over
public transport. To ensure statistical reliability and mitigate the impact of outliers, the analysis
focused on edges with over 40 trips, capturing more consistent patterns of time difference.
(a) Bike vs. Public Transport Time Differences
(b) Car vs. Public Transport Time Differences
Figure 5.15: Copenhagen’s Top 15 Routes with the Largest Time Discrepancies Between Bike/­
Car and Public Transport (Routes > 40 trips). Edges are color­coded by Average Trip Duration
Difference
Figure 5.15 showcases some intricate patterns for both bike and car routes where public transport is
enormously falling behind. These routes are particularly important for spotting the vulnerabilities
within the public transport in Copenhagen. Bicycle advantages span from just under 10 minutes
up to over 19 minutes. We can observe many routes involve crossing the main Copenhagen canal,
particularly in the southwest part where trips are also short. Special bicycle bridges are facilitating
this efficient movement whereas public transport still needs to be optimized for speed for these
routes. Even though data from Table 5.9 suggests the majority of these routes would require a
below­average number of changes by public transport, they are still more direct and efficient by
cycling. This big advantage over public transport times explains why some of these routes are also
amongst the most popular ones as Table 5.13 states.
Conversely, cars have a massive advantage over public transport durations for longer trips, par­
ticularly involving the city’s outskirts such as DTU in the north, Ballerup Kommune in the west,
and Copenhagen Airport in the south. We can also spot with supporting data from Table 5.9 that
shared cars make possible mobility between zones that require multiple public transport changes
otherwise, which also explains prolonged public transport trips duration.
56
==PAGE:63==
Biking Advantage
Car Advantage
Route
Changes
Route
Changes
Christianshavn midt ­> Islands Brygge S
0.661
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs ­> DTU S
1.529
Islands Brygge S ­> Christianshavn midt
0.589
Ingeniørhøjskolen N ­> Ørestaden Metrosta­
tion
1.500
Gammelholm ­> Fisketorvet
0.559
DTU S ­> Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
1.449
Fisketorvet ­> Gammelholm
0.430
Sydhavn S ­> DTU S
1.320
Nordhavn S ­> Gammelholm
0.247
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs ­> DTU N
1.205
DR­byen ­> Fisketorvet
0.188
DTU N ­> Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
1.167
Fisketorvet ­> DR­byen
0.169
Hvidovre Hospital og Risbjerg Midt NØ ­>
Sundbyøster Nord S
1.114
Sydhavn Ø ­> Gammelholm
0.120
DTU S ­> Frederiksberg Vest N S
1.079
Islands Brygge S ­> Vesterbro Ø
0.078
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs ­> Vigerslev SV
0.957
Amager Fælled nord ­> Kastellet
0.043
DTU S ­> Utterslev NV
0.791
Amager Fælled nord ­> Vesterbro N
0.042
Charlottenlund NØ ­> DTU S
0.341
Ydre Nørrebro SV ­> Dronningens Tværgade
0.042
Ingeniørhøjskolen SØ ­> DTU N
0.330
Dronningens Tværgade ­> Ydre Nørrebro SV
0.011
Hvidovre Hospital og Risbjerg Midt NØ ­>
Ørestaden Metrostation
0.319
Vesterbro N ­> Amager Fælled nord
0
Skovlunde N ­> DTU S
0.061
Nordhavn S ­> Østerport Station
0
Tingbjerg NØ ­> DTU S
0
Table 5.9: Average Number of Public Transport Changes for Bike and Car Travel Across Top 15
Routes with the Largest Time Discrepancies Between Bike/ Car and Public Transport (Routes >
40 trips)
The integration of multimodal public transportation options, including shared mobility services, is
essential for enhancing urban mobility, offering residents flexible, efficient, and sustainable alter­
natives to single­mode journeys. These services not only complement public transport by bridging
gaps in the network but also alleviate congestion by redistributing the transportation load, making
the overall system more resilient and user­friendly.
5.2.4
Graph Centrality Metrics
Graph centrality metrics are pivotal for understanding the roles and influence of nodes and edges
within a network. These metrics include degree centrality, closeness centrality, node and edge
betweenness centrality, and eigenvector centrality. Each offers unique insights into the structural
importance of nodes. Degree centrality simply counts the number of direct connections a node has,
indicating its immediate influence. Eigenvector centrality extends the concept of degree centrality
by highlighting nodes that are not just well­connected but also connected to well­connected neigh­
bors, essentially measuring the influence of a node in a network. Closeness centrality calculates the
average shortest distance from one node to all others in a network, identifying key points that can
rapidly connect different transportation system parts. Betweenness centrality, on the other hand,
identifies nodes that act as critical bridges within the network, while edge betweenness centrality
extends this concept to the connections themselves, highlighting edges that frequently appear on
the shortest paths between pairs of nodes, serving as a direct indicator for traffic flow.
Degree Centrality
Figure 5.16 showcases the degree centrality for both bicycles and car networks. Both networks
are highly interconnected in the center with the cars spreading wider in a radial manner. We can
observe that the car network is more connected which is directly reflected by a higher density
explained in the previous section. Table 5.10 shows that the airport ­ ’Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs’
in cars network is involved in at least a trip with 97.5% of the nodes. It is impressive to find out
that no matter where people start, they would prefer to get to or from the airport by car.
57
==PAGE:64==
(a) Bicycles Degree Centrality
(b) Cars Degree Centrality
Figure 5.16: Cars and Bicycles networks nodes importance by Degree Centrality. Nodes are col­
ored and sized based on their centrality values.
Car Degree Centrality
Bike Degree Centrality
Node
Centrality
Node
Centrality
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs
0.975
Rundetårn
0.720
Dronningens Tværgade
0.950
Kgs. Nytorv
0.711
Vesterport Station V
0.937
Rådhuspladsen
0.709
Indre Østerbro N
0.930
Amagertorv
0.697
Pisserenden
0.925
Gammelholm
0.667
Rundetårn
0.916
Vesterbro NØ
0.667
Christianshavn S
0.906
Københavns Hovedbanegård
0.665
Utterslev NØ
0.899
Vesterport Station Ø
0.665
Kgs. Nytorv
0.899
Vesterbro Midt
0.658
Indre Nørrebro NØ
0.897
Vesterbro N
0.656
Table 5.10: Top 10 Nodes by Degree Centrality in Car and Bike Networks. Highlighted rows
overlap in both networks.
Eigenvector Centrality
After analyzing degree centrality, the eigenvector centrality map visualizations for both bicycles
and cars reveal a similar distribution and significance of nodes, mirroring the findings from the de­
gree centrality analysis. This similarity underscores a fundamental characteristic of Copenhagen’s
transportation networks: nodes that have a high number of connections (high degree centrality)
are also those that are connected to other well­connected nodes (high eigenvector centrality), rein­
forcing their pivotal roles within the network’s structure.
Given the similar pattern between the degree and eigenvector centrality analyses, the figures il­
lustrating the eigenvector centrality for both networks have been included in the appendix. For a
58
==PAGE:65==
detailed visual representation please refer to Figure A.12 in the Appendix.
Closeness Centrality
After a visual examination of Figure 5.17 we find that nodes at the city’s geographical center also
have the highest closeness centrality meaning that even without knowing the exact locations of
these nodes, their central role within the network becomes clear through analysis, revealing how
well the network’s structure mirrors the physical layout of the city.
Discovering that we can identify key spots in the network without needing geospatial data is not
surprising, yet it offers valuable insights. It reveals how Copenhagen’s transport system is designed
with major hubs right in the city center. This knowledge is important for city planners, emphasizing
that focusing on these central spots is key to making the whole city more connected and efficient.
(a) Bicycles Closeness Centrality
(b) Cars Closeness Centrality
Figure 5.17: Cars and Bicycles networks nodes importance by Closeness Centrality, weighted by
Average Distance between nodes. Nodes are colored and sized based on their centrality values.
Bike Closeness Centrality
Car Closeness Centrality
Node
Centrality
Node
Centrality
Vesterport Station Ø
0.279
Frederiksberg Vest NØ N
0.152
Vesterport Station V
0.274
Ørstedsparken
0.150
Pisserenden
0.272
Indre Nørrebro S
0.150
Ørstedsparken
0.270
Frederiksberg Øst N N
0.149
Indre Nørrebro S
0.270
Frederiksberg Øst Ø NV
0.149
Frederiksberg Øst Ø NØ
0.269
Ydre Nørrebro VSV
0.148
Vesterbro NØ
0.267
Ydre Nørrebro NNV
0.148
Rådhuspladsen
0.266
Indre Nørrebro SØ
0.148
Nørreport
0.266
Nørreport
0.148
Indre Nørrebro SØ
0.266
Ydre Nørrebro SV
0.148
Table 5.11: Top 10 Nodes by Weighted Closeness Centrality in Bike and Car Networks. High­
lighted rows overlap in both networks.
59
==PAGE:66==
Betweenness Centrality
The Betweenness Centrality measures the extent to which a node lies on the shortest paths between
other nodes, thus, identifying nodes that serve as bridges or connectors within the network. We
can visually inspect the centralities of both networks in Figure 5.18.
Table 5.12 highlights the ten most influential nodes for each mode of transportation where we can
observe key areas such as ”Sundbyvester Ø” and ”Tivoli” serve as critical points for both. These
spots are crucial for their role in linking different parts of the city, showcasing their significance in
Copenhagen’s transport system. The inclusion of ”Frederiksberg Øst Ø NV” in the top ranks for
both bikes and cars points to an overlap of pathways, indicating that certain locations are vital for
car travel too, alongside the city’s well­known cycling routes.
(a) Bicycles Betweenness Centrality
(b) Cars Betweenness Centrality
Figure 5.18: Cars and Bicycles networks nodes importance by Betweeness Centrality, weighted
by Average Distance between nodes. Nodes are colored and sized based on their centrality values.
Bike Betweenness Centrality
Car Betweenness Centrality
Node
Centrality
Node
Centrality
Frederiksberg Øst Ø NV
0.059
Hellerup SV
0.016
Sundbyvester Ø
0.047
Sundbyvester Ø
0.014
Indre Nørrebro S
0.045
Frederiksberg Vest NØ N
0.014
Tivoli
0.044
Tivoli
0.014
Sundbyvester N
0.043
Frederiksberg Øst Ø NV
0.013
Nordhavn Station
0.040
Kongens Have
0.012
Vesterport Station Ø
0.040
Frederiksberg Øst N N
0.011
Frederiksberg Øst NV S
0.039
Husum Ø
0.011
Amager Fælled nord
0.037
Nordhavn indre kaj
0.011
Ydre Nørrebro NV
0.037
Statens Serum Institut
0.011
Table 5.12: Top 10 Nodes by Weighted Betweenness Centrality in Bike and Car Networks. High­
lighted rows overlap in both networks.
60
==PAGE:67==
Thanks to the city’s strong support for biking, Copenhagen’s bike paths show better connection
scores than car routes. Bikes can take more direct routes through a well­planned network, unlike
cars which often face traffic and roadblocks. This situation highlights how well Copenhagen has
built its city to make biking an easy choice for getting around, serving as a great example for cities
worldwide.
Edge Betweeness
Diving deeper into betweenness centrality analysis, we are curious to investigate some of the most
critical connections for the flow of trips in the network. By applying a weight to the centrality
calculations, values not only reflect the number of shortest paths that pass through an edge but also
incorporate the distance of these paths, giving a nuanced view of the network’s functioning. This
facilitates the identification of paths that are significant for longer­distance connectivity as well,
not only for short trips. Both graphs were treated as undirected for calculating edge betweenness
centrality to capture the bidirectional flow, highlighting their connection rather than direction. This
directly relfects the real­world scenario with most traffic between any nodes being both ways.
Figure 5.19 illustrates the most influential paths for bike and car networks, respectively. In both
images, we can see some of the central nodes are very crucial in connecting multiple pathways. For
bikes for example we can see the Bispebjerg NV—Rådhuspladsen­Kgs. Nytorv­Refshaleøen link
which is very important for connecting and facilitating the flow from Nørrebro through the center
and all the way to Refshaleøen. The path between Nordhavn Station and Kastellet is important,
and it is most probably linked further with the center but did not find its way amongst the 15 most
influential edges. This link highlights the importance of flow between the center and the north
port area. In general, there is a higher density of nodes and edges in the very center connecting to
those spread further away. This means that the central areas act as crucial hubs in Copenhagen’s
bike network, facilitating efficient connectivity and access across the city, thereby underscoring the
city’s infrastructure’s focus on ensuring that cyclists can navigate with ease from more residential
or peripheral areas into the dense urban core and beyond.
The car picture is somewhat similar to that of bikes but with obviously longer paths, still a high
density in the center but more spread out. One can directly observe that the majority of the nodes
are interconnected, which stems directly from a higher network density when compared to bicy­
cles. We can observe multiple long links with the two longest and most direct being Vigerslev Sta­
tion/Ørestaden Metrostation­Sydhavn Ø­Indre Nørrebro Ø­DTU S and Vigerslev Station/Ørestaden
Metrostation­Sydhavn Ø­Droningens Tværgade­Charlottenlund S. Apart from these, a few trian­
gular connections show multiple efficient routes between 2 nodes(zones).
61
==PAGE:68==
(a) Bicycles Edge Betweenness Centrality
(b) Cars Edge Betweenness Centrality
Figure 5.19: Top 15 Routes by Edge Betweenness Centrality in Car and Bike Networks weighted
by Average Distance between nodes. Edges are color­coded based on their centrality values.
The visual insights described above coupled with the data from Table 5.13 lead us to the conclusion
that these edges are strategically important for enabling efficient city­wide mobility. The edge
betweenness centrality for cars is twice as large as that of bikes due to a more dense and extensive
car network. Nevertheless, for both networks, the values are relatively low which suggest a couple
of things. First, there are localized usage patterns in the city center mostly for bicycles, reducing
the relative betweenness of edges that connect broader areas. Second, both networks are well­
distributed with multiple alternative paths connecting different zones as clarified by the presence
of the triangular connections, meaning no single edge is overwhelmingly critical for connectivity.
Bike Edge Betweenness Centrality
Car Edge Betweenness Centrality
Route
Centrality
Route
Centrality
Kastellet ­ Nordhavn indre kaj
0.0036
Dronningens Tværgade ­ Sydhavn Ø
0.0084
Rådhuspladsen ­ Kgs. Nytorv
0.0023
Dronningens Tværgade ­ Ørestaden Metrostation
0.0078
Kgs. Nytorv ­ Refshaleøen
0.0022
Christianshavn S ­ Emdrup V
0.0073
Amagertorv ­ Langebro N
0.0020
Sundbyøster Nord S ­ Amagertorv
0.0073
Tivoli ­ Amagertorv
0.0018
Ørestaden Metrostation ­ Sydhavn Ø
0.0072
Rådhuspladsen ­ Bispebjerg NV
0.0018
Charlottenlund S ­ Hellerup SØ
0.0070
Nordhavn Station ­ Nordhavn indre kaj
0.0018
Indre Nørrebro NØ ­ Sydhavn Ø
0.0068
Rundetårn ­ Frederiksberg Øst N N
0.0018
Dronningens Tværgade ­ Ydre Østerbro S
0.0068
Rundetårn ­ Sydhavn S
0.0018
Dronningens Tværgade ­ Charlottenlund S
0.0066
Islands Brygge S ­ Christianshavn midt
0.0018
Christianshavn S ­ Vesterport Station V
0.0064
Sydhavn Station ­ Sydhavn Ø
0.0018
Hellerup SØ ­ Indre Østerbro N
0.0064
Vesterbro NØ ­ Indre Nørrebro NØ
0.0018
Sydhavn Ø ­ Vigerslev Station
0.0059
Christianshavn Midt V ­ Refshaleøen
0.0018
Kastrup Lufthavn Udenrigs ­ Sundbyøster Nord N
0.0048
DR­byen ­ Fisketorvet
0.0018
Dronningens Tværgade ­ Vesterport Station V
0.0045
Vesterbro Ø ­ Pisserenden
0.0017
Indre Nørrebro NØ ­ DTU S
0.0045
Table 5.13: Comparative Analysis of Top 15 Routes in Bike and Car Networks by Edge Between­
ness Centrality
Consequently, through the lens of edge betweenness centrality, we demonstrate that both our net­
62
==PAGE:69==
works are resilient and efficient. Ideally, a resilient and efficient network would not have too high a
centrality on many edges, as this would indicate a heavy reliance on specific paths that, if disrupted,
could significantly impact mobility.
5.2.5
Louvain Community Identification
Analyzing Copenhagen’s commuting habits through the Louvain method reveals insightful patterns
in both bike and car­sharing networks. This approach effectively segments these networks into
distinct communities, by modularity optimization as explained in Chapter 3 where nodes within
the same community have denser connections, while connections between communities are sparser.
The visual representation of the communities from both bicycle and car networks is depicted in
Figure 5.20
(a) Bicycles Louvain Communities
(b) Cars Louvain Communities
Figure 5.20: Cars and Bicycles networks nodes/zones grouped by the Louvain Community Algo­
rithm.
Let’s take a look at the bicycle network on the right in Figure 5.20a. There is a clear geographical
split into three distinct areas: the Center­North, Amager, and Western, each reflecting the city’s ge­
ographical layout. These communities have strong internal connectivity, aligning with the unique
characteristics of these regions. Interestingly, there are certain outlier zones that, despite geograph­
ical separation, maintain strong connections with their communities, which could be explained by
their interest and ties to those specific zones.
The car­sharing network is divided into three main communities as well, showcasing a slightly dif­
ferent spatial arrangement, but still similar to the bicycle communities: North­East, North­Weast,
and Amager extending towards the west. This variation likely originates from the broader reach
of car travel. Similar to the bike­sharing analysis, there are a few exceptions like the airport and
Albetsund zone which have stronger ties to the yellow community, overriding geographical prox­
imity.
63
==PAGE:70==
The Louvain community detection aligns with the graphical representations of mobility patterns
for both bikes and cars, as shown in Figure 5.12, confirming the method’s accuracy in capturing the
underlying structure of transportation networks, and at the same time, underscoring the pivotal role
of spatial factors in shaping urban commuting patterns as observed from geographical clustering.
64
==PAGE:71==
6
Discussion
In this chapter, we will also reflect on our limitations and how to address them in the future. We
will also discuss suggestions and recommendations based on our results and what further research
can be done.
6.1
Limitations and Mitigations
In subsection 4.5.3 we already introduced the limitations related to the temporal mismatch between
the datasets which span from 2017­2019 and the extracted public transport itineraries in October
2023 using the Open Trip Planner (OTP) API. To mitigate this limitation two approaches could be
considered. Firstly, getting access to more recent data from bike and car­sharing services would
reflect the current state of shared mobility networks, including expansions, and improvements.
Secondly, obtaining historical public transport data corresponding to the period covered in our
datasets would have allowed for a precise comparison between modes, facilitating us in identifying
the exact public network vulnerabilities from past times. This factor would have been crucial
in improving our comparative analysis and demonstrating with supporting data the evolution of
public transport and the importance of the construction of metro lines M3 and M4 in optimizing
passenger flow across the city. Thus, by implementing these two suggested approaches we would
gain a holistic view of the past, the evolution along the way, and a very clear understanding of the
actual picture of the multimodal transport network in Copenhagen.
The other limitation is the lack of the ”first and last mile” in our shared mobility data. Thus, our
analysis does not account for the distances users may need to walk to reach or leave shared vehicles
which could cause the equivalent public transport trips to take longer door­to­door. To mitigate
this issue, if shared mobility providers were to make available the data on the exact locations of
users at the time they reserve a vehicle before the trip begins, it would offer a precise picture of the
actual start location at least. This detailed information would greatly enhance the accuracy of our
analysis, especially in calculating the true distances involved in the ”first and last mile,” providing
a more accurate comparison to public transport and the general representation of mobility. If the
data is made available, one could expand on the current research and calibrate the findings further
providing even more accurate results.
6.2
Suggestions
6.2.1
Metro line M4 Expansion
The public transport network in Copenhagen is in continuous expansion to reach more residents and
make their mobility and flow around the city very smooth and efficient. Reflecting on our analysis,
there’s an apparent necessity to extend the M4[78] metro line into Sydhavn. This conclusion is
based on our data­driven analysis that uncovered significant public transport gaps in Sydhavn,
which is a very busy residential zone including the Fisketorvet shopping center. Our thorough
study demonstrates that zones where Metro line M3 and current M4 pass through, have higher
transportation efficiency, highlighting their crucial role in improving urban mobility. The extension
of the M4 line into Sydhavn promises to bridge these gaps, which will significantly benefit every
commuter in those zones by providing easy access to and consolidating Copenhagen’s transport
network. This expansion, will not only solve current problems but also validate our findings which
advocate for a crucial need in the development of transport infrastructure, replicating the positive
impact of M3 and the current state of the M4 lines.
65
==PAGE:72==
6.2.2
Arguments for Metro line M5 Construction
Moving on, our findings further support the proposal of the metro line M5[79] construction in
Copenhagen. The building of crucial new stations will significantly enhance the city’s transport
network and improve the accessibility to zones that currently struggle and fall behind alternative
shared transportation services. Our results show that central zones like: Amager Fælled nord
(south of Islands Brygge), east of DR Byen, Sundbyøster Nord NØ (north of Lergravsparken),
Amagerværket(HOFOR Power Station), Refshaleøen are amongst the most vulnerable ones for
public transport when compared to bicycles and cars. The proposed map of M5 addresses the
majority of critical accessibility issues identified in our study and mentioned above. Our data
highly supports the construction of this new metro line and also aligns well with planned new metro
stations locations. However, adding one more station between Prags Boulevard and Refshaleøen
would solve the accessibility issue to Amagerværket. Some very popular zones like Christianshavn
Midt and Christianhavn N remain uncovered by M5. However, the proposed M5 orange line [80]
could be extended with one more station to Christianshavn Midt before connecting to Østerport,
which will significantly optimize the traffic in that region, considering its residential area expansion
which includes Papirøen[81] for instance. To visually check the expansion of M4 and the proposed
M5 and M5 Orange lines, please refer to Figures A.13, A.14 and A.15 from the Appendix.
These expansions not only strengthen the connectivity of key residential and industrial zones in
Copenhagen but also contribute to the city’s vision for a complete and efficient transportation
network, ensuring that all zones, particularly those identified in our analysis, are well­served and
integrated into the whole transportation network of Copenhagen.
6.2.3
Campus­only bicycle fleet at DTU
Given high observed mobility patterns and the considerable walking time across DTU’s growing
campus as demonstrated in Subsection 5.1.4, deploying a campus­only bicycle fleet could signifi­
cantly enhance intra­campus travel. We suggest bikes because they offer a cheaper, more environ­
mentally friendly, and space­efficient mode of transport, perfectly suited for the short but frequent
trips between and within campus zones. Our current findings, more in­depth analysis, and an ad­
ditional campus­wide survey amongst students and staff would be an excellent starting point to
assess the feasibility of this solution.
6.3
Future Work
As explained above in limitation, obtaining accurate updated, or historical data will set the stage
for a more precise analysis of the mobility network.
Despite hitting multiple limitations during our study, we have managed to overcome some of them
and consider this methodology could be used in the future for other papers. For instance, if other
articles about car­sharing services possess information about the type of trip (one way or round trip)
[21] we had to gauge unsupervised machine learning algorithms with data from external sources
(OTP API) to draw conclusions about the data.
During our research, we analyzed the idea of incorporating socio­economic data to learn more
about user profiles. Despite available data from the Bureau of Statistics of Denmark [82], it would
be difficult to estimate the financial profile of the customers because there are many underlying
assumptions. For instance, mapping the users’ age and gender with a statistical average profile for
the same parameters would mislead and is prone to errors in the absence of residence, education
level, and other variables. Therefore, we believe our thesis is a good starting point for policy makers
who have access to personal information to expand the demand forecasting for these services.
Further, using state­of­the­art deep learning models such as Spatio­Temporal Graph Neural Net­
works (STGNNs)[83] which are advanced extensions of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) designed
to handle data that varies across space and time can significantly contribute to demand forecasting
66
==PAGE:73==
in Copenhagen’s zones. These advanced neural networks are trained to capture complex spatial
and temporal dependencies ingrained in urban mobility data, making them well­suited for pre­
dicting demand in different zones. By analyzing historical mobility patterns and incorporating
additional factors like traffic flow, weather conditions, and urban development projects, STGNNs
can forecast future transportation needs with high precision. This would enable city planners and
transportation authorities to better allocate resources, optimize transport networks, and ultimately
enhance urban mobility efficiency.
67
==PAGE:74==
7
Conclusion
Throughout this thesis, we researched the multimodality of the public transport system in Copen­
hagen. The goal was not to solve a particular challenge but rather to use sophisticated tools to
uncover deep commuting patterns with the available data, aiming to understand the complex in­
teraction between different modes of public transport and shared mobility services. We seek to
provide practical insights for policymakers, urban planners, and transportation providers while
contributing to the academic research and discussion on urban mobility and multimodal transport
systems. We utilized a wide range of traditional statistical, data­driven analysis tools, as well as
graph­based methodologies.
During the Exploratory Data Analysis, we discovered daily and hourly patterns in car and bike us­
age. We employed the K­means machine learning clustering algorithm to discover and aggregate
user groups based on their activity levels. We extracted the public transport trip equivalent for each
bike and car trip to set the stage for a novel head­to­head comparison of these services. The statis­
tical analysis helped us confirm or reject multiple hypotheses during our research. We discovered
active cyclists are faster but also cover more distance than the rest, how rush hours influence car
trip duration, and how these compare to public transport duration during and outside those peak
hours. Cars outperform public transport in terms of trip duration, especially as the complexity of
public transport routes increases, while bikes show a more mixed performance, reflecting their
unique position in the urban mobility landscape.
Thanks to rich datasets of bike and car­sharing trips, as well as auxiliary geographic information
and extracted public transport itineraries, we aggregated trip start and end locations into zones, fa­
cilitating a focused analysis of mobility between zones. Through visualizations, we identified the
most and least frequented zones for both bicycles and cars. The comparative analysis of transporta­
tion times emphasizes the efficiency of public transport in the city center and its competitive edge
over cars and bikes in specific zones. At the same time, we successfully addressed the implications
of bike usage towards first and last­mile connectivity.
We constructed directed graphs to delve deeper into the relationships and connectivity between
different zones and we discovered the most popular routes as well as the most efficient ones where
both bikes and cars have a major advantage over public transport. By applying graph central­
ity metrics and community detection algorithms, we brought to light the influential nodes within
the networks, and communities based on shared transport pathways, emphasizing the importance
of strategic locations in bridging different parts of the city and enhancing the efficiency of the
transport system. We have tested the networks’ resilience to disruptions through the lens of edge
betweenness centrality index. We highlighted the critical roles of certain zones as hubs of con­
nectivity, with central areas and major transport nodes like the Central Station, Rundetårn, and
Gammelholm in both shared mobilities and transportation hubs such as Kastrup Airport and DTU
for cars emerging as pivotal in facilitating urban flow.
A key insight from our research is the complementarity of bike­sharing and car­sharing services to
Copenhagen’s existing public transport system. This approach provides clarity in understanding
urban movement patterns, highlighting the flow of traffic in and out of specific areas. Integra­
tion of each transportation mode forms a robust, flexible, and efficient urban mobility ecosystem
by leveraging their strengths and acknowledging their limitations. Our comparative analysis of
popular routes and time discrepancies demonstrated the potential for shared mobility services to
fill gaps in the public transport network, offering faster and more direct connections for certain
journeys.
68
==PAGE:75==
This analysis provides a wide overview of Copenhagen’s transportation infrastructure, highlighting
its strengths and vulnerabilities, as well as potential areas for development and service growth.
69
==PAGE:76==
References
[1]
Michael Batty. The New Science of Cities. The MIT Press, 2013. ISBN: 0262019523; 9780262019521.
URL: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9399.001.0001.
[2]
Manuel Castells. The Rise of the Network Society. Wiley­Blackwell, 2010.
[3]
Benoit B. Mandelbrot. The Fractal Geometry of Nature. W.H. Freeman and Company, 1982.
[4]
Paul Longley and Michael Batty. Spatial Analysis: Modelling in a GIS Environment. GeoIn­
formation International, 1996.
[5]
Q. Xie and E. K. K. Seng. “Primal and Dual Graphs in Urban Network Analysis”. In: Urban
Studies Research (2011).
[6]
Bill Hillier. Space is the Machine: A Configurational Theory of Architecture. Cambridge
University Press, 1996.
[7]
M. Barthélemy. “Spatial Networks”. In: Physics Reports 499.1­3 (2011), pp. 1–101.
[8]
R. Albert and A.­L. Barabási. “Statistical mechanics of complex networks”. In: Reviews of
Modern Physics 74.1 (2002).
[9]
M. Newman. Network Science. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[10]
Michael Batty. “Urban growth models: A historical review”. In: Ecological Modelling 296
(2015), pp. 1–10.
[11]
P. L. Jacobsen. “The impact of street network design on pedestrian volume”. In: Urban
Studies 48.8 (2011), pp. 2143–2156.
[12]
John Montgomery. “Assessing urban vitality: Indicators and policies”. In: Journal of Urban
Design 19.1 (2014), pp. 1–20.
[13]
Aura Reggiani and Peter Nijkamp. “Resilience of transportation networks: From classical
approaches to recent developments”. In: Research in Transportation Economics 34 (1 2012),
pp. 1–7.
[14]
Todd Litman. “Multimodal transportation planning: Challenges and opportunities”. In: Trans­
port Policy 36 (2014), pp. 266–276.
[15]
John Pucher and Ralph Buehler. “Connecting the dots: Strategies for expanding urban bi­
cycle infrastructure”. In: Journal of Transport Geography 34 (2014), pp. 105–112.
[16]
Kevin M. Leyden. “Measuring liveability in urban centers”. In: Social Science & Medicine
65 (8 2007), pp. 1644–1655.
[17]
Xin Qu, Gordon Yu, and Bo Yu. “Urban mobility and car sharing”. In: Emerging issues in
urban mobility (2017).
[18]
Koen Frenken and Juliet Schor. “The economic interaction between car sharing and public
transport”. In: Transport Policy (2017).
[19]
Robyn Dowling and Jennifer Kent. “Practice and public–private partnerships in sustainable
transport governance: The case of car sharing in Sydney, Australia”. In: Transport Policy
40(2015) (May 2015), pp. 58–64. DOI: 10.1016/j.tranpol.2015.02.007.
[20]
Francesco Ferrero et al. “Car­sharing services: An annotated review”. In: Sustainable Cities
and Society 37 (2018), pp. 501–518.
[21]
Danilo Giordano, Luca Vassio, and Luca Cagliero. “A multi­faceted characterization of free­
floating car sharing service usage”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Tech­
nologies 125 (2021), p. 102966.
[22]
Henrik Becker, Francesco Ciari, and Kay W Axhausen. “Comparing car­sharing schemes in
Switzerland: User groups and usage patterns”. In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice 97 (2017), pp. 17–29.
70
==PAGE:77==
[23]
Grzegorz Wielinski, Martin Trépanier, and Catherine Morency. “Carsharing versus bike­
sharing: Comparing mobility behaviors”. In: Transportation Research Record 2650.1 (2017),
pp. 112–122.
[24]
Emilio Picasso et al. “Car­sharing vs bike­sharing: A choice experiment to understand young
people behaviour”. In: Transport Policy 97 (2020), pp. 121–128.
[25]
Bing Zhu et al. “Revealing the driving factors and mobility patterns of bike­sharing com­
muting demands for integrated public transport systems”. In: Sustainable Cities and Society
(2024), p. 105323.
[26]
Riccardo Ceccato and Marco Diana. “Substitution and complementarity patterns between
traditional transport means and car sharing: a person and trip level analysis”. In: Transporta­
tion 48 (2021), pp. 1523–1540.
[27]
Aaron Kolleck. “Does car­sharing reduce car ownership? Empirical evidence from Ger­
many”. In: Sustainability 13.13 (2021), p. 7384.
[28]
Rozaliia Tarnovetckaia and Hamid Mostofi. “Impact of car­sharing and ridesourcing on pub­
lic transport use: Attitudes, preferences, and future intentions regarding sustainable urban
mobility in the Post­Soviet city”. In: Urban Science 6.2 (2022), p. 33.
[29]
Susan Shaheen, Elliot Martin, and Adam Cohen. “Public bikesharing and modal shift be­
havior: a comparative study of early bikesharing systems in North America”. In: (2013).
[30]
Marie Karen Anderson, Otto Anker Nielsen, and Carlo Giacomo Prato. “Multimodal route
choice models of public transport passengers in the Greater Copenhagen Area”. In: EURO
Journal on Transportation and Logistics 6.3 (2017), pp. 221–245.
[31]
Tan Yigitcanlar et al. “A GIS­based land use and public transport accessibility indexing
model”. In: Australian planner 44.3 (2007), pp. 30–37.
[32]
Jan Scheurer. “Measuring Copenhagen’s public transport accessibility and network perfor­
mance in a European context”. In: Proceedings from the Annual Transport Conference at
Aalborg University. Vol. 20. 1. 2013.
[33]
Rafael Martínez Márquez and Giuseppe Patanè. Graph­Based Analysis and Visualisation of
Mobility Data. 2023. arXiv: 2310.06732 [cs.DM].
[34]
Bruno Scalzo Dees et al. “Graph Theory for Metro Traffic Modelling”. In: July 2021, pp. 1–
5. DOI: 10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9533420.
[35]
Somnath Mukherjee. “Statistical analysis of the road network of India”. In: Pramana 79.3
(2012), pp. 483–491.
[36]
Zhao Tian et al. “Analysis of Urban Road Traffic Network Based on Complex Network”.
In: Procedia Engineering 137 (2016). Green Intelligent Transportation System and Safety,
pp. 537–546. ISSN: 1877­7058. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2016.01.290.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877705816003179.
[37]
B. Boulmakoul et al. “Combinatorial connectivity and spectral graph analytics for urban
public transportation system”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 27 (2017). 20th EURO
Working Group on Transportation Meeting, EWGT 2017, 4­6 September 2017, Budapest,
Hungary, pp. 1154–1162.
[38]
Y. Liang et al. “Fine­grained urban flow prediction”. In: Proceedings of the Web Conference
2021. 2021.
[39]
M. E. J. Newman. Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[40]
Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz. “Collective dynamics of ‘small­world’ networks”.
In: Nature 393 (1998), pp. 440–442.
[41]
Vito Latora and Massimo Marchiori. “Efficient behavior of small­world networks”. In:
Physical Review Letters 87.19 (2001), p. 198701. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.198701.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.198701.
71
==PAGE:78==
[42]
A. Adam, J­C. Delvenne, and I. Thomas. “Detecting communities with the multi­scale Lou­
vain method: robustness test on the metropolitan area of Brussels”. In: Journal of Geograph­
ical Systems 20 (2018), pp. 363–386. DOI: 10.1007/s10109-018-0279-0.
[43]
W.L. Hamilton. Graph Representation Learning. Synthesis lectures on artificial intelligence
and machine learning. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2020. ISBN: 9781681739632. URL:
https://books.google.dk/books?id=V6HnzQEACAAJ.
[44]
M. Labonne. Hands­On Graph Neural Networks Using Python: Practical techniques and
architectures for building powerful graph and deep learning apps with PyTorch. Packt
Publishing, 2023. ISBN: 9781804610701. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
P063EAAAQBAJ.
[45]
Douglas B West. Introduction to Graph Theory. Prentice hall, 2001.
[46]
Mark Newman. Networks. Oxford university press, 2018.
[47]
Wikipedia contributors. Graph theory — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Graph_Theory. 2024.
[48]
Mikko Kivelä et al. “Multilayer networks”. In: Journal of complex networks 2.3 (2014),
pp. 203–271.
[49]
Albert­László Barabási. Network science. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
[50]
Jari Saramäki et al. “Generalizations of the clustering coefficient to weighted complex net­
works”. In: Physical Review E 75.027105 (2007).
[51]
Jukka­Pekka Onnela et al. “Intensity and coherence of motifs in weighted complex net­
works”. In: Physical Review E 71.6 (2005), p. 065103.
[52]
Giorgio Fagiolo. “Clustering in complex directed networks”. In: Physical Review E 76.2
(2007), p. 026107.
[53]
Giulio Costantini and Marco Perugini. “Generalization of Clustering Coefficients to Signed
Correlation Networks”. In: PloS one 9.2 (2014), e88669.
[54]
Thomas H Cormen et al. Introduction to algorithms. 3rd ed. MIT press, 2009.
[55]
Mark EJ Newman and Michelle Girvan. “Finding and evaluating community structure in
networks”. In: Physical review E 69.2 (2004), p. 026113.
[56]
Vincent D Blondel et al. “Fast unfolding of communities in large networks”. In: Journal of
statistical mechanics: theory and experiment 2008.10 (2008), P10008.
[57]
Vincent A Traag, Ludo Waltman, and Nees Jan van Eck. “From Louvain to Leiden: guaran­
teeing well­connected communities”. In: Scientific reports 9.1 (2019), pp. 1–12.
[58]
Nicolas Dugué and Anthony Perez. Directed Louvain: maximizing modularity in directed
networks. Tech. rep. HAL Archives­ouvertes, 2015.
[59]
Giuseppe Bonaccorso. Machine Learning Algorithms ­ Second Edition. Packt Publishing,
2018.
[60]
AMAZON AWS. What is an API? https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/api/. 2024.
[61]
OpenTripPlanner. OpenTripPlanner Documentation. https://docs.opentripplanner.org/
en/v2.4.0/. 2024.
[62]
Matthew Wigginton Conway, Deborah Salon, and David A. King. “Open Transit Data for
Improved Transportation Equity”. In: Transportation Research Record 2652.1 (2017), pp. 1–
8. DOI: 10.3141/2652-01.
[63]
Interquartile Range. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interquartile_range. 2024.
[64]
Scribbr. Interquartile Range (IQR). https://www.scribbr.com/statistics/interquartile-
range/. 2023.
[65]
Samuel Sanford Shapiro and Martin B. Wilk. “An analysis of variance test for normality
(complete samples)”. In: Biometrika 52.3/4 (1965), pp. 591–611.
[66]
George Casella and Roger L. Berger. Statistical Inference. Duxbury, 2002.
[67]
William J. Conover. Practical Nonparametric Statistics. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
72
==PAGE:79==
[68]
Myles Hollander, Douglas A. Wolfe, and Eric Chicken. Nonparametric Statistical Methods.
3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[69]
Olive Jean Dunn. “Multiple comparisons among means”. In: Journal of the American Sta­
tistical Association 56.293 (1961), pp. 52–64.
[70]
Jacob Cohen. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988.
[71]
Larry V. Hedges. “Distribution theory for Glass’s estimator of effect size and related esti­
mators”. In: Journal of Educational Statistics 6.2 (1981), pp. 107–128.
[72]
GreenMobility. About Us | GreenMobility. https://www.greenmobility.com/dk/en/.
2024.
[73]
SHARE NOW. About Us | SHARE NOW car­sharing. https://www.share-now.com/dk/
en/about-us/. 2024.
[74]
Donkey Republic. How It Works ­ Donkey Republic. Accessed: 2024­03­30. 2023. URL:
https://www.donkey.bike/how-it-works/.
[75]
Allen B. Downey. Think Stats: Exploratory Data Analysis in Python. Version 2.1.0. Need­
ham, Massachusetts: Green Tea Press, 2014.
[76]
Maria Cristina Mariani, Osei Kofi Tweneboah, and Maria Pia Beccar­Varela. Data Science
in Theory and Practice: Techniques for Big Data Analytics and Complex Data Sets. First.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2022.
[77]
B LOUIS Decker. “World geodetic system 1984”. In: Defense Mapping Agency Aerospace
Center St Louis Afs Mo (1986).
[78]
Metroselskabet. M4 til København S. 2024. URL: https://m.dk/vi-bygger-nye-linjer/m4-
til-koebenhavn-s/.
[79]
Copenhagen Municipality. Metrolinje M5. 2024. URL: https://metrolinjem5.kk.dk/.
[80]
Copenhagen Municipality. Metrolinje M5. 2024. URL: https://storymaps.arcgis.com/
collections/3963f11909aa4e0cacbbc97c4e479abd?item=3.
[81]
Papirøen. https://papiroeen.dk/. 2024.
[82]
Statistics Denmark. https://www.dst.dk/en/. Accessed: 2024­04­01. 2024.
[83]
Guangyin Jin et al. Spatio­Temporal Graph Neural Networks for Predictive Learning in
Urban Computing: A Survey. 2023. arXiv: 2303.14483 [cs.LG].
73
==PAGE:80==
A
Appendix
(a) Available GM cars on map near Gentofte
Any of the green icons when selected point to an
available car which the user can access.
(b) Example of a GM Trip Summary
The user drove 2.7 km for almost 11 minutes. Start
and drop­off location also indicated.
Figure A.1: GreenMobility App User Interface
Figure A.2: Share Now trip report
74
==PAGE:81==
Dimension
Description
Type
TripDurationHours
the time difference between StartTime and
EndTime
numerical (hours)
TripDurationMinutes
the time difference between StartTime and
EndTime
numerical (minutes)
AvgSpeed
the average speed of the trip calculated as
the ratio of KmDriven and TripDurationHours
numerical (km/h)
Month
Extracted from StartTime
text
Weekday
Day of the week extracted from StartTime
text
StartHour
The hour the trip started at
Extracted from StartTime
numerical
HaversineDistance
The shortest distance between
start and end location of the trip
accounting for the curvature of the earth
numerical (km)
CarDistanceKm
the distance between a start location and
end location as if traveled by car
retrieved from OTP API
numerical (km)
Table A.1: Auxiliary dimension used for EDA for Share Now and GreenMobility. Introduced by
the authors.
The formula for Haversine distance is:
a = sin2
∆ϕ
2

+ cos(ϕ1) · cos(ϕ2) · sin2
∆λ
2

(A.1)
c = 2 · atan2
 √a,
√
1 −a

(A.2)
d = R · c
(A.3)
where:
• ϕ1 and ϕ2 are the latitudes of points 1 and 2, respectively, in radians,
• ∆ϕ is the difference in latitudes,
• ∆λ is the difference in longitudes, in radians,
• R is the radius of the Earth (mean radius = 6,371 km),
• d is the distance between the two points (along the surface of the sphere),
• a is the square of half the chord length between the points,
• c is the angular distance in radians.
75
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.3: Share Now user interface
Figure A.4: Share Now outliers detection
76
==PAGE:83==
(a) Cars Start Zone Duration Difference
(b) Cars End Zone Duration Difference
Figure A.5: Trip duration difference between public transport and cars for each starting and ending
zone.
Zone Name
Weighted Avg Proximity
Trips
Kastellet
977.86
1968
Christianshavn Midt V
890.60
1362
Sundbyøster Nord NØ
883.40
211
Nordhavn S
882.81
1855
Amager Fælled nord
867.69
1052
Esplanaden
831.95
540
Indre Østerbro SØ
793.02
132
Nordhavn indre kaj
757.95
619
Nordhavn Midt
743.23
279
Valby NNV
733.71
44
Ørstedsparken
695.26
979
Dronningens Tværgade
669.77
2203
Kastrup by NØ
668.52
122
Amalienborg Ø
655.13
2152
Kalvebod Brygge
634.58
391
Table A.2: Top 15 Zones in the Bikes Network with the Highest Weighted Mean Proximity to
Public Transport Stations
77
==PAGE:84==
Zone Name
Weighted Avg Proximity
Trips
Brønshøj Ø
69.26
30
Charlottenlund S
92.22
44
Lyngby C+Vest N
109.45
36
Buddinge S
118.42
32
Christianshavn midt
131.61
1463
Emdrup V
145.00
66
Kastrup SØ
146.77
119
Svanemøllen Station
154.78
455
Vanløse Syd Ø
155.88
187
Hellerup Midt Ø
164.17
137
Bispebjerg SV
164.17
263
Grøndal Øst S
178.70
321
Grøndal Øst Ø
189.96
239
Bispebjerg NØ
191.11
44
Danshøj N
193.21
232
Table A.3: Top 15 Zones in the Bikes Network with the Lowest Weighted Mean Proximity to
Public Transport Stations. (Trips >30)
Figure A.6: Weighted Average Distance Proximity to the Public Station for each Zone in the Car
Network.
78
==PAGE:85==
(a) Start Locations of Arrivals at Gentofte
(b) End Locations of Departures from Gentofte
(c) Start Locations of Arrivals in Tarnby Kommune
(d) End Locations of Departures from Tarnby Kom­
mune
(e) Start Locations of Arrivals at the airport
(f) End Locations of Departures from the airport
Figure A.7: Heatmaps of Trip Origins and Destinations Associated with Gentofte, Tarnby Kom­
mune, and the Airport for Bikes
79
==PAGE:86==
(a) Bicycle Distribution
(b) Car Distribution
Figure A.8: Bicycle Trip Distance and Car Trip Distance Distributions Across User Categories
80
==PAGE:87==
(a) Bicycle Distribution
(b) Car Distribution
Figure A.9: Bicycle Trip Speed and Car Trip Speed Distributions Across User Categories
81
==PAGE:88==
(a) Bicycle Distribution
(b) Car Distribution
Figure A.10: Comparisons of trip durations between bike and public transport and between car
and public transport across different levels of transport changes
82
==PAGE:89==
(a) Bicycle Trip Durations and Distance vs. Public Transport
(b) Car Trip Durations and Distance vs. Public Transport
Figure A.11: Comparison of Trip Duration and Distance and Public Transport Equivalent by each
hour of the day for Bicycle and Car data
83
==PAGE:90==
(a) Bicycles Eigenvector Centrality
(b) Cars Eigenvector Centrality
Figure A.12: Car and Bicycle networks nodes importance by Eigenvector Centrality, weighted by
Average Distance between nodes. Nodes are colored and sized based on their centrality values.
Figure A.13: Metro line M4 with planned expansion[78]
84
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.14: Proposed Metro line M5[79]
Figure A.15: Proposed Orange Metro line M5[80]
85
==PAGE:92==
StartHubName
Number of trips
Nørreport St. (Nørre Voldgade)
454
Nørreport St. (Depot)
192
Israels Plads
158
Vandkunsten
147
Central Station
145
Reventlowsgade
141
Tourist Information Office
125
Mindenkaeret
124
Torvehallerne
122
Founders House
120
Kongens Nytorv St.
119
Israels Pl. II
114
Christianshavn St.
114
Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek
113
Tycho Brahe Planetarium
109
Table A.4: Top 15 locations for invalid trip: DR
UserID
Trips
Time (min)
Trip (km)
35595
788
18.02
4.38
45688
785
31.65
7.28
41516
670
22.10
3.65
10152
641
31.57
7.09
2889
504
28.18
6.09
35768
456
23.95
4.43
22484
420
28.21
5.31
46971
395
19.71
5.27
41919
393
24.53
6.74
605
386
41.29
7.69
30338
384
28.18
5.17
19212
367
20.25
3.55
44886
365
26.30
6.25
35462
365
23.80
5.53
7035
365
22.64
4.92
Table A.5: Top 15 most frequent SN users
UserID
Trips
Time (min)
Trip (km)
51152
1
34.32
6.00
51150
1
36.68
10.00
41202
1
20.37
2.00
51144
1
101.10
35.00
51112
1
22.65
3.00
41205
1
43.63
16.00
51139
1
58.42
16.00
41206
1
43.98
17.00
51135
1
29.27
7.00
28987
1
27.18
5.00
51127
1
76.90
31.00
51126
1
41.02
17.00
51125
1
32.70
10.00
41219
1
199.52
60.00
59197
1
99.55
71.00
Table A.6: SN occasional users
86
==PAGE:93==
UserID
Trips
Time (min)
Trip (km)
11894
332
21.09
6.32
10627
273
21.00
6.23
9216
234
31.26
6.50
5279
229
29.78
5.82
11969
225
18.07
5.79
4489
215
21.94
5.65
14412
209
21.31
5.94
7317
209
27.17
6.98
9685
207
20.99
5.98
3709
203
26.96
5.86
7445
199
28.40
6.10
14411
196
20.02
5.76
8373
188
29.80
7.05
3847
184
32.26
5.43
14841
184
31.52
5.46
Table A.7: Top 15 most frequent GM users.
UserID
Trips
Time (min)
Trip (km)
6995
1
20.70
4.00
14591
1
25.32
7.00
7005
1
22.50
4.00
14588
1
44.42
8.00
7028
1
27.58
7.00
7037
1
16.73
3.00
7042
1
26.90
14.00
14578
1
36.37
16.00
14576
1
35.78
6.00
7051
1
37.93
18.00
14570
1
20.48
6.00
7053
1
16.87
5.00
7055
1
28.58
7.00
7074
1
12.62
6.00
19118
1
32.12
7.00
Table A.8: GM occasional users.
Figure A.16: Granular demand per hour per day of the week: SN
87
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.17: Granular demand per hour per day of the week: GM
Figure A.18: Granular demand per hour per day of the week: DR
88
==PAGE:95==
89
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
