==PAGE:1==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode
characterization
Supervisor:
Peter Vang Hendriksen
Co-supervisor:
Morten Phan Klitkou
Author:
Denise Ferraresi (s211270)
May 16, 2024
==PAGE:2==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Energy Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Solid Oxide Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.1
Why SOCs? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.2
Operating principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.3
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.3.1
Electrolyte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.3.2
Electrodes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2.3.2.1
Fuel Electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2.3.2.2
Oxygen Electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.2.4
Cell Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.2.5
Symmetric Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1.2.6
Thesis Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2
Methods
21
2.1
Tape casting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
Electrochemical characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
Physical characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.1
Scanning electron Miscroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Results and Discussion
29
3.1
Developments in the cell manufacturing route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Impact of Current collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.1
EIS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.1.1
EIS and Rs replicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.1.2
Effect of gas composition and temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2.2
Sources Of Polarization Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2.3
Polarization Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.2.4
Activation Energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.2.5
Identification Of The Causes Of The High Total Polarization Loss
. . . . . .
62
3.2.5.1
Impurities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
3.2.5.2
Setter Plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.2.5.3
Microstructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
3.2.5.3.1
Pt samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
3.2.5.3.2
NiO Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
3.2.6
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
3.3
Effect of Different Reduction Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3.3.1
EIS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3.3.1.1
Reduction Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3.3.1.2
EIS and Rs replicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
3.3.1.3
Effect of gas composition and temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
3.3.1.4
Polarization Losses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
3.3.1.5
Activation Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
3.3.2
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
4
Summary and Closing Remarks
114
References
119
5
Appendix
125
5.1
Appendix A: Ohmic Resistance Of The Testing Electrical Fixtures . . . . . . . . . .
125
5.2
Appendix B: Gas Conversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
5.3
Appendix C: EIS Data & Fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
i
==PAGE:3==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
5.3.1
Current Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
5.3.1.1
Pt Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
5.3.1.2
NiO(663) Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
5.3.1.3
835 Setter Plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
144
5.3.2
Effect of Different Reduction Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
5.3.2.1
Protocol III-880
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
5.3.3
Effect of Different Reduction Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
162
5.4
Appendix D: Data from Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
5.4.1
Stability Ellingham diagram of NiO/Ni. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
5.5
Appendix E: Technical Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165
5.6
Appendix F: Kr¨oger-Vink notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165
ii
==PAGE:4==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
1
Introduction
1.1
Energy Context
Today’s energy market is undergoing unprecedented changes. The global energy crisis prompted
by the sad political situation in the Middle East and the Western World and Asia, which raised
concerns about energy security and affordability, and the greater awareness of the consequences
of global warming and climate change, the effects of which on the World’s ecosystems and overall
human well-being are becoming ever more evident, have created significant momentum for clean
energy transitions.
The global average surface temperature today stands already at around 1.2 °C above pre-industrial
levels and the total energy-related CO2 emissions have not ceased to decreased, but in 2023 reached
a new record high of 37.4 Gt, with a growth of 1.1% since 2022 (Figure 1); this is in contrast with
the rapid downfall required to meet the ambitious climate goals set out by the Paris Agreement [1].
Tackling environmental issues associated with energy use calls for a more rapid decarburization of
the energy sector [2], with huge policy effort to pave the way for sustainable alternatives based on
renewable energy sources (RES), and adoption of more clean, energy-efficient technologies, with the
aim of putting a stop to the rising trajectory of CO2 emissions.
Figure 1: Global energy-related CO2 emissions and their annual change during 1900-2023 [1].
Consistent with meeting the ambitious climate goals, a rapid expansion of renewables was ex-
perienced in the last decade, mainly of wind and solar, with investments in clean energy rising by
40% since 2020. In 2023 additions in global wind and solar photovoltaics (PVs) capacity increased
by 75% on 2022 levels, for which a record 540 GW of added capacity was reported, and sales in
electric vehicles (EVs) went up 35% on 2022 levels [1].
In particular, solar photovoltaics (PV), aided by the fall of module prices and expansion of manufac-
turing capacity, has witnessed an unprecedented growth. An 8-fold increase in annual additions of
PV capacity was experienced since 2010 and this trend , as seen in Figure 2, is expected to continue
at a much faster pace according to the Internation Energy Agency (IEA) Stated Policy Scenario
(STEPS), with manufacturing capacity set to reach 1200 GW after 2025.
Page 1 of 165
==PAGE:5==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 2: Global solar module manufacturing and solar PV capacity additions in the Stated Policy
Scenario (STEPS) during the period 2010-2030 [2].
500 GW of solar PV capacity is set to be deployed globally in 2030, but as observed in Figure 2
there is room for greater growth given the under-utilization of the projected available manufacturing
capacity, which represents a significant opportunity to accelerate the transition to a clean energy
society [2].
Greater planned expansion of RES is anticipated in the coming years; 80% of new power capacity
to 2030 in the STEPS is set to be covered by RES, with solar PV representing more than half of
this addition.
It is clear that pushing RES technologies has played an important role in combating climate change,
despite CO2 emissions so far kept increasing; without the growing deployment of clean energy
technologies global emissions would have been and are projected to be higher, in comparison what
was to be expected in pre-Paris baseline Scenario, as illustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Global energy sector CO2 emissions in the pre-Paris Baseline Scenario and the STEPS in
the period 2015-2030 [2].
Although CO2 levels rose, the percentage growth of emissions was substantially slower than
Page 2 of 165
==PAGE:6==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
global GDP growth, for which the greater deployment of clean energy technologies was to thank, as
illustrated in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Change in CO2 emissions from energy combustion and avoided emissions from deployment
of major clean technologies during the years 2019-2023 [1].
What drove about two-thirds of the annual rise in energy-related CO2 emissions from 2022
levels was the cumulative negative effect of weather, which caused the global shortfall in power
generation from wind and hydro, the latter caused by severe and prolonged droughts in the areas of
interest, and an increase in cooling demands in 2023, the hottest year on record, and the effect of
resumed travel with continued post-Covid reopening, which resulting in an increase in aviation and
transport-related Co2 emissions (Figure 5) [1]. As this downfall points out, with a higher incidence
of extreme weather conditions anticipated with global warming, which will have an impact on the
energy sector and cooling and heating energy needs, mitigating the same causes of climate change
will prove even more challenging.
Figure 5: Change in global CO2 emissions by driver in the period 2022-2023 [1].
As economic growth and energy demand are not expected to halt anytime soon, finding low-
emissions ways to meet the rising total energy demand, for which an average annual growth rate
of 0.7% to 2030 is projected in the STEPS, is necessary. This is even more crucial in developing
and emerging economies in Asia and Africa, the main drivers, where, as Figure 6 shows, most of
Page 3 of 165
==PAGE:7==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
the global population growth of 1.7 billion by 2050 is expected to be situated in urban areas and,
hence, where demand for energy services are projected to increase with rates of urbanization and
GDP growth. According to the STEPS these economies will account for about 80% of global rise
in electricity demand, therefore, investments and financing in clean sources of electricity will be
a determining factor to combat climate change. In these countries the switch from fossil fuels to
low- to zero-emission fuels and clean sources of electricity will have a significant impact on emission
abatement, specifically RES replacing coal power will be responsible for a 40% in total emission
decline projected between today and 2030 [1].
Figure 6: Change in population in urban and rural areas by region to 2050 [2].
The volatility in energy markets, a ramification of the global energy crisis resulting from the
tumultuous geopolitical context, highlighted the importance of affordable and reliable energy supply
and its diversification, especially in fossil-fuel importing countries, after the electricity price spikes
witnessed when gas supply to Europe was cut by Russia, its major supplier before the invasion of
Ukraine.
This provided governments with the financial incentive to decrease their economies’s reliance on
fossil fuels, whose global demand was seen to decline from the mid-2020s and is expected to continue
to decrease by an average of 3 EJ per year up to 2050 in STEPS, as shown in Figure 7, with China
primarily offsetting their increase in demand, mainly in emerging and developing economies.
Hence, in response to market signals, greater investments in clean energy alternatives followed in
recent years (Figure 8).
Despite this glowing picture presented, uncertainty of outcomes are high, especially considering
that at 2018 levels World’s proved oil and gas reserves were still sufficient to meet 50 years of
global production, while coal proved reserves were expected to last for another 132 years [3]. This
underlines that the fossil fuel era may be far from being over, especially if the national pledges made
by countries to ultimately become carbon-free are not respected and if remaining countries do not
soon start to take part in these efforts.
Page 4 of 165
==PAGE:8==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 7: Fossil fuel consumption by fuel in the STEPS during the period 2000-2050 [2].
Figure 8: Global energy investment in clean energy and fossil fuels [2].
The clean energy transition will need to also heavily rely on the electrification of important
sectors and end-uses, which comes with inherent efficiency advantages.
In recent years, energy demand has been growing at a faster rate than technological change can keep
up with, which had serious implications on efforts to meet climate and energy goals. It is, therefore,
important that the transition to a sustainable energy system go hand-in-hand with sustained and
rapid gains in energy efficiency, also of fossil fuels-driven technology to cut emissions in the near-
term while their are still in use, which will play a critical role in moderating the growth of energy
demand, while the deployment of low-carbon and sustainable options is underway, taking some of
the strain off the supply side and the environment, but without undermining economic growth.
According to the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE) Scenario, which limits global warming to
1.5°C, other than tripling RES power capacity in 2030 from 2022 levels, rapid energy efficiency
improvements and electrification of end-uses are necessary to meet the requirement of a 4% increase
in energy intensity in 2030 (Figure 9), which will entails more stringent stringent efficiency standards
for technologies and end-use devices, deployment of large-scale near zero-emissions plants in energy-
intensive sectors and faster roll-out of EVs [2]. As highlighted in Figure 10, significant investments
need to be dedicated to achieve this target.
Page 5 of 165
==PAGE:9==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 9: Global renewables power capacity and primary energy intensity improvements in 2020 and
2030 in the Net Zero-Emission Scenario. [2].
Figure 10: Average annual clean energy investment needs by region/country in the Net Zero Emission
Scenario for the period 2022-2050 [2].
The higher penetration of RES in the energy mix forecast in the coming years, especially of
solar and wind, which in Denmark already account for almost 50% of electricity supply, will require
to overcome the challenges of effectively integrating these intermittent energy sources in currently
not-so-flexible power systems [4].
As emphasized in Figure 10, major investments for grid extension and in digitalisation and smart-grid
systems will be required to improve management and stability of electricity flows, as an increasing
share of variable generation from wind and solar PV is accomodated.
Until the extension of energy infrastructures and the implementation of smart grid systems is re-
alized, the development of efficient, cost-effective and scalable storage will, therefore, be crucial to
cope with the inevitable increase in the share of RES.
Page 6 of 165
==PAGE:10==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
1.2
Solid Oxide Cells
1.2.1
Why SOCs?
In Today’s complex energy context solid oxide cells (SOCs) have gained a lot of attention as a key
enabling technology for efficient power generation and large scale storage.
The idea of SOCs as a viable efficient and potentially green alternative to conventional fossil-based
power systems has gained a lot of traction in recent years.
Conventional power production systems involve a multi-step energy conversion process, from chem-
ical to thermal to mechanical to electric energy, with fuel combustion representing the main heat
source, generally responsible for the largest exergetic loss in a power cycle, as well as the production
of a significant amount of polluting compounds.
Fuel cells, on the other hand, allow to directly convert the chemical energy of a fuel into electricity
through electrochemical reactions, with water and heat as the only byproducts when H2 is used as a
fuel. Thus their conversion efficiencies are not subject to the Carnot limitation as more conventional
systems.
As highlighted in Figure 11, the efficiencies reached by these electrochemical devices are generally
higher than those of other commercial energy conversion technologies.
Moreover, if the waste heat generated by fuel cells operating in the intermediate and high temper-
ature range can be recovered for use in cogenerative industrial and residential applications (e.g. to
satisfy domestic hot water and space heating needs), or is converted in additional power output by
integrating this technology with a heat engine in hybrid solutions (e.g. gas turbines for large scale
stationary applications), a further increase in the overall system efficiency can be achieved.
Figure 11: Efficiency vs. power comparison between energy conversion technologies. [5].
Although the environmental impact of this efficient power generation technology will depend on
production path of fuel employed, it is generally lower; if H2 supplied as fuel is obtained via water
electrolysis using renewable-generated electricity, life-cycle emissions can be near zero.
As mentioned, to accommodate a significant share of variable RE, there is the need for cost-efficient
storage for grid balancing. Chemical-energy storage of the excess electricity from RES represents
the most effective option, as other available storage technologies are not able to provide cheap and
seasonal (i.e. for few months) large scale storage of electricity.
In this front, SOCs can play an essential role. if operated in electrolysis mode they give the pos-
sibility to convert surplus RES electricity into storable fuels (power-to-X). From steam and CO2
electrolysis, H2 and CO (syngas) can be obtained, which are also used as feedstock for a wide variety
Page 7 of 165
==PAGE:11==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
of commodity chemicals for which there is an also an increasing need; these can be converted into a
variety of e-fuels (e.g.methane, methanol, ammonia, synthetic diesel and kerosene) via the Fischer-
Tropsch reaction ((2n+1)H2+nCO −→CnH2n+2+nH2O), more easy to handle and transport than
H2, given their higher boiling points and higher volumetric energy densities, even when it is in its
compressed form, with acceptable gravimetric energy densities in comparison to other energy storage
systems like batteries, as summarized in Figure 12.
While economical and technical challenges related to transport and storage of H2 are big hurdles to
overcome, storage of energy in the form of these e-fuels is much more feasible, with the possibility
to use with the latter already existing hydrocarbon infrastructures.
Figure 12: Volumetric and gravimetric energy density for selected energy-storage technologies. [6].
This can also help decarbonize the hard-to-abate heavy-duty transport sectors, such as aviation
and the shipping, where compact and lightweight on-board fuel storage is a requirement. This is
especially true if CO2 captured can be recycled to produce these e-fuels, with further possibility of
heat integration to generate the steam required. Methanol, liquefied natural gas and ammonia are
starting to being considered as viable fuels for naval applications.
From this aspect, SOCs are expected to play a major role in the not-so-distant future, as key
enablers in the green transition.
Nonetheless, their large-scale uptake and commercialization requires further reduction in costs to
become competitive alternatives, as well as improvements in durability to extend stack and system
lifetime to at least 50,0000 h [7].
1.2.2
Operating principle
SOCs are electrochemical devices that can convert between chemical and electric energy (and partly
heat due to overpotentials). SOCs like any other fuel cell consist in three important components: a
positive oxygen electrode, a negative fuel electrode and an electrolyte in between them, as schemat-
ically depicted in Figure 13.
An external electrical circuit connects the electrodes, allowing the
transfer of the electrons involved in their half-cell reduction and oxidation reactions (in Figure 13
the H2 and O2 reactions).
A key characteristic of SOC compared to other fuel cells types is that they employ oxide-ion con-
ducting ceramics as electrolyte materials, which makes them inherently much more fuel-flexible, as
the source of ions comes from the oxygen electrode side, while for example with polymer membrane
fuel cells, H containing compounds need to be supplied at the fuel electrode, where H+, which are
the charge carrier ions in the electrolyte of these cells, are generated.
When SOCs are operated under galvanostatic or fuel cell mode (SOFC), H2 and/or CO supplied at
the fuel electrode undergoes oxidation, releasing 2e-:
H2 + O2−→H2O + 2e−
(1.1)
CO + O2−→CO2 + 2e−
(1.2)
Page 8 of 165
==PAGE:12==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
These will reach the oxygen electrode through the external circuit, where they are consumed in the
reduction reaction there taking place:
1/2O2 + +2e−→O2−
(1.3)
This net-movement of electrons in the external circuit corresponds to an electrical current flowing
from the cathode to the anode, which will be equal in magnitude the ionic current flowing in the
electrolyte to close the circuit. Hence, these heterogeneous electrochemical reactions occurring at
the surface of the electrode, are the means by which a current can flow from the cathode to the
anode and electrical work can be done by the system.
The process is reversed when SOCs are operated in electrolysis mode (SOEC), with reactions occur-
ring in the opposite direction, in which case power needs to be supplied to drive the non-spontaneous
full cell reactions. Under electrolytic operation the oxygen electrode, where oxide ions are oxidized
to O2, will then act as the anode and the fuel electrode, where H2 and/or CO are produced by
reduction reactions, will act as the cathode.
Regardless of the direction in both operating modes, the amount of charge generated at the anode
in every instance will be equal to the one consumed at the cathode.
By allowing electron transfer between the electrode to take place in the external circuit, rather than
directly between the reacting species, the e- flow between the electrodes can be used to perform
work or drive the reactions in the desired direction and at the desired rate, by controlling either the
voltage or current of the system.
Figure 13: (a) SOEC: power is supplied to split H2O electrochemically into H2 and O2.(b) SOFC:
H2 is combined electrochemically with O2 to produce H2O and power [8].
In absence of an external electrical connection between the electrodes, hence, at open circuit,
there will be no net reactions taking place at either electrode and the system is said to be at
equilibrium. Under these conditions, at each electrode the rate of the forward and backward reactions
will be the same. The difference in electron energy at the two electrodes, determined by their reaction
equilibrium, is measured as voltage at open circuit (OCV) and is what drives the reaction and current
flow once the circuit is closed without any DC power source. This, unless there is significant gas
cross-over or electronic leakages due to defects and non-negligible electronic connductivity in the
electrolyte, will be close to the Nernst potential, given by the following equation:
U = U o −RT
nF ln
Y
asi
i
(1.4)
where n is the moles of electrons transferred, F=96485 C/mol is Faraday’s constant, T[K] the
temperature, si the stoichiometric coefficients of the i-species in the reaction, taken by convention
positive for products and negative for reactants; ai is the activity of the gaseous i-species that, by
taking as their standard state that of a pure ideal gas at 1 bar and temperature of the system, can
be approximated with its partial pressure Pi, a simplification valid except at very high pressures
where interaction between the gas molecule are no longer negligible.
U o [V] is standard Nernst potential, which can be obtained from the standard Gibbs free energy
change, remembering that the potential represents the work per unit charge required to move charge
Page 9 of 165
==PAGE:13==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
between the two electrode, as follows:
U o = −∆Go
nF
(1.5)
Figure 14: Example of a SOC current-voltage curve at 850°C, with a 50/50 H2O/H2 gas mixture
supplied to the fuel electrode and air supplied to the oxygen electrode. SOC crosssection schematics
showing the electrical and oxygen activity gradients in SOEC, at OCV and SOFC are included. [7].
As shown in Figure 14, SOCs are operated at voltages higher than the OCV in electrolysis
mode and lower in fuel cell mode to drive the reactions in the desired direction and rate, due to
irreversible kinetic, mass transport and ohmic losses occurring in the cells. The difference between
the operating or applied potential and the equilibrium Nernst potential is termed overpotential.
The activation overpotential is associated with the kinetics of the reactions, which involve energy
barrier that the reacting species need to overcome to proceed in the desired direction. It represents
the additional free energy required to speed up the charge transfer reactions to a rate reflected by
the net current.
Mass transport-related overpotentials are associated to the build up of concentration gradients in
the electrodes, as species are consumed and produced at the surface of active sites with respect to
the bulk of the gas phase. Mass transport limitations become eminent at high current densities
and low reactant concentrations, when removal of products and supply of reactant from and to
electrochemically active site are slower than what is needed to sustain a certain current density.
These losses depend strongly on current density, reactant activity, and electrode microstructure.
Ohmic overpotentials are associated to the resistance to ion and electron transport in the different
cell components, and contact resistance between the different layers. Generally, electrode ohmic
contributions are negligibly small in SOC, leaving this kind of losses to be mainly dominated by the
electrolyte ionic resistance.
As displayed in Figure 15 for the H2 and CO reactions, the change in the Gibbs free energy due
to the entropy term will decrease with temperature as an increasing fraction of the energy needed
can be supplied in the form of heat.
The decrease in Gibbs free energy, which represents the minimum input of electric energy required
to drive the electrolytic reactions, is an argument in favor of high temperature SOC electrolysis,
besides enhanced reaction kinetics. Ideally, SOEC should be operated as close as possible to the
thermoneutral potential UT N calculated based on the heating value of the produced H2:
UT N = ∆Ho
nF
(1.6)
Page 10 of 165
==PAGE:14==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 15: Total Energy(∆H), electrical energy (∆G), and thermal energy (T∆S) as a function of
temperature [9].
At this voltage, electrolyzer efficiency is of 100%, as heat generated by internal irreversibilities
in the cell are able to make up for the exact required by the electrolysis reaction.
Below UT N
efficiencies go above 100%, which entails that an external heat source is required to close the gap
between enthalpy and the Gibbs free energy. Above UT N these go below 100%, indicating that the
heat generated internally in the cell exceeds the one required for the electrolysis process and needs
to be removed.
In this respect operating close to UT N represents the sweet spot, however, reducing capital costs
motivates to go for higher voltages to have higher cell current densities, as these will decrease with
H2 production rates [9]. By increasing temperature, as the reversible potential decreases, it becomes
therefore possible to operate closer to UT N and at higher current densities.
In the case of SOFC, on the other hand, a decrease in Gibbs free energy means that the maximum
work that can be extracted is lower, as a higher amount of energy is dissipated as heat. Nevertheless,
efficiencies for the re-utilization of these enthalpy losses are higher as temperature is increased, which
would lead to higher overall system efficiency if the higher-value heat can be recuperated.
For what concerns the effect of pressure, given that the mentioned reactions as written proceed
with decrease in number of moles, i.e. contraction of volume, a decrease in the Gibbs free energy
change and increase in reversible potential follows for increasing pressures:
∂∆G
∂P

T
= ∆V < 0 ⇒
∂U
∂P

T
= −∆V
nF > 0
(1.7)
Despite the higher electrical energy input required by SOEC at higher pressures, enhanced kinet-
ics due to higher catalyst coverage, hence, higher reaction rates at any given polarization are an
advantage. Moreover, the possibility to produce the gases already at the high pressures required
for storage and transport and their end-uses, makes high pressure electrolysis attractive. Especially
in the case of H2, compression work could be cut back by compressing water in its liquid state
beforehand, rather than such as small size gas molecule after.
Nevertheless, technical challenges concerning sealing and material resilience at the high tempera-
tures SOC are operated, limit pressures to a few bar. Indeed, in this thesis work cells were operated
at 1 bar.
1.2.3
Materials
High temperature operation has its advantages, in terms of fast kinetics, which eliminate the need
for precious metal catalyst like Pt in polymer membrane systems, and in terms of thermodynamics,
as discussed for electrolysis, it enables internal reforming of fuels and offers the possibility of higher
Page 11 of 165
==PAGE:15==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
“quality” waste heat recovery for cogeneration purposes, allowing to raise system efficiency. On
the downside, SOC components need to withstand very harsh oxidizing and reducing conditions,
which limits the choice in materials that can be used, mainly brittle ceramics, which does not help
in the end goal of extending cell and system lifetime, also considering that components’ chemical
stability may be undermined by the more accelerated sintering and inter-diffusion at high tempera-
tures; challenges related to heat management and sealing, the need for thermal shielding, long start
and shut down times, are also some of the drawbacks of high temperature operation [10]. Thus,
significant research efforts in recent years have been focused in lowering SOC operating temperature
to increase system durability and cut costs with increased material selectivity and flexibility (e.g.
use of metallic interconnects). But overcoming the higher activation and ohmic overpotentials that
come with decreasing temperatures, plaguing performance, meant that finding alternative electrode
and electrolyte materials or ways to reduced polarization losses with current ones was required.
1.2.3.1
Electrolyte
The ideal requirements that a SOC electrolyte must possess are high oxide ion conductivity (at
least > 10−3 S/cm2 at the operating temperature for acceptable electrode kinetics [11]) and neg-
ligible electronic conductivity, chemical and structural stability in both the oxidizing and reducing
environments it is exposed to, compatibility with adjacent electrode materials, with closely matched
thermal expansion coefficient (TEC), and it must be dense and gas-tight to prevent any reactant
cross-over.
So far yttrium-stabilized stabilized zirconia (YSZ), which possesses good ionic conductivity at
high temperature (∼0.1 S/cm−1 at 1000°C [12]) and is essentially an electronic insulator over a wide
range of relevant oxygen partial pressures (from 100 −10−25 atm [13]), showing good mechanical
properties like strength and toughness, has been the state-of-the-art electrolyte material for high
temperature SOCs.
Y2O3 doping stabilizes down to room temperature its denser cubic phase and it introduces oxygen
vacancies in the material with substitution of Zr4+ by Y +3 cations to maintain electro-neutrality,
according to the following reaction in Kr¨oger-Vink notation (see Appendix F for explanation of
symbology) :
Y2O3
ZrO2
−−−→2Y′
Zr + 3Ox
O + V ··
O
(1.8)
A doping level of 8 mol.% Y2O3 in zirconia (Y0.08Zr0.92O2−δ, 8YSZ) has been reported to be the
one that maximizes ionic conductivity and represents the minimum dopant amount that completely
stabilizes the cubic fluorite phase; conductivity will decrease for higher additions of the acceptor-type
dopant, owing to the higher association of the oxygen vacancies and dopant cations into complex
defects of low mobility (e.g. (Y ′
ZrV ··
O)′, (Y ′
ZrV ··
OY ′
Zr)x) [13].
This tendency with higher dopant concentrations has been reported to be greater the bigger the
difference in ionic radius between the host and the dopant.
Among the rare earth trivalent dopants, the highest conductivity for binary doped-zirconia systems
has been observed with Sc2O3, supposedly because of the minimal mismatch in Zr4+ and Sc3+
ionic radii (rZr4+=0.84 ˚A and rSc3+=0.87 ˚A), which as observed in Figure 16.a resulted in the
lowest ion migration enthalpy and highest association enthalpy [13] compared to other dopants of
the lanthanide series.
Page 12 of 165
==PAGE:16==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 16: (a) Maximum conductivity and a oxygen-ion migration and association enthalpies versus
the radius of rare earth trivalent cations in the binary ZrO2–Ln2O3 systems (Ln=lanthanide) at
1273 K [13]. (b) Composition dependence of the conductivity of the binary ZrO2–Ln2O3 systems
(Ln=lanthanide) at 1273 K [11].
Figure 17: (a) Conductivity of (ScxZr1−xO2−δ) for different molar quantities x of Sc2O3. (b) Sup-
pression of conductivity drop of Sc0.11Zr0.89O2−δ (11ScSZ) due to the cubic-rhombohedral transition
with substitution of 1 mol.% of Sc2O3 with Y2O3 (Sc0.1Y0.01Zr0.89O2−δ, 1Y-10ScSZ). [14]
The conductivity maximum for the ScSZ system is found for doping levels of ∼10-12 mol.%.
Sc2O3 (Figure 16.b), but as observed in Figure 17.a, above a concentration of ∼8 mol.%, these
are characterized by a phase transition from the cubic to the rhombohedral (Sc2Zr7O17, β-phase),
which causes the conductivity to drop of at least an order of magnitude, with the transition tem-
perature shifting to higher values for increasing dopant additions.
The cubic structure of ScSZ can be stabilized by adding small amounts of Y2O3. This is ascribed to
the larger ionic radius of Y 3+ (rY 3+=1.02 ˚A), which increases the average coordination number of
the cations in the lattice, favoring an eight-fold coordination of the cubic phase (Figure 18), unlike
the smaller Sc3+, which shows a strong preference for six-fold coordination of cations, which is why
Page 13 of 165
==PAGE:17==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
there is a strong tendency in SCSZ for short-range ordering of the oxygen vacancies in the rhombo-
hedral phase [15].
Improvements in ScYSZ aging, which has been theorized to be due to slow diffusion of the dopant
cations at elevated temperatures, leading to the formation of low cow-conductivity phases like the
tetragonal (given that the optimum dopant concentration in zirconia systems lies close to the bound-
ary of the tetragonal zirconia phase field) or rhombohedral, have also been reported with Y2O3 doping
[14].
However, the increase of lattice parameter caused by Y 3+ addition in ScSZ [15], leads to a higher
activation enthalpies for the oxygen vacancy migration, hence, lower ionic conductivities than those
undoped ScSZ at high Y2O3 concentrations [14].
As observed in Figure 17.b, the addition of an amount as low as 1 mol.% of Y2O3 can suppress the
cubic-to-rhombohedral transformation in the temperature range of interest, without compromising
ionic conductivity.
Figure 18: Cubic fluorite structure of ZrO2, which can be viewed as a stacking of simple cubic-
packed oxygen ions with the tetravalent cations sitting at the center of the cubic voids, with 8-fold
coordination. Highlighted are also a dopant ion and an oxygen vacancy formed. [16]
The higher conductivities of 10Sc1YSZ (Sc0.1Y0.01Zr0.89O2−δ) compared to 8YSZ, especially
at lower temperatures (∼0.03 vs 0.001 S/cm2 at 600°C [14]) due to the lower activation energy (∼
0.65 vs 0.95 eV [15]), make this material an attractive choice for the electrolyte in SOC application
in the intermediate temperature range.
1.2.3.2
Electrodes
It is evident that for the electrochemical reactions mentioned can only take place in the electrode
where gaseous reactants, electrons and oxide ions are simultaneously present. Hence, the require-
ments that the electrode must satisfy are high electrocatalytic activity to these respective reactions
and good stability in their respective operating environments (highly reducing and oxiding for the
fuel and the oxygen electrode, respectively), good chemical compatibility with adjacent cell compo-
nents, especially the electrolyte, with good TEC matching, sufficient porosity to enable the access
of gaseous reactants and removal of products to and from the reaction sites.
1.2.3.2.1
Fuel Electrode
A ceramic-metallic composite (”cermet”), consisting of Ni and YSZ, remains at present the state-
of-the-art fuel electrode of SOCs.
In the cermet Ni acts as both the electronic conductor and
electro-catalyst, while YSZ is the ion conducting phase.
The inclusion of an ion conductor in the electrode has important implications on performance. As
the reactions can only occur where the ionic phase, the electronic conductor and the gas meet, re-
ferred to as the triple phase boundary (TPB), if the electrode consisted of just the metal, then the
reaction would be restricted at the interface between the metal and the electrolyte accessible to the
gas phase. The advantage of employing a mixture of metal and the ion conducting ceramic is that
Page 14 of 165
==PAGE:18==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
the reaction region can be delocalized over a higher number of TPB sites.
The ceramic in the electrode, other than providing ion conducting channels extending from the elec-
trolyte interface that allow O2−to migrate further into the electrode, broadening the TPB length,
also limits agglomeration and sintering of the metal particles, allowing to preserve their surface area,
allows better matching with underlying electrolyte, as metals display much higher TECs than ce-
ramics (TECNi= 13.3 10−6 vs TEC8Y SZ= 10.8 10−6 K−1 [13]), and improved mechanical stability.
In the cermet where a breakdown in connectivity between the gas pores, Ni and YSZ phases occurs,
the considered TPB will not contribute to the reaction. Hence, the three phases should be perco-
lating through out the electrode.
The microstructure of the elecrode should be porous enough to ensure the continue supply the site
with the reactants and to facilitate the removal of products, the metal should ensure a continuous
conduction path for the flow of the electrons involved in the half-cell reactions up to the external
electrical circuit, and the ionic conducting ceramic should effectively transfer oxide ions to and from
the TPB, which entails that an intimate connection between electrode and electrolyte is crucial.
Typically at least metallic contents of 30 vol% are required to obtain a percolating Ni network in
the cermet [17].
The conventional Ni-YSZ electrode is the single component in the cell that still most contributes
to SOC performance degradation.
The causes of degradation have been related to the redistribution and changes in morphology of Ni
particles in the cermet, due to coarsening mechanisms like coalescence and Ostwald ripening driven
by the difference in surface energy of the particles.
Ni migration has also been reported in both SOFC and SOEC mode, which has been attributed to
involve the formation of surface and/or gas phase Ni(OH)x species [18]:
Ni(OH)x(g) + 2xe−(Ni) ⇌Ni(s) + xO2−(Y SZ) + 1
2xH2(g)
(1.9)
Ni(OH)x(g) + 1
2xH2(g) ⇌Ni(s) + xH2O(g)
(1.10)
While the migration of Ni particles in the cermet has been observed to occur down the steam partial
pressure gradient for both modes of operation at high temperature, at 700°C in SOFC and at 850°C
and below in SOEC Ni migration was reported to occur in the opposite direction; Enrichment of
Ni near the interface was observed in SOFC, while a depletion of Ni at the inner most catalyst
layer took place in SOEC, where Ni migration was observed to be more pronnuanced under strong
polarization conditions.
This has been suggested to occur due to loss of contact of the Ni particle with YSZ [19](Figure 19.a),
which has been observed to occur for fuel electrode overpotentials of 160-300 mV [18]. This has
been attributed to the spheroidization and rounding of Ni particles, resulting from surface diffusion
of Ni from areas of the particles with a small radius of curvature to areas with a large radius of
curvature [19, 18], which should also be promoted at large steam partial pressures, and under strongly
reducing conditions due to the reduction of grain boundary impurities like SiO2 that reduce to Si
in Ni, forming a dilute solution, and likewise the reduction of ZrO2 to metallic Zr in the Ni phase,
leading to a decrease in the molar volume of the YSZ skeleton and the creation of some porosity
around the Ni particles [18, 19]. Following its solid diffusion to sites with a higher PO2 and low Zr
chemical potential, such as the Ni-Ni and Ni-pore interfaces, the reduced Zr will precipitate as ZrO2
nanoparticles; these have been observed under strong polarization condition, for current densities
equal and above -1 A/cm2 [20].
When Ni contact is lost the active TPB moves away from the electrolyte and the electrochemical
potential of the non-contacted Ni particles will be determined simply the local gas composition, while
the Ni at the active TPB will be significantly polarized, which explains the direction of the migration
under such conditions in the two modes of operation, as schematically depicted in Figure 19.b.
Page 15 of 165
==PAGE:19==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 19: (a) Main mechanisms responsible for the loss of contact between Ni and YSZ [20].
(b)Sketches of cross-sections of degrading Ni-YSZ cermet electrodes in SOEC mode (left) and SOFC
mode (right) at lower temperatures (below 700°C for SOFC and below 850°C for SOEC). Green
depicts Ni and gray YSZ. Shown are the qualitative variations of η, the local overvoltage of Ni
particles, PH2O, steam partial pressure, and aNi(OH)x, the activity of Ni(OH)x species versus
distance from original electrolyte/electrode interface (d = 0) indicated. [18]
The consequence of these degradation phenomena is Ni coarsening and decrease in surface area,
with loss of Ni percolation and active TPBs, which lead to higher ohmic and polarization resistances.
Ceria-based electrode have been considered as attractive alternatives to Ni-YSZ.
CeO2 like YSZ has a fluorite structure and is characterized by higher ionic conductivity in the
intermediate temperature range when it is doped with lower valence cations introducing oxygen
vacancies as charge compensating defects, but most interesting is that the under reducing conditions
at the fuel electrode it becomes a mixed ionic and electronic conductor (MIEC) due to oxygen
exchange with the environment.
While its MIEC character makes it unsuitable as an electrolyte material, it is a very sought after
property for electrodes.
By replacing YSZ with a MIEC as the main oxide phase in the cermet, the reaction will no longer be
restricted at the TPBs, but because this material is also capable of electron transport it can extend
over the MIEC-gas interface, the so called double phase boundary (DPB) (Figure 20), resulting in
a significantly larger active area benefiting electrode performance.
Figure 20: (a)Triple and (b) double phase boundary.
Among the rare earth dopants, the highest conductivities have been observed for Gd2O3, due
to the more similar radii of Gd3+ and Ce4+, leading to least disturbances in the lattice [21]. The
Page 16 of 165
==PAGE:20==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
maximum in lattice ionic conductivity has been reported for concentrations of the dopant of 10
mol.%, corresponding to a minimum in activation energy, which is the result of competitive inter-
actions between point defect and formation of defects associates due to coulombic interactions (e.g.
(Gd′
CeV ··
O)′, (Gd′
CeV ··
OGd′
Ce)x); a decrease in conductivity resulting from the development of vacancy
traps due to defect clustering occurs at higher dopant amounts [21]. Oxygen vacancies by doping
CeO2 with Gd2O3 are introduced according to the following Kroeger-Vink equation:
Gd2O3
CeO2
−−−→2Gd′
Ce + 3Ox
O + V ··
O
(1.11)
where an oxygen vacancy is created for each two Gd introduced.
Electronic conductivity in ceria is introduced due extraction of oxygen from the ceria lattice that is
accompanied by the creation of an oxygen vacancy, with the reduction from Ce4+ (CeX
Ce) to Ce3+
(Ce′
Ce), according to the following equation:
2Cex
Ce + Ox
O ↔2Ce′
Ce + 1
2O2 + V ··
O
(1.12)
As observed in Figure 21, electronic conductivity of Gd0.1Ce0.90O2−δ (CGO10) increases with in-
creasing temperature and decreasing oxygen partial pressure, so it is expected to improve the more
reducing the conditions at the fuel electrode (e.g. at higher CO and/or H2 gas production rates).
Acceptor dopants reportedly enhance the reducibility of ceria at temperatures below 1000°C, so at
the same temperature and oxygen partial pressure doped ceria has a higher concentration of elec-
tronic defects than pure ceria [21]. The domain in which onset of n-type conductivity is observed
moves towards higher PO2 as temperature increases.
Figure 21: Dependence of the electronic conductivity of Gd0.1Ce0.90O2−δ on oxygen activity mea-
sured at 700, 800 and 900°C along with literature values at 800 °C [22].
Ceria is a good electrocatalyst for the H2/H2O and CO/CO2 reactions and has been suggested
to alone be able to provide sufficient catalytic activity. Studies [?] on Ni-samarium-doped ceria
patterned electrode provided evidence to support the allegation that electrochemical reactions occur
predominantly at the ceria-gas interface and that the metal-catalyzed pathway does not contribute
significantly to electro-catalysis, with metal serving merely as a current collector. A study [23] on
single phase GCO electrodes showed promising results, with low polarization resistances even below
the ones of a corresponding cermet (∼0.012Ωcm2 at 800°C). However, performance was severely
penalized by its low electronic conductivity, which required to have very thin electrodes to minimize
the ohmic penalty. Hence, the presence of a percolating Ni network therefore is beneficial to com-
Page 17 of 165
==PAGE:21==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
pensate for the low electronic conductivity of the cermet. Nevertheless, it is suggested that in case
disruptions of the Ni network the MIEC can still bridge the gap between the the disconnected metal
particles and lead to lower performance loss.
Ceria-based material have also gained attention due to ceria’s interesting carbon suppression capa-
bilities [2,3].
Onset of carbon deposition on ceria electrodes was reported to occur at much higher overpoten-
tials than for Ni-YSZ, at critical CO2/CO ratios well beyond the thermodynamic carbon deposition
threshold; when it did occur carbon deposition was not so disruptive, as performance could be re-
covered by oxidizing the C deposits. The C tolerance of ceria-based electrodes is postulated to be
related to the kinetic-limiting of C deposition, first and foremost by energetically trapping the C
atoms by surface oxygen vacancies on ceria as oxidized carbonate intermediates (CO3)′
0,s, so that
gaseous CO2 and CO cannot be easily reduced to C, hence, higher oxygen vacancies at the surface
introduced through doping can be beneficial in this respect. Moreover, at high coverages, these
intermediates were suggested to play a role in preventing carbon build up by removing the deposited
carbon as carboxylates via a reverse surface Boudouard reaction [2,3]:
2 (CO3)′
O,s + C −C + 2OX
O,s ↔4COδ−
2
(1.13)
All of the above represent very compelling arguments in favor of adopting a Ni-10CGO cermet as
fuel electrode.
As the reactions take place at surface in SOC electrodes at TPB and/or DPB, their performance
will be high affected by the microstructure and morphology of the phases. As Ni in the cermet is
initially present as an oxide, it needs to be reduced before testing. NiO reduction to its metallic
form will occur with ∼40% reduction in volume and generation of porosity, with redistributon of
the formed Ni phase. Hence, the reduction treatment will have a strong impact on the electrode
microstructure and its evolution, hence, electrode performance. Specifically temperature and gas
composition will have an effect of particle size and degree of percolation. Typically higher reduction
temperature have been preferred as they were seen to lead to the best performance at least with
Ni-YSZ electrodes, but findings vary depending on the specific starting particle size and size dis-
tribution [24]. At high reduction temperature due to the higher mobility, greater surface diffusion
of Ni is expected to lead to agglomeration and coalescence, resulting in bigger metal particles, but
these could be more stable than the smaller particles anticipated at lower reduction temperatures,
due to the inherent nature to minimize the surface area. Coarsening mechanisms such as Ostwald
repening may take place depending on the size uniformity of the metal particles formed.
If truly the reaction takes place predominately at the CGO surface, then performance would not be
penalized by the reduction of surface area of the metal and going to higher reduction temperature
could actually be advantageous if larger, but well percolated metal particles are obtained, rather
than having smaller, but disconnected ones at lower reduction temperatures.
Gas composition also has a strong influences on NiO reduction. The presence of steam has been
observed to affect the kinetics of reduction and has been suggested to increase nickel mobility, accel-
erating coarsening [24]. With ceria-based material there is also the added complication that under
reducing conditions, ceria expansion takes place, owing to the change in oxidation state from 4+ to
3+, with increase in cation ionic radius, from 0.097 nm to 0.1143 nm, which will introduce stresses
in the structure.
Hence, assessing the effect of NiO reduction conditions on electrode microstructure and performance
is crucial.
1.2.3.2.2
Oxygen Electrode
Pervoskites have been widely investigated as oxygen electrode materials. The pervoskite structure
(ABO3), displayed in Figure 22, can tollerate relatively large non-stoichiometries and substitutions
in the A and B sites, allowing to tailor its conducting functionalities. As a rule of thumb to increase
Page 18 of 165
==PAGE:22==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
electronic conductivity the A-site generally occupied by a lanthanide or alkali rare earth (e.g. La3+)
is partially substituted by an alkali metal( e.g. Sr3+), while the B-sites is partially substituted
by 3d-transition metal (e.g. Co, Fe, Mn) to enhance ionic conductivity, given its ability to easily
transition between oxidation states. While a composite of lanthanum manganite and YSZ was the
state-of-art oxygen electrode, nowadays, the tendency is to have a MIEC, for the same reasons men-
tioned for the fuel electrode, to extend the active region in principle to that whole surface exposed
to the reacting gas. Among the possible options, Strontium-doped lanthanum cobaltite (LSC) has
stood out as really promising material for the oxygen electrode, in combination with CGO to com-
pensate for its low ionic conductivity, although appreciable.
Figure 22: Peroskite structure ABO3. Can be viewed as 3D network of corner-sharing BO6 octahe-
dra, where A is a 12-fold coordinated site ionically bonded with O, whereas B a is 6-fold coordinated
site covalently bonded with O.
Most of perovskite material,however, including LSC, show reactivity with zirconia-based elec-
trolyte leading to formation of poorly conductive secondary phases (e.g. SrZrO3, mainly due to
Sr segregation), hence, a GDC interlayer is usually inter-imposed to prevent unwanted solid-state
reactions [25, 26, 27].
1.2.4
Cell Structure
While at the beginning the structural component was the electrolyte, to reduce the ohmic losses
that penalize performance, especially at lower temperature, electrolyte thickness was significantly re-
duced, which was also made possible by advancements in manufacturing, adopting instead electrode-
supported configurations. As the active reaction zone does not extend more than a few µm from
interface, the functional layer can be made also very thin and have a thicker support element, which
serves more as a gas distribution layer, that needs to be electronically conductive and provide good
mechanical stability. Ni-(Y0.03Zr0.97O2−δ (3YSZ) is considered a good supporting layer. The sub-
optimal dopant concentration of 3 mol% Y2O3, although it leads to lower ionic conductivity [25],
results in a microstructure characterized by finer grains, with higher toughness and bending stength
compared to 8YSZ (1200 vs 279 MPa [11]). Its higher mechanical resilience has been attributed to
the presence of the tetragonal phase along with the cubic, which is metastable and in the presence
of stresses undergoes a transformation to the less dense monoclinic phase. When a crack forms in
correspondence to the tetragonal regions, the volume expansion due to the phase transition will put
the material in compression, closing the crack and preventing its advancement through out the layer.
Hence, the component is able to withstand high stresses without breaking, making it suitable as a
support.
Page 19 of 165
==PAGE:23==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
1.2.5
Symmetric Cells
Symmetric cells allow to focus on just one of the electrodes of a cell and study its performance
separately from the other components. In impedance measurements, especially when spectra of the
different electrode are not sufficienctly resolved, with a symmetric cell with identical electrodes of
the same type (fuel or oxygen electrode), it allows to isolate the single electrode response, to gain an
insight on the limiting process of the electrode and their characteristic frequency ranges. They rep-
resent an important tool when even by performing isolated changes in gas composition at the anode
and cathode of a full cell does not allow to distinguish their responses due to significant overlap of
their frequency ranges.
Typically symmetric cells are exposed to a single environment, which simplifies testing, as no seal-
ing is required as in full cell test rig, where the anode and cathode environment need to be kept
separated. Moreover, typically fabrication time and costs can be cut by performing screening tests
on symmetric cell before implementing the findings on a full cell.
Measurements on symmetric cells, however, are limited to around the open-circuit voltage, where
reversibility of the reactions at the two electrode can be assumed and the single electrode polariza-
tion resistance can be obtained as half of the total measured on the symmetric cell, as their EIS
response will be identical in characteristics and size. The greater the DC bias applied, the greater
the deviation between the response of the two simingly identical electrodes. So relevant studies on
the effect of cell polarization cannot be performed on symmetric cells.
1.2.6
Thesis Objective
The development of a suitable symmetric SOC platform to study the performance of a Ni-10CGO
fuel electrode with a Ni-3YSZ supporting layer, on a thin 10SC1YSZ electrolyte was the main ob-
jective of this study.
The need for a testing vehicle to investigate the effect of key cell performance parameters, with
the aim of acquiring relevant information that could be transferred to the full cell counterpart in
a timely, cost-effective, robust manner was what motivated this work. This required attempting
first different cell designs and the definition of a proper methodology to obtain physically-sound,
artifact-free measurements, not corrupted by electrical shorts.
The validity of the developed architectures was assessed through electrochemical testing, to check
that results obtained were consistent and reproducible and sensible, close to what would be ob-
tained with an exact electrode in the full cell equivalent. Once this was achieved, the impact of
three different reduction treatments on fuel electrode performance was investigated on the settled
architecture.
Page 20 of 165
==PAGE:24==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
2
Methods
2.1
Tape casting
The different cell layers were prepared by tape casting.
The tape casting method starts from the preparation of the slurry, in which the ceramic powders
are mixed with various organic additives, to obtain a slip with the desired rheological properties.
The batch formulation is of crucial importance in the tape casting process to obtain uniform, compact
green tapes that are free of defects, and requires the implementation of good preparation practices
and an especially careful selection of the slurry ingredients.
Each additives has a specific function [28], outlined below:
Solvent
The solvent is the fluid vehicle in which the powders are suspended to achieve the degree of flowa-
bility and formability required by this manufacturing process. Its purpose is to dissolve the other
additives introduced in the slip and distribute them and the powders homogeneously. The selection
of a solvent is therefore limited by the nature of the slurry ingredients, including the powders to be
cast, in that it must not adversely affect them. Once the slip is metered into a thin, two-dimensional
layer, all of the solvent will be removed in what is essentially a one-side drying process (the carrier
film on the bottom is impermeable) to obtain the green tape.
Surfactants
The term Surfactant is a contraction for “Surface Active Agent”. Accordingly, a surfactant is an
additive that actively modifies or coats the particle surface to impart a desired characteristic. The
following additives belong to this category:
Dispersant
The primary purpose of the dispersant is to separate the powder particles and to hold them in a
homogeneous suspension so that the binder can coat them individually.
As a result of their high surface area, ceramic powders typically form soft agglomerates due to elec-
trostatic forces, furthermore when added to the slip, powder particles have the tendency to form
loosely bound groups held together by van der Waals forces called flocks, particularly when they
have low affinity for wetting, to lower the free energy of the suspension by reducing the solid-liquid
interfacial area. If these agglomerates and clusters are not broken up prior to the addition of the
binder, they will by made permanent throughout the rest of the process, causing inhomogeneity,
bubbles in the green tape due to the air entrapped in the interstitial voids of the particle groups
or unwanted porosity in the fired part, and irregular grain growth during sintering. The separation
into primary particles is done by mechanical means (ball milling), with the dispersant acting against
particle grouping, ensuring the particles remain evenly distributed throughout the suspension.
Other functions of the dispersant are to increase solid loading in order to maintain moderate slurry
viscosities after binder addition, and to reduce the amount of solvent required in the suspension,
therefore decreasing costs, drying speed and shrinkage of the tape.
The selection of the proper
dispersant and dispersion milling procedures can aid the processing of powders without the optimal
morphological characteristics.
Binder
Binders are typically long-chain polymers or precursors (monomers or emulsion particles) that be-
come long-chain polymers during drying, with film forming capabilities.
The binder is probably the most important processing additive as it supplies the network that holds
together the entire chemical system; in fact, the green tape can be viewed as a polymer matrix
impregnated with the ceramic material. Being the only continuous phase, the binder has the great-
est effect on the green tape properties (e.g. strength, toughness etc.), which explains why when
formulating a tape casting slip its selection is prioritized over that of other additives (it is the sec-
ond ingredient chosen after the ceramic powders). Long chain polymeric binders are also effective
Page 21 of 165
==PAGE:25==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
suspending and stabilizing agents due to the steric action of the dissolved binder.
The choice of binder is based on its solubility, viscosity, cost, strength and burnout characteristics.
Plasticizer
A plasticizer is any additive that imparts either flexibility or plasticity to the green tape. If no
plasticizer is used, with most polymeric binders a relatively stiff and brittle tape is formed; later
forming and assembly requires that the tape be more bendable.
Plasticizers work either on or around the binder polymer chains, weakening the intermolecular forces
and increasing the distance between them, improving mobility inside the tape matrix. Two different
mechanism can be identified and accordingly two distinct types of plasticizers:
- Type I plasticizers, also referred to as binder solvents, interact with the binder softening the poly-
mer chains between particles by shortening the length of the chains and by partially dissolving them,
allowing them to stretch or deflect more easily under an applied load. The addition of a Type I
plasticizer leads to a greater flexibility and extensibility of the green tape, but lowers its strength,
and increases the reversible strain and stress storage of the matrix.
-Type II plasticizers impart plasticity to the green tape. They act as lubricants working between
binder polymer chains, allowing better mobility within the tape matrix and physically inhibiting
some of the cross-linking between polymer chains, thus decreasing rigidity.
The addition of a Type II plasticizer results in a larger strain to failure but also lower yield stress,
which helps prevent cracking during drying and handling. As the solvent leaves the matrix, the
cast layer undergoes a liquid-solid transition and a gel structure is formed, which is compelled to
shrink as the solvent is further removed from the system. The Type II plasticizer can facilitate this
shrinkage by promoting permanent plastic deformation within the matrix.
By providing a slippage layer between particles, the Type II plasticizer prevents streaks or grooves
from forming in the green layer aiding flow under the doctor blade and in extreme cases of pseudo-
plasticity it also lowers the extent of the shear thinning behavior decreasing the low-shear viscosity.
Moreover, due to its lubricating nature, it acts as a release agent facilitating green tape removal
from the casting carrier.
Page 22 of 165
==PAGE:26==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
2.2
Electrochemical characterization
Electrochemical impedance consists in applying an AC signal to the EC system and measuring its
response. Under potentiostatic mode, an oscillating voltage signal is superimposed to a defined bias
potential of the EC at steady-state and the resulting current is measured. Typically in impedance
measurements a sine wave (or equivalently a cosine wave since both functions describe the same
oscillation sustained) are preferred because irrespective of the amplitude and frequency of the input
and output signals, these will have the same form (Figure 23).
When a sinusoidal voltage signal, u(t), of amplitude u0 and angular frequency ω = 2πf[rad · s−1]
(where f is the frequency in Hz) of the following form is applied:
u(t) = u0sin(wt)
(2.1)
If the cell’s response can be considered linear then the current signal induced will also be sinusoidal
and have the same angular frequency as the excitation potential, but may be shifted in phase and
have a different amplitude (Figure 23), accordingly:
i(t) = i0sin(ωt + ϕ)
(2.2)
with i0 and ϕ denoting, respectively, the amplitude of the output current signal and its phase shift
with respect to the input potential signal.
Figure 23: Current Response to a sinusoidal voltage perturbation in a linear System: in this specific
example where the two signal are out of phase the voltage lags the current (the voltage reaches its
maximum value at a later time than the current signal), resembling the behaviour of a capacitive
element.
If the system responds in a linear way, exploiting the principle of superposition, which states
that adding two inputs yields a combined output that is equal to the sum of the two outputs from
each individual input, and the proportionality principle, according to which multiplying an input by
a constant yields a proportional output, an alternative input signal can be defined as follows:
u(t) = u0cos(wt) + ju0sin(wt)
(2.3)
Using Euler’s relationship:
ejwt = cos(wt) + jsin(wt)
(2.4)
where j = √−1 is the imaginary unit, it is possible to express the input signal in the complex polar
form:
u(t) = u0ejwt
(2.5)
Page 23 of 165
==PAGE:27==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
as well as the corresponding current response:
i(t) = i0ejwt+ϕ
(2.6)
Applying Ohm’s law, which holds in both the time and frequency domain, the impedance of the
system can be defined as the ratio of potential and current, as follows:
Z(ω) = u(t)
i(t) = u0(ω)
i0
ejϕ(ω)
(2.7)
This transfer function can be expressed in both polar and Cartesian coordinates as follows:
Z(ω) = |Z(ω)|ejϕ(ω) = |Z(ω)|(cos(ϕ(ω))+jsin(ϕ(ω))) = Re{Z(ω)}+j Im{Z(ω)} = Z′ +jZ′′ (2.8)
Noteworthy, the time dependence is eliminated, with the phase angle, ϕ, and magnitude, |Z(ω)|, of
the impedance depending only on the frequency. The relationship between these two quantities and
the real and imaginary components of the impedance, Z′ and Z′′ respectively, are the following:
ϕ(ω) = tan−1
Z′′
Z′

(2.9)
|Z(ω)| = u0(ω)
i0
=
p
(Z′)2 + (Z′′)2
(2.10)
Figure 24: (a) Schematic of the voltage-current characteristic of a SOFC, with displayed the appli-
cation of a sinusoidal signal of small amplitude to a defined bias and the resulting response in an
impedance measurement. (b) EIS measurement set-up for a SOFC of impedance, Zcell. [29]
The current-voltage characteristics of most EC cells, however, is highly non-linear (Figure 24.a).
This entails that the output signal will contain higher harmonics of the excitation frequency, but will
also depend on the amplitude of the AC input signal. Nevertheless, if the perturbation amplitude
is chosen adequately small it is possible to neglect these non-linear effects and model the system
response as pseudo-linear. For EC systems displaying a more linear current-voltage curve larger
perturbing amplitudes can be used without incurring in non-linearities than for systems exhibiting
very non-linear current-voltage characteristics.
A way to determine the limit is to increase the input signal to the point where the response is
no longer independent on the perturbation amplitude and the presence of a significant harmonic
response is observed.
he polarization curve for a given system dictates the excitation amplitude that may be used while
retaining a pesudo-linear response. By appling a small amplitude AC signal (typically 1 to 10 mV)
the cell’s non-linear response to the DC potential is not observed since only the current at the exci-
tation frequency is measured [30]. In practice, the appropriate choice in amplitude should represent
a compromise between the need to minimize the non-linear response (by using a small amplitude)
and the need to minimize experimental noise in the measurements (by using larger amplitudes).
Page 24 of 165
==PAGE:28==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
For frequencies that are low compared with the relaxation frequencies in the system, the impedance
obtained at a particular point of operation approaches the slope of the current–voltage characteris-
tics (Figure 24.a), i.e. the differential resistance of the DC measurement [29].
EIS analysis is typically done by probing the response of the EC cell to a small amplitude sinusoidal
signal in the form of an impedance over a wide range of frequencies (typically over 6 frequency
decades or more if possible). What poses a limit in the frequency range that can investigated is the
requirement that the system under study be stationary during the measurement of the EIS spec-
trum. A practical issue during EIS measurements is the drift in the EC system under study due
to different dynamic phenomena occurring during cell operation [31, 30]: concentration changes of
reactants and products, degradation of cell components, component reactivity with formation and
growth of unwanted secondary phases, morphological changes and changes in surface reactivity (e.g.
due to coarsening and agglomeration of active elements like the Ni electro-catalyst) and/or temper-
ature variations (e.g. due to gas cross-over) are just to name a few of the causes of non-stationary
behavior of SOFC/SOEC systems.
No EC system will be perfectly stationary, but what matters is that it doesn’t undergo substantial
changes in the course of the measurement, otherwise the impedance data will be influenced by bias
errors caused the non-stationary effects, which will be visible as artifacts especially at low frequen-
cies. The lower bound frequency is, thus, selected so that the system can be considered stable at the
lowest timescale used in the EIS experiment. Furthermore, a higher level of noise is to be expected
at lower frequencies.
The frequency range typically adopted in EIS measurements for SOFC/SOEC spans from 0.1 Hz to
1 MHz.
A way impedance measurements are performed in practical applications is with the aid of a fre-
quency response analyzer (FRA), a digitally demodulated, computer-controlled, stepped-frequency
impedance meter [29], a commercial example of which is the Solartron. In the FRA, impedance
acquisition involves the correlation of the system response with two reference signals generated from
the excitation signal, with one being in-phase with the input and one shifted in phase by π/2. The
mean of the resulting signals is taken by integration over several cycle periods, NT, and what is ob-
tained as FRA outputs are signals proportional to the real and the imaginary part of the impedance,
as schematically illustrated in Figure 25, where the principle is explained for galvanostatic operation.
Figure 25: Orthogonal signal correlation principle of a frequency response analyzer for impedance
determination. [29]
In galvanostatic mode when a current perturbation i(t)=sin(wt) is applied, the potential re-
sponse measured will have the following form:
u(t) = u0 sin(ωt + φ) +
X
k
Ak sin (kωt + φk) + n(t)
(2.11)
where if the measurement noise, n(t), is stochastic, its mean value vanishes for a sufficiently long
measurement interval. Moreover, for a full number of cycles, the higher harmonics due to the non-
linearity of the system are also cancelled by the integration. The reduction in noise and higher
harmonics rejection with increase in the integration time or number of integration cycles is seen in
Figure 26. The multiplication by the cosine and sine signal of the same frequency and integration
Page 25 of 165
==PAGE:29==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
will then yield mean signals proportional to the real and imaginary components, accordingly:
u0
NT
Z NT
0
sin(ωt + φ) sin ωt dt = u0
2
"
cos φ −
1
NT
Z NT
0
cos(2ωt + φ)dt
#
= 1
2i0
|Z(ω)| cos φ(ω) = 1
2i0
Z′(ω)
(2.12)
u0
NT
Z NT
0
sin(ωt + φ) cos ωt dt = u0
2
"
sin φ −
1
NT
Z NT
0
sin(2ωt + φ)dt
#
= 1
2i0
|Z(ω)| sin φ(ω) = 1
2i0
Z′′(ω)
(2.13)
Figure 26: Frequency response of a FRA for different numbers of integration cycles N [32].
Impedance values measured in a defined frequency range are usually visualized in the a complex
plane, the so-called Nyquist plot, in which impedance spectra are obtained by plotting the negative
of the imaginary part on the y-axis versus the real part on the x-axis.
The shape of the EIS curves, where each data point corresponds to an impedance at a given fre-
quency, give some insight on the governing processes of the cell. If the processes have sufficiently
differing time constants corresponding arcs can be distinguished in the impedance spectra.
In the Nyquist plot, the first high frequency intercept of an EIS curve with the real axis, in absence
of instrumentation artifacts, will correspond to the ohmic resistance of the cell (Rohm), mainly domi-
nated by the solid electrolyte, while the low frequency intercept of the spectrum gives the overall cell
resistance. Hence, from the difference of the two real axis intercepts the cell polarization resistance
(Rp) can be obtained, which will be given by the sum of each electrode’s polarization contributions
caused by their various loss mechanisms (e.g. activation or charge transfer, concentration losses
etc.).
In the Nyquist plots, the unit length of real and imaginary axes should be the same, otherwise,
deformation of the spectra is observed and it is common practice to normalize the impedance com-
ponents by the nominal electrode active area to enable the comparison of systems of different size.
A shortcoming of the Nyquist representation is that frequency is not explicitly displayed, but one
has only the knowledge that the frequency of the data points illustrated decrease from the left to
the right side of the plot. This information is provided by the Bode plots, in which phase angle,
magnitude or the real or negative of the imaginary components are plotted as a function of frequency,
usually on a logarithmic scale. By inspection of the Bode plots an identification of the characteristic
frequencies of the different processes is possible by looking for example at the inflections or steps in
the magnitude plot or the position of the peaks in the phase angle or in the imaginary contributions
Page 26 of 165
==PAGE:30==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
versus frequency plots, this if the time constant of the underlying processes are well separated. But
normally EIS curves of complex EC systems like SOFC/SOEC are the result of the overlap of more
arcs originating from many different phenomena, making it difficult to separate processes with sim-
ilar time scales: if the time constants do not differ of at least 2 orders of magnitude the frequency
domains over which each process relaxes will considerably overlap leading to their related impedance
features merging [25]. The poor resolution of the Nyquist and Bode plot makes it also difficult to
identify processes with smaller contributions to the total polarization loss.
Particularly challenging is ascribing processes to a specific cell component, which is especially desir-
able to better target R&D efforts to improve overall cell performance and stability by understanding
what electrode and/or process needs to be addressed first. To better detect the changes in the spec-
tra and isolate processes that are affected by the parameter variation in the frequency domain, the
analysis of differences of impedance spectra (ADIS) is done. Typically, instead of taking the simple
difference between imaginary contributions of the impedance spectra recorded at different conditions,
∆Z′′, the difference of the derivative of the real part with respect to the logarithm of frequency is
preferred. For a finite set of N values recorded in the frequency domain {f1, ..., fN}, considering the
real impedance values measured at two different conditions Z′
i and Z′
j, at the nth frequency point
fN between 1 + k and N −k, the difference of the derivative of the real part with respect to ln(fn),
∆˙Z′ (fn), can be evaluated by approximating it with a finite difference, accordingly:
∆˙Z′ (fn) = ∆

∂Z′
∂ln (fn)

∼=
[Z′
i (fn+k) −Z′
i (fn−k)] −

Z′
j (fn+k) −Z′
j (fn−k)

ln (fn+k) −ln (fn−k)
(2.14)
A sort of moving average of more points is performed to reduce noise in the resulting ∆˙Z′ vs log(f)
plot.
It has been demonstrated that taking ∆˙Z′ instead of ∆Z′′ results in a better resolution in the
frequency domain of the impedance features affected by the parameter change, leading to sharper
and more defined peaks and a better suppression of the response from invariant processes [33].
Although ADIS can help selectively reveal processes contributing to the cell impedance when these
can be difficult to distinguish solely based on differences in their characteristic time constants, by
investigating their dependency on the parameter altered, processes that show weak or no sensitivity
to the parameter considered or that display a smaller impedance response may not be so detectable
due to overlapping contribution from more prominent processes.
For a quantitative interpretation of EIS data it is common to rely on the analogy between the
EC systems and networks of discrete electrical components, whose connection in series and parallel
should reflect those of the cell processes/components they represent.
EIS data interpretation is
terms of these equivalent circuit models (ECMs) is reasonable given that charge and potential
relationships for linear systems should be similar in electronic and ionic materials [25]. Although,
full mechanistic model could provided a greater detail of information on the physico-electrochemical
processes involved than these analogues, these are not available or are simply too complex, especially
in the case of SOCs, explaining why simpler fitting of EIS data to ECMs is usually the most popular
approach adopted.
By building suitable ECMs and fitting them to EIS spectra it is possible to break-down cell losses
and determine resistances and characteristic frequencies ascribable to different component processes,
as well as obtain quantitative information on their partial pressure and/or temperature dependencies
(i.e activation energies).
It is necessary to recall that impedances are combined like resistances in series and parallel. Hence,
the equivalent impedance of a series connection will be given by the sum of the single impedances,
and the reciprocal of the equivalent impedance for a parallel arrangement will be equal to the sum
of the reciprocal of the single impedances.
A typical SOC circuit consists of a serial connected inductance (L), resistance (R) and various sub-
circuits (-RQ-), each consisting of a resistance in parallel with a constant phase element (Q), which
are generally used to represent and model arbitrary processes, which if sufficiently separated give
rise to arc features in the Nyquist plots. The ECM model used was the following:
Page 27 of 165
==PAGE:31==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 27: Equivalent circuit used for the fitting of spectra with two visible curves.
2.3
Physical characterization
2.3.1
Scanning electron Miscroscopy
A Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was adopted to obtain information on the morphology and
microstructure of the samples. The electro-optical instrument allows to process and analyze, follow-
ing the emission of an electron beam, the various signals produced by the interaction of the incident
electrons with the sample under examination, obtaining a wide range of information, morphological,
compositional and structural. The instrument is capable of reproducing images with magnifications
up to ∼50000X, with a field depth suitable for the focus of surfaces characterized by high topo-
graphical variations. To obtain sharp images, the instrument operates under vacuum in order to
minimize interactions with particles external to the sample. In order to avoid charge accumulation,
samples examined by SEM were made sufficiently conductive by C coating, unless destined low-
voltage SEM were to be done. The SEM used essentially consisted of a tungsten filament that emits
electrons through thermo-ionic effect, with energies between 0.2 and 40 keV. A beam of electrons
(“primary electrons”), adequately accelerated and collimated, strikes the sample surface, interacting
either elastically or inelastically. Part of the incident electrons will loose little or no energy during
their collisions and are reflected (“backscattered electrons”), while others lose significant energy
dislodging electrons from the material itself (“secondary electrons”). Incident electrons that have
sufficient energy can excite the electrons in the outer energy levels of the material, which will emit
photons upon their return to the initial state, producing X-rays. The energy of the X-rays generated
is characteristic of the atoms from which they originate, hence, useful information on the sample
chemical composition can be drawn with an energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) detector, which produces
a spectrum showing various peaks for different elements. The difference in energy of secondary and
backscattered electrons allows their separation by different detectors, to produce different signals
and images of the sample being investigated. Secondary electrons (SE) produce the highest quality
images with the greatest possible magnification in SEM. Because these electrons have lower energy
and originate from within a few nm of the surface, around the point where the primary beam hits
the sample, SE signals are more surface-specific. Backscattered electrons (BSE), on the other hand,
originate from a larger interaction volume within the sample (a few µ m below the surface) and their
intensity is related to the atomic number of the elements present. So although a worse resolution
image is obtained, BSE imaging can provide useful information on the sample’s composition.
Page 28 of 165
==PAGE:32==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Developments in the cell manufacturing route
The different cell lamination strategies and geometries developed and the associated challenges
encountered, are briefly here presented.
As previously elucidated, the different ceramic sheets were obtained by casting on a mobile
carrier a slurry of the ceramic powders and different organic additives, each of which played a role
in obtaining a slip with the desired rheological characteristics to produce ideally defect-free and
flexible tapes, with proper thickness control achieved though adjustments of the doctor blade gap,
casting speed and viscosity. Once the green layers were fully dried and ready to be handled, the cells
could be assembled by superimposing and laminating the cut sheets to obtain the desired multilayer
compacts after co-sintering. Lamination other than fusing the layers together allows to achieve a
more uniform sintered thickness as it eliminates some of the in-plane differential shrinkage, and can
increase green density, lowering overall sintering shrinkage [28].
Two lamination techniques were adopted: the heated roll lamination and isostatic lamination.
Roll lamination consisted in squeezing the tapes in between two rotating rollers pre-heated to 120°C,
at a speed of 0.5 m/s, using two pieces of Mylar (polyethylene terephthalate) sheets as parting
substrates above and under the stacked layers to prevent them from sticking to the heated pressing
faces; generally, the organic phases contained in the tapes, specifically the binder and the plasticizers,
set the upper limit for the lamination temperature, which needs to be high enough to achieve good
adhesion between the layers but low enough to avoid distorting the laminate stack due to excessive
softening.
The layers were progressively added in the desired sequence one at a time, and passed through
the rollers twice, flipping the laminate stack between each pressing to average out any thickness
variations and taking care to wait a few seconds for the laminate to cool down before separating it
from the Mylar substrates.
Isostatic lamination, on the other hand, involved vacuum sealing the multilayer tape stack in a
flexible bag and ensure intimate contact between the layers, and immersing it in a heated water
bath to achieve a more uniform temperature and pressure distribution over all the surfaces, which
ideally should lead to better laminate uniformity [34].
The starting batch of cells tested were circular button cells of the semi-symmetric type, which
consisted in the sintered state in a ∼10 µm 10Sc1YSZ electrolyte sandwiched between two active ∼
10 µm NiO-CGO10 functional layers obtained from the same green tape, with only one having the
∼430 µm 3YSZ support on its side, as illustrated in Figure 28, where the layer thicknesses reported
were obtained from cross-sectional SEM images of the samples and represent average values.
Fabrication issues such as cracking and delamination were known beforehand from past sintering
attempts when applying the support layer with a cast thickness of 1300 µm on both sides to produce
a perfectly symmetric cell, which is why the asymmetric cell configuration was initially considered.
To circumvent the issue of cell shorts arising from the contact and sintering of the electrodes on
opposite side of the electrolyte upon firing, either due to misalignments of the stacked tiers or the
pressing substrate during the final heating stage, the bare active NiO-CGO was punched into a
smaller diameter than the rest of the layers to obtain ∅9.6 mm after sintering; this was also found
to be strategic as it limited any dripping at the edges of the current collection paste applied on the
electrode area, which would otherwise provide a direct lateral current path between the electrodes,
resulting in a short-circuited system. This semi-symmetric architecture , schematically depicted in
Figure 28, will be referred to as Type I.
Nevertheless, as highlighted by Table 1, this way of constructing the stacks produced semi-symmetric
samples that resulted mostly short-circuited, as verified post-mortem with a multi-meter; when
Pt paste was adopted for current collection on both sides of the cells checks with a multi-meter
helped exclude the presence of a Pt conductive path at the sides at least prior to testing, something
that could not be detected when NiO paste was applied instead, being poorly conductive at room
temperature.
Page 29 of 165
==PAGE:33==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Post-mortem SEM investigations of the shorted samples revealed that a common denominator was
the presence of defects in the electrolyte as well as some delamination of the active electrode from
the electrolyte on the support side, as seen in the cross-sectional micrographs reported in Figure 29
and Figure 30; in these SE images the upper and less porous layer is the 3YSZ support, underneath
are the thinner active layers on both sides of the dense electrolyte, which display a relatively similar
microstructure having the same composition and are characterized by a higher degree of porosity,
with the GDC phase appearing brighter than the Ni phase in the composites; a thinning of the
bottom active layer is seen at the edge as a result of the pressure applied by the lamination process
regardless of the method adopted.
Clearly evident for both the roll and isostatically laminated
samples are the crevices in the electrolyte and crack propagation starting from the edge.
Figure 28: Schematic of the different cell architectures investigated.
Cell Architecture
lamination method
# Tested
# Shorted
Semi-symmetric, circular, Type I
roll
8
7
Semi-symmetric, circular, Type I
isostatic
2
1
Semi-symmetric, circular, Type I, removed edge
roll
2
0
Semi-symmetric, circular, Type II
roll
4
4
Semi-symmetric, rectangular, Type II
roll
22
5
Symmetric, rectangular, Type II
roll
10
2
Table 1: Summary of different cell architectures tested and electrical shorts measured.
An explanation for the electronic leaks proposed in the Type I architecture is the penetration in
these defects of the contacting paste or possibly the Ni particles, which could redistribute following
the initial reduction phase and/or further testing moving into the existing electrolyte cracks to
contact the Ni network in the opposite electrode .
Noteworthy, a short was measured in some of the semi-symmetric roll laminated Type I samples
even though the same electrolyte defects were not seen. It is suggested that given the different size
of the electrodes when laminating at some edge the smaller bare electrode could have been pushed
through the thin electrolyte contacting the opposite one, something that was already observed in
previous roll lamination attempts (Figure 31), but that was originally attributed to the pressure
exerted by the rigid Mylar substrate edges onto which the layers were cast. This could also explain
why the shorts in these Type I cells only appeared following testing, after the NiO in the active
layer is reduced in H2 making the cell less resistive, with the resulting metallic Ni providing an
electronic path across the cell; this hypothesis could not be confirmed by the SEM images taken,
although it must be said that for what concerns finding the cause of electrical shorts, relying on
single cross-sectional SEM images of the cells is limiting as it does not give a complete picture, which
Page 30 of 165
==PAGE:34==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
a technique such as focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) tomography could
provide by yielding a three dimensional reconstruction of the cells’ geometry, although it is more
time-consuming and complicated if one want to probe volumes larger than what normally is done,
beyond a few µm3. Regardless of the cause, whether it was cracks and infiltration of the contacting
paste and/or metallic Ni, the fact that the issue of the type I architecture originated from the edges
was confirmed by polishing the samples to remove the external 3YSZ/NiO-CGO/10Sc1YSZ ring to
have a geometrical area close to the smaller NiO-GCO bare electrode. This, importantly, eliminated
the problem of electronic shorts.
Figure 29: Postmortem SE cross-sectional micrographs of the defects of a shorted roll laminated
circular Type I sample.
Figure 30: Postmortem SE cross-sectional micrographs of the defects of a shorted isostatically
laminated circular Type I sample.
This conclusion and the low success rate of the previous preparation attempts (Table 1) led to
prefer the simpler roll lamination. Once the tapes stacked in the desired order were roll laminated,
Page 31 of 165
==PAGE:35==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
they were subsequently cut to have samples with same size electrodes and co-sintered. The current
collector paste was then applied on the sintered compacts and sides were polished to eliminate the
edge issues; this geometry is here designated as Type II.
Figure 31: Postmortem SE cross-sectional micrograph of a cell showing the direct lamination of the
two fuel electrodes together through a deformation of the thin electrolyte. Image taken by Morten
Phan Klitkou (DTU Energy).
Figure 32: Postmortem SE cross-sectional micrographs highlighting the causes of shorts due to in-
sufficient edge polishing of Type II semi-symmetric circular samples: contact between the electrodes
(top) and presence of current collection paste (bottom) at the cell side.
Initially circular samples were cut, however, these were found difficult to polish uniformly by
hand due to uneven pressure when rotated on sand paper. This explains the shorts reported in
Table 1, which as seen from the micro-graphs in Figure 32 can be clearly attributed to the presence
of Pt paste and direct contact of the electrodes at the cell periphery due to insufficient polishing.
The micro-graphs also show how rough the polishing process can be, resulting in very irregular edges.
Page 32 of 165
==PAGE:36==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Based on these considerations square Type II samples were eventually preferred and paste application
was done after edge treatment. By reducing in the rig an untouched sample and then by slowly
polishing off its edges, while meticulously measuring with a digital caliper the sample width and
checking with a multi-meter when the short was eliminated, it was possible to work out that it was
necessary to remove an amount of material corresponding to a thickness of ∼0.2 mm from each
side of the square cell. As an extra precaution the current collector paste was also applied ∼0.05
mm from the edge as displayed in Figure 33, to avoid painting over existing cracks in case of layer
damage due to polishing, but also reduce the likelihood of the paste softening and spreading over to
the opposite electrode during high temperature testing.
Figure 33: Type II semi-symmetric square sample after polishing and applying the current collection
paste, ready for testing.
Figure 34: Nyquist and Bode plots collected at room temperature at the end of the same test for a
shorted (top) and unshorted (bottom) semi-symmetric Type II rectangular sample, with magnified
inset of the impedance spectrum for the latter.
Page 33 of 165
==PAGE:37==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
An additional measure that was implemented to identify electronic shorts, was to acquire after
testing in-situ room temperature impedance spectra in safety gas (9% H2/N2); this allowed to obviate
the possibility that shorts that were present during testing may be eliminated while dismounting
the samples (e.g. due to detachment of the current collector paste which often stuck to the top
and bottom Pt meshes of the rig sample holders), and being no longer detectable might lead to
misinterpretation of data collected and to construing wrong assumptions on cell performance.
An example of the appearance of the impedance response at room temperature in the Nyquist and
Bode plot of a short-circuited cell and one that is not, is provided in Figure 34. As seen from the
graphs, the impedance data of the shorted sample is very scattered with lower real and imaginary
values and no discernable process is identifiable, whereas what resembles an arc in the Nyquist plot
and a corresponding low frequency peak in the Bode plot are seen for the unshorted sample despite
the high level of noise detected. A high resistive and capacitive components that are in line with
the slow reaction kinetics and the low electrolyte conductivity expected at room temperature, is
observed.
All the semi-symmetric compacts produced showed some warpage towards the support side
(Figure 36.b left), a clear indication of shrinkage mismatch of the co-fired stacked layers, with the
greater shrinkage of the support determining the curvature development observed, likely a TEC
mismatch effect leading to bending during cooling. Even in absence of cracks, warping is highly
undesirable as it limits the contact area with the current collectors, compromises the cell’s durabil-
ity, making it more susceptible to breakage during testing or due to stresses introduced from a load
applied.
In co-fired layered structures due to differences in composition/initial green density or TEC mis-
match, layers will shrink at different rates, but being constrained to each other, internal stresses
develop, which can influence their densification rates and lead to distortions in the fired parts. In
general, when in presence of different shrinkage kinetics, the layer that shrinks at a faster rate will be
constrained by the slower shrinking layer and will be subject to tensile stresses; in order to alleviate
the generated stresses and further shrink, the faster-shrinking layer will tend to curve the structure
towards its side, which is what was observed. The bending was contained in the samples produced
by applying as a load a top setter plate during the final sintering stage following organic burn-out.
Performing cell flattening while simultaneously sintering allows a more gradual accommodation of
the powder particles following the physical restriction imposed by the substrates.
Nevertheless,
limiting vertical deformation implies that also large residual stresses can be present in the sintered
piece, which can result in micro-crack formation when these exceed the intrinsic strength of the
layer, which is what likely happened in the electrolyte of the semi-symmetric architectures of type
I, where also the different layers’ radii contributed to having additional stresses especially at the
interface with the bare NiO-CGO tier as the NiO-3YSZ/NiO-CGO/ScYSZ trilayer underwent dif-
ferent sintering and cooling conditions, at the ’free’ edge versus in the middle where it was further
constrained by this layer.
The different shrinkage behavior of the layers and prevention of stress relaxation to obtain more
planar cells, and possibly misalignments in the centering of the bare electrode leading to uneven
pressure distribution while laminating, is what likely impacted the success rate of the different
lamination protocols in the semi-symmetric configuration of Type I. Indeed, SEM analyses of these
samples prior to testing suggest that the defects detected cannot be attributed to exposure to too
extreme reduction conditions or high temperatures, as some samples already prior to reduction
showed electrolyte cracking in proximity to the edge (Figure 35), where the darker gray phase
observed in this case is NiO, underlining that the issue arised in the fabrication stage.
The advantage of having a symmetric assembly from a manufacturing point of view is that by
symmetry the samples will not bend. Deformation compensation to yield a flat sample is possible
by having identical porous layers on each side of the electrolyte, which, moreover, by shrinking at
a faster rate will be under tension putting the electrolyte layer under compression. However, as
already mentioned, intact symmetric cells could not be obtained initially indicating maybe a too
Page 34 of 165
==PAGE:38==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
dramatic accumulation of interfacial stresses at the electrolyte leading to delamination and defects
(Figure 36.a).
Small variations in composition or thickness within the starting green tapes are
reasonable to be expected, especially for the support layer cast to a thickness of 1300 µm. These
could cause differing sintering rates related to organics burnout and densification differentials within
the same tape and could explain the cracking of electrodes observed (Figure 36.a), which suggests
only partial compensation of shrinkage occurred between the top and bottom layers even though
they were obtained from the same tape.
It is clear that in order to improve manufacturing success and reproducibility further work is needed
to adjust the shrinkage behavior of the single layers during sintering to reduce any remnant interfacial
stresses.
Figure 35: Crossectional SE SEM images of Type I semi-symmetric circular samples prior to reduc-
tion obtained by roll (top) and isostatic lamination (bottom).
Mismatch between the tapes could be minimized to more tolerable levels by playing with the
slurry composition (e.g. tape shrinkage can be reduced by decreasing the organic additives content
in a given formulation [35] or the sintering rate can be to a certain extent tailored by adjusting the
ceramic powder’s coarse-to-fine particle fractions [36]), the heating rate (at slower heating rates, due
to mass transport and diffusion, lower mismatches between the shrinkage of the layers and their rate
and differences in the temperatures corresponding to their maximum shrinkage rate can be narrowed
[35]) or alternatively the cell geometry, like the thickness ratio of the cell components. Given the
time constraint, it was opted not to vary the slurry formulation or the heat treatment but rather
the layers’ thickness. Specifically, with respect to the original assembly, the electrolyte thickness
was increased by laminating three layers from the same tape of cast thickness of 90 µm, with the
aim of enhancing its overall mechanical strength. However, as observed in Figure 36.a it resulted in
delamination in proximity to the cell center or in fracture of the top or bottom layers. What was
found to be successful instead was reducing the cast thickness of the support layer to half, from 1300
Page 35 of 165
==PAGE:39==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
to 650 µm, to have a support of thickness ∼98 µm after sintering. The use of a thinner support
produced perfectly flat and apparently defect-free symmetric cells (Figure 36.b). These cells were
used to systematically assess the impact of different reduction conditions on electrode performance.
The same sample preparation protocol, which involved polishing and applying the current collector
paste at a distance from the sides, was also followed for these symmetric cells.
Figure 36: a)Broken and delaminated symmetric samples obtained by increasing the electrolyte
thickness by laminating three layers of cast thickness of 90 µm and b) flat symmetric samples (right)
obtained by reducing the thickness of the support to ∼98 µm next to a curved semi-symmetric cell
obtained with the original support of ∼430 µm thickness (left).
Aside from the account of the strides made in cell manufacturing here stated, to obtain a valid
architecture for fuel electrode testing, it is clear that specifying these more sensitive practical details
about polishing, contact paste application and electronic short detection has a significant importance
for acquiring physically-sound and artifact-free measurements, and omitting to disclose them could
hinder the success of achieving consistent and replicable results with the proposed testing platform.
3.2
Impact of Current collection
Finding a suitable way to achieve good electronic connection of the cells in the test rig to attain
repeatable contact resistances was a necessary starting point for achieving a reliable platform for
screening different reductions protocols and their consequences.
To address an issue of lack of consistency in the ohmic resistance values measured for semi-symmetric
samples, owed likely to the limited contact area between the electrodes and the Pt meshes of the
alumina samples holders of the test set-up, resulting from the semi-symmetric cells being convexly
warped towards the support side, and possibly limited planar conduction, the inclusion of a current
collector layer was considered with the aim of improving the contact resistance.
The choice of an appropriate current collector is crucial to establish a continuous conduction path
to transfer the electrons involved in the electrochemical reactions between the electrodes and inter-
connects and/or testing fixtures and minimize overall cell resistance. Although ideally it should not
participate directly in the electrochemical reactions, it can have a significant impact on cell perfor-
mance as inefficient current collection can introduce non-negligible losses in performance in terms
of both ohmic and polarization resistance[37, 38, 39]. In some cases the discrepancy in performance
found in literature has also been attributed in part to the choice of current collector material and/or
application method [38, 39]. In durability studies under practical operating conditions loss of con-
tact between the current collector and electrodes may lead to misinterpretation of cell degradation
mechanisms, as deterioration of performance could be erroneously attributed solely to changes in the
electrodes when poor charge drainage/supply might be the main cause [40]. Moreover, it has been
observed for cells with thin-film electrodes, especially when these display poor in-plane conduction,
that the cell resistance can be strongly affected by the contact between the current collector and
the electrode, with it decreasing as the contact area increases, suggesting the occurrence of the phe-
Page 36 of 165
==PAGE:40==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
nomenon of current constriction is, hence, not only restricted at the electrolyte/electrode interface,
but can also arise due to discrete contact points at the electrode/current collector interface [41, 42].
All this to emphasize the importance of having adequate current collection and why a part of this
study was dedicated to understanding which current collector material is more suitable and trans-
lates in the collection of consistent high-quality data.
Among the requirements that a current collector should possess are high electronic conductivity, suf-
ficient porosity to not impede gas diffusion over the electrode active area, good adhesion and CTE
matching with electrode materials and adjacent components of the electrochemical testing station,
as well as chemical compatibility. Accordingly, a Pt paste (Ferro GmbH) and a NiO slurry (Haldor
Topsoe) were selected to improve cell contactability.
In the following electrochemical data measured by applying these two current collector pastes on
rectangular Type II semi-symmetric cells are presented.
3.2.1
EIS data
Impedance data of rectangular Type II semi-symmetric cells were analyzed to assess the effect of
using Pt and Ni as current collector layers. The cells used were part of the same batch, i.e. they were
obtained from the same electrode and electrolyte tapes and exposed to the same heat treatment.
This means that no compositional and structural differences were to be expected between samples.
After the heat up and paste additives’ burn-off stage (in air), the samples underwent the same
reduction process at 850°C according to protocol I (in 90/10 H2O/H2 for 1 h followed by 50/50
H2O/H2 for 1 h) prior to testing. It is therefore reasonable to assume that any variations in cell
performance observed that originate stem from the choice in the current collection material.
A
detailed discussion of the results of this study is presented below.
3.2.1.1
EIS and Rs replicability
Illustrated in Figure 37 are the average area specific resistance values estimated from the high
frequency intercept of the impedance spectra with the real axis in the Nyquist plot, measured at the
fingerprint conditions.
What is immediately evident from the graph is that resistances were considerably higher across all
conditions when Pt was applied as a conducting paste as opposed to NiO by almost a factor of two.
Also a higher variance in ohmic data is displayed with the former, shown as error bars in the plot.
The standard deviation reaches a maximum of 13%, while these were contained within 4% for the
NiO, as summarized in Table 2.
Typically, the ohmic resistance is mainly dominated by the resistance to ionic transport in the elec-
trolyte, but the high values here encountered suggest that other factors may also be contributing;
as the measured resistances are generally much higher than the calculated based on the thickness
and conductivity of 10Sc1YSZ (0.01 Ωcm2 for ∼0.1 S/cm at 800°C [43, 15]). Poor contact between
the layers or current collector and other interfacial resistive effects are among the possible reasons.
It is necessary to recall that an important difference between the pastes is that while Pt does not
undergo significant changes during test start up, the NiO paste undergoes reduction to Ni when
exposed to H2 with creation of porosity.
The larger scatter in data for nominally identical cells reported with Pt paste than with NiO, could
be related to some extent to the quality of the contact between the electrode and the current collec-
tor material, with weak adherence of the Pt layer to the electrode surface, which was seen to come
off more easily from the samples, and rather displayed a higher affinity to the meshes of the sample
holders, being made of the same metal. The lower variation in resistance observed in comparison
with NiO paste could be an indication that better contact was achieved, which can be attributed to
this current collector material more closely matching the cermets’, with both the support and the
functional layers containing Ni, which would allow for the formation of stronger metal bonds ensured
by having one kind of metal. Moreover, as Ni has a lower melting temperature than Pt (1453°C vs
1770°C [44]), at the same testing temperature it is expected to soften more, possibly leading to a
greater contact area and enhanced attachment to the electrode.
Page 37 of 165
==PAGE:41==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
A first order correction was done by simple subtraction of the rig short-circuit resistance from the
raw data to exclude pure ohmic lead effects, with corrected values reported in Table 2. As visualized
in Figure 37, values did not differ significantly, underlining that the resistive contributions of the Pt
meshes and wiring of the test set-up were minimal.
Figure 37: Bar plot of the average area specific ohmic resistance (RS), with its standard deviation
as error bars, of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with
Pt and NiO as contact pastes, obtained from EIS spectra collected at three temperatures (800, 750,
700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h. Reported
are the raw data along with the corresponding values corrected by subtracting the contributions of
the testing fixtures found in Appendix A. The spread for Pt was deduced from six samples and for
NiO from four samples.
Temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
Paste
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
Pt
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.201
0.179
0.173
0.236
0.192
0.191
0.315
0.314
0.327
(sd%)
(10%)
(7%)
(5%)
(10%)
(5%)
(5%)
(13%)
(12%)
(10%)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.186
0.164
0.158
0.221
0.177
0.177
0.301
0.301
0.314
(sd%)
((10%)
(7%)
(5%)
(10%)
(5%)
(4%)
(13%)
(11%)
(9%)
NiO
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.090
0.101
0.118
0.131
0.136
0.153
0.177
0.183
0.206
(sd%)
(2%)
(2%)
(2%)
(2%)
(2%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(4%)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.071
0.083
0.100
0.113
0.118
0.136
0.160
0.166
0.189
(sd%)
(2%)
(2%)
(2%)
(2%)
(2%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(4%)
Table 2: Mean and standard deviation (in parenthesis) of the area specific ohmic resistance of semi-
symmetric Type II rectangular samples reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with Pt and NiO as contact
pastes, obtained from EIS spectra collected at OCV at three temperatures (800, 750, 700°C) and
gas compositions (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h. Values calculated from
the raw data (RS,Raw) and the ones corrected (RS,corrected) by subtracting the contributions of the
testing fixtures found in Appendix A are reported. The spread for Pt was deduced from six samples
and for NiO from four samples.
Page 38 of 165
==PAGE:42==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
The ohmic resistance with both pastes decreased as the temperature was raised, in agreement
with the thermally-activated nature of ion conductivity.
Two opposing trends with gas composition come to light for the two current collector materials: in
the case of Pt a decrease in resistance is seen moving towards more reducing mixtures, which is more
evident at higher temperatures, in contrast, application of NiO paste led to decreasing values with
increased H2 content.
It is possible that for the first this dependency of the ohmic resistance on gas composition may
be related to the CGO phase in the functional layer of the electrode. At high temperatures and
low oxygen partial pressures ceria is expected to become highly oxygen-deficient, displaying n-type
conductivity by small polaron thermally-activated transport; these localized electronic defects arise
as a result of charge compensation due to the reduction of ceria with creation of oxygen vacancies
[21]. While the ohmic resistance is mainly determined by the electrolyte, if electronic conductivity
of the electrodes is low, these may introduce additional contributions; if say Ni percolation in the
cermets is poor, then electron migration will occur alternatively over the GCO grains, explaining
why the ohmic resistance would vary with the H2O /H2 mixing ratio, as the offset associated to the
electrodes would then follow the same oxygen partial pressure dependency of the CGO electronic
conductivity. In principle, if the Pt paste did not ensure good contactability with the thin Ni-CGO
fuel electrode, which is only 10 µm thick, then you would have a constriction resistance on top of the
one stemming from the electrolyte, with uneven current density distribution and in-plane electronic
current flow that becomes more important. In such a case the distance over which electrons travel
between the current collector contact points will determine the resistance to in-plane electronic
transport, which if it relies mostly on the moderate electronic conductivity of CGO rather than
Ni would explain why this sheet resistance would not be gas composition-independent as would be
expected if the Ni phase primarily served to carry the electrons. It is not unreasonable to assume
this to be the case to decipher the observed variation in ohmic resistance of cells with Pt paste in
different H2O/H2 mixtures.
Possibly the drop in ohmic resistance exhibited under more reducing conditions may be the result
of improvements in conductivity with better effective percolation through the Ni/CGO, due to
enhanced contact between the particles that may follow with chemical expansion of the ceria lattice
that accompanies the change in its oxidation state as it reduces, with increase in ionic radius from
rCe4+=0.097 nm to rCe3+=0.1143 nm, which reportedly can easily reach values of the order of 2-3%
[45].
The effect of gas composition on the ohmic loss when the NiO slurry is employed is far more
difficult to comprehend, but it is safe to assume that it is not a time-effect, related to microstructural
changes and degradation phenomena, given the reverse sequence in which the fingerprint at 700°C
was taken compared to the other temperatures, for ascending steam contents. One could speculate
that it might correlate to the large polarization resistance measured, as will be shown later on,
which was similarly affected by gas composition, increasing as less steam was supplied. The current
density distribution in the electrolyte and the electrode is likely dictated by the distribution of the
high polarization resistance, as the current will tend to flow along the least resistive path; this could
entail that part of the electrolyte area may be unutilized, especially if there are also geometric ef-
fects of the contact between the CGO backbone and the ScYSZ electrolyte in discrete points, as ion
transfer will only occur at the sintering necks between these two phases; the CGO phase will only
cover a fraction of the interfacial area, given also the presence of Ni in the cermet regardless of how
good the electrode/electrolyte interface may be. Constriction of the current lines to the effective
reduced active cross-section will consequently give rise to locally higher current densities, leading to
an overall higher ohmic resistance.
In addition one could also argue that as the thickness of the active region tends to scale with the
polarization resistance, which becomes greater as more H2-rich mixtures are fed, then the effective
active thickness will also increase as a result, moving further into the electrode as to exploit more of
the actives sites (TPB and/or DPB); this will ensue longer ionic transport in the backbone of the
electrode, which could partly explain the increase in ohmic resistance in more reducing atmospheres.
Page 39 of 165
==PAGE:43==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
To further inspect the validity of the Type II semi-symmetric architecture the impedance spectra
of nominally identical cells with the two current collector pastes are compared.
The grouped EIS data at different temperatures for 50% H2O/H2 represented in Figure 38 are of
samples that were part of the same test to minimize any sources of uncertainty, numbered based on
the position of the sample holders. The 50%/50% composition was selected for illustrative purposes,
given that lower steam contents, as will be displayed in the following section for two representative
samples, resulted in uncomplete arcs due to a shift of the low frequency feature below the lower limit
of 0.08 Hz.
Figure 38: Graphs of EIS raw data of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples reduced with
protocol I at 850°C, collected at OCV at three different temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C), for a
fuel composition of 50%H2O/H2, supplied at a rate of 6 l/h. Nyquist (top) and Bode plots (bottom)
of samples with Pt (a,b) and with NiO (c,d) as contact pastes. EIS data of samples are numbered
based on the sample holder position in the rig.
Page 40 of 165
==PAGE:44==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Gas composition (%H2O/H2)
50%
Paste
Position
Temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
Pt
0
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.249
0.278
0.316
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.236
0.265
0.304
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.92
1.42
2.97
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.90
1.41
2.96
1
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.085
0.114
0.160
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.071
0.100
0.147
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.12
2.24
4.44
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.11
2.23
4.43
2
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.129
0.162
0.214
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.115
0.149
0.202
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.51
2.99
5.05
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.50
2.97
5.04
3
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.202
0.351
0.499
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.187
0.337
0.486
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.57
3.01
5.39
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.56
2.99
5.37
NiO
1
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.070
0.116
0.172
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.054
0.101
0.155
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
2.17
3.72
5.76
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
2.16
3.71
5.74
2
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.107
0.162
0.222
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.090
0.146
0.206
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
2.15
3.49
5.02
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
2.14
3.47
5.00
3
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.077
0.116
0.163
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.059
0.099
0.146
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.72
3.25
5.00
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.70
3.24
4.99
Table 3: Summary of the area specific Ohmic resistance (Rs), obtained graphically from the high
frequency intercept with the real axis in the Nyquist plot, and real low frequency point value (RLF )
of the semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples whose EIS are presented in Figure 38. Reported
are also the corrected values obtained by subtracting from the raw data the contributions of the
testing fixtures found in Appendix A.
As observed in Figure 38, the general shape of the spectra are similar across samples for both
current collectors, displaying two arcs in the Nyquist plots, which show the same behaviour with
temperature, suggesting that the underlying processes that give rise to these features might be the
same, despite as revealed by the Bode plots, these having different characteristic frequencies, at least
an order of magnitude lower at each temperature when NiO paste was applied.
Although the serial resistance was reasonable lower with NiO paste compared to Pt, as concluded in
the previous analysis, the arcs are seen to be generally bigger for the former, owing to the larger both
real and imaginary parts, which leads one to infer that there might be some fundamental differences
between the two current collectors in what limits electrode performance.
Most importantly, what the graphs highlight is the lack of consistency in the EIS spectra of cells,
more evident for the Pt samples, as full arcs could not be measured for the ones with NiO already
when the temperature was decreased to 750°C. While the response is pretty much the same down to
frequencies of more or less 1 Hz for Pt samples and 3 Hz for NiO samples, they show very different
behaviour at lower frequencies, which seem to be systematically the same across the sample positions.
At least for the Pt group, the departure between samples appears to increase as the temperature is
lowered.
Page 41 of 165
==PAGE:45==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
3.2.1.2
Effect of gas composition and temperature
Figure 39 showcase how gas composition and temperature changes affect the impedance spectra.
To facilitate comparisons between current collector pastes, EIS data of the samples of the previous
series were averaged out; any parameters extracted will, thus, be overlined to indicate that values
refer to the average of the samples’ spectra.
To better visualize the EIS responses to mixtures with different steam contents, the data was orga-
nized by plotting the impedance data for the three investigated compositions at one temperature,
and vice-versa to showcase changes with temperature more clearly, and the serial resistances were
subtracted to focus on the polarization portion of the spectra.
As observed in Figure 39, decreasing the steam partial pressure at 800°C produced an increase in
the low frequency arc located below 1 Hz, while it seemed to cause a decrement in the size of the
high frequency arc situated in the 1-103 Hz frequency range.
What is apparent from the graphs in Figure 39.a,b is the difference in magnitude of the low fre-
quency arcs with the two current collectors, which differently from the high-frequency portion of the
spectra, are well separated as a result of the larger difference in characteristic frequencies.
With the Ni contact layer the size of the second arc was considerably greater and more displaced
towards the lower end of the frequency interval, on which changes in gas composition seemed to
have a greater influence with respect to the Pt equivalent.
In the Bode plot (Figure 39.b, d) minor shifts of summit frequencies to higher values in more H2-rich
conditions are seen for the high-frequency feature, which appears to be less gas composition-sensitive
than the low frequency part of the spectra that instead moves in the opposite direction; while for
the Pt sample it still falls in 1-0.1 Hz frequency range, for the NiO sample it shifts well below 0.1 Hz
as mixtures become more reducing to the point where it is lost due to the limited frequency range
in which the measurements were performed.
Although the arcs did not fully close, it is clear that with more steam-lean mixtures the low fre-
quency contribution to the polarization resistance becomes more important, dictating its increase,
as conveyed by values reported in Table 4; these do not represent true polarization resistances for
those conditions where complete arcs could not be measured, as they were calculated by taking the
average of the speactra’s difference between the real part of the impedance data point of lowest
frequency and the serial resistance.
From Figure 39.c,d it emerges that both arcs are thermally-activated and as summarized in Table 5
a decrease in the cell polarization and total resistance consequently follows with increasing temper-
ature, in agreement with expectations.
Differences in impedance spectra at the three temperatures are again more noticeable for the sample
with NiO paste, with marked enlargement of the second arc following 50°C decrements in tempera-
ture.
Also displayed in Figure 40 is the standard deviation in terms of both real and imaginary components
for the conditions presented. As observed in the graphs, the spread between the samples increases at
lower temperatures and the change is seen to be more pronounced for the NiO samples. Indeed for
these samples the standard deviation curves for the imaginary and real part start to depart below
10 Hz and 100 Hz, respectively, while these frequencies are an order of magnitude lower for the Pt
samples. The variability in terms of resistance increases with more reducing mixtures, but while for
the Pt samples the curves coincide below 100 Hz, for the NiO samples the curves deviate already
at 105Hz; a jump in the standard deviation of the imaginary components as mixtures become less
reducing is observed in the low frequency end of the interval, below 1 Hz.
Page 42 of 165
==PAGE:46==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 39: Nyquist (a,c) and Bode plots (b,d) of the average EIS data of the semi-symmetric Type
II rectangular samples of the previous data sets with, respectively, Pt and NiO as contact pastes,
reduced with protocol I at 850°C and collected at OCV at three different nominal temperatures
(800°C, 750°C, 700°C) and steam contents (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), maintaining a feed rate of 6
l/h.
Page 43 of 165
==PAGE:47==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 40: Standard deviation of the real (a,c) and imaginary (b,d) contributions of the EIS data
of the semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples of the previous data sets, with Pt and NiO as
contact pastes, reduced with protocol I at 850°C and collected at OCV at three different nominal
temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C) and steam contents (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), maintaining a
feed rate of 6 l/h.
Page 44 of 165
==PAGE:48==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Temperature [°C]
800°C
Paste
Gas composition (%H2O/H2)
50%
20%
4%
Pt
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.152 (7%)
0.148 (7%)
0.148 (5%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.27 (31%)
1.27 (22%)
1.42 (16%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.22 (18%)
1.23 (10%)
1.35 (5%)
Ni
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.068 (2%)
0.079 (2%)
0.100 (3%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
2.00 (26%)
1.54 (8%)
1.71 (10%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.93 (25%)
1.46 (8%)
1.61 (8%)
Table 4:
Summary of the average area specific resistances obtained from the spectra of semi-
symmetric Type II rectangular samples, reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with Pt and NiO as
contact pastes. EIS were collected at OCV at the nominal temperatures of 800°C and three gas com-
positions (50%,20%,4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h. The serial resistance (RS,corrected)
was obtained graphically from the high frequency intercept with the real axis of the Nyquist plot
and corrected by subtracting from the raw data the contributions of the testing fixtures found in
Appendix A. The polarization resistance (Rp,exp) was calculated from its difference with the real
low frequency point value (RLP , the subscript LP stands for last point).
Gas composition (%H2O/H2)
50%
Paste
Temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
Pt
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.152 (7%)
0.213 (11%)
0.284 (15%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.27 (31%)
2.40 (75%)
4.45 (107%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.22 (18%)
2.48 (32%)
4.62 (29%)
Ni
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.068 (2%)
0.115 (3%)
0.169 (3%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
2.00 (26%)
3.47 (24%)
5.24 (43%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.93 (25%)
3.36 (24%)
5.08 (44%)
Table 5:
Summary of the average area specific resistances obtained from the spectra of semi-
symmetric Type II rectangular samples, reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with Pt and NiO as
contact pastes. EIS were collected at OCV at the nominal composition of 50% H2O/H2, fed at a
constant rate of 6 l/h, and three nominal temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C). The serial resistance
(RS,corrected) was obtained graphically from the high frequency intercept with the real axis of the
Nyquist plot and corrected by subtracting from the raw data the contributions of the testing fixtures
found in Appendix A. The polarization resistance (Rp,exp) was calculated from its difference with
the real low frequency point value (RLP , the subscript LP stands for last point).
3.2.2
Sources Of Polarization Contributions
From the above analysis one can conclude the existence of a high and low-frequency contribution to
the polarization resistance for both samples. The response located at 10 −103 Hz is suggested to be
due to ionic transport across the electrolyte–MIEC interface or from the bulk to the surface of the
MIEC, given its weak sensitivity to gas changes and strong temperature dependence; the frequency
range and nature of the high-frequency feature is in agreement with other studies on Ni-CGO elec-
trodes [46, 23, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52], which also showed the same shift towards higher frequency
in more steam-lean mixtures, possibly a consequence of the increased reducibility of ceria at lower
oxygen partial pressures.
Typically low frequency contributions are ascribed to mass transport processes like gas diffusion
and/or conversion characterized by slow relaxation frequencies, which would be consistent with the
more prominent gas dependency observed of the associated impedance response below 1 Hz, which
increases as the mixing ratio of H2/H2O deviates from unity. In general, concentration gradients
affect the electrode electrochemistry via a change of the equilibrium potential and reaction kinetics.
The gas conversion feature arises due to concentration changes above the surface of the porous active
electrode, which can be viewed as a reactive wall; analytical expression, like the one by Primdahl et.
Page 45 of 165
==PAGE:49==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
al.[53] based on a zero-dimensional CSTR model (see Appendix B), have been derived to describe
this semi-circle impedance, which was found to be dependent on gas composition, gas flow rate,
rig geometry (i.e. channel length and cross-sectional area) and temperature. The impedance arc
associated with gas conversion should be rather contained in the EIS data analyzed considering the
small size of the samples and that measurements in the symmetric button cell set-up are conducted
in a unique large atmosphere where changes in composition are expected to be better suppressed.
Gas phase diffusion is an unvoidable process and contributions to the spectra of gas diffusion limita-
tions in the fuel electrodes’ porous structure are reportedly expected to be negligible for thin layers
(≪100 µm) with porosity well above 10% [53]. Hence, as the support is comparatively thicker
than the functional Ni-CGO layers (430 µm versus 10 µm), gas concentration gradients would be
predominantly located in this component, giving rise to the gas diffusion impedance.
The resistance to gas phase diffusion will depend on the partial pressures of the gases and their dif-
fusion coefficients, the microstructure of the porous layer (i.e. porosity, tortuosity) and temperature
[52, 53].
The behaviour of the low frequency feature with gas composition points to a diffusion impedance,
whose resistance will increase strongly as compositions deviate from the 50%H2O/50%H2 equilib-
rium composition where it is at its minimum; higher diffusion resistances are expected moving to
more diluted mixtures of either of the reacting species, due to the depletion of the lower concentra-
tion reactant and a decrease of the diffusion coefficient, related to an increase in gas phase collision
at higher partial pressures of the abundant species in the binary mixture [52]. However, the evident
variation of the impedance spectra in the low frequency domain with temperature suggests that the
underlying process cannot be solely diffusion as the temperature dependance is not the one expected;
models derived for the diffusion resistance have shown it to be rather temperature insensitive, ex-
hibiting a T 0.5 dependency [54], hence, the thermal activation observed suggests a physicochemical
electrode process may be occurring in the same frequency range. This finding is consistent with
other studies [54, 55, 56], which also interpreted the low frequency peak as a convolution of the two
contributions.
The difference in dimensions of the low frequency arcs for the two type of current collectors observed
in Figure 39 likely depends on the degree to which each loss mechanism dominates over another,
which could be traced back to their microstructure.
The effect of steam on the low frequency arc suggests that the underlying electrode process could
be a surface process; this is in agreement with studies that have also observed this low frequency
contribution to be dependent on the CGO active surface area [47]. Although there is no general
consensus, a change transfer process has been previously assigned. Electron transfer between the
hydroxyl ion intermediate and Ce4+ (Ce′
Ce + OH·
o ⇌Cex
Ce + OHox) has been proposed as a rate
determining step in the hydrogen reaction [47] and the enhancing effect of steam on the kinetics of
the reaction has been related to its role in the formation rate and coverage of hydroxide species on
surface vacancies; it is suggested that steam plays an autocatalytic effect during H2 electro-oxidation
by promoting the reduction of oxide ions into these intermediates [57].
Dissociative H2 adsorption/desorption possibly coupled with surface diffusion on CGO has also
been considered, due to evidence of significant improvements in performance when small catalytic
amounts of Ni where introduced in pure CGO electrodes mainly related the low-frequency portion of
the spectra, attributed to dissociation of H2 occurring more readily on the Ni surface, with spillover
to the interface with ceria or its surface; this low frequency process was also found to display isotope
mass effect, which adsorption of H2 on the MIEC and dissociation into singular hydrogen species
(H+ or H), as well as their surface diffusion are all expected to show [58].
An overlap in dispersion frequencies of the gas phase diffusion and electrode processes is charac-
teristic of MIEC electrodes and is a direct result of their oxygen non-stoichiometry that gives rise
to a large chemical capacitance, responsible for shifting the electrode response to lower relaxation
frequencies [52, 50].
Nevertheless, it is unclear whether the source of this large capacitance associated to the low fre-
quency process can be exclusively attributed to the functional CGO layer for these samples. This
can be verified qualitatively by fitting the low frequency arc with an RQ element to obtain the
capacitance from the extrapolated parameters (C = 1/(2πf)n · 1/R), which can then be compared
Page 46 of 165
==PAGE:50==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
with literature predictions for the conditions of interest.
The bulk capacitance of CGO shows a dependance on both temperature and oxygen activity,
as reflected by Figure 41 [45]. In general, the capacitance of a MIEC is proportional to the slope of
an oxygen non-stoichiometry isotherm [45, 52], according to the following equation:
C[F/cm3] = −8F 2
VmRT
dδ
d (ln (pO2))
(3.1)
in which δ is the oxygen non-stoichiometry in the stochiometric chemical formula of the material,
Gd0.1Ce0.9O1.95−δ, Vm = 23.92cm3/mol is the molar volume calculated as the ratio of the molar
mass (MMCGO = 172.11g/mol) and theoretical density of CGO (ρth,CGO = 7.196g/cm3 [59]),
F = 96485C/mol is Faraday’s constant, R = 8.314J · mol−1K−1 is the universal constant and T
[K] is the temperature. The oxygen partial pressure PO2 could be calculated knowing the steam-
to-hydrogen fraction, xH20/xH2 and equilibrium constant, Keq, as follows:
PO2 =
xH20
xH2
·
1
Keq
2
(3.2)
where the approximate expression [60] used to calculate Keq at a given temperature was the following:
Keq(T) = 10−(2.958−13022
T
)
(3.3)
For the intended scope it should be sufficiently adequate to adopt the above expression given its
validity in the temperature range 1000K < T < 1300K, although higher inaccuracy is to be expected
at the lowest fingerprint temperature of 973 K.
Figure 41: Bulk Oxygen non-stoichiometry of CGO10 as a function of PO2 from 600 to 900°C with
50°C increments [45]. The blue, red and green closed symbols mark, respectively, compositions of
50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2, on the 700°C, 750°C, 800°C isotherms.
Page 47 of 165
==PAGE:51==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 42: Slope of the Bulk Oxygen non-stoichiometry isotherm of CGO10 at the fingerprint
conditions determined from Figure 41 and the calculated volumetric capacitance (C) .
T [°C]
Keq
% H2O/H2
log(PO2) [atm]
δ
∆δ/∆ln(PO2)
C [F/cm3]
800°C
1.50E+09
50%
-18
0.010
-0.008
2730
20%
-20
0.034
-0.016
5412
4%
-21
0.076
-0.048
16838
750°C
5.88E+09
50%
-20
0.009
-0.004
1445
20%
-21
0.016
-0.003
1152
4%
-22
0.036
-0.010
3830
700°C
2.65E+10
50%
-21
0.005
-0.003
1211
20%
-22
0.008
-0.003
1211
4%
-23
0.016
-0.008
3038
Table 6: Oxygen non-stoichiometry (δ) and volumetric capacitance (C) as a function of oxygen
activity determined from the slope of the isotherms at the fingerprint conditions from Figure 41.
As seen in Figure 41, the isotherm lines become more steep as one moves towards more reducing
mixtures, but at each fixed composition, the slope is numerically larger as temperature is increased.
The values determined approximately from Figure 41 for the PO2 of concern are plotted in Figure 42
and can be found in Table 6. Based on this stoichiometric data a higher capacitance would be
expected when steam content is lowered at a fixed temperature, and at a given H2O/H2 ratio when
temperature is increased, owing to the greater change in oxygen non-stoichiometry with oxygen
activity.
A tentative fitting of the spectra using an equivalent circuit model consisting of two RQ ele-
ments, one for each arc, was performed. Due to the limited fingerprint conditions tested, there was
not sufficient basis to add more of these components although a high frequency and a low frequency
electrode process plus mass transport have been suggested, as the latter could not be visibly resolved
in the spectra due to similarities in time constants in the low frequency domain. The low frequency
RQ element will therefore be likely representative of an electrode process and diffusion/gas conver-
sion.
Although the ohmic resistances were subtracted and the data was already corrected for the resistive
contributions of the electrical fixtures of the set-up before averaging, a serial resistance and inductor
were still included in the circuit to account for any ohmic remnants and residual interferences of the
electrical wiring that would appear as high-frequency inductive artifacts. These fits are presented
Page 48 of 165
==PAGE:52==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
in Appendix C.
Obviously greater uncertainty is foreseen for lower temperatures and steam contents as the lower
frequency bound was reached sooner and only part of the second arc could be traced. This ECM
fitting, however, suggested to provide a better estimate than taking the last frequency data point
which would lead to underestimating values. The relative residuals expressing the goodness of the
fits of EIS data with the equivalent circuit selected, at least in the low frequency range of interest
did not go beyond 10% (see Appendix c).
The results of this analysis are presented in Table 7 and Table 8.
As shown in Figure 44 and Figure 43, the capacitance coupled with the low frequency resistive con-
tribution obtained from the spectra did follow the expected trend with composition and temperature
in the case of both current collectors. There was a discrepancy in the behavior of the capacitance
with temperature for the Pt samples with the 4% steam mixture, whereby values, as seen in Fig-
ure 43, increased with temperature.
Figure 43: Capacitance trend calculated based on the resistance and summit frequency, obtained
from the fitting of the low frequency portion of the average spectra of the Pt samples found in
Appendix C.
T [°C]
% H2O/H2
RLF [Ω· cm2]
f summit,LF [Hz]
C [F/cm2]
V active · 10−4 [cm3]
t [µm]
800°C
50%
0.86
0.51
0.46
0.52
2
20%
1.2
0.15
0.85
0.48
2
4%
1.5
0.090
0.98
0.18
1
750°C
50%
2.0
0.23
0.38
0.80
4
20%
2.0
0.12
0.64
1.7
8
4%
7.0
0.0037
1.3
1.1
5
700°C
50%
1.7
0.25
0.40
1.0
5
20%
2.3
0.097
0.64
1.6
8
4%
5.9
0.0055
1.4
1.4
6
Table 7: Summary of resistance, summit frequency from fitting the low frequency portion of the
average spectra of Pt samples, found in Appendix C, and corresponding calculated capacitance,
active volume and apparent active thickness.
Page 49 of 165
==PAGE:53==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 44: Capacitance trend calculated based on the resistance and summit frequency obtained
from the fitting of the low frequency portion of the average spectra of the NiO samples found in
Appendix C.
T [°C]
% H2O/H2
RLF [Ω· cm2]
f summit,LF [Hz]
C [F/cm2]
V active · 10−4 [cm3]
t [µm]
800°C
50%
2.4
0.10
0.62
0.77
3
20%
5.7
0.017
1.1
0.70
3
4%
5.4
0.016
1.2
0.24
1
750°C
50%
5.8
0.055
0.50
1.2
5
20%
8.4
0.029
0.64
1.9
8
4%
6.0
0.018
1.2
1.1
4
700°C
50%
12
0.034
0.38
1.1
5
20%
14
0.021
0.54
1.5
6
4%
13
0.013
0.80
0.89
4
Table 8: Summary of resistance, summit frequency from fitting the low frequency portion of the
average spectra of NiO samples, found in Appendix C, and corresponding calculated capacitance,
active volume and apparent active thickness.
It is possible that interdiffusion between ceria and zirconia at the ScYSZ/Ni-CGO interface
during co-sintering might have modified the non-stoichiometry of the electrode leading to this con-
trasting capacitive behaviour at the mentioned operating condition. An investigation of this interface
performed by Klitkou et al. [61], but on a full cell with an equivalent electrode and electrolyte sin-
tered under the same conditions (1250°C for 12 h), revealed by EDS line scans the presence of
interdiffusion of Zr and Ce; identifying the interdiffusion zone as the graded region where the atomic
fraction of the Zr cation varied in the range 0.1 < Zr/(Zr+Ce) < 0.9, it was found that it extended
1 µm into the electrolyte and 1.5 µm into the fuel electrode side, where supposedly the presence of
NiO increased the interdiffusion length, as there have been reports of it having an accelerating effect
on intermixing kinetics compared to when CGO is alone employed [62, 63].
Studies [64, 65] have demonstrated that ceria-zirconia solid solutions (Ce1−xZrxO2−δ, CZO) are
more reducible than pure ceria. This is said to originate from the incorporation of the smaller Zr4+,
which causes local distorsions of the ceria lattice, leading in a decrease in the oxygen vacancy for-
mation energy due to strain effects. Indeed, a structural relaxation follows with vacancy formation
through the reduction of Ce4+ to Ce3+, allowing the accommodation of this smaller cation, whereby
Page 50 of 165
==PAGE:54==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
it achieves a lower coordination number (7-fold coordination versus 8-fold coordination of Ce4+).
Hence, due to the presence of these cation defects in ceria the onset of reduction is shifted towards
higher PO2.
In light of these findings, if the reaction zone is mainly located in this region, one can assume a
greater chemical capacitance than the one arising from CGO alone, with greater enhancement in
reducibility and, thus, oxygen non-stoichiometry, especially at higher PO2 conditions.
For these solid solutions, there is evidence to suggest that the chemical capacitance trend with tem-
perature could be the opposite, as demonstrated by Klitkou et al. [61], which found a capacitance
that decreased from 700°C to 800°C at 50% steam.
However, it must be said that if the chemical capacitance contribution stemmed solely from the
interdiffusion zone this temperature dependence would be in contrast with what is observed in the
present study for all other compositions except for the 4% steam mixture for the Pt samples.
Possibly for this set of samples a mixed behaviour stems from the two different chemical capacitive
contributions, the one in the ScYSZ-CGO interdiffusion zone and one from the GCO external to it,
depending on how far the reaction zone extends into the electrode.
The uncertainty in the values extracted, especially with unclosed arcs and probable overlap of other
processes in the same frequency domain (diffusion/conversion), which make achieving a meaningful
analysis of EIS data with electrical circuit analogues more difficult, does not allow to confirm or
deny this statement in this narrow study.
Nevertheless, if one sets aside the possibility of a capacitive contribution from the interdiffusion
layer, justified by the more predominant agreement of the temperature trend of the extracted capac-
itance with the one calculated from the stoichiometric data of CGO, the values obtained are actually
in line with what is reported in literature for ceria electrodes. A study by Riegraph et.al [50] on
Ni-CGO10/CGO10/3YSZ/CGO10/Ni-CGO10 symmetrical cells found with a 20/80 H2O/H2 mix-
ture that the capacitance associated to the low frequency process varied between 0.1-1 F/cm2, and
increased with temperature as in the present study (Figure 45).
Figure 45: Capacitance of the low frequency electrode process as a function of temperature of a
commercial Ni-CGO10/CGO10/3YSZ/CGO10-Ni/CGO10 symmetrical cell in 20/80 H2O/H2 [50].
It is necessary to understand whether the capacitive values can be accounted for by the CGO
phase present in the electrodes. This can be asserted by calculating the active volume from the
ratio of the extracted area specific capacitance (C) in Table 7 and Table 8, appropriately multiplied
by the average sample geometric area, and the calculated volumetric capacitance (C) in Table 6, as
Page 51 of 165
==PAGE:55==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
follows:
V active[cm3] = C · A
C
(3.4)
where the average sample areas used were AP t = 0.308 cm2 and ANiO = 0.340 cm2. The error
introduced by taking the average is deemed acceptable as the standard deviations were 4% and 2%
for the Pt and NiO sets, respectively.
By dividing the resulting volumes in Table 7 and Table 8 by the active GCO area, these can be
traslated into an apparent active thickness,t, which is easier to relate to:
t =
V active
A · (1 −ϵ) · volCGO · 2
(3.5)
where the CGO active area was obtained by multiplying the average geometric electrode area of the
samples by the solid fraction in the electrode, assuming a porosity of ϵ=30% and the volumentric
CGO fraction, volCGO = 50%. The factor 2 at the denominator is to account for the fact the active
volume calculated includes contributions from both electrodes.
This thickness equivalent to the required amount of ceria that gives rise to the estimated capacitance
can then be compared with the electrode thickness of 10 µm, which corresponds to the available
volume of CGO assuming the entirety of the Ni-GCO layer is active.
The bar chart in Figure 46 illustrates that for both set of samples active thicknesses did not
exceed 10 µm. Even if the active areas were 50% of the ones stated, values would still be within the
correct order of magnitude.
This fairly good agreement suggests that the interpretation of this capacitance as having a chemical
nature and being related to the change of oxygen stoichiometry in the material is reasonable.
Possible discrepancies may come from some uncertainty surrounding both the prediction of vol-
umetric capacitance based on stoichiometric data obtained from literature, and the fitting of EIS
measurements done to extract peak frequencies and resistances for the capacitance calculation.
The oxygen non-stoichiometry isotherms used likely carry some uncertainty, .e.g. maybe due to
an offset of the thermocouple or PO2 sensor used or if true sample equilibrium was not reached
during the thermogravimetric measurements.
In addition, only the oxygen non-stoichiometry of
the bulk was considered, when there is also a contribution coming from the surface, where oxygen
vacancy formation should occur more readily [45]. Hence, one underestimates the volumetric ca-
pacitance by neglecting the surface oxygen non-stoichiometry, without even considering the effect
of the GCO/ScYSZ interdiffusion, previously mentioned, which may have altered the oxygen non-
stoichiometry of the material to have higher values.
Moreover, the presence of other contributions from gas phase species that give rise to impedance
features overlapping with that of the electrodes’ process cannot be excluded, so the capacitance
obtained from the EIS data likely includes a gas conversion and/or diffusion term. So the true value
is expected to be smaller if these contribution were to be removed, but they are not expected to be
so significant given the strong temperature dependence displayed by the low frequency arc.
On the basis of this number of sources of uncertainty, any discrepancy between our estimate and lit-
erature prediction in this rough assessment is acceptable, and it is sensible to relate the low frequency
response in the spectra to the capacitance of ceria.
Page 52 of 165
==PAGE:56==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 46: Calculated apparent active thickness of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples with
Pt and NiO as contact pastes and reduced with protocol I at 850°C.
3.2.3
Polarization Losses
Reported in Table 9 are the results of the fitting of the average spectra collected. Tabulated are the
polarization resistances associated to the high (RHF ) and low (RLF ) frequency arcs and total (RP )
obtained as their sum; for comparison the total polarization resistance, RP ,exp, calculated as the
difference between real value of the highest and lowest frequency points measured, is also reported.
The bar chart in Figure 47 illustrates the partition of the two polarization contributions in the total.
For both data sets the low frequency resistance at all temperatures and compositions represented
the largest polarization loss in the cells, accounting for a fraction above 60% of the total.
For the most part at a given composition, the resistance of both contributions increased with a
decrease in temperature for both set of samples.
A difference between the two set of data is the magnitude of the polarization resistances, which for
the NiO samples were generally numerically higher, 2 to up to 6 times greater.
For the Pt samples, both polarization losses showed an increasing trend with H2 content at a given
temperature. In contrast, for the NiO samples the trend with composition was less straightforward;
values grew going from 50% to 20% steam, but then a decrement followed when the steam content
was lowered to 4%. This discrepancy might arise from the higher inaccuracy of the results the more
reducing the conditions at the electrode, due to the challenge of fitting incomplete arcs. Moreover,
it should specified that the parameters of the ECM used were not constrained to follow a certain
trend, but they were only adjusted to stay within their physical ranges, which was purposely done
in an attempt to avoid introducing further subjectivity in the fittings.
Hence, one cannot expect in this case to get fully trustworthy values of the individual resistances,
especially at lower temperature and steam contents where the expected uncertainty is greater, which
may lead to misleading interpretations of results, possibly of some of the observed trends. More
detailed analysis would be required to obtain sensible and reliable results.
But as made evident from Table 9, if the cutoff values were taken, an understimation of the total
polarization resistance especially for decreasing PO2 would follow. While some uncertainty remains
for what concerns the composition dependence, with ECM fitting it is assumed that one would extract
the same qualitative information, which is the case when looking at the effect of temperature.
This analysis although very rudimentary allows to understand where the major losses of the cells
Page 53 of 165
==PAGE:57==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
lie. Clearly, as this study underlines the low frequency process/processes, which were tentatively
hypothesized in the previous section, need to be targeted to improve cell performance.
Nominal temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
Paste
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
Pt
Tavg [°C]
801.4
801.7
801.8
751.1
751.8
752.1
702.1
701.3
701.3
(sd)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.0)
(0.3)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.3)
(0.0)
(0.1)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.152
0.148
0.148
0.213
0.167
0.165
0.284
0.278
0.310
(sd%)
(7%)
(7%)
(5%)
(11%)
(6%)
(4%)
(15%)
(12%)
(11%)
RP,exp [Ωcm2]
1.2
1.2
1.3
2.5
2.3
2.0
4.6
4.3
3.4
(sd%)
(18%)
(10%)
(5%)
(32%)
(11%)
(6%)
(29%)
(21%)
(7%)
RP [Ωcm2]
1.3
1.7
2.2
3.0
3.1
8.4
2.9
3.4
7.3
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.46
0.47
0.61
1.0
1.1
1.4
1.1
1.1
1.4
RLF [Ωcm2]
0.86
1.2
1.5
2.0
2.0
7.0
1.7
2.3
5.9
NiO
Tavg [°C]
800.1
799.0
799.1
760.7
748.7
749.2
712.1
699.0
698.8
(sd)
(1.9)
(0.1)
(0.0)
(12.3)
(0.2)
(0.1)
(11.7)
(0.2)
(0.0)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.068
0.079
0.100
0.115
0.120
0.142
0.169
0.169
0.203
(sd%)
(2%)
(2%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
RP,exp [Ωcm2]
1.9
1.5
1.6
3.4
2.6
2.5
5.1
4.5
4.2
(sd%)
(25%)
(8%)
(8%)
(24%)
(14%)
(9%)
(44%)
(37%)
(20%)
RP [Ωcm2]
3.0
6.6
6.6
7.9
11
8.3
17
19
17
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.67
0.91
1.2
2.1
2.8
2.3
4.8
4.9
4.0
RLF [Ωcm2]
2.4
5.7
5.4
5.8
8.4
6.0
12
14
13
Table 9: Summary of the average area specific resistances of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular
samples with NiO and Pt as contact pastes, reduced with protocol I at 850°C, obtained from the EIS
spectra collected at OCV at the fingerprint conditions with constant feed of 6 l/h. Reported are the
corrected ohmic resistances (RS,corrected) obtained by subtracting from the raw data the contributions
of the testing fixtures in Appendix A, the average temperature (Tavg), total polarization resistances
(RP,exp, RP )and the low (RLF ) and high (RHF ) frequency contributions.
Figure 47: Resistance contributions obtained by fitting of the average EIS data, collected at OCV at
the fingerprint conditions, of the semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples reduced with protocol
I at 850°C, with Pt and NiO as contact pastes.
Page 54 of 165
==PAGE:58==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Summarized in Table 10 are a few values of polarization resistance found in literature, which
were compared to the polarization estimates in conditions as close as possible to those in these
references. The polarization values obtained in this work were divided by 2 to account for the fact
that there are two electrodes; although the cell is not truly symmetric, as only one of the electrodes
will have polarization contributions (diffusion/conversion) coming from the supporting Ni-YSZ layer
placed on just one side of this semi-symmetric architecture, by doing so part of the losses from the
support are removed. Despite this inaccuracy, this allows to check whether the performance of this
fuel electrode is in line with literature and polarization values obtained when it is implemented in a
full cell configuration.
Electrode
Cell Type
Sintering
T [°C]
H2/H2O
Rpol [Ωcm2]
Ref.
interlayer/Electrolyte
T [°C]
Ni-CGO10
ES Symm.
1100
750
8/92
0.13
[52]
YSZ8
for 3 h
Ni-YSZ3
FES Symm.
1250
750
4/96
RP,exp,P t/2 = 1.0
This work
/Ni-CGO10
10Sc1YSZ
for 12 h
RP,P t/2 =4.2
RP,exp,NiO/2 = 1.3
RP,NiO/2 = 4.2
Ni-YSZ3
FES Full
1250
800
50/50
0.18
[ * ]
/Ni-CGO10
YSZ8
for 12 h
Ni-YSZ3
FES Full
1250
826
50/50
∼0.3**
[61]
/Ni-CGO10
10Sc1YSZ
for 12 h
778
50/50
∼0.4 **
778
20/80
∼0.5**
730
50/50
∼0.7 **
800
50/50
RP,exp,P t/2 = 0.61
This work
RP,P t/2 =0.66
RP,exp,NiO/2 = 1.0
RP,NiO/2 = 1.5
Ni-YSZ3
FES Symm.
1250
800
20/80
RP,exp,P t/2 = 0.60
/Ni-CGO10
10Sc1YSZ
for 12 h
RP,P t/2 = 0.84
RP,exp,NiO/2 = 0.75
RP,NiO/2 = 3.3
750
50/50
RP,exp,P t/2 = 1.3
RP,P t/2 = 1.5
RP,exp,NiO/2 = 1.7
RP,NiO/2 = 4.0
750
20/80
RP,exp,P t/2 = 1.2
RP,P t/2 =1.5
RP,exp,NiO/2 = 1.3
RP,NiO/2 = 5.6
700
50/50
RP,exp,P t/2 = 2.3
RP,P t/2 = 1.4
RP,exp,NiO/2 = 2.6
RP,NiO/2 = 8.5
Table 10: Total polarization resistance of Ni-CGO at OCV found in literature and from the present
work. Abbreviations FES and ES stand, respectively, for fuel electrode-supported and electrolyte-
supported cell. Symm. is used to indicate that the cell was symmetric, full to indicate that it is
complete with an air electrode. * Data of a full cell with the same fuel electrode reduced with
protocol I at 850°C, provided by Morten Phan Klitkou (DTU Energy) and Albert Lopez de Moragas
(DTU Energy). Also reference [61] refers to a similar cell reduced with the same protocol. ** Values
were extracted from the graphs in the paper [61], reported in Figure 128 in Appendix D.
As observed in Figure 48, values were greater than the ones found in literature. It is necessary to
recall that RP,exp was obtained as the average of the difference between the real parts of the highest
and lowest frequency points of the spectra measured. As most of the arcs were left incomplete,
especially for the more reducing conditions tested, due to the limited frequency interval set to
Page 55 of 165
==PAGE:59==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
perform the EIS measurements, this estimate will be further away from the true value, as the lower
the temperature and steam content the greater will be the underestimation. Even so, RP,exp is seen
to be higher than literature values.
The more significant comparison is with the value at 800°C and 50% steam obtained of 0.18 Ωcm2
by Morten Phan Klitkou (DTU Energy) and Albert Lopez de Moragas (DTU Energy) on a full cell
with the exact fuel electrode and electrolyte formulation and reduced in the same manner, according
to protocol I (1 h in 90/10 and 1 h in 50/50 H2O/H2 at 850°C). Compared to their value, at 800°C
and 50% steam the total polarization resistances obtained in this study were significantly higher
with both contact pastes; even in terms of RP,exp, values were 3 times greater than the one of the
full cell with Pt, and 5 times higher with NiO.
Figure 48: Comparison of the total area specific polarization resistance found in literature and in
this work for the semi-symmetric type II samples with Pt and NiO as contact pastes. Reported
are both the estimates, RP from fitting and RP,exp obtained by taking the real part of the lowest
frequency data point. Details of the cells which these values refer to are reported in Table 10.
The polarization resistance of the full cell included also the contributions from the oxygen elec-
trode, a composite of a MIEC perovskite, lanthanum strontium cobaltite and CGO (LSC-CGO),
with a dense CGO barrier in between it and the electrolyte; these are expected to be relatively small
for this high performing material, displaying high oxygen diffusion and exchange properties [25], so
the full cell value is assumed to mainly consist of polarization losses of the same components of the
semi-symmetric samples, namely the Ni-3YSZ/Ni-GCO layers.
The mass transport contributions in the polarization term might differ in the full cell compared to
the semi-symmetric samples, as a different test-set up was adopted to test the full cell, with forced
convective flow of gases parallel to the electrode surface, instead of the stagnant atmosphere of the
Page 56 of 165
==PAGE:60==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
symmetric cell set-up, as to better resemble the channel geometry in commercial stacks. Hence, a
greater gas conversion impedance is to be expected for the full cell, being that it was also larger
in dimension (4 x 4 cm2), with a greater influence of channel geometry given the different flow
configuration. At the 50/50 composition at least the gas transport resistances should be minimum
and the difference between the full cell and symmetric cell should be rather contained.
Studies performed by Albert Lopez de Moragas and Rishabh Kumar on symmetrical and full cells
with the same materials, found that at least at 750°C with 70/30 H2O/H2, a good overlap between
the full cell and fuel electrode response in the symmetrical cell was achieved, with additional con-
tributions only accounting for ∼20% of total polarization resistance, ascribed to the air electrode
and gas conversion in the full cell.
Considering the sensitivity of the polarization resistance to the details of the electrolyte/electrode
interfacial structure, some differences between polarization values of a full cell and the present semi-
symmetric are to be expected.
Microstructural differences might arise from having in the full cell an additional constraining GCO
barrier layer, co-sintered with the fuel electrode and electrolyte tapes, and then subjecting these
same components to an additional sintering step at 930°C for 24 h for the oxygen electrode, during
which additional impurities may also be introduced. Also, minor differences in the thickness of the
layers, mainly of the support, which in the full cell was thinner (∼250µm vs 430 µm), can determine
different sintering conditions and stresses that can have an impact on the resulting microstructure.
While all of this is true, the polarization values for these semi-symmetric cells were unreasonably
high, which required an investigation of the reasons behind the poor performance here registered.
Page 57 of 165
==PAGE:61==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
3.2.4
Activation Energy
The results of the Arrhenius analyses of the single area specific resistances, whose values have been
summarized in Table 9, are systematically presented. The determined activation energies obtained
from a linear fitting of the data are tabulated below, together with an indicator of the quality of the
fit (R2) and the slopes of the resulting lines from which the values were calculated.
Figure 49 shows the temperature dependence of the corrected ohmic resistance. As seen in the
Paste
R [Ωcm2]
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
Pt
RS,corrected
R2
0.9957
0.9068
0.8811
slope
6.6
6.6
7.8
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
55 (0.57)
55 (0.57)
65 (0.67)
RP,exp
R2
0.9968
0.9994
0.9957
slope
14
13
9.7
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
117 (1.2)
108 (1.1)
81 (0.84)
RP
R2
0.6875
0.9993
0.6337
slope
8.1
16
12
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
67 (0.69)
130 (1.3)
103 (1.1)
RHF
R2
0.8252
1.000
0.7425
slope
9.5
14
8.5
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
79 (0.82)
120 (1.2)
71 (0.74)
RLF
R2
0.5863
0.9990
0.6216
slope
7.2
16
14
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
60 (0.62)
135 (1.4)
113 (1.2)
NiO
RS,corrected
R2
0.9883
0.9921
0.9991
slope
9.6
7.9
7.4
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
80 (0.83)
66 (0.68)
61 (0.64)
RP,exp
R2
0.9826
0.9979
0.9987
slope
11
12
9.8
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
91 (0.94)
97 (1.0)
82 (0.85)
RP
R2
0.9859
0.9990
0.9408
slope
19
11
9.7
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
162 (1.7)
91 (0.95)
80 (0.83)
RHF
R2
0.9790
0.9511
0.9942
slope
22
17
12
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
185 (1.9)
144 (1.5)
102 (1.1)
RLF
R2
0.9879
0.9975
0.8702
slope
19
9.4
9.0
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
154 (1.6)
79 (0.81)
74 (0.77)
Table 11: Parameters of the linear fits in Figure 49, Figure 50, Figure 51 and corresponding activation
energy values calculated from their slope.
Arrhenius plot, the cells with NiO paste correctly displays an average resistance that decreases with
increasing temperatures in accordance with expectations as ionic transport is thermally activated.
Instead, an outlying average behaviour can be observed at the intermediate temperature for the Pt
series for more steam-lean compositions than the 50%, but it is within the standard deviation of
the samples; this is reflected in the lower quality of the fits (lower R2 in Table 11), especially at 4%
steam. At least for the 50% steam mixture, an Arrhenius-type dependence is undeniable for these
samples.
The ohmic resistance should be invariant with gas composition, but as previously mentioned it
showed a weak dependence on PO2, and as observed in Table 11, the activation values also show
some variation with composition, more significant for the NiO series.
Page 58 of 165
==PAGE:62==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 49: Arrhenius plot of the corrected average area specific ohmic resistance obtained from the
spectra of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples with NiO and Pt as contact pastes, reduced
with protocol I at 850°C. The EIS were collected at OCV at three nominal temperatures (800, 750,
700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h. Values are
reported in Table 11.
The resulting Eact,Rs,correceted for the samples with Pt paste was found to be 0.57eV for the
50% and 20% mixture and 0.67 eV with 4% steam. These values are not that far off from the one
anticipated from literature of 0.65 eV for 10Sc1YSZ [15], only 3% higher for the 4% mixture and
13% lower for the other compositions. Moreover, some uncertainty surrounds this reference activa-
tion value, which is related to differences in the processing conditions [66] and possibly the powder
synthesis route [67], which will affect grain size, impurity and phase segregation at the grain bound-
aries and other microstructural features impacting conductivity. This close agreement between the
calculated values and the one from literature suggests that the excess resistance with respect to
the theoretical predicted of ScYSZ is a constriction resistance arising from geometric effects at the
electrolyte/electrode interface.
The NiO paste samples showed an adequately good linear fit of the data, but the resulting
Eact,Rs,corrected in Table 11 showed a greater variation with composition, with values decreasing from
0.83 eV to a more acceptable value of 0.64 eV moving from 50% to 4% steam. While a 5% and 2%
deviation is acceptable, the activation energy at 50% steam was 24% higher, which is considerable.
On average activation values were higher than for the Pt samples.
The presence of solid-state solutions of low conductivity that are known to form in ZrO2 −CeO2
systems as a result of cation interdiffusion during sintering [27, 68, 69, 70, 71] can’t not be men-
tioned; although as discussed previously, with the maximum sintering temperature being limited to
1250°C in this work the extent of the intermixing zone at the ScYSZ-CGO interface is supposedly
limited to an overall thickness of 2.5 µm [61], it could still cause a minor increase in the activation
value with respect to the reference (e.g. Eact,Rs = 1.01 ± 0.03 was measured for the CGO10/YSZ8
bilayer sintered at 1250°C for 4 h [69]), explaining the upper value of the interval. However the same
secondary phases would be expected to have a similar impact on the Pt samples, given that aside
from the contacting paste these should be nominally identical.
The slightly higher energy barrier of the NiO sample suggests other overlapping causes. Possibly the
change in the ohmic response of the sample with temperature is due to an additional contribution
Page 59 of 165
==PAGE:63==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
coming from the electrodes and could be to some extent dictated by the temperature behavior of
the conductivity of the ceramics, which would raise the associated activation value closer to the one
of either 3YSZ or CGO10, which from literature reportedly vary in the range of, respectively, ∼
0.9-1 eV [72] and ∼0.66-1.2 eV [66, 73, 74], for the dopant amounts used in this work and sintering
temperatures close to the one adopted. The reported drop in activation energy for decreasing steam
content might be related to the enhanced conductivity of ceria in more reducing conditions, which
suggests a reliance on the CGO phase for e−transport through the electrode in NiO samples.
Displayed in Figure 50 and Figure 51 are the Arrhenius plots for the total polarization resistance
and its two separate contribution.
As suggested by the low R2 values in Table 11, good fits could not be always achieved. At 20%
where a better fitting of the data to the Arrhenius-type equation is obtained, the activation energies
associated to RP were 1.3 eV and 0.95 eV for the Pt and NiO samples, respectively. At this com-
position the discrepancy with the other estimate, RP,exp, was lower for the NiO samples for which
a value of 1.0 eV was determined. A better agreement is achieved between the activation values of
the two sets of samples using RP,exp.
For the NiO samples, which displayed better quality fits (R2 > 0.9), a decreasing trend in activation
energy of RP is observed as more H2 is supplied, from 1.7 eV at 50% steam to 0.83 eV at the 4%
composition.
Table 12 shows some activation values reported in literature for Ni-CGO cermets, which can be seen
to vary quite significantly, depending on the sintering temperature, the presence of an additional
CGO interlayer, the amount of Gd dopant and gas mixture fed, making a proper comparison diffi-
cult. Although the reliability of the values obtained is questionable, activation energies of the total
polarization resistance were not that far off from values reported in literature for Ni-GCO electrodes,
which normally fall in the range of 77-111 KJ/mol (0.8-1.2 eV) [48]. For Pt samples the best fit
value for the estimate RP of 1.3 eV was still reasonable although on the higher side of this interval.
Figure 50: Arrhenius plot of the average area specific polarization resistances obtained from the
spectra of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples with NiO and Pt as contact pastes, reduced
with protocol I at 850°C. The EIS were collected at OCV at three nominal temperatures (800, 750,
700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h. Both the
polarization resistance estimated by taking the last low frequency point measured (RP ,exp) and by
fitting the low frequency portion (RP ) of the average spectra. are reported in Table 11.
Page 60 of 165
==PAGE:64==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Electrode
Cell Type
Sintering
T Range [°C]
Gas Composition
Eact [eV]
Ref.
interlayer/Electrolyte
T [°C]
Ni-CGO40
FES Symm.
1350
800-950
4/96
0.71
[49]
YSZ8
for 4 h
H2O/H2
Ni-CGO
ES Full
n.a.
750-850
20/80 H2O/H2 ∥air
0.48
[46]
CGO/YSZ8
20/80 H2O/H2 ∥O2
0.50
50/50 H2O/H2 ∥air
0.51
50/50 H2O/H2 ∥O2
0.61
Ni-CGO
ES Symm
n.a.
600-900
20/80
0.94
[54]
CGO/YSZ8
H2O/H2
Ni-CGO
ES Full
n.a.
750-900
50/50 20/80, 4/96
0.89
[48]
CGO/YSZ
H2O/H2
Ni-CGO10
ES Symm.
1100
650-850
2.5/2.5/95
0.93 ± 0.07
[56]
YSZ3
for 3 h
H2O/H2/Ar
Ni-CGO10
ES Symm.
1400
650-900
3/97
1.02
[51]
YSZ8
for 2 h
H2O/H2
Table 12: Activation Energies of Ni-CGO polarization resistance found in literature. Abbreviations
FES and ES stand, respectively, for fuel electrode-supported and electrolyte-supported cell. Symm.
is used to indicate that the cell was symmetric, full to indicate that it is complete with an air
electrode. Not available, n.a., states that the information was not specified in the mentioned reference
article.
Figure 51: Arrhenius plot of the area specific polarization contribution of the high (RHF ) and low
frequency (RLF ) portions of the average spectra of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples
with NiO and Pt as contact pastes, reduced with protocol I at 850°C. The EIS were obtained were
collected at OCV at three nominal temperatures (800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%,
4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h. Values are reported in Table 11.
The high activation energies obtained for the low and frequency process (Table 11) indicated that
they were strongly thermally activated, confirming the speculation that actual electrode processes
and not gas transport are the dominating contributions; very low or negative values would be
expected otherwise. For the Pt sample at 20% where the best Arrhenius fits were obtained activation
values were 1.2 eV and 1.4 eV for, respectively, the high and low frequency contributions. Instead,
for the NiO samples the high frequency resistance was the more thermal activated, with an activation
value at 20% of 1.5 eV, while the low frequency contribution showed a lower value of 0.81 eV. It is
Page 61 of 165
==PAGE:65==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
possible that the greater influence of mass transport limitations overlapping in the same frequency
range might have partly suppressed the temperature dependence of this contribution. Also, the
different ease of separation of the processes might have led to these different conclusions for Pt and
NiO samples.
In the case of the NiO set, the energy barrier associated with both resistances is seen to decrease
for increasing H2 contents. It is clear that the mechanism behind these processes are sensitive to
gas composition changes.
For the Pt samples it is difficult to conjecture anything given the poor fit of the data achieved except
with the 20% mixture.
Electrode
Cell Type
Sintering
T Range [°C]
H2O/H2
Eact [eV]
Ref.
interlayer/Electrolyte
T [°C]
Ni-CGO10
ES Symm.
n.a.
550-975
20/80
Eact,HF =1.04
[50]
GCO10/YSZ8
Eact,LF =1.16
Ni-YSZ3
FES Symm.
1250
700-800
20/80
Eact,HF,P t = 1.2
This work
/Ni-CGO10
10Sc1YSZ
for 12 h
Eact,HF,NiO =1.5
Eact,LF,P t = 1.4
Eact,LF,NiO = 0.81
Ni-CGO10
ES Symm.
1400
650-900
3/97
Eact,HF =1.03
[51]
YSZ8
for 2 h
Eact,LF = 1.24
Ni-YSZ3
FES Symm.
1250
700-800
4/96
Eact,HF,P t = 0.74
This work
/Ni-CGO10
10Sc1YSZ
for 12 h
Eact,HF,NiO =1.1
Eact,LF,P t = 1.2
Eact,LF,NiO = 0.77
Table 13: Activation energies of the high and low frequency polarization resistances of Ni-CGO
identified found in literature, with values determined in this work at similar conditions for compar-
ison. Abbreviation ES stands for electrolyte-supported cell. Symm. is used to indicate that the cell
was symmetric. Not available, n.a., states that the information was not specified in the mentioned
reference article.
Some reference values from literature for the identified processes at high and low frequency are
reported in Table 13. What here is referred to as a high frequency process falls really in the middle
frequency range, as was shown previously.
The terminology here used was just to differentiate
between processes associated with the two EIS arcs observed. So the activation values extracted
from literature are in actuality the ones corresponding to a middle frequency process, which exhibited
the same temperature and composition behaviour, and fell in a similar frequency range as in this
study.
At the 4% composition, with respect to the work of Babaei et al. [51], for the NiO samples a 2%
and 12% difference was reported for RHF and RLF , respectively. Compared to what Riegraf et al.
[50] found, the Pt set showed a 4% difference in the activation value of RHF and of 5% for RLF ,
while a 9% difference for both contributions was recorded with NiO paste.
The discrepancy reported for these resistances with respect to literature is acceptable considering
the quality of the fits.
3.2.5
Identification Of The Causes Of The High Total Polarization Loss
In light of the results presented, it is apparent that physically-sound EIS data were acquired with both
contact pastes, as both ohmic and overall polarization resistances displayed the correct temperature
dependence, with sensible variations with gas composition.
Reasonable activation energies were obtained for the ohmic resistances, in support of the conclusion
that uncorrupted measurements by shorts and set-up artifacts could be achieved.
The different magnitude of the impedance arcs underlined the sensitivity of electrode performance
to the type of contact paste adopted.
For what concerns the reproducibility of the serial resistance of the same type of cells, it was clear
that NiO paste was the most suitable choice for current collection, as it led to having consistently
smaller ohmic values, with lower scatter of data. Another motivation pointing to the selection of this
Page 62 of 165
==PAGE:66==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
current collection material is its greater affinity with the ones used in the testing of full cells which
often rely on the use of Ni felts and Ni meshes, which should minimize differences in performance
with respect to the issue of current collection at least. Moreover, other than the highly unreplicable
ohmic resistances, an argument in disfavor of Pt, although it does not strictly pertain to this study,
is its questionable long term stability, as there has been evidence in durability studies of loss of
electronic connection due to the detachment of this contact layer.
The main issue were the large polarization resistances measured.
The large discrepancy in performance of the fuel electrode in the asymmetric cells tested, especially
with respect to the one in the full cell assembly, motivated the following analysis to tentatively
explain the large and inconsistent impedance response recorded.
The approach taken was to start by focusing on the differences in the present architecture compared
to the full cell assembly, as it seemed very odd that the same electrode tapes that performed
reasonably well in a full cell test, exhibited such considerably inferior performance.
The following argumentations were made:
−First off, one main difference was that one of the functional Ni-CGO layers in the asymmetric
architecture did not present a support on top of it. So this layer likely did not benefit from the
scavenging effect of the thick Ni-YSZ support, which acts as a filter of external contaminants
in the furnace or impurities in the gas streams, protecting it from poisoning effects.
An eye inspection of the surface of the bare Ni-CGO revealed the presence of unknown red
spots. This exposed Ni-CGO layer during the sintering stage came furthermore into direct
contact with the setter plates, instead of the support like for the other electrode.
The CGO barrier layer in the full cell configuration was also bare before the application of
the air electrode and was similarly exposed to the furnace environment, touching as well the
setter plates when it underwent the first sintering stage, but the red impurities were not visibly
present on this interlayer.
One assumption is that the high impedance of the semi-symmetric cells may derive from the
poisoning of the exposed functional layer due to it easily picking up impurities that inhibited
the hydrogen reaction, through the blocking/coverage of its active sites.
The 663 setter plates used for the sintering of the semi-symmetric samples contained 20% silica
(see Appendix E), which is a known poison for solid oxide cells [75, 76, 77].
It is possible than some of the silica may have segregated from the plates during sintering and
trasferred to the bare Ni-CGO cermet.
−Another possibility is that an adequate percolating network of Ni particles was not achieved
through out the electrode with the reduction protocol adopted. Differently from the full cell
test, as previously mentioned, the flow was not forced so it is possible that the same reduction
protocol led to differing results.
−Lastly, if NiO reduction was not complete and resulted to having insufficient porosity in the
electrode, fuel starvation would be an issue. This is deemed especially crucial with the NiO
contacting paste, which also needs to be reduced by the hydrogen flow to not block gas access
at the surface of the electrode, unlike the Pt paste, which is already porous after the burnout
of the organics during the heating stage in air. This is not issue in the full cell set-up, where
Ni foams and meshes are typically employed as contacting materials and represents another
difference, which could further explain how different reduction behaviours of the same elec-
trode could be achieved in the two rigs, despite the reduction protocol being the same.
SEM and EDS analyses were performed to clarify the root of the bad performance of the semi-
symmetric samples presented, focusing on corroborating or ruling out the above points discussed.
To assess whether the silica contained in the sintering plates was responsible for compromising the
cells’ electrochemical activity, another batch of semi-symmetrical samples, starting from the same
tapes, were sintered on silica-free setter plates and were tested.
Findings are briefly discussed in the following subsections.
Page 63 of 165
==PAGE:67==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
3.2.5.1
Impurities
The red spots visible in Figure 52, predominantly on the bare Ni-CGO layer, were analyzed to
understand what type of contaminant was present on the electrode and how cell performance would
be affected by it.
Figure 52: Surface of the bare NiO-CGO electrode (right) and of the opposite Ni0-YSZ support
(left).
An inspection of the surface of this layer by SEM revealed the presence of aggregates, presum-
ably in correspondence to these red areas. The EBS image in Figure 53 shows that, while in the
surrounding regions a rather homogenous mixture of the darker NiO and brighter GCO phases is
observed, as it should be, these impurities mainly consist of NiO, given their darker gray shading,
but also present plate-like structures that resemble crystallites, not normally seen with Ni. In the
bottom of the left image of Figure 53, some lighter dense clusters can be observed, which are likely
Ni-depleted regions of CGO.
The elemental color mapping of these these denser darker regions allowed to identify the presence
of Ni along with Fe (Figure 54).
Figure 53: EBS SEM images of the redish spots on the top surface of the bare CGO electrode before
reduction and testing.
Page 64 of 165
==PAGE:68==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 54: EBS SEM image of a redish spot on the top surface of the bare CGO electrode before
reduction and testing, and corresponding EDS maps.
From EDS analysis of three points on these darker structures, shown in Figure 55, it was possible
to quantify the amount of Fe, which in the EDS spectra showed two peaks at ∼0.5 and 6.5 eV, and
it was found to vary between ∼40%-70% in weight.
The contaminant found is very likely ferric oxide, which has a reddish appearance and is a known
sintering aid [78, 69], which would explain the clusters observed. Fe is not expected to be such a
critical contaminant for the cells, aside from causing the observed inhomogeneity and agglomeration
in the electrode.
These impurities appear to be restricted to the surface as no Fe, or other foreign elements for that
matter, were detected along the cell cross-section, as highlighted by the elemental maps in Figure 56.
These superficial impurities may possibly have an impact on in-plane conductivity and the contact
with the current collection paste, and possibly to some degree on the top porosity through Ni
clustering, but as they cover only ∼10% of the total surface of this functional layer, their effect is
expected to be minimal and cannot alone rationalize the bad electrode performance observed.
Page 65 of 165
==PAGE:69==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 55: EBS SEM image of a redish spot found on the top surface of the bare CGO electrode
side before reduction and testing, and EDS point analyses.
Page 66 of 165
==PAGE:70==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 56: EDS mapping of an EBS cross-sectional image of an assymetric sample sintered on the
663 setter plates, before reduction and testing.
3.2.5.2
Setter Plates
As previously stated, the starting 663 setter plates adopted for cell sintering contained silica, which
is a critical impurity for solid oxide cells.
Siliceous insulating phases can deposit on active sites or in-between particles constricting ionic
and electronic conductivity and blocking catalytic activity. These can also redistribute within the
electrode via vaporization by their reaction with steam to form various mobile hydroxides and
oxy-hydroxides (e.g.
SiO2 + 2H2O(g) ⇔Si(OH)4(g)), that re-deposit where the steam partial
pressure drops low enough to shift chemical equilibrium back to the formation of the silica species.
These can have detrimental effects on the mechanical stability of the cell, especially if at the elec-
trolyte/electrode interface [75, 76].
Page 67 of 165
==PAGE:71==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
While in Ni-YSZ electrodes silica has been found to have a blocking effect on catalytic active sites
through coverage of the Ni and YSZ particles, in Ni-GCO electrodes, even under OCV conditions,
silica was seen to concentrate predominantly at the ceria surface, which was suggested to be due to
the occurrence of a reaction between the materials that fixed the silica in a secondary phase of poor
conductivity and low electrocatalytic activity [77], compromising cell performance.
As was observed in the previous part, the inspection of the cell crossection in Figure 56 did not
uncover any silica impurity within the detection limits.
To completely exclude any presence of silica, zirconia 835 sintering plates were adopted instead to
produce another batch of samples. Also this batch of cells presented the same red spots, excluding
the plates as the possible source of the Fe impurity. It is likely that it came from the furnace used,
maybe from its heating element. No further analyses of these impurities were carried out and the
source was never identified.
Further electrochemical testing was done utilizing the NiO paste, which on the basis of the previous
analysis was concluded to be more suitable to minimize contact resistances, as it gave lower and
more reproducible ohmic values, despite higher polarization values were registered. The average EIS
data of the samples sintered with new plates (835) is, thus, compared with the set of data previously
presented of cells with NiO as contact paste, which were sintered with the silica-containing plates
(663). In this section the setter plate type is used to denominate these samples to avoid confusions.
EIS data of the new batch of cells at 50/50 H2/H2O and at different temperatures is presented
in Figure 57. The ohmic resistances, which can be found tabulated, were again subtracted to better
highlight differences in the spectra of nominally identical cells in the 4 locations of the sample holder.
Figure 57: Nyquist (left) and Bode plots (right) of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples,
sintered using the 835 setter plates and reduced with protocol I at 850°C, collected at OCV at three
different temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C) at 50%H2O/H2, with a rate of 6 l/h and using NiO
as contact paste. Cells are numbered based on the sample holder position.
Page 68 of 165
==PAGE:72==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Gas composition (%H2O/H2)
50%
Plate
Position
Temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
835
0
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.199
0.221
0.229
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.184
0.206
0.214
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.40
1.57
1.61
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.38
1.56
2.52
1
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.075
0.084
0.098
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.057
0.065
0.080
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.45
1.47
1.37
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.43
1.45
1.35
2
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.146
0.156
0.170
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.127
0.137
0.151
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.61
1.60
1.44
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.59
1.58
1.42
3
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.311
0.287
0.284
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.289
0.265
0.262
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.69
1.59
1.44
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.67
1.56
1.42
Table 14: Summary of the area specific ohmic resistance (Rs) obtained graphically from the high
frequency intercept with the real axis in the Nyquist plot and real low frequency point value (RLF )
of the semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with the 835 plates. Reported are also
the corrected values obtained by subtracting from the raw data the contributions of the testing
fixtures found in Appendix A.
Figure 58: Bar plot of the average corrected area specific ohmic resistances, with standard deviations
as error bars, of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered using two different setter
plates, 663 and 835, reduced with protocol I at 850°C and with NiO as contact paste, obtained from
EIS spectra collected at OCV at three temperatures (800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions (50%,
20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h. Corrected values were obtained by subtracting
from the raw EIS data the contributions of the testing fixtures found in Appendix A.
Page 69 of 165
==PAGE:73==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 59: Nyquist (a,c) and Bode plots (b,d) of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples
sintered using two different setter plates, 663 and 835, respectively, and reduced with protocol I at
850°C and with NiO as contact paste, collected at OCV at three different nominal temperatures
(800°C, 750°C, 700°C) and steam contents (50%,20%,4% H2O/H2), maintaining a feed rate of 6 l/h.
Page 70 of 165
==PAGE:74==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 60: Standard deviation of the real (a,c) and imaginary (b,d) contributions of the EIS data of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered using two different setter plates, 663 and 835,
respectively, and reduced with protocol I at 850°C and with NiO as contact paste, collected at OCV
at three different nominal temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C) and steam contents (50%,20%,4%
H2O/H2), maintaining a feed rate of 6 l/h.
Similarly to what was observed for the previous batch, the variability in the response of the
samples in the low frequency regime is very evident from Figure 57, and as the bar plot in Figure 58
shows, average values of the area specific ohmic resistance for these were greater in comparison to
the previous samples sintered with the 663 plates and, as the longer error bars indicate, were also
characterized by a larger spread. At 800°C and 50% steam, switching to the 835 plates produced a
80% increase in the average resistance, with a higher related standard deviation of 6% compared to
the previous of 2%. with the 663 plates
It is possible that some interdiffusion at the interface between the zirconia setter plate (835) and the
Page 71 of 165
==PAGE:75==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Ni-GCO functional layer, on the side without the Ni-YSZ support when during sintering they came
in contact, may have contributed to the observed increase in ohmic resistance for this new batch.
Despite the higher inconsistency in the ohmic values reported, these numbers were still generally
lower than the ones measured with the Pt paste with the 663 plates, confirming that the NiO paste
is better suited for current collection, ensuring lower contact resistances.
The ohmic resistance of the 835 samples displayed the same behaviour with composition as the 663
samples, increasing at each temperature with the H2 content.
Average impedance spectra of cell sintered with the 835 plates and with the 663 plates are compared
in Figure 59. The Nyquist plots show that spectra of similar shape were also measured for the new
batch of samples, with curves displaying two distinct arcs.
Like the 663 samples, the arc at lower frequency showed a high dependence on temperature and
composition changes, increasing strongly as temperature was lowered and steam content decreased,
while shifting to lower characteristic frequencies.
The higher frequency portion of the spectra was relatively insensitive to gas changes and was strongly
temperature-dependent like previous samples, with the associated arc becoming bigger and moving
towards lower frequency at lower temperature.
The limiting processes behind these impedance features can, therefore, be assumed the same for
batches sintered with the two type of plates. Nevertheless, a variation in the size of the impedance
curves is observed in Figure 59, smaller for the 835 samples, which in comparison to the 663 spectra,
were also slightly shifted to higher frequencies. Moreover, as the standard deviation plots in Fig-
ure 60 show, the variation between 835 samples were lower and occurred in a narrower window at
lower frequencies, unlike for the 663 samples, whose spectra already diverged significantly at higher
frequency values.
The average EIS at all fingerprint conditions are found in Appendix C.
Figure 61: Resistance contributions obtained by fitting of the average of EIS data collected at OCV
at the fingerprint conditions of the semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples, sintered with two
different plates, 835 and 663, and reduced with protocol I, with NiO as contact paste.
As illustrated in Figure 61, the polarization losses were generally lower for the 835 batch. The
Page 72 of 165
==PAGE:76==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
discrepancy observed at 4% steam at 750°C is likely related to the fitting difficulty at this composi-
tion due to the low frequency limit set. Nevertheless, at 800°C and 50% steam, where the impedance
arcs are nearly closed, hence, where the results of the rudimentary fitting are expected to be more
reliable, the use of the 835 plates caused the RP to decrease by half the value with the 663 plates,
from 3 to 1.5 Ωcm2. Still this lower polarization value did not come even close to the reference value
of 0.18 Ωcm2 of a corresponding full cell.
From the tentative breakdown of polarization contributions through fitting with the ECM adopted,
it was found that the low frequency resistance was the dominant in the total (Figure 61), as it was
for the 663 samples. At a given temperature the share of the low frequency contribution increases
with more steam lean mixtures.
Nominal temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
Plate
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
835
Tavg [°C]
799.6
799.7
800.0
750.3
749.9
749.4
703.3
702.8
703.0
(sd)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.0)
(0.3)
(0.1)
(0.4)
(0.4)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.123
0.136
0.148
0.147
0.162
0.183
0.187
0.211
0.245
(sd%)
(6%)
(7%)
(7%)
(5%)
(6%)
(6%)
(5%)
(5%)
(5%)
RP,exp [Ωcm2]
1.4
1.4
1.3
2.7
2.3
1.7
4.5
3.7
2.8
(sd%)
(11%)
(6%)
(9%)
(25%)
(12%)
(9%)
(18%)
(23%)
(10%)
RP [Ωcm2]
1.5
2.4
6.4
3.2
11
9.7
6.7
10
12
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.57
0.70
0.61
1.2
2.6
1.3
2.4
2.2
2.6
RLF [Ωcm2]
0.90
1.7
5.8
2.0
7.9
8.4
4.3
8.2
9.2
663
Tavg [°C]
800.1
799.0
799.1
760.7
748.7
749.2
712.1
699.0
698.8
(sd)
(1.9)
(0.1)
(0.0)
(12.3)
(0.2)
(0.1)
(11.7)
(0.2)
(0.0)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.068
0.079
0.100
0.115
0.120
0.142
0.169
0.169
0.203
(sd%)
(2%)
(2%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
RP,exp [Ωcm2]
1.9
1.5
1.6
3.4
2.6
2.5
5.1
4.5
4.2
(sd%)
(25%)
(8%)
(8%)
(24%)
(14%)
(9%)
(44%)
(37%)
(20%)
RP [Ωcm2]
3.0
6.6
6.6
7.9
11
8.3
17
19
17
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.67
0.91
1.2
2.1
2.8
2.3
4.8
4.9
4.0
RLF [Ωcm2]
2.4
5.7
5.4
5.8
8.4
6.0
12
14
13
Table 15: Summary of the avrage area specific resistances of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular
samples sintered using two setter plates, 835 and 663, with NiO as contact paste and reduced
with protocol I at 850°C, obtained from the EIS collected at OCV at the fingerprint conditions
with constant feed of 6 l/h. Reported are the corrected ohmic resistances (RS,corrected) obtained by
subtracting from the raw data the contributions of the testing fixtures in Appendix A, the average
temperature (Tavg), total polarization resistances (RP,exp, RP )and the low (RLF ) and high (RHF )
frequency contributions.
Arrhenius analyses of the area specific resistances for the 835 sample were also done, with corre-
sponding activation values reported in Table 16, with the ones of the 663 samples for comparison.
In contrast to what was observed for 663 samples, the activation energies associated with the ohmic
resistance of 835 samples in Table 16 did not vary as much with the mixture composition, as it should
be, but values of 835 samples were smaller than for the 663 set and the one reported in literature
for ScYSZ (0.65 eV [15]). The lower activation energy for Rs,corrected indicates that ceria-zirconia
interdiffusion was not to blame for the higher ohmic resistances measured, which would otherwise
raise the energy barrier for ion conduction.Defects in the cells or a worse interface between the layers
would lead to an increase in resistive values, but the lower activation energy points to the presence
of electronic shorts, although there was no indication of that, at least with the measures described to
identify them. Given that the ohmic resistances showed significant thermal activation, these would
be minimal. It is more likely that a constant metallic contribution coming from the set-up that was
not accounted for was included in the ohmic resistance measured, which dampended the temperature
dependance; its possible resistances of the electrical fixtures used for the correction of the cell ohmic
values may have changed in some positions of the sample holder, due to possible damages to the Pt
Page 73 of 165
==PAGE:77==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
meshes and wiring after repeated tests and cycles of mounting/dismounting.
Plate
R [Ωcm2]
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
835
RS,corrected
R2
0.9956
0.9892
0.9939
slope
4.74
4.99
5.60
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
39 (0.41)
41 (0.43)
47 (0.48)
RP,exp
R2
0.9956
0.9983
0.9845
slope
12.8
10.7
9.01
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
106 (1.10)
89 (0.92)
75 (0.78)
RP
R2
0.9997
0.9942
0.9908
slope
17
17
13
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
138 (1.4)
143 (1.5)
105 (1.1)
RHF
R2
0.9997
0.3416
0.9994
slope
16
8.6
15
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
131 (1.4)
72 (0.74)
128 (1.3)
RLF
R2
0.9994
0.6620
0.7093
slope
18
17
2.3
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
149 (1.5)
138 (1.4)
20 (0.20)
663
RS,corrected
R2
0.9883
0.9921
0.9991
slope
9.59
7.91
7.37
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
80 (0.83)
66 (0.68)
61 (0.64)
RP,exp
R2
0.9826
0.9979
0.9987
slope
10.9
11.7
9.83
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
91 (0.94)
97 (1.01)
82 (0.85)
RP
R2
0.9859
0.9990
0.9408
slope
19
11
9.7
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
162 (1.7)
91 (0.95)
80 (0.83)
RHF
R2
0.9790
0.9511
0.9942
slope
22
17
12
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
185 (1.9)
144 (1.5)
102 (1.1)
RLF
R2
0.9879
0.9975
0.8702
slope
19
9.4
9.0
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
154 (1.6)
79 (0.81)
74 (0.77)
Table 16: Parameters of the linear fits in Figure 62 and Figure 65 and corresponding activation
energy values calculated from their slope.
The ohmic resistance in position 0 of the sample holder was found to be consistently higher
in the subsequent tests ran. As shortcircuit measurements were not repeated to establish the new
contact resistances associated to the set-up fixtures, the electrical resistance in this position was
estimated to have increased of at least 0.2 Ωat 800°C. This value was adjusted with temperature,
following the same variation reported for the previously measured resistance in the 0 position, i.e
assuming a 6% and 10% decrease in the value at 800°C going to 750°C and 700°C, respectively. This
additional resistance is reported in Table 17.
Page 74 of 165
==PAGE:78==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 62: Arrhenius plot of the average corrected area specific ohmic resistance obtained from the
spectra of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with the 835 setter plates, with NiO
as contact pastes and reduced with protocol I at 850°C. The EIS were collected at OCV at three
nominal temperatures (800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a
constant rate of 6 l/h.
The resulting activation energies following this correction were 0.09 eV higher across the different
compositions (Table 17), nevertheless, the discrepancy with respect to the reference value for ScYSZ
was still substantial; with 50% steam the activation value was still 23% lower.
As observed in
Figure 63, the adjusted ohmic resistances were still higher, but closer on average to the ones of
cells sintered with the 663 plates, and the spread in values was also diminished. This additional
contribution in position 0 will, therefore, be accounted and compensated for in subsequent analyses.
Plate
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
835
RS,rig,0,add[Ω]
0.2
0.19
0.18
Rs,corrected
R2
0.9981
0.9926
0.9957
slope
5.8
6.0
6.5
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
48 (0.50)
50 (0.51)
54 (0.56)
Table 17: Parameters of the linear fits in Figure 64 and corresponding activation energy values
calculated from their slope, for the area specific ohmic resistance, corrected for the contributions of
the electrical fixtures of the set-up in Appendix A and the additional resistance in position 0 of the
sample holder (RS,rig,0,add) also reported in the table.
Nominal temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
Plate
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
835
Tavg [°C]
799.6
799.7
800.0
750.3
749.9
749.4
703.3
702.8
703.0
(sd)
(0.0)
(0.0)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.0)
(0.3)
(0.1)
(0.4)
(0.4)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.097
0.110
0.123
0.123
0.137
0.159
0.164
0.188
0.222
(sd%)
(4%)
(4%)
(4%)
(4%)
(4%)
(4%)
(4%)
(4%)
(5%)
Table 18: Adjusted ohmic values of Table 15 by subtracting the estimated additional resistance
in position 0 of the sample holder reported in Table 17, on top of the set-up electrical fixture
contributions reported in Appendix A.
Page 75 of 165
==PAGE:79==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 63: Bar plot of Figure 58 adjusted by subtracting from the raw EIS data of 835 samples the
estimated additional resistance in position 0 of the sample holder reported in Table 17, on top of
the contributions of the testing fixtures found in Appendix A.
Figure 64: Arrhenius plot of Figure 62 adjusted by subtracting from the raw EIS data of 835 samples
the additional estimated resistance in position 0 of the sample holder reported in Table 17, on top
of the contributions of the testing fixtures found in Appendix A.
The activation energies of RP obtained from the linear fittings done in Figure 65 varied from
1.5 down to 1.1. The high activation values for the two polarization contributions obtained, of 1.4
Page 76 of 165
==PAGE:80==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
for the high frequency portion of the spectra and 1.5 eV for the low frequency one at 50% steam,
just ascertained that the related processes were thermally activated, as expected.
Figure 65: Arrhenius plots of the average area specific total polarization resistance and the contribu-
tions of the high (RHF ) and low frequency (RLF ) portions of the average spectra of semi-symmetric
Type II rectangular samples sintered with the 835 setter plates, with NiO as contact paste and
reduced with protocol I at 850°C. The EIS were collected at OCV at three nominal temperatures
(800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h.
Based on the results presented it was possible to conclude that the performance was not sig-
nificantly improved by adopting silica-free setter plates for cell sintering, which suggested that the
determining cause for the high polarization values was not silica poisoning but another.
Page 77 of 165
==PAGE:81==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
3.2.5.3
Microstructure
To gain an insight into the origin of the high polarization resistances registered, the microstruc-
ture of the cells sintered with the first 663 plates and tested with the two contact pastes were
investigated by SEM. The micrographs taken are here presented and discussed.
3.2.5.3.1
Pt samples
What is immediately evident from the cross-sectional images in Figure 66 is the delamination of
the top Ni-GCO layer with the support from the dense electrolyte, which in certain locations also
displayed cracks.The interface between Ni-YSZ and the functional layer underneath is also worse in
correspondence to these regions, where the Ni-GCO electrode is observed to be more loosely bound
to the top support.
Figure 66: Postmorten SE SEM cross-sectional images of the semi-symmetric Type II samples
reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with Pt as contact paste.
In Figure 67, the different electron backscatter coefficients of Ni and CGO allows to differentiate
between the two phases, with CGO appearing brighter in EBS mode.
What is observed in the
micrographs in these delaminated regions, are differences in the structure of the top and bottom
functional layers. While the exposed electrode below showed a more homogeneous distribution of
Ni and CGO, Ni agglomeration and coalescence was observed in the top electrode, which was also
characterized by a lower degree of porosity. On average the void area fraction obtained from SEM
images of intact layers was ∼30%.
Page 78 of 165
==PAGE:82==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 67: Postmorten ESB SEM cross-sectional images of a semi-symmetric Type II samples re-
duced with protocol I at 850°C, with Pt as contact paste.
The presence of the support clearly had an impact on the microstructure of the electrode un-
derneath, affecting its NiO reduction and distribution, likely through an increase in the diffusion
resistance of the reacting gases, given the lower porosity and tortuosity of this supporting layer. In
absence of any forced flow in the symmetric set-up, a more difficult and slow supply and removal of
gases in the most inner part of the supported functional layer is foreseen, which could explain the
higher degree of Ni agglomeration observed, which could be related to the presence of high steam
concentrations with the reduction protocol adopted. Moreover, because of the top supporting struc-
ture Ni particles are not expected to redistribute as freely as in the opposite exposed electrode, as
their movement would be restricted by the geometric constraint of this top layer.
Although the supported layer delaminated, in it the interconnectivity between the particles seemed
to be better than in the other electrode, where these appeared to be more loosely connected. Note-
worthy, even without delamination, the area fraction of the electrode/electrolyte interface covered
by the CGO grains was very limited and mostly taken up by pores as well as Ni. From the two
images in Figure 67, the CGO contact area determined was found to represent only ∼10% of the
interfacial area between the electrolyte and the bottom layer, while porosity accounted for an area
fraction close to ∼50%. In the low-voltage SEM image captured with an In-lens detector (Fig-
ure 68.c) the bright phase corresponding to percolating Ni is clearly distinguishable from the dark
insulting YSZ phase and the pores filled with the epoxy resin, in which the sample was embedded,
and the non-percolating Ni particles. CGO possesses some conductivity at room temperature, but
it is not that appreciable that it also appears dark.
The contrast observed between the phases arises due to differences in secondary electron yield, which
for the non-percolating Ni is suppressed by a positive charge that builds up until the amount of emit-
ted secondary electrons matches the amount supplied.
The inhomogenous brightness level observed in Figure 68.c is likely due to complex charging mecha-
nisms related to the scan direction, which was from top to bottom, which is where the intensity level
is seen to be lower. To overcome this an averaging of multiple images taken with different scanning
directions should have been done.
In the micrograph the percolating metal is seen to be present throughout the support and both
functional layers, but these display different degree of Ni percolation, lower for the electrode without
support. In the bottom Ni-CGO layer, non-percolating dark Ni particles circled in red could be
distinguished through a comparison of the in-Lens and EBS image (Figure 68.b,c).
The areas of non-percoltating Ni through out the crossection of the electrodes was better highlighted
in white in the combined image of Figure 69.c, obtained by superimposition of the segmented ESB
image (Figure 69.a),in which the YSZ, CGO and pores appear gray, and the in-lens micrograph,
where the color threshold was varied to just pin point the percolating particles in red (Figure 69.b).
Page 79 of 165
==PAGE:83==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 68: Postmorten SEM cross-sectional images of a semi-symmetric Type II sample reduced
with protocol I at 850°C, with Pt as contact paste. (a) SE, (b) ESB and (c) In-Lens.
A perfect overlap of the images was difficult to achieve due to charging effect and drift. The
lower contrast in the ESB image between Ni and YSZ in the support also complicated segmentation.
Furthermore, edge effect in the in-lens image, which are known to alter the true interface position
between Ni and the insulating phases, cannot be excluded.
These have been reported [79] to be due to the higher probability of Ni scattering events electrons
of being backscattered, thus increasing signal intensity in the Ni side of the interface, since these
would need to have a higher angle relative to the primary beam to enter the neighbouring phase
when they are still relatively close to the surface due to the lower mean free path in Ni; In contrast,
on the insulating side of the interface the signal will be less intense, due to increased probability
of absorption in Ni of scattering events electrons coming with the right angle from the adjacent
insulting phase, which will have reached greater penetration depths.
This effect, which will be more prominent at higher acceleration voltages due to the increased
interaction volume in the sample, will produce a brighter glow at the Ni interface and lead to an
overestimation of the size and Ni phase fraction [79].
This seems to be what is observed for the functional layer with the support, where the area covered
by the percolating phase is seen to be bigger than the Ni area identified in the corresponding EBS
image of the same region (Figure 68.b).
Page 80 of 165
==PAGE:84==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 69: Segmented Post-mortem SEM images of a crossection of a semi-symmetric Type II sample
reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with Pt as contact paste. (a) ESB image with YSZ,CGO and
pores in gray scale, (b) In-lens image with percolating Ni in red, and (c) their superimposition.
From the SEM analysis it was clear that the poor performance of the cells with the Pt contact
paste could not be attributed to the lack of formation of a Ni percolating network, as disproved
by the micrographs, but it arose from the occurrence of cracks in the electrolyte and mostly de-
lamination on the support side, as well as constriction effects, resulting from ion transport at the
electrode/electrolyte interface being restricted to the few sintering necks between the CGO and
ScYSZ phase observed.
Due to the limited electrolyte area accessible to the ion flux, current lines will be concentrated at
these contact point, lengthening transport paths and increasing current density and, thus, the re-
sistance, reducing the electroactive area as a result. This effect is more pronounced the thinner the
electrolyte.
Similarly, with delamination the transport area is reduced at the cracked interface and the current
density will increase accordingly, due to the bending of the current lines away from the cracked
region that will represent an obstruction to current flow. If delamination is significant, current dis-
tortion effects will interest also the projected cracked zone on the opposite interface, where current
flow will decrease as delamination becomes more severe; when the size of the delaminated region
grows large enough, a point is reached where the current becomes negligible, with consequent loss
in electroactive area also in this region of the interface opposite the crack-affected area (masking).
With thinner electrolytes the onset of masking due to resistance effects within the affected area with
progression of delamination is more abrupt [80].
Hence, the loss in electroactive area and longer ion transport paths due to delamination and geo-
metric effects at the interface were the likely causes of the higher values of ohmic resistance reported
for the Pt samples, which the good agreement of their activation values also hinted to, and allow to
justify why polarization resistances were so high.
All the sample with Pt paste tested with no exceptions displayed some degree of delamination. It
Page 81 of 165
==PAGE:85==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
is suggested that in the electrode constrained by the support ceria expansion under more reducing
conditions and the redistribution of Ni, which was seen to agglomerate on the support side, imparted
additional stresses at the electrolyte interface, which is where also the residual stresses, resulting
from sintering these layers with different thermal expansion coefficients, would be located.
3.2.5.3.2
NiO Samples
In Figure 70 the inspection of the crossection of the NiO sample at three different locations re-
vealed very different microstructures at the edges versus in the middle of the specimen. At the low
accelerating voltage used, it is possible to distinguish in the cermets of the SE image the Ni and
ceria particles, which due to its higher backscatter coefficient appears brighter.
Figure 70: Postmorten SE SEM cross-sectional images of a semi-symmetric Type II sample reduced
with protocol I at 850°C, with NiO as contact paste. The micrographs were captured at different
positions along the cross-section: (a) left edge, (b) middle and (c) right edge.
Both electrodes at the edges In (Figure 70.a,c) exhibited a similar porous microstructure, al-
though some coarser Ni particles of ∼4-5 µm in size were discernable in the bottom supported
Page 82 of 165
==PAGE:86==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
layer. In the middle section (Figure 70.b), the top exposed functional layer showed a microstructure
similar to the one of the bottom supported layer at the edges, however, the structure is observed to
be significanty denser on the opposite electrode, in both the functional and the support layer. By
comparing the shade of the grains in the top and bottom electrodes, it is apparent that those on the
support side are of a visibly lighter shade of gray, suggesting these particles are actually unreduced
NiO.
In correspondence to these regions some cracks and delamination were also observed, but these were
not as severe as for the Pt set and were present only in a few of the NiO samples and in very limited
regions, as seen in Figure 71. The presence of this unreduced middle areas were common to all
samples with the NiO contact paste.
In these regions, unexpectedly, the porosity, especially in the supported functional layer, is seen to
be even lower than in the starting pristine cells in Figure 72 prior to reduction, where pores are
seen to be uniformly distributed across the entire the NiO and GCO composite. It is possible that
some of the smaller Ni grains in this region that were able to reduce coarsened or agglomerated,
also under the pressure of the neighboring ceria due to its volume change if also reduced, blocking
porosity.
It is clear that in this inner most region of the electrode on the support side, with a porosity of less
than 10% and pore sizes as low as 0.1 µm, gas diffusion limitation cannot be fully neglected.
Figure 71: Postmorten SE SEM cross-sectional images at middle locations in a semi-symmetric Type
II sample, reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with NiO as contact paste.
Figure 72: SEM cross-sectional images at a middle location in a semi-symmetric Type II rectangular
sample, prior to reduction and testing: (a) SE and (b) ESB mode.
Page 83 of 165
==PAGE:87==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 73: Postmorten SE SEM images of the surface of the Ni current collection layer on CGO side
of a semi-symmetric Type II sample.
Figure 74: Postmorten SE SEM images of the Ni current collection layer’s cross-section (top) and
surface (bottom) on the support side of a semi-symmetric Type II sample reduced with protocol I.
Figure 73 and Figure 74 clearly prove that the NiO contact paste on both the support and the
exposed Ni-CGO cermet did not constitute a blocking layer for gas access, as the micrographs show
it to be completely reduced and more porous than the layers onto which it was applied, displaying
pores sizes even above 10 µm.
For these sample no percolation images could be acquired, but very likely the author’s inexperience
was to blame.
Page 84 of 165
==PAGE:88==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
It must be said that acquiring these images was not a trivial task. First off, sample preparation and
handling is very critical for the success of the LV charge contrast method in visualizing percolating
phases.
The sample needs to be uncoated, which entails that charging effects from the surrounding epoxy
resin used for embedding the sample might be an issue, disturbing low energy electrons and pro-
ducing image distortions. So a correct placement of the conducting carbon tape is necessary, which
should be close enough to the specimen and grounded to the metal sample holder. Also, maintaining
the sample clean is crucial, as even a single dust particle, which is negatively charged, due to its
potential difference with the surrounding surface will give rise to a radial field that will capture
and send back to the specimen the secondary electrons emitted, producing a dark ring that can
extend several mm from its surface, eradicating the contrast from percolating Ni [81]. Achieving
optimum contrast requires a proper selection of accelerating voltage, walking distance, scan rate and
correct contrast/brightness adjustments, which requires effort and time, at high magnifications and
resolutions.
The choice in scan rate, specifically, will represent a compromise between having sufficient contrast
between the phases at slow enough scan rates, such that the beam dwell time is long enough for
sufficient positive charge to build up and suppress the SE yield of non percolating phases, that will
thus appear darker, and limiting unwanted charging effects of the resin at fast enough scan rates,
due to the shorter beam dwell time and lower fraction of electrons emitted.
Likely, also the presence of ceria, which has better room temperature conductivity than zirconia,
likely added another level of difficulty in finding the right threshold, as it would be expected to
dampen the contrast between percolating Ni and non, possibly by connecting neighbouring non-
percolating particles.
Nevertheless, even with the exact parameters used for the Pt sample no illumination of Ni particles
was observed, despite the multiple attempts and the inspection of different regions of the samples.
It is surprising that despite these samples presented these middle dense zones of unreduced NiO,
lower and reasonable resistances were still achieved, also with the knowledge that in this architecture
the poor contact at the interface between the ceramic phases and the longer ionic paths between
CGO grains most definitely added a constriction contribution; this leads to conclude that a continu-
ous Ni network was in fact achieved in the present case, even though a percolation image could not
be obtained.
NiO reduction has been proposed to proceed from the surface and inward [82, 83], hence, a possible
explanation for the low resistances observed is that in this middle section close to the interface par-
tial reduction of NiO particles may have occurred, forming a thin shell of metallic Ni around them,
so that it was still possible to achieve a continuous conducting network.
It has been reported that in the presence of very dilute H2 mixtures and of steam in the feed, NiO
reduction was characterized by longer initial induction periods for Ni cluster nucleation and led to
overall lower NiO conversion rates [84, 85]. It is suggested that this is what occurred, given the very
steam-rich H2 mixtures in which reduction was carried out, especially in the first stage of protocol
I with 90/10 H2O/H2.
On top of that the NiO contact paste evidently had a significant impact on NiO reduction in the
cermet, considering that in the Pt samples such unreduced regions were absent. By increasing the
distance from the surface and restricting gas access until sufficient porosity was generated by its
reduction, this contact layer delayed the exposure of the inner structure to the reducing gas, with
its reach already made difficult by the thick support, in which also the NiO present needed to first
undergo reduction. The edges were more easily reduced likely due to the more facile and shorter gas
access paths from the sides.
Agglomeration, coalescence, Ostwald ripening and other grain growth mechanisms in the surround-
ing areas, especially in the presence of high concentration of steam, which is known to aid coarsening
of Ni particles by mobilizing them in the form of volatile hydroxides [86], might have determined
a more tortuous path for gas access and slowed the outward diffusion of formed steam, hindering
further NiO reduction in the middle region of these samples.
The reaction zone will therefore be significantly removed further out in the cermet from these regions
with poor gas access and electronic conductivity; this would be in agreement with the activation
Page 85 of 165
==PAGE:89==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
energy values found for the ohmic resistance of these samples, which were slightly higher and closer
to the ones of GCO, signifying that a contribution from ionic transport in the electrode might have
also been included in the cell ohmic term.
In these dense regions near the electrolyte interface, if Ni and NiO were simultaneously present as
suggested, then locally the oxygen partial pressure would have been dictated by their equilibrium.
From the Ellingham diagram of Ni/NiO [87] (Figure 129 in Appendix D) this was estimated to be
of the order of 10−9 Pa at 800°C, which was higher than the oxygen partial pressures determined
by the feed gas compositions. Possibly, capacitive contributions from these dead zones related to
the continuous exchange of oxygen between Ni and NiO, could account for the slightly higher value
of capacitance observed at the most reliable condition of 800°C and 50% steam compared to the Pt
samples (0.62 vs 0.46 F/cm2).
To close, the presence of these dead closed volumes in the samples, where complete NiO reduc-
tion was not achieved, most certainly accounted for the high polarization resistances measured for
the semi-symmetric samples with the NiO contact paste.
3.2.6
Conclusions
The influence of two contact pastes, Pt and NiO was investigated. With both sensible and physically-
sound EIS data were collected, as confirmed by the expected dependencies with temperature and
composition of the ohmic and overall polarization resistances.
What was concerning was the magnitude of the polarization losses, which for both contact pastes
were mainly dominated by a low frequency response, which exhibited a strong temperature depen-
dence that hinted at an actual electrode process.
The NiO slurry was the one that led to significantly smaller and less scattered ohmic values, but the
magnitude of impedance arcs measured surpassed those obtained with Pt, which instead gave high
and very inconsistent ohmic resistances.
This pointed to the existence of underlying differences arising from the use the two pastes, despite
the similar shape of the corresponding spectra indicated that the same loss mechanisms were likely
involved. This was corroborated through the analysis of the microstructure of the two type of tested
cells, which gave an insight into the causes behind the high polarization values reported, which were
revealed not to be due to impurity poisoning.
The choice in contact paste led to microstructures marked by very distinct issues.
The high polarization losses in the case of Pt clearly arose due to severe delamination on the support
side of the electrode from the electrolyte, which agreed with the higher ohmic resistances measured
for these sample, while still having activation values coherent with the expected for the electrolyte
material adopted.
With NiO paste, the large polarization resistance was mainly attributed to the existence of closed
unreduced regions in the inner most part of supported electrode, which constituted dead zones for
the reaction.
Hence, differences in active surface area will ensue between the samples with these two type of cur-
rent collectors, hence, the different size of the spectra observed.
Based on the SEM analyses constriction effects, related to imperfect contact for ion flux at the elec-
trolyte interface, are expected to introduce additional interfacial resistances in both set of samples.
Thus, the shift of the low frequency feature towards a much lower frequency range than usually
reported could be interpreted as resulting from the reduction of the effective utilizable active area
due to these different shortcomings of the samples.
NiO was concluded to be the current collector of choice and was the one used for further testing.
This assessment was mostly based on the evidence with this contact paste of successfully acquiring
mostly reproducible and low cell ohmic resistances, which was proved even with the semi-symmetric
type II architecture, in spite of the fact that full cell reduction was not reached.
In truth, it must be said that the comparison made between the two contact pastes was hardly
Page 86 of 165
==PAGE:90==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
conclusive or fair, since unlike the Pt paste, the NiO slurry needed to be reduced at the start,
therefore, it indirectly affected cell reduction, by obstructing gas flow to some extent at the beginning,
before sufficient porosity was created. It is unclear whether onset of delamination would have likewise
followed in these samples with NiO paste upon reduction completion.
For the investigation of which pastes ensures the best contact to be truly conclusive, tests should
be repeated by adopting a reduction protocol that at least allows to achieve a complete reduction
of the NiO paste for the comparison to be more fair. This was unfortunately not done due to time
constraints.
Nevertheless, what was evident from the analysis was that the reduction protocol needed to be
changed to ensure complete reduction of the cermet.
Other than the insufficient reduction time, there was the impression that the 90/10 H2O/H2 step of
reduction protocol I might have had detrimental effects on the cell integrity, based on the comparison
of the microstructure of samples with the two contact pastes.
It is suggested that the high steam concentration in this initial phase might have caused significant
Ni reorganization and stresses at the electrolyte interface in Pt samples.
In NiO samples, instead, the cermet was exposed for a shorter time frame to this mixture due to
the delay caused by the reduction of the top contacting paste, which needed to reduce first for the
gas to reach this innermost region. At the edges removal of steam was likely not an issue, resulting
in lower Ni coarsening and rearrangement, thus, less stresses.
Nevertheless, as mentioned there is evidence to suggest that high steam contents and too lean H2
mixtures could slow NiO reduction.
For this reason this step was altogether removed and the reduction period was prolonged significantly
in the next reduction protocols later discussed, where it was even opted to go to higher temperatures
to speed up reduction kinetics, in the hopes of achieving higher NiO conversion.
Page 87 of 165
==PAGE:91==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
3.3
Effect of Different Reduction Protocols
The very different behaviour displayed by the samples with the semi-symmetric architecture tested
under the same conditions (in Figure 127 in Appendix C) with the same reduction protocol (Pro-
tocol II-880) that led to good results on symmetric cells, which will be here presented, suggested
that these presented issues of cell integrity likely stemming from processing defects and residual
stresses due to mismatched thermal expansion characteristics of the co-sintered layers. Moreover,
the presence of the support on just one side of the cell in this geometry is expected to inherently
lead to microstructural differences between the two functional layers, therefore, giving rise to dissim-
ilar overlapping impedance responses. The truly symmetric architecture, on the other hand, is not
expected to present this last issue, and as the minimal differences between the impedance responses
of distinct samples seen in the previous section proved, more replicable results can be achieved with
this cell design.
On this basis the symmetric architecture developed was settled to be the more appropriate vehicle
to study the effect of different reduction conditions on fuel electrode performance.
Three reduction treatments were tested, further evaluating at the same time the extent to which
this geometry holds itself as a suitable platform to study individual electrode behavior.
It was
thought wiser not to vary the gas composition during this initial reduction stage, with times kept
the same for the different conditions for consistency reasons. The reduction protocols investigated
are summarized in the following table.
Designation
Gas Composition
Temperature
Duration
Protocol II-880
50%/50% H2O/H2
880°C
60 h
Protocol II-930
50%/50% H2O/H2
930°C
60 h
Protocol III-880
100% H2
880°C
60 h
Table 19: Reduction protocols of symmetric cells.
3.3.1
EIS data
Differences between the reduction conditions tested are presented from an electrochemical perspec-
tive through EIS. Data and findings are presented and discussed.
3.3.1.1
Reduction Tracking
EIS measurements were taken during the whole reduction period. Impedances in the narrow high
frequency range of 96850-1000 Hz were sequentially collected over 1 h for one selected sample to
have faster sampling of the high frequency intercept of the spectra with the Nyquist real axis, to
tentatively track NiO reduction by monitoring the ohmic resistance; in between, after every hour,
slower measurements in the wider frequency range so far adopted of 96850-0.08 Hz were performed
for each of the samples. Since the spectra in the wider range were found to not differ significantly
between positions, EIS data of only the samples that were fast tracked are shown and analyzed;
these were the ones in the same position 2 of the sample holder for all the reduction protocols.
Figure 75 shows that there are noticeable differences in the behaviour of the impedance curves
under the different reduction protocols. While reduction protocol II both at the higher and lower
temperature resulted in rather contained real and imaginary values at the lowest frequency mea-
sured, these were considerable for the sample reduced in pure H2 (protocol III-880), although ohmic
resistances were comparable and reasonably low.
For all the reduction conditions the ohmic resistance was already low for the first measurements,
suggesting that most of NiO conversion to metallic Ni already occurred within the first minute of
introducing the reducing mixture. The curves are seen to shift towards higher real and imaginary
values as time progressed. These rised faster with reduction time in the first minutes and then
continued to increase at a progressively slower rate until stabilization was finally achieved.
Page 88 of 165
==PAGE:92==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 75: Nyquist and Bode plots of the ”fast” sampled EIS data of symmetric cells taken during
reduction with the different protocols adopted.
Page 89 of 165
==PAGE:93==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
In the case of protocol II the Bode plots highlight that for both temperatures a deviation of the
curves towards higher frequencies takes place for increasing reduction time. Evidently microstruc-
tural changes such as agglomeration and coarsening of the reduced particles likely took place with
prolonged exposure to the reducing gas.
Surprisingly, while changes were more gradual for the
sample reduced at 930°C with protocol II, the sample reduced at lower temperature stabilized in a
shorter time frame. In the Bode plots curves are seen to merge within 2.38 hours with the reduction
temperature of 880°C against 4 hours at 930°C.
On the other hand, for protocol III-880 impedance curves were seen to move to higher frequencies
until 1.26 hours, after which they shifted to lower frequencies while the imaginary part continued
to increase. Impedance curves were observed to converge only after 9 hours from the start of the
reduction period.
Figure 76: The variation versus reduction time of the ohmic resistance, estimated from the high
frequency intercept of the spectra with the real axis of the Nyquist plots in Figure 75, for the
different protocols adopted.
Figure 76 displays the variation in time of the estimated ohmic resistances for the high frequency
EIS sampling. The graphs show that the increment in ohmic values from the start of reduction was
greater for Protocol III-880, with the resistance rising gradually until it reached a plateau after 20
hours, corresponding to an overall increase of 50% from the initial value. For the other reduction
conditions resistances were seen to increase less abruptly at the beginning and roughly after 5 hours
Page 90 of 165
==PAGE:94==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
they were observed to slowly increase linearly with time, at a rate of 0.20%/h and 0.14%/h with
protocol II-880 and protocol II-930, respectively. For protocol II-930 the initial spike in values was
lower, ∼3% versus the 12% increase recorded with protocol II-880, and the overall increment to-
wards the end was ∼14%, also less than the value of ∼21% for the lower reduction temperature.
Presented in Figure 77 are the EIS data taken over the wider frequency range. First off, one can
comment on the differences in the shape of the spectra with the different protocols. With protocol
III-880 the presence of two arcs is apparent, with the one left incomplete at lower frequency being
the more prevalent at this condition. The changes with reduction time for this set mainly concern
this last portion of the spectra, which is seen to increase in magnitude and shift to lower frequency.
Much more subtle are, instead, the differences between the spectra for the other reduction condi-
tions. The spectra for protocol II-930 also shows two arc, which became less distinguishable as time
progressed. While at 2 hours from the start of reducion two peak were observed in the Bode plot
for this reduction protocol, one confined between 100-1000 Hz and the second between 10-100 Hz,
these merged closer to each other with time, resulting in the more marked peak at ∼97 Hz and a
barely perceptible shoulder. The curves were seen to become sharper, but more gradually after 7.56
h. For what concerns protocol II-880, a single arc was visible and a single peak was detectable at ∼
54 Hz already after 3.3 hours. Changes in the Bode plot were minimal after 8.4 hours and were less
pronounced in comparison.
For all the reduction conditions tested, the spectra were observed to slowly shift to the right of
the real axis.
The continuous increase in ohmic resistance, better highlighted by the graphs in
Figure 78, may reflect the evolution with time of the microstructure, leading to a subtle worsening
of the electrolyte/electrode interface. Values increased linearly for reduction protocol II-880 over
almost the whole time period at a rate of 0.14%/h, while for protocol II-930 the rate was higher at
the beginning, ∼0.5%/h, and it decreased to 0.14%/h after 20 hours.
Also reported in Figure 78 is the polarization values. Noteworthy, with reduction protocol II-880
the polarization resistance following its initial increase, stagnated after 20 hours around a value of
0.051-0.052 Ωcm2, ∼6% greater than the initial value measured. Differently, at the higher reduction
temperature of 930°C the polarization resistance was found to increase linearly during the whole re-
duction period, at the same rate of the ohmic resistance, resulting in ∼18% increase at the end.
Nevertheless, the polarization resistances for this protocol were the lowest measured, however, the
observed trend with time does beg the question of whether in the long run values would come close
to those reported with protocol II-880 and worse case scenario could ultimately become even higher
as time progresses, or if at some point they would just settle.
The trend of the polarization estimate for protocol III-880, which was observed in Figure 78 to seem-
ingly linearly decrease with time above 10 hours after its initial increase, is actually very misleading.
The impedance arcs for the sample reduced with this protocol did not close, so the values reported
do not actually refer to true polarization resistances as the real part of the last low frequency data
point was taken into consideration to calculate this estimate. As the low frequency arc grew shifting
towards the lower side of the frequency interval after 10 hours from the start of this reduction phase,
the cut-off values were reached sooner and the real components of the lowest frequency impedance
points measured decreased accordingly, which explains why values decreased as time passed. This is
no testament to improvements in performance with exposure time to dry hydrogen, but represents
a limitation of taking this estimate when complete arcs cannot be measured.
Disregarding this drawback, this estimate gave a sense of the magnitude of the resulting polarization
resistance when protocol III-880 was adopted, which was an order of magnitude higher than the one
obtained with the other reduction conditions, which already was a telling sign that reduction in dry
H2 was not the direction to take to enhance fuel electrode performance.
What this analysis allowed to conclude was that most of NiO reduction occurred relatively
quickly for all reduction conditions tested, as evidenced by the low ohmic reistances measured
already within 1 minute from the start of the reduction phase, after which likely microstructural
changes followed, due to a reorganization of the metallic particles formed, though agglomeration and
coarsening mechanisms, which caused the observed trends in the ohmic and polarization resistance.
Page 91 of 165
==PAGE:95==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 77: Nyquist and Bode plots of the ”slow” sampled EIS data of symmetric cells taken during
reduction with the different protocols adopted.
Page 92 of 165
==PAGE:96==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 78: The variation versus reduction time of the ohmic resistance, estimated as the difference
of the real component of the high frequency impedance value with a negative imaginary component
and the ohmic resistance from Figure 77, for the different protocols adopted.
3.3.1.2
EIS and Rs replicability
Figure 79 illustrates the average ohmic resistance at the fingerprint conditions for the reduction
protocols adopted. As observed in the bar plots, on average values increased in the following order
Protocol II-930 < Protocol II-880 < Protocol III-880. The spread across samples was rather con-
tained for all reduction methods, with standard deviation not exceeding 1% and as low as 0.1%.
Even though the ohmic resistances were higher for samples reduced in H2, these were still reasonably
low; at 800°C and 50% steam a value of 0.048 Ωcm2 was obtained, bigger than the value estimated
from the thickness and conductivity of the electrolyte of ∼0.01Ωcm2 by a factor of 5, which is not
unheard of, especially considering interfacial effects such as current constriction and interdiffusion
phenomena that rationalize why higher values are typically measured.
It is possible that reduction in dry H2 might have been too extreme and detrimental for the cell
integrity, leading to the higher ohmic values measured. An investigation of the microstructure could
clarify the cause behind the higher resistances of samples reduced with this protocol in comparison
to those reduced differently. Nevertheless, the values do not come close to those reported for the
delaminated semi-symmetric samples with Pt contact paste, which suggest that any structural issues
were not as extensive for these symmetric samples.
At 800°C and 50% steam the lowest average ohmic resistance resulting from reduction with protocol
Page 93 of 165
==PAGE:97==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
II-930 was 0.026 Ωcm2, 13% and 46% lower than the ones obtained with protocol II-880 and protocol
III-880, respectively. For all reduction protocols the ohmic resistance shows the correct temperature
dependance and is seen to increase at each temperatures as mixtures become more reducing, a trend
that was also observed for semi-symmetric samples tested using NiO paste as a contacting material.
Figure 79: Bar plot of the average area specific ohmic resistances (RS), with their standard devi-
ation as error bars, of symmetric samples, obtained from EIS spectra collected at OCV at three
temperatures (800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant
rate of 6 l/h, with NiO as contact paste, for the different reduction protocols adopted. The raw data
was corrected by subtracting the contributions of the testing fixtures found in Appendix A, plus the
estimated additional resistance in position 0 of the sample holder reported in Table 17.
Temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
Protocol
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
II-880
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.030
0.042
0.048
0.055
0.061
0.066
0.081
0.090
0.097
(sd%)
(1.0%)
(0.4%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.2%)
(0.1%)
(0.2%)
III-880
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.048
0.055
0.062
0.079
0.083
0.091
0.127
0.136
0.147
(sd%)
(0.6%)
(0.4%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.2%)
(0.2%)
II-930
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.026
0.036
0.042
0.050
0.056
0.061
0.078
0.086
0.094
(sd%)
(0.1%)
(0.3%)
(0.5%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.4%)
(0.3%)
(0.5%)
Table 20: Mean and standard deviation (in parenthesis) of the corrected area specific ohmic resis-
tance of symmetric samples, obtained from EIS spectra collected at OCV and three temperatures
(800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h,
with NiO as contact paste, for the different reduction protocols adopted. The raw data was corrected
by subtracting the contributions of the testing fixtures found in Appendix A, plus the estimated
additional resistance in position 0 of the sample holder reported in Table 17.
The EIS data at 50% steam and three different temperatures of individual samples, tested at the
same time after reduction with the different protocols, are presented in Figure 80. As the Nyquist
and Bode plots display, in all cases the polarization resistance correctly exhibited thermal activation
and peak frequencies shifted to lower frequency as temperature was decreased, owed to the slower
electrode processes.
Page 94 of 165
==PAGE:98==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 80: Nyquist (left) and Bode plots (right) of raw EIS data of symmetric samples collected at
OCV at three temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C), at 50%H2O/H2, supplied at a rate of 6 l/h, with
NiO as contact paste, for the different reduction protocols adopted. Samples are numbered based
on the sample holder position in the rig.
Page 95 of 165
==PAGE:99==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Gas composition (%H2O/H2)
50%
Protocol
Position
Temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
II-880
2
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.058
0.077
0.101
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.037
0.057
0.082
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.33
0.67
1.3
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.31
0.65
1.3
3
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.048
0.077
0.102
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.024
0.053
0.079
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.24
0.63
1.2
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.21
0.61
1.2
III-880
0
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.157
0.182
0.227
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.048
0.080
0.129
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.5
3.2
5.7
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.4
3.1
5.6
1
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.070
0.098
0.147
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.049
0.078
0.127
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.3
3.0
5.9
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
1.3
3.0
5.8
2
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.075
0.102
0.147
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.054
0.083
0.128
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
1.0
2.3
4.7
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.98
2.3
4.7
3
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.063
0.099
0.144
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.039
0.076
0.122
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.98
2.5
4.9
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.96
2.4
4.9
II-930
0
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.127
0.141
0.165
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.027
0.048
0.076
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.38
0.61
1.1
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.28
0.52
0.97
3
RS,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.050
0.077
0.104
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.025
0.053
0.081
RLF,Raw [Ωcm2]
0.26
0.55
1.0
RLF,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.24
0.52
1.0
Table 21: Summary of the area specific Ohmic resistance (Rs), obtained graphically from the high
frequency intercept with the real axis in the Nyquist plot, and real low frequency point value (RLF )
of the symmetric samples whose EIS are presented in Figure 80. Reported are the raw values and the
corrected ones obtained by subtracting the contributions of the testing fixtures found in Appendix
A, plus the estimated additional resistance in position 0 of the sample holder reported in Table 17.
The graphs in Figure 80 highlight the poor performance reproducibility for the samples reduced
with protocol III-880, where deviations between the sample spectra mainly concerned the low fre-
quency arc below 10 Hz, a behaviour that was also displayed by the poor performing semi-symmetric
samples previously analyzed. The deflection between the samples’ spectra was greater as the tem-
perature was lowered, with the onset frequency at which this departure occurred also shifting to
lower values.
More promising was the electrochemical behaviour of the samples reduced under the other condi-
tions, whose spectra were observed to more closely match.
The discrepancy between spectra were minimal for the samples reduced with protocol II-930, and
except for the ones at 800°C, differences were mainly related to the ohmic resistance of the cells.
Curves in the Bode plot greatly overlap at all temperatures but 800°C.
For protocol II-880 samples differences in polarization values and imaginary components are more
visible from the graphs.
Page 96 of 165
==PAGE:100==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
The discrepancy between samples at 800°C and 50% steam were greater than expected. This was
the first condition at which the fingerprint spectra were acquired, starting from the cell in position
3 down to the one in position 0 of the sample holder. Hence, the higher discrepancies reported at
this temperature than at the next are related to not waiting sufficient time before collecting the EIS
data for the chamber temperature to decrease around the nominal temperature set. The sequence
in which the EIS data of the samples were taken will, therefore, matter in this front, with devia-
tions being higher the greater the time lapse between the measurements. This explains the greater
discrepancy at this condition seen for samples reduced at 930°C with respect to those at 880°C with
protocol II.
With the exception at 800°C, the spread between the spectra of the samples reduced with protocol
II-880 increased as temperature was reduced, as the Nyquist and Bode plots show.
The fairly good reproducibility in terms of ohmic resistance for all protocols suggested that
contact resistances could be minimized with the NiO paste used to improve the connection of the
symmetric cells to the test rig fixtures, for which to be fair current collection from the electrodes was
also likely less of a problem; this because, in comparison to the previous semi-symmetric samples
prepared that were bent towards the support side, thus, for which current constriction at the elec-
trode/current collector interface would have been a serious problem without the contacting paste,
given the poor planar conductivity observed, symmetric cells were flat, with ample contact points
with the above Pt meshes of the sample holder.
The reproducibility between the samples’ spectra in both shape and magnitude for both protocol
II-880 and II-930 observed further backed the claim that the symmetric architecture developed is
a suitable platform to study fuel electrode behaviour. Although the lack of spectra reproducibility
shown by samples reduced with protocol III-880 seemingly represented a set back, the fact that
replicable ohmic resistances could still be acquired, suggested that this framework still represented
a valid tool to study individual electrode responses, and this short-coming was more related to the
reduction in dry H2 being an unsuitable choice for ceria-based materials, which are known to un-
dergo expansion under such extreme reducing conditions, which possibly compromised cell integrity
and overall electrochemical performance.
3.3.1.3
Effect of gas composition and temperature
Reported in Figure 81 are the average EIS data at the fingerprint conditions for the different reduc-
tion protocols. The serial resistance was subtracted to focus on cell polarization and better visualize
differences in performance. The corresponding standard deviations in term of imaginary and real
values are illustrated in Figure 82. Further details of the spectra are reported in Table 22, Table 23
and Table 24.
What transpires from the graphs is the superior performance of the samples reduced with protocol
II-930. The supposed discrepancy observed at 800°C and with the 50% steam mixture, at which
condition spectra are seen to overlap is, as explained earlier, linked to the short time elapsed after the
reduction phase for the cool down of the test house to this nominal temperature. The actual average
chamber temperature was higher for protocol II-880 samples when measurements were taken, 842°C,
while in the case of samples reduced with protocol II-930 this was 827°C. Hence, as similar perfor-
mance was achieved with the latter at a comparatively lower temperature, this reduction protocol
was confirmed to be better, resulting in lower polarization resistances in all conditions presented.
Moreover, as the plots of the standard deviations in Figure 82 put in view, these were for the most
part the lowest.
With protocol II-880 the spread was also small, with standard deviations for both the real and
imaginary parts never going beyond 8% over the entire frequency interval.
Higher were the standard deviation with protocol III-880, reaching values of at maximum ∼55%
and ∼70% for the real and imaginary components, respectively, with 50% steam at the lowest
temperature.
Page 97 of 165
==PAGE:101==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 81: Nyquist (left) and Bode plots (right) of the average EIS data of symmetric samples
collected at OCV at three different temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C) and steam contents (50%,
20%, 4% H2O/H2), maintaining a feed rate of 6 l/h, with NiO as contact paste, for the different
reduction protocols adopted.
Page 98 of 165
==PAGE:102==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 82: Standard deviation of the real (left) and imaginary (right) contributions of the EIS data
of the symmetric samples collected at OCV at three different nominal temperatures (800°C, 750°C,
700°C) and steam contents (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), maintaining a feed rate of 6 l/h, with NiO as
contact paste, for the different reduction protocols adopted.
Page 99 of 165
==PAGE:103==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
For all three reduction protocols the total polarization in Figure 81 was observed to increase
with H2 content and for decreasing temperatures.
The spectra of the samples exhibited a higher and lower frequency feature. The Bode plots suggest
two main contributions, with the one at lower frequency being less distinguishable at higher steam
percentages, and for the samples reduced in dry H2 at higher temperatures, while the opposite was
true with the other reduction protocols, for which at 4% steam the two corresponding peaks in the
graphs were observed to merge as temperature was reduced down to 700°C.
The high frequency feature was observed to slightly shift towards higher frequencies as mixture
became more reducing, in contrast to the low frequency contribution which shifted towards lower
values, with a greater separation of the characteristic frequencies of the processes with protocol II-
880 and protocol II-930, reflected by the broadening of the single peak observed at 800°C as steam
content was decreased from 50% down to 20%, which split into two peaks at 4% steam.
The size of the arcs for all protocols decreased as temperature was raised, with associated peaks
moving to lower frequency values. The appreciable thermal activation displayed, which was more
pronounced for samples reduced in pure H2, pointed to the dominant underlying electrode processes
being physico-chemical in nature.
From the Bode plots presented in Figure 81, it is evident that the different reduction protocols
affected the characteristic frequencies of these processes, if these can be assumed the same.
The higher frequency process for protocol II-880 and protocol II-930 samples was mainly located
between 10-100 Hz, while the other contribution was found to interest the 0.1-10 Hz range. For
protocol III-880°C these processes were shifted towards lower frequencies; the contributions were
less discernable, but with the help of fitting summit frequencies were found to fall in the range
between 1-10 Hz and 0.01-1 Hz, hence, these were in comparison an order of magnitude lower.
Temperature [°C]
800°C
Protocol
Gas composition (%H2O/H2)
50%
20%
4%
II-880
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.030(1%)
0.042 (0.4%)
0.048 (0.3%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.26 (7%)
0.44 (2%)
0.84 (0.3%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.23 (6%)
0.39 (1%)
0.80 (1%)
III-880
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.048 (1%)
0.055 (0.4%)
0.062 (0.3%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.2 (23%)
1.5 (15%)
2.1 (16%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.1 (23%)
1.4 (16%)
2.0 (16%)
II-930
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.026 (0.1%)
0.036 (0.3%)
0.042 (0.5%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.26 (3%)
0.39 (1%)
0.70 (1%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.23 (3%)
0.35 (0.3%)
0.66 (0.1%)
Table 22: Summary of the average area specific resistances obtained from the spectra of symmetric
samples for the different reduction protocols adopted. EIS were collected at OCV at 800°C and three
gas compositions (50%,20%,4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h, with NiO as contact paste.
The serial resistance (RS,corrected) was obtained graphically from the high frequency intercept with
the real axis of the Nyquist plot and corrected by subtracting from the raw data the contributions
of the testing fixtures in Appendix A and the added contribution in position 0 reported in Table 17.
The polarization resistance (Rp,exp) was calculated from its difference with the real low frequency
point value (RLP , the subscript LP stands for last point).
Page 100 of 165
==PAGE:104==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Gas composition (%H2O/H2)
50%
Protocol
Temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
II-880
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.030 (1%)
0.055 (0.3%)
0.081 (0.2%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.26 (7%)
0.63 (3%)
1.2 (8%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.23 (6%)
0.57 (2%)
1.2 (7%)
III-880
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.048 (1%)
0.079 (0.3%)
0.127 (0.3%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.2 (23%)
2.7 (41%)
5.3 (54%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
1.1 (23%)
2.6 (41%)
5.2 (54%)
II-930
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.026 (0.1%)
0.050 (0.3%)
0.078 (0.4%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.26 (3%)
0.52 (1%)
0.99 (2%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.23 (3%)
0.47 (0.2%)
0.91 (2%)
Table 23: Summary of the average area specific resistances obtained from the spectra of symmetric
samples for the different reduction protocols adopted. EIS were collected at OCV at 50% H2O/H2,
fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h, and three temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C), with NiO as contact
paste. The serial resistance (RS,corrected) was obtained graphically from the high frequency intercept
with the real axis of the Nyquist plot and corrected by subtracting from the raw data the contri-
butions of the testing fixtures in Appendix A and the added contribution in position 0 reported in
Table 17. The polarization resistance (Rp,exp) were calculated from its difference with the real low
frequency point value (RLP , the subscript LP stands for last point).
Gas composition (%H2O/H2)
4%
Protocol
Temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
II-880
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.046 (0.3%)
0.064 (0.3%)
0.096 (0.2%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.84 (0.003%)
1.5 (0.05%)
2.3 (0.02%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.80 (1%)
1.4 (5%)
2.2 (2%)
III-880
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.062 (0.3%)
0.091 (0.3%)
0.147 (0.2%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
2.1 (16%)
3.2 (10%)
4.5 (2%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
2.0 (16%)
3.1 (10%)
4.3 (2%)
II-930
RS,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.042 (0.5%)
0.061 (0.3%)
0.094 (0.5%)
RLP,corrected [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.70 (1.0%)
1.1 (5.2%)
1.8 (9.4%)
Rp,exp [Ωcm2] (sd%)
0.66 (0.1%)
1.01 (5%)
1.7 (9%)
Table 24: Summary of the average area specific resistances obtained from the spectra of symmetric
samples for the different reduction protocols adopted. EIS were collected at OCV at 4% H2O/H2, fed
at a constant rate of 6 l/h, and three temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C), with NiO as contact paste.
The serial resistance (RS,corrected) was obtained graphically from the high frequency intercept with
the real axis of the Nyquist plot and corrected by subtracting from the raw data the contributions
of the testing fixtures in Appendix A and the added contribution in position 0 reported in Table 17.
The polarization resistance (Rp,exp) was calculated from its difference with the real low frequency
point value (RLP , the subscript LP stands for last point).
To better detect the changes in the spectra and isolate in the frequency domain processes
that were affected by the parameter varied, ADIS was also performed, with results illustrated in
Figure 83.
As observed in the graphs, at 800°C decreasing the steam content produced similar changes in
the higher frequency portion of the spectra, as reflected by the peak confined between 10-1000 Hz,
which was present for all reduction protocols and was seen to shift towards the right of the frequency
interval as the percentage of steam was lowered. The deviation between the samples reduced with the
different protocols grew as H2 content in the gas stream was increased. Changes in the impedance
response with gas compositions in this range were not as significant as those observed at lower
frequencies. Moreover, the interested frequency intervals differed between the samples reduced in
dry H2 and with the other reduction methods.
Page 101 of 165
==PAGE:105==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 83: ADIS of symmetric samples collected at OCV at three different nominal temperatures
(800°C, 750°C, 700°C) and steam contents (50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), maintaining a feed rate of 6
l/h, with NiO as contact paste, for the different reduction protocols adopted.
Page 102 of 165
==PAGE:106==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
At 800°C the affected range by switching from the 50/50 mixture to the one with 20% steam
was 0.1-1 Hz adopting protocol III-880, while it was 1-10 Hz for the other reduction treatments, for
which responses with changes in gas composition varied less strongly.
As the steam content was dropped to 4% at 800°C, with protocol III-880 a third middle peak ap-
peared in the difference plot in the frequency range of 1-10 Hz, where also for the other protocols
a shoulder could be discerned in the same interval. Hence, at least three processes contributing to
cell impedance can be ascribed.
To better appreciate the differences resulting from the the better reduction threatments, namely
protocol II-880 and protocol II-930, ADIS were also done by taking the EIS data for the latter as
reference at each of the conditions presented, which are displayed in the difference plots on the right
of Figure 83.
At 800°C, with the exception of the 50% composition, for which an explanation was given, improve-
ments produced by the higher temperature reduction for higher H2 contents mainly concerned the
low frequency response below 0.1 Hz and to a lesser extent the one at middle and higher frequency.
The difference analysis at the 50/50 mixture shows more significant changes in the response of sam-
ples reduced with protocol III-880 sample with operating temperature, which was more considerable
as temperature was lowered down to 700°C, especially below 1 Hz. At this composition processes
were hardly distinguishable, but contributions above 1 Hz, where a shoulder in the curve was de-
tectable, and below 1 Hz, where a peak reflecting changes resulting from lowering the temperature
from 800°C to 750°C could be observed, which was lost with a reduction of temperature down to
700°C as it shifted outside the measuring frequency interval, clearly show thermal activation.
Single curves representing changes with temperature were observed for the other protocols at the
50% composition, indicative of the greater overlap in the characteristic frequencies of the processes
involved, with peaks centered around 10 Hz.
The ADIS plot for the more steam-lean mixture of 4% in the case of protocol III-880 shows two
thermally activated processes in the 1-100 Hz interval, corresponding to the two peaks observed in
this range, but also a glimpse of a third process below 1 Hz was caught, for which changes with
temperature were mainly located beyond the cut-off value of 0.01 Hz, explaining why only traces of
a possible third peak were seen. This partially detectable process also seemed to display thermal
activation.
With the other reduction methods three peaks were observed in the difference plots at this compo-
sition, a low frequency peak confined between 0.1-1 Hz, a higher frequency peak centered around
10-20 Hz, and a middle peak in the range of 1-10 Hz, only barely visible for the change in tem-
perature between 800°C and 750°C; this was likely shadowed by the more predominant change in
the response of the higher frequency process as temperature was further decreased. This was more
distinguishable in the ADIS plot comparing the reduction treatments according to protocol II.
The analysis revealed greater differences between the two sets of protocol II samples in the low and
high frequency contributions, as operating temperature was decreased; also considerable were the
ones ascribed to the middle process, which were also seen to increase for decreasing temperatures.
The greater variation observed in the impedance responses with temperature of the three processes
identified with the 4% mixture, for protocol II-880 and protocol II-930 samples, suggests these were
phisico-chemical electrode processes, as the analysis seemed to confirm that they all were thermally
activated.
The observed behaviour of the high frequency feature seen above 10 Hz, which was thermally ac-
tivated and more weakly affected by gas composition changes, with its response varying similarly
for the different protocols, lead to its interpretation as a bulk process, like ion transfer across the
CGO/ScYSZ interface speculated in literature. It is less clear what the other two electrode processes
might be. The low frequency process was seen to be more sensitive to gas composition changes, with
these being more dramatic for the samples reduced in dry H2, but it is possible that the stronger
dependence on gas composition that was observed might have stemmed from the overlap of diffu-
sion/gas conversion contributions in the low frequency range of interest. The thermal activation
observed, however, emphasized that gas transport processes were not the limiting factors.
The previous analysis done for semi-symmetric samples proved that the capacitance associated to
the low frequency process was chemical in nature and was related to the change in non-stoichiometry
Page 103 of 165
==PAGE:107==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
of CGO. As this low frequency characteristic for the symmetric samples seemed to behave similarly
with temperature and composition as for the semi-symmetric cells, with just notable differences in
the magnitude and frequency regime of this contribution, one can assume that it was the same and
could be correlated to a charge transfer process coupled with the ceria chemical capacitance.
The middle frequency contribution here observed is not normally reported in literature, but was also
documented in the work of Aiswarya Krishnakumar Padinjarethil [88] on symmetric
Ni-GCO/CGO/YSZ/CGO/Ni-CGO cells. This was found to be located in the same frequency range
(1-10 Hz) and also showed a stronger temperature dependence than the one that could be rational-
ized for gas diffusion and gas conversion (see Figure 130 in Appendix D), landing on the conclusion
that it must represent an actual phisico-chemical electrode process.
3.3.1.4
Polarization Losses
Illustrated in the bar plot of Figure 84 are the total polarization resistances obtained with the
different protocols. Values are found summarized in Table 25.
Figure 84: Average polarization resistances obtained from the spectra of symmetric samples collected
at OCV at the fingerprint conditions, with NiO as contact paste, for the protocols tested. The RP ,exp
values were obtained from the average of the difference of the high and low frequency intercept of
the spectra with the real Nyquist axis. The RP values for Protocol III-880 samples were obtained
by fitting with the ECM in Figure 27, with the results of the analysis reported in Appendix C.
For protocol III-880 the resulting arcs were incomplete at lower temperatures and steam con-
tents, impedance curves were fitted with the same equivalent circuit adopted for the semi-symmetric
samples, with two RQ elements in series, to determine the total polarization resistance. Although
the analysis of the spectra revealed the presence of at least three electrode processes, as these were
not fully resolved in the frequency range for the limited temperature and gas changes performed,
which made the accurate identification of the processes and the deconvolution of their resistive
Page 104 of 165
==PAGE:108==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
contributions more difficult, fitting of the spectra with this circuit was considered acceptable. Con-
fidence in a more complex and physically significant electrical analogue with more RQ sub-circuits
requires additional observations. This more relatively simple ECM served its purpose of providing
a better estimate of the polarization resistance than taking the difference of the real high and low
frequency intercepts in the Nyquist plots (Rpexp), also reported, which gave erroneous lower values
when impedances were not sufficiently resolved at the end of the frequency range in which measure-
ments were carried out. The average spectra and the ECM fits are presented in Appendix C.
In the graph the total polarization loss is seen to increase for decreasing temperatures and steam
contents. For samples reduced with protocol III-880 a misleading and uncoherent behaviour of the
Rpexp estimate is seen at 700°C, at which temperature it is observed to decrease as higher per-
centages of H2 were supplied, a result of the spectra falling outside the lower bound of the allowed
frequency interval. The value obtained from fitting on the other hand followed the expected trends
at all conditions.
As Figure 84 shows, protocol III-880 undoubtedly led to worse performancing samples, with sizeable
polarization resistances, 3 to 5 times greater than those reported with the other reduction treat-
ments. In the case of protocol II, increasing the reduction temperature by 50°C, from 880°C to 930°C
clearly yield improvements in performance. Reducing at higher temperature produced the lowest
polarization values; at 700°C and 4% H2O this resulted in a drop in the polarization resistance of
29%, from the value of 2.2 Ωcm2 reported for protocol II-880 to 1.7 Ωcm2 for samples reduced with
protocol II-930. The gap in performance between the samples reduced according to ptotocol II at
these two temperatures was seen to increase as temperature was lowered, which is already indica-
tive of the smaller activation energy associated to electrode polarization resulting from the higher
reduction temperature.
Figure 85: Comparison of the total area specific polarization resistances found in literature and
in this work for the symmetric samples. Details of the cells for which these reference values were
obtained are reported in Table 10.
Page 105 of 165
==PAGE:109==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
The comparison of the polarization values obtained with the symmetric cells with those found
in literature, in conditions closely matching those investigated, is provided in Figure 85. The values
presented were obtained by diving by two polarization resistances reported in Table 21to get polar-
ization losses of the single electrode.
Except for the values resulting from protocol III-880°C, area specific resistances obtained with the
other reduction method were comparable to those in the references. At a comparatively lower tem-
perature values were even smaller than those reported by Klitkou et al.
[61]. The polarization
resistance at 800°C and 20% steam obtained with reduction protocol II-930 was 0.18 Ωcm2, equal
to the reference measured by Klitkou and de Moragas on an equivalent full cell but at 50% steam.
Numbers were higher with respect to the 0.13 Ωcm2 at 750°C and with 4% humidified H2 docu-
mented by Nenning et al. [52]. At 750°C and 20% steam, the values obtained were larger despite
the higher steam content, respectively, 0.42 and 0.31 Ωcm2 with protocol II-880 and protocol II-930.
This higher disagreement can be attributed to the differences in the fabrication method adopted and
in the resulting microstructure of their symmetric cells. These were produced by sintering at 1100°C
for 3 hours in H2 the screen printed Ni-CGO electrodes on both sides of a pre-sintered YSZ elec-
trolyte. The lower sintering temperature and dwell time, as well as the fact that electrodes were not
co-sintered with the electrolyte as in the present study, likely affected the thickness and composition
of the interdiffusion zone at the interface between the electrolyte and the electrodes; these were also
seen to be characterized by very small CGO grains, ∼250 nm in size, hence, benefited from the
larger surface area of these particles, where the reaction is expected to take place, explaining the
much lower polarization resistance measured in their work.
Figure 86: Resistance contributions obtained by fitting of the average EIS data collected at OCV at
the fingerprint conditions of the symmetric samples reduced with protocol III-880.
The partition of the polarization resistance in a high and low frequency contribution, obtained
through fitting of the spectra of the samples reduced with protocol III-880, is displayed in Figure 86.
As previously mentioned, for the symmetric samples a middle frequency process was also identified,
but this was only distinguishable with the 4% steam mixture, and became more prominent at
lower temperatures. Moreover, its small separation from the high frequency process, due to their
similar relaxation times, meant that a trustworthy deconvolution of these contributions through
fitting would be challenging, when it was already difficult to differentiate between the high and
low frequency processes, especially at higher temperatures and steam contents where their response
Page 106 of 165
==PAGE:110==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
overlapped more in the spectra, without the support of other tools, such as DRT, which requires
further mathematical manipulation of the data.
It was therefore accepted to limit the number of RQ sub-circuits to two.
The accuracy of the
deconvolution of the polarization resistance in the two contributions presented is, thus, questionable.
The bar chart in Figure 86 shows that the share of the high frequency contribution increased as the
temperature was reduced, signaling its greater thermal activation compared to the polarization
contribution at low frequency.
Nominal temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
Protocol
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
II-880
Tavg [°C]
841.6
800.3
800.4
750.8
750.4
750.1
703.1
701.9
702.1
(sd)
(26)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.1)
(0.01)
(0.3)
(0.2)
(0.1)
(0.1)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.024
0.039
0.046
0.053
0.058
0.064
0.079
0.089
0.096
(sd%)
(1%)
(0.4%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.2%)
(0.1%)
(0.2%)
RP,exp [Ωcm2]
0.23
0.39
0.80
0.57
0.84
1.4
1.2
1.5
2.2
(sd%)
(6%)
(1%)
(1%)
(2%)
(1%)
(5%)
(7%)
(5%)
(2%)
III-880
Tavg [°C]
809.0
800.9
801.0
751.2
750.8
750.2
702.8
702.3
702.4
(sd)
(15)
(0.1)
(0.03)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.4)
(0.3)
(0.1)
(0.2)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.048
0.055
0.062
0.079
0.083
0.091
0.127
0.136
0.147
(sd%)
(1%)
(0.4%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.2%)
(0.2%)
RP,exp [Ωcm2]
1.1
1.4
2.0
2.6
2.7
3.1
5.2
4.7
4.3
(sd%)
(23%)
(16%)
(16%)
(41%)
(20%)
(10%)
(54%)
(20%)
(2%)
RP [Ωcm2]
1.2
1.5
2.2
2.9
3.2
4.1
6.6
6.9
8.2
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.40
0.68
1.1
1.2
1.5
2.1
3.4
3.4
3.7
RLF [Ωcm2]
0.77
0.86
1.1
1.7
1.8
2.0
3.2
3.5
4.5
II-930
Tavg [°C]
827.2
801.5
801.5
751.9
751.5
751.0
703.2
702.7
702.7
(sd)
(36)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.1)
(0.04)
(0.5)
(0.3)
(0.1)
(0.1)
RS,corrected [Ωcm2]
0.026
0.036
0.042
0.050
0.056
0.061
0.078
0.086
0.094
(sd%)
(0.1%)
(0.3%)
(0.5%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.3%)
(0.4%)
(0.3%)
(0.5%)
RP,exp [Ωcm2]
0.23
0.35
0.66
0.47
0.62
1.1
0.91
1.2
1.7
(sd%)
(3%)
(0.3%)
(0.1%)
(0.2%)
(2%)
(5%)
(2%)
(5%)
(9%)
Table 25: Summary of the average area specific resistances of symmetric samples sintered using the
835 plates obtained from the spectra collected at OCV at the fingerprint conditions with constant
feed of 6 l/h and with NiO as contact paste, for the different reduction protocols adopted. Reported
are the corrected ohmic resistances (RS,corrected) obtained by subtracting from the raw data the
contributions of the testing fixtures in Appendix A, plus the additional resistance in position 0
of the sample holder reported in Table 17, the average temperature (Tavg), the total polarization
resistances (RP,exp, RP )and the low (RLF ) and high (RHF ) frequency contributions.
3.3.1.5
Activation Energy
Reported in Table 26 are the activation values determined for the resistances of the symmetric
cells reduced according to the different protocols, which were determined by linear fitting of the
values at different temperatures in the Arrhenius plots presented below.
The obtained activation energies for the ohmic resistance were the lowest for samples reduced with
protocol II-880, with values of 0.66-0.69 eV in very good agreement with the 10Sc1YSZ reference of
0.65 eV [15]. These were slightly higher with protocol II-930, with values in the range of 0.73-0.78
eV, at maximum 20% higher than the value from literature.
It is possible that reducing the cell at a higher temperature might have caused dopant or impurity
segregation, affecting conductivity and causing the observed increase in activation energy.
Impurities with a relatively high degree of covalent bonding such as (Si, Na, Al)Ox, trace amounts
of which are typically present in the raw materials, have been reported to lower the surface energy of
ionic oxides such as Sc and/or Y-stabilized zirconia and segregate as glassy phases on their surface,
deteriorating its properties and functionality. Dopants (e.g. Y2O3, Gd2O3) in ceria and zirconia
compounds have also been observed to segregate at the grain boundaries, as well as at the interface
Page 107 of 165
==PAGE:111==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
between the bulk and these surface glassy phases [8]. An increase in grain boundary resistivity, re-
sulting from the excess of dopants and accumulation of impurities, would raise the activation energy
for ion conduction in the electrolyte, with the grain boundary contribution weighing more at lower
temperature.
Moreover, if ohmic losses of the electrodes were not negligible, resulting from incomplete NiO re-
duction or the formation of a poorly percolating metallic phase, this would raise activation values
closer to those reported for CGO, which can be higher (0.66-1.2 eV [66, 73, 74]).
Even greater was the energy barrier for the ohmic resistance when reduction was carried out at 880°C
in pure H2. Activation values were 0.81-0.84 eV, 25-29% higher than the expected from literature.
Under such reducing conditions impurity/dopant segregation cannot be excluded, but these can be
expected to have a more detrimental effect compared to reduction with humidified H2, due to ev-
idence of steam playing a role in removing impurities by increasing their mobility [7]. This could
explain why the resulting activation values associated to the ohmic resistance were much higher
when reduction protocol III-880 was adopted.
The weak variation with gas composition exhibited by the ohmic activation energy for all three reduc-
tion protocols suggested that electron transport likely occurred predominantly though the metallic
phase.
Protocol
R [Ωcm2]
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
II-880
RS,corrected
R2
0.9997
1.000
0.9984
slope
7.9
8.0
7.7
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
66 (0.68)
67 (0.69)
64 (0.66)
RP,exp
R2
0.9935
0.9800
0.9995
slope
14
14
11
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
117 (1.2)
118 (1.2)
91 (0.94)
III-880
RS,corrected
R2
1.000
0.9993
0.9977
slope
9.7
9.7
9.4
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
81 (0.84)
81 (0.84)
79 (0.81)
RP,exp
R2
0.9976
0.9967
0.9914
slope
15
12
7.4
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
125 (1.3)
102 (1.1)
61 (0.63)
RP
R2
0.9999
0.9987
0.9974
slope
17
15
13
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
143 (1.5)
124 (1.3)
110 (1.1)
RHF
R2
0.9996
0.9998
0.9976
slope
21
17
13
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
177 (1.8)
142 (1.5)
107 (1.1)
RLF
R2
0.9961
0.9994
0.9949
slope
14
15
15
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
118 (1.2)
124 (1.3)
128 (1.3)
II-930
RS,corrected
R2
0.9991
0.9998
0.9991
slope
8.4
9.1
8.9
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
70 (0.73)
76 (0.78)
74 (0.77)
RP,exp
R2
0.9906
0.9997
0.9997
slope
12
13
10
Eact [kJ/mol] ([eV ])
100 (1.0)
106 (1.1)
84 (0.87)
Table 26: Parameters of the linear fits in Figure 87, Figure 89 and Figure 89, with corresponding
activation energy values calculated from their slope.
Page 108 of 165
==PAGE:112==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 87: Arrhenius plot of the corrected average area specific ohmic resistances obtained from the
spectra of symmetric samples sintered with the 835 plates, reduced with the different protocols. The
EIS were collected at OCV at three nominal temperatures (800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions
(50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h and with NiO as contact paste. Values are
reported in Table 26.
For what concerns the polarization resistance, for all protocols an activation was observed as
mixtures became more reducing, with values dropping from 1.2 eV to 0.94 for with protocol II-
880, from 1.5 eV to 1.1 eV with protocol III-880 (for RP ) and from 1 to 0.87 eV with protocol
II-930, moving from the mixture with 50% steam to the one with 4% steam content. At each gas
composition, taking the better polarization estimate for protocol III-880, values increased in the
following order: protocol II-930 < protocol II-880 < protocol III-880.
Hence, while values obtained for reduction in dry H2 were a bit high that what is normally reported
for Ni-CGO cermets, for the other reduction conditions these were very well in line with what is
found in literature. Based on the results presented it was clear that protocol II-930 led to higher
performing fuel electrodes.
Page 109 of 165
==PAGE:113==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 88: Arrhenius plot of the average area specific polarization resistances obtained from the
spectra of symmetric samples sintered with the 835 plates, reduced with different protocols. The
EIS were collected at OCV at three nominal temperatures (800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions
(50%, 20%, 4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h, with NiO as contact paste. Both the
polarization resistance estimated by taking the last low frequency point measured (RP ,exp) and by
fitting the low frequency portion of the average spectra (RP ) are reported in Table 26.
The Arrhenius analysis was also performed for the two contribution quantified through ECM
fitting for protocol III-880 samples. As the higher activation values reported in Table 26 point to,
the high frequency feature displayed stronger thermal activation; activation energies ascribed to the
high and low frequency contributions were found to be 1.8 eV and 1.2 eV, respectively, with 50%
steam.
Page 110 of 165
==PAGE:114==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 89: Arrhenius plots of the average area specific total polarization resistance and the contri-
butions of the high (RHF ) and low frequency (RLF ) portions of the average spectra of symmetric
samples sintered with the 835 setter plates and reduced with protocol III-880. The EIS were col-
lected at OCV at three nominal temperatures (800, 750, 700°C) and gas compositions (50%, 20%,
4% H2O/H2), fed at a constant rate of 6 l/h, with NiO as contact paste.
Page 111 of 165
==PAGE:115==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
3.3.2
Conclusions
Three reduction protocols were tested on symmetric cells and their effect on electrode performance
was assessed through EIS, which was also employed to get some insight on the reduction process by
capturing the evolution with time of the ohmic resistance in the shorter measurements, as well as
the polarization losses from the more complete spectra collected in a wider frequency domain.
The EIS measurements taken during the reduction period revealed that already within few minutes
of introducing the reducing gas ohmic values were very low, signifying that the contribution coming
from the electrodes was minimal, thus, indicating that most of NiO reduction had already occurred;
this suggested that the NiO reduction process proceeded very rapidly under the conditions tested.
The ohmic resistances were seen to deteriorate, faster in the beginning and then slowly with increas-
ing reduction time for all reduction protocols, although at a different rate, lower for protocol II-930,
with the highest recorded for protocol III-880, for which the initial degradation stage lasted longer
(∼20 h vs 10 h), resulting in a 50% increase of the ohmic resistance at the end of the 60 h period.
From the spectra corresponding to a wider frequency interval, already a difference in the shape
and magnitude of the spectra for protocol III-880 could be observed with respect to the other two,
between which differences were more subtle. Large, unclosed impedance curves were measured for
protocol III-880 samples, with a large low frequency arc, while these were reasonably lower for the
other protocols.
A degradation of the polarization losses were also evident for protocol II samples, faster at the
beginning, but while polarization values seemed to stabilize after 10 hours for samples reduced at
880°c, these proceeded to increase linearly, although at a lower rate, for the remainder of the time
for samples reduced at 930°C.
Fingerprint measurements showed that results were very replicable across samples reduced with
protocol II-880 and protocol II-930, while samples’ spectra deviated in the case of protocol III-880,
mainly in the lower frequency portion below 1 Hz.
Variations in temperature and steam partial pressure revealed three processes contributing to
the cell polarization, all thermally activated.
The high frequency component varied with temperature and more weakly with composition in a
similar manner with the different protocols. On the other hand, compared to what was observed for
the other reduction treatments, the low frequency contribution in the case of protocol III-880 was
more shifted to lower frequencies, below 0.1 Hz at 700°C.
While normally a high and a low frequency feature are reported for Ni-CGO electrodes, which have
been hypothesized to arise due to a bulk ionic conduction process and a surface process, respectively,
there is little known in literature of the middle process identified. This was only distinguishable in
the ADIS plots, more markedly for the case of reduction in dry H2 at lower temperatures with the
4% steam mixture, owing to the greater separation of the time constants of the processes.
Of all the reduction treatments, protocol II-880 produced the lowest ohmic and polarization
resistances. Ohmic resistances were higher for the other protocols, but still reasonably low.
While the resulting polarization resistances with protocol II-880 were close in magnitude to those
obtained with protocol II-880, protocol III-930 gave values an order of magnitude higher.
The analysis of the activation energies revealed that the reduction process had an effect on the
energy barriers associated to these resistances.
Ohmic activation energies were found to be in good agreement with expectations from literature
when protocol II-880 was adopted; values were 20% higher with protocol II-930 and up to 29%
higher with protocol III-880.
Activation values associated to the total polarization resistance for all protocols decreased as mix-
tures with lower steam content were supplied, and the lowest activation energy value was reported
for protocol II-930, of 0.87 eV for mixtures with 4% steam.
Based on this assessment it was concluded that protocol II-930 led to the best performance,
resulting in lower overall cell losses, while reduction in pure hydrogen produced the worse results
Page 112 of 165
==PAGE:116==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
and should be therefore avoided.
Nevertheless, durability studies should be performed to confirm protocol II-930 as the better choice,
by checking how stable the performance produced with this reduction treatment is, and whether
it is still the best in the long run or if with time values converge to those obtained with protocol
II-880, as a result of degradation phenomena.
Page 113 of 165
==PAGE:117==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
4
Summary and Closing Remarks
The steps taken to develop a suitable symmetric platform to study individual Ni-CGO fuel electrode
responses were presented in this work.
The initial technical challenges to obtain crack-free, un-shorted semi-symmetric samples have been
illustrated, which were found to be mainly related to the lamination method and geometry adopted
at the start. The initial idea of having opposite electrodes of different sizes as a way to prevent them
from fusing together at the sides during sintering was abandoned , due to evidence of propagation
of defects in correspondence to the edge of the smaller electrode.
The issue was solved by roll
laminating together the tapes, and cutting out rectangular samples, which were then appropriately
polished at the edges with sand paper. The undertaken choice of making the samples rectangular
in shape was motivated by the fact that this made polishing by hand easier and more precise.
Defect-free semi-symmetric and fully symmetric architectures were developed at the end of this work,
the latter by adopting instead thinner support layers, prepared by cutting the cast thickness by half.
The precautions taken to prevent shorts and detect them in case these appeared was the following:
−Removal with sandpaper of an amount corresponding to at least ∼0.2 mm from each side of
the samples before the application of the contact paste, with the aid of a caliber to measure
the reduction in thickness;
−Brush painting of the contact paste (NiO slurry or Pt ink) on the surface of each electrode at
a distance of ∼0.05 mm from the edges, this to circunvent the issue of paste spreading down
to the sides due to softening at the high operating temperatures reached in the rig.
−Multimeter checks for shorts when possible before mounting the samples in the rig (only useful
when the conductive Pt ink was adopted).
−Multimeter checks on each channels once the samples were mounted in the rig before heat up,
to ensure that the sample holder Pt meshes and wiring at each position were not touching
before performing any measurements.
−After the tests were done in-situ collection of room temperature impedances at the end of
cooldown for each sample position, to understand whether shorts might have originated during
heat up stage and/or testing.
Resistances coming from the testing fixtures were evaluated by performing short-circuit mea-
surements on a Ni plate at the different sample holder positions, under the operating condition of
interest, so that these artifacts could be subtracted from the collected raw data and only actual
contributions coming from specimens under scrutiny could be analyzed.
These more practical details is what made the difference in acquiring corrupt versus artifact-free,
sound data, thus, the importance to clearly disclose them.
The impedance of the cells developed were thoroughly investigated in different gas phase mix-
tures and temperatures (fingerprint conditions) to assess the robustness of the architectures in pro-
ducing replicable results.
The semi-symmetric cells produced appeared to be warped towards the support side, a result
of the different TECs of the constituent layers and geometric asymmetry, hence, for these achieving
proper and repeatable contact resistances required necessarily the use of a conducting paste in
between the measuring fixtures of the rig sample holder and the cells surface. Two contact pastes,
a NiO slurry and Pt ink, were, thus, evaluated on this architecture.
The measurements obtained were physically-sound with both pastes, as the correct temperature
and gas composition dependencies of the ohmic and polarization resistances were obtained for the
samples.
Page 114 of 165
==PAGE:118==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Differences in the ohmic values and their spread were reported with the two contact pastes, lower
when NiO was adopted, but impedance arcs, despite having the same shape, differed in magnitude,
mainly for what concerns the low frequency portion of the spectra, where low frequencies arcs were
observed to be much bigger with NiO, for which the corresponding observable peaks were also shifted
to the lower end of the frequency interval, located at frequencies almost an order of magnitude lower
than when Pt was used.
By means of a systemic investigation of the dependencies of the resistive contributions on
temperature and PH2O, insight on the underlying electrode processes could be obtained.
A high frequency process located in the range of 1 −103 Hz with both pastes and one at lower
frequency, falling between ∼0.1-1 Hz with Pt and located ∼0.1 Hz and below when NiO was adopted.
The weak dependency on gas changes and the high thermal activation displayed by the high frequency
arc was in agreements with has been reported for Ni-GCO electrode, which was interpreted as due
to a bulk ion conduction process, either ion conduction across the electrode/electrolyte interface or
from the bulk to the surface of the MIEC.
The low frequency feature varied more strongly with gas composition, but its significant activation
with temperature suggested that it was related to a surface electrode process and not mass transport
effects, a conclusion that also other studies in literature have arrived at, but overlapping contribution
due gas diffusion and/or gas conversion cannot be excluded in the frequency range of interest;
the strong temperature dependence however, suggested that these represented minor contributions
compared to that of the electrode process.
This was further confirmed by the assessment done on the capacitive contribution associated to this
low frequency feature, estimated with the aid of ECM fitting, which proved that this was related to
the change in oxygen non-stoichiometry of the CGO phase.
The polarization resistances with both contact pastes were much higher than what could be
anticipated from literature or compared to values obtained from the full cell counterparts.
The hypothesis of electrode poisoning from impurities coming from the furnace or the type of setter
plates used were disproved as possible causes.
An intel on the root of the problem behind the poor performance of the Ni-CGO electrodes in the
semi-symmetric design investigated was provided by SEM analysis, which revealed delamination
from the electrolyte of the functional layer on the support side and uncomplete of NiO reduction
in the middle section of the samples, as being the primary causes for the high polarization losses
observed when Pt and NiO were adopted as contacting material, which mainly correlated to the
low frequency arcs. The consequent loss in electrode active area and constriction effects explained
the higher variance and magnitude of ohmic values for the Pt set, while still displaying activation
energies that agreed well with values expected for ScYSZ. Higher ohmic activation values, especially
with the equilibrium 50/50 mixture, were obtained for samples with NiO paste, presenting middle
dead zones of low porosity and conductivity, which contributed to raise energy barriers.
The different causes for the high impedances measured for the two set of sample, underlined the
sensitivity of electrode performance to the type of contact paste adopted, and explained the lack of
reproducibility of different samples’ impedance responses in the low frequency part of the spectra.
The arguments in favor of the NiO paste as the better current collection material were the
lower and more replicable serial resistances obtained with respect to those resulting with Pt ink,
which likely were caused by more severe constriction effects resulting from delamination, but also
the expectation that stronger adherence of the NiO paste with the underlying electrodes could be
achieved, given the higher affinity between the layers, as both the functional layer and support
contained NiO, which leads one to assumed that stronger metal bonds could be achieved with the
same kind of metal compared to when Pt ink is applied.
The lower melting temperature of Ni
compared to Pt also indicate that higher contact areas can be anticipated with the former as it is
expected to undergo greater softening at the high operating temperatures reached during testing.
Moreover, the affinity with the contacting material used in full cell testes, which often rely on Ni
meshes and Ni felts has to be mentioned. In durability studies a loss of electronic connection due to
Page 115 of 165
==PAGE:119==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
the detachment of the Pt contact layer has been reported, which discredit this contacting material
as a suitable choice if long term testing needed to be performed in the future.
For the above reasons mentioned the next experiments were performed using solely the NiO slurry.
Although these experiments on semy-symmetric samples did not prove so conclusive for what
concern which contact paste was ultimately the most suitable, they clearly underlined the need to
change the reduction protocol initially adopted, which involved reducing the samples at 850°C for 1
h in 90/10 H20/H2, followed by 1 h in 50/50 H20/H2.
The reduction time was significantly increased to 60 h and the temperature was increased to
880 to speed up reduction kinetics and achieve greater NiO conversions, bypassing the step at 90/10
H20/H2, and solely exposing the electrode to the 50/50 H20/H2 mixture.
This new reduction protocol was tested on both the semi-symmetric and symmetric cells and proved
that reasonably low polarization resistances could be attained in both cases. However results clearly
showed that a better consistency in performance across different samples was only obtained with
the symmetric architecture. While one of the two semi-symmetric samples tested showed low polar-
ization values, its ohmic resistance did not display the correct temperature dependence, while the
opposite was true for the other sample, for which impedance arcs, however, were considerably larger
and incomplete, with total resistances well exceeding 4 Ωcm2 at 700°C.
This clearly indicated that structural issues were still very much relevant in the semi-symmetric
architecture, likely stemming from manufacturing defects and different thermal expansion charac-
teristics of the constituent layers, with stresses not well compensated between them, which resulted
in the formation of cracks and other defects in some samples, compromising their performance, ex-
plaining the lack of consistency observed.
On this basis the symmetric architecture developed was settled to be the most appropriate platform
to infer on the effect of different reduction conditions on fuel electrode performance.
The three reduction treatments that were evaluated on symmetric cells are tabulated below:
Designation
Gas Composition
Temperature
Duration
Protocol II-880
50%/50% H2O/H2
880°C
60 h
Protocol II-930
50%/50% H2O/H2
930°C
60 h
Protocol III-880
100% H2
880°C
60 h
Table 27: Reduction protocols of symmetric cells.
Reduction tracking through EIS uncovered that most of NiO reduction took place relatively quickly,
given the low ohmic reistances recorded already in the first measurements taken a few minutes
from the start of the reduction phase. Ohmic resistances and polarization values only proceeded to
increase with time, as a result degradation phenomena related to microstructural changes occurring
at both the interface and within the electrode, likely due to Ni redistribution and coarsening. For
all protocols after an initial transient in which a more abrupt increase in values was reported, which
lasted longer (∼20h)forthesamplesreducedindryH2 at 880°C, these continued to increase, but at
a much slower rate.
Fingerprint EIS measurements showed that results were very replicable across samples reduced
with protocol II-880 and protocol II-930, while a deviation in the samples’ spectra were observed
in the case of protocol III-880, which interested mainly the lower frequency portion below 1 Hz.
Nevertheless, ohmic values were reasonably low and characterized by small standard deviations,
even for the samples reduced in dry H2, although for these average values were higher, followed
by those reduced with protocol II-880, but they still were considerably smaller in all fingerprint
conditions in comparison to what was measured for the semi-symmetric samples. The lowest ohmic
values was measured for samples reduced with protocol II-930; at 800°C and 50% steam the average
ohmic resistance recorded was 0.026 Ωcm2, 13% and 46% lower than the ones obtained with protocol
II-880 and protocol III-880, respectively.
Page 116 of 165
==PAGE:120==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
For all three protocols three processes could be ascribed. A high frequency and a low frequency
process showing the same dependencies as the ones identified for the semi-symmetric samples, with
the high frequency process confined in the range 1 −103 Hz and the low frequency process in the
interval 0.1-10 Hz for samples reduced with protocol II, while this last process was shifted to values
lower than 1 Hz even below 0.1 Hz when temperature was lowered to 700°C for samples reduced in
dry H2. This led to assume that these processes were the same as the ones hypothesized for the
semi-symmetric cells initially tested.
The ADIS analyses done revealed deviations related to an intermediate process found in the range
between 1-10 Hz for all protocols, but these were more evident for protocol III-880 and only appeared
for variations in temperature at steam contents of 4%. The temperature effect on this deflection
peak suggested that it did not correspond to a gas phase process, but there is little to no testimony
in literature of its existence and what the source of this polarization loss could be.
The reduction process had an effect on both the magnitude of the resistances and their associated
energy barriers. Ohmic activation energies were found to be in good agreement with expectations
from literature when protocol II-880 was adopted; values were at maximum 20% higher with protocol
II-930 and up to 29% higher with protocol III-880. A decreasing trend in the polarization resistances’
activation values with more H2-rich mixtures was observed with all reduction treatments, with values
ranging between 0.94-1.2 eV for protocol II-880, and 0.87-1.0 eV for protocol II-930, in accordance to
what is reported in literature for Ni-GCO electrode, while these were on the higher side for samples
reduced in dry H2, which varied between 1.1-1.5 eV.
The lowest polarization resistances were measured for those samples reduced with protocol II-930;
at an average temperature of 827 °C and 50% steam a value of 0.23 Ωcm2 was obtained.
Based on the results obtained it was possible to decree protocol II-930 as the reduction treat-
ments leading to the best cell performance, in terms of both ohmic and polarization resistance, while
the worse performing cells were the ones that underwent reduction in dry hydrogen.
Durability studies should be performed to ascertain that protocol II-930 still produces the best
results long term, as degradation phenomena are to be expected, which depend on the starting
microstructure obtained.
To conclude, the good reproducibility between the samples’ spectra, in both shape and mag-
nitude, achieved with both protocol II-880 and II-930, supported the claim that the symmetric
architecture developed was a suitable platform to study fuel electrode behaviour and effect of re-
duction treatment on its performance. The fact that replicable low ohmic resistances could still be
acquired, even with protocol III-880, despite the resulting spectra of the samples showed consider-
able deviation at low frequencies, it suggested that the above statement still applied, and that the
lack of consistency observed in the low frequency response of the samples reduced in dry H2 rather
originated from exposing the cells to these too harsh reducing conditions, which likely negatively
affected the integrity of the cells and their electrochemical behaviour.
It is suggested that further improvements in the formulation of the starting cast tapes from which
the cells were obtain, with the aim of minimizing the thermal expansion mismatch between the layers
could be beneficial for the mechanical resilience of the cell, possibly to the point where it could be
exposed to more extreme reducing conditions, in dry H2 even, without running into cell failure.
In this study it became clear that in order to have a trustworthy and accurate deconvolution and
quantification of polarization resistance contributions, through the definition of a suitable ECM to
which fit the data that more closely reflects the underlying physics of the cells analyzed, conducting
EIS measurements at only three different temperatures and gas compositions, for a total of nine
conditions, is not sufficient, especially when the difference between the time constants of the different
processes is small and when in the presence of minor contributions (e.g of diffusion or gas conversion
or the middle frequency process identified for symmetric cells), which can be overshadowed by the
more prominent ones in the same frequency range in the conditions tested.
Despite this limitation, the high and low frequency processes frequently reported in literature
Page 117 of 165
==PAGE:121==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
for the same type of fuel electrode were identified in this study.
Nenning et al.[52] showed that the high frequency contribution was considerably reduced when a 150
nm dense CGO layer by pulsed laser deposition was incorporate in between the YSZ electrolyte and
the Ni-GCO electrode, a result that confirmed the interpretation of this high frequency characteristic
as an interfacial feature. The improvement observed has been attributed to improved mechanical
adhesion of the electrodes to the electrolyte and greater contact area at the electrolyte interface,
which likely reduced constriction effects, explaining the reduced ohmic resistance observed, with
possible increase in the available active area in the electrode, also by removing the the interdiffusion
zone with limited conductivity away from the main reaction zone in the cermet.
As the SEM images of the cells revealed, the interfacial electrolyte area covered by the GCO phase
was less than 10%, hence, constriction resistances were not negligible. This approach could, there-
fore, be a viable way to further reduce cell polarization losses and the ohmic resistance.
A sintering aid like Fe2O3 could also be included in the electrolyte and barrier layer, which has been
demonstrated to promote densification at lower sintering temperatures and enhance the conductivity
of the YSZ/CGO bilayer by an order of magnitude, by modifying the intermixing behaviour and
reducing the thickness of the interdiffusion zone. Moreover, by appropriately adjusting the amount
of Fe2O3 the shrinkage profile of the co-sintered layer could be matched [69].
Another way to increase the area fraction of CGO at the interface may be achieved by altering the
tape formulation of the functional layer, maybe by reducing the starting size of the NiO powders,
but how this affects the sintering and shrinkage behaviour of the layers during firing would need to
first be assessed.
All of these represent valid solutions that could be attempted in the future to improve the perfor-
mance of the Ni-3YSZ/Ni-CGO10/10Sc1YSZ half cells.
Page 118 of 165
==PAGE:122==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
References
[1] IEA, “Co2 emissions in 2023,” 2023.
[2] IEA, “World energy outlook 2023,” 2023.
[3] B. P. Company, “Bp statistical review of world energy,” 2020.
[4] A. Hauch, R. K¨ungas, P. Blennow, A. B. Hansen, J. B. Hansen, B. V. Mathiesen, and M. B.
Mogensen, “Recent advances in solid oxide cell technology for electrolysis,” Science, vol. 370,
no. 6513, p. eaba6118, 2020.
[5] https://www.energy.gov.
[6] M. Mogensen, M. Chen, H. Frandsen, C. Graves, J. Hansen, K. Hansen, A. Hauch, T. Jacobsen,
S. Jensen, T. Skafte, et al., “Reversible solid-oxide cells for clean and sustainable energy,” Clean
Energy, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 175–201, 2019.
[7] R. Knibbe, A. Hauch, J. Hjelm, S. D. Ebbesen, and M. Mogensen, “Durability of solid oxide
cells,” 2011.
[8] J. T. Irvine, D. Neagu, M. C. Verbraeken, C. Chatzichristodoulou, C. Graves, and M. B.
Mogensen, “Evolution of the electrochemical interface in high-temperature fuel cells and elec-
trolysers,” Nature Energy, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2016.
[9] A. Smith and A. S. Pedersen, “Electrolysis,” in Encyclopedia of Environmental Management,
Taylor & Francis, 2014.
[10] D. J. Brett, A. Atkinson, N. P. Brandon, and S. J. Skinner, “Intermediate temperature solid
oxide fuel cells,” Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 1568–1578, 2008.
[11] O. Yamamoto, “Low temperature electrolytes and catalysts,” Handbook of fuel cells, 2010.
[12] A. J. Jacobson, “Materials for solid oxide fuel cells,” Chemistry of Materials, vol. 22, no. 3,
pp. 660–674, 2010.
[13] V. Kharton, F. Marques, and A. Atkinson, “Transport properties of solid oxide electrolyte
ceramics: a brief review,” Solid State Ionics, vol. 174, no. 1-4, pp. 135–149, 2004.
[14] A. O. Zhigachev, V. V. Rodaev, D. V. Zhigacheva, N. V. Lyskov, and M. A. Shchukina, “Doping
of scandia-stabilized zirconia electrolytes for intermediate-temperature solid oxide fuel cell: A
review,” Ceramics International, vol. 47, no. 23, pp. 32490–32504, 2021.
[15] J. T. Irvine, J. W. Dobson, T. Politova, S. G. Mart´ın, and A. Shenouda, “Co-doping of scandia–
zirconia electrolytes for sofcs,” Faraday discussions, vol. 134, pp. 41–49, 2007.
[16] P. Gao, E. Lara-Curzio, R. Trejo, and M. Radovic, “Dynamic mechanical analysis of phase
transformations and anelastic relaxation in stabilized zirconias,” Journal of The Electrochemical
Society, vol. 162, no. 1, p. F14, 2014.
[17] D. Dees, T. D. Claar, T. Easler, D. Fee, and F. Mrazek, “Conductivity of porous ni/zro2-y 2 o
3 cermets,” Journal of the Electrochemical Society, vol. 134, no. 9, p. 2141, 1987.
[18] M. B. Mogensen, M. Chen, H. L. Frandsen, C. Graves, A. Hauch, P. V. Hendriksen, T. Jacobsen,
S. H. Jensen, T. L. Skafte, and X. Sun, “Ni migration in solid oxide cell electrodes: Review and
revised hypothesis,” Fuel Cells, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 415–429, 2021.
Page 119 of 165
==PAGE:123==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
[19] M. B. Mogensen, A. Hauch, X. Sun, M. Chen, Y. Tao, S. D. Ebbesen, K. V. Hansen, and P. V.
Hendriksen, “Relation between ni particle shape change and ni migration in ni–ysz electrodes–a
hypothesis,” Fuel cells, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 434–441, 2017.
[20] M. Chen, Y.-L. Liu, J. J. Bentzen, W. Zhang, X. Sun, A. Hauch, Y. Tao, J. R. Bowen, and
P. V. Hendriksen, “Microstructural degradation of ni/ysz electrodes in solid oxide electrolysis
cells under high current,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 160, no. 8, p. F883, 2013.
[21] C. Chatzichristodoulou, P. T. Blennow, M. Søgaard, P. V. Hendriksen, and M. B. Mogensen,
“Ceria and its use in solid oxide cells and oxygen membranes,” in Catalysis by ceria and related
materials, pp. 623–782, World Scientific, 2013.
[22] C. Chatzichristodoulou and P. V. Hendriksen, “Electronic conductivity of ce 0.9 gd 0.1 o 1.95-
δ and ce 0.8 pr 0.2 o 2- δ: Hebb–wagner polarisation in the case of redox active dopants and
interference,” Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, vol. 13, no. 48, pp. 21558–21572, 2011.
[23] A. Nenning, M. Holzmann, J. Fleig, and A. K. Opitz, “Excellent kinetics of single-phase gd-
doped ceria fuel electrodes in solid oxide cells,” Materials Advances, vol. 2, no. 16, pp. 5422–5431,
2021.
[24] A. Faes, A. Hessler-Wyser, A. Zryd, and J. Van Herle, “A review of redox cycling of solid oxide
fuel cells anode,” Membranes, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 585–664, 2012.
[25] S. Jiang and Q. Li, Introduction to Fuel Cells: Electrochemistry and Materials. Springer Nature
Singapore, 2022.
[26] G. Constantin, C. Rossignol, J.-P. Barnes, and E. Djurado, “Interface stability of thin, dense
cgo film coating on ysz for solid oxide fuel cells,” Solid State Ionics, vol. 235, pp. 36–41, 2013.
[27] B. Liang, T. Tao, S. Zhang, Y. Huang, Z. Cai, and S. Lu, “Asymmetric diffusion of zr, sc and
ce, gd at the interface between zirconia electrolyte and ceria interlayer for solid oxide fuel cells,”
Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 679, pp. 191–195, 2016.
[28] R. Mistler and E. Twiname, Tape Casting: Theory and Practice. Wiley, 2000.
[29] D. Stolten and B. Emonts, Fuel Cell Science and Engineering, 2 Volume Set: Materials, Pro-
cesses, Systems and Technology, vol. 1. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[30] G. Instruments, “Basics of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy,” G. Instruments, Complex
impedance in Corrosion, pp. 1–30, 2007.
[31] M. Orazem and B. Tribollet, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy. The ECS Series of Texts
and Monographs, Wiley, 2008.
[32] A. Lasia, Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and its applications. Springer, 2002.
[33] S. H. Jensen, A. Hauch, P. V. Hendriksen, M. Mogensen, N. Bonanos, and T. Jacobsen, “A
method to separate process contributions in impedance spectra by variation of test conditions,”
Journal of the Electrochemical Society, vol. 154, no. 12, p. B1325, 2007.
[34] E. Twiname and R. Mistler, “Tape casting and lamination,” in Encyclopedia of Materials:
Science and Technology (K. J. Buschow, R. W. Cahn, M. C. Flemings, B. Ilschner, E. J.
Kramer, S. Mahajan, and P. Veyssi`ere, eds.), pp. 9083–9088, Oxford: Elsevier, 2001.
[35] Z. Shen, X. Zhu, S. Le, W. Sun, and K. Sun, “Co-sintering anode and y2o3 stabilized zro2 thin
electrolyte film for solid oxide fuel cell fabricated by co-tape casting,” International journal of
hydrogen energy, vol. 37, no. 13, pp. 10337–10345, 2012.
Page 120 of 165
==PAGE:124==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
[36] M. Cologna, V. M. Sglavo, and M. Bertoldi, “Sintering and deformation of solid oxide fuel cells
produced by sequential tape casting,” International Journal of Applied Ceramic Technology,
vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 803–813, 2010.
[37] C. M. Priest, J. Gomez, N. J. Kane, J. L. Hartvigsen, L. Wang, D. Ding, M. J. Casteel,
and G. Wu, “Challenges in practical button cell testing for hydrogen production from high
temperature electrolysis of water,” Frontiers in Energy Research, vol. 11, p. 1278203, 2023.
[38] Y. Guo, Y. Zhou, D. Chen, H. Shi, R. Ran, and Z. Shao, “Significant impact of the current
collection material and method on the performance of ba0. 5sr0. 5co0. 8fe0. 2o3- δ electrodes
in solid oxide fuel cells,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 196, no. 13, pp. 5511–5519, 2011.
[39] M. Guillodo, P. Vernoux, and J. Fouletier, “Electrochemical properties of ni–ysz cermet in solid
oxide fuel cells: effect of current collecting,” Solid State Ionics, vol. 127, no. 1-2, pp. 99–107,
2000.
[40] Z. Jiao and N. Shikazono, “Study on the influence of current collector on the sudden deterio-
ration of solid oxide fuel cell anode performance,” Journal of fuel cell science and technology,
vol. 11, no. 2, p. 021010, 2014.
[41] S. Jiang, J. Love, and L. Apateanu, “Effect of contact between electrode and current collector
on the performance of solid oxide fuel cells,” Solid State Ionics, vol. 160, no. 1-2, pp. 15–26,
2003.
[42] S. Jiang, “Issues on development of (la, sr) mno3 cathode for solid oxide fuel cells,” Journal of
Power Sources, vol. 124, no. 2, pp. 390–402, 2003.
[43] E. Lomonova, D. Agarkov, M. Borik, G. Eliseeva, A. Kulebyakin, I. Kuritsyna, F. Milovich,
V. Myzina, V. Osiko, A. Chislov, et al., “Zro 2–sc 2 o 3 solid electrolytes doped with yb 2 o 3
or y 2 o 3,” Russian Journal of Electrochemistry, vol. 56, pp. 118–123, 2020.
[44] https://www.onlinemetals.com/en/melting-points, [Accessed: 12 Dec 2023].
[45] S. Bishop, K. Duncan, and E. Wachsman, “Surface and bulk oxygen non-stoichiometry and
bulk chemical expansion in gadolinium-doped cerium oxide,” Acta Materialia, vol. 57, no. 12,
pp. 3596–3605, 2009.
[46] A. Hagen, A. K. Padinjarethil, and J. Heijne, “Experimental deconvolution of resistance contri-
butions in commercial solid oxide cells with ni-cgo electrode,” Electrochimica Acta, p. 142672,
2023.
[47] M. Riegraf, V. Yurkiv, R. Costa, G. Schiller, and K. A. Friedrich, “Evaluation of the effect of
sulfur on the performance of nickel/gadolinium-doped ceria based solid oxide fuel cell anodes,”
ChemSusChem, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 587–599, 2017.
[48] A. K. Padinjarethil, F. R. Bianchi, B. Bosio, and A. Hagen, “Electrochemical characterization
and modelling of anode and electrolyte supported solid oxide fuel cells,” Frontiers in Energy
Research, vol. 9, p. 668964, 2021.
[49] B. Iwanschitz, J. Sfeir, A. Mai, and M. Sch¨utze, “Degradation of sofc anodes upon redox cycling:
a comparison between ni/ysz and ni/cgo,” Journal of the Electrochemical Society, vol. 157, no. 2,
p. B269, 2009.
[50] M. Riegraf, S. Dierickx, A. Weber, R. Costa, G. Schiller, and K. A. Friedrich, “Electrochemical
impedance analysis of ni/cgo10-based electrolyte-supported cells,” ECS Transactions, vol. 91,
no. 1, p. 1985, 2019.
Page 121 of 165
==PAGE:125==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
[51] A. Babaei, J. Li, et al., “Electrocatalytic promotion of palladium nanoparticles on hydrogen ox-
idation on ni/gdc anodes of sofcs via spillover,” Journal of the Electrochemical Society, vol. 156,
no. 9, p. B1022, 2009.
[52] A. Nenning, C. Bischof, J. Fleig, M. Bram, and A. K. Opitz, “The relation of microstructure,
materials properties and impedance of sofc electrodes: a case study of ni/gdc anodes,” Energies,
vol. 13, no. 4, p. 987, 2020.
[53] S. Primdahl and M. Mogensen, “Gas conversion impedance: a test geometry effect in charac-
terization of solid oxide fuel cell anodes,” Journal of the electrochemical Society, vol. 145, no. 7,
p. 2431, 1998.
[54] C. Grosselindemann, N. Russner, S. Dierickx, F. Wankm¨uller, and A. Weber, “Deconvolution
of gas diffusion polarization in ni/gadolinium-doped ceria fuel electrodes,” Journal of The Elec-
trochemical Society, vol. 168, no. 12, p. 124506, 2021.
[55] P. Kim, D. Brett, and N. Brandon, “The effect of water content on the electrochemical
impedance response and microstructure of ni-cgo anodes for solid oxide fuel cells,” Journal
of Power Sources, vol. 189, no. 2, pp. 1060–1065, 2009.
[56] V. A. Rojek-W¨ockner, A. K. Opitz, M. Brandner, J. Math´e, and M. Bram, “A novel ni/ceria-
based anode for metal-supported solid oxide fuel cells,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 328,
pp. 65–74, 2016.
[57] M. Athanasiou, D. K. Niakolas, S. Bebelis, and S. G. Neophytides, “Steam effect on gerischer
impedance response of a ni/gdc— ysz— lsm fuel cell/anode,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 448,
p. 227404, 2020.
[58] S. Primdahl and M. Mogensen, “Mixed conductor anodes: Ni as electrocatalyst for hydrogen
conversion,” Solid State Ionics, vol. 152, pp. 597–608, 2002.
[59] A. K. Soman, P. Kuppusami, and A. M. Rabel, “Electrical conductivity of nio-gadolinia doped
ceria anode material for intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells,” Nano hybrids and
composites, vol. 17, pp. 224–236, 2017.
[60] R. Hartung and H. H.-H. M¨obius,
“Potentiometrische bestimmung des wasserdampf-
dissoziationsgleichgewichtes zwischen 1000 und 1300° k mit einer festelektrolytzelle,” Chemie
Ingenieur Technik, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 592–600, 1968.
[61] M. Klitkou, A. Lopez de Moragas, J. Taubmann, S. Pirou, P. Khajavi, P. V. Hendriksen, and
H. L. Frandsen, “Investigating viability of low temperature co-sintering to produce fuel electrode
supported solid oxide electrolysis cells with a ni-gdc active layer,” Unpublished, 2024.
[62] C. Lenser, H. Jeong, Y. J. Sohn, N. Russner, O. Guillon, and N. H. Menzler, “Interaction of a
ceria-based anode functional layer with a stabilized zirconia electrolyte: Considerations from a
materials perspective,” Journal of the American Ceramic Society, vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 739–748,
2018.
[63] A. Schwiers, C. Lenser, O. Guillon, and N. H. Menzler, “Interdiffusion at electrochemical in-
terfaces between yttria-stabilized zirconia and doped ceria,” Journal of the European Ceramic
Society, vol. 43, no. 14, pp. 6189–6199, 2023.
[64] M. Kuhn, S. Bishop, J. Rupp, and H. Tuller, “Structural characterization and oxygen nonsto-
ichiometry of ceria-zirconia (ce1- xzrxo2- δ) solid solutions,” Acta Materialia, vol. 61, no. 11,
pp. 4277–4288, 2013.
Page 122 of 165
==PAGE:126==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
[65] S. Bishop, D. Marrocchelli, W. Fang, K. Amezawa, K. Yashiro, and G. Watson, “Reducing
the chemical expansion coefficient in ceria by addition of zirconia,” Energy & Environmental
Science, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1142–1146, 2013.
[66] L. Jadhav, S. Pawar, and M. Chourashiya, “Effect of sintering temperature on structural and
electrical properties of gadolinium doped ceria (ce 0· 9 gd 0· 1 o 1· 95),” Bulletin of Materials
Science, vol. 30, pp. 97–100, 2007.
[67] S. Omar, E. D. Wachsman, and J. C. Nino, “A co-doping approach towards enhanced ionic
conductivity in fluorite-based electrolytes,” Solid State Ionics, vol. 177, no. 35-36, pp. 3199–
3203, 2006.
[68] X. Zhang, M. Robertson, C. Dec`es-Petit, Y. Xie, R. Hui, W. Qu, O. Kesler, R. Maric, and
D. Ghosh, “Solid oxide fuel cells with bi-layered electrolyte structure,” Journal of Power
Sources, vol. 175, no. 2, pp. 800–805, 2008.
[69] A. Mehranjani, D. Cumming, D. Sinclair, and R. Rothman, “Low-temperature co-sintering for
fabrication of zirconia/ceria bi-layer electrolyte via tape casting using a fe2o3 sintering aid,”
Journal of the European Ceramic Society, vol. 37, no. 13, pp. 3981–3993, 2017.
[70] A. Tsoga, A. Gupta, A. Naoumidis, and P. Nikolopoulos, “Gadolinia-doped ceria and yttria
stabilized zirconia interfaces: regarding their application for sofc technology,” Acta Materialia,
vol. 48, no. 18-19, pp. 4709–4714, 2000.
[71] A. Mart´ınez-Amesti, A. Larra˜naga, L. M. Rodr´ıguez-Mart´ınez, M. L. N´o, J. L. Pizarro, A. Lares-
goiti, and M. I. Arriortua, “Chemical compatibility between ysz and sdc sintered at different
atmospheres for sofc applications,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 192, no. 1, pp. 151–157, 2009.
[72] E. Dro˙zd˙z, J. Wyrwa, K. Schneider, and M. Rekas, “Electrical properties of silica-doped 3 mol%
yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia,” Journal of Materials Science, vol. 52, pp. 674–685, 2017.
[73] K. R. Reddy and K. Karan, “Sinterability, mechanical, microstructural, and electrical properties
of gadolinium-doped ceria electrolyte for low-temperature solid oxide fuel cells,” Journal of
Electroceramics, vol. 15, pp. 45–56, 2005.
[74] K. Anjaneya, G. Nayaka, J. Manjanna, G. Govindaraj, and K. Ganesha, “Preparation and
characterization of ce1- xgdxo2- δ (x= 0.1–0.3) as solid electrolyte for intermediate temperature
sofc,” Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 578, pp. 53–59, 2013.
[75] M. Lankin, Y. Du, and C. Finnerty, “A review of the implications of silica in solid oxide fuel
cells,” 2011.
[76] A. Hauch, K. Brodersen, M. Chen, C. Graves, S. H. Jensen, P. S. Jørgensen, P. V. Hendriksen,
M. B. Mogensen, S. Ovtar, and X. Sun, “A decade of solid oxide electrolysis improvements at
dtu energy,” ECS Transactions, vol. 75, no. 42, p. 3, 2017.
[77] A. L. de Moragas, C.-Y. Tsai, A. Hauch, and M. Chen, “Analysis of the long-term operation
of an electrolyte-supported solid oxide cell under co-electrolysis regime,” ECS Transactions,
vol. 111, no. 6, p. 1431, 2023.
[78] G. Zhang, G. Zheng, Z. Huang, X. Bao, C. Shi, X. Yang, J. Zhou, T. Chen, and S. Wang,
“The effect of fe2o3 sintering aid on gd0.1ce0.9o1.95 diffusion barrier layer and solid oxide fuel
cell performance,” International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 48, no. 57, pp. 21908–21919,
2023.
[79] M. B. Rosendal, “Quantitative charcaterization of solid oxide cells by image analysis of scanning
Page 123 of 165
==PAGE:127==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
electron microscopy micrographs,” Bachelor Thesis, 2019.
[80] G. J. Nelson, “Solid oxide cell constriction resistance effects,” May 2006.
[81] K. Thyd´en, Y.-L. Liu, and J. Bilde-Sørensen, “Microstructural characterization of sofc ni–ysz
anode composites by low-voltage scanning electron microscopy,” Solid State Ionics, vol. 178,
no. 39-40, pp. 1984–1989, 2008.
[82] K. V. Manukyan, A. G. Avetisyan, C. E. Shuck, H. A. Chatilyan, S. Rouvimov, S. L. Kharatyan,
and A. S. Mukasyan, “Nickel oxide reduction by hydrogen: kinetics and structural transforma-
tions,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 119, no. 28, pp. 16131–16138, 2015.
[83] X. Zhu, C. Guan, Z. L¨u, and W. Su, “Effects of initial reduction temperature on the mi-
crostructures and performances of ni/ysz anodes for solid oxide fuel cells,” Journal of The
Electrochemical Society, vol. 160, no. 10, p. F1170, 2013.
[84] H. Monz´on and M. A. Laguna-Bercero, “The influence of reduction conditions on a ni-ysz sofc
anode microstructure and evolution,” ECS Transactions, vol. 68, no. 1, p. 1229, 2015.
[85] M. Andrzejczuk, O. Vasylyev, I. Brodnikovskyi, V. Podhurska, B. Vasyliv, O. Ostash,
M. Lewandowska, and K. Kurzyd lowski, “Microstructural changes in nio–scsz composite fol-
lowing reduction processes in pure and diluted hydrogen,” Materials characterization, vol. 87,
pp. 159–165, 2014.
[86] L. Holzer, B. Iwanschitz, T. Hocker, B. M¨unch, M. Prestat, D. Wiedenmann, U. Vogt, P. Holtap-
pels, J. Sfeir, A. Mai, et al., “Microstructure degradation of cermet anodes for solid oxide fuel
cells: Quantification of nickel grain growth in dry and in humid atmospheres,” Journal of Power
Sources, vol. 196, no. 3, pp. 1279–1294, 2011.
[87] I. Bahaj, M. Kaddami, M. Essahli, et al., “Elaboration of the al-al 3 ni alloy eutectic by a
carbothermal process,” The Scientific World Journal, vol. 2022, 2022.
[88] A. K. Padinjarethil, Identification of acceleration parameters for SOC degradation: Data-driven
and Experimental Approaches. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2022.
Page 124 of 165
==PAGE:128==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
5
Appendix
5.1
Appendix A: Ohmic Resistance Of The Testing Electrical Fixtures
RS,rig [Ω]
Channel
Measurement
800°C
750°C
700°C
0
1
0.0573
0.0546
0.0522
2
0.0571
0.0545
0.0520
Average
0.0572
0.0546
0.0521
1
1
0.0476
0.0447
0.0428
2
0.0472
0.0449
0.0430
Average
0.0474
0.0448
0.0429
2
1
0.0460
0.0451
0.0432
2
0.0465
0.0452
0.0433
Average
0.0463
0.0452
0.0433
3
1
0.0371
0.0350
0.0335
2
0.0370
0.0351
0.0335
Average
0.0371
0.0350
0.0335
Table 28: Ohmic resistance (RS,rig) contributions of the Pt mesh and wiring of the test set-up
obtained from short-circuit measurements with a Ni plate on the different channels of the rig, esti-
mated from the lowest frequency real value of the spectra collected at the three nominal temperatures
(800,750,700°C) at which the cells’ fingerprint were taken. The average values at each temperature
are based on two measurements. The sample holders positions were reversed compared to the mea-
suring channels.
5.2
Appendix B: Gas Conversion
Figure 90: CSTR model [53]
A zero-dimensional continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) model depicted in Figure 90 was
adopted by Primdahl et al. [53] to find an expression for the gas conversion contribution. The derived
impedance is given by the parallel connection of the following resistance, Rgas, and capacitance, Cgas:
Rgas = 1
J
RT
4F 2
 1
xH2
+
1
xH2O

(5.1)
Cgas = V
A
4F 2p
R2T 2
 1
xH2
+
1
xH2O
−1
(5.2)
where A is the electrode area, V is the volume over the anode, J [mol/m2s] is the incoming area-
specific gas flow rate, xi,H2O and xi,H2 are the inlet mole fractions of the gases, T is the temperature,
Page 125 of 165
==PAGE:129==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
F=96485 C/mol is Faraday’s constant and P is the total pressure.
The model implicitly assumes perfect mixing of gases due to high diffusion rates and changes in
compositions in the volume that are small compared to the inlet gas composition (∆xH2O << xi,H2O,
∆xH2 << xi,H2) so to linearize the nernstian concentration overpotential expression by Taylor
expansion, and is only valid at open circuit conditions.
5.3
Appendix C: EIS Data & Fitting
5.3.1
Current Collection
5.3.1.1
Pt Samples
Figure 91: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with Pt as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 126 of 165
==PAGE:130==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 92: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with Pt as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 127 of 165
==PAGE:131==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 93: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with Pt as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 128 of 165
==PAGE:132==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 94: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with Pt as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 129 of 165
==PAGE:133==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 95: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with Pt as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 130 of 165
==PAGE:134==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 96: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with Pt as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 131 of 165
==PAGE:135==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 97: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with Pt as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 132 of 165
==PAGE:136==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 98: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with Pt as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 133 of 165
==PAGE:137==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 99: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 4% H2O/H2 of semi-
symmetric Type II samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with Pt
as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
T [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
L[H]
7.1E-09
4.8E-09
2.1E-09
4.2E-09
2.1E-09
2.1E-12
8.3E-12
1.3E-13
4.2E-15
R0[Ωcm2]
3.9E-09
6.7E-10
1.2E-10
1.4E-09
9.7E-10
3.2E-16
3.2E-16
3.2E-16
3.2E-16
-RQHF −
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.46
0.47
0.61
1.0
1.1
1.4
1.1
1.1
1.4
nHF [Ωcm2]
0.61
0.66
0.58
0.62
0.69
0.52
0.65
0.71
0.52
fsummit,HF [Hz]
13
29
33
5.9
11
10
5.6
11
9.6
-RQLF −
RLF [Ωcm2]
0.86
1.2
1.5
2.0
2.0
7
1.7
2.3
5.9
nLF [Ωcm2]
0.80
0.71
0.73
0.76
0.81
0.59
0.86
0.75
0.62
fsummit,LF [Hz]
0.51
0.15
0.090
0.23
0.12
0.0037
0.25
0.097
0.0055
Table 29: Parameters of the ECM fitting of the average of spectra at OCV at fingerprint conditions
of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol
I at 850°C, with Pt as contact paste.
Page 134 of 165
==PAGE:138==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
5.3.1.2
NiO(663) Samples
Figure 100: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 135 of 165
==PAGE:139==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 101: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 136 of 165
==PAGE:140==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 102: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 137 of 165
==PAGE:141==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 103: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 138 of 165
==PAGE:142==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 104: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 139 of 165
==PAGE:143==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 105: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 140 of 165
==PAGE:144==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 106: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 141 of 165
==PAGE:145==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 107: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 142 of 165
==PAGE:146==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 108: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with
NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
T [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
L[H]
2.6E-13
6.5E-14
2.5E-11
6.9E-17
6.9E-17
1.1E-16
2.0E-16
2.0E-16
2.0E-16
R0[Ωcm2]
3.2E-16
3.2E-16
1.6E-07
4.2E-07
8.5E-07
1.0E-16
1.0E-16
1.0E-16
7.0E-02
-RQHF −
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.67
0.91
1.2
2.1
2.8
2.3
4.8
4.9
4.0
nHF [Ωcm2]
0.65
0.49
0.43
0.57
0.56
0.48
0.52
0.50
0.54
fsummit,HF [Hz]
12
9.9
11
3.6
3.8
5.0
0.90
1.3
4.1
-RQLF −
RLF [Ωcm2]
2.4
5.7
5.4
5.8
8.4
6.0
12
14
13
nLF [Ωcm2]
0.88
0.83
0.80
1.0
1.0
0.90
1.0
1.0
0.92
fsummit,LF [Hz]
0.1
0.017
0.016
0.055
0.029
0.018
0.034
0.021
0.013
Table 30: Parameters of the ECM fitting of the average of spectra at OCV at fingerprint conditions
of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 663 plates and reduced with protocol
I at 850°C, with NiO as contact paste.
Page 143 of 165
==PAGE:147==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
5.3.1.3
835 Setter Plates
Figure 109: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 144 of 165
==PAGE:148==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 110: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 145 of 165
==PAGE:149==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 111: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 146 of 165
==PAGE:150==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 112: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 147 of 165
==PAGE:151==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 113: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 148 of 165
==PAGE:152==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 114: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 149 of 165
==PAGE:153==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 115: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 150 of 165
==PAGE:154==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 116: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at
850°C, with NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding
residuals.
Page 151 of 165
==PAGE:155==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 117: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
semi-symmetric Type II samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol I at 850°C, with
NiO as contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Nominal temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
L[H]
1.2E-08
6.9E-08
2.7E-08
4.0E-10
5.0E-11
1.3E-08
4.0E-10
1.2E-10
7.9E-10
R0[Ωcm2]
5.8E-05
4.2E-07
4.2E-07
1.3E-06
3.6E-06
2.1E-07
1.3E-06
6.3E-07
4.6E-07
-RQHF −
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.57
0.70
0.61
1.2
2.6
1.3
2.4
2.2
2.6
nHF [Ωcm2]
0.70
0.40
0.50
0.70
0.60
0.54
0.70
0.67
0.58
fsummit,HF [Hz]
10
37
17
4.1
5.0
7.0
2.0
2.7
3.5
-RQLF −
RLF [Ωcm2]
0.90
1.7
5.8
2.0
7.9
8.4
4.3
8.2
9.2
nLF [Ωcm2]
0.99
0.72
0.76
1.0
1.0
0.83
1.0
1.0
0.96
fsummit,LF [Hz]
0.28
0.080
0.014
0.17
0.034
0.010
0.10
0.040
0.017
Table 31: Parameters of the ECM fitting of the average of spectra at OCV at fingerprint conditions
of semi-symmetric Type II rectangular samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol
I at 850°C, with NiO as contact paste.
Page 152 of 165
==PAGE:156==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
5.3.2
Effect of Different Reduction Protocols
5.3.2.1
Protocol III-880
Figure 118: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Page 153 of 165
==PAGE:157==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 119: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Page 154 of 165
==PAGE:158==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 120: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 800°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Page 155 of 165
==PAGE:159==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 121: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Page 156 of 165
==PAGE:160==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 122: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Page 157 of 165
==PAGE:161==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 123: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 750°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Page 158 of 165
==PAGE:162==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 124: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 50% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Page 159 of 165
==PAGE:163==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 125: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 20% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Page 160 of 165
==PAGE:164==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 126: Nyquist and Bode plots of the average OCV EIS data at 700°C and 4% H2O/H2 of
symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste. Included are the results of the ECM fitting and the corresponding residuals.
Nominal temperature [°C]
800°C
750°C
700°C
%H2O/H2
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
50%
20%
4%
L[H]
9.0E-17
2.8E-16
1.6E-16
6.1E-16
6.1E-16
1.2E-15
6.1E-16
6.1E-16
6.1E-16
R0[Ωcm2]
1.2E-06
5.8E-07
2.5E-03
1.2E-03
4.2E-07
2.9E-07
4.2E-07
4.2E-07
4.2E-07
-RQHF −
RHF [Ωcm2]
0.40
0.68
1.1
1.2
1.5
2.1
3.4
3.4
3.7
nHF [Ωcm2]
0.68
0.65
0.58
0.66
0.62
0.55
0.62
0.59
0.55
fsummit,HF [Hz]
14
15
15
4.9
6.2
6.2
1.0
1.5
3.0
-RQLF −
RLF [Ωcm2]
0.77
0.86
1.1
1.7
1.8
2.0
3.2
3.5
4.5
nLF [Ωcm2]
0.70
0.80
0.90
0.87
0.87
0.90
0.98
0.98
0.94
fsummit,LF [Hz]
0.96
0.50
0.35
0.35
0.22
0.13
0.15
0.097
0.050
Table 32: Parameters of the ECM fitting of the average of spectra at OCV at fingerprint conditions
of symmetric samples sintered with 835 plates and reduced with protocol III at 880°C, with NiO as
contact paste.
Page 161 of 165
==PAGE:165==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
5.3.3
Effect of Different Reduction Protocols
Figure 127: Nyquist (top) and Bode (bottom) plots of EIS raw data of semi-symmetric Type II
rectangular samples and symmetric samples, both sintered with 835 setter plates and reduced with
protocol II-880, collected at OCV at three different temperatures (800°C, 750°C, 700°C), for a fuel
composition of 50%H2O/H2, supplied at a rate of 6 l/h and NiO as contact paste. EIS data of
samples are numbered based on the sample holder position in the rig.
Page 162 of 165
==PAGE:166==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
5.4
Appendix D: Data from Literature
Figure 128: Nyquist plot of a Ni-CGO10/ScYSZ/LSC-CGO/LSC fuel electrode-supported cell re-
duced using protocol I from[?].
5.4.1
Stability Ellingham diagram of NiO/Ni.
Figure 129: Stability Ellingham diagram of the oxides for the couples NiO/Ni, CO2/CO, CO2/C,
CO/C, and Al2O3/Al. [87]
Page 163 of 165
==PAGE:167==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
Figure 130: EIS spectra recorded for symmetric Ni-CGO/CGO/YSZ/CGO/Ni-CGO cells tested
under different temperatures at the 80/20 H2/H2O composition [88].
Figure 131: Comparison of impedance spectra of 7.5 µm thick Ni/GDC electrodes with (A) and
without (B) a 150 nm dense GDC10 buffer layer between them and YSZ electrolyte, measured in
275 mbar H2/25 mbar H2O at 750°C [52].
Page 164 of 165
==PAGE:168==
A symmetric cell architecture for fuel electrode characterization
5.5
Appendix E: Technical Specifications
Setter Plate
663
835
Composition
Mullite 80 AlOx/20 SiOx
Zr/Ca 4mol%
Density [g/m3]
2.4
3.3
Porosity [%]
29
43
Bending Strength [MPa]
>25
>22
Spall Resist [°C]
500
350
Hot Creep Test [mm] Def @ °C
1400
1
1
1500
1
5
1550
3
11
Thermal Exp. Coeff. [ppm/°C]
@300
4
8
@900
5
8
Features
Can be zirconia coated
High Porosity
Table 33: Technical specification of the Repton setter plates from Merketech International, Inc.
5.6
Appendix F: Kr¨oger-Vink notation
In general, in the Kr¨oger-Vink notation M C
S indicates the M species that occupies the S lattice site
with a charge C relative to the normal host lattice. The symbols used are summarized in the table
below:
M
Ion
Element Symbol
Vacant site
V
S
Ion
Element Symbol
C
Relative positive charge
.
Relative negative charge
’
Relative neutral charge
X
Table 34: Symbols used in the Kr¨oger-Vink notation.
Page 165 of 165
