==PAGE:1==
How damage occurs in steel
A closer look
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
How damage occurs in steel
A closer look
Master Thesis
April 28, 2024
By
Sebastiaan van Putten
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Sebastiaan van Putten, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Materials and Durability,
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering and Section for Structural En­
gineering and Structural Mechanics, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, This thesis has run from October 2023 until
April 2024, with a credit count of 32.5 ECTS, and has been completed solely by the author
in partial fulfilment for a Master of Science in Wind Energy, .
Sebastiaan van Putten ­ s213893
Signature
Date
ii
How damage occurs in steel
             28 - 04 - 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Steel is one of the most common construction materials worldwide, but also contributes
heavily to greenhouse gas emissions. Reducing the demand for steel by making struc­
tures last longer safely is imperative. This master thesis evaluates damage propagation
in S355J2+ grade steel before, at, and beyond macro­crack initiation in order to evaluate
the impact of damage on material and fatigue properties. Large coupons are damaged
using a control program to ensure repeatable results. An extended control program is set
up in order to automate testing and to introduce an increased damage level into speci­
mens. Small coupons are cut from large coupons, and are tested in uniaxial tension and
in HCF tests. These results show that calculated damage increases are minor before
macro­crack initiation. In practice the remaining fatigue life is much lower than predicted.
Models currently used such as Palmgren­Miner and Lemaitre do not fully describe the
way damage propagates in S355 steel. Results from D1 and D2, damage just before and
after fracture transition, indicate 89.4% and 60.8% less fatigue performance as expected
by Palmgren­Miner. It can be concluded that no current model fully describes the contin­
uation of damage development after an initial ductile damage application. Further model
development is recommended, with potential applications for GTN models.
Acknowledgements
Alexander Michel, [Lecturer], [Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering]
[Thesis Supervisor]
[Weijian Wu], [Postdoc], [Section for Structural Engineering and Structural Mechanics]
[Thesis Supervisor]
How damage occurs in steel
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials (organisation)
EDM
Electrical Discharge Machining (production method)
EUL
Extension Under Loading (test method)
GTN
Gurson­Tvergaard­Needleman (model)
HCF
High Cycle Fatigue (test method)
ISO
International Standards Organisation (organisation)
LCF
Low Cycle Fatigue (test method)
MPE
Multi­Purpose Elite (software)
MTS
MTS Systems (company)
NTSB
National Bureau of Transport Safety (organisation)
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope (machine)
XCT
X­ray Computed Tomography (test method)
Variables
ν
Poisson ratio [­]
Φ
Yield Function
σ
Normal Stress [MPa]
σt
True stress [MPa]
σeng
Engineering stress [MPa]
τ
Shear Stress [MPa]
ε
Strain [mm/mm]
εel
Elastic strain [mm/mm]
εeng
Engineering strain [mm/mm]
εpl
Plastic strain [mm/mm]
⃗σ
Cauchy Stress Tensor [MPa]
⃗n
Cauchy stress normal vector [­]
A
Cross­sectional area [m2]
a
Crack Length [m]
D
Damage
E
Youngs Modulus [GPa]
f
Fraction [­]
iv
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:7==
Fmeas
Measured Force [N]
K
Stress intensity factor
K′
Cyclic Strength coefficient [Pa]
L
Length [m]
N
Number of Cycles [­]
n′
Cyclic Strain hardening exponent [­]
Nf
Number of Cycles until fracture [­]
ni
Cycle count in current test [­]
p
Accumulated plastic strain [­]
qi
GTN coefficients
V
Volume [m3]
y
Damage Strain Energy Release Rate [­]
How damage occurs in steel
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Literature
3
2.1
Determining Material Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Fatigue and Crack Growth Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Damage Determination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Specimen Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Thesis Scope
13
4
Methodology
15
4.1
Standard testing methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Specimen types and geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Testing equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Sensors and Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.5
Large Specimen Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.6
Small Specimen Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.7
Test Programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.8
Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Results
33
5.1
Extended Control Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
L1 Specimen Test Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
S1 Material Property Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Discussion
43
6.1
L1 tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
S1 Monotonic Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.3
S1 High Cycle Fatigue tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.4
Control Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.5
Results in an industry context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Conclusion
49
8
Recommendations
51
Bibliography
53
A Additional Figures
57
B Specimen Images
59
vi
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
As the global population grows, so does the demand for steel. The International Energy
Agency states that steel is the most carbon intensive heavy industry, and its carbon emis­
sions are set to rise 7% up to 2050 [1]. To reduce these emissions, new processes are
being implemented, but a part must come from reducing our need for steel. By developing
methods to make current structures last longer, the demand for steel can be reduced.
Damage in steel is defined as a change in the micro­structure of metal following a large
deformation, leading to a material that is perceived to be weaker in the macro­scale. If
no predictions can accurately made on a structure’s fatigue­life, a structure mail either fail
prematurely, or be replaced before it needs to be. If damage due to an external force or
repeated loading can be accurately assessed, a structure may either be used for a longer
time frame, or the structure may be replaced prematurely for increased safety. This thesis
will focus on evaluating the impact damage has on the remaining high cycle fatigue life in
steel structures.
There are a number of relevant applications which this research could potentially impact.
Steel dampers are used in earthquake­prone regions in building foundations per Konishi
et. al. [2]. If it is known what the lifespan is of these dampers after a large earthquake,
optimisations can be proposed to the design to either use less material, or to increase
structure safety.
Another example to consider are offshore wind farms. These are increasing in number
and size. Large quantities of structural steel are required to produce monopiles upon
which the wind turbines rest. Damage can occur in these due to many factors, including
unanticipated wave loads, manufacturing defects, or a mistake during transport. Extend­
ing the lifespan of damaged monopiles can reduce the need to produce new one, and can
increase cost effectiveness of a wind farm.
The thesis starts with an introduction to concepts and literature in chapter 2, that can
contribute towards determining damage levels in steel. This will be followed by the thesis
scope in chapter 3, which sets out the goal of the research, the questions that will be
answered, and the limitations set. The methodology in chapter 4 will introduce how tests
will be set up to create and quantify damage. This section will also discuss which tools can
be used for these purposes. The results in chapter 5 will present the results from the tests
set up in the methodology, and will illustrate the differences between materials of different
damage levels. The discussion in chapter 6 will discuss any remarkable results obtained.
The conclusion and recommendation in chapter 7 and 8 respectively will provide a closing
argument to the results of this research, and recommendations for how testing could be
continued or improved.
How damage occurs in steel
1
==PAGE:10==
2
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and Literature
This section will consider what material properties and relationships can affect a testing
programme. An evaluation will be made of methods to determine material properties,
methods for fatigue analysis, damage development, and control of specimens.
2.1
Determining Material Properties
In a most simple sense, the engineering stress in a tension loaded test­piece can be de­
scribed by dividing the measured force by the initial cross sectional area, or as in Equa­
tion 2.1. True stress can be estimated from this through a scaling law based on strain, as
can be seen in Equation 2.2 [3]. Additionally, it can be calculated using the Cauchy stress
tensor, which can be found in Equation 2.3. This allows for calculating exact loads on ex­
act parts of the specimen. In practice, not every part of the specimen can be monitored,
so for uni­axial loading Equation 2.1 and 2.2 are sufficient.
σeng = F
Ai
(2.1)
σt = σeng · (1 + εeng)
(2.2)
⃗S = ⃗σ⃗n
⃗σ =


σxx
τxy
τxz
τyx
σyy
τyz
τzx
τzy
σzz


⃗n =


n1
n2
n3


(2.3)
The Young’s Modulus, also called the Modulus of Elasticity, is a measure for the elastic
performance of the material. At some point, metallic materials will transition from elastic
to plastic deformation. The accompanying stress is called the Yield Stress. During plastic
deformation, the load the material can withstand increases up to the Ultimate Tensile
Stress, also known as Tensile Strength.
Strain can be defined in two ways, engineering and true strain. Engineering strain as­
sumes the cross­sectional area of the specimen remains identical, while true strain ac­
counts for the change in cross­section. Engineering strain can be measured by sensors
such strain and clip gauges, or by relating the distance a specimen has extended by. In
both cases, Equation 2.4 is used to determine the strain. The gauge length Lg depends
on the sensor and/or the specimen used.
ε = δrel
Lg
(2.4)
Motra et. al. [4] show that strain measurement devices such as strain and clip gauges
can both give accurate results on the material properties up to and beyond yield, while
calculating using the displacement does not give as accurate an insight into material prop­
erties.
True strain can be estimated by Digital Image Correlation (DIC) or by a correlation with
the true stress [3]. For this, total strain can be split up into an elastic and plastic portion,
How damage occurs in steel
3
==PAGE:12==
as in Equation 2.5. In uni­axial loading, elastic strain can be determined from the Young’s
modulus and the stress, as can be seen in Equation 2.6.
ε = εel + εpl
(2.5)
εel = σ
E
(2.6)
The strain is expected to be similar in the elastic region regardless if engineering or true
stress is used, as the change in cross­section will be only due to the Poisson Ratio ν. Li
et. al. [3] show that the data for true and engineering strain is very similar in the elastic re­
gion for a uni­axially loaded specimen. Plastic engineering strain can be calculated using
Equation 2.4, with δrel being the difference in deformation since yield and Lg being the free
length of the specimen. True plastic strain can be calculated according to Equation 2.7
for uni­axial loading [3].
εpl,t = ln(1 + εpl,eng) + σt · E
(2.7)
S355 steel is a common structural steel used in applications such as wind turbines, with
good availability, and reasonable price [5]. Material properties of S355 steel are described
by standard EN 10025­2:2019 [6] [7].A table of relevant material property requirements
can be seen in Table 2.1 for material 15 mm thick. It is important to validate during tests
that material performance for Young’s modulus, yield strength and ultimate strength meet
these requirements.
Material
Density
( kg
m3 )
Youngs
Modulus
(GPa)
Poisson
Ratio
(­)
Yield
Strength
(MPa)
Ultimate
Strength
(MPa)
Fracture
Elongation
(%)
S355
7850
210
0.3
355
510
20­22
Table 2.1: Material Properties of S355 steel [6][7]
2.2
Fatigue and Crack Growth Models
Fatigue in metal refers to the phenomenon where repeated loading will cause a material
to fracture at a stress lower than the ultimate tensile stress for a given material. Fatigue
life of a given material gives an insight into what design and maintenance considerations
must be made when designing a structure or component. Various fatigue models exist
and will be discussed in this section. Fatigue loading under varying temperatures is called
creep. For this thesis, creep is not evaluated.
A Wöhler curve, also known as a design or S­N curve, provides a relation between stress
and fatigue life. Klusák and Seitl [8] show how the effect of stress σz on different types of
S355 steel affect fatigue­life N, as can be seen in Figure 2.1. The fatigue life decreases up
until the stress is roughly equal to the yield stress value. The material fails after 107 cycles
at yield stress. Below this stress level the material is tested up to 1010 cycles without failing,
leading to a run­out. Batias at. al. [9] state that material must be tested up until 1010 cycles
to determine if its yield plateau exists. They do not however evaluate S355 steel. Since
data from Klusák and Seitl provides run­out data beyond at 107 cycles, they offer a more
4
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Fatigue relation for different grades of S355 steel, Klusák and Seitl [8]
accurate indication of very high cycle fatigue performance for S355 material. A caveat is
that the mean stress should be evaluated to see if the material is truly undamaged, or if
some properties have changed. The data from this research can serve as a reference to
expected values and fatigue performance. It will also be interesting to compare if there is
a fatigue limit for S355 once it is damaged.
Chang [10] discusses Masing behaviour [11] and the impacts it has on stress­strain hys­
teresis curves. Masing behaviour is relevant in LCF and shows that the reversal point
in a tension­compression fatigue test should be of equal magnitude and opposite sign.
This means that at an equal positive and negative strain, the force and displacement val­
ues should be equal and opposite, provided the test starts with all parameters zeroed.
This relation holds only for stable hysteresis loops. Stabilised hysteresis loops can be de­
scribed using the Ramberg­Osgood relation in Equation 2.8, also described by Röscher
and Knobloch[12][13].
εa = εa,e + εa,p = σa
E + σa
K′
1
n′
(2.8)
For S355 Steel, the cyclic strain hardening exponent and cyclic stress coefficients are as
described by Chiou and Yip as in Table 2.2[14]. If a LCF test is fully reversed, that is the
positive strain and force values are equal and opposite to the negative values, then the
mean strain value will be 0%.
Mean Strain
Level εm
0.4%
0.2%
0%
­0.1%
K′ [MPa]
587.70
693.08
722.57
745.59
n′ [­]
0.117
0.142
0.151
0.157
Table 2.2: Ramberg­Osgood Parameters for S355 steel as a function of mean strain, from
Chiou and Yip [14]
How damage occurs in steel
5
==PAGE:14==
Over an increasing amount of cycles a stable hysteresis curve will deteriorate due to ma­
terial damage. At a constant strain amplitude, the displacement is expected to increase
with a reduction in force as the cycle count increases. Si et. al. [15] show that for S355
steel the stress, and therefore force as per Equation 2.1, tend to decrease. From Equa­
tion 2.6 and 2.7 it can be seen that a decrease in stress at constant strain must lead
to a reduction in Young’s modulus E. This reduced stiffness will mean that at a similar
engineering stress, the damaged material will elongate further.
During fatigue, cracks develop and propagate. Paris and Erdogan [16] provide a model
relating crack length to material properties and number of load cycles. This creates Equa­
tion 2.9
da
dN = C(∆K)m
(2.9)
With this the crack growth per cycle can be related to the Stress Intensity Factors of the
material. Material constants C and m must be determined experimentally. Seitl et. al. [17]
discover the parameters in Table 2.3 at a temperature 23oC. Furthermore they state ∆K
can be determined from the stress amplitudes, initial crack length, and specimen geometry
[17]. These relations may prove valuable in estimating how cracks may continue to grow
in damaged specimens.
Material
C (mm/cycle)
m (­)
S355 J2
1.0 · 108
2.71
Table 2.3: Crack growth parameters determined by Seitl. et. al [17]
De Jesus et. al. [18] developed some relations for fatigue life of S355 steel using a
standard coupon design similar to the one proposed in the ASTM E606 standard [19]. A
curve is fit with the following relation between strain range and number of cycles to fatigue,
as can be seen in Equation 2.10[18]. They provide separate curves for elastic and plastic
strain as well.
∆ε = 0.0090(Nf)−0.0089 + 1.4742(Nf)−0.664
(2.10)
This equation form fits the Manson­Coffin relation well. This proposes an equation which
correlates the contributions of elastic and plastic strain amplitudes to fatigue life. High cy­
cle fatigue tests will be mainly governed by the elastic portion, while low cycle fatigue tests
will be governed predominantly by the plastic portion. The equation is as in Equation 2.11.
[20][21][13]:
∆ε = ∆εe + ∆εp = σf
E (Nf)b + εf(Nf)c
(2.11)
Other notes to take from De Jesus et. al.’s research are the design of coupons and fatigue
life for certain cycle counts. Their coupon design can withstand a strain range up to ±1%.
Furthermore, results are provided for fatigue tests completed with these specimens. It is
known what the stress and strain ranges are for these specimens, as well as the number
of cycles until fracture. This furthermore provides insight into how long each fatigue test
could take, with ultra­low­cycle tests completing in half an hour [18].
Röscher and Knobloch propose using a two­stage model to determine fatigue [13]. While
their research focuses on butt welds, the topics discussed are also of interest to this
research. Their model assumes a welded specimen with a surface imperfection such as
6
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:15==
a notch. Stage one considers a strain­life approach, where the material in the imperfection
has the same properties as the surrounding material. The fatigue life of stage one is the
life up to the initiation of the crack. Phenomena that belong in this stage include hysteresis
loops described by Ramberg­Osgood [12], Masing behaviour as described in English by
Chang [10][11], and the Manson­Coffin relation [20][21].
Röscher and Knobloch’s second stage approaches the problem from a crack propagation
approach[13]. It is expected that after the first stage, a crack has formed, which will now
extend according to Paris’ law. XFEM software is used to simulate how the crack grows
and jumps across finite elements. Four models of different weld types and plate offsets
are proposed and tested, where the two step approach for each model can be seen in
Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Röscher and Knobloch’s Two­Stage Fatigue model [13]
Chen et al. (2022) [22] suggest using ABAQUS software with an extended finite element
method (XFEM) analysis to allow for a 3D structure to be simulated and analysed for crack
growth. They mention the effects of overload, where having a few cycles with a higher
maximum force can retard crack growth. This is expected to be due to a brief increase
in the size of the plastic region near the crack tip. The results of their simulations predict
well how cracks will propagate from small imperfections.
This section indicates that there is already a large amount of research available on fatigue
and how this propagates. Both physical testing and FEM simulations are considered to
be valuable research methods. Most testing is carried out on undamaged material, or on
material that is tested in fatigue in multiple stages. It is of interest to see how damage
caused by a monotonic load may affect material performance. As FEM models can predict
the propagation of a crack, it would be interesting to conduct physical tests to determine
material properties.
How damage occurs in steel
7
==PAGE:16==
2.3
Damage Determination
Damage occurs under loading beyond yield stress. Initially voids are formed, which grow
to form micro­cracks. At some point the micro­cracks have grown to such a point where
the material can no longer sustain the applied load. This point is the fracture transition
point, where multiple micro­cracks and imperfections connect to form one large crack,
leading to fracture [23]. Damage can occur under tensile or fatigue loading, this distinction
is referred to as ductile and fatigue damage.
Wciślik and Lipiec [23] discuss the origins of void damage. Voids originate from defects
in the material due to imperfections in the crystal structure or surface. These can be
introduced during manufacturing, or during the material’s lifespan as the material structure
undergoes loading and temperature changes. These contribute to local void growth, in the
early stages they can be approximated as being spherical, as confirmed by Tai and Yang
[24] and Bandstra et. al. [25]. Wciślik and Lipiec further state that damage originates in
the centre of the material, moving outward. As voids grow, they merge together to form
longer voids, and eventually cracks. As the damaged zone extends towards the surface
of the metal, the metal becomes weaker. Upon fracture, a cup­cone shape is formed in
round metal specimens [23]. In flat metal, it is expected that this phenomenon will also
occur, the damaged region will form elliptically in the centre of the metal cross­section.
The most uniform damage levels are expected to be in the centre of the material.
A simple model for quantifying damage is proposed by Lemaitre [26]. A resisting area is
proposed, which depends on the initial area and the area taken up by voids, as can be
seen in Equation 2.12. This allows the damage to be calculated as in Equation 2.13 [26].
A′ < A −Ad
(2.12)
D = A −A′
A
(2.13)
With the damage determined, an effective stress can also be determined. This is based
on the Cauchy stress tensor from Equation 2.3, giving Equation 2.14 [26].
⃗σd =
⃗σ
1 −D
(2.14)
Lemaitre also derives values for critical points, where the transition occurs between micro
crack growth and macro crack growth. This will be referred to as the fracture transition
point. Equations for the critical damage strain release rate, critical stress, and critical
damage can be seen in Equation 2.15 [26]. Lemaitre furthermore states that the critical
value of damage lies between 0.2 and 0.8. Beyond macro crack initiation, the material
will therefore still have between 20 and 80% undamaged material.
yc =
σ2
c
2E(1 −Dc)2
⃗σd =
⃗σ
1 −D =
√
2Eyc
Dc = 1 −
σc
√2Eyc
(2.15)
Lemaitre combines this model for damage with the Ramberg­Osgood hardening law to
obtain the following general equation for plastic damage, seen in Equation 2.16 [26]. Here,
K′ and n′ are the Ramberg Osgood parameters, which for S355 are determined by Chiou
8
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:17==
in Table 2.2 for fatigue testing. The ratio σH
σeq is equal to 1
3 for uni­axial loading, as is the
case for this research. Lemaitre states that a perfectly plastic metal will have a relation
of
1
n′ of infinity, meaning n’ goes towards zero at higher plasticity. The material cannot
endure more strain hardening if it has already reached its maximum. During a monotonic
test, the Ramberg­Osgood parameters will therefore change as the plasticity increases.
˙D =
(
K′2
2EA0
(
2
3(1 + ν) + 3(1 −2ν)
(σH
σeq
)
)2)
p2n′
)A0
˙εp
(2.16)
Despite the Ramberg­Osgood parameters not staying constant, Lemaitre defines one final
relation. Here, the change in Young’s modulus and damage can be directly correlated, as
seen in Equation 2.17 [26]. This means that by comparing the elastic slope of damaged
and undamaged specimens, it will be possible to determine the damage level.
D = 1 −Ed
E
(2.17)
Sancho et. al. [27] show that unloading a specimen at increasing strain values can give
an indication of the degraded Young’s modulus. This shows that a physical test must be
carried out to quantify damage in metal.
One common damage model used for quantifying damage in fatigue is the Palmgren­
Miner linear damage model. This is defined as in Equation 2.18 [28][2].
D =
∑ni
Nf,i
(2.18)
Palmgren­Miner states that as long as the damage index is lower than 1, the material
will not fail. If a material with a damage index of 0.5 is tested, it would sustain half the
amount of cycles as undamaged material. Combined with Lemaitre’s model, it is possible
to evaluate if the total damage index of material is equal to 1 at failure.
Current models have focussed on damage as a value from zero to one, with one being
equivalent to fracture. The Gurson Tvergaard Needleman (GTN) model defines a method
to determine the volume fraction of voids in material [29][30][31]. This approach can
combine crack growth with damage models. The fraction of voids in material can be
determined as in Equation 2.19.
fv = Vv
V
(2.19)
Wcislik’s evaluation of the GTN model serves as a basis for this analysis [31]. the GTN
yield function is set up, wherein the progress of yield can be evaluated relative to changes
in material and three q coefficients. This is given in Equation 2.20 for pure tensile stress.
A modified porosity f∗is presented in Equation 2.21, where fc is the void fraction at the
start of void coalescence, the point where voids start to grow. fF is the void fraction at
failure.
Φ =
(σe
σy
)2
+ 2q1f∗cosh 3q2σe
sσy
−1 −q3f∗2 = 0
(2.20)
How damage occurs in steel
9
==PAGE:18==
f∗=





f
for
f ≤fc
fc +
¯
fF −fc
fF −fc (f −fc)
for
fc < f < fF
¯
fF
for
f ≥fF
. .
(2.21)
The values for qi depend on the material used. Faleskog et. al. [32] determine the values
in Table 2.4, which are used by Wcislik for determining the volume fraction of voids.
q1
q2
q3
1.8
0.82
3.24
Table 2.4: qi values determined by Faleskog et. al [32]
Wcislik determines that for S355J2 steel, the volume fraction at failure is equal to 0.598
[31]. This is achieved by imaging fractured steel cross sections. These images can be
analysed to evaluate light and dark areas, giving a good indication for the void fraction of
the material.
This section shows that there are models to quantify damage propagation in metals. There
are models that cover fatigue such as Palmgren­Miner, and models that cover ductile
damage such as Lemaitre and GTN, but there are no general models that cover both.
Research on the propagation around and beyond macro­crack initiation is limited, so this
is an interesting region to explore.
2.4
Specimen Control
Besides the standardised test methods proposed by ASTM and ISO in section 4.1, there
are some additional considerations that are of interest with regards to specimen control.
This section intends to discuss additional phenomena.
Forni et. al. state that steels such as S355 are strain rate sensitive [33]. From their tests,
it becomes apparent that both the fracture strain and tensile strength are affected by the
strain rate. Forni et. al. test up to strain rates significantly higher than recommended in
standards for monotonic testing, such as ISO 6892­1 and ASTM E8 [34][35]. Their results
can be seen in Figure 2.3, compared to data from Knobloch et. al. [36]. While they also
compare the influence of strain rate to material performance, they do so largely under
elevated temperature, while Forni et. al. complete their tests under room temperature
conditions. It can be seen that at increasing strain rate, initially the fracture elongation
increases with increasing ultimate tensile stress. At extremeely high rates, the ultimate
strength continues to increase, but with a decrease in fracture elongation.
Hockett proposes an equation to estimate testing machine stiffness [37]. A stiffer machine
will deform less during the test, giving a better indication of material properties. However
practical limitations apply, as larger machines are equipped with larger grips unsuitable
for small specimens. Should different test machines be used during testing, a comparison
can be made to discuss the impact of the machine.
As mentioned in section 4.1, ISO 10025­1 [6] states that the material properties for thicker
and thinner materials are different. Thinner S355 steel tends to have a longer maximum
elongation coupled with lower ultimate and tensile strengths. Upon comparing material
properties of metal, it is important to choose the data within the same thickness range for
an accurate comparison.
10
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Comparison of strain rate to material properties, from Forni et. al, 2016 [33]
How damage occurs in steel
11
==PAGE:20==
12
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:21==
3
Thesis Scope
From the literature study, there is plenty of research on fatigue­life and how damage prop­
agates due to fatigue. Lemaitre’s model [26] can provide insights into how damage propa­
gates in tension. It is of interest how damage progresses around and beyond the fracture
transition point. The Thesis scope is set up following the conducted research. An analysis
will be made close to the fracture point, as a large portion of metal’s strength is lost in a
small strain interval.
The objective of this research is how damage can affect material and fatigue life properties
of S355 steel at and beyond macro­scale crack initiation
To complete this objective, numerous questions arise. A main research question is set up
and is followed by main questions for each section of this thesis:
Which effects will damage near the fracture transition point have on material and fatigue
properties, and how can this affect existing structures?
Methodology
• Which tests should be set up to accurately introduce and measure damage, and
which test specimens should be used for this?
• What equipment should be used to carry out the tests and measure data, and what
properties do these have?
• Which control logic schemes can be considered to introduce damage, and which
elements can be used to prevent material from pulling itself apart?
Results
• How do damaged specimen tests compare to a reference test?
• What are the elastic and yield properties of the damaged material relative to the
undamaged material?
• How can Lemaitre’s model be applied to determine different damage levels?
• What is the fatigue life of various damage levels subject to different loading cycles?
Discussion
• What if any deviations occurred during testing, how did these occur, and how may
these influence the results?
• How do the results impact the current understanding of structure lifespans?
In addition, some limits and assumptions apply to the research. These are as follows:
Limitations
• The Only material to be analysed is S355 J2 and its damaged variants.
• Influence of welding or other manufacturing techniques/treatments on material is not
evaluated.
• All tests will be carried out under room temperature and normal atmospheric condi­
tions, creep will be disregarded.
How damage occurs in steel
13
==PAGE:22==
• All specimens will only be loaded uni­axially, in either tension, or tension­compression
cycles.
• Fatigue performance will not be tested beyond 107 cycles.
• Low Cycle Fatigue (LCF) will not be considered due to limitations in available ma­
chines and sensors.
Assumptions
• The supplied S355 steel is perfectly homogeneous, and includes no inherent defects
or damage.
• Lab equipment attached to the machine is calibrated unless otherwise stated by lab
technicians.
• For a quarter­bridge strain setup, it is assumed every connecting wire has the same
resistance.
14
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:23==
4
Methodology
The goal of the research is to evaluate the effect of damage on mechanical properties
and fatigue life of steel specimens. To achieve this, a general testing outline is set as
follows: A control code will be set up to introduce the desired damage level inside the
specimen. Geometry L1 will be tested using this control code. After these have been
damaged as desired, these can be cut into smaller specimens. These smaller specimens
will be subjected to monotonic and fatigue tests in order to determine the new material
properties and fatigue life.
This section will first present standard testing methods, followed by specimen geome­
try. Machines, sensors, and calibration will be discussed next. Two control schemes for
large specimens will be discussed, followed by test plans for small specimens. A test
programme is then set up, followed by the test setup.
4.1
Standard testing methods
Two organisations are considered for their testing standards: ISO and ASTM. Three tests
are considered, monotonic tests, Low Cycle Fatigue (LCF) tests, and High Cycle Fatigue
(HCF) tests. A table is provided with the relevant standards for each test type to carry
out, as seen in Table 4.1. ISO standards are less accessible, therefore ASTM standards
are referenced for testing. There are no standards for introducing damage in metallic
materials. As a result, a modified monotonic test is carried out. The explanation for the
test logic can be found in subsection 4.5.5.
Organisation
Monotonic
LCF
HCF
ASTM
E8/E8M ­ 24
E606/E606M ­ 21
E466/E466M ­ 21
ISO
6892­1:2019
12106:2017
1099:2017
Table 4.1: Overview of standards for metal testing
4.1.1
Monotonic Tests
Monotonic tensile tests allow for determination of material properties such as stiffness,
yield strength, and ultimate strength. ASTM standard E8 states that monotonic tests must
be strain controlled, depending on whether the goal is to determine yield or ultimate prop­
erties [35]. It is of interest to determine the change in Young’s modulus per Lemaitre’s
equation in Equation 2.17. As a result section 7.6.4.3 of ASTM E8 can be used, wherein
the crosshead speed must remain between given strain boundaries. Since the machines
available do not adequately track strain control, the choice is made to test with displace­
ment control. For this, the strain control limits of 0.015 ± 0.006 mm/mm/min are multiplied
with the length of the specimen’s neck length L, which is determined in section 4.2.
4.1.2
LCF Tests
LCF tests are controlled by strain control per ASTM E606 [19]. Strain controlled is recom­
mended to be used between predetermined strain limits. For strain control, a clip gauge is
recommended. Strain control may be challenging, due to factors such as signal noise and
machine response. The standard also permits using displacement control between strain
limits. The standard states that the frequency and strain rate should remain constant, but
also accept a constant average strain rate. Deviations in minimum and maximum values
may be at most up to 2% of the intended value.
How damage occurs in steel
15
==PAGE:24==
Control schemes for LCF testing have been evaluated. It is found through testing that
pure strain control does not work on available machines. The alternative displacement
control between strain limits does not fall within 2% of the target value set. LCF tests are
considered out of scope for this project.
4.1.3
HCF Tests
ASTM E466 considers force controlled strain tests [38]. Force control is generally used
for HCF tests, as the tests occur within a largely plastic area. Strain control is important
when large plasticity occurs, as the material will weaken significantly over time. Klusák
and Seitl [8] show in their fatigue relation from Figure 2.1 that S355 has a clear yield
plateau at and below its yield strength. Damaged material is expected to show different
behaviour compared to this, as the damaged material should have a lower yield strength
and a less homogeneous composition due to voids and cracks inside the material.
4.2
Specimen types and geometry
There are 2 types of specimens that will be evaluated during the tests to be carried out.
L1 will be used for developing damage in steel, S1 will be used to test material proper­
ties in monotonic and HCF tests. The sheet metal for L1 specimens is 15mm thick, S1
specimens are cut from L1 specimens after these have been damaged. This section will
consider the recommendations set by standards, geometry to be used, and production
methods.
ASTM E466 and E8 offer various specimen designs [38][35]. For HCF tests per ASTM
E466, recommended specimen geometry can be seen in Figure 4.1, with dimensional
data in Table 4.2. For monotonic tests per ASTM E8, Figure 4.2 and Table 4.3 show
recommended specifications for tensile test coupons. There are no recommendations for
specimens for damaging. A variation on the E8 coupon with smaller gauge length G is
used.
Figure 4.1: E466 recommended specimen designs, from ASTM E466 [38]
The damaged region is expected to be small in L1 specimens, and the effects of clamping
should be reduced as much as possible. For HCF tests, ASTM E466 coupon 2 is used as
reference. The same coupon design is used for monotonic tests, as the recommended
16
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:25==
Coupon type
R [mm]
W [mm]
L [mm]
T [mm]
A [mm2]
Coupon type 1
>8T
2T ­ 6T
2L ­ 3L
>2.54
19.4 ­ 645
Coupon type 2
>8T
5.08 ­ 25.4
n.a
>2.54
19.4 ­ 645
Table 4.2: Table of dimensions for E466 specimens [38]
Figure 4.2: ASTM design for monotonic coupon, from E8M standard [35]
L
G
R
W
T
A
B
C
100
25 ± 0.1
6
6 ± 0.1
any
32
30
10
Table 4.3: ASTM E8 coupon dimensions, all in mm, from E8 standard [35]
gauge length would have differing damage levels along its entire length. With the area
changing across the damaged area, it can be ensured that the largest damage would be
in the very centre of the specimen. A modification is made to ASTM E466 coupon 2, by
making a straight section of 5mm long in the centre. This offers a gauge length on which
strain can be measured. Geometry for specimens L1 and S1 can be seen in Figure 4.3.
L1 specimens will be used to create damage inside the material. L1 are cut using water
jet cutting. This specimen design has two large flat surfaces where it can be gripped,
and a notch cut out halfway along the long side. The notch allows for a specific damage
region, while also preventing stress concentrations from the grips influencing the point of
fracture. The larger thickness of the material allows for S1 specimens to be cut from the
centre of Geometry L1 specimens after these have been damaged.
Geometry S1 will be cut from the centre of Geometry L1 specimens using Wire EDM. Wire
EDM uses a thin electrically charged wire to cut shapes with tight tolerances. Per Maher
et. al. [39] the effect of heating at the boundaries is limited, leading to a negligible change
in material properties in the finished specimen. Up to six S1 specimens can be cut from
the narrow region of the large specimen. It is expected that the damage field will be formed
elliptically along the cross­section of Geometry L1. As such, only the middle 3 specimens
will be considered for manufacturing. The smaller specimens are dog­bone shaped with
gripping regions on both ends, with a thickness of 4mm. Due to a manufacturing error,
two S1 specimens are only 3.35mm thick, one for each damage level. These are used
for monotonic tests, where the change in thickness should only affect the area used to
calculate stress.
After the S1 specimens are cut, an X­ray Computed Tomography (XCT) scan is made of
the material to identify cracks and voids. This will allow a 3D evaluation of their shape
How damage occurs in steel
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.3: Dimensions for large and small specimens of geometries L1, S1. Gripping
regions indicated with hatched areas
and for indications on what material properties might be.
The steel used for damage tests is a plate of S355 J2+N with a thickness of 15mm. This
is chosen due to its prevalent use in structures such as wind turbines [5]. Given the
material properties in Table 2.1, Yield and ultimate force levels can be determined, which
are presented along with neck geometry in Table 4.4.
Geometry
Cross­
sectional
area [mm2]
Fyield [kN]
Fult [kN]
Lneck
L1
600
213
294­312
5
S1
32
11.4
15.7­16.6
5
Table 4.4: Neck properties, and expected Yield and Ultimate force
These properties can be used to determine which equipment can be used in material
testing.
4.3
Testing equipment
Different types of equipment are necessary to ensure specimen control. This section will
evaluate the testing machines and grips that are desirable for testing.
18
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:27==
4.3.1
Testing Machines
Servo­hydraulic testing machines are used for specimen damaging and fatigue testing. A
choice can be made between testing on two different machine brands: MTS and Instron.
MTS machines are chosen for the initial test with Geometry L1 as they are equiped with
a software known as MultiPurpose Elite (MPE). This allows for custom control software
to be implemented onto the machines and run. Smaller specimens will be run on MTS
machines for monotonic tests and for low to medium cycle fatigue tests. This is chosen
as these tests are strain controlled, and the Instron machines available for experiments
do not have this control mode. From Table 4.4 it can be seen that the maximum force
for Geometry L1 is between 294 and 312 kN. MTS machines are available in 250, 500,
and 1 MN capacities for these tests. For the smaller samples where the ultimate force is
lower, a 10 to 25 kN machine is sufficient. Instron machines will predominantely be used
for these tests.
4.3.2
Machine Grips
Wedge grips are used both for the top and bottom grips. For the large specimen these
have a plate gripping thickness of 0 to 22 mm. For the small specimen grips are used with
a plate thickness of 0 to 10 mm. On both the upper and lower set of grips an alignment
bracket is attached. This prevents specimens from being inserted at an angle, allowing
for more repeatable and reliable test results.
4.4
Sensors and Calibration
During the test, multiple sensors are used to ouput data, including force, time, displace­
ment, and strain. Of these, strain is measured using external sensors. This section con­
cerns sensor choice and calibration.
4.4.1
Sensor types
Strain is measured differently between large and small specimens. The primary strain
measurement device on large samples is a clip gauge extensometer. This is chosen
due to the sample’s size, and being able to plug into the machine’s controller directly.
The extensometer is attached just above and below the neck in the coupon specimens
to measure the deformation in this region. The gauge length is variable, and has been
measured to be 35.6 mm in the undeformed state. A pin can be inserted to keep the clip
gauge in its undeformed position. The parameters can be found in Table 4.5.
Type
Min.
Disp. [mm]
Min.
Disp. [%]
Max.
Disp. [mm]
Max.
Disp. [%]
Gauge
Length
[mm]
Instron 2620­604
­2.5
­7.02
+12.5
+35.1
35.6
LY41 Strain Gauge
­0.06
­2.00
+0.06
+2.00
3.0
Table 4.5: Clip & Strain Gauge Parameters
Resistance [Ω]
Gauge Factor
LY41
120 ± 0.3
2.04
Table 4.6: Further strain gauge data
For smaller specimens strain gauges will be used of type LY41, for which displacement
data can also be found in Table 4.5 and 4.6. On MTS machines, these can be connected
How damage occurs in steel
19
==PAGE:28==
to a FLEX­DAQ measuring system using a 120­ohm quarter bridge setup. To account for
the wire resistance between the machine and strain gauge, three wires are used, as seen
in Figure 4.4. It is assumed that as the wires are all made from the same material and
have the same length, their resistances will be equal.
Figure 4.4: Quarter Bridge Setup with 3 wires
The strain gauge is applied by marking the middle of the neck on top and bottom, and
marking the middle of the short sides of the specimen. Lines are drawn with a pencil
between these points using a ruler to get alignment lines. The strain gauge is then aligned
with these lines using the marks on the gauge. Tape is used to flip the strain gauge up
while ensuring its position will be accurate when released. Cyanoacrylate glue is applied,
and the strain gauge is pressed down for 30 seconds to ensure good adhesion. The tape
is removed. Connection pads on the strain gauge are small, so a larger pad is glued on
next to the strain gauge to ensure easier soldering of wires. Copper jumper wires connect
the large connection pad to the strain gauge, while the three wires connect the large pad
to the rest of the Wheatstone bridge setup. An example is given in Figure 4.5. While
the strain gauges are not perfectly centred, they are vertically oriented, which is most
important for strain measurement.
4.4.2
Calibration of sensors
Before the test starts, the extensometer or strain gauge must be calibrated. Calibration is
carried out differently between MTS and Instron machines. Since clip extensometers are
only used on MTS machines, only this will be discussed. On MTS, a calibration bench
is used to move the arms to a known value. A lab worksheet can be filled in comparing
the data output in MTS Station Manager and the value on the calibration bench. The gain
can then be updated in the calibration file to match the slope of the worksheet. A voltage
offset can be applied to ensure the gauge is operating from a known zero point. The clip
gauge is calibrated to operate within 1% of the actual strain value.
Strain gauges are calibrated using Shunt calibration. A resistor with a value of 54900
Ohm is placed across the strain gauge terminals in the Wheatstone bridge setup from
Figure 4.4. This is interpreted as a mechanical load being placed on the strain gauge.
From this, the gauge can be calibrated to a known zero. The strain gauge has a resistance
of 120 Ohm ± 0.3 Ohm. It is expected that the accuracy of the shunt calibration is within
0.25%.
Strain gauges on MTS can be connected through the FLEXDAC system, and calibrated
directly through Acquisition Manager by providing the gauge and shunt values. Instron
20
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.5: Strain gauge and connection pads on S1 geometry specimens
machines do not have a connection possiblity available at the lab, so an external datalog­
ger is used. This has built­in shunt calibration capacities.
4.5
Large Specimen Control
To control the specimen during testing, a control program is set up in MTS’ MPE software.
The program is intended to control the large testing specimens. This section will discuss
the theory behind the code, explain how these elements will be made to work with the
machine, and how the code is be validated.
4.5.1
Displacement Control
A choice is made to control specimens by displacement control. This is done as the testing
machines used do not safely support strain control. By using the clip gauge extensometer
and MPE, it is possible to detect strain and determine the difference in time between the
strain in two different points. While it is possible to calculate engineering stress in MPE,
It is convoluted to read this directly during the test, so it is chosen to use the force in MPE
and calculate the engineering stress after from the test data obtained. Since the test is
monotonic and the sample is assumed to be loaded purely uni­axially, the engineering
stress can be calculated by dividing the force by initial cross sectional area.
From the force and strain measured, a slope dF
dε can be determined to detect how the
force changes relative to strain. This is done by measuring the values for force and strain
at a set time interval, using Equation 4.1.
dF
dε = F2 −F1
ε2 −ε1
(4.1)
This slope will change throughout the test’s progression, as can be seen in Figure 4.6.
The values of dF
dε 1 and dF
dε 2 are interesting, as they are respectively an imminent warning
and a marker for macro­crack initiation respectively.
How damage occurs in steel
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6: Change in dF
dε during a test, with target slopes indicated in red and blue
This schematic gives an indication of the sign of the slope. The slope is predominantly
negative in the necking and fracture regions. Depending on factors such as data measur­
ing frequency, signal noise, or yield behaviour, it is still possible that the slope is negative
outside of these anticipated areas. For this, a counter system can be implemented. If a
certain amount of steps have passed where the slope is negative, it can be assumed that
the slope is decreasing. It is undesirable that a single positive value in noise can delete
the counter’s progress, so it is decided that every positive value measured reduces the
counter by 1, to a minimum of zero.
4.5.2
Rate Adjustment
The goal of the large specimen tests is to introduce as much damage as possible into
the specimen without causing full fracture. For this, a number of control options must be
considered.
Firstly, the testing rate can be adjusted. A slower rate provides more time to control the
specimen. While the change in dF
dε will remain identical, the change in dε
dt will be affected.
Additionally a lower rate can lead to a longer elongation. Forni et al. [33] declare that
S355 steel is strain rate sensitive. With engineering strain being defined by Equation 2.4,
it can be seen that displacement control and strain control are correlated. Therefore a
slower displacement rate will lead to a lower strain rate. A lower rate causes a lower
stress and therefore force, and a larger fracture elongation.
To control the rate during the large specimen tests, two types of rate control are evaluated.
A single rate reduction increment can be made at a predetermined displacement. In order
to run the test within the ASTM E466 standard’s [35] recommended strain rates for the
largest strain possible, the transition from high to low strain rate will happen close to the
22
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:31==
fracture transition point.
In comparison, a rate reduction will be tested that seeks to change the rate linearly when
the slope dF
dε changes. For this, a reference slopes will be used. These are indicated in
Figure 4.6 in red as dF
dε 1. The rate is reduced until either the slope is more positive than
the set slope, or until the rate has hit a certain minimum value.
The rate used for testing is 0.50 mm/min, corresponding to an initial strain rate before
necking of 0.2 mm/mm/min at the critical area.
4.5.3
Control Beyond Fracture Transition
Beyond the fracture transition point the slope dF
dε becomes steep. The test is set to termi­
nate once a certain force value is reached, which is expected to be linked to a damage
level. The reason force is used instead of strain is that the strain may vary slightly be­
tween specimens, while the force the specimen can still withstand is an indicator for how
much of the cross­sectional area is still intact.
At a slow rate the controller can control the specimen. However, to control the slope to
low force values without having the specimen fracture additional control may be required.
A system is implemented to unload the specimen beyond the fracture transition point.
When the force­strain slope grows beyond a certain value, this function is activated. The
behaviour of this function can be seen in Figure 4.7. The slope at which this function is
activated is shown in Figure 4.6 in blue and marked with dF
dε 2.
Figure 4.7: Schematic representation of push back function behaviour, with displacements
δ1, δ2, δ3 and measurement points A, B, C
The activation point of each push in Figure 4.7 is marked as point A. The machine pushes
the specimen back from point A to B by 0.1 mm in 0.1 seconds. Following this, the spec­
imen is pulled 0.01 mm in 0.1 seconds from point B to C. The slope of BC is measured.
If it is positive, the material can still sustain the force applied, and the test can resume
How damage occurs in steel
23
==PAGE:32==
at a low test rate. Should the slope from B to C be negative, the specimen is pushed
back again, and this process is repeated until the slope BC becomes positive again. The
test terminates at or below a predetermined set force, and when the slope is negative.
This is so that the test does not activate during a push­pull phase. It is expected that any
potential variance that will occur between specimens set to the same force level will be
minor.
Figure 4.8: Plastic And Elastic regions in a specimen close to failure
4.5.4
Specimen Preservation
Following test termination the specimen must be preserved. For this, the specimen must
be returned to an undeformed state. Force control could be used for this, but the ma­
chine’s control software does not know if it should do this by pulling the grips apart or
pushing them together. Especially if the slope becomes more negative, the controller will
decide pull the grips further apart to satisfy a zero­force request, fracturing the specimen
fully. Therefore displacement control must be used to specify direction.
Beyond the fracture transition point, the damaged region is too weak to withstand the
stress introduced by the elastic region between it and the grips. Stopping the test is not
sufficient, as the undamaged elastic area will still be pulling on the damaged region, in
an effort to return itself to equilibrium. The elastic areas must therefore be unloaded to a
level where fracture is arrested. Figure 4.8 provides a schematic of this process, where
the damaged area is denoted with a pattern. While the measured force decreases, the
cross­sectional area decreases, leading to a generally higher true stress.
The specimen should never be loaded in compression, as this may cause excess damage,
so it must be brought to a stable state at or above zero force. While the Young’s modulus
is expected to have changed dramatically, it can give an indication for what the material’s
elastic properties look like. From an initial fracture test’s data, it can be determined how
far to push back a specimen to preserve it. This data can be found in subsection 5.2.1
4.5.5
Basic Control logic
The combined control logic for a simple controller with a 1­step rate reduction and with an
unloading mechanism can be summed up in Figure 4.9.
The values for ramp goals d1, d2, and drel will be determined from the initial fracture test
in subsection 5.2.1. The test rate r1 is already determined as being 0.50 mm/min, in line
24
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:33==
Start
Ramp to d1 at r1
Ramp to d2 at r2
If Fmeas ≤Fset
Ramp relative to
position by drel
within trel seconds
If d2 is exceeded
End Test
False
True
False
True
Figure 4.9: Basic Damage Test Control Scheme
with the test rate set for the monotonic test. Test rate r2, push back time trel, and target
force Fset will also be determined in subsection 5.2.1.
4.5.6
Extended Control logic
It is of interest to see how close to fracture a damage level can be obtained. For this
the extended control is set up. The first element of this control uses rate reduction to
control the rate at which damage happens. The control parameters for this are the slopes
dF
dε 1,2 found in Figure 4.6. The second element initiates the push­back algorithm once the
transition point is passed, this algorithm is identical to Figure 4.7. Lastly, the specimen is
unloaded at the end of the test, as mentioned in subsection 4.5.4. The control scheme
can be seen in Figure 4.10. Scrap aluminium and steel is used to validate this control
method, ranging in thickness of 2­4mm, and in width from 15­30 mm. Experiments are
carried out with various geometries, including a double­sided notch, or a hole drilled in
the centre. Examples can be seen in Figure B.4.
Some considerations to make for extended control are the calculation of slopes. MPE has
no way to calculate a slope over a timespan, so a delay must be introduced between two
measurement points in order to compute the average slope over this domain. Constant
parameters for testing the extended control scheme can be seen in Table 4.7
4.6
Small Specimen Control
Small specimens of type S1 are subjected to monotonic and fatigue tests. This section
will mention the practices and relevant standards that will be used to complete the tests.
How damage occurs in steel
25
==PAGE:34==
Start
Define initial rate r0, minimum rate rmin,
target force Fset, target slopes dF
dε 1,2
Initiate ramp loop
Ramp to d =
20mm with r
Measure dF,
dε over dt.
Calculate dF
dε
If dF
dε ≤dF
dε 1
If r ≤r0, r +
0.01mm/min
Endcount = 0
Slopecount =
Slopecount ­1 if
Slopecount ≥1
Slopecount =
Slopecount +1
If slopecount ≥3:
r = r −0.05mm/min.
If r ≤0.00:
set r = rmin
If dF
dε ≤dF
dε 2
Endcount =
Endcount+1
If Endcount ≥3
& Fmeas ≤Fset
Unload speci­
men to preserve
End Test
Ramp ­0.1 mm rela­
tive in 0.1 seconds
Ramp +0.01
mm relative in
0.2 seconds
Measure dF, dε,
determine dF
dε pb
If dF
dε pb ≥0
Slopecount = 0
Endcount = 0
False
True
False
True
Force False
False
False
True
Both True
Figure 4.10: Extended Damage Test Control Scheme
26
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:35==
Slope calculation
Delay [s]
Data Aquisition
Rate [Hz]
Upper Force
Limit [kN]
Lower Force
Limit [kN]
0.10
100
25 kN
­2.0
Table 4.7: Extended control constants
4.6.1
Monotonic Tensile control
Monotonic tensile tests will be controlled by the guidelines in the ASTM E8 standard [35].
Deviations are made from the standard coupon design, as the damaged area is limited
to the very centre of the material. The standard recommends strain control, however
the measurement devices used in the tests is a strain gauge. While data can be read
from the strain gauge, these cannot interface with Instron machines’ control system at a
sufficient data rate. Clip gauges may provide strain control, but these are not available
with a gauge length small enough to operate fully within the damaged region. A FLEXDAC
system could be used to attach a strain gauge to an MTS machine. However if the strain
gauge is damaged the machine will no longer be able to control the specimen. As a
result, it is opted to use displacement control on a 25 kN Instron machine. The neck
length for S1 specimens is 5mm long, with the specified strain rates in ASTM being 0.015
mm/mm/min ± 0.006 mm/mm/min, it is chosen to run all monotonic tests at a rate of 0.1
mm/min displacement rate. It is anticipated that since no plasticity occurs until yield, this
will give an accurate indication of the Young’s modulus, and a very good indication of the
yield properties.
4.6.2
Fatigue control
Distinction is made between High and Low cycle fatigue (HCF and LCF). Low cycle con­
trol requires strain control per the ASTM E606 standard, either controlled by clip gauge, or
by displacement control between strain limits [19]. From subsection 4.6.1 it is determined
that strain control is difficult for monotonic tests, the same reasoning holds for strain con­
trolled fatigue tests. An alternative to LCF is force controlled HCF, standard ASTM E466 is
used for this [38]. Since the tests are force­controlled, no additional sensors are required
as with LCF. A strain gauge will still be used to output data, but if the output signal is af­
fected by material not being uniform or strain gauge damage, the test will not be affected.
The standard does not state what amount of plasticity is permitted, but it is chosen to
keep this limited during testing, as standard E606 is designed for measuring fatigue per­
formance under larger plasticity. The only requirement set is that the fatigue cycles must
be ’relatively high’ by ASTM [35]. From S­N curves from for example Klusák and Seitl,
this is understood to larger than 104 to 105 cycles.
4.7
Test Programme
This section will evaluate what tests will be run, how many of each test, and what param­
eters will be tested for.
4.7.1
L1 Tests
The Test plan for the large specimens is as follows. ASTM E8M will be used as reference,
where the strain rate up to tensile strength must remain between 0.05 and 0.5 mm/m­
m/min [35]. A strain rate of 0.1 mm/mm/min is taken, and converted to an equivalent
displacement rate. It is expected that the strain rate will increase after yield at constant
displacement rate, so picking a value towards the lower limit is wise. From the F­ε data
this generates, two points will be picked: one just before the fracture transition, and one
after. Multiple specimens are tested for each damage level using control logic from Fig­
How damage occurs in steel
27
==PAGE:36==
ure 4.9. Various parameters for the large tests can be seen in Table 4.8, where limits set
for the tests can be seen in Table 4.9. These tests will evaluate at what elongation and
force values L1 specimens fracture, and if large specimens can repeatably be damaged
to a pre­determined point.
Specimen
Damage
Level
Grip
Length [mm]
Clamping
Pressure [bar]
S0
D0
60
200
S2a
D1
75
500
S2b
D1
75
500
S3a
D2
75
500
S3b
D2
75
500
S3c
D2
75
500
S3d
D2
75
500
Table 4.8: L1 Parameters. Force Set levels to be determined in subsection 5.2.1
Limits
Force [kN]
Displacement [mm]
Strain [mm/mm]
Lower
­25
­1.00
­0.070
Upper
400
15.00
0.350
Table 4.9: Testing limits for L1 geometry tests
Test Type
Test
rate
[mm/min]
Gauge
Length
[mm]
Data
rate
[Hz]
Test file
format
Test
software
used
Machine
Used
Reference
0.50
5
100
.CSV
Basic Testware
MTS 1.0MN
Damage
0.50
5
100
.CSV
MPE
MTS 500 kN
Table 4.10: Miscellaneous Test Parameters for L1 tests
4.7.2
S1 Monotonic Tests
Three monotonic tests will be carried out, one for each damage level. The test programme
is set up such that the degradation in Young’s modulus and Yield properties between the
various damage levels can be determined. From this, Lemaitre’s damage model can be
applied as seen in Equation 2.17 [26]. Data can be found for monotonic tests in Table 4.11.
For these tests, Instron machines with a capacity of 25 kN are used. It is expected that
damaged material will have a lower stiffness, a lower yield and ultimate stress, and a
lower fracture elongation compared to undamaged material.
4.7.3
S1 High Cycle Fatigue Tests
High­cycle fatigue (HCF) tests are force­controlled according to ASTM E466 [38]. It is
expected that the undamaged material will be below the fatigue plateau for the full duration
of the tests. As a result, while two undamaged specimens are proposed, in practice only
one may need to be tested in HCF. The other specimen may provide more insightful data
in LCF testing. Parameters for the tests can be seen in Table 4.12. Stress amplitudes can
be converted to force amplitudes through the initial cross­sectional area. All tests are run
with a sine waveform. For HCF tests, Instron machines with a capacity of 25 kN are used.
Instron Waveform is used to create and run tests. Per Klusák and Seitl [8] specimens will
28
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:37==
Specimen
S01
S2a5
S3c5
Geometry
S1
S1
S1
Damage Level [­]
D0
D1
D2
Thickness [mm]
4.0
3.35
3.35
Test Rate [mm/min]
0.10
0.10
0.10
Grip Length [mm]
25
25
25
Clamping Pressure [bar]
100
100
100
Gauge Length [mm]
5
5
5
Specimen Data Rate [Hz]
100
100
100
Strain Gauge
Data Rate [Hz]
100
100
100
Control Software
MTS Basic Testware
Instron Waveform
Instron Waveform
Testing Machine
MTS 100kN
Instron 25kN
Instron 25kN
Upper Force Limit [kN]
20.0
20.0
20.0
Lower Force Limit [kN]
­2.0
­2.0
­2.0
Upper Displacement
Limit [mm]
­0.20
­0.20
­0.20
Lower Displacement
Limit [mm]
10.0
10.0
10.0
Table 4.11: S1 Monotonic testing parameters
be tested up to 10 million cycles. If this point is reached, failure is considered through
run­out, unless a large change in mean strain is detected from the initial condition.
Specimen
Damage
Level
Stress
Range
[MPa]
Max
Stress
[MPa]
Min
Stress
[MPa]
Mean
Stress
[MPa]
Freq
[Hz]
S04
D0
297
330
33
181.5
25
S05
D0
360
400
40
220
25
S2a2
D1
297
330
33
181.5
25
S2b2
D1
200
222
22
122
25
S3c2
D2
200
222
22
122
25
S3d2
D2
297
330
33
181.5
25
Table 4.12: S1 High Cycle Fatigue Tests
Limits
Force [kN]
Displacement [mm]
Strain [mm/mm]
Upper
15.0
2.00
n.a.
Lower
­2.0
­0.20
n.a.
Table 4.13: S1 High Cycle Fatigue Test Limits
4.7.4
Control Validation Test Plan
To validate the extended control scheme from Figure 4.10 scrap metal is used of various
geometries and materials. Geometries used include a centre­hole, and notched, as seen
in Figure 4.11. Examples of samples can also be seen in Figure B.4. Lengths are between
How damage occurs in steel
29
==PAGE:38==
120 and 200mm, width is between 15 and 30 mm, thickness is between 2 and 4 mm.
Aluminium or steel scrap material is used.
Figure 4.11: Examples of test specimen shapes used for extended control validation.
Gripping regions in hatched area
Parameters such as rate, slopes, and target force values can be adjusted between tests.
As each specimen is different, some trial and error will be involved. If the software can
be validated to work on these thin metal pieces, it will work on thicker, stiffer material
too. This can be seen from the material properties for S355 steel, where larger material
thicknesses have a higher yield strength [6].
The extended control scheme is first created in MPE. Then, a reference test is carried
out to see what ultimate forces may be, and what reference slopes dF
dε 1,2 may be used.
From this data, an evaluation of the code’s performance can be made. By optimising
code parameters and functions in an iterative process a code can be obtained that can
introduce a set amount of damage into material.
4.8
Test Setup
This section concerns steps required to set up the test. Test setups for L1 and S1 speci­
mens are presented, followed by practices for calibrating sensors and starting the tests.
4.8.1
Alignment, Clamping, and Offsets
For all geometries, metal L­brackets are used to align specimens vertically within the
grips. Lines are drawn on the specimens to mark the gripping area. All specimen types
will first be aligned by the L­brackets, then clamped by the lower grips. Following this, the
specimen is moved such that the upper grips are aligned with the upper line on the metal.
30
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:39==
Strain, Force, and displacement are set to zero. The specimen is clamped by the upper
grips. The grips may introduce a force into the material, this initial force must be noted.
4.8.2
Setup Overview
The setups for L1 and S1 specimens will be as in Figure 4.12. The clip gauge for L1 is
positioned on the other side of the specimen in the figure, with elastic bands and metal
rods ensuring good support in pulling the gauge against the metal surface. Alignment
brackets can be seen on both L1 and S1 setups. S1 uses a strain gauge to measure
data, the cable is taped to the grip head to ensure it doesn’t loosen during testing.
(a) L1 Test setup on 500kN MTS Machine
(b) S1 Test setup on 25 kN Instron machine
Figure 4.12: Test Setups for L1 and S1 specimens. Shown are 500 kN MTS machine,
and 25 kN Instron machine
4.8.3
Pre­test checks
Before any test commences, notes must be made of the test parameters to be used.
The test type is noted, along with the values for any potential offsets. The start time is
noted, and any machine interlocks are checked should these appear. The temperature is
considered to be equal in the lab over the course of the test, therefore this difference will
not be noted.
How damage occurs in steel
31
==PAGE:40==
32
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:41==
5
Results
This section presents the results of the tests following the guidelines set out in chapter 4.
First a validation will be made of the extended control code, and it is evaluated if this
can be used for testing L1 specimens. Following this, L1 specimen test results will be
presented. Test results for S1 monotonic and HCF tests will follow in the final part of this
section.
5.1
Extended Control Validation
An initial test is done with 3 aluminium specimens with a hole in the centre of 12mm
diameter. Tests are completed using a dF
dd slope, where the slope between force and
displacement is evaluated. This is done as the specimens are small and do not have
sufficient space for a clip gauge to be attached. Results can be seen in Figure 5.1 and
Table 5.1. These tests illustrate the change in test parameters with different target force
levels. Tests are also carried out with steel hole specimens, these results can be seen
in Figure 5.2 and Table 5.2. The goal of these steel hole tests is to see repeatability with
specimen performance in identical material and geometry. Finally, Aluminium specimens
with a crack are presented in Figure 5.3 and Table 5.3. For these tests the push­back
algorithm is disabled, and it is verified to see if the algorithm can terminate based on a
given slope value alone.
Figure 5.1: Test results of three aluminium specimens with holes, varying target forces
It can be seen that the pushback function works, although not always to an equal extent.
Zooming in it is noticed that the displacement continues to increase during the smaller
pushback initiations. The end levels are tracked closely, but not perfectly. For specimen
ALh3 the target is overshot, and when the slope gets steeper towards the end of the test,
the pushback manoeuvre is not initiated as intended.
How damage occurs in steel
33
==PAGE:42==
Target
Force [kN]
Measured End
Force [kN]
Target
Slope [kN/mm]
Alh1
3.50
3.69
­1,0
Alh2
4.00
4.10
­1,0
Alh3
3.00
2.81
­1,0
Table 5.1: Aluminium Hole Parameters
Figure 5.2: Test results of two steel specimens with holes
Target
Force [kN]
Actual End
Force [kN]
Target
Slope [kN/mm]
Sth1
7.00
7.21
­1,0
Sth2
7.00
0.00
­1,0
Table 5.2: Steel Hole Parameters
While the geometry for both Steel hole specimens is similar, it is noted Sth2 has a higher
ultimate tensile strength. Sth1 terminates close to the intended value, where Sth2 frac­
tures. It can be seen the data points increase in spread, indicating the last mm of displace­
ment occurred quickly, in less than 0.5 seconds. The slope of Sth2 first flattens before
this, leading to an increase in test rate. The slope is then not detected in the final slope
area.
The aluminium Notch results show a large difference between specimen ultimate load.
It shows that the extended control code is capable of detecting a slope and terminating
the test at the given slope. Comparing this to Figure 5.2 shows the system struggles with
combining a pushback command and a termination command. Therefore it is decided to
run L1 damage tests with the basic control code brom subsection 4.5.5.
34
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.3: Test results of four aluminium specimens with notch
Target
Force [kN]
Actual End
Force [kN]
Target
Slope [kN/mm]
Alc1
n.a.
6.45
­0.5
Alc2
n.a.
4.68
­2,0
Alc3
n.a.
9.56
­2,0
Alc4
n.a.
6.01
­1,0
Table 5.3: Aluminium Notch Parameters
5.2
L1 Specimen Test Data
Large specimens are tested and the results presented. An initial reference test S0 is
carried out to gather information on the shape of the stress­strain curve and the slope
of the graph before and after the fracture transition. Following this, large specimens are
tested using the basic control program discussed in subsection 4.5.5.
5.2.1
Reference Fracture Test Results
The reference test is carried out, stress­strain results can be seen in Figure 5.4. In Fig­
ure 5.5 strain­force results can be seen. Displacement­force relations can be found in
Figure A.1. Images of the fractured specimen can be found in Figure B.1. The initial
value for Force can be seen in Table 5.4. Large drops can be seen during the test due
to slip. As a result of this, all other specimens are clamped for a longer distance and at a
higher clamping pressure.
From the reference results, targets can be set for future specimen control. Variables
d1, d2, drel, Fset are determined. An overview can be found in Table 5.4. Displacement d1
must be chosen well before the fracture transition. A lower displacement means a slower
test, and a comparison to the reference. Therefore d1 is set as 11 mm. Following further
How damage occurs in steel
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.4: Reference test specimen Engineering Strain versus Engineering Stress
Figure 5.5: Reference test specimen Strain versus Force
tests, the target is increased slightly to 11.2mm for specimens S3c and S3d. For a proper
comparison to the reference test, r1 is also set to 0.050 mm/min.
Displacement d2 is set to be 2.0 mm larger than d1. Therefore it is 13.0 mm, except for
S3c and S3d where it is 13.2 mm. The rate r2 is set to 0.050 mm/min, except for S3c and
S3d where it is set to 0.010 mm/min.
The set force Fset is determined as follows. A point just before the fracture transition is
36
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:45==
identified, at a force of 325 kN or an engineering stress of 542 MPa. This will correspond
to damage level D1. A point just beyond the fracture transition is identified, at a force of
290 kN or an engineering stress of 483 MPa. Following tests S3a and S3b, this set point
is increased to a force of 295 kN, or an engineering stress of 492 MPa.
Specimen
Damage
Level
Target
d1
[mm]
Rate
r1
[mm/min]
Target
d2
[mm]
Rate
r2
[mm/min]
Target
Force
Fset [kN]
Initial
Force
[kN]
S0
D0
20
0.50
n.a.
n.a.
n.a
0.28
S2a
D1
11.0
0.50
13.0
0.050
325
­20.8
S2b
D1
11.0
0.50
13.0
0.050
325
­20.3
S3a
D2
11.0
0.50
13.0
0.050
290
­19.8
S3b
D2
11.0
0.50
13.0
0.050
290
­21.2
S3c
D2
11.2
0.50
13.0
0.010
295
­18.2
S3d
D2
11.2
0.50
13.0
0.010
295
­22.1
Table 5.4: Set points and rates for all L1 specimen tests
Additionally, slopes dF
dε 1,2 and rates r0 and rmin for advanced control can be determined.
These can be found in Table 5.5. Here, r0 is taken as the same rate as for test S0, and rmin
is taken as the rate for tests S3c and S3d. It is important to note that while the extended
control scheme is not applied, these values are stored for future control reference.
dF
dε 1 [kNmm/mm]
dF
dε 2 [kNmm/mm]
r0 [mm/min]
rmin [mm/min]
­5.849E+02
­3.430E+03
0.50
0.010
Table 5.5: Parameters for advanced damage control scheme
5.2.2
Pre­Damaging Test Results
The other large specimens of geometry L1 are now tested according to the control scheme
in Figure 4.9 and the parameters in Table 5.4. The results of the strain­stress curve can
be found in Figure 5.6, and the results of the displacement­force curve can be found in
Figure A.2.
Specimen S0 follows a different path than the other specimens in both strain and displace­
ment plots. Drops in the force are noticeable at 3.62% and at 16,8% strain. A drop can be
noticed in all specimens with damage levels D1 and D2 around 0.20 mm/mm strain due to
the rate change implemented. In the displacement plot, this happens at 11mm for speci­
mens S2a, S2b, S3a, S3b. S3c and S3d change at 11.2mm. It is noted that S3b partially
fractured, and did so at a much lower strain than anticipated, as seen in Figure B.2.
Figures for behaviour around yield and fracture are provided in Figure 5.7. Specimens
S2a and S2b follow each­other very closely, with only minor deviations in yield point. Both
S2a and S2b terminate at the same stress and strain level as well, it is expected these
will have identical damage levels. S3c and S3d also follow each other closely, with near
identical yield performance. Towards the end of the test, both are subject to oscillations.
This occurs due to an uneven displacement rate, as seen in Figure 5.8.
5.3
S1 Material Property Tests
This section evaluates the results for material property tests using specimen geometry
S1. Material properties are determined for both monotonic and fatigue tests.
How damage occurs in steel
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.6: L1 tests compared to reference, Nominal Strain versus Stress
(a) Yield behaviour
(b) Fracture behaviour
Figure 5.7: Enlarged behaviour at yield and fracture for L1 specimens, strain­stress
Figure 5.8: S3c & S3d ­ Time versus displacement behaviour at fracture
38
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:47==
5.3.1
XCT Scans of Damaged Material
XCT Scans are made for specimens S2a2 and S3c2, corresponding to damage levels D1
and D2 respectively. Scans can be seen for these in Figure 5.9 and 5.10 respectively.
Figure 5.9: XCT Scan of S2a2 (D1) showing voids
Figure 5.10: XCT Scan of S3c2 (D2) showing cracks
While the image quality for the scans is not high, some speckled pattern in the S2a2 picture
indicates voids have been created. S3c2 has a very pronounced crack throughout its
thickness. It is expected that damage level D2 will have a lower fatigue life and a smaller
Young’s modulus as a result compared to damage level D1.
5.3.2
Monotonic Tests
The results for monotonic tensile tests carried out on damaged and undamaged spec­
imens can be seen in this section. Figure 5.11 indicates the stress­strain performance
at yield for each tested specimen, while Figure 5.12 shows the stress­displacement be­
haviour. Material properties determined from these tests can be found in Table 5.6. Here
the damage is calculated using Equation 2.17. The actual strain rates during testing can
be found in Figure A.4.
The yield stress for S2a5 and S3c5 is higher than the yield and ultimate stresses for S01,
despite the testing parameters being identical. This is notable and will be discussed in
section 6.2. It can be noted that the Young’s modulus degrades, as predicted by Lemaitre
[26]. Lemaitre states fracture transition tends to occur between a damage level of 0.2 and
0.8. The material here appears to do so around a damage level of 0.05.
Upon fracture the cross­section of specimen S3c5 was oxidised. This can be seen in
Figure 5.13. Specimens S01 and S2a5 did not exhibit the same behaviour, having oxide
How damage occurs in steel
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.11: Monotonic test reference for small specimens, engineering strain versus
engineering stress
Figure 5.12: Monotonic test reference for small specimens, displacement versus engi­
neering stress
free material inside the fracture region. This corresponds to the crack identified in the
XCT scan from Figure 5.10.
40
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:49==
Specimen
Young’s
Modulus
[GPa]
Damage
Level [­]
Initial
Force
[kN]
Yield Stress
offset =0.1%
[MPa]
Ultimate
Stress
[MPa]
Elongation
at fracture
[mm/mm]
S01
204
D0 = 0.00
­7.6 kN
379
530
Ref. [6]
210
D0 = 0.00
n.a.
355*
470­630
0.20­0.22
S2a5
195
D1 = 0.047
0.0
683
721
S3c5
129
D2 = 0.37
0.0
472
543
Table 5.6: Material properties of monotonic tests compared to those outlined in ISO
10025­2 standard [6]. *S355 reference data is provided at upper yield strength, or if not
present, 0.2% offset
Figure 5.13: S3c5 Cross Section showing oxidised area in the centre
5.3.3
Fatigue Tests
A table with the overview of number of cycles to failure for the HCF tests can be seen in
Table 5.7. This indicates a much lower number of cycles to failure for damaged material.
The mean stress over time for S04 can be seen in Figure A.3. Some specimens from
chapter 4 have not been able to be fatigue tested to failure, these have been excluded
from this overview.
Specimen
Damage Level
Stress Range [MPa]
Cycles to failure [­]
Failure mode
S04
D0
297
> 1,00 E +07
Run­out
S2a2
D1
297
592628
Fracture
S3c2
D2
200
212471
Fracture
Table 5.7: Fatigue results per specimen tested
How damage occurs in steel
41
==PAGE:50==
42
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:51==
6
Discussion
This section discusses the results presented in chapter 5. Discussions will be made for
Reference Tests, Damage Tests, Monotonic Tests, Fatigue tests, and the Extended Con­
trol Scheme.
6.1
L1 tests
6.1.1
L1 Reference test
From the reference test S0 in Figure 5.4 it can be seen that slip occurs at multiple points
during the test. Following this, the clamping pressure was increased for future tests to
counteract this occurrence. Slip may reduce the reference test’s validity with respect to
displacement, as this was measured using the cross­head displacement. Since the strain
will reduce and increase during slip, as the clip gauge was attached to the metal directly,
it was expected that the overall impact on the stress­strain behaviour was negligible. In
addition, despite the slip, the graphs of Figure A.2 and Figure 5.4 show a similar offset
relative to the damage test specimens. This is to be discussed further in subsection 6.1.2.
6.1.2
L1 damage tests compared to reference
Figure 5.6 shows a slight difference between the reference test and the damage tests.
S0 has a higher yield and ultimate stress, and fails at a slightly higher strain. Specimen
S0 was tested on a 1MN machine, while all other specimens were tested on a 500 kN
machine. The reason for this change was that during tests following S0, the machine
could not track the displacement rate input. It was chosen to run further tests on a smaller
500kN machine. The change in machine stiffness going from a larger to smaller machine
may explain in part the change, as Hockett describes [37]. It was also noted that the
initial force on S0 was much lower than on the other specimens, this was attributed to
the different grips and clamping pressure used. The slower test rate at the end for the
damage specimens may have affected the strain at fracture, this was discussed by Forni
et. al. [33]. While the reference was offset from the damage tests, it was expected that
any parameters found from here hold for further large specimen tests.
6.1.3
L1 damage level D2 tests
S3b at damage level 2 partially cracked due to the machine not reacting fast enough
during the post­fracture stage. While the code run was identical to S3a, the code was
designed with a 0.1 second delay. The delay was deemed necessary as MPE does not
have a while loop, it can repeat a loop to a maximum count of 100 million cycles. Following
further testing, it was found that it was possible to reduce the delay. In addition, S3c and
S3d were tested to a force level above S3a and S3b and at a slower test rate. This lead
to significantly more repeatable behaviour as seen in Figure 5.6. It was expected that
wile the damage may be somewhat less in S3c & d relative to S3a & b, this will still give
a good indication of how damage progresses beyond the fracture transition point. From
Figure 5.6 it can be seen that all specimens follow each other, with the exception of S3b,
which reaches its fracture transition point before all other specimens. While this specimen
was subject to the same conditions as S3a throughout the testing programme, it could be
that an inherent defect in this material lead to its premature failure. Both S3a and S3b
were discarded for further analysis due to this discrepancy.
6.1.4
Oscillations in Displacement Rate
From Figure 5.8 it can be seen that the displacement at slow rates caused issues with
oscillations. The machine struggled to apply a constant rate, often oscillating. Oscillations
How damage occurs in steel
43
==PAGE:52==
like these are unlikely to reduce fatigue life, due to the small force amplitude of 1­2 kN at
most. This effect was noted for the extended control code.
6.2
S1 Monotonic Tests
6.2.1
Undamaged Material Properties
The undamaged material has material properties close to those set for S355 steel in stan­
dard ISO 10025­2:2019 [6]. Table 5.6 indicates that the yield stress was slightly higher,
however this was considered not to be of concern. A change in material compounds used
could cause a higher yield stress, and the yield stress was higher, causing no issues for
structures using this steel.
6.2.2
XCT Scans comparison
The XCT scans in Figure 5.9 and 5.10 show a very large increase in damage compared
between the two damage levels. Where S2a2 has some voids, S3c2 has large cracks.
This validates the fracture transition point, as S3c had run to strain values beyond this
point.
6.2.3
Damaged Material Yield and Ultimate Stresses
It was notable that the yield and ultimate stresses are much higher for the damaged ma­
terial than the undamaged material. It was expected that the material would have a lower
yield and ultimate stress. This section will discuss what may have caused this.
Kink bands are usually found in material that is inhomogenous, as discussed by Dewey
[40]. This research is aimed at rock types, but can also be applied to other crystal struc­
tures such as metals. When a stress becomes too high, the micro­structure may kink,
leading to an increase in stress this may carry before fracture is initiated. To determine
if this was the case, damaged material should be checked with SEM. This would allow
insight into the micro structure and identification of voids and any grain boundary kinks.
Another explanation can be given by Forni et. al., who state that a test carried out at a
higher strain rate can increase the yield and ultimate strength of a test to a point, as seen
in Figure 2.3 [33]. While the displacement rates were constant during testing, the strain
rates changed, as seen in Figure A.4. Forni et. al. do state that a much higher strain rate
may affect the testing performance. Strain rates from Figure A.4 indicate that S3c5 and
S04 have a strong increase of strain rate towards yield, while S2a5 does not. The strain
gauage on S2a5 was outside of the area where fracture occured, but since its behaviour
was similar to S3c5 in displacement, it could be reasoned through Equation 2.5 that the
behaviour in strain would be similar too. Therefore if all three specimens exhibit similar
strain responses in the elastic region, it would be expected that Forni et. al.’s findings
would not cover the change in stress significantlty.
Temperature in the lab was stable throughout all tests, staying within the ±2◦limit set
by ASTM E8. Therefore this can not have contributed to much higher yield and ultimate
strains.
The type of test machine was changed to a 25kN Instron machine for testing damage
levels D1 and D2. This was done as the 100 kN MTS machine used for S01 was no
longer available. However from the test machine change between the L1 Reference and
Damage tests, it was seen that the difference was quite limited, seen in Figure 5.6. The
main difference was the initial force between S01 and S2a5/S3c5. S2a5 and S3c5 were
started from 0.0 kN, as this was the value the initial force tended towards after gripping.
S01 on the other hand was started from a much lower force, as this was the force mea­
sured following gripping. This force was lower than expected, but with identical alignment
44
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:53==
methods between both machines types it was not expected to be an issue due to installa­
tion. It was therefore assumed that this force was completely a compression load applied
to S01 by the grips, and therefore no force offsets needed to be applied. If the force offset
were to be applied, the data in S01 would match be closer to data from S2a5/S3c5, but
the post­fracture force values would be off by 7.6 kN, equal to the offset value. A change
in machine or grips can have influenced the data somewhat, but would not explain the
large margin seen in the results.
The manufacturer for Wire EDM cutting differed between undamaged and damaged ma­
terial due to practical constraints. An evaluation is made whether a difference in settings
could cause a change in material properties. Maher et. al. [39] state that Wire EDM has
an effect on material up to 200 µm from the surface. They state increased or decreased
spark energy has a minor effect on the affected material depth, with an increase of 20µJ
linked to a change of 2­3µm. It is expected that the production process has little to no
effect on the yield and ultimate strength. The material thickness being less for damaged
specimens was also unlikely to be an issue. The different cross­sectional areas were
between S01 and S2a5/S3c5, where S1 had a thickness of 4mm, and S2a5/S3c5 had a
thickness of 3.35mm due to a misunderstanding with the workshop. The change in cross­
sectional area was considered when calculating the stress in the material from the force,
and while smaller thickness material may withstand slightly higher stress levels per ISO
10025­2:2019 [6], this effect is considered negligible at this scale.
A final effect could be that undamaged test S01 was misaligned. However, this would
not yield such a large discrepancy. The data for S01 matched the reference data closely,
indicating that this specimen was not misaligned.
A paper was found by Tang e. al. [41]. They first fatigued material to a known damage
level per Palmgren­Miner’s rule, then completed monotonic tests to evaluate the remain­
ing performance of the metal. Their results indicate a decreasing stress as the material
grows more damaged. It is anticipated that yield and ultimate stress data found in their
research for monotonic tests is valid, although further research is required to uncover if
kink banding or strain rate effects influenced the test outcomes.
6.2.4
Damaged material properties
The strain ranges for S2a5 and S3c5 were as expected compared to S01. The increase in
voids as seen in XCT imagery from Figure 5.9 caused the material to fail at a lower strain
than the undamaged material. The voids were noticeable, consisting of some speck­
les and micro cracks. The change in strain range and damage level between S2a5 and
S3c5 was larger than the change between S2a5 and S01 by Lemaitre’s model from Equa­
tion 2.17[26]. The XCT images from Figure 5.10 indicated a significant increase in crack
length, and showed that the majority of damage occurred during and just after the frac­
ture transition. Material pushed beyond the fracture transition point will rapidly loose its
strength, but will retain some remaining strength. Lemaitre states that the damage at the
fracture transition is around 0.2­0.8, while from this data it appears to be around 0.05.
Conducting evaluations with a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) allows for the void
fraction to be estimated for this material, as per the GTN model [29][30][31].
6.2.5
S2a5 Strain Drop
S2a5 showed decreasing strain beyond a value of 0.005 mm/mm. This happened as
the crack in this material formed outside of the critical section, where the strain gauge
was located. As a result, the specimen unloaded elastically throughout the range. An
exception was between 0.004 and 0.003 mm/mm.
How damage occurs in steel
45
==PAGE:54==
6.2.6
Displacement Control Discrepancies
From Figure 5.11 it could be seen that at a displacement just after 3mm the data was
suddenly spaced further apart, indicating a sudden increase in test rate. This appeared to
be an anomaly in the displacement rate control, where it momentarily increased, followed
by a decrease to compensate. As strain and displacement are linked as per Equation 2.4,
the strain will follow in similar behaviour. This will not affect the material properties found,
and will not affect the fracture strain.
S01 was subject to oscillations in the later stage of testing, just like L1 specimens. While
Instron machines had a single mistracking of displacement rate, this repeated behaviour
was not seen. It can be concluded that MTS machines struggle to maintain low displace­
ment rates at high strain levels, with no data to support if the same occurs using Instron
machines at these strain ranges.
6.3
S1 High Cycle Fatigue tests
6.3.1
Run­out as failure mode
Specimen S04 completed the test as a run­out after 10 million cycles. There was no
discernible difference in maximum or minimum strain values between the start and end of
the test, seen in Figure A.3. It can be concluded that S355 has a fatigue plateau below
it’s yield stress, as predicted by Klúsak and Seitl [8].
6.3.2
Comparing Damage levels
Specimen S2a2 fractured at 5.92 · 105 cycles. This was compared to 10 million cycles for
undamaged material S04. While S04 did not fracture, it did reach a run­out failure criterion,
therefore a comparison was made. Using Palmgren­Miner’s rule from Equation 2.18, and
with D1 equal to 1 when ni equals Nf,1, an estimation can be made for the fatigue life of
D0 at this point in Equation 6.1.
D0 =
∑Nf,1
Nf,0
= 0.0592
(6.1)
Palmgren­Miner states that damage in fatigue is linear. As both damage indications by
Lemaitre and Palmgren­Miner are scalers on a scale from 0 to 1, these can be summed
to create a total damage of 0.106. The material fractured, meaning the actual damage
was 1.00. A discrepancy is found of 0.894.
A comparison can also be made for S3c2 at a lower stress range. The initial damage is
equal to 0.37 per Lemaitre’s rule, with fatigue damage equalling to 0.021 per Palmgren­
Miner’s rule. This adds to a predicted damage by the models of 0.392, with an actual
damage of 1.00, leading to a discrepancy of 0.608. This is closer than S2c2, while the
material initially had more damage. This indicates that linear models do not hold for de­
termining damage before, at, and beyond the fracture transition point. Using SEM would
allow for an application of the GTN model, where the void fraction in the material at dif­
ferent stages could be used to discuss damage more accurately.
6.4
Control Validation
6.4.1
Use of slopes and counters
The use of slopes for control was more difficult in practice as the signal obtained from
the machine was noisy. A system of counters helped detect a change in slope, but was
not accurate in each case. While MPE does support array based calculations, indexing
arrays was non­trivial compared to programming in Python or MATLAB. External software
could have been used for data processing, but this could have lead to further delays.
46
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:55==
6.4.2
Impact of code delays and MPE limitations
The code struggled at times to stop specimens in a timely manner. From Figure 5.1 and
Table 5.1 it can be seen that while the target forces were 4, 3.5, and 3 kN, there was
some variation in the final force at test termination. This was attributed to the way the
slopes were calculated. Every slope calculation must occur by measuring data with a
delay in between. These delay intervals therefore affected the speed at which the code
ran. From testing various delays, a high delay between measurement values caused poor
code performance, while a low delay introduced a lot of noise into the data, as the raw
signal was noisy. This made it harder for slope detection to work. Using no delays lead to
many cases of repeat data, which did not produce a calculated slope at all and terminated
some loops prematurely. While MPE supports parallel paths, it was not possible to pass
variables between paths unless these merged at some point. Therefore it was not pos­
sible to put slope calculations in parallel to loading and unloading unless the dependent
calculations came after both.
6.4.3
Signal Noise and Controller Tracking
As discussed in the previous section, the data at high resolution was quite noisy. Part of
this was due to the way the data was acquired, part of this was due to oscillations due to
the machine controller struggling to track displacement. Examples of this can be seen in
Figure 5.12 and 5.8. This becomes especially pronounced at slow testing rates and high
strains, which was exactly the region in which precision was desired. Figure 5.7 shows
this behaviour for the large specimens. The slope would be calculated very differently for
both tests at equal force and strain, due to the phase difference between the oscillations.
Another issue of controller tracking was the sudden push­pull during the specimen push­
back manoeuvre from Figure 4.7. Figure 5.2 can be used to see that some valleys are
small. Here the pushback was activated but was not successful. The displacement contin­
ued to increase. It was thought that the controller struggled with multiple sudden changes
in direction, especially with the delays inherent to the code’s slope detection functionality.
6.4.4
Comparing extended and basic control
From the extended control data, it appears that this method was less repeatable and
accurate than the basic control programme. One reason can be the scrap metal used
for creating specimens. Using thicker material and more regular shaped coupons would
aid in further development of the code. The push back phenomena was made difficult by
some inherent limitations to implementing slope calculations into MPE. The basic control
scheme, while requiring some estimates on safe displacement limits and test rates, does
not require as much input and offers much more repeatable results, provided the material
and geometry was identical.
The extended control code is not as appealing as initially presumed. The goal of this
code is to push a specimen as far towards fracture as possible without causing fracture to
occur. As large cracks already formed in the material just beyond the fracture transition
point, it is expected that the code won’t produce useful material for testing further away
from this point. The basic control controlled specimens down to roughly 290 kN, although
accuracy suffered at and beyond this point.
6.5
Results in an industry context
The impact of these results on normal operation of offshore wind farms or earthquake
dampers is limited, as these usually do not operate in regions with such extreme strain
and damage. It can be concluded though that once damage has been introduced into any
How damage occurs in steel
47
==PAGE:56==
steel structure, even an amount that is considered small by Lemaitre’s criterion, its ability
to withstand further loading cycles is reduced greatly.
An example could be an offshore monopile on its way to be installed. These are usually
shipped by barge. If the oceans are rough, or the monopile is not secured as designed,
it may lead to damage occurring during shipping. From the results of this thesis it can be
concluded that small amounts of ductile damage already affect the fatigue life negatively.
Therefore it is important that such structures are replaced and not installed.
Another example could be steel truss members. A recent example, as of the writing of
this thesis, of such a structure undergoing a sudden increase in ductile damage was the
tragic Baltimore Key Bridge Collapse on March 26th of 2024. The bridge collapsed after
being hit by a container ship, a case currently still under investigation by the NTSB [42].
Knowing what damage level the structural members have been subjected to can help
better understand what happens at and around points where such large loads are applied
onto a structure. An analysis can be completed to identify which remaining members
have been affected. This could allow for some parts of the bridge to be safely reused with
limitations on load, or for these to be replaced at a later date when approaching the end
of their damaged fatigue life. This can help reduce retrofitting costs, down­time, and allow
for lower amounts of new steel to be used, reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
48
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:57==
7
Conclusion
S355 Steel has been evaluated at damage levels at and beyond the macro­crack initia­
tion. Damage levels increased rapidly after macro­crack initiation, by 0.323 over a drop
of 20 kN. A sharp drop­off of material properties was associated with this, and large in­
ternal cracks formed in the material. There are some gaps in existing models for damage
propagation, especially at high strain rates.
Specimens were designed using ASTM E466 standard as reference, and tested using a
variety of MTS and Instron testing machines. Two control programmes were set up in MPE
and compared, one basic and one extended. Markers used for identifying damage levels
include Force level, and the slope of the Force­Strain curve. It was found that limitations
in MPE affect the extended control programme’s performance. By the material properties
from test after the fracture transition point, such software is not as desirable as expected
due to a very rapid decrease in material strength and crack length. After material was
damaged to damage levels D1 and D2, it was subject to montonic tests per ASTM E8
and HCF tests per ASTM E466. These tests provide D1 = 0.047 and D2 = 0.37. After
fatigue testing, the combined damage calculated through Lemaitre and Palmgren­Miner
did not describe the entirety of the damage caused. The fatigue tests ended after 5.9%
and 2.1% of the cycles as undamaged material for D1 and D2 respectively. This gave an
underestimation of damage of 89.4% and 60.8% for damage levels D1 and D2.
The results show that care must be taken when steel structures are exposed to large
sudden deformations, for example when transporting a monopile on a barge. Monotonic
tests showed some unexpected behaviour with damaged specimens having high stress
values. Further study of kink band effects and machine choice should be made.
Damaged material can still carry load, but it must not be relied upon to do so for extended
periods in a safe manner. Different requirements must be implemented in ductile damaged
steel compared to steel that has received a similar amount of fatigue damage. When
applied to offshore monopiles or truss bridges made from S355 steel, this research can
help identify at what damage level replacements should be considered, and can help
ensure structure safety.
How damage occurs in steel
49
==PAGE:58==
50
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:59==
8
Recommendations
For further research some recommendations are made. It is recommended to explore
more damage levels before and just after fracture transition. This will give a higher res­
olution in data for how voids propagate and turn into macro cracks. In addition, more
monotonic tests must be carried out to verify yield and ultimate strength of damaged ma­
terial. If possible, these tests should be run on a 100 kN MTS machine to see if the values
are different, or all tests should be re­run on a 25kN Instron machine with strain control, so
that an evaluation can be made if machine or displacement rate affect the stress values.
Finally, SEM should be used to evaluate the micro­structure of the metal used to identify
void locations, and to identify if any kink bands occur.
This thesis has only evaluated S355 steel, as this is one of the more common types avail­
able. However many more types of steel are commonly used in structures, and other
materials such as aluminium or titanium used in aerospace applications may exhibit dif­
ferent damage behaviour as well. It would be beneficial to complete tests on these other
materials to evaluate how ductile damage affects remaining fatigue life in these materials.
For fatigue tests, strain controlled LCF tests could be carried out. For specimens with
high amounts of damage, this can allow for a more accurate evaluation at a lower cycle
count. For HCF tests, more repeats of tests should be run, at more stress ranges, for more
damage levels. This will allow for accurate averaged data, from which S­N curves can be
generated for different damage levels. This will allow for easier estimation of remaining
fatigue life by using the S­N curves as a look­up. Interpolation can then be made between
damage levels to estimate the damaged material’s performance should it not be exactly
on a curve.
For control, optimisations can be made to the code to minimise delays. Other software
than MPE can be used to process data. If MPE must be used, an array based approach
may provide improvements over a counter based approach. For validating the code, it
would be recommended to have standardised coupons of a uniform geometry and thicker
material, at least 4mm or larger. This would reduce impact from specimen geometry, and
improve testing repeatability.
For determining damage, models such as Lemaitre’s model and Palmgren­Miner do not
hold well near and beyond fracture initiation. It is recommended to explore models such
as the GTN model by utilising SEM to estimate void percentages in material at various
damage levels during tests, and after fracture as reference. This can be compared to
experimental data from Wcislik [31]. Additionally, with more data from a S­N curve com­
parison, it may be possible to make statements about a new model that takes varying
pre­damage amounts into account, and can combine this with a fatigue model.
How damage occurs in steel
51
==PAGE:60==
52
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
J. Armijo, K. Gaffney, A. Gouy, L. L. Re, Francesco Pavan, Uwe Remme, Marcela
Ruiz de Chavez VelezRemme, Hugo Salamanca, and Andreas Schröder, “Iron and
Steel Technology Roadmap ­ Towards more sustainable steelmaking,” en, Interna­
tional Energy Agency, Roadmap, Oct. 2020.
[2]
Y. Konishi, N. Kawamura, M. Terashima, S. Kishiki, S. Yamada, I. Aiken, C. Black,
K. Murakami, and T. Someya, “Evaluation of the fatigue life and behavior charac­
teristics of U­shaped steel dampers after extreme earthquake loading,” en, vol. 15,
Lisbon: WCEE, 2012.
[3]
J. Li, G. Yang, T. Siebert, M. F. Shi, and L. Yang, “A method of the direct measure­
ment of the true stress–strain curve over a large strain range using multi­camera
digital image correlation,” en, Optics and Lasers in Engineering, vol. 107, pp. 194–
201, Aug. 2018, ISSN: 01438166. DOI: 10.1016/j.optlaseng.2018.03.029. [Online].
Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0143816618301349 (visited
on 04/03/2024).
[4]
H. Motra, J. Hildebrand, and A. Dimmig­Osburg, “Assessment of strain measure­
ment techniques to characterise mechanical properties of structural steel,” en, Engi­
neering Science and Technology, an International Journal, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 260–
269, Dec. 2014, ISSN: 22150986. DOI: 10.1016/j.jestch.2014.07.006. [Online].
Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2215098614000597 (visited
on 04/03/2024).
[5]
V. Igwemezie, A. Mehmanparast, and A. Kolios, “Materials selection for XL wind
turbine support structures: A corrosion­fatigue perspective,” en, Marine Structures,
vol. 61, pp. 381–397, Sep. 2018, ISSN: 09518339. DOI: 10.1016/j.marstruc.2018.06.
008. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0951833917304859
(visited on 03/05/2024).
[6]
Dansk Standard, DS/EN 10025­2:2019, Copenhagen, 2019. (visited on 04/03/2024).
[7]
Eurocode, Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures, Brussels, May 2005.
[8]
J. Klusák and S. Seitl, “Very high cycle fatigue tests of high strength steels S355 J0
and S355 J2,” en, Procedia Structural Integrity, vol. 17, pp. 576–581, 2019, ISSN:
24523216. DOI: 10.1016/j.prostr.2019.08.077. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2452321619302823 (visited on 03/06/2024).
[9]
C. Bathias, L. Drouillac, and P. Le François, “How and why the fatigue S–N curve
does not approach a horizontal asymptote,” en, International Journal of Fatigue,
vol. 23, pp. 143–151, 2001, ISSN: 01421123. DOI: 10.1016/S0142-1123(01)00123-2.
[Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0142112301001232
(visited on 04/19/2024).
[10]
D.­Y. Chiang, “The generalized Masing models for deteriorating hysteresis and cyclic
plasticity,” en, Applied Mathematical Modelling, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 847–863, Nov.
1999, ISSN: 0307904X. DOI: 10.1016/S0307- 904X(99)00015- 3. [Online]. Avail­
able: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0307904X99000153 (visited on
04/08/2024).
[11]
G. Masing, “Eigenspannungen und Verfestigung beim Messing,” Zurich, 1924.
[12]
Walter Ramberg and William R. Osgood, “Description of Stress­Strain Curved by
Three Parameters,” National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, Washington, Tech.
Rep. Technical Note 902, Jul. 1943.
How damage occurs in steel
53
==PAGE:62==
[13]
S. Röscher and M. Knobloch, “Towards a prognosis of fatigue life using a Two￿Stage￿Model:
Application to butt welds,” en, Steel Construction, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 198–208, Aug.
2019, ISSN: 1867­0520, 1867­0539. DOI: 10.1002/stco.201900018. [Online]. Avail­
able: https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / 10 . 1002 / stco . 201900018 (visited on
10/04/2023).
[14]
Y.­C. Chiou and M.­C. Yip, “Effect of mean strain level on the cyclic stress–strain
behavior of AISI 316 stainless steel,” en, Materials Science and Engineering: A,
vol. 354, no. 1­2, pp. 270–278, Aug. 2003, ISSN: 09215093. DOI: 10.1016/S0921-
5093(03)00016-9. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0921509303000169 (visited on 04/13/2024).
[15]
Q. Si, Y. Ding, L. Zong, and X. Meng, “Effect of pre­fatigue damage on static and
hysteretic behavior of Q355 steel,” en, International Journal of Fatigue, vol. 160,
p. 106 874, Jul. 2022, ISSN: 01421123. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.106874. [On­
line]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0142112322001475
(visited on 10/04/2023).
[16]
P. Paris and F. Erdogan, “A Critical Analysis of Crack Propagation Laws,” en, Journal
of Basic Engineering, vol. 85, no. 4, pp. 528–533, Dec. 1963, ISSN: 0021­9223.
DOI: 10.1115/1.3656900. [Online]. Available: https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/
fluidsengineering/article/85/4/528/395834/A-Critical-Analysis-of-Crack-Propagation-
Laws (visited on 03/05/2024).
[17]
S. Seitl, P. Pokorný, P. Miarka, J. Klusák, Z. Kala, and L. Kunz, “Comparison of
fatigue crack propagation behaviour in two steel grades S235, S355 and a steel
from old crane way,” en, MATEC Web of Conferences, vol. 310, K. Kotrasová, E.
Kormaníková, and S. Kmeť, Eds., p. 00 034, 2020, ISSN: 2261­236X. DOI: 10.1051/
matecconf/202031000034. [Online]. Available: https://www.matec-conferences.org/
10.1051/matecconf/202031000034 (visited on 04/03/2024).
[18]
A. M. De Jesus, R. Matos, B. F. Fontoura, C. Rebelo, L. Simões Da Silva, and
M. Veljkovic, “A comparison of the fatigue behavior between S355 and S690 steel
grades,” en, Journal of Constructional Steel Research, vol. 79, pp. 140–150, Dec.
2012, ISSN: 0143974X. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcsr.2012.07.021. [Online]. Available: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0143974X12001782 (visited on 03/11/2024).
[19]
ASTM, Test Method for Strain­Controlled Fatigue Testing, en, Jul. 2021. DOI: 10.
1520/E0606_E0606M-21. [Online]. Available: http://www.astm.org/cgi-bin/resolver.
cgi?E606E606M-21 (visited on 03/12/2024).
[20]
S. S. Manson, “Fatigue: A complex subject—Some simple approximations,” en, Ex­
perimental Mechanics, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 193–226, Jul. 1965, ISSN: 0014­4851,
1741­2765. DOI: 10.1007/BF02321056. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/BF02321056 (visited on 04/08/2024).
[21]
Coffin,L. F., “A Study of the Effects of Cyclic Thermal Stresses on a Ductile Metal,”
Trans. ASME. Aug 1954, vol. 76, no. 6, pp. 931–949, Aug. 1954. DOI: 10.1115/1.
4015020.
[22]
Z. Chen, H. Bao, Y. Dai, and Y. Liu, “Numerical prediction based on XFEM for mixed­
mode crack growth path and fatigue life under cyclic overload,” en, International
Journal of Fatigue, vol. 162, p. 106 943, Sep. 2022, ISSN: 01421123. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ijfatigue.2022.106943. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0142112322002122 (visited on 10/04/2023).
[23]
W. Wciślik and S. Lipiec, “Void­Induced Ductile Fracture of Metals: Experimental
Observations,” en, Materials, vol. 15, no. 18, p. 6473, Sep. 2022, ISSN: 1996­1944.
DOI: 10.3390/ma15186473. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1944/
15/18/6473 (visited on 04/14/2024).
54
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:63==
[24]
W. H. Tai and Yang, Bing Xian, “A NEW MICROVOID­DAMAGE MODEL FOR DUC­
TILE FRACTURE,” en, Engineering Fracture Mechanics, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 377–
384, 1986.
[25]
J. Bandstra, D. Koss, A. Geltmacher, P. Matic, and R. Everett, “Modeling void co­
alescence during ductile fracture of a steel,” en, Materials Science and Engineer­
ing: A, vol. 366, no. 2, pp. 269–281, Feb. 2004, ISSN: 09215093. DOI: 10.1016/j.
msea.2003.08.018. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0921509303006932 (visited on 03/26/2024).
[26]
J. Lemaitre, “A Continuous Damage Mechanics Model for Ductile Fracture,” en,
Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 83–89, 1985.
DOI: 10.1115/1.3225775￿.
[27]
A. Sancho, M. Cox, T. Cartwright, C. Davies, P. Hooper, and J. Dear, “An exper­
imental methodology to characterise post­necking behaviour and quantify ductile
damage accumulation in isotropic materials,” en, International Journal of Solids and
Structures, vol. 176­177, pp. 191–206, Nov. 2019, ISSN: 00207683. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ijsolstr.2019.06.010. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0020768319302872 (visited on 11/18/2023).
[28]
A. Palmgren, “Die Lebensdauer von Kugellagern,” Zeitschrift des Vereines Deutscher
Ingenieure, vol. 68, no. 14, pp. 339–341, 1924.
[29]
A. L. Gurson, “Continuum Theory of Ductile Rupture by Void Nucleation and Growth:
Part I—Yield Criteria and Flow Rules for Porous Ductile Media,” Journal of En­
gineering Materials and Technology, vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 2–15, Jan. 1977, _eprint:
https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/materialstechnology/article­pdf/99/1/2/5788715/2_1.pdf,
ISSN: 0094­4289. DOI: 10.1115/1.3443401. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1115/1.3443401.
[30]
V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman, “Analysis of the cup­cone fracture in a round
tensile bar,” en, Acta Metallurgica, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 157–169, Jan. 1984, ISSN:
00016160. DOI: 10 . 1016 / 0001 - 6160(84 ) 90213 - X. [Online]. Available: https : / /
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/000161608490213X (visited on 04/18/2024).
[31]
W. Wcislik, “Experimental determination of critical void volume fraction fF for the
Gurson Tvergaard Needleman (GTN) model,” en, Procedia Structural Integrity, vol. 2,
pp. 1676–1683, 2016, ISSN: 24523216. DOI: 10.1016/j.prostr.2016.06.212. [Online].
Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2452321616302232 (visited
on 04/18/2024).
[32]
J. Faleskog, X. Gao, and C. Fong Shih, “Cell model for nonlinear fracture analysis
­ I. Micromechanics calibration,” English, International Journal of Fracture, vol. 89,
no. 4, pp. 355–373, 1998, Publisher: Springer Netherlands, ISSN: 03769429 (ISSN).
DOI: 10.1023/A:1007421420901. [Online]. Available: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-0032273429&doi=10.1023%2fA%3a1007421420901&
partnerID=40&md5=d0fb0f0ca3f7f5b2678405453b3d6915.
[33]
D. Forni, B. Chiaia, and E. Cadoni, “Strain rate behaviour in tension of S355 steel:
Base for progressive collapse analysis,” en, Engineering Structures, vol. 119, pp. 164–
173, Jul. 2016, ISSN: 01410296. DOI: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2016.04.013. [Online].
Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0141029616301249 (visited
on 03/05/2024).
[34]
Dansk Standard, Metallic Materials ­ Tensile Testing ­ Part 1: Method of test at Room
Temperature, Brussels, 2020.
[35]
ASTM, Test Methods for Tension Testing of Metallic Materials, en, Mar. 2024. DOI:
10.1520/E0008_E0008M-24. [Online]. Available: http://www.astm.org/cgi-bin/
resolver.cgi?E8E8M-24 (visited on 03/08/2024).
How damage occurs in steel
55
==PAGE:64==
[36]
M. Knobloch, J. Pauli, and M. Fontana, “Influence of the strain­rate on the me­
chanical properties of mild carbon steel at elevated temperatures,” en, Materials
& Design, vol. 49, pp. 553–565, Aug. 2013, ISSN: 02613069. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j .
matdes.2013.01.021. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0261306913000356 (visited on 04/19/2024).
[37]
J. E. Hockett, “MECHANICAL TESTING MACHINE STIFFNESS,” en, International
Journal of Mechanical Science, vol. 13, pp. 251–264, 1971.
[38]
ASTM, Standard Practice for Conducting Force Controlled Constant Amplitude Ax­
ial Fatigue Tests of Metallic Materials, Jul. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://compass.
astm . org / document / ?contentCode = ASTM % 7CE0466 - 21 % 7Cen - US (visited on
03/13/2024).
[39]
I. Maher, A. Sarhan, and H. Marashi, “1.9 Effect of Electrical Discharge Energy on
White Layer Thickness of WEDM Process,” en, in Comprehensive Materials Finish­
ing, Elsevier, 2017, pp. 231–266, ISBN: 978­0­12­803249­7. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-
12-803581-8.09154-2. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/B9780128035818091542 (visited on 04/24/2024).
[40]
J. F. Dewey, “Nature and origin of kink­bands,” Tectonophysics, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 459–
494, 1965, ISSN: 0040­1951. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0040 - 1951(65 )
90019- 3. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0040195165900193.
[41]
Z. Tang, X. Hu, J. Jiang, H. Xue, and H. Zhuge, “Effects of pre­fatigue damages
on ultimate strength of steel columns: From material to structure,” en, Journal of
Constructional Steel Research, vol. 195, p. 107 358, Aug. 2022, ISSN: 0143974X.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcsr.2022.107358. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0143974X22002309 (visited on 04/26/2024).
[42]
N. B. of Transport Safety, Contact of Cargo Vessel Dali with Francis Scott Key Bridge
and Subsequent Bridge Collapse, Publication Title: NTSB Investigations, Mar. 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/Pages/DCA24MM031.aspx.
56
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:65==
A
Additional Figures
Figure A.1: Reference test specimen Displacement versus Force
Figure A.2: L1 tests compared to reference, Displacement versus Force
How damage occurs in steel
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.3: S04 mean strain change over test duration. Dips due to specimen unloading
Figure A.4: Strain rates for S01, S2a5, and S3c5
58
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:67==
B
Specimen Images
Figure B.1: S0 following full fracture
How damage occurs in steel
59
==PAGE:68==
(a) Unfractured
(b) Partial Fracture
Figure B.2: S3B before and after testing, with crack noticeable in centre after test
60
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:69==
Figure B.3: S2a and S3c after small specimens have been removed. Outer specimens
marked with 1 and 4 not used for testing
How damage occurs in steel
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure B.4: Scrap metal specimens for extended control validation, hole and notched
specimen
62
How damage occurs in steel
==PAGE:71==
How damage occurs in steel
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
