==PAGE:1==
Locus
Global Localization of Earthly Images powered by
Deep Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Locus
Global Localization of Earthly Images powered by Deep Learning
Master Thesis
May, 2024
By
Kristóf Kenéz Drexler
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
http://www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Autonomous Systems, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has intermediate knowledge in the areas of machine learning
and deep learning.
Kristóf Kenéz Drexler ­ s220279
Signature
2024­05­14
Date
ii
Locus
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The LOCUS project (LOCalisation of Unidentified imageS) aims to offer a practical and
accessible solution for predicting the location of where an image on Earth was captured.
At the core of this mission is the creation of a user­friendly experience. The thesis en­
deavors to develop a fully functional prototype — an interactive website enabling users to
seamlessly upload their images. Powered by state­of­the­art deep learning models, this
predictive engine will analyse visual data, providing accurate predictions. The project’s
sustainability is ensured through the incorporation of best practices from Machine Learn­
ing Operations. This not only aims to keep the project viable in the long run, but also
opens the door for external contributors once the thesis concludes.
Locus
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kristóf Kenéz Drexler, MSc Autonomous Systems, DTU
Author of thesis.
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, Postdoc, DTU
I would like to express my gratitude to Nicki Skafte Detlefsen for the consistent support and
guidance he provided me over the last six months. The regular meetings, the valuable
insights on writing such a paper, and the encouragement to follow my own ideas were
instrumental in the success of this thesis.
Søren Hauberg, Professor, DTU
I wish to extend my gratitude to Søren Hauberg for accepting the role as my supervisor,
thus allowing me to pursue a topic for my Masters Thesis which I am passionate about.
iv
Locus
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature Study
3
2.1
IM2GPS: estimating geographic information from a single image . . . . . .
3
2.2
PlaNet ­ Photo Geolocation with Convolutional Neural Networks
. . . . . .
4
2.3
Places: A 10 million Image Database for Scene Recognition
. . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Data
6
3.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Data storage and retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Quadtree generation
11
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Quadtree structure and naming convention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Generating the quadtree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Quadtree results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
The model
22
5.1
Modifying the ResNet­50 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.2
Data pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3
Model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6
Cloud Deployment
31
6.1
Building the backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Building the frontend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.3
Cloud deployment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7
Evaluation
37
7.1
Model Inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
8
Conclusion
44
8.1
Future improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Bibliography
47
Locus
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Locus
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The LOCUS project (LOCalisation of Unidentified imageS) aims to offer a practical and
accessible solution for predicting the location of where an image on Earth was captured.
At the core of this mission is the creation of a user­friendly experience. The thesis en­
deavours to develop a fully functional prototype: an interactive website that allows users
to seamlessly upload their images. Using state­of­the­art deep learning models, the pre­
dictive engine will analyse visual data to accurately predict the location where an image
was captured.
The project’s sustainability is ensured through the incorporation of best practices from
machine learning operations. This not only aims to keep the project viable in the long run,
but also opens the door for external contributors once the thesis concludes.
1.1
Motivation
Although some individuals possess an innate ability to discern the location of a picture
based on subtle visual cues, such as the texture of grass or the colour of soil, replicating
this feat using Deep Learning Neural Networks presents a compelling challenge.
However, developing such a model is only part of the solution. For the project to be
truly impactful, it must provide users with an intuitive and accessible interface. Hence, in
addition to creating a sophisticated model for image localisation, our goal is to develop a
user­friendly web application that allows seamless interaction with the predictive engine.
By bridging the gap between advanced technology and user accessibility, the LOCUS
project aims to revolutionise the way images are localised and contribute to advancements
in the field of computer vision.
1.2
Methodology
A brief overview on the figures, charts and code snippets found throughout this paper.
1.2.1
On code snippets and flow charts
This project is heavily reliant on coding and machine learning. The code snippets pre­
sented in the paper are valid Python code designed to illustrate specific concepts or
functionalities central to the project’s methodology. However, these snippets should be
considered as pseudocode, as they have been simplified by omitting details that are not
essential for understanding the underlying logic. For those interested in comprehensive
details and full implementation, the complete, documented source code is available on
the project’s GitHub repository [1][2].
The flow charts found in the paper are used when inserting a code snippet was deemed
too long or complicated, or where the structure of a flowchart could better convey certain
ideas or concepts.
1.2.2
On map projections
This project delves deep into topics of a geospatial nature. As such, displaying data on
the Earth’s surface is inevitable. The reader will find two types of map in this thesis; the
first will be the figures showing the entire Earth as a whole, and the other are those that
focus on a particular region of interest.
Locus
1
==PAGE:10==
The former will always be in the Robinson projection, an apt choice for general­purpose
maps that have no requirements of having equal area or being conformal. In this pro­
jection, areas very near the poles appear severely distorted, but this quickly tapers off to
moderate levels as distance from the poles is increased. This results in more accurate
landmass shapes than is expected from the Mercator projection, while Northern regions of
interest in the world are still recognisable. The other projection that will be encountered in
this paper is the Transverse Mercator Projection. This will be used when showing a local
region of interest as this projection is conformal, meaning smaller, local shapes are well
preserved in the projection given the central parallel and meridian are set to the centre of
the region of interest.
2
Locus
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Study
Over the past decades, many papers have been written on algorithmically determining
location based on image data. This chapter is dedicated to reviewing the most influential
of these works in order to gain an understanding of the state of the field and to leverage
their findings in our own work.
The literature reviewed in this chapter mainly touches upon the topics of image geoloca­
tion and deep learning.
2.1
IM2GPS: estimating geographic information from a single
image
Before the deep learning era, the IM2GPS [3] paper published in 2008 represented a leap
in geospatial computer vision and analysis. This paper demonstrated a novel approach
using traditional feature extraction methods applied to a dataset to match images against
those features. Thus, a probability distribution was generated on the Earth’s surface.
Leveraging a dataset comprising more than 6 million GPS­tagged images, the authors em­
ploy a combination of colour histograms, texton histograms, line features, gist descriptors,
and geometric context to match images with these precomputed features in the dataset.
In particular, the paper reports performance improvements of up to 30% compared to
baseline methods, demonstrating the efficacy of the proposed approach in image locali­
sation.
Despite its pioneering role in geospatial analysis, the IM2GPS paper’s reliance on non­
deep learning approaches ultimately inhibited its performance. The image features upon
which the model relied on were handcrafted in the sense that the authors of the papers
defined the relevance and weight that each feature has on the output. This, of course,
completely lacks the flexibility and adaptability that we have come to expect form later
deep learning algorithms. Although this technique yielded promising results, it was limited
by the reliance on these handcrafted features and the need to store the 6 million images
and their precomputed features to search against.
A considerable drawback of this method is that the dataset used by the authors did not
cover the globe evenly, resulting in worse performance on images outside the scope of
the dataset. The dataset itself was biased towards urban regions. Furthermore, while
the paper does not explicitly go into the details, a larger dataset leads to better accuracy;
however, more storing these images and their precomputed features does not scale well
with accuracy.
In conclusion, the IM2GPS paper represents an influential contribution to the field of im­
age localisation, showcasing the efficacy and the pitfalls of traditional feature extraction
methods in predicting the geographic location of images. However, the emergence of
deep learning techniques in subsequent years led to the deprecation of these traditional
image feature extraction methods; IM2GPS undoubtedly played a seminal role in the work
of later research papers.
Locus
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
PlaNet ­ Photo Geolocation with Convolutional Neural
Networks
The 2016 research paper by Weyand et al., known as PlaNet[4], marked a significant
advancement in geolocation methodologies. Shifting over from traditional regression­
based approaches, the paper proposed the use of deep learning convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) to tackle geolocation tasks. To facilitate this shift, the PlaNet paper
proposed partitioning of the Earth’s surface into cells using the quadtree method. This shift
transformed geolocation into a classification task, predicting regions on Earth rather than
exact coordinates, allowing the assignment of probabilities to each cell in the prediction.
This also leverages the radical increase in the quantity and quality of the data during the
period between the release of the IM2GPS and the PlaNet paper.
A key novelty of PlaNet lay in its use of deep learning CNNs to automatically discern
the most relevant features for image localisation. Compared to previous methods such
as IM2GPS, this approach offered two significant advantages.
Firstly, the model au­
tonomously learnt features during training, resulting in a more comprehensive and higher­
quality feature set. Secondly, with sufficient data, PlaNet’s predictive capabilities sur­
passed those of IM2GPS, demonstrating superior performance in practical applications.
The PlaNet paper explored the addition of Long­Short­Term Memory (LSTM) models into
the prediction pipeline. Recognising the topographical correlation inherent in sequences
of images, such as family photo albums taken during travel, the authors hypothesised
that LSTM models could improve geolocation accuracy. By leveraging the predictions of
images where the model predicted the location with high certainty to predict the location of
images where the model was less certain, an LSTM model could enhance the predictions
in these cases.
Furthermore, an inherent advantage of deep learning neural networks is a large dataset
is required only during training. With the completion of model training, only the model is
required for inference, greatly increasing portability, thus utility of such approaches.
In conclusion, the PlaNet paper represents a groundbreaking advancement in the field of
image geolocation. It demonstrated the utility deep learning approaches exhibit for such
complex tasks. The availability of more diverse and more populous datasets resulted in
the ability to train these models with higher accuracy.
2.3
Places: A 10 million Image Database for Scene
Recognition
The Places paper [5], published in 2017, introduces a vast image database compiled to
facilitate scene recognition research. This dataset comprises ten million images, curated
to cover a diverse range of scenes and environments. The Places database aims to
address the limitations of existing datasets by offering a comprehensive collection that
reflects the complexity and variability of real­world scenes.
The Places dataset constitutes a wide spectrum of scene categories, including indoor
and outdoor environments, urban and rural landscapes, natural settings, and man­made
structures. By incorporating such diverse scenes, the dataset provides researchers with
a rich resource for training and evaluating scene recognition algorithms across various
domains. This ensures that models developed using the Places database are robust and
capable of generalising to a wide range of real­world scenarios.
A feature of the Places dataset is its hierarchical organisation, which categorises images
4
Locus
==PAGE:13==
into a multi tiered architecture of scenes. This hierarchical structure facilitates researchers
to explore scene recognition at different levels of granularity. At the highest level of ab­
straction, the Places dataset categorises datapoints into Indoor, Outdoor­Nature, and
Outdoor­Urban categories. At deeper levels, the hierarchy differentiates between rooms
of a house, such as kitchen, or bedroom, watering hole, or coast.
The availability of the Places dataset has facilitated advancements in scene recognition
research, enabling researchers to develop more accurate algorithms for scene categori­
sation. Using this collection of images provided by the dataset, researchers have been
able to push the boundaries of scene recognition, leading to improved performance and
scalability in real­world applications. As a seminal resource in the field of computer vision,
the Places dataset has served as a cornerstone of many research papers in the field of
computer vision.
2.4
Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition
The ”Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition” paper [6], written by Kaiming He,
Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun, introduces a groundbreaking approach
to deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) called ResNet. Published in 2015, this
paper presents a new architecture that tackles the challenges of training very deep neural
networks by adding residual connections.
ResNet is notable for its remarkable depth, ranging from 18 up to 152 layers. Until the
publishing of this paper, deeper networks were expected to perform better, but training
such deep models proved difficult due to the degradation problem. This issue occurs
when adding more layers leads to diminishing accuracy because of vanishing gradients.
To solve this problem, ResNet introduces residual connections or skip connections. These
connections allow the network to skip one or more layers by directly passing the input from
one layer to a later one. By focusing on learning the difference between the input and the
desired output, ResNet can ensure successful training even with such deep networks.
ResNet’s introduction of residual connections not only enables the training of deep net­
works but also improves accuracy and convergence speed. ResNet achieved state­of­
the­art performance on various image recognition benchmarks, including ImageNet clas­
sification and COCO detection. Moreover, the ResNet architecture has become widely
adopted in subsequent research and practical applications, becoming a foundational model
in the field of deep learning.
Locus
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Data
The following section details the most essential aspect of this project; the data and its cor­
responding processes. As will be discussed at greater length in later chapters, the main
driver behind this artificial intelligence is a ResNet based deep learning neural network.
The way neural networks achieve the high­accuracy metrics often associated with them
is by training them on enormous amounts of data. Such data can be acquired in the form
of ready­made datasets.
Once a dataset has been chosen, the next step is to preprocess the data into a format
suitable for the chosen neural network, which is light to store and efficient to retrieve during
training. This does not entail resizing, normalising, or otherwise manipulating the images,
as that happens at a later step in the process.
3.1
Dataset
A substantial amount of data is required for model training for an endeavour of this magni­
tude. Our research necessitates a dataset meeting two specific criteria: it must comprise
a minimum of one million images, each geotagged to provide spatial information essen­
tial for our analysis. One such dataset is the ”Large Dataset of Geotagged Images” [7], a
4.2 million image subset of the YFCC100M dataset. A latitude/longitude pair accompany
each of these images. It is provided as a collection of 142 files in MessagePack format,
a binary file format that can be thought of as the compact version of JSON. A sample of
images can be viewed 3.1.
It is important to get an idea of the resolutions and aspect ratios of the images in the
dataset, as the input to the ResNet model should be chosen with care keeping this in mind.
There are around 8000 different image resolutions in the dataset, and as can be seen in
3.2 they follow a power­law distribution. 320 pixels was both the most common height
and width, and as can be seen from the histogram of image sizes, the 20 most popular
image resolutions all had 320 pixels as one of the image’s resolutions, furthermore the
amount subsequent most common resolutions on each axis are larger than 320 pixels.
This means that scaling the images and cropping to a 320 by 320 pixel image should be
a satisfactory input for the ResNet model.
1
{
2
'image': b'\xff\xd8\xff\xe0...',
3
'id': '13/20/8010869266.jpg',
4
'latitude': 29.426458,
5
'longitude': -98.490723
6
}
Listing 3.1: A deserialised sample record from the Large Dataset of Geotagged Images
6
Locus
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.1: Sample images from the dataset (not original scale)
Figure 3.2: Batch fetch speeds at different batch sizes when using PostgreSQL database
Locus
7
==PAGE:16==
3.2
Data storage and retrieval
A single MessagePack file holds around 30,000 such records. With 142 files, weighting
725MB each, the total size of the dataset comes to 102GB. With such a considerable size,
an efficient storage method is crucial to keep training times as low as possible. The first
method attempted was to convert all the MessagePack files into Parquet files, which is a
file format that can be natively read by both Pandas and Polars. This was chosen for the
apparent simplicity of implementation. During this conversion, all records from a given
MessagePack file were extracted, the id attribute was removed and replaced with a more
meaningful index attribute. The index starts from 1 and increments with each record, thus
uniquely identifying each record and allowing binary search on the records.
Issues arose when the implementation of data fetching began, that is, fetching batches
across all 142 .parquet files introduced huge overhead with smaller batch sizes. To get
an accurate representation of how long it took to fetch different sized batches in this data
format, refer to 3.3. In this benchmark, we measured the time it took to fetch a randomised
batch of the following sizes: [1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 11, 16, 24, 36, 54, 81, 121, 181,
270, 403, 602, 898, 1340, 2000]. As we can see, until the batch size reaches the
same order of magnitude as the number of .parquet files, the fetch time per record is
quite high. This is likely due to the requested records being spread across multiple files,
necessitating a large number of file reads. Once the batch size reaches 100 the likelihood
of multiple requested records being in the same file increases, this is when we see a sharp
drop off in the fetch time per record.
Figure 3.3: Batch fetch speeds at different batch sizes when using .parquet files
Nevertheless, being forced to use large batch sizes with batches fetching for more than
a minute was not a viable solution. Furthermore, significant development time would
8
Locus
==PAGE:17==
still have been needed to complete the data fetching API, not to mention the untenable
scalability of such a solution. Recognising these issues proved to be a valuable lesson,
as it was from these failures that the requirements for a potential solution would be set.
• Scalable
• Robust API
• Batch size agnostic record fetch times
• Greatly reduced fetch times (below 10ms for each record)
Faced with these requirements, the obvious choice is to use a relational database to store
the data. Among the numerous existing database management systems, PostgreSQL
proved to be a strong contender. Open source, supported by a huge community, solid
documentation, and with a 27­year history, it is safe to say that it has proven its reliability
and efficiency in managing and storing data. Integrating it into the project proved to be a
simple endeavour, as PostgreSQL has a purpose­built docker image. After a simple setup,
the entire dataset will be stored in the dataset table. This table has four columns; an
autogenerated id column serving as the primary key, the float32 latitude and longitude
columns, and the binary image column storing the image data.
After performing the same benchmark as above, the difference is unmistakable 3.4. Using
PostgreSQL results in a speedup of a factor of 100. The difference is so large that the
two benchmarks cannot be plotted on the same graph. Keeping in mind the requirements
mentioned above, the following conclusions can be drawn.
• Scalability: PostgreSQL can handle many times the size of this dataset
• API: Interaction with the database using SQL
• Batch size agnostic record fetch times: Record fetch times are stable with batch
sizes larger than 7
• Greatly reduced fetch times: In the above mentioned range, the retrieval times per
record are between 0.001 [s] and 0.0015 [s].
Locus
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.4: Batch fetch speeds at different batch sizes when using PostgreSQL database
10
Locus
==PAGE:19==
4
Quadtree generation
In this chapter, we will discuss the process of creating meaningful classes as the outputs
of the ResNet model. As ResNet is an image classification deep­learning model, each of
it’s output will correspond to a predefined region on the Earth’s surface. A proven method
has been to split the Earth’s surface using a quadtree. Using this method, each node in
the quadtree would correspond to a quasi­rectangular region on Earth clearly defined by
2 lines of longitude and 2 lines of latitude. Of course, quasi­rectangular in the sense that
these regions show up as rectangles on a Mercator projection, but in real­life are distorted
to fit on the Earth’s geoid.
The algorithms detailed in this chapter are implemented in Python with the help of the
NetworkX library [8].
4.1
Overview
Using a quadtree is a prudent choice as the distribution of images in the dataset is not
homogeneous across the Earth’s surface. 4.1 visualises this distribution in the form of
a heatmap, as can be seen, the majority of images are in or around population centres
across the globe. By utilising a quadtree, areas with a high density of data points will be
split into smaller cells, allowing for more precise predictions. For example, as famous
buildings are over­represented in the dataset, we will find a much higher concentration of
pictures around the Eiffel tower than around an apartment complex in suburban Chicago.
Hypothetically, this would mean that once the model is trained, it might even be able to
predict from which direction the photo of the Eiffel tower was taken, while its prediction of
the suburban apartment complex might not even be near Chicago, due to a much lower
sample size, and the fact that the other suburbs across America are likely to have similar
style buildings.
Locus
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1: Distribution of data points in the dataset
To start with, let us define the parameters of the quadtree generation:
• τmin: The minimum amount of data points an cell should contain within its borders
• τmax: The maximum amount of data points an cell should contain within its borders
• D: The dataset
To begin the quadtree generation we can define the base of the quadtree as a single cell
with the western edge at −180° longitude, the northern edge at 90° latitude, the eastern
edge at 180° longitude and finally the southern edge at −90° latitude. This initial cell
covers the entire Earth.
Before moving on with the rest of the quadtree generation, it is worthwhile to define the cell
states first. A cell can have 3 states; Evaluating, Stopped, and Active. Evaluating is the
initial state of a cell and signifies that the cell is yet to be evaluated, and upon expansion
of the quadtree this cell will either split further or switch to the Stopped or Active state.
Stopped means that a cell contains fewer than or equal to τmin data points or has been
expanded. On the other hand, Active signifies that the cell contains more than τmin but
fewer than τmax data points. It is these Active cells that we will use as the outputs of our
model.
12
Locus
==PAGE:21==
Keeping this in mind, 4.2 illustrates how the quadtree is expanded.
• 1. Quadtree expansion loop: The left flowchart shows that the quadtree keeps
expanding and evaluating new cells until there are no more cells left in the Evaluating
state
• 2. Cell expansion: As shown on the centre flowchart; each cell that is in the Evaluat­
ing state switches to the stopped state and subdivides into 4 more cells. (Explained
more in depth in the next section)
• 3. Cell evaluation: As depicted in the rightmost flowchart, when a cell is evaluated,
it switches to Active if the count of data points within the cell is greater than τmin
but fewer than τmax, to Stopped if it has fewer than or equal to τmin data points, or
remains in the Evaluating state.
This process has to stop at one point since the data set D contains only so many data
points, and with subsequent subdividing of each cell the count of data points within each
cell decreases until the conditions mentioned above are met, in which case the cells col­
lapse into the Stopped or Active states.
Figure 4.2: The 3 processes for building the quadtree
Locus
13
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Quadtree structure and naming convention
As the quadtree is expected to contain thousands of cells, it seems prudent to define a
naming convention to refer to individual cells. In the chosen naming convention, each cell
is assigned a sequence of numbers containing 0, 1, 2, or 3. The root cell (this being the
cell that spans the entire Earth) is assigned an empty label: ” ”. For each subdivision, the
resulting cells are assigned labels that expand the label of their parent in the following
manner:
• North­Western cell: 0 is appended to the parent label
• North­Eastern cell: 1 is appended to the parent label
• South­Western cell: 2 is appended to the parent label
• South­Eastern cell: 3 is appended to the parent label
Figure 4.3: Visualization of cell labels at different levels of subdivision
This results in a highly compact, yet descriptive labelling system. Two important attributes
of such a system are the following:
1. A cell’s label encodes all of it’s ancestors
2. The label of a cell uniquely identifies an area on the surface of the Earth, regardless
of the parameters used to generate the quadtree
This means that given the label of a cell, the lines of longitude and latitude that constitute
the borders of the cell’s area are trivial to calculate, even if the entire quadtree is not
known. 4.4 shows a Python code snippet to calculate the boundaries of a cell. Thus, it is
possible to decode coordinates from a predicted cell label.
14
Locus
==PAGE:23==
def cell_bounds(cell: str):
"""
Given a cell identifier, return the bounds of the cell in the form
(south latitude, north latitude, west longitude, east longitude).
Args:
cell (str): Cell identifier string, corresponds to a path in the quadtree.
Returns:
tuple: (south latitude, north latitude, west longitude, east longitude)
"""
# Initialize bounds to the entire world
south_lat = -90.0
north_lat = 90.0
west_lon = -180.0
east_lon = 180.0
# For each character in the cell identifier, update the bounds by entering the
# corresponding quadrant
for divide in cell:
if int(divide) < 2:
# 0 or 1 is north
south_lat = (south_lat + north_lat) / 2
else:
# 2 or 3 is south
north_lat = (south_lat + north_lat) / 2
if int(divide) % 2 == 0:
# 0 or 2 is west
east_lon = (west_lon + east_lon) / 2
else:
# 1 or 3 is east
west_lon = (west_lon + east_lon) / 2
return south_lat, north_lat, west_lon, east_lon
Figure 4.4: Code snippet for calculating the coordinates of cell bounds
Now that the decoding from cell label to coordinate has been solved, the next step is to
encode the coordinates into the correct cell of a given quadtree. This process requires a
quadtree and a set of coordinates. The pseudocode for this process can be seen in 4.5.
This code is a simplified version of the actual code found in the codebase, all modifications
were made in order to keep the essence of the algorithm while cutting out some error­
handling and optimisations that, while crucial, are not necessary for understanding the
algorithm.
At its core, the algorithm iteratively goes deeper into the quadtree and builds up the cell
label step by step. At first, the bounds are set as the bounds of the entire world, and the cell
label is initialised as an empty string. Then, the quadrant in which the input coordinates
are in is determined. This would of course be either quadrant 0, 1, 2, or 3 as discussed
at the beginning of this section. Next, the quadrant number is appended to the cell label,
and the bounds are updated to the bounds of that quadrant. In addition, the nodes in the
quadtree are filtered to the cells, the labels of which start with the constructed cell label.
This constitutes one loop, looping until just a single cell matches the constructed label.
Locus
15
==PAGE:24==
def calc_enclosing_cell(lat: float, lon: float, active_cells: list[str]):
"""
Given a point (lon, lat) and a graph, return the cell that encloses the point.
If the point is not enclosed by any cell, return None.
Args:
lat (float): Input latitude.
lon (float): Input longitude.
active_cells (list[str]): List of active cells in the graph.
Returns:
(str | None): The cell that encloses the point, or None if the point is
not enclosed by any cell.
"""
# Initialize bounds to the entire world
west_lon = -180
east_lon = 180
south_lat = -90
north_lat = 90
cell = ""
# While there are still cells to check...
while True:
quad = 0
# Determine the vertical half of the cell that the point is in
half_lat = (south_lat + north_lat) / 2
if lat < half_lat:
quad += 2
north_lat = half_lat
else:
south_lat = half_lat
# Determine the horizontal half of the cell that the point is in
half_lon = (west_lon + east_lon) / 2
if lon >= half_lon:
quad += 1
west_lon = half_lon
else:
east_lon = half_lon
# Build the cell identifier
cell += str(quad)
# Filter the cell pool to only include cells that are still possible
cell_pool = [c for c in active_cells if c.startswith(cell)]
# If there is only one cell left in the pool, return it
if len(cell_pool) == 1 and cell == cell_pool[0]:
return cell
Figure 4.5: Code snippet for calculating the coordinates of cell bounds
16
Locus
==PAGE:25==
Since the encoding from a coordinate to a cell is done for every data point during model
training, it is crucial that this process does not increase data load times significantly. Con­
sequently, it is appropriate to run benchmarks on the function. This was done in the
following way: we ran the function on 10000 datapoints 5 times, then took the average
time to execute. This average time was 5.3520 [s] with no significant variance. This
means that for every single data point this adds 0.5352 [ms] and for a batch size of 128
the increase in data loading times 68.50 [ms] per batch. This is an acceptable increase
in data loading time, although over the course of an entire epoch this adds up to around
38 minutes of additional processing.
4.3
Generating the quadtree
Finally, everything is in place to generate the quadtree. All that remains is to implement the
processes as seen in 4.2, using the Click Python library, it is trivial to turn the python code
into a command line utility with variable parameters, and 4.6 shows the usage manual of
the CLI tool.
Figure 4.6: Quadtree generation manual
Once the quadtree generator is running, the progress is shown in the form of a table
displaying useful stats of the momentary status of the quadtree generation. As seen in
4.6, these stats include showing the number of Active cells (i.e. the cells that are to
be used as the output classes during model training), Evaluating cells (see 4.2, as the
number of evaluating cells must reach 0 at one point, a colour change in the table depicts
the breakpoint when the number of evaluating cells starts to decrease), Stopped cells
(these are the cells that did not have enough datapoints within their borders) and finally
Excluded datapoints. Please note that the quadtree generation shown in 4.2 uses the
default parameters and is only for display purposes, it is not the quadtree used for model
training.
Locus
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.7: UI element showing the progress of quadtree generation
The quadtrees are constructed using the NetworkX; a Python library which facilitates the
creation, manipulation, and other activities related to graphs. Graphs constructed using
NetworkX along with their state can be saved in the .gml file format. The quadtrees/
folder that stores all generated quadtrees also contains a manifest.json file. Upon sav­
ing a quadtree, the parameters of its generation are recorded in this file. 4.8 shows the
structure of an element in the manifest.json file, they are also the parameters of the
quadtree used for model training. The parameter values of τmin = 50 and τmax = 5000
were chosen heuristically, taking into account the fine balance between the resolution of
the quadtree, the number of cells and the number of excluded data points. Almost 3000
cells provides a sufficiently high resolution with multiple subdivision at major population
centres and is a good base to start at; this can be fine­tuned at a later point if found to be
inadequate.
When setting the parameter τmin to 2 or higher, there will almost certainly be datapoints
that lie within the boundaries of a stopped cell. Since only active cells are considered
output classes, any data point not enclosed by an active cell will not have a matching
output class; therefore, it cannot be used for training. Thus, these datapoints have to be
recorded along with the quadtrees, allowing the dataloaders to ignore them during model
training when using that quadtree.
18
Locus
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.8: Excerpt from manifest.json showing the parameters and stats of the chosen
quadtree.
4.4
Quadtree results
Having successfully generated the quadtree, let us look at the results. The parameters
are saved in the manifest.json file, of which an excerpt is shown in 4.8. The quadtree
was generated by setting τmin to 50 and τmax to 5000. The entire dataset of 4233900 dat­
apoints was used. This resulted in 2857 active cells or, in other words, output classes. Of
the 4233900 datapoints, 5066 were excluded, having not formed a region dense enough
to constitute an active cell. These excluded datapoints make up less than 0.12% of the
entire dataset, so no significant loss of data can be reported.
Figure 4.9: Quadtree results: World
Locus
19
==PAGE:28==
4.9 clearly shows that a large number of active cells are concentrated in the United States
and Europe, with the United States perhaps being the country with the most subdivisions.
Figures 4.10 and 4.11 show a more detailed image of these regions. We can see that the
areas around population centres , e.g. London 4.12, are broken up into minuscule pieces
as we hoped would be the case, allowing for higher precision in these areas.
Figure 4.10: Quadtree results: USA east coast (left), British Isles (right)
Figure 4.11: Quadtree results: Europe
20
Locus
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.12: Quadtree results: London
Locus
21
==PAGE:30==
5
The model
As discussed in the literature overview, the ResNet­50 model was found to be an appro­
priate neural network for classifying images into multiple thousands of categories. This
chapter is dedicated to giving the reader an in­depth understanding of the model, from
the customisations made to the base model to accommodate the project requirements, to
the training and later deployment of the model.
This chapter also delves into creating the custom dataloader. Detailed herein are the
technical practicalities of fetching data from a database server, efficiently batching the
data, and on­the­fly ascertaining that only valid datapoints are present in batches.
The Python implementation of the algorithms detailed in this chapter were brought to life
using PyTorch [9] [10]. To make management of the large volume of data possible, we
opted to use Polars [11], a Rust­based dataframe library, whose claim to fame is the
Rust­enabled memory safety and lazy dataframes. For tasks in which Polars hasn’t fully
matured yet, we fell back to using Pandas [12] [13].
5.1
Modifying the ResNet­50 model
The base model with which we will work is the ResNet­50, the intricacies of the model are
not necessary to be able to follow along with this paper.
Figure 5.1: ResNet­50 model architecture [14]
The only modification needed to the base ResNet­50 model as seen in Fig. 5.1 is to
replace the number of output classes to match the number of active cells in the quadtree.
A softmax function is applied at the end of the forward loop, as seen in Figure 5.2. For
faster training times, we used pre­trained weights.
22
Locus
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.2: Python code of the model implementation based on ResNet­50
5.2
Data pipeline
Setting up a data pipeline capable of efficiently batching data to the model during training
is crucial, especially with datasets of this size and scale. Our requirements of the data
pipeline are as follows.
• Fast
• Process the data into a format fit for the model
• Batch the data
• Sample randomly from the dataset
• Ensure that excluded datapoints are not loaded
Figure 5.3: Dataflow during model training
The data pipeline consists of a PostgreSQL server, which in this case is hosted locally on
the machine, but in practice could also be hosted remotely. Within the Python application,
the dataset class is responsible for interfacing with this database and retrieving the data
requested by the dataloader. After fetching, this is where the transforms are applied to the
image, and the encoding to a cell label is also performed. The dataloader is responsible
for preparing the batches to be sent to the model for training; this includes telling the
Locus
23
==PAGE:32==
dataset which datapoints are needed in the next batch, data prefetching, and supplying
batches to the model.
5.2.1
Writing a custom PyTorch dataset object
In PyTorch, the dataset object (henceforth LDoGIDataset) is the first layer of abstraction
over our data, be it stored on the disk as files or on a remote Database server. The objec­
tive of LDoGIDataset is to provide an interface in Python where fetching data is as simple
as indexing LDoGIDataset. In our case, the data is stored on a PostgreSQL database run
on the local machine using docker. Therefore, under the hood, LDoGIDataset will set up
the connection to the database server.
Dataset objects in PyTorch can be one of two types: map­style or iterable­style [15]. For
our purposes, an iterable­style dataset is the prudent choice, allowing the dataloader to
iterate over the dataset. For this to work properly, the LDoGIDataset must be able to
be indexed with any integer between 0 and the length of the dataset. This is important
when we consider that datapoints that have been excluded during the quadtree generation
cannot be included. Simply skipping over these excluded ids would leave holes in the
LDoGIDataset indices, making iterating over it impossible.
Algorithmically patching holes in the dataset indices
Given a quadtree, there will be a list of excluded ids that correspond to datapoints that are
not usable for model training. To ensure that all LDoGIDataset indices correspond to valid
datapoints, a mapping must be created. During this subsection, the words ”id” and ”index”
will appear often. The concepts are not interchangeable and should be interpreted in the
following way; ”id” refers to the id of a datapoint as it appears in the database. The list
of excluded ids also references this meaning of the word ”id”. On the other hand, ”index”
refers to subscripting the LDoGIDataset iterable object in Python. Thus, the mapping
detailed in this subsection is a mapping from indices to ids.
First, the length of LDoGIDataset will be the number of excluded datapoints subtracted
from the total number of datapoints (the dotted blue line in Fig. 5.4); let us define this as
lLDoGI(Q), where Q indicates that this length depends on the quadtree. Next, when an
index is fetched from the LDoGIDataset, the index is checked against the list of excluded
ids. Two things can happen; the index is not in the list, in which case the output id will
be the input index. If the index is in the list, fetch the position of the id within the list
of excluded ids and add it to lLDoGI(Q) to get the new id. Repeat this process until the
resulting id is no longer in the list.
It is simple to prove that this algorithm must terminate. The input index must come from
the range [1; lLDoGI(Q)]. Taking a look at Fig. 5.4, the mapping essentially works by
finding the candidate datapoint to replace the excluded datapoint by matching it’s position
in the list of excluded ids (column B) to the datapoint at the position following lLDoGI(Q)
(column A). If the candidate datapoint is still excluded, then it’s number in column B must
be larger than in column A. This process continues until a valid data point is reached or
the last valid id is reached. The only way the numbers in column A and column B could
match is if the id of the datapoint is larger than lLDoGI(Q), in which case it will never be
referenced by a datapoint other than itself (datapoint 11 in Fig. 5.4).
24
Locus
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.4: Algorithm for patching holes in the dataset indices
Locus
25
==PAGE:34==
5.2.2
Writing a custom PyTorch dataloader object
Now that the LDoGIDataset can perform all the functions expected from it, let us move
on to the dataloader. The requirements for the dataloader are to supply a list of indices
desired to be fetched to the LDoGIDataset. The solution to this was a few hours spent
in the PyTorch documentation and the realisation that the sampler parameter can take
a BatchSampler object. The reason this is important is because a base PyTorch Dat­
aLoader requests each datapoint individually and collates them together once the entire
batch has been fetched. The issue with this is that fetching the data happens over a net­
work connection, meaning that sending 128 requests to the PostgresSQL server in order
to populate the batch would waste time. Instead, the LDoGIDataset is written so it can
accept a list of indices, which it then processes as seen in the previous subsection to get
the datapoint ids. All of these ids are then placed in a single SQL query instead of 128
different ones.
Figure 5.5: Batched dataloader implementation
5.3
Model training
Moving on, the model was trained on DTU’s High Performance Computing cluster. The
cluster has a number of performant GPU’s available. For our purposes, the NVIDIA A100
GPUs are sufficiently powerful for our needs. The HPC cluster has 6 of these available,
resulting in lower queue times than the more recent NVIDIA H100 GPUs on the cluster.
The NVIDIA A100s have almost 40 GB of memory, which should be more than enough
for training the ResNet­50 model.
The default user disk space on the HPC is 40 GB. This is not enough to store the almost
100 GB dataset. For this reason, we requested 300 GB of scratch disk space. This is a
high­performing parallel file system accessible from all HPC nodes and the home of the
PostgreSQL database server for the duration of the model training.
As was the case with quadtree generation, we have also created a useful CLI tool for
model training as seen in Fig. 5.6. Training can be configured by providing a configuration
file when starting model training as seen in Fig. 5.7. Due to the size of the dataset and
26
Locus
==PAGE:35==
the time constraints of the thesis work, exhaustive hyperparameter optimisation was not
feasible. Our method was to perform a rudimentary hyperparameter optimisation on just
1% of the dataset, and using these results train the model on the entire dataset. Thus,
a batch size of 128, learning rate of 0.001 and the optimiser being SGD was settled on.
Regarding actual training, 70% of the entire dataset was used for model training, 20% for
model testing, and finally 10% for validation.
Figure 5.6: Model training CLI tool help page
Figure 5.7: conf.toml configuration file example
To monitor training progress, we used the Python logging library. Each run is assigned
a random generated name, which will also be the name of the directory created in the
runs/ directory as seen in Fig. 5.8. This is where all the logs and stats associated with
a run are stored. progress.log is useful for getting a quick overview on how far along in
training cycle has the training progressed. By opening the progress.log file with the tail
-f command, the file is printed on the console and updated every time the file changes,
giving a real­time view of the training progress, as seen in Fig. 5.9. run.log is the other
Locus
27
==PAGE:36==
file that is useful to monitor during the run, it gives a human­readable overview of the
epochs as seen in Fig. 5.10.
The run.json simply stores all the run parameters, which are basically the contents of
the configuration file, and the training start time. stats.csv stores almost the same in­
formation as run.log, but in tabular format and also contains statistics such as data load
time and other timings. Finally, the weights/ directory contains all the model checkpoints
that are created when an epoch ends.
Figure 5.8: Directory containing the logs and stats of each training run
Figure 5.9: progress.log sample
28
Locus
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.10: run.log sample
We decided to implement our own logging script rather than using established tools like
Weights & Biases for several reasons. Primarily, we aimed to deepen our understanding
of the Python logging library, which is a versatile tool for tracking events that happen
when some software runs. By developing our own script, we could customise the logging
process to fit our specific needs and preferences, enhancing our project’s maintainability
and scalability. Additionally, we wanted to explore how the tqdm library could be integrated
to create interactive progress bars. This feature is particularly useful for monitoring long­
running processes, and by implementing it ourselves, we could ensure that these progress
bars could also be logged to files effectively, providing real­time feedback directly within
our logs. This hands­on experience has not only improved our coding skills, but also
provided us with valuable insights into the practical applications of these libraries.
5.4
Results
Determining the appropriate stats with which to evaluate model performance is not a
straightforward task. For measuring the loss of the model, we applied categorical cross
entropy as our loss function, a widespread choice among classifier models.
A measure of accuracy is also a prudent choice, which is simply the measure of how
many times the model predicted the exact cell of the datapoint. However, this can be
deceivingly low, especially when considering the geospatial relation that cells have with
each other. For example, taking an image of the Eiffel tower, and passing it through the
model, we might get a prediction in Paris, but at a few blocks distance, or on the other
side of the tower. This would result in a failed prediction, even though the prediction is
just a few hundred metres away.
In order to get a more precise understanding of the models performance, and improve­
ment from epoch to epoch, we added a Mean Squared Error metric to monitor during the
training. This is the average of the squares of the distances between the predicted and
the actual position of a datapoint. This distance was a measure of the distance between
the bounds of the predicted cell and the ground truth coordinate of the datapoint.
As expected, improvement can be seen across all metrics from epoch to epoch until the
third epoch, when the MSE metric starts to increase again. As mentioned previously the
MSE metric might prove to be a more reliable metric to follow; in this regard, we can
consider the model after 3 epochs of training our best model.
Locus
29
==PAGE:38==
Epoch
Train Loss 2
Test Loss
Test Accuracy
Test MSE [km2]
1
5.8576
5.6664
0.0703
47 510 519
2
5.4234
5.4393
0.0912
45 466 653
3
5.2152
5.3314
0.1021
43 165 851
4
5.4234
5.4393
0.1127
45 733 714
5
5.2152
5.3314
0.1166
44 521 524
Table 5.1: Training metrics of the best performing model
To be able to evaluate it relative to a baseline, let us define a baseline model that always
predicts the same coordinate. Let this be the average latitude and longitude of all the
datapoints in the dataset. This results in a coordinate with a latitude of 35.4285 and a
longitude of ­16.9189; a point that lies in the Atlantic Ocean halfway between the Strait of
Gibraltar and the Azores. Using this baseline model to evaluate the datapoints in the test
set, we obtain an MSE metric of 49 788 457 [km2]. Comparing this to the training data, we
can see that the model has already outperformed the baseline after the first epoch and
gained a significant advantage over it by epoch 3.
At this point the model has been trained, but is still not easily usable. It is hard to pass
images into it and get human­readable predictions out of it. Therefore, we have refrained
from adding sample images and predictions to this part of the paper; these will be visible
in the next chapter.
30
Locus
==PAGE:39==
6
Cloud Deployment
With the model ready to make predictions, the next step is to build an application around
it that is ready for user interaction. In this section we will see the process of building a
modern web application with a focus on widespread availability. This entails supporting
not just desktop computers with large monitors, but also phones and tablets.
This application is written in the FastAPI/SvelteKit stack, where FastAPI [16] is responsible
for the model hosting backend, and SvelteKit [17] for serving the web application to the
user.
The decision to use these frameworks for the web application is based on the core of the
project, where we strive to use new, upcoming, and interesting projects. This has been the
case earlier, when we decided to use Polars as our Python dataframe library over Pandas.
More mainstream alternatives to these technologies might have been React/Next.js for the
frontend, and Flask or Django as the backend framework.We decided to implement our
own logging script rather than using established tools like Weights & Biases for several
reasons. Primarily, we aimed to deepen our understanding of the Python logging library,
which is a versatile tool for tracking events that happen when some software runs. By
developing our own script, we could customise the logging process to fit our specific needs
and preferences, enhancing our project’s maintainability and scalability. Additionally, we
wanted to explore how the tqdm library could be integrated to create interactive progress
bars. This feature is particularly useful for monitoring long­running processes, and by
implementing it ourselves, we could ensure that these progress bars could also be logged
to files effectively, providing real­time feedback directly within our logs. This hands­on
experience has not only improved our coding skills, but also provided us with valuable
insights into the practical applications of these libraries.
6.1
Building the backend
FastAPI served as the backbone for hosting our model and performing real­time infer­
ences on incoming images. Using FastAPI streamlined the setup of this backend ap­
plication, condensing the entire logic into just 73 lines of code, encapsulated within the
locus/api/main.py file.
There are three main parts to the file. First, we initialise the FastAPI instance and apply
minimal configuration, notably incorporating the URLs of the locally hosted SvelteKit app
into the CORS middleware. This step facilitates frontend development by allowing com­
munication between the backend and the locally hosted web app. CORS (Cross­Origin
Resource Sharing) safeguards web browsers by restricting requests to servers sharing
the same domain. By configuring the list of origins, the SvelteKit app hosted at the default
URL (http://127.0.0.1:5173) gains access to this FastAPI application, regardless of where
it is hosted.
Subsequently, the file orchestrates the loading of the model, alongside the weights dis­
cussed in the preceding chapter. Additionally, the relevant quadtree is also loaded; this
is needed to decode the outputs of the model.
The backend has but a single endpoint, /predict. The final task in this file is to serve this
endpoint. Designed to receive files via HTTP multipart requests, a feature fully supported
by FastAPI, the Python function associated with this endpoint first extracts image data
Locus
31
==PAGE:40==
from the request. Then it applies the same transformations to prepare the image for
model input. Next, after the model has finished the inference, the output gets decoded
into cell names alongside their corresponding probabilities. This constitutes the body of
the HTTP response.
Figure 6.1: The /predict endpoint
6.2
Building the frontend
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, the frontend was crafted using SvelteKit,
a backend for the new and rapidly growing UI framework, Svelte. The app was built on the
shoulders of giants, in this case, the component library, Skeleton UI, and TailwindCSS,
the utility­first CSS framework. All of these join forces to make the building of aesthetic,
performant, and responsive web applications scalable and maintainable.
Design
The design of the web application is simple. There is only one single view, or page. This
page contains three main sections; the File Upload component, the Map component, and
the Prediction Table component.
The File Upload component is a modified version of the one found in the Skeleton UI
package, it is modified to give the user feedback on the uploaded image by displaying the
image in the background, and displaying the image name in the textbox.
The Map component is provided by the LeafletJS library, bringing mapping functionality
to Javascript applications. The Map component displays custom icons as pins when a
prediction has been made, showing the top three predictions of the model by default,
arranged by probability.
The Prediction Table component shows the top 10 predictions in a tabular format. The
first column ”Prediction” finds the nearest city to a prediction and calculates the distance
and direction in relation to this. This is done by storing a table of the 1500 most populous
cities and their coordinates. The next 2 columns show the latitude and longitude of the
prediction. The probability column displays the model’s certainty of that prediction; this
32
Locus
==PAGE:41==
is the result of the softmax function applied to the final layer of the model which returns
a probability for each class. Finally, the final column depicts a coloured marker, which
also shows up in the Map component, representing the prediction on the map. Clicking
on a row enables or disables the corresponding marker, allowing the user to explore the
different predictions made by the model.
Figures 6.2 and 6.3 depict how the web application appears on a handheld and a desk­
top device. The aforementioned components can be found in these figures, adapting
responsively to the device’s width. For a full demonstration of the web application.
Locus
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.2: Responsive design on a handheld device showing the default page (top left),
and the various sections of the page after a prediction is made (top right, bottom left,
bottom right).
34
Locus
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.3: Responsive design on a desktop device showing the default page (top), and
the the page after a prediction is made (bottom).
6.3
Cloud deployment
With the completion of both the frontend and the backend the final step is deploying to
the cloud. Starting with the frontend, this part is straightforward, as Vercel, the company
behind Next.js, offer free cloud hosting for web applications. The platform supports Svel­
teKit projects, and the setup process is quick and intuitive, providing the GitHub repository
is enough for the hosting to commence. The Vercel platform has useful features, such as
automatically building and deploying when the repository is updated, and adding custom
domain names. In our case, the frontend is deployed on the https://locus.dkenez.dk/ URL.
Hosting the backend was slightly more in depth. There are no free solutions for hosting
CPU and Memory intensive apps on the web, so we turned to Digital Ocean. Digital Ocean
offers Virtual Private Server services; VPSs are virtualised operating systems running in
containers over the bare­metal servers. By using this service, a customer is not renting
an entire server machine, instead they are renting these containerised servers, each with
Locus
35
==PAGE:44==
their own configuration of virtual CPUs, memory, data storage, and even IP addresses.
Our VPS configuration consists of 2 vCPU cores, 4 GB of ram, and 80 GB of data storage.
The FastAPI backend application can now be set up in this VPS that is accessible via
SSH. An additional step is required to make this compatible with the frontend deployed
on Vercel, and TLS certificate is required to be setup, in order for the two services to
be able to communicate over HTTPS. TLS certificates can be obtained from the Let’s
Encrypt non­profit Certificate Authority. After obtaining and setting up the TLS certificate,
we can also connect the backend to our domain, thus making the backend available on
https://locus.api.dkenez.dk/.
A note about renting domains with the .dk Top Level Domain: The customer must reside or
have a business in Denmark to be eligible for use of this TLD, and must be able to prove it
before gaining access to the domain. This process is described on the https://punktum.dk/
website.
36
Locus
==PAGE:45==
7
Evaluation
With the full­stack application working, model inference can be performed on sample im­
ages. This chapter will contain a number of images that will be discussed in depth. All
inferences on the images have been made through the web application.
7.1
Model Inference
We have split the inferences into four categories; Famous places, Less well­known places,
Generic places, and Art and Generative AI. The border between these categories were
not scientifically defined, but heuristically we might come up with a reasonable distinction
between them.
Famous places are based on what we might expect an average person from North Amer­
ica or the European Union to recognise. We chose North America and the European Union
specifically due to the fact that according to lightstalking.com, the official flickr statistics
show the following userbase distribution: USA (31.03%), UK (9.83%), Germany (5.26%),
France (4.62%), Canada (4.17%), others (45.09%) [18]. Although we have not been able
to verify these statistics through data provided officially by flickr, the average coordinates
of all datapoints, as calculated in Chapter 5, Section 4, also indicate that the majority
of images were captured in North America and the European Union. Such landmarks
would include places like the Eiffel tower, Mount Rushmore, the Golden Gate bridge, the
Elizabeth tower, or perhaps the Burj Khalifah.
Less well­known places could be categorised as locations that are more widely known
within their respective countries but whose recognition quickly falls off outside the coun­
tries borders. Examples could include the Royal Palace of Madrid, the Hungarian Parlia­
ment, etc.
We put locations into the Distinctive Regional Features category that perhaps have a
distinct architectural style or a unique geographic characteristic but are otherwise repre­
sentative of a larger geographic area. Examples in this category could be nordic houses,
communist­era apartment blocks, or unique rock formations found along the shores of
Thailand. These are features that are emblematic of a certain region of the world but do
not contain enough information to locate the exact place.
Locus
37
==PAGE:46==
Famous places
Figure 7.1: Eiffel tower predictions [19]
Figure 7.2: Vatican predictions [20]
The model seems to have a strong grasp of very well­known buildings, which is to be
expected, as these buildings are over­represented in the dataset. In the case of Fig. 7.1,
the model also seems to know that something similar exists in Las Vegas as well. In
38
Locus
==PAGE:47==
the case of the Vatican in Fig. 7.2, the model has no doubt that the Vatican is in Rome,
although the prediction with the highest probability assigned is not at the correct location
of the Vatican.
Less well known places
Figure 7.3: Hungarian parliament predictions [21]
Figure 7.4: Copenhagen (Børsen) predictions [22]
Locus
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 7.5: Royal Palace of Madrid predictions [23]
The results in these sections are mixed. To start with, Fig. 7.8, which depicts the Hungar­
ian parliament building, has a very high probability assigned to it but is once again slightly
off from the actual location of the building, which is located along the eastern bank of the
Danube in Budapest. However, in this case, the inaccuracy is due to the low resolution
of cells in Hungary (see Fig. 4.11). In the case the Børsen as seen in Fig. 7.4, the model
was less sure of its prediction and seems split between Copenhagen and Stockholm. This
is not surprising, given that copper roofing, red bricks, and a tiered gabling are a staple
of Scandinavian architecture. The model performed even worse with the Royal Palace
of Madrid, with both Lisbon and Lyon outranking the prediction of the actual location of
the palace. In this instance, the model seems to have only recognised the classical style
emblematic of the Iberian peninsula and could not accurately predict a location.
40
Locus
==PAGE:49==
Distinctive Regional Features
Figure 7.6: Apartment complex in Hong Kong predictions [24]
Figure 7.7: Apartment complex in Szeged, Hungary predictions. Image sourced from test
user Dinnyés Dávid, 2024
Locus
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 7.8: Phang Nga Bay, Thailand predictions [25]
As expected from the predictions in this section, the predictions of generic residential
complexes did not fare very well. Although the top prediction of the Hong Kong apartment
complex was located near Beijing, it still received only a probability of around 5%, but with
a relatively high probability that placed it within China. The even more bland apartment
complex in Szeged, Hungary, received a mixture of predicted locations, each with around
2%. However, the image of a beach in Thailand resulted in predictions with very high
probabilities, although not exactly at the place where the image was taken, but all in
South­East Asia.
42
Locus
==PAGE:51==
Art and Generative AI
Figure 7.9: Art depicting the Golden Gate bridge, San Francisco, USA predictions [26]
Figure 7.10: AI generated image of Copenhagen predictions [27]
(a) Prompt: Generate an image of Copenhagen
To experiment with the resilience of the model, we decided to observe how it would per­
form against art and AI­generated images. In both cases, the model recognised the key
features on the images that were enough to accurately locate which city the image is
depicting.
Locus
43
==PAGE:52==
8
Conclusion
For some, locating where an image was captured is as simple as looking at the grass,
observing the colour of the soil, or recognising weather patterns in the sky. As we have
seen over the course of this paper, deep learning algorithms provide a capable platform
for learning features of an image in a similar fashion and are able to geolocate images on
Earth with high accuracy. The result is an accurate, portable model capable of running on
simple hardware configurations.
First, researching the method for storing and retrieving data proved to be a fruitful en­
deavour, potentially saving hours of development and training time by opting to store the
dataset in a relational database. Next, we saw that the final model is highly dependent
on the quality of the dataset. Regions with lower datapoint densities consequently have
fewer classes to predict, resulting in poorer accuracy in those regions. On the other hand,
cities and high density urban regions are split into very high­resolution classes, setting the
scene for close to city block­level predictions.
Training such a large model proved to be an arduous task, one that required the fine tuning
of not just the training parameters but also the quadtree generation to be able to train it
to the accuracy we finally achieved. Tiny errors in the programme can cause the loss of
a day’s worth of training, so the proper setup of the infrastructure around model training
is of utmost importance. We innovated upon the original PlaNet[4] paper, by utilising the
ResNet model to train deeper networks that can learn more image features for it’s final
prediction.
Ultimately, we developed an accessible web application that users can access on both
mobile devices and computers. The web application has an appealing and clear user
interface designed for ease of use. Results are shown in a concise and understandable
manner, with the predictions appearing on a map as well as a list for in­depth analysis.
The web application is hosted on a virtual private server with humble specifications, show­
ing the portability and versatility of training deep learning models for such scenarios. Fur­
thermore, the web application is set up with the appropriate security features in accor­
dance with contemporary guidelines.
In conclusion, the objectives of the paper were achieved. The development resulted in a
fully functioning web application capable of providing realistic predictions of user­uploaded
images.
8.1
Future improvements
We propose a number of improvements to the project in the future. Some of these were
cut during the duration of the thesis due to time constraints, while others were never a
part of the original project plan from the onset.
The primary recommendation for future improvement involves integrating the findings
from the Places paper (Zhou et al., 2017)[5] into the project. This integration is expected
to provide valuable contextual information to the model during prediction. Accommodat­
ing this integration would likely require some restructuring of the model to incorporate a
submodule dedicated to scene prediction. However, it is not expected that this integra­
tion would significantly extend training times, as the scene prediction submodule would
be pre­trained and require no additional training during the project’s implementation.
44
Locus
==PAGE:53==
Next, the dataset was not of the highest quality, a number of the datapoints had very
little information value, especially those taken indoors at people’s homes. These data­
points served only to bloat the dataset, while lacking in information density for training
purposes. We propose to circumvent the issues caused by such datapoints by imple­
menting a scraper that fetches street view images from online providers, thus ensuring
the dataset is a compilation of images taken from outside. This approach would also allow
access to a much larger set of images than is available in the dataset used in this paper.
Although a broad and expansive field, a number of improvements and additions can be
made to our code when viewing it in purely MLOPS terms. The final web application could
be packaged into a container for easy deployment anywhere. Furthermore, training mon­
itoring could be improved with better integration with existing solutions such as Tensor­
Board or Weights and Biases. Finally, the project ultimately has poor code coverage, as
with the quickly approaching deadline, the development of features was prioritised more
than the writing tests. On the other hand, the project has exceptional comment quality,
with clear and concise comments scattered throughout the codebase.
Locus
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Locus
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Kristóf Kenez Drexler. LOCUS model codebase. 2024. URL: https://github.com/
dKenez/locus-model.
[2]
Kristóf Kenez Drexler. LOCUS UI codebase. 2024. URL: https : / / github . com /
dKenez/locus-ui.
[3]
James Hays and Alexei A. Efros. “im2gps: estimating geographic information from
a single image”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). 2008.
[4]
Tobias Weyand, Ilya Kostrikov, and James Philbin. “PlaNet ­ Photo Geolocation with
Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer
International Publishing, 2016, pp. 37–55. ISBN: 9783319464848. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-319-46484-8_3. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46484-8_3.
[5]
Bolei Zhou et al. “Places: A 10 million Image Database for Scene Recognition”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2017).
[6]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1512.03385
(2015). arXiv: 1512.03385. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[7]
Hassan Abedi. Large Dataset of Geotagged Images. 2022. URL: https://www.
kaggle.com/datasets/habedi/large-dataset-of-geotagged-images.
[8]
Aric A. Hagberg, Daniel A. Schult, and Pieter J. Swart. “Exploring Network Struc­
ture, Dynamics, and Function using NetworkX”. In: Proceedings of the 7th Python
in Science Conference. Ed. by Gaël Varoquaux, Travis Vaught, and Jarrod Millman.
Pasadena, CA USA, 2008, pp. 11–15.
[9]
Adam Paszke et al. “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch”. In: NIPS­W. 2017.
[10]
Adam Paszke et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High­Performance Deep Learn­
ing Library. 2019. arXiv: 1912.01703 [cs.LG].
[11]
Ritchie Vink et al. pola­rs/polars: Python Polars 0.20.23. Version py­0.20.23. Apr.
2024. DOI: 10. 5281 / zenodo. 11080725. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
11080725.
[12]
Wes McKinney. “Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python”. In: Proceed­
ings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. Ed. by Stéfan van der Walt and Jarrod
Millman. 2010, pp. 56–61. DOI: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a.
[13]
The pandas development team. pandas­dev/pandas: Pandas. Version latest. Feb.
2020. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
[14]
Gorlapraveen123 via Wikimedia Commons. ResNet­50 architecture. 2023. URL:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ResNet50.png.
[15]
PyTorch documentation – Dataset Types. 2023. URL: https://pytorch.org/docs/
stable/data.html#dataset-types.
[16]
FastAPI ­ Homepage. 2023. URL: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/.
[17]
SvelteKit ­ Homepage. 2023. URL: https://kit.svelte.dev/.
[18]
JasenkaG. How Many Pictures? Photo Statistics That Will Blow You Away. 2023.
URL: https://www.lightstalking.com/photo-statistics/.
[19]
Eiffel tower source. URL: https://scottandcindyuk.blogspot.com/2012/08/paris-and-
eiffel-tower.html.
[20]
Vatican image source. URL: https://php8.monasterystays.com/blog/city-guides/
dream-and-plan-rome/.
[21]
Hunagarian parliament image source. URL: https://wall.alphacoders.com/big.php?
i=899256.
Locus
47
==PAGE:56==
[22]
Copenhagen image source. URL: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:B%C3%
B8rsen_Copenhagen_Denmark.jpg.
[23]
Royal Palace of Madrid image source. URL: https : / / www . instagram . com / p /
CLMwmqBHaix/.
[24]
Hong Kong image source. URL: https://www.instagram.com/p/CbcrwkAPNTG/.
[25]
Thailand image source. URL: https://www.boatinternational.com/destinations/rest-
of-the-world-yacht-destinations/days-discovering-thailand-on-a-luxury-yacht--1367.
[26]
William Phillips. Approaching The Gate To Destiny ­ U.s.s. Hornet Aircraft Carrier.
URL: https://www.artbarbarians.com/gallery2/main.asp?artist=21&pic=12014.
[27]
Microsoft. Microsoft Designer Image Creator. 2024. URL: https://designer.microsoft.
com/image-creator.
48
Locus
==PAGE:57==
Locus
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
http://www.compute.dtu.dk
