==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Engineering Acoustics
Masters Thesis
The effect of lip movements in an audio-visual
scene analysis task in virtual reality
By
Johan Kristian Petersen, s160701
May 6, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The cocktail party problem is a well known issue in the world of acoustics, the phenomenon
that having multiple talkers speaking simultaneously in a reverberant space can make it difficult
to hear what one particular talker is saying. In these situations it can help to focus on the lip
movements of the talker of interest.
As the correlation between the masked audio and the
lip movements could help with speech intelligibility. Lip reading of masked speech has been
researched before, but mostly with video recordings on a screen, and with stationary noise as
the masker.
In this experiment, a simplified cocktail party problem has been set up in a virtual space,
using a VR headset. Three talkers are shown in front of the listener in VR, these correspond with
the location of three loudspeakers. During the experiment, the eight, normal hearing, young
listeners will each sit in the room, wearing a VR headset, and will be tasked with identifying
what is being said by the talker directly in front, with the two other talkers as maskers, and
then repeat back what was said. Their response is then scored based on how many of the three
keywords in the target sentence they guessed correctly. This is done with three lip movement
types, plus a baseline with no lip movement. The three lip movement types include a pulsating
sphere which follows the envelope of the speech, the Oculus Lipsync model from Meta which
simulates lip movement, and video recordings of the talkers. For each of the four conditions, 40
sentences are played. The four conditions are played for the test subjects in a pseudo random
order. The two research questions revolve around how big of an impact these lip movement
types have on the intelligibility score.
The results show that increasing the realism of the displayed lip movement does see an
increase in intelligibility. In the overall averages, the two simulated lip movement types score
lower than the baseline. They still show an increase in score with an increase in realism, if
ignoring the baseline, which follows the first research question. Looking at the results for every
second list in each condition gives results that follow the research question very well. The second
research question is asking if the simulated lip movement can be as much of a help as the video
recordings, and no data in this experiment backs this theory, the video results always shows the
highest scores. Even with a small sample size of eight listeners, the results show a statistical
significance for the varying condition, meaning that lip movement type does have an influence
on the results.
Overall, this experiment was considered successful and shows promise, and future work in
this area could be very interesting. To get closer to a virtual cocktail party problem, testing
added reverberation or hearing impairment could be very interesting.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Method
2
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Lip reading according to ChatGPT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Experiment design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Experiment Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Influential factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.8
Preliminary failed tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Results and discussion
14
3.1
Training effect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Sources of error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Conclusion
27
REFERENCES
27
==PAGE:4==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
1
Introduction
The cocktail party problem is a central discussion in acoustics, the issue that multiple talkers in
a room can make it difficult for someone to hear what the person they are listening to is trying
to say. The issue becomes increasingly problematic the more reverberation there is in the given
space, the more talkers are present, and is especially troubling for hearing impaired listeners. This
is where lip reading can be a help. Adding the lip movement that follows along with the presented
speech can improve intelligibility in noisy scenarios. This has been tested before by using video
recordings of the talkers, and speech shaped noise as the masker [Plo87].
This project will focus on attempting to create a controlled test which can replicate multi talker
scenarios in a virtual space, displaying coherent lip movement at different levels of realism along
with speech. This experiment will take place in AVIL (Audio Visual Immersion Lab) at DTU, an
anechoic chamber with 64 speakers which can simulate complex acoustic scenarios. Along with the
many speakers, a VR headset is used to show visual information, in this case humanoid avatars,
that are placed so the talkers in the virtual world match the location of the speakers in the real
world chamber. The test will include three talkers in front of the listener, the center one being the
target, and the others presenting masking speech. Three different types of lip movement will be
tested, plus no lip movement as a baseline. The most realistic and accurate being video recordings
of the talkers, the second most realistic being the Oculus Lipsync model, and the least realistic
being a sphere placed as a mouth, which pulsates according to the envelope of the speech. This is
done to test how realistic or detailed lip movements are needed in order to help in a multi talker
scenario.
1.1
Research questions
1.
Will increasing realism of displayed lip movement have an increasing benefit on
speech intelligibility?
2.
Can simulated lip movement have an approximately similar impact on speech
intelligibility compared to video?
In this case, realism is meant as a way of quantifying how lifelike the visuals are.
One could
argue that displaying a video of a person talking is not as realistic as the Lipsync model, based on
dimensions. The Lipsync model being three dimensional and the video being a flat two dimensional
overlay. These research questions are meant as a way of asking, when going from no lip movement,
to the sphere, to Lipsync and finally to video, will the speech intelligibility increase or are there
diminishing returns?
1
==PAGE:5==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
2
Method
2.1
Background
In previous studies, experiments regarding the benefits of lip movement for speech intelligibility in
noisy conditions have been conducted by showing a talker on a screen, and having noise play as
a masker. In [Plo87], noise with a speech shaped spectrum was used as a masker, the additional
visual information provided a lower speech reception threshold of about -4dB.
Previous studies at AVIL (Audio Visual Immersion Lab) have been focused more on source local-
ization. In [Lun22], a multi-talker scenario is presented. The goal for the listener was to locate a
specific talker, based on the content of the speech presented. In this study, the number of talkers in
the scene, and the amount of reverberation in the scene was shown to affect the ability to localize
the correct talker. The subjects were rated on localization speed and accuracy.
This project will then focus on combining these two concepts, presenting a multi talker scenario
in VR with lip movement of the talkers, and then rating speech intelligibility as a percentage of
correctly guessed keywords.
2.2
Lip reading according to ChatGPT
The following prompt: ”Can you tell me about lip reading?” was entering into ChatGPT 3.5 and
the response is shown below.
Lip reading, also known as speechreading, is the practice of understanding speech by visually
interpreting the movements of the lips, face, and tongue of a speaker. It’s often used by individuals
who are deaf or hard of hearing as a way to supplement their auditory comprehension.
Here are some key points about lip reading:
• Visual Clues: Lip reading relies on observing the movements of a speaker’s lips and facial
expressions to understand what they are saying. This includes the shape of the lips, jaw
movements, and facial expressions.
• Context: Context plays a significant role in lip reading. People often rely on context clues,
such as the topic of conversation, body language, and gestures, to help understand what is
being said.
• Language Variations: Lip reading can be influenced by factors such as accents, speech
2
==PAGE:6==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
speed, and the clarity of the speaker’s lip movements. Some languages and dialects may be
easier or more difficult to lip read depending on these factors.
• Training and Practice: Becoming proficient in lip reading typically requires training and
practice. Individuals may undergo formal lip reading classes or work with speech therapists
to improve their skills.
• Limitations: While lip reading can be a valuable communication tool, it’s not foolproof.
Factors such as distance, lighting conditions, speaker’s facial hair, and background noise can
make lip reading more challenging.
• Supplemental Techniques: Lip reading is often used in conjunction with other communi-
cation strategies, such as sign language, written notes, or assistive devices like hearing aids
or cochlear implants.
• Facial Expressions and Body Language: In addition to lip movements, facial expressions
and body language can provide important context clues for understanding communication,
especially emotions and emphasis.
Overall, lip reading is a valuable skill that can greatly enhance communication for individuals
with hearing impairments, allowing them to participate more fully in conversations and interac-
tions. However, it’s important to recognize its limitations and to use it in combination with other
communication strategies when necessary.
This response from ChatGPT has some truth to it, some of it is simply common sense, for example
that distance between talker and listener has an influence on lip reading ability. There is also
some reverse common sense at play here, like background noise having an influence on lip reading
ability. Background noise could perhaps be a distraction, but auditory noise shouldn’t directly
affect visual information. There are also some ’facts’ presented here that are in need of some fact
checking, particularly finding a scientific paper which confirms it. It mentions that body language
can give some cues about context, which can help the lip reading listener, and no study could be
found to confirm the influence of body language for speech intelligibility. However, some studies
have mentioned facial expressions as a factor when it comes to communication [Doh97], so saying
that facial expressions could give context cues might not be completely false.
2.3
Experiment design
A large portion of the project was spent designing and implementing the experiment. From the
start, the goal was to utilize a VR headset along with the speaker setup at AVIL. Two separate
routes were considered for this project, both regarding adding lip movement in VR. One was about
3
==PAGE:7==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
adding lip movement as a factor to previous talker localization tests [Lun22].
This test would
require the listener to find a specific target talker among multiple possible, all with added lip
movement as a help to find the target faster. The other was about doing a speech intelligibility test
with multiple talkers in VR. This experiment would require more work to set up, as it deviated
more from previous experiments done at AVIL, but was decided to be worth pursuing as this
was considered to potentially have the most interesting outcome. This experiment also seemed to
be more of an approximation of the cocktail party problem, which would be very interesting to
investigate.
Another factor which greatly influenced the decision on which of the two to pursue, was video
recordings.
From the start it was thought that having video recordings for the presented lip
movement visuals was very important, to relate to previous studies.
Since the DAST (Danish
Sentence Test) material already had video recordings ready for use, these were decided to be the
used speech material, but this made it impossible to do a source localization test, as the sentences
are too short, three to four seconds.
The design of this experiment was approached by iterating through functional builds with increasing
complexity over time, to have a functioning fallback experiment in case the ideal goal couldn’t be
reached. The first iteration was simply to get the different lip movement types to work on a regular
computer setup with a screen and headphones, this would mean only a single talker, but restaurant
chatter could be added as masking noise. The second iteration would be to add more talkers to the
previous iteration, and removing the masking restaurant chatter. The next iteration was planned
to be getting the experiment to work in AVIL, using the speakers and screens in the room, which
can be seen on Figure 1, but not yet including the VR headset. This step was to some extent
skipped as the three screens placed in front of the listener above the ear level speakers were not
functioning properly. Instead the final iteration was worked on, to get the visual information to
show up in VR which was the goal from the start. This goal was reached and worked as planned.
4
==PAGE:8==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
Figure 1: A look at the front speakers and screens in AVIL (Audio Visual Immersion Lab).
At AVIL, the audio is handled via Matlab, and the visuals in the VR headset are programmed in
Unity. This experiment required a whole new testing procedure, compared to previous measure-
ments run at AVIL, so new experiment scripts were programmed in both Matlab and Unity, these
scripts are attached with the hand-in of the report.
Matlab is used as the ’brain’ of the experiment, handling audio playback, keeping track of the
sentences and the files needed, saving results and later analyzing and visualising the data and
more. The Matlab PC controls the entire experiment, the Unity PC is in no way tracking how far
along the test is, or how the subjects score, this is all done in Matlab.
A table was create which contains the order in which each subject will experience the different
conditions, this is shown on Table 1, with added colors for each lip movement type for better
readability. This list was generated in Matlab by making it create a list of all possible permutations,
and then randomizing the list. This randomization was done multiple times until a satisfactory
spread for the first condition was achieved for the first 10 permutations of the list, this was chosen as
the goal was to get around 10 test subjects, and to have a varying spread of the starting condition.
It was also considered to have the order fixed for all subjects, or have at least the first condition
always be the baseline with no lip movement. But this was decided against, as it was suspected
that training might be a notable factor in this experiment. If the subjects always started with
5
==PAGE:9==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
no lip movement, then the effect of added lip movement would appear larger, due to the training
effect overlapping. In other words, if the listeners generally perform worse at the beginning of
the experiment, it would be bad to always start with no lip movement, as the results for no lip
movement would look worse than they should.
Scenario order
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Subject 1
Sphere
Video
None
Lipsync
Subject 2
Lipsync
Sphere
Video
None
Subject 3
None
Video
Sphere
Lipsync
Subject 4
Video
None
Lipsync
Sphere
Subject 5
Lipsync
Video
Sphere
None
Subject 6
Lipsync
Video
None
Sphere
Subject 7
None
Lipsync
Video
Sphere
Subject 8
Sphere
Lipsync
None
Video
Table 1: The order in which the eight subjects experienced the four lip movement scenarios.
Unity is used for the visual part of the experiment. All models shown in VR are copied either from
previous experiments done at AVIL, or is from the Oculus Lipsync package. The avatars used as
’targets’ are from Oculus, and the anechoic chamber design is from a previous experiment. This
means that no graphic design or 3D modeling was done in this experiment, except for the simple
black sphere used in the ’Sphere’ condition. So for this project, the work in Unity consisted of
getting to know the workflow of the engine, placing the models where needed in the virtual world,
and making sure everything behaved as wanted via scripting. Which included routing the incoming
audio signals to either Lipsync or the sphere, making sure the virtual and real world match by using
the trackers in AVIL, designing functions for all needed OSC messages, and the script to make the
sphere follow the envelope of incoming signals.
The speech material used will consist of sentences from DAST (Danish Sentence Test) [Kre23]. It
includes 1200 sentences, recorded by four talkers, two male, two female. Each sentence is around
three to four seconds long, and has a high context, meaning the sentences are not nonsense. The
sentences used are from DASTs lists, as these lists are normalized to be of equal intelligibility on an
average of the 20 sentences in each list. i.e. all lists are of equal intelligibility if averaging over all
sentences in each. For each lip movement type, two lists are used, so 40 sentences per lip movement
type.
The different lip movement designs is the most important aspect of this project. It was found that
Meta has an open source lip movement model, Oculus Lipsync [Meta], which could be integrated
into Unity, which is used at AVIL. This was researched further and then decided to be used in this
6
==PAGE:10==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
project as one of the lip movement types. It was decided early on that it would be a possibility to
use the DAST material, as it has a large number of sentences, and four different talkers which is
great for use in a multi talker scenario, but most importantly, there are video recordings of each
sentence from each talker. This meant that actual video recordings of people talking could be used
in this test, making the most lifelike scenario possible for testing. Beyond Lipsync and video, it
was also decided to include a very simple type of lip movement, a pulsating sphere. This gives a
total of four lip movement types, including the baseline of no lip movement.
The experiment was designed around Oculus Lipsync [Meta]. Oculus Lipsync by Meta, is an SDK
(software development kit) which includes a female avatar to present the lip movement, this can
be seen on Figure 2 below. Lipsync comes with two functioning modes, by playing an audio file
and generating the lip movement from there, or by using a microphone input. The early testing of
Lipsync was run with the audio file playback, but using the audio input functionality will work well
in this experiment as the audio is being played from another PC. Oculus Lipsync estimates and
predicts visemes, the visual counterpart of phonemes, or mouth shapes, by putting the incoming
audio through a deep learning neural network [Metb], based on previous or even upcoming phonemes
if utilizing lookahead. It isn’t specifically mentioned in any found documentation in which situations
lookahead is being used, but it doesn’t seem likely to be used with a live input, as used in this
project. The predicted visemes are then supposed to closely mimic actual lip movement. Oculus
Lipsync estimates the 15 visemes based on this standard [Tec]. These visemes are not handled
perfectly though, as an example, it was noticed that there is no viseme that resembles a convincing
’O’ sound. Oculus Lipsync was released in 2018 and shows its age, it is not overly realistic, and it
resembles lip movement from video games from around 2010, in subjective opinion. It is however
very useful for this experiment. The entire point here is to increase the realism of visual information,
to show what influence it has on the results, and Lipsync is more realistic than the simple pulsating
sphere.
Using a pulsating sphere to follow the envelope of speech has been done before, and is a very simple
way to display coherent visual information along with audio [WO21]. In this experiment, a sphere
is placed over the mouth of the Lipsync avatar, and doesn’t pulsate in overall size, i.e. radius,
instead the height of the sphere is varied, which more closely resembles a mouth. This can be
seen on Figure 2 below, in both ’closed’ and ’open’ positions. The height of the sphere is varied
by the calculated envelope of the input signal. The envelope is calculated and used, as the fine
structure of the audio signal is not needed. The sphere only needs to roughly follow the slowly
varying amplitude of speech, not the tonality of the voice. The script in Unity is calculating a
short term mean with a specific window size, averaging over multiple samples to approximate the
envelope of the signal and disregard the fine structure. Beyond that, on the Matlab PC the speech
signal is also run through Matlabs ’Envelope’ function using the ’rms’ flag. This makes Matlab
calculate the RMS (root-mean-square) envelope of the signal using a sliding window of a certain
7
==PAGE:11==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
size. In this experiment, the window size was set to 1,000 samples on the Matlab PC and 1,024
samples in Unity. Since the two PCs do roughly the same sort of processing on the signal, there is
some redundancy here when it comes to smoothing. This was fine tuned through a lot of trial and
error, but came to a point where the sphere doesn’t fluctuate too much, but isn’t too slow, which
could remove some details in the envelope.
There is a small amount of delay in the generated lip movement, both for Oculus Lipsync and
the pulsating sphere, with the audio leading the visuals slightly. This was found to be an issue
in [Gre01] as even a delay of 40ms was showing worse speech intelligibility.
By simple visual
estimation, Lipsync is the worst offender of the two, with the sphere only being slightly off, quite
possibly due to its averaging window.
The videos are included as a simple overlay put in front of each avatar. Unlike the Lipsync and
Sphere, the videos don’t react to incoming audio in real time, thus they need to be called and
played at a specific time for them to be synchronized with the audio. This is handled via OSC
(Open Source Control) messages, which is described further below.
Figure 2: Screenshots of the different lip type movements. Showing the Oculus Lipsync avatar,
along with the video overlay and pulsating sphere, open and closed.
At AVIL, the audio and visuals are handled on two separate computers, so for audio and visuals
to work together, some sort of communication between the two PCs is needed. This is handled by
8
==PAGE:12==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
using OSC (Open Source Control), to send simple strings of numbers from one computer to the
other. In this project, OSC messages are only sent from the Matlab PC to the Unity PC, with
no returning messages. These OSC messages are mainly used to inform the Unity PC of which lip
movement condition is up next, and the Unity PC then switches to the appropriate visuals. When
the condition is set to ’Video’ the Unity PC then needs to know which video files to load and later
play. This is done via one OSC message for each talker. Conveniently, the files used are already
named with a four digit number, so the file names are simple to send directly as an OSC message,
where the Unity PC then finds the files with the name given. One could then send an OSC message
back to the Matlab PC to inform when the video files are loaded, as some research showed that
Unity has a function to call a certain function when a file has loaded. This would be perfect, but
apparently Unity calls this function when the first buffer for loading the video is filled, not when
the full clip is loaded. So relying on this function could do more harm than good. Instead, it was
chosen to have a delay of four seconds set on the Matlab PC, before instructing the Unity PC to
play the loaded video files. After this delay there is inserted a variable delay in Unity, this was
used to synchronize the video with the audio coming from the Matlab PC. This delay was set to a
fixed, acceptable value before doing any trials with test subjects. So video and audio was synced
subjectively by ear, which means they might not align perfectly. This was chosen as an acceptable
approximation, as doing any calibration to perfectly synchronize audio and video would have been
too time consuming for this project. The video files used are placed on an external hard drive,
as they take up more space than what was available at the Unity PCs internal SSD. This was an
improvement over the previous solution where they were placed on a network drive. But having
the files on an external hard drive isn’t perfect as sometimes the drive needs to ’wake up’ after
idling for too long. This resulted in the video some times not being as well synced to the audio on
the first sentence when starting the ’Video’ scenario.
2.4
Equipment
The equipment used in this experiment is what is available at AVIL (Audio Visual Immersion Lab)
at DTU. The room itself is an anechoic chamber with 64 loudspeakers placed in a sphere around
the listener at a distance of 2.4 meters, which is considered far field for frequencies over 143Hz. In
this experiment, only the speakers at ear level are of interest, more specifically, the three speakers
in front of the listener are used, these are separated by an angle of 15°, so one right in front and one
to each side, 15° left and right. These speakers are driven by amplifiers and DSPs connected to a
computer outside the anechoic chamber. The visual information is presented to the listener via an
HTC Vive VR headset, this is run via another computer outside the room. Along with the headset
are also three HTC Vive Trackers, which are used to align the virtual world with the real world, to
make sure that the speakers in the room are aligned with what they are supposed to in VR. The
two handheld controllers that come with the HTC Vive headset are not used in this project. The
9
==PAGE:13==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
VR headset is run via SteamVR to show the material created in Unity. For more details on the
equipment at AVIL, check [T19].
Figure 3: A look inside AVIL (Audio Visual Immersion Lab).
For sending the audio between the two computers, two RME Fireface UCX audio interfaces were
used, one for each PC. The audio is sent via a digital ADAT connection, using an optical fiber cable.
The audio which is sent to the speakers in AVIL, is also sent via three separate output channels
on the Fireface, this was possible by using Dante Via to virtually extend the number of output
channels from the Matlab PC. Essentially, Dante Via puts the output channels of the Fireface in
series with the ones from the Tesira Biamp DSPs normally used at AVIL, making it possible to
send audio via two audio interfaces at once. On the receiving side, Unity takes the audio sent from
the Matlab PC and uses it to generate the lip movement.
2.5
Experiment Procedure
The exact procedure of the experiment is described below. The experiment takes around 30 to 35
minutes depending on how quickly the participants give their responses.
The participant sits on the chair in AVIL and is first instructed on the procedure of the experiment.
The listeners ears are aligned in elevation to the speakers, which is not essential to get exactly right
10
==PAGE:14==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
in this type of experiment, but it is done to make sure no subjects are way off axis. The participant
wears a VR headset and short sentences are played from the three front speakers, the center one
being the target. The two masking speakers on the sides have been gained to be louder than the
target, to get around 50% correct speech reception when no visual information is present, to avoid
ceiling effects when adding lip movement. The listener repeats back what they understood from the
target sentence, which is picked up by a microphone in the room, to judge whether the keywords
were correctly repeated.
For judging the responses, it was decided that different alterations of the correct word would be
accepted. As an example, if the correct keyword is ’Konkurrencer/Competitions’ then ’Konkur-
rence/Competition’ would be accepted as a correct answer. So swapping between singular and
plural, or past, present and future tense was considered acceptable. For words which are very
close to the keyword when it comes to sound, but have a different meaning, it would be treated as
incorrect. As an example, if the keyword is ’Maj/May’ then ’Majs/Corn’ would not be accepted.
2.6
Instructions
This section will describe the instructions given to the participants of the experiment. The par-
ticipants were informed that they had to sit in AVIL wearing a VR headset, they will see three
avatars in front of them in VR, which match with the real life location of the three front speakers
in AVIL. These three avatars will then talk at the same time, with the same lip movement types,
and the participant will then need to repeat back what they heard from the middle talker. They
are informed that they will not be graded for a whole sentence, but for certain keywords, so they
should repeat back whatever words they hear. They are told there is no timer on their response,
that the next sentence won’t play until they have responded, giving them the possibility to think
about what they heard. They are also informed that the test is hard, as it is designed to yield
around 50% correct responses with no visual information, but it will get easier as they get used to
it. It is also said that the voices of the three talkers doesn’t change.
The participants are also shown the different lip movement types on a screen before entering AVIL,
this is done for two reasons. First, some preliminary tests were showing that people sometimes be-
came confused when the lip movement type changed, particularly when there was no lip movement,
and when the video overlay was shown, causing the participants to not listen properly for the first
sentence. Second, because the first participant whose responses are used in this data, accidentally
saw some of the lip movement on the screen outside AVIL. So all four lip movement types were
shown to all participants before starting the experiment, to keep it consistent for all participants
and to avoid some confusion.
11
==PAGE:15==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
2.7
Influential factors
There are multiple factors that could influence the outcome of the experiment, some have been set
to a fixed value, to minimize sources of error, and some have been left as variables to test their
impact on the results. All considered variables and sources of error are listed and described below.
• Lip movement type is the main targeted variable of this project, three lip movement types,
plus no lip movement, are considered, these four are discussed in more detail in another
section.
• Talker voices have been fixed for all trials.
Since the DAST material is used for this
experiment, two male and two female talkers are available. In the first few preliminary trials,
the talker voices were varying for each lip movement type, but a problem occurred which
required these to be fixed for the later, actual measurements. This is discussed in detail in
another section. So the target voice was chosen to be one of the males from DAST, and
have a male and a female masker. Having fixed talker voices creates some bias, as the entire
experiment is probably influenced by the voice placement, and simply changing the voices
might change the outcome notably.
• SNR has been set to a fixed value for all subjects throughout the experiment. The SNR
was set by doing an SRT style test with a single subject. It was not an actual SRT test, but
something similar to reach a percent correct of around 50%. Different gain levels in Matlab
for the masking speakers were tested, with 20 sentences, or one list, for each level. With the
masker talkers gained at two and a half times higher than the target talker, the test subject
had 55% keywords correct, so this level was used throughout the testing. Assuming that a
scalar of 2.5 is linear all through the system, this will result in an increase around 4dB, and
since two speakers are playing, an additional 3dB is added, so theoretically the masking noise
is around 7dB higher than the signal, giving an SNR of around -7dB. Doing very simple dBA
SPL readings in the chamber using a smartphone, the level of only the target speaker showed
a maximum of 52dBA and with the two masking speakers, the max level was 65dBA. These
measurements were mainly done to double check if the sound levels in the chamber were at
safe and comfortable levels and to know the levels presented for future reference.
Other variables which are not considered in this project, but could be interesting to look into in
future work, are reverberation, hearing impairment and audiovisual coherence. I.e. testing different
reverberation levels, testing with both normal hearing and hearing impaired listeners, and testing
with coherent and incoherent visual information.
12
==PAGE:16==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
2.8
Preliminary failed tests
When doing the first rounds of tests, with three participants, a problem occurred. These were
meant to be the first real measurements, but the results ended up unusable. This was a setback,
but it helped with highlighting an issue in the experiment, and changed the testing procedure
slightly. Initially, and with these three subjects, it was planned to have the voice of the target and
masker talkers change with every scenario, so every subject had a different order in which they
would hear a specific target talker. This was planned as it would remove some bias related to how
the four voices in the DAST material sound. The idea was, if the target voice is always the same,
the results will have some bias that fits specifically to that voice, and the accompanying masker
voices. By altering the target talkers voice this bias would decrease, at least when averaging over
at large amount of subjects. The problem with this approach, and with the first three tests, was
that one of the voices was louder than the other three. The speech in the DAST material has been
normalized for speech intelligibility, therefore no more normalizing is done in this project. This
resulted in one of the female talkers, F1, was notably louder than the others. A Matlab script was
run to calculate the RMS value of every single sentence by every single talker and then the mean
for each talker was calculated, this resulted in three of the talkers being very similar, but one being
around 50% higher in RMS. The result of this inconsistency was what caused a single subject to
go from scoring around 15% correct, to 80%. When the louder talker was a masker, the listeners
had a very hard time hearing the target, and when the louder talker was the target, the test was
much easier.
This was handled by removing the varying target talker, since only three talkers are needed, and
three of the ones on hand were behaving as expected, these three talkers were fixed for all upcoming
test. The suspected reason why this problem occurred might be that the DAST audio files were
retrieved from two different online repositories, and in the beginning only the files for F1, the
problematic talker, were downloaded. So the files for F1 might have been pre normalization, as the
RMS was also very inconsistent for the 1200 sentences for this particular subject, where the other
three showed very little variation.
13
==PAGE:17==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
3
Results and discussion
Figure 4 below shows a box plot of the averages for each lip movement type. The values are sorted
to fit the hypothesized increase in intelligibility based on realism of the lip movement, with no lip
movement scoring lowest, then ’Sphere’, then ’Lipsync’ and ’Video’ scoring highest. Every box
has one data point per test subject for each condition, meaning the results from the two lists in
each condition have been averaged before calculating this plot. These data points are marked as
red dots and named ’Single Subject Mean’. The overall mean for each condition is marked with a
blue X. Each list will be analysed in more detail later. From these means and percentiles it would
appear that adding the sphere or Lipsync as visual information will decrease speech intelligibility.
This follows along with some comments from the test subjects, as some said they felt that the
sphere was more of a distraction than a help. This shows that when looking at overall averages,
the hypothesized increase in intelligibility is not showing. However, if ignoring the baseline value,
the lip movement types show an increase in mean and median as expected.
Figure 4: A box plot with one averaged data point per condition. Each data point used in the box
plots are the ’Single Subject Mean’ points shown.
On Figure 5 below, the results for each sentence is plotted, averaged over all subjects and grouped
by lip movement type, and list number. Every data point on the blue curve is one specific sentence
with one specific lip movement type, averaged over all subjects scores. It can be seen that there are
a few sentences where all subjects guessed every word, and one where no one guessed a single word
correctly. As mentioned, each subject experienced each lip movement type in a different order,
meaning for one data point on the blue curve, the eight subjects can have heard that particular
14
==PAGE:18==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
sentence at different times during the experiment, ideally yielding an average when it comes to the
training effect, given enough test subjects. The average scores over a specific condition and list are
also plotted. The yellow curve shows the average over all 40 sentences presented during a particular
lip movement condition, where the red curve shows the average for each list of 20 sentences. There
are always two lists per lip movement type, and they are always presented in the same order. Ergo,
the collected data for the second list within a specific condition will never be what is presented
to the listener as the very first stimulus they experience, meaning these results should be fairly
uninfluenced by the training effect. This makes it viable to look more closely at the results for each
list, which is shown as a box plot on Figure 8.
If only looking at the means for the second list in each condition, the averages increase with
increasing realism, this is discussed in more detail later. It is interesting to note that the three
conditions with lip movement shows an increase in score when going from the first to the second
list, where the score for ’None’ decreases by a substantial amount. The only theory that could be
thought of to explain this behavior would be fatigue. Perhaps with no visual information to keep
the subjects focused, the fatigue effect shows through more clearly.
Figure 5: Means for every sentence averaged over all subjects. Including means for each lip move-
ment type and each list.
Figure 6 below shows a box plot of the averaged results, showing the median as the red line, 25’th
and 75’th percentile as the upper and lower bound of the box, and extreme data points visualized
by the lines extending beyond the box, no outliers are present, probably due to the small data set.
The data used in this box plot is the average score within a specific list for every subject, so with
15
==PAGE:19==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
eight subjects there are 16 data points per condition. These data points are marked as red dots
and named ’Single Subject Mean’, all 16 might not show as some overlap. The overall mean for
each condition is marked with a blue X.
When the data is plotted like this, the data for ’Sphere’ and ’Lipsync’ appears to yield worse results
than the reference, ’None’, similar to Figure 4. When using one data point per list, the median
for ’None’ and ’Video’ are identical, which would indicate fairly similar results, but the mean is
slightly higher for ’Video’ as was expected.
Figure 6: A box plot with two averaged data points per condition, for for each list. Each data
point used in the box plots are the ’Single Subject Mean’ points shown.
Figure 7 below is a box plot of each list, this can further show the differences between the first and
second list in each condition. Each box has one data point for each subject, so eight data points per
box. It can be seen that the differences between two lists within a certain condition are notable. It
is interesting to note that all lip movement types show an increase in score for the second list, but
the baseline with no lip movement shows a notable decrease going from the first to the second list,
as mentioned before. It can also be seen that the first list for sphere shows the largest variation in
the scores. It is also interesting to note that the scores for the first list with no lip movement has
the least variation in scores.
16
==PAGE:20==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
Figure 7: Box plot of means for each individual list, two per condition. Each data point used in
the box plots are the ’Single Subject Mean’ points shown.
One interesting way to look at this data is to look at the results for every second list. Either by
looking at Figure 7 above, or on Figure 8 below. It can be seen that the averages, along with medians
and percentiles, increase when the realism of the lip movement increases, which directly follows the
first research question of this project. It could be said that this is just a way of presenting the data
so it fits the hypothesis, but there is a valid argument to be made as to why looking at every second
list is viable. Every second list will never be as influenced by the training effect, either in terms of
the listener getting used to the new lip movement, or if it is the very start of the experiment. Any
data in any of the second lists will never be the first thing a subject experiences, and as shown in
Figure 10, the subjects score better over time, with the first 10-15 sentences being notably worse
than the rest. So the data for every second list is not as influenced by training, despite each subject
experiencing the conditions in a different order. This is a solid argument to look more closely at
the data for only each second list, which shows an increase in score corresponding with an increase
in realism, thus supporting the first research question of this project.
17
==PAGE:21==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
Figure 8: A box plot for every second list. Each data point used in the box plots are the ’Single
Subject Mean’ points shown.
Looking at every first list shows the opposite. All of the added lip movement types scores worse
compared to the baseline. This could be influenced by the overall training effect also shown in
Figure 10, since all conditions have been the first condition for some subjects. If this was the only
factor influencing this trend, then ’Lipsync’ should show the worst results for the first list, as it
has been the starting condition most times, as seen in Table 1. It can be seen on Figure 7 that
the ’Lipsync’ results show the biggest difference going from list one to list two, especially for the
median, so being the starting condition most times could be showing an effect here. The opposite
effect can be seen for ’Video’, it has been the starting condition the least times, and shows the
smallest difference in median between its two lists. However, when looking at percentiles, or the
means, this effect isn’t as noticeable. The training effect might not have as much of an influence
on the ’None’ results, as the listeners don’t need to get used to, and focus on, any new visual
information, they just need to listen.
One very interesting aspect of the results are the results for subject four, they were the only
subject who started with ’Video’, and had the overall best score of all subjects, which can be seen
on Table 2 below. Subject four consistently scored above 70%, which is very good compared to
other participants. This is where the small sample size is very frustrating. This high score could
be due to experiencing the ’video’ condition early, which perhaps could give some important cues
for upcoming conditions, or it could simply be that subject four was particular good at the test.
Either way, there are no other subjects starting with ’video’, to further show if it has an influence
on the results. It could just be a coincidence that subject four was very good at this type of test,
18
==PAGE:22==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
which is probably the most likely reason, but is something worth noting in potential future work.
Lip Movement
Type
None
Sphere
Lipsync
Video
Geo mean
Subject 1
40.8%
18.3%
39.2%
40.0%
34.6%
Subject 2
50.0%
46.7%
37.5%
54.2%
47.1%
Subject 3
64.2%
68.3%
73.3%
71.7%
69.4%
Subject 4
75.8%
78.3%
76.7%
75.8%
76.7%
Subject 5
52.5%
38.3%
40.0%
50.0%
45.2%
Subject 6
58.3%
59.2%
53.3%
59.2%
57.5%
Subject 7
40.0%
42.5%
45.0%
55.8%
45.8%
Subject 8
71.7%
51.7%
60.8%
85.8%
67.5%
Table 2: The average scores for each subject for each lip movement type, with color showing
whether a certain result is higher or lower than the baseline for that specific subject. With yellow
indicating a difference below 1%.
An ANOVA test was done to check the results for statistical significance, the results of which are
shown on Figure 9 below. This test was done in Matlab, as the rest of the data analysis was already
done it Matlab, and Matlab seems to have the features needed for the analysis that was wanted, an
ANOVA test with interactions. The three input parameters tested in this case are the Subject ID,
the condition (lip movement type), and the list number, a number to indicate whether a specific
result is from the first or second list within a certain condition. The scores given to this model are
averaged percentages, one number per subject, per list. So the average result over all 20 sentences
within a certain list for each subject. It can be seen that ’Condition’ has the lowest P value and
is well below the standard confidence interval of 5%. Therefore, from this test there is statistical
significance to back up that the condition, or lip movement type, has an influence on how people
score in this experiment.
There are other factors with statistical significance, using the standard 5% confidence interval,
in this dataset. ’Subject ID’ shows statistical significance, which makes sense as the individual
subjects scored notably different, as an example, one scoring above 70% in every condition, and
one scoring just 18% in one of the conditions. ’ListNumber’ is just barely above the 5% confidence
interval, so very close to a statistical significance. But the interaction between ’Condition’ and
’ListNumber’ also shows a very strong statistical significance, similar to that of ’Condition’ alone.
19
==PAGE:23==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
Figure 9: ANOVA results with interactions, which shows statistical significance for ’Condition’,
and others.
However, a very important point to make is, since the data set is so small, the statistical analysis
can not be taken as the full truth. With more data, this statistical significance might disappear, or
it might improve. But in this particular test there is a statistical significance for the most important
factor, ’Condition’, which is very nice to see.
In regards to the research questions, the two of them are contradictory to some extent, one questions
whether ’better’ lip movement gives better results, the other asks whether some of the simulated,
less realistic, lip movements are enough, showing similar results to ’Video’. As mentioned earlier,
when looking at the results for every second list, which can be seen on Figure 8, they follow perfectly
along with the first research question, that increasing realism also increases the score. This also
goes against the second research question, as the result for ’Video’ is showing a higher score than
the others. When looking at the combined results in Figure 6, the data doesn’t support either
research question. For the first research question, the two simulated lip movements show worse
results than the baseline with no lip movement, which doesn’t follow the hypothesis, unless the
baseline is ignored, then it fits well. This also doesn’t follow the second research question, as the
results for the simulated results are notably lower than the ’Video’ results.
3.1
Training effect
Figure 10 below is plotted to show how the listeners score over time.
Each point on the blue
curve is the mean of all subjects at a specific sentence number in the testing. As the order of
which the subjects experience each lip movement type is pseudo random, the exact sentence and
lip movement type does not match in this plot. As an example, the highest point of 100% at around
sentence number 65 is not the same sentence or lip movement type for every subject. All subjects
coincidentally guessed all words correct at the 65’th sentence they heard. As it was noticed quickly
20
==PAGE:24==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
that the listeners generally score better over time, but reaches a ’steady state’, it was decided to
fit a logarithmic curve to the data, which is shown in the figure. While there is a lot of variation,
the general trend of the fitted curve is to some extent reflected in the mean curve. This theory was
also backed up by the comments from the test subjects, as most if not all subjects mentioned that
it was tough in the beginning, but got easier over time. One subject mentioned that they had a
hard time focusing towards the end, which is the fatigue effect, which is also something to consider
a factor. The fatigue effect doesn’t show as clearly from the results on Figure 10, and since only
one subject mentioned it, it might not be a general issue with this experiment.
Figure 10: The average results for all subjects over time. This is to show the training effect, a
logarithmic curve has been fitted to the data, which shows that subjects get better over time,
regardless of lip movement type.
3.2
Limitations
There are many limitations and interesting variables that could have been looked into in this
project, but were cut due to time constraints.
The biggest limitation in this project might be the low number of test subjects. With eight test
subjects there is a lot of variation in the results, and the averages aren’t as refined as they could
have been. It could have been possible to run the experiment with a few more people, but adding a
few more people wouldn’t change much in terms of averages. It could have been interesting to run
these tests on 30-50 people, which would yield more stable averages and percentiles, and a more
reliable ANOVA test. Finding 30-50 native danish speaking, normal hearing, test subjects might
21
==PAGE:25==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
be difficult, but doable given enough time. As an example, for DAST there were 60 normal hearing
participants [Kre23]. For [Plo87], there were 36 normal hearing participants.
One variable that could have been very interesting to measure in this test would be hearing im-
pairment. The hypothesis here being that hearing impaired people might be relying more on lip
movement in their everyday life, which would be shown as greater score improvements versus the
baseline. Also, since this project is presenting a virtual multi talker scenario, it is a fairly controlled
virtual version of the cocktail party problem, which is a greater issue for hearing impaired listeners,
compared to normal hearing [Bro00]. Hearing impairment was not tested in this project, as this
would have been another variable with assumed notable impact on the measurements, which would
require essentially a doubling of test subjects, as normal hearing and hearing impaired would in
most cases be grouped separately, and each group would need a sufficient number of participants.
Also, if doing tests with hearing impaired listeners, some audiometric test should be done prior to
the actual test, to make sure that the SRT is set equally for the participants.
One limitation to keep in mind is the influence that the VR headset has on the listeners capabilities
to hear what is coming directly from the front. The headset covers up a great deal of space in front
of the face, right at ear level, so the ’line of sight’ from the speakers to the ears is to some extent
obstructed, which is of course not ideal, but hard to avoid. This means that the direct sound from
the front speakers, where the target talker is, cannot reach the ears optimally. This can be seen
on Figure 11 below, most of the ear is blocked by the headset. This picture is attempted to be
taken from directly in front of the front speaker, i.e. where the target talkers voice is coming from.
However, in a previous study using the exact same equipment [T19], the influence of the headset
was found to be negligible. But that was a localization test, not a speech intelligibility test.
22
==PAGE:26==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
Figure 11: A picture of a listener wearing the HTC Vive headset taken from the point of view of
the speaker in front, it can be seen that the headset covers up most of the line of sight for the ears.
Another limitation along the same line, speech intelligibility is increased when the speech is coming
from around a 45° angle azimuth [Web63].
This is however likely to just be due to increased
sound source discrimination, due to ILDs (Interaural Level Differences) and ITDs (Interaural Time
Differences), and with the small 15° angles between the speakers in this test, turning the head 45°
might not help with source discrimination. But since the listeners are attempting to focus on the lip
movement, they cannot move their head very much off axis, slightly due to biological limitations,
but mostly the limited viewing angle of the VR headset. The HTC Vive claims a field of view of
around 110° but there is a notable lack of focus when trying to look to the sides, with only a very
narrow field of view in the middle displaying clearly and detailed. This results in the listeners not
being in an optimal listening position, which one might have tried if placed in an actual cocktail
party problem, by turning one ear towards the target talker.
One notable aspect that was cut from the project due to time constraints was reverberation. The
idea was to use impulse responses with some degree of reverberation, maybe from an IEC room, to
have some reverberation, as it would worsen the conditions for a multi talker scenario, and would
more closely resemble the cocktail party problem. Very early on, it was thought that comparing
different levels of reverberation could have been tested. The more reverberation, the harder it
will be to hear one specific talker during a multi talker scenario. The implementation of this was
cut, because a functional version of the experiment without reverberation was ready for use, but
implementing reverberation would have required a lot of the scripting to be reworked, and since it
23
==PAGE:27==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
was already quite late in the project, it was decided to just stay without reverberation. For future
work, adding reverberation would be very interesting.
Another factor that could have been a variable but was left fixed was target location, and target
acquisition. It was considered to have five avatars in front, instead of the three, and have the
target move around, either for each sentence, every couple of sentences or at every list. This would
require some way of informing the listener of which target to focus on, this could either be done
visually, or by training the listener to know the different voices, and try to find a specific voice.
This was cut for a number of reasons. It was already decided to use the DAST material and the
sentences are rather short, giving the listener very little time to find the target. Also, since it’s a
speech intelligibility test, they might lose a couple of keywords in the beginning of each sentences,
due to not finding the target soon enough. This gives a lot of potential error which isn’t needed to
investigate the effects of lip movement for speech intelligibility.
3.3
Sources of error
There is a source of error in the judging system, as the listeners need to repeat back what they
hear, and the experiment handler has to hear what the listeners say, and evaluate what words they
meant to say, and then grade them. If the listeners talk too softly or unclear, the handler might
not hear exactly what the listener is trying to say, leading to some uncertainty. This uncertainty
could be avoided by having the listeners write down their responses, which would lead to clearer
answers, but would also result in a longer experiment, and requiring more work to process and
grade the responses. This would also require a rework of the experiment, as the subjects would
need to have a keyboard in AVIL to write down their answers, and a way of seeing the keyboard, so
the experiment would become more complex. The listeners could have a keyboard show in VR and
then click the wanted keys by pointing the HTC Vive controllers at them, but this would increase
the length of the experiment greatly.
One minor source of error which was deemed acceptable early on, was the assumption that all these
young test subjects are of close to equal hearing capabilities. Ideally, a full audiogram should be
run on each subject to determine their hearing capabilities, which would be very time consuming,
and not something one usually does for a Masters project. Doing an individual SRT test before
each experiment could also remove some error. This was decided against due to time constraints,
so a general SRT style test was done on a single subject to estimate an SNR level at which normal
hearing people would generally score around 50% correct with no lip movement. This generalization
is a source of error, but was deemed to be minor and therefore left as a fixed SNR for everyone,
as the SRT differences for young adults shows little variation in [Mim79]. In future work, an SRT
test could be done on each test subject, this would give a more fitting SNR for each subject, and
24
==PAGE:28==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
this could also reduce the training effect in the actual tests, as the subjects would already be more
familiar with the experiment before starting measurements.
Another minor source of error is that the subjects are given as much time as they want to think
about their response. Since these are high context sentences, the subjects are given the opportunity
to guess the correct word based on the other words in the sentence. As an example, if the subject
hears most of the sentence but only hears what a specific word sounds like to some degree, like only
hearing the vowel, they could maybe guess the word based on the rest of the sentence. Then, when
given the time to think their response through, they have a better chance of estimating what the
correct sentence could be. This could mean that for some responses they didn’t actually hear the
keywords correctly, they might have guessed them based on context. The test subjects were not
informed of the high context of the sentences, so they weren’t informed to think of words that make
sense in the sentence. This is deemed as an acceptable source of error, as the idea for this project
was to mimic the cocktail party problem to some extent, and when placed in a actual multi talker
scenario with poor conditions for speech intelligibility, a listener would most likely also take their
time to think about what the target talker has said before responding, or ask them to repeat. So
this was found acceptable because it resembles how one would behave during a real world scenario.
Another source of error is in the presentation of the sentences. The three sentences played for a
specific trial are not synchronized in terms of onset, e.i. the start and end times of the sentences are
not equal. This makes it possible for the listener to sometimes hear words from the target talker
in isolation, either before or after the other talkers are talking. This is not ideal for a controlled
test, but it is considered to be more realistic than having three sentences start at the exact same
time and end somewhat synchronized. This is a source of error to keep in mind and consider in
any future work, but for this project it was deemed acceptable to have a more loose and realistic
test, rather than a very precise and controlled test.
One notable source of error in this experiment lies in the speech material. The DAST material was
not designed to be used in multi talker scenarios. The sentences are normalized for intelligibility
over each list, meaning when comparing the average intelligibility of all 20 sentences in every list,
they should be equal. It is great that these lists are normalized, making it much easier to use as-is
in this project, but it doesn’t mean that every sentence in a list is of equal intelligibility, this can
be an issue. As an example, if using the fourth sentence of three different lists for the three talkers,
these three sentences a probably not of equal intelligibility. This could sway the overall difficulty,
depending on how these sentences compare in intelligibility. If the target sentence is of relatively
low intelligibility compared to the two masking sentences, the overall difficulty of that particular
trial will become notably harder, which is probably what happened for that one sentence during the
’Lipsync’ condition where nobody guessed a single word correctly, which can be seen on Figure 5.
Ideally, this type of test should be done with material where the intelligibility of every sentence is
25
==PAGE:29==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
known, so all sentences presented during a particular trial are of equal intelligibility.
3.4
Future work
The most interesting factors to address in future work on this subject, at least in personal opinion,
would be to include reverberation and hearing impairment. This test gets fairly close to a simulated
cocktail party problem, but the main effect missing is reverberation. It would be very interesting to
see how different levels of reverberation impacts the results of a test like this, with the hypothesis
being that more reverberation would lead to worse speech intelligibility. Using the impulse responses
of an IEC room would be interesting as it would simulate a generic room, and would probably fit a
lot of real world scenarios. But, more importantly would be to test with slight longer reverberation
time, perhaps around two seconds. A reverberation time that is longer than a well treated room,
but shorter than that of a reverberation chamber.
Something that resembles untreated rooms
that people might encounter out in the world from time to time. Perhaps doing impulse response
measurements in an untreated old restaurant or something similar could lead to a very interesting
acoustic scenario for this type of test.
Secondly, including hearing impaired subjects could be
interesting, the hypothesis being that hearing impaired listeners will struggle more in the multi
talker scenario, but are more used to rely on lip movement in their everyday life, and therefore
would show a greater improvement when adding lip movement.
26
==PAGE:30==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
4
Conclusion
In conclusion, the effects of added lip movement in a virtual scene has shown to be helpful. While
the overall ’Sphere’ and ’Lipsync’ averages are shown to be lower than the baseline, meaning
they might be more of a distraction than a help, they show an increase when only looking at the
second list of each condition. The results for every second list follow exactly along with the first
research question, that increasing the realism, or details, of the lip movement will increase speech
intelligibility. Either way, if looking at the scores of only the three actual lip movement types,
ignoring the baseline of no lip movement, they then show an increase in intelligibility following an
increasing realism as expected. So there is some data to support the first research question. The
second research question can be answered with a rather confident, no. At least in this experiment,
no data shows the results for either of the simulated lip movement to come close to the benefit of a
video recording. Even with a small sample size of eight test subjects, there is a statistical significance
between the lip movement condition, and the percentage of correctly guessed keywords. Overall,
this experiment is considered successful and shows promise, and further work which brings it closer
to a virtual cocktail party problem could be very interesting.
DISCLAIMER:
ChatGPT 3.5 was used in this report. To write the noted subsection in the method section, asking
to describe lip reading. To give an example of the structure of a scientific paper. To help with syntax
of some Overleaf functionality and scripting. And to try and find papers to use as reference for
certain facts, by describing the fact to ChatGPT. This idea was abandoned however, as ChatGPT
didn’t give any useful information, mostly made up papers that couldn’t be found at any credible
sources.
References
[Web63]
P. 0. Thompson; J. C. Webster. “The effect of talker-listener angle on word
intelligibility”. In: (1963). url: https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/dav/
aaua/1963/00000013/00000005/art00003.
[Mim79]
R. Plomp; A. M. Mimpen. “Speech-reception threshold for sentences as a function of
age and noise level”. In: (1979). doi: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.383554.
[Plo87]
M.J. Middelweerd; R. Plomp. “The effect of speechreading on the speech-reception
threshold of sentences in noise”. In: (1987). doi: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.395659.
27
==PAGE:31==
Johan Kristian Petersen
Engineering Acoustics Masters Thesis
May 6, 2024
[Doh97]
A. H. Anderson; E. G. Bard; C. Sotillo; A. Newlands; G. Doherty-Sneddon. “Limited
visual control of the intelligibility of speech in face-to-face dialogue”. In: (1997). doi:
10.3758/BF03211866.
[Bro00]
Adelbert W. Bronkhorst. “The Cocktail Party Phenomenon: A Review of Research on
Speech Intelligibility in Multiple-Talker Conditions”. In: (2000). url: https://www.
ingentaconnect.com/content/dav/aaua/2000/00000086/00000001/art00016#.
[Gre01]
Ken W. Grant; Steven Greenberg. “Speech intelligibility derived from asynchronous
processing of auditory-visual information”. In: (2001). url:
https://avspeechlab.com/AVSP2001.pdf.
[T19]
Ahrens A.; Lund K.D.; Marschall M.; Dau T. “Sound source localization with varying
amount of visual information in virtual reality.” In: (2019). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0214603.
[WO21]
Yi Yuan; Yasneli Lleo; Rebecca Daniel; Alexandra White and Yonghee Oh. “The
Impact of Temporally Coherent Visual Cues on Speech Perception in Complex
Auditory Environments”. In: (2021). doi:
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2021.678029.
[Lun22]
Axel Ahrens; Kasper Duemose Lund. “Auditory spatial analysis in reverberant
multi-talker environments with congruent and incongruent audio-visual room
information”. In: (2022). doi: https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0013991.
[Kre23]
Abigail Anne Kressner. Danish Sentence Test (DAST). 2023. doi:
https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.24058110.v1.
[Meta]
Meta. Oculus Lipsync for Unity Development. url:
https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/unity/audio-ovrlipsync-unity/.
[Metb]
Meta. Tech Note: Enhancing Oculus Lipsync with Deep Learning. url:
https://developer.oculus.com/blog/tech-note-enhancing-oculus-lipsync-
with-deep-learning/.
[Tec]
Visage Technologies. MPEG-4 Face and Body Animation (MPEG-4 FBA). url:
https://visagetechnologies.com/uploads/2012/08/MPEG-4FBAOverview.pdf.
28
