==PAGE:1==
        DTU Wind and Energy Systems
LingoFlow - Enchancing scientific 
understanding through AI - powered 
conversational assistant
Marek Igor Fijolek
DTU Wind-M0736
February 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0736 
February 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Tomislav Dragicevic
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: 
Marek Igor Fijolek
Title: 
LingoFlow - Enchancing scientific 
understanding through AI-powered 
conversational assistants
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The new advancements in the area of Generative Artificial Intelligence clearly show that AI
language models have vast potential and can bring numerous new opportunities. Their
power can be leveraged in virtually any area of science, as long as they are provided
platforms which will utilize their capabilities in the best way possible.
The thesis outlines the significance of Generative Artificial Intelligence and Large Lan-
guage Models like OpenAI’s GPT-4 family in digesting, synthesizing, and presenting com-
plex scientific concepts in accessible formats.
Through interviews and comparison of potential existing solutions, the thesis identifies the
need for a user-friendly, efficient tool that incorporates functionalities such as advanced
library management, team collaboration, image parsing and AI chat interface which will
address the challenges of knowledge extraction from scientific papers, which in return can
help in faster, more focused research.
After conducting interviews with researchers and team leaders, comprehensive lists of
functional and non-functional requirements were formed. The listed requirements were
then utilized as guidelines in developing a five-part, full-stack web application which com-
bines the existing, powerful GenAI models with novel solutions. As evaluated by three
separate users, the proposed solution shows great potential and gives more than satis-
factory results.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisor, Tomislav Dragičević, for his never-ending trust,
patience and understanding. His support made it easier to go through all the perturbations,
stress, sickness, and other unlucky events on the way. His vision of an AI-assisted plat-
form for researchers, as well as the pointers he gave me along the way, is what ultimately
gave birth to a platform with an incredible potential.
I would like to thank my family for their mental support, always believing in me and
helping me keep both of my feet on the ground whenever I accidentally flew away too
high. Without your invaluable lessons, I would have not achieved what I did, and for that
I will forever be thankful.
Special thanks go also to my dear friends, who supported me along the way, always
gave great advice, and overall were there for me when I needed it the most. The path to
complete this thesis felt as long as going from Łódź to London, but with you, it was a joy
to walk it.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to each and every person who agreed
to participate in the user interviews and testing session, thank you for your time, your
expertise and your honest opinions. It’s your input which helped to shape this thesis.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my colleagues for keeping up with my absolutely
random working schedule during the thesis period, for their mental support, always being
understanding and crossing their fingers for me.
ii
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
ADA - Advanced Data Analysis
AI - Artificial Intelligence
API - Application Programming Interface
CSR - Client-Side Rendering
CSV - Comma-Separated Values
DB - Database
GPT - Generative Pre-trained Transformer
GPT-4V - GPT-4 with Vision
GenAI - Generative Artificial Intelligence
GUI - Graphical User Interface
IR - Image Recognition
JSON - JavaScript Object Notation
JWT - JSON Web Tokens
LLM - Large Language Model
ML - Machine Learning
NLP - Natural Language Processing
OAuth2 - Open Authorization 2.0
OCR - Optical Character Recognition
PDF - Portable Document Format
REST - REpresentational State Transfer
SDK - Software Development Kit
SSR - Server-Side Rendering
UI - User Interface
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction and the purpose of the project
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Core concepts behind GPT and NLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Goals and contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
State of the art
6
2.1
Knowledge extraction - general solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Existing solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Interviews and identifying potential areas of improvement . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Pre-implementation analysis and requirements
21
3.1
Features analysis based on the interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Functional requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Non-functional requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Discussing the problem of knowledge extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Implementation
28
4.1
General overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2
Client-side app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Server-side app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.5
Deployment and scalability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5
Evaluation
43
5.1
Testing method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
User testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Discussion
47
6.1
End-user testing summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Comparison with existing solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Conclusion
49
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Bibliography
51
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction and the purpose of the
project
1.1
Introduction
In recent years, we could witness a sudden spike of popularity of the topic of artificial
intelligence. It evolved from being this strange, esoteric, niche subject and nowadays
even people who previously had no experience nor interest in it, at least have heard some
information or news about it.
Especially one subtype, Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI), has made a massive
paradigm shift in many sectors of human activity. At its core, the GenAI are special AI
models which are able to generate novel content, most notably text, images, code, but
also music, videos, and animations. This capability is what makes GenAI stand out from
the crowd of other, less nuanced, traditional AIs - it can not only analyze, but also create,
which is a function considered to be exclusive to human intelligence until now.
One subset of the GenAI are Large Language Models (LLM) - type of models designed
to understand and generate messages using which they communicate with the users,
using natural language. Such models are trained on vast amounts of text data and are
able to perform a plethora of language tasks such as translations, answering questions,
generating paragraphs of text, and more [1].
One of if not the most popular LLM, as well as the most popular GenAI at the same time, is
a family of Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) models created by OpenAI [2]. They
are designed to generate human-like text and are part of a broader category of models
known as transformers. These kinds of models excel at natural language processing
(NLP) tasks, such as language modelling, text classification, and text generation.
A visualization of relations between the mentioned types of AIs are depicted in the Fig-
ure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Relationships between different types of AI
The GPT family consists of various versions of text-generating LLMs, such as GPT-2,
GPT-3, and latest ones like GPT-4, which represent iterations of this technology. Each
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
1
==PAGE:9==
subsequent version is typically bigger (in terms of training data), more powerful and more
sophisticated, usually as a result of also additional features such as more advanced train-
ing techniques or increased model size. These improvements lead to better understand-
ing, more nuanced responses and in general a wider range of capabilities.
Figure 1.2: Evolution of the different GPT series models[3]
1.2
Core concepts behind GPT and NLP
The most basic building block of LLMs, GenAI and in general the non-symbolic Artificial
Intelligences, is neural networks. They draw inspiration from the biological neural net-
works of the human brain. At their core, AI neural networks are composed of artificial
neurons organized and interconnected into layers. Each ”neuron” is a fundamental unit
of processing. It receives input and processes it through a so-called activation function
before sending the output to the neurons in the next layer.
The architecture of a neural network is typically organized into multiple layers: the input
layer, one or more hidden layers, and the output layer. The number of hidden layers and
the number of neurons within them is what often determines the complexity and depth of
an AI model.
The neural network is ”trained”, which from the technical point of view is nothing more than
the neural network adjusting the weights and biases - coefficients which play a crucial role
in learning from the data. Weights are attached to each connection between neurons in
different layers. To simplify, weights determine the strength of the influence the neurons
have on other neurons. The end goal of the training is to find a set of weights so that the
error in the network’s output is minimized. The biases are additional parameters added to
the sum of the weighted inputs that are fed into the neuron’s activation function. It can be
described most simply as an offset which shifts the activation function left or right. Without
biases, the neural network would be less flexible in fitting the data.
Transformer models are an expansion of the basic idea of neural networks. First intro-
duced in a famous paper by Vaswani et al. ”Attention Is All You Need” [4], the transformer
model sped up the training process by avoiding the sequential processing of traditional, re-
current, neural networks, opting for a parallel approach instead. Another key innovation
in the transformer model technology is the self-attention mechanism, which allows it to
weight the significance of different parts of the input data. For example, in tasks related to
natural languages, the model can focus more on relevant words in a sentence. Lastly, the
transformers utilize positional encoding to maintain the order of the data, which is crucial
to understand the context in natural languages.
2
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:10==
1.2.1
Generative Pre-trained Transformers
Generative Pre-trained Transformer model, GPT, originally described in a highly influential
paper by Radford et.al., ”Improving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training”
[5], simplifies this architecture by substituting encoder-decoder blocks with decoder blocks.
Models which utilize the former technology are best suited in generative tasks, where the
output relies a lot on the input, such as summarizations, or translations. The decoder-only
models tend to excel more in generative tasks, such as responding to questions, which is
one of the main reasons for their great potential.
GPT took the modified transformer model and pre-trained it on large amounts of text-
based data using unsupervised learning techniques. A part of this process was predicting
the next word in an unfinished sentence. This task is known as language modelling.
The most crucial parts of the GPT architecture can be summarized as follows:
• Input Embedding Layer: Converts input tokens to vectors for transformer process-
ing.
• Positional Encoding: Adds order information to input embeddings; necessary for
transformers.
• Masking: Masks tokens in tasks like language modeling to use only preceding to-
kens.
• Transformer Blocks: Core of GPT, enabling focus on various input parts for NLP
tasks.
• Linear and Softmax Functions: Used in attention mechanism and output layer for
classification and next-token prediction.
• Pre-training: Initial unsupervised training of GPT on large data sets.
• Fine-tuning: Adjusts pre-trained model for specific tasks, optimizing performance.
• Language Modeling: Pre-training task predicting the next word based on previous
ones.
• Unsupervised Learning: Allows GPT to learn from unlabeled data during pre-
training.
1.2.2
Word embeddings
Word embeddings are a way of converting words into numbers, specifically into vectors
of numbers, so that computers can understand them [6]. The easiest way to explain this
concept is when one imagines that each word in the whole language has its own unique
fingerprint in a form of a pattern of numbers, that captures much of its meaning.
In the world of word embeddings, every word is represented as a vector in high-dimensional
space. It can have hundreds of dimensions, and every word is a point in it. Words with
similar meaning, such as ”king” and ”queen” would be placed closer in this vector space,
than, for instance, ”king” and ”potato”. The placement of the words (points), is calculated
through a process of the model learning from vast amounts of text. It should be noted that
the positioning also captures relationships between words such as synonyms, antonyms,
but also more abstract connections.
By reading millions of sentences, the word embedding models learn which words appear
often in similar contexts. For example, words ”Italy” and ”Spain” would often appear in
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
3
==PAGE:11==
similar contexts (”... is a popular holiday destination in Europe”), therefore they are placed
near each other in the high-dimensional space.
1.3
Problem formulation
One promising application of the capabilities of the generative AI is the realm of scientific
research. Scientists across the globe are often constrained by the amount of scientific
literature that exists in their field, and when one also adds the complexity of this literature to
the equation, it turns out that assimilation of new knowledge and by extension generation
of new ideas, is greatly impeded.
The ability of GenAI to digest, synthesize and present complex scientific concepts in an
easier to understand and more accessible format, presents itself as a great opportunity
for the academia environments. Generative Artificial Intelligence presents itself as a tool
which could solve many potential problems in the scientific research area. In the scope
of this thesis, I will focus on one in particular: faster knowledge extraction from scientific
papers.
With so many scientific papers being published each year, it could be difficult to keep up,
read and comprehend all the interesting ones. This number grows exponentially every
year as shown in the Figure 1.3
Figure 1.3: Number of papers published each year according to Microsoft Academic
Graph database [7]
While on the most high-level, abstracts and keywords can serve as a form of filtering in
or filtering out the documents relevant for a researcher, what are the next steps? How to
make sure that the given paper contains answers to the questions the researcher has?
Consequently, even if the paper contains those answers, it will take time to read the
entirety of it, and extract the knowledge the researcher cares about. Now, even more
problems arise - what if the paper is difficult to understand due to the complexity of the
knowledge within? What if the style of writing makes it difficult to comprehend it? What
if the relevant answers are scattered throughout the entire paper, so that searching for
keywords is a completely ineffective method in that case?
All of those problems, and perhaps even more, could be mitigated with a tool which would
be able to process and extract the relevant knowledge, while simultaneously giving the
4
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:12==
reader some kind of human-friendly interface to ”interact” with the paper, like for instance
a chat window. Another solution to some of the above points could be an automated
summarization creation, which will take into consideration not only the key takeaways
from the paper, but also its structure and references.
1.4
Goals and contributions
This master thesis aims to develop, design and, lastly, evaluate a possible solution which
utilizes the recent advancements in the GenAI field. Large Language Models, such as
GPT-4 developed by OpenAI, proved themselves in recent months to be useful, general-
purpose tools which could provide good enough quality answers to any questions the
users might have to the documents they submit.
The end goal of this project will be more than a simple proof-of-concept app - the final
result will be a full-stack application consisting of a database, server-side backend and a
user-side frontend with a modern user interface (UI), ran in a browser. This kind of full-
stack software will enable this project to be immediately usable by researchers around
the world, and not only server as a proof-of-concept of a possible solution.
In order to determine particular functionalities and general design of the app, a compar-
ison of existing solutions will be performed, followed by a series of interviews with DTU
researchers, research team leaders, and representatives of the industry (who also need
to read and understand scientific papers). They will be shown the identified state-of-the-
art software solutions and asked to determine areas where they could be improved, as
well as to think of what functionalities are they missing.
Once the solution is implemented, an evaluation in the form of a user-testing sessions
will be performed, where the interviewees will be tasked with going through the process
of user testing from end to end - they will create an account, upload the papers of their
choice, test any other functionalities which will be determined as part of the questionnaires,
and lastly test the quality of the answers and therefore verify the usability of the system.
The application will be developed with open source in mind, and therefore use only publicly
available languages, frameworks, libraries, and SDKs (Software Development Kits). In
addition to that, the entirety of the solution (excluding sensitive secrets such as Application
Programming Interface (API) keys for external services, for instance OpenAI APIs) will be
licensed as an open-source project available as public repositories on the author’s
(Marek Fijołek) GitHub [8].
This is the author’s contribution to the scientific community. Any person who is able to set
up and host the software, is welcome to do so, without the need to ask or even inform the
author. The code might be evolving in the future, and new improvements might be added
over time (possibly as identified by the final user evaluations), but the user contributions
will be always welcome, and community efforts will always be appreciated.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
5
==PAGE:13==
2
State of the art
In this chapter, a general solution to the problem mentioned in the introduction will be
investigated, and its high-level overview described, followed by an investigation of the
different implementations of the idea, with multiple categories taken into account, to de-
termine their strengths and weaknesses.
This comparison will be followed by the introduction to the questionings that were per-
formed together with the scientists and research team leaders from DTU. In this section,
their opinions on the existing solutions mentioned before will be evaluated and subse-
quently concluded, which will serve as a base for requirement analysis in the next chapter.
It should be noted, that the field of AI, and in particular GenAI and LLM, is constantly
growing. The information contained in this chapter is susceptible to possible changes in
the future.
Lastly, it is important to remark, that one of the existing solutions (built-in PDF
upload in ChatGPT) have not existed when the thesis was approved and started.
While the scope was extended to include it in this investigation, it is still crucial
to note, that the solution proposed by the author was started before that fact and
therefore some functionalities might have already been covered by ChatGPT’s new
features.
2.1
Knowledge extraction - general solution
A proposed solution to the problem of overabundance of scientific papers, which results
in the research potentially taking a lot of time, will be a tool which allows the reader to
extract the knowledge from a document in a fast and reliable way. To achieve this result,
a Large Language Model can be used for processing the text contents of the paper. The
human-machine interface could take a form of a text chat with a ”virtual assistant” which
in this case would be the model. On the high level, the principles of operation of such a
tool can be summarized in a few steps:
• The user uploads the document or multiple documents, or alternatively they are
downloaded from some kind of database or a cloud data provider
• Once the document is uploaded, preprocessing phase is commenced, if necessary).
This can be for example putting the text in vector databases, trimming the text, di-
viding into sections based on the layout, etc.
• The user is able to interface with the model, for example in a form of a user-friendly
chat window or a prompt input interface (e.g., command line).
• For every question or request posted by the user, the model generates a response
based on multiple factors - mainly the knowledge extracted from the document, com-
plemented by the knowledge of the model itself (which is why it is of utmost impor-
tance to choose a big enough model which has an insight into multiple areas of
human knowledge), context provided by the user (if they had done it) in the mes-
sage itself, and lastly the context of the previous messages in the thread.
One important factor is what kind of files should be supported by the tool. According to the
research done by the CEO of PDF Association, Duff Johnson, The Portable Document
Format (PDF) is the most popular document format on the internet [9]. In 2021, 90% of
6
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:14==
the Google searches which contained a request for a particular file type, were requesting
for a PDF, as shown in the Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Google hits for different document types [9]
It is safe to assume, in that case, that the solution should primarily support PDF documents.
That poses another set of problems - PDF files are notoriously difficult to write processing
software for due to the nature of the format itself [10].
The problem of text extraction from PDF files exists since the early days of the format, and
it has been approached from multiple angles over the years. One of the biggest issues of
working with PDF files is interpreting their layout. For human brains, trained by consuming
text media for their whole life, processing the layout of papers and documents seems trivial.
One has to remember, however, that the PDF format is designed to be viewed by human
eyes and, as stated by IETF, Internet Engineering Task Force, “is used to represent ”final
form” formatted documents.“ [11], in contrast to more machine-interpretable and rendered
document types like Markdown, LaTeX or CSV.
There exist multiple methods to interpret the layout of PDF files and convert them to
computer-understandable formats, such as spatial layout processing, or classifying text
blocks into rhetorical categories, among others [12].
If the AI model used for the processing of the text is not able to parse the PDF directly, the
solution will have to implement one of them, or use a different model just for the layout
parsing.
2.2
Existing solutions
Knowledge extraction from documents using Generative Artificial Intelligence is a concept
that has been approached from multiple angles, with different results and implementations.
Even most recently, while this thesis was being written, late October and early Novem-
ber 2023, the company behind the GPT models themselves, OpenAI, rolled out a beta
functionality which allows the premium users to ask questions related to the contents of
uploaded documents directly in their popular chat assistant tool, ChatGPT [13, 14].
This section will compare some of the existing tools for document knowledge extraction.
They use different models and are operated in different ways, but the core functionality of
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
7
==PAGE:15==
using GenAI to process the contents of PDF files, is the same in all of them.
2.2.1
Unriddle
Unriddle [15] is a freemium service, which utilizes a chat interface and uses OpenAI GPT
models to provide knowledge extraction from PDF documents (as well as other formats).
Created in April 2023 by an American startup from San Francisco of the same name,
it presents the user with multiple functionalities in addition to the knowledge extraction.
Here are some of the most noteworthy ones:
• File upload and searching for a particular file in a list
• Resizable UI split into two panels, with PDF viewer in one half, and chat interface
in the other. Upon selecting a file from a sidebar, the chat window switches and the
document is displayed on the left side
• Copying and exporting chat messages
• Basic settings, which allows the users to select the particular LLM as well as limit
the number of words generated in a response
• Graph view, which visualizes relationships between different files in the list
• Multilingual support
Figure 2.2: The main screen of unriddle
Figure 2.3: AI models supported
by unriddle
As one can see from the list of available models, the
users can select either GPT-3.5 or GPT-4, which are
all-purpose text generating LLMs without any built-in
PDF processing capabilities. A support for image in-
puts has been added only in GPT-4 [16].
While it is possible that the images were, for instance,
parsed into text descriptions using GPT-4 or some
other image recognition (IR) model, subsequent tests
disprove this theory.
8
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Shortcomings of unrid-
dle
When asked about the layout of the document, the
model clearly does not understand the question cor-
rectly and returns an irrelevant answer. This could
be caused by, for example, not enough context be-
ing passed to the model together with the prompt,
which could cause it to hallucinate. Hallucinations,
in the scope of LLMs, is a phenomenon where
the model makes predictions or perceives patterns
based on an incomplete or biased data, and there-
fore creates false information [17, 18].
Moreover, hallucinations occur in unriddle when the
user tries to ask questions about the figures - as
one can see in Figure 2.4, the model hallucinated
an answer, which, as one can compare with the original figure (Figure 2.5), is not correct.
Figure 2.5: The original figure used
in the testing of unriddle
From the above examples, it can be concluded, that
unriddle lacks OCR capabilities and is unable to
answer questions regarding the layout of the doc-
ument.
The particular implementation details are not dis-
closed as this is a commercial project, however,
based on the information presented above, it is pos-
sible to conclude that, most likely, unriddle extracts
the text from the PDF document, splits it into seg-
ments (not necessarily chapters; it can be just ar-
bitrary fragments of text), and stores the relation-
ships between them as word embeddings in a vec-
tor database.
Whenever the user writes a prompt, a segment of
text (or multiple segments) which is most likely to
contain an answer is selected as a context and con-
catenated together with the user’s prompt and most
likely other crucial instructions, such as ”Based on
the following context <context> answer the follow-
ing question <user prompt>” or similar, added auto-
matically by the system.
2.2.2
ChatGPT plugins (e.g., AskYourPDF)
AskYourPDF [19] is a free plugin for the OpenAI’s
popular GPT-based chatbot, ChatGPT [20]. Plugins are tools devised either by the com-
pany itself, or by the community, which extend the base functionality of the chatbot [21].
One can explore and install the available plugins using a built-in Plugin store.
At the time of writing, ChatGPT was not able to process PDF documents, the only option
was to either:
• use the OCR functionality of ChatGPT (in the paid, premium tier; added in November
2023) on a PDF with pages converted to images
• use the Advanced Data Analysis, which makes the ChatGPT generate a python
code to process the file, which it then subsequently executes
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
9
==PAGE:17==
• use an external plugin such as AskYourPDF or similar. There exists dozens of plu-
gins such as this one; this one however was the first one in the plugin store, when
one searches for a phrase ’PDF’ and filters by popularity, which is why it was chosen
in this investigation.
Figure 2.6: ChatGPT plugin store
The first two options will be explored more in-detail in the further sections. Here the main
focus is the third approach, a ChatGPT plugin. In contrast to the separate tools like unrid-
dle, AskYourPDF uses the UI of ChatGPT directly to help the user go through the process
of uploading the document, instructs them how to connect the file to the plugin, and then,
after this setup is completed, answers the user inquiries, all in the same chat window.
Figure 2.7: AskYourPDF’s first, introductory, message
The process of uploading a document, due to the nature of the tool being a chatbot plu-
gin, is more convoluted than in the case of unriddle. As one can see in the Figure 2.7,
the plugin provides detailed instructions together with an animated demo video with an
overview of the process. The user does not have the option to upload the file directly in
the chat window. The file upload procedure can be summarized in a few steps:
1. The user has to have the document as a file to upload
10
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:18==
2. The user goes to a special file upload website [22], hosted by AskYourPDF
3. The user logs in, and/or creates an account if they don’t have one yet. It has to be
noted, that it is a separate account to the one of ChatGPT
4. The user uploads a document and once that process is finished, the file gets an ID
assigned to it
5. The user heads back to the chatbot and pastes the file ID in the chat window, where
they can subsequently as questions or other inquiries
Once the user pastes the file ID in the chat window, by default, the tool provides a very
detailed overview summary, with bullet points and numbered lists, as one can see in the
Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: AskYourPDF’s summary mechanism
Subsequently, the user is capable of asking questions related to the contents of the paper;
providing the ID is no longer required in further messages.
Figure 2.9: AskYourPDF’s answer to a question
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
11
==PAGE:19==
2.2.3
ChatGPT Plus - OCR functionality
For all the users of the paid tier of ChatGPT, named Plus, an image input functionality is
provided. Firstly, the user has to select GPT-4 as their model of choice in the main page
of the chatbot, which is an option not available for the members of the free tier. GPT-4, as
mentioned before, is the first GPT model which supports this functionality in the history
of all OpenAI LLM’s [16, 23]. Then, the user can open a new chat and write prompts as
normal, with the added image upload functionality.
While the model itself does not support the PDF format directly, the user can perform
a workaround to be able to extract the knowledge from it, by firstly screenshotting or
exporting each individual page of the PDF as an image in one of the formats supported
by the GPT-4 [23].
Subsequently, in the prompt input on the bottom of the page of the chatbot, the user can
upload the image and write a text prompt at the same time, as shown on the Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: ChatGPT prompt with an uploaded image
Figure 2.11: ChatGPT’s answer to a ques-
tion asked about the text content
It should be noted, that multiple images
can be uploaded simultaneously, and the
AI will be able to answer the user’s ques-
tion based on the content on all of them.
As one can immediately see, this solution
does not scale well and is completely unus-
able with large files with hundreds or even
dozens of pages. The reason for that is
that the number of images that can be up-
loaded at the same time is limited, and de-
pends on multiple factors, as stated in the
official help page of ChatGPT’s image in-
put functionality, such as “the size of the
images and the amount of text accompa-
nying them“ [23].
Even if we assume that the document is
short enough, or the user lowers the qual-
ity of the images, they still need to con-
vert each separate page into an image for-
mat and wait for the file upload to finish,
which can take a substantial amount of
time based on their internet speed and/or
OpenAI servers.
That being said, this option yielded great
results, both in terms of the number of sup-
ported functionalities and the quality of the
answers. GPT-4 seems to perform the OCR very well, answers questions correctly, and,
12
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:20==
more importantly, is able to answers questions about the figures within a document, as
seen on Figure 2.12. Not only was it able to describe the image in terms of what kind
of objects are located on it, but it also understood the caption of the figure as well as
described details such as a background.
(a) User question regarding a figure inside
an image
(b) ChatGPT’s answer
Figure 2.12: GPT-4-based ChatGPT’s IR capabilities
2.2.4
ChatGPT Plus - Advanced Data Analysis
Similarly to the OCR method, should one be a ChatGPT Plus subscriber, they are able to
use a feature which was formerly known under a different name, Code Interpreter, later
renamed to Advanced Data Analysis (ADA) [24]. It is a functionality which allows the users
to upload and work with different document types directly inside the ChatGPT, thanks to
the chatbot’s ability to generate and subsequently execute Python code.
As the name suggests, the intended purpose is data analysis - which is why ADA sup-
ports multiple file formats, such as .txt, .doc, CSV, Excel files, and, more importantly in
this case, PDF. The official help guide of ADA from OpenAI mentions that, among other
functionalities, it can ”Identify and pull out specific pieces of information from a document”
[25].
This method is easy to use - after enabling ADA in the settings, the user can, similarly to
the previous method with OCR, upload the file in the prompt input on the bottom of the
page, and ask a question or write a request at the same time. ChatGPT will then proceed
to generate Python code by itself, with the user being able to follow the generation live as
it happens, since it’s displayed in real time on the screen. After the code is generated, it
is executed and the AI sends a response. An example of a code which was generated to
process a document can be seen in Figure 2.13. As we can see, it’s very short and simple
- it uses PyPDF2 library [26] to simply extract the text from each page of the document,
and, surprisingly, take only the first 1000 characters from it.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
13
==PAGE:21==
The reason for that behavior is seemingly because the chatbot wanted to give some very
brief overview first, before generating more sophisticated code to analyze the rest of the
document.
While it may seem like a questionable choice, it would make sense - after all, the abstracts
are located in the beginning of the document, and, if within the 1000 characters limit,
should provide enough context to generate a brief overview.
(a) Code generated by ADA to process the
first part of PDF file
(b) A summary of the ”initial portion” of the
extracted text
Figure 2.13: Part one of ADA’s knowledge extraction method
The chatbot then went to process the rest of the file, using a different, more sophisticated
code. In it, we can see that it utilizes the concept of word embeddings [6] by splitting the
text into sentences, vectorizing them and calculating their cosine similarities, so that it
can rank the sentences based on the sum of them. At the end, the top-ranked sentences
are returned as the summary. It uses a Machine Learning library, scikit-learn, to perform
these complicated operations [27].
(a) Code generated by ADA
to process the entirety of
PDF file
(b) A summary of the entire document
Figure 2.14: Part two of ADA’s knowledge extraction method
14
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:22==
ADA managed to successfully extract the knowledge from the text, however, no image
recognition was performed, and the quality of the summary seemed lackluster - instead
of providing a good overview, it went deep into niche topics, and the choice of these topics
also seems random.
Another negative aspect of using this approach was the speed - it took more than a minute
to process the document, which is significantly more than the previously investigated so-
lutions.
Lastly, the code generated by ChatGPT was relatively simple - it lacked any form of IR,
OCR, and instead relied on comparing similarities between particular sentences. As it was
demonstrated by Pilehvar et al. in their ”Embeddings in Natural Language Processing”
book [6], word embeddings are not free of biases, which, as the text is vectorized per
each sentence, could potentially lead to unexpected and unwanted results.
2.2.5
ChatGPT Plus - PDF Analysis (beta)
Figure 2.15: ChatGPT ”reading” a PDF file
without any external tools nor visible python
code
The last solution to investigate is a rela-
tively new addition to the ChatGPT toolkit.
In November 2023, OpenAI started to roll
out a new feature which added a possibil-
ity to upload PDF documents directly in the
ChatGPT prompt. This is a beta feature,
for now only available for selected mem-
bers of the ChatGPT Plus paid plan. As
one can see on the Figure 2.15, the chat-
bot doesn’t seem to run any python code
(or at least it’s not displayed to the user).
There is no disclosed information as to how
it was implemented, no technical documen-
tation, and it’s available only for the paid users and only through ChatGPT, as it is not a
part of the official API of OpenAI AI models, which means it cannot be integrated to any
existing systems, as ChatGPT has no APIs available and it is against OpenAI’s terms of
service to extract its output in any other way:
”What You Cannot Do. You may not use our Services for any illegal, harmful,
or abusive activity. For example, you may not:
(…)
Automatically or programmatically extract data or Output (…)” [28]
Apart from these drawbacks, it seems like the most user-friendly solution compared to all
the previous ones:
• The user does not have to convert the PDFs to the images or do any other pre-
processing
• Uploading the files is easy and, depending on the speed of the internet and their
size, fast
• Multiple files can be uploaded at the same time
• The progress of processing is updated live with a loading animation
Moreover, the chatbot was able to not only provide a good summary of the file, but also
correctly identified the layout of the document, which one can see on the Figure 2.16.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.16:
A high-quality sum-
mary and overview of the layout,
generated as a response to the
question from Figure 2.15
After these initial successes, when tested for more
functionalities, it turned out that it is not a perfect
solution and has even more drawbacks than those
initially found.
The first issue appeared when a few files were se-
lected to be uploaded at the same time - for this ex-
periment, five approx. 50-page long open-access
master thesis from different majors were selected,
and subsequently a simple question was asked to
the AI - ”What do these documents have in com-
mon?”. The expected answer should mention two
things at the minimum - that there were 5 docu-
ments, and that they are all master thesis.
From ChatGPT’s answer it’s clear that the content
was correctly identified to be master thesis from dif-
ferent science areas, and moreover, the AI delved
deeper and focused a theme of complexity inside
them.
However, the model had considered only
two documents at the same time, and answered the
question as if only two files were uploaded, render-
ing it useless for this particular kind of task.
Moreover, when asked about a specific piece of con-
tent of one of the documents in the next question, ChatGPT was not able to provide an
answer, claiming that it did not find any mention of the searched phrase. That is com-
pletely wrong - not only this particular phrase occurred 7 times in 4 separate pages, but
also it is the name of one of the chapters. ChatGPT’s answer can be found in Figure 2.17.
Figure 2.17:
ChatGPT’s answer
about a phrase found in one of the
five documents
Lastly, the ChatGPT’s PDF reading tool is miss-
ing any form of Image Recognition. In a separate
chat with only one file (to avoid possible confusions),
when asked about the content of one of the figures
in it (the relevant fragment is on a white background
in Figure 2.18), it explicitly mentioned that it’s not de-
scribed in the text related to the figure, which indi-
cates that it relies on text inside the PDF, and most
likely lacks any IR functionality. Overall, this func-
tionality seems to be an upgraded version of the
ADA solution - there is no visible python code dis-
played, which could potentially confuse or scare a non-technical user, and it’s capable of
processing the layout of the PDF at least to some extent.
Figure 2.18: ChatGPT’s PDF reading tool’s inability to process an image
16
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Comparison
Overall, each solution has its unique value, but at the same time they all have some
drawbacks which at best make the tool not user-friendly or confusing, like AskYourPDF’s
file upload solution, and at worst makes the whole solution nearly useless in some cases,
like the OCR method’s limitations in terms of the number of pages.
They all provide a satisfactory level of quality of the generated answer, which is thanks to
the GPT-3.5 / GPT-4 models, which are underlying technology in all of them. It should be
mentioned, however, that ChatGPT is not the same as GPT - it tends to provide longer
answers, more akin to chatbots, most likely because of its (non-disclosed) instructions,
settings, or special parameters set in order for it to behave in that way. Therefore, the
answers in tools like unriddle, which don’t rely on ChatGPT, will be de facto different from
the other methods, most likely more concise and shorter.
Another important aspect from the user perspective is pricing. Unriddle, as well as Chat-
GPT Plus cost 20 dollars per month for their premium tiers. This is where an open-source
solution would be different from them, as the user will pay directly to OpenAI without any
middleman (like AskYourPDF or unriddle), as well as pay only for their actual usage, with
no monthly subscriptions. It could, depending on the usage, render it cheaper than paying
for the premium plan.
Moreover, they all, apart from the very limiting and non-user-friendly method of using
ChatGPT’s OCR function, have no built-in support for any kind of image recognition. As
most of these solutions seem to rely on extracting raw text from the PDF and creating
word embeddings to be able to determine the similarities between the sections/sentences,
it does not come as a surprise.
The most user-friendly option seems to be unriddle - it provides an easy to use Graphical
User Interface (GUI), with an ability to change the file the user wants to ask questions
about with a single click, while having a preview of the document - all in one app. It lacks
any form of library management, however, and does not support the newer GPT models
unless the user pays a monthly fee.
Another interesting option is the ChatGPT’s built-in beta PDF reading feature - it’s also
easy to use, and the user does not need to have a separate tool for their other questions
- they can at any point ask a question not related to the document, and the chatbot will
not try to fit it with some context from the PDF. However, the issues with multiple files,
and the fact that it’s not possible to integrate it with any system, as well as having to pay
a monthly fee of 20 dollars (excl. tax) [29] per user, makes this solution non-viable for
research groups and in some cases, individual users.
2.4
Interviews and identifying potential areas of improvement
In order to get a different perspective, verify what will the end users care about the most,
and potentially discover some areas of improvement, a selected group of researchers,
research team leaders and industry professionals was questioned and asked to compare
the solutions presented in this chapter.
The surveyed group consisted of:
• 7 researchers from various backgrounds and areas of research (Biology, Biotechnol-
ogy, Chemistry, Data Science, Computer Science), 5 from the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU), one from Technical University of Łódź, Poland, and one from the
University of Twente, the Netherlands
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
17
==PAGE:25==
• 2 research team leaders from the DTU Biosustain department
• 3 professionals working for different industries in private companies
The meetings were performed in a 1:1 format, with firstly a predefined set of eight ques-
tions asked, with the last one aimed to spark a general conversation about particular needs
which the interviewee could identify, and secondly by a brief demo of all the possible so-
lutions mentioned in this chapter, with the entire process displayed, from a file upload to
getting the answers to particular questions. The files were chosen by the author, and they
were the same as used in the author’s evaluation presented in this chapter.
The questions asked to the interviewees were as follows:
1. Have you ever encountered a problem of being overwhelmed by the amount of sci-
entific papers you have to go through?
2. Have you ever had a problem where you just needed answers to a particular ques-
tion or a problem, but you still needed to go the whole paper to get them?
3. Did you ever feel like you could use a summary of a long paper and the abstract
was not enough for your needs?
4. Have you heard of GPT, or any other LLM/GenAI?
5. Did you ever try any method of knowledge extraction from a paper?
6. Were these methods satisfactory for your needs?
7. What kind of features would you like to see in a knowledge extraction tool?
8. Which are the most important features of a knowledge extraction tool for you as a
<role>?
All the interviewees responded positively to the first three questions. Most of them also
used GPT (though it has to be noted, they all mentioned ChatGPT, only two people used
the GPT models directly - one computer scientist researcher, and one software developer
from the industry). Only two people have not used any form of GenAI, but they did hear
about it.
Four researchers claimed to have used ChatGPT to extract knowledge by copying and
pasting the fragments of the text, though, they all stated it is a very limited method, both
in terms of the amount of text the chatbot can process at once, (as in, one cannot paste a
whole document) and the functionality itself being lackluster, with the formatting breaking
constantly i.a. tables being unable to be copied reliably well.
The types of features identified as important by the interviewees seemed to strongly de-
pend on whether they are a scientist, a team leader or an industry professional, as well as
their field of expertise. For instance, the more theoretical scientists have put more empha-
sis on the image recognition - one of the feature requests was that the model should ideally
be able to process chemical formulas in the form of images and derive some conclusions
based on that. Moreover, all the scientific team leaders from DTU stressed the importance
of the tool having some team functionalities - like a library of documents shared between
team members, and a shared chat window so that all researchers can see the previously
asked questions of their colleagues. Moreover, all three of them also mentioned that one
of the reasons why they cannot use ChatGPT was having the need to pay 20 dollars per
month per team member regardless of whether some of them use it or not, and put em-
phasis that the tool should not have any subscription fees but let the team pay for the
18
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:26==
actual use of it.
All the identified functionalities which were deemed important can be summarized in a
following list:
• 3/3 team leaders agree that a standalone app is a must
• One of the most important aspects is data security (especially for the industry)
• Should be a combination of tools like Zotero [30] or Mendeley [31] in terms of persis-
tent library management and ChatGPT (possibly replace or at least integrate with
Zotero)
• Team collaboration with shared libraries (like Zotero/Mendeley)
• Comprehensive summarization
• Image recognition for figures and tables
• Should be easy to deploy and be scalable with the number of users
• Statistics for admins – data about usage, costs, NOT the questions themselves
• Should recommend similar papers (but only when asked)
• Good built-in PDF reader with highlighting and notes
After the initial eight questions and the conversation, as mentioned, brief demonstrations
of the functionalities of unriddle, AskYourPDF and the three built-in ChatGPT tools were
performed. None of the solutions was deemed as satisfactory, with different things being
pointed out as missing in each tool, and in some cases the existing functionalities being
described as lackluster.
Unriddle was overall the most praised solution - the most appreciated features being the
user-friendliness, the design of the GUI, overall ease of use, and the fact that the docu-
ment is being displayed at the same time together with the chat. All the research team
leaders pointed out that while having a persistent list of uploaded files which can be easily
switched between is a good feature, it’s missing any kind of more intricate library man-
agement, with division into directories and subdirectories. Moreover, another missing
functionality that was identified was a lack of any sorts of team collaboration, such as
shared libraries of files.
AskYourPDF was almost universally described as not user-friendly, with most people dis-
liking the fact that one needs to install an additional plugin, create a separate account
and on top of that, go through the convoluted file upload procedure. Moreover, some
interviewees pointed out that the speed of the answers’ generation was too slow.
Figure 2.19: Error in ADA
Furthermore, the Advanced Data Analysis feature
also has not been well-received. One person de-
scribed it as looking like an experimental feature,
one researcher with no past coding experience also
mentioned that the fact that a code is being gener-
ated live and subsequently ran is not welcoming and
contributes to the lackluster user experience, and in
one case the generated code have not finished suc-
cessfully, with an error message being displayed (Figure 2.19).
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
19
==PAGE:27==
Lastly, the ChatGPT OCR method was showcased to the interviewees. After the fact that
there is a hard limit on the number of pages that can be uploaded at once was mentioned,
every person pointed out that it is too limiting, albeit some researchers state that it can be
useful for just one page or even one particular figure. One industry professional pointed
out that some PDFs are scans of actual documents or books and therefore consist of
only images, so it is the only method that would work in such case (of all the demoed
ones). The fact that the OCR works very well, and even images inside the image can
be processed (as it was presented in Figure 2.12) was also universally praised, with the
majority of interviewees stating that if this method could automatically extract the pages
from the PDFs and if it could process more documents at the same time, it would have
been the best solution of all the presented ones.
The ChatGPT PDF processing functionality, because it was released in November 2023,
so after the questionings took place, was not presented to anyone. However, since the
principle of working is so similar to ADA (apart from the code being executed in real time),
in both being a built-in functionality of ChatGPT, with a need to pay for premium access,
with IR being a missing feature in both cases, some conclusions which apply to ADA could
also be derived to the PDF reading functionality.
Overall, the quality of the answers was universally liked and praised by the interviewees
for their accuracy and structure, which shows a great potential of GPT in different areas
of research. The feature deemed missing in most of the existing solutions was the ability
to process figures as well as text.
20
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:28==
3
Pre-implementation analysis and
requirements
This chapter will analyze which of the functionalities identified by the interviewees could
and should be implemented in the final solution, and describe the functional and non-
functional requirements.
3.1
Features analysis based on the interviews
Thanks to the questions asked, the conversations and the feedback from the demo ses-
sions, a comprehensive feature analysis will be performed, resulting in a list of features
which need to be implemented.
It should be noted, that the best approach would be to implement everything that the
interviewees mentioned and everything that the existing solutions lacked. However, due
to this being a thesis with a limited time scope, I had to select the particularly important or
crucial ones, therefore the need for the analysis presented in this section.
Firstly, since the UI structure of unriddle was deemed as good and user-friendly, the pro-
posed solution will take its elements into consideration. The split of the screen between
a chat window and a PDF reader is a welcome addition which is missing in the rest of the
mentioned solutions.
Moreover, another feature which is necessary to implement as it was identified by all
the team leaders as important, is an option to share the document libraries with different
users or even entire teams. As a result, some kind of advanced library management is
also needed, in order to achieve that goal. It was also a functionality described as crucial
by most of the interviewees, and the lack of it was noticed during the demo of unriddle.
From just these two features, it is apparent that the proposed solution has to be a stan-
dalone app - developing a plugin for ChatGPT which extends it functionalities with a file
library management and a PDF reader would be not only a much more difficult task, but
also would be limiting in terms of file uploading - as it is a case with AskYourPDF plugin.
Furthermore, another feature which was pointed out as missing in most of the existing
solutions was image recognition. The proposed solution should be able to either process
the images inside the document on-the-fly, give the user the ability to select parts of the
document, or convert all the images to a detailed summary of what is on them in a pre-
processing phase right after the user uploads the document. All of these solutions will
be described more in-detail and compared in the section 3.4 Discussing the problem of
knowledge extraction.
Moreover, the solution should be able to either link to a particular place in the PDF the
solution is coming from, or quote the relevant part of the document directly.
It is also assumed, at least in the scope of this thesis, that the users will upload the files
from their local storage themselves, therefore the system needs to provide this function-
ality while ensuring the ease of use of file upload.
Lastly, as the solution will be a standalone, self-hosted app, it will have to support autho-
rization and user profiles. It needs to be up to modern standards, with user sessions or
tokens, and a security of the system has to be ensured.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
21
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Functional requirements
Based on the interviews and the state-of-the-art analysis, functional and non-functional
requirements can be derived now. The former will describe the services that the system
must provide and focus on describing the features which will help the users to achieve their
goals with the software [32]. The determined functional requirements can be summarized
as follows, with division into three categories.
1. User Interface and Experience
• Documents upload - Users can upload the papers (in the PDF format) from
their computer
• Document Viewer - Users can view the papers directly on the website, without
the need to open them separately. The viewer should have some basic PDF
management functionalities such as searching and annotating
• Library management - All the papers submitted by the users are arranged in
their personal or shared libraries. Users can create an unlimited number of
libraries, which are arranged in a tree-like structure with directories, subdirec-
tories, and so on. Moreover, the users need to be able to delete the libraries,
directories and particular documents. If their delete a directory which contains
subdirectories and papers, all those child elements should be deleted in a cas-
cading manner
• Content processing - Automatic extraction and processing of text and images
from uploaded documents
• AI-Powered Chat Interface - An interactive chat interface that uses, i.a. GPT
models from OpenAI to provide explanations, summaries, and in general an-
swers based on the content of the papers and the model’s own knowledge
• Multiple documents support - Users can select multiple files at once and ask
questions about them at the same time
• Search Functionality - Filtering the library based on the string provided by the
user to enable searching for particular files or directories
2. Security
• User registration and authorization - Secure login mechanism to enable users
to access the software and its features
• Data Encryption - Secure transmission and storage of user data and uploaded
documents
3. Team collaboration
• Sharing libraries - The users need to be able to create team libraries, and add
other users to it. All the invited users will see the same directories and files and
can upload more documents, create folders and delete them
• Shared chats - All the users whom the document has been shared with, need
to be able to see the history of the conversation about the particular file
22
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Non-functional requirements
Non-functional requirements refer to how the system behave and perform, rather than
describe the particular system functionalities. The main ones that were identified for the
proposed solution are as follows:
1. Performance
• Responsiveness - The tool should start processing the file as soon as it’s up-
loaded, and inform the user that it’s being processed with, for instance, an
animation of buffering or a status bar
• Parallelization - The tool should be able to process multiple files at once
2. Usability
• Intuitive Design - The user interface should be easy to navigate for users with
varying levels of technical expertise
• User experience - The app should be developed with user experience princi-
ples in mind. A UX book by Steve Krug, ”Don’t make me think” [33] served as
a guide when designing the GUI.
3. Security
• Audit Trails - Logging of user activities and system changes for security moni-
toring and compliance
4. Deployment
• Ease of deployment - The system needs to be easy to deploy, to enable the
researchers to start to use the system quickly without much setup. This will
be achieved by containerization of the app and its prerequisites such as a
database using Docker [34]
3.4
Discussing the problem of knowledge extraction
As it was clear from the analysis of existing solutions, GPT models are in general good
at extracting knowledge from the text. What they are lacking is the ability to process the
PDF document as a whole, together with tables, equations, figures, and other graphical
elements. That is why some kind of pre-processing needs to be performed on the docu-
ment. In this section, three different ways to achieve it will be discussed.
Two out of three solutions proposed by the author in this section will rely on conversion
of the document to purely text format, meaning that the figures will turn into comprehen-
sive descriptions of them. While this approach certainly have its drawbacks (such as a
possibility that some elements of the images get accidentally skipped over during the con-
version), doing it this way firstly allows the whole document to be converted to vectors of
text, which makes searching for relevant pieces of text substantially easier, and secondly,
it speeds up the process of generating the answer (as relying on the model to perform an
image analysis is always more time-consuming than passing it just text).
The three proposed ways to convert the PDF are as follows:
• Converting the document using only OCR
• Converting the document by layout parsing, text extraction and OCR per image
• OpenAI Assistants API (Beta)
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
23
==PAGE:31==
They will be described each in a separate subsection.
3.4.1
Converting the document using only OCR
The first approach assumes that the document will be parsed page-by-page by some IR-
capable model, such as GPT-4 or newly released ”GPT-4 with Vision” (GPT-4V) [35], in
order to parse it to a text format such as Markdown.
The workflow of this approach on can be summarized in a few steps without going into
implementation details:
1. For each page, the tool converts it to a high-quality raster image
2. Then, it sends it to the OCR/IR model together with the instruction to convert it
to a Markdown format, including chapters, tables and turning figures into highly-
detailed descriptions. Moreover, as part of the prompt, the previous page or pages
are passed in their Markdown format, in order for the model to know, for instance, if
the current section is a continuation, to preserve the level of headings
3. The software repeats the steps above until it runs out of pages
4. The converted pages are joined together
5. Lastly, the text is split into sections, paragraphs or sentences, and word embeddings
are created.
6. The embeddings are stored in the database together with the file, so that for each
question asked, they are retrieved, a cosine similarity is calculated, and the relevant
pieces of text are passed to the prompt as the context.
While this approach should theoretically result with a high-quality converted document, in
practice, when tested, it not always preserved the continuity of the document, especially
when a given page started with a heading. Even despite passing the previous page as
a context, the level of headings was not always preserved. Moreover, the descriptions
of the figures were not always complex enough, sometimes being one or two sentences
long, which could result in poor results or even hallucinations when the user later asks
about a particular image.
Lastly, it is assumed that the GPT-4V model will be used, which would be an understand-
able choice, as it ”exhibits impressive performance on English visual-centric benchmarks”,
as suggested by Wu et.al. in their paper which analyzed the performance of the model, ”An
Early Evaluation of GPT-4V(ision)” [36]. That results in another downside of this method -
considering that the price of GPT-4V is $0.03 per output token [37] (tokens are essentially
small chunks that represent pieces of text, which could range from parts of a word, to
entire words, but on average, in English language, one token corresponds to four charac-
ters; OpenAI models convert the inputs and outputs to tokens before they are processed
[38]), it can generate substantial costs for long papers.
For that and the other reasons mentioned above, another approach will be considered,
which will use GPT-4V together with other, open source, models for layout parsing instead.
3.4.2
Converting the document by layout parsing, text extraction and
OCR per image
This approach is similar in essence, with the document being firstly converted to Mark-
down format before letting the user ask questions about it. That includes converting the
headings and tables, and again it will use the GPT-4V model for converting the figures
to their text representations, but with one major difference - instead of sending the whole
24
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:32==
pages to the model, only the figures will be sent, and the layout of the document can
be parsed using one of many popular open-source machine learning (ML) library, which
implement different layout analysis algorithms. If the library does not provide a built-in
OCR functionality, it will be necessary to parse the parts which contain the text using a
separate one, such as PyTesseract [39].
Throughout the history of Computer Science, multiple techniques for analyzing the layout
of documents were devised. One such method is the bottom-up approach [40, 41], which
analyzes how a document is organized by starting from the smallest elements, such as
individual characters or words, and gradually working its way up to larger units, such as
lines, paragraphs, and sections.
Firstly, the document is enhanced for analysis by cleaning and denoising. Then, it is bro-
ken down into the smallest elements, such as characters or words, before the distinguish-
ing features of each element being determined, such as the font of the text, the texture
of the images and the shape and size of the characters. As a next step, the core of the
algorithm, classification, is performed. Using pre-trained ML models, elements are sorted
into categories (text, images, tables) based on their individual features. The next phase is
grouping and merging, which results in the related elements being joined into larger units
such as words into lines, and then lines into paragraphs. A penultimate step is Hierar-
chy Construction - once the elements are grouped, the system constructs a hierarchical
structure of the document. This involves determining the organization of the grouped el-
ements into larger sections like headings, subheadings, paragraphs, footnotes, etc. The
hierarchy reflects the logical and spatial organization of the document, representing its
layout. As a last step, post-processing is performed, which aims to refine the hierarchical
structure to ensure it represents the layout of the document before it was processed. It
can involve, for instance, correcting misclassifications and adjusting the boundaries of
grouped elements.
An example of a particular implementation of the general idea of a bottom-up algorithm is
Docstrum, presented by O’Gorman (1993) [41]. In order to avoid coding it from scratch,
one can use one of many open-source libraries which implement this algorithm, such as
simple-docstrum [42] for C# or docstrum [43] for Python.
Another open-source library which can be used for processing the layout of the uploaded
document is PDFFigures 2.0 [44, 45], which implements the algorithm under the same
name, developed by Christopher Clark and Santosh K Divvala, researchers in the Uni-
versity of Washington, Seattle, USA, described in their paper ”PDFFigures 2.0: Mining
Figures from Re-search Papers” [46]. As it shows a 94% precision, according to the au-
thors, it is a good candidate to use in the proposed solution in the scope of this thesis.
Another, very popular, also open-source option is a well-endorsed Python library, Layout-
Parser [47, 48]. With more than four thousand endorsements on GitHub (at the time of
writing this thesis) and widespread popularity, it is an option which can be considered.
According to an article by Ruben Winastwan, Data Scientist, published in an online publi-
cation website, Towards Data Science, ”Analyzing Document Layout with LayoutParser”
[49], LayoutParser ”is a great library to detect the layout of document images in just a
few lines of code. Not only detecting the layout, but we can also extract the text of each
detected layout with OCR”.
Since all the mentioned methods tend to give similar quality of results, it is a safe choice
to use arguably the most popular, simple to use and well documented one, LayoutParser.
Using this library, the document can be turned into a text file such as Markdown or even
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
25
==PAGE:33==
.txt, as LayoutParser supports OCR out-of-the-box, with the figures extracted as separate
files. The IR part remains the same as in the first method - the figures are sent to the
GPT-4V model with a prompt asking to provide a detailed description of it. The difference
is, that now this output will be injected to the converted document to replace the figures.
The rest of the process remains exactly the same as the previously described method
- word embeddings are created, and every time the user sends a question, a context
consisting of relevant pieces of text gets appended as context to the inquiry.
3.4.3
OpenAI Assistants API (Beta)
Lastly, a new addition to the OpenAI product catalog should be considered, the Assistants
API [50]. Added in November 2023, it is still in the beta phase (at the time of writing this
thesis), but already provides a unique solution to the problem of parsing the PDFs, or at
least to a part of it.
It allows the developers to create customizable AI assistants with predefined instructions,
specific LLM models, as well as multiple additional functionalities which further extend
their capabilities. They can use different built-in assistant tools, such as Code Interpreter,
Function calling, and most importantly in this case, Knowledge Retrieval. Since Assistants
functionality is part of the OpenAI API, that eliminates the need to rely on any GUI tool or
chatbot, and instead gives the user more control and makes it possible to integrate this
functionality in their own code.
It should be noted, that, similarly to the PDF reading functionality of ChatGPT, the
method that the model uses to parse the document is not publicly available.
In the proposed solution, the approach of using one Assistant for one conversation (be
it with one or multiple files) would make the most sense - otherwise, there is a risk that
some piece of knowledge potentially gets extracted from a different file than the selected
one.
While the Assistants API is a promising option, it lacks any OCR functionality, though, it is a
planned feature. As it is stated in the official documentation of Assistants, ”Adding images
via message objects like in Chat Completions using GPT-4 with Vision is not supported
today, but we plan to add support for them in the coming months” [50]. For the time being,
until this feature is added, it is mandatory then to process the file in the same way as in the
previously described solution, using some external library to parse the layout, and convert
the images to the text format, before replacing the actual figure with its description in the
PDF.
The main difference between this and previous methods, however, is the fact, that there
is no need to create word embeddings or pass any context to the prompt. Instead, we
rely on the model being able to ”read” the file and provide an answer to the inquiry. This
eliminates the problem of incorrect embeddings being chosen, and removes the need
to decide in how big chunks should the text be split. Moreover, there is no need to go
through the convoluted process of converting the text parts to Markdown - it is enough to
only process the figures, replace them with their descriptions directly in the PDF, upload
it, and the model should handle the rest.
Overall, one can define a workflow of using this API together with the layout parsing as
follows:
1. For each uploaded file, it is processed in the same way as it was described before -
a layout is parsed, images gets converted to their text representation, and the actual
images are replaced with them in the document.
26
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:34==
2. The final PDF files are sent to OpenAI servers. This is a required step, as the
Assistants can only use the files which were previously uploaded there.
3. An Assistant and an associated Thread is created. A thread is a representation of
a single conversation session and can be created with an initial set of messages,
such as welcome info. It should be noted, that Threads and Assistants do not rely
on each other - one Assistant can answer in multiple threads, and every Thread
can contain messages from multiple Assistants. The proposed solution will not use
this functionality however - in this case a single Assistant is associated with a single
Thread.
4. Once everything is ready, a chat window is displayed to the user. For every prompt
asked by them, it is simply sent to the Thread, with no context needed (it should
be noted that Assistants handle reading the previous messages as a context by
themselves, there is no need to implement this functionality), and once the answer
is ready, it is sent back to the user.
This solution is by far the best of the three presented ones. It provides the IR function-
ality, while eliminating the need for creating the word embeddings, and it is also more
future-proof - the Assistants API is being constantly developed by OpenAI, with new func-
tionalities being added at a fast pace. Possibly in the following months the IR will be
also a built-in option, which could eliminate the need to parse the document altogether,
depending on the quality of the processing.
To summarize, the final implementation will utilize the Assistants API [50] with the gpt-
4-turbo-preview (GPT-4 Turbo) [51] model for the knowledge retrieval, gpt-4-vision-
preview (GPT-4V) [35] for analyzing the images, and LayoutParser [47] for parsing the
layout of the documents.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
27
==PAGE:35==
4
Implementation
In this chapter, the details of the implementations will be described, with division into the
client-side part, with strong emphasis on the UI and UX, server-side app with the overview
of the endpoints and database models as well as an explanation of the method of storing
the documents, followed by the overview of the security, and lastly, a deployment and
scalability of the system will be discussed shortly.
4.1
General overview
The proposed solution is a self-hosted app with the architecture split between the client-
side frontend written using HTML, CSS and JavaScript, and a server-side backend, also
written in JavaScript, which connects to a MongoDB [52] NoSQL database and Total.js
OpenFiles [53] for storing the documents.
This kind of two-part architecture, known as client side rendering (CSR), as opposed to
the server side rendering (SSR), while worse in terms of performance [54], is usually
more suited for dynamic, interactive web pages where the content changes often based
on user’s actions, such as in this case (with the AI chat window).
The client and server-side apps are connected with each other using API. The server
exposes several endpoints, which provide functionalities such as authentication, library
management, file upload, and getting the history of conversations. The API is realized
using Representational state transfer, REST, principles [55], although, considering that
the sessions are preserved on the server, one might also call it REST-like as this is a
violation of them. Apart from that fact, each request is separate and unconnected with
each other.
For each request from the client, the server responds with a JSON object, the format of
which changes depending on the endpoint, however, it always contains a ”success” field,
which is of type boolean and will be equal to either true, if the request was processed as
expected and no errors were encountered, or false in any other case. If the request was
unsuccessful, the response JSON will contain, apart from the ”success” field, a second
one, always named ”msg”, which contains the details of the problem encountered. From
this point onwards, such a JSON will be called ”unsuccessful”.
As the responses come from the OpenAI API only after some time when they are pro-
cessed, the server does not know when it will be ready. This generates a problem for the
client - how can it be notified when the answer is received? There are two main solutions
which aim to mitigate it - Polling [56] and WebSockets [57]. The former is an approach
where the client sends an initial HTTP request and then keeps initiating new ones with a
time interval between them. The server responds with either the requested data, if it is
finally available, or some other kind of response or even an empty message otherwise.
In contrast, WebSockets is a persistent, two-way communication protocol, which enables
real-time communication between the client and the server, without the need for polling.
This mechanism is more suited for cases where the client can send multiple requests and
expects the answers later on, therefore, while the REST API will be used for the majority
of the functionalities of the server, sending and receiving messages will be implemented
using WebSockets. A diagram showcasing the communication between the client and
the server regarding the chat messages exchange can be found in Figure 4.1.
28
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.1: Exchanging messages using WebSockets
The frameworks of choice are Vue.js [58] for the client-facing part, and Express [59] for
the server. The former was chosen arbitrarily - a similar result could have been achieved
using, for example, React or Svelte, other popular JavaScript frameworks. Express, or
in general Node.js [60] on the server side, was a thought-out design choice - OpenAI
has released SDKs which make working with their APIs substantially easier, and they are
available for both Python and JavaScript. Moreover, as shown by the analysis performed
by Kai Lei of Peking University [61], Node.js is in most cases outperforming Python in
terms of speed, which renders Express the superior choice in this particular case.
Once the system has been deployed and successfully hosted by the administrator, users
can safely log in to the system through Google, using OAuth2 standard. They can proceed
to make libraries, upload files, read them, read the automatically created summaries, and
start chatting about the content with the AI assistants.
Last but certainly not least, the solution needed a proper name, one which would indicate
that it is something modern and cutting edge, but at the same time it should make it
clear that it is a tool which operates on text and documents, ergo something related with
language. The proposed name is LingoFlow, from the Latin word lingua, language, which
informally refers to a dialect or a jargon, and ”flow”, which suggests the action of moving
along in a steady, continuous stream, such as the conversations between the user and
the AI, or user’s understanding of a given topic.
4.2
Client-side app
4.2.1
UI/UX requirements fulfillment
To achieve the requirements of Intuitive Design and User Experience, the following design
choices were made:
• The app consists of five elements: navbar, library panel, settings panel, and the
main screen composed of two parts, chat window and a PDF reader window. The
two panels are resizable by dragging the line dividing them towards one side or the
other.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
29
==PAGE:37==
• The app is single-page - meaning, there is no routing, and the context changes
which occur when the user switches the conversation to another one by loading a
different file, happen live, without refreshing the page.
• Consistent color scheme - a combination of white, light gray, black and different
shades of orange was chosen. Each color has its intended purpose - white and
light gray are used for backgrounds, black for text, and orange for highlighting and
clickable things such as buttons and selectors. This helps to realize the principle
presented in ”Don’t make me think” [33] - make it obvious what’s clickable.
• Another thing which helps with the UX by differentiating the clickable objects from
the static ones is a size or color change of the background when the user hovers
over them. In case something is clickable, but not available at the moment (such
as a ”send message” button when there is no user input), the buttons turn gray, and
the cursor changes to a ”not allowed” icon.
• Whenever applicable, next to or instead of the label, buttons have icons which repre-
sent the action they are supposed to perform. For instance, when one hovers over
a directory or a file in the library panel, three buttons appear - upload a file, add a
subdirectory, delete this directory. Thanks to the usage of the icons as well as color
coding which appears when the user hovers over them, it is clearly visible that firstly,
these are clickable buttons, and secondly, which actions do they perform.
Figure 4.2: Buttons as icons instead of text
• The app occupies the entire screen, and its elements scroll independently - meaning,
that the user always sees the navbar and the buttons on top of their screen. This
helps to reduce the possible design chaos and helps to create an impression in the
user’s mind, that nothing is hidden from their view. That also corresponds to the
suggestions from ”Don’t make me think” to create a visual hierarchy - the user can
see at all times the different panels filled with grouped and nested elements at all
times, which helps with portraying the different relationships of the elements on the
page.
4.2.2
Overview
As previously mentioned, the client-side app, LingoFlow, was implemented using Vue.js,
is single-page, non-scrollable and consists of distinct panels. The final design is presented
below on the Figure 4.3. In this section, the elements will be described more in detail one
by one.
Another important framework used in the implementation is TailwindCSS [62]. As the
name suggests, it is a CSS framework, used to style the components of the app, as well
as to provide conditional changes, for instance when the user hovers over them.
It is also worth mentioning, that the icons such the ones for settings or library management
come from two libraries. Most icons come from FontAwesome [63], and the rest from
PrimeVue [64], a UI component library for Vue, which provided one more functionality,
mentioned in the section about the library panel.
30
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: The UI of LingoFlow
Navbar
The topmost element of the page is a Navbar - the most important feature it provides is
enabling the user to toggle the library and settings panels on and off through the use of
buttons on the two opposite sides of it. Moreover, upon clicking on the user icon, the user
is displayed with a simple modal which enables them to log out as well as access the
account settings. The latter is not implemented, however, at the time of writing this thesis.
Figure 4.4: User overview modal
Library panel
When the user clicks the top-left button on the navbar, the library panel element slides
from the left side of the screen, causing the chat window and the PDF viewer to shrink to
fit the size.
The library panel (Figure 4.5) answers the user requests for a feature-rich document library
management. Going from top to bottom, its elements are as follows:
• A button to create a new library. In LingoFlow, a library is a topmost level directory,
which then can contain children elements such as subdirectories or documents.
• A search bar which enables the user to filter the directories and documents. When
they enter a string, only the elements which name contains it will be displayed.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
31
==PAGE:39==
• Toggleable directory tree, with an option to hide the children elements of each direc-
tory upon clicking on them.
• The documents themselves. When clicked on a particular one, it is opened in the
PDF viewer panel, and the corresponding chat window opens.
• Buttons, which appear only when the user hovers over the particular element. They
provide the functionalities of library management.
Figure 4.5: The library panel
The tree element itself comes from the PrimeVue [64] library mentioned above, albeit
heavily modified through the use of CSS and selectors such as focus and hover.
Chat panel
The chat panel is the most important part of LingoFlow - it is the interface between the
user and the AI. A fragment containing a user’s message, server’s response and an input
bar is presented on the Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: A fragment of the chat panel
32
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:40==
The messages are exchanged with the server through WebSockets, and the incoming
messages are formatted using Markdown. To convert it to a displayable HTML code, an
open-source library, markdown-it, was used [65]. The Assistants API is able to provide
a reference from the PDF which contains the answer to the user’s question. These refer-
ences are rendered as quote blocks, as one can see on the screenshot. The reason why
the server does not send the HTML code directly will be explained in the Security section
of this chapter.
The chat panel together with the PDF viewer form a main window with a vertical split
in between. The two parts are of changeable size - this functionality is provided by a
Splitpanes library for Vue.js [66].
PDF viewer
The PDF viewer is the second part of the main window, which it shares with the Chat
panel. Upon selecting a file from the library panel, the viewer gets updated in real time
to display the appropriate file. The library, which enables the PDF display, as well as
additional functionalities such as searching for text, writing on the document and adding
annotations, is PSPDFKit [67]. It is a proprietary library offered as a freemium service,
with its free version only available for evaluation purposes only. Before LingoFlow opens
up as an open-source project, it has to be replaced with an alternative solution such as
PDF.js [68] for two reasons, firstly, it is not clear whether the use in an open source project
is an evaluation purpose or not, and secondly, each page contains a bright red watermark
which can obfuscate some parts of it.
Figure 4.7: PDF viewer
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
33
==PAGE:41==
4.3
Server-side app
The server-side app in LingoFlow serves as a middleman between the database, the client
app and the file service, while simultaneously providing services such as authentication
and connecting with OpenAI Assistants API. A use-case diagram depicting the different
functionalities of the server-side app can be see on Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: LingoFlow use-case diagram
4.3.1
Overview
The main server-side app was developed using JavaScript with a Node.js framework,
Express. The first of its main purposes is to expose multiple endpoints to the client app,
divided by categories:
34
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:42==
• authentication
• File upload
• File deletion
• File retrieval
• Creating libraries and directories
• Getting the history of messages in a given conversation
• Providing the summary of a given file
• Adding other users to the library
Moreover, through the use of WebSockets, the server is capable of bidirectional messages
exchange with the client app.
Apart from the backend service itself, two more services are run on the server - a database
(DB) and a file service, Total.js OpenFiles.
To manage the connection between the server app and the database, as well as get the
data from it without the need for writing the queries manually which could potentially open
the service to a NoSQL Injection attack [69], Mongoose [70], an open-source library which
maps the collections to objects was used.
As it was discussed in the previous chapter, the server also needs to perform document
processing. For that reason, apart from the main Express app, there is a separate, signif-
icantly smaller one which uses Python, with a Flask framework [71] hosted as a docker
container, and it runs the Layout Parser models to process the document, connects to
the OpenAI for image processing, and returns the converted document in the Markdown
format. The two parts of the backend service communicate through a simple REST API
exposed by the Python app.
Now the different functionalities of the server-side apps will be described together with
their corresponding endpoints.
authentication
The server exposes three endpoints related to the authentication. There is no registration
form, instead, the authentication is outsourced entirely to an external service, in this case
to Google, but it can be any other provider such as GitHub or AWS
• /auth/google - provides a login functionality using OAuth2 through Google, using
an open-source library Passport.js [72]
• /auth/google/callback - an endpoint for the OAuth2 callback (more on that later in
the Security section)
• /auth/logout - enables the user to log out
File upload
File upload is realized by the endpoint /file/upload. It accepts only HTTP POST requests,
which contain a PDF file in their body, encoded as multipart/form-data. Any other request
type or encoding will result in a 404-page being returned. Multer [73], a node.js middle-
ware which handles the correct requests, is being used here.
Apart from the file itself, the server expects an ID of the parent directory to be passed in
the body of the request. The server checks whether such a directory exists, and returns
an unsuccessful JSON response if not.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
35
==PAGE:43==
After that verification, the file can be processed before sending it to the OpenAI servers.
As mentioned before, this is handled by a separately hosted Flask app, which exposes a
single endpoint, /. It should be noted, that this app is not supposed to be exposed to the
clients, therefore no authentication was implemented for it. Once the file is passed to it
through the endpoint, the app begins to parse the layout using the LayoutParser Python
library with the Detectron2 model in order to extract the images. The images are sent to
the GPT-4V model for summarization, and the resulting summaries are injected back into
the PDF, replacing the original pictures. The app then returns the parsed PDF back.
After the processing, the ready PDF file is sent to the OpenAI servers using the File end-
point [74]. The ”purpose” field is set to ”assistants”.
After the file is successfully uploaded and gets an ID assigned by the OpenAI, the server
creates an Assistant with the following instructions:
”You are a research assistant chatbot which has access to uploaded papers. You answer
questions based on their content and your knowledge base to best respond to the user’s
queries. You can use Markdown syntax in your answers if you for example want to empha-
size parts of the message or write bullet lists or ordered lists. Remember to use newline
symbols when you use Markdown syntax, otherwise your message will be formatted as a
single line.”.
After that, the processed file is assigned to the Assistant, and an empty Thread is created.
It then proceeds to store the original, unprocessed file in Total.js OpenFiles, and creates
a new entry containing the metadata of the file together with the ID of the file on OpenAI
servers in the MongoDB database. Similarly, a new entry gets added to the Conversa-
tions collection in the DB, initially with an empty list of messages, but with the IDs of a
corresponding Assistant and a Thread.
At this point it is worth mentioning, that the reason for using a separate service for file
storage, instead of the existing database is that firstly, it is in general a better idea and
an industry standard, to store the files directly in a system-level file system (which is what
OpenFiles does), and secondly, without installing any plugins, MongoDB has a hard limit
of 16 MB per data field.
File deletion
The endpoint /file/:file_id/delete is responsible for handling the deletion of the files and
directories. After performing the initial checks for the existence and correctness of the
file_id parameter, the file or directory with the given ID is searched for. If it has been found,
and it is a directory, the server gets recursively its children, marks them for deletion, and
then does the same to the children of the children, and so on. After scanning the entire
tree in that manner, it deletes the ones which were marked for deletion.
File retrieval
The user can send a GET request to the endpoint /file/all to get the list of all the files
and directories that are available to them. It should be noted, that because the actual
files are stored in a separate service, they are not returned as a response, but rather their
metadata, which, i.a., includes a URL to the actual file in OpenFiles.
It poses some security risks - the user should not have direct access to OpenFiles, oth-
erwise, they could theoretically brute force some file IDs of other users. This should be
re-implemented as soon as possible, with the file service not being available to anyone
except the server app itself, and instead, an actual file should be returned.
36
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:44==
Creating libraries and directories
The endpoint /file/newDir expects the name and the parent’s ID in the body of the HTTP
POST request. Upon checking if the given parent exists (returning an unsuccessful JSON
otherwise), a new directory is added to the DB.
Getting the history of messages in a given conversation
That functionality is provided by the /conversation?files=id1,id2,… endpoint. The files
parameter in the query is a coma-separated list of the file IDs the conversation is about.
Firstly, after parsing the query, turning the string into an array of IDs, the app performs a
check for the existence of these files.
Upon confirming that they all indeed exist, and the user can access them, if there was no
conversation with such a list of files, similarly to how it was done in the file upload endpoint,
a new assistant is created, with the same instructions as mentioned before, but now it has
multiple files assigned to it. And in the similar fashion, a new Thread is started, and an
entry is added to the collection of conversations, with the new Assistant and Thread IDs
assigned. Lastly, the list of the messages is returned.
Providing the summary of a given file
/conversation/:file_id/generate_summary is a special endpoint which handles both gen-
eration and retrieval of the summary of the document as well as suggested relevant ques-
tions to be asked to start off the conversation.
Upon confirming that the file with the provided ID exist, the server creates a temporary
special Assistant and Thread, in order to exchange a single message. The Assistant has a
slightly different instruction compared to the ones normally created for the conversations:
”You are a research assistant helper AI which has access to uploaded papers. You sum-
marize papers and suggest questions based on their content. You can use Markdown
syntax in your answers if you for example want to emphasize parts of the message or
write bullet lists or ordered lists. Remember to use newline symbols when you use Mark-
down syntax, otherwise your message will be formatted as a single line.”.
After it’s created, a single message with the following content is sent on the Thread, as-
signing the newly created Assistant to answer to it:
”Summarize the paper and suggest 4 questions based on the content. Your response
has to be formatted following the JSON formatting as follows: {”summary”: ”<summary>”,
”questions”: [”<question1>”, ”<question2>”, ”<question3>”, ”<question4>”]} where <sum-
mary> is a summary of the paper and <question1-4> are questions based on the content
of the paper.”
The return message is expected to be a string following the JSON format. After obtaining
it, it is parsed to an actual JavaScript object using a built-in JSON.parse() function.
As this was the only purpose of this Assistant, it now gets deleted together with the Thread.
After all of that is done, the summary and questions get saved in the DB in the correspond-
ing Conversation entity, as well as returned in a JSON format to the client.
Adding other users to the library
The last endpoint of the REST API is /file/:file_id/add_user?user=email, where ”email”
is the actual email address of the invited user. The principle of working is relative simple.
Firstly, upon checking whether a user with the corresponding email address exists (as
usual, if they don’t, an unsuccessful JSON response is returned), the server gets their ID.
Then, a standard check is performed on the file_id to determine its existence. Once
confirmed, an additional check needs to be done - verification if the provided file_id is
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
37
==PAGE:45==
indeed a library, aka a top-level directory, as only those can be shared. If not, then similarly,
an unsuccessful response is returned, this time with a different message.
Otherwise, the invited user’s ID gets appended to the array of the field ”user” for the given
library. Due to the design of the database, the server also recursively recreates the tree
of all the children of this library down to the leaves, and appends the user’s ID to each of
them.
WebSockets-based chat overview
The chat part of the server was implemented using a popular Node.js library for creating
and handling WebSockets connections, ws [75].
The implementation starts with the authentication, which is performed as soon as the
client connects to the socket. As we cannot utilize the previously used library for OAuth2,
Passport, this needs to be one by hand. This process can be summarized in a few steps,
as follows:
1. A check whether there is a cookie string included in the header is performed
2. The cookie is parsed as a JavaScript object either manually or, preferably, using a
dedicated function, such as parse() from the ”cookie” library [76]
3. A check whether the cookie contains the following key, ’connect.sid’, which is a
session ID, is performed
4. The signed cookie is calculated, or in other words, an HMAC of its value encoded
as base-64. Again, it can be done either manually, or as is the case in LingoFlow,
a specialized function can be used, such as signedCookie() from the cookie-parser
library [77]
5. The collection of sessions in the database is searched through, and if a session
corresponding to the given signed cookie is found, the user is successfully authen-
ticated.
6. In any other case, if something went wrong on the way, such as there were no
cookies in the header, no authentication cookie was found, or no session for the
corresponding cookie was found, the server sends a standard unsuccessful JSON
as usual, but this time, due to the limitations of WebSockets, parsed as a string, and
at the end closes the socket
If the authentication was successful, the server starts to listen for messages. Upon de-
tecting one, it performs three checks:
1. Is the message a valid JSON object? As in, is correctly formatted and contains the
two required fields ”message” and ”file_ids”
2. Do these file exist and does the user have access to all of them?
3. Does the conversation for this set of files exist?
If an answer to any of the following question was no, then an unsuccessful JSON is sent,
followed by the socket being closed.
If the message passed through all the checks, then the server can finally add the user
message to the conversation and to the Thread, wait for the Assistant to respond, add the
responses to the database, and send the updated history of the conversation back to the
client.
38
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:46==
4.3.2
Database
As mentioned previously, the database engine of choice in the server part of LingoFlow
is MongoDB. It contains four collections:
• conversations
• files
• sessions
• users
Each one has a separate schema, defined right in the code in separate files using mon-
goose.Schema class as follows:
Figure 4.9: Database schemas definitions
The simplest schema is the Session - it corresponds to the user’s session, which was
started by logging in using OAuth2. It has an ID, which in this case is the signed cookie,
an expiration date of the session, and lastly a reference to the Passport’s session object
itself.
The second-smallest one is the User schema. Once the user logs in to LingoFlow for the
first time, some of their data get stored in the database, such as the Google ID, their first
and last name, their email, and lastly the URL to their avatar from the Google account.
The schema for the Files is twofold, since in principle there is no distinction between a
directory and a document - they are defined using the same schema and stored together
in the same collection. Regardless of whether it is a file or a directory, they both have
a name, a timestamp of the addition to the DB, a list of users who have access to them,
a type string which can be equal to either ”pdf” or ”dir”, and a parent, which is an ID of
the parent directory. The difference between a library and a standard directory is that the
former will have ”root” as a value in that field. Documents have three more fields in the
schema definition: url, total_id and openai_file_id, corresponding to the url and ID in the
OpenFiles service and an ID in OpenAI, respectively.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
39
==PAGE:47==
The Conversation schema has by far the most fields - going from top to bottom as one
can see in the top-left corner in the Figure 4.9, they correspond to:
• The list of the IDs of the users who have access to it
• A list of filenames the given conversation corresponds to
• A timestamp of when it was added to the collection
• An ID of the OpenAI Thread associated with it
• An ID of the OpenAI Assistant associated with
• A summary of the file (does not apply in the case of multiple-file conversation)
• A list of suggested questions which can be asked to the document (does not apply
in the case of multiple-file conversation)
• A list of actual messages, each with a timestamp, ID of the author (or ”system” if it
was an AI response” and a markdown-formatted content
4.4
Security
This section will briefly describe the overall security of LingoFlow, with the main focus
being put on the authentication.
In order to ensure that one cannot access the system without logging in, a robust authen-
tication needed to be implemented. An industry-standard protocol, OAuth2 [78] (which
stands for Open Authorization 2.0) was chosen to fulfill that requirement. Despite the fact
that it is a protocol for authorization, not authentication, it is flexible enough to be used for
that purpose, albeit with some caveats [79]. It does not provide any means of telling who
the current user is or even how did they authenticate. The core idea is that OAuth just
states, that the user has delegated an eternal application to act on their behalf. Many pop-
ular websites provide this functionality, for instance GitHub, Google, Twitter, Facebook,
and many more. In the case of LingoFlow, for the purposes of this thesis, Google was the
only provider, it is easy, however, to integrate it with more services, such as e.g., GitHub.
Figure 4.10: LingoFlow login screen displaying if the user is not logged in
40
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.11: Signing in to LingoFlow us-
ing Google’s OAuth2 services
Some key features it provides include:
• Token-Based Authentication instead of
credentials.
• Interoperability & Widespread Adoption
- because OAuth has become a de
facto standard in the industry, many plat-
forms allow users to authorize them-
selves through them, and what is more, a
lot of different open-source libraries were
created, which allowed the developers
to integrate that feature relatively quickly,
compared to the standard, credential-
based solution
• User Control - since the user is being
displayed in-detail information regarding
which data can the particular service ac-
cess, while they log in using OAuth, it is
easier for them to control it, and, if need
be, revoke the access without having to
change the login credentials.
As mentioned before, a popular JavaScript library was used to implement OAuth2 in Lin-
goFlow, Passport.js [72], in combination with another library, passport-google-oauth [80]
which made it substantially easier to integrate it with Google authentication strategies.
Another way LingoFlow ensures the security of the system is that when the server re-
sponds with the AI answer, it is in a Markdown format, as opposed to HTML. The reason
for this simple - HTML is easy to inject unwanted things to through the use of <script> tags
which would enable the attacker to run an unchecked JavaScript code - such an attack is
known as HTML injection [81].
Moreover, LingoFlow is most likely protected from NoSQL Injection attacks through the
use of a simple Express middleware, express-mongo-sanitize [82] which scans the user-
supplied data, searching for any keys in objects that begin with a $ sign or which contain
a dot. The reason for that is that such objects are reserved for use by MongoDB as
operators, therefore, once identified, the input should be sanitized, by either removing the
offending characters altogether, or replacing them with a safe one, like ”_”.
Lastly, LingoFlow uses the library named Helmet [83], created specifically for Express. It
is a collection of 12 middleware that simply set the HTTP security response headers. It
ensures that the app is protected from attacks such as code injection [84], clickjacking
[85], and Cross-Site Scripting [86].
4.5
Deployment and scalability
As part of the fulfillment of the Ease of deployment requirement, each individual compo-
nent of LingoFlow (client-side app, server-side app, database, file storage and document
parser tool) has a separate image and can be run as a docker container.
The server-side part of the system, which arguably has the most dependencies, has a
docker-compose file in the repository, which makes booting up the system even faster
by coupling it together with the file service and the database. The client-side app and
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
41
==PAGE:49==
the document parser tool have their own separate Docker images, also stored in their
respective repositories together with the code.
Sensitive information, like database credentials, OAuth2 session secret, Total.js token,
OpenAI API key and Google Client ID and Client Secret are stored outside the code
repository as a dotenv file. When the server-side app is launched, the contents of the
file are loaded into process.env thanks to a JavaScript library, [87].
Lastly, while the scalability of the system was not considered and was deemed out-of-
scope, thanks to the containerization of the solution and the usage of MongoDB as a DB
engine, it should be theoretically possible to do it by, for instance, implementing strategies
such as load balancing and horizontal scaling, however, these claims were not tested.
42
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:50==
5
Evaluation
In order to verify whether the proposed solution, LingoFlow, solves the problem introduced
in this thesis, an end evaluation needed to be performed. The chosen method was again
a 1:1 user testing, similarly to how the initial interviews were performed. In this chapter, an
overview of the testing methods and procedure will be described, followed by the summary
of the testing sessions themselves.
5.1
Testing method
In order to evaluate the solution in an organized and fair manner, three usability testing
sessions were organized with people with different needs and backgrounds:
1. System administrator with a research background in biology
2. Software engineer with background in electrical engineering
3. PhD student of biotechnology
Usability testing can be performed in multiple different ways [88]. In this particular case, it
was deemed the most suitable to perform moderated, in-person and explorative tests,
as the number of planned sessions was low, and doing it in this way offers the most control.
The aim of the testing sessions is to let the interviewees to experiment with and experience
the solution, as well as enable them to develop the impressions on their own without
suggesting any particular way of working. The additional benefit of that approach is that
it verifies the user experience of the system and checks whether it is easy to understand
without much guidance.
The only requirement from each of them was to prepare a few documents that they are
familiar with, so that they can verify the quality of the answers.
For that reason, an end-to-end approach was the most suitable - the users start from the
website in the logged out state, and they have to figure out the particular elements of the
UI and the way of working by themselves, including creating a new library, directories,
upload the documents and start chatting with the AI about them.
5.2
User testing
5.2.1
Session #1
The first testing session, performed together with an expert system administrator, focused
mostly on verifying the quality of the answers and found a few bugs which were then
subsequently fixed before the second session.
The tester set up an account using their Google account, and proceeded to create their
first library and a few subdirectories. They proceeded then to upload two files, one of
which they authored, therefore they can verify the quality of the answers very precisely by
asking the particular questions.
The user started with asking for recommendations of similar papers, which was not a
feature that was ever considered to be implemented, making it rely solely on the GPT-4
Turbo model itself with no other functionality. Surprisingly, the AI handled that task rather
well, suggesting both papers from the bibliography as well as from its own knowledge
base.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
43
==PAGE:51==
The tester then proceeded to ask a specific question regarding the content of the paper.
It should be noted that the user question had a few typos. The LLM answered it correctly,
however, even despite the mistakes. It even elaborated on the answer with the knowledge
from outside the paper.
The user then asked the AI to elaborate on the answer, to verify whether it will still re-
member the previous question and the answer. It did, and responded with additional
information, which the user claimed to be very precise and high-quality.
The user then asked a specific question, an answer to which could only be found in a
specific table within the document. The model handled it well and provided a correct
answer as well.
Lastly, the user proceeded to ask a few questions to the second document, which they
didn’t create, but they are very familiar with. One of them was a request to summarize a
particular piece of knowledge, an information split in a few parts, spread around the doc-
ument, making it necessary to combine them all together. The model handled it correctly
and provided an answer described by the tester as accurate.
Overall, the user was happy with both the user experience of LingoFlow, and the quality
of the answers. They also praised the design choices of the GUI.
5.2.2
Session #2
As this tester is a highly-skilled Software Engineer, the second session focused a lot on
implementation details and suggestions of potential improvements, while simultaneously
verifying the quality of the answers.
The session largely followed the structure of the previous one, this time however with
more and much longer files, one of them being a long and highly detailed book. The
tester authored two of the uploaded documents.
Firstly, it needs to be mentioned that while the tool processed every single document, the
tester noticed that it took some time, but no loading animation, or even a message was
shown on the UI. Moreover, they suggested that one should be able to upload multiple
files at the same time, which is indeed a feature not supported as of now.
The user has noticed an important bug where sometimes the chat content has not been
loaded correctly when the file context switched, followed by an error message due to the
socket expected to be open even though it closed. This bug has been fixed before the
next session.
The tester also suggested a few more quality-of-life features regarding the library manage-
ment functionality. Firstly, a drag-and-drop option to upload the file, instead of having to
click a button, and secondly, adding a separate button to rename the files and directories.
Moreover, the user went to test whether the summaries of the files and the answers are
loaded in parallel. They were, thus rendering the test successful.
The user then proceeded to test the quality of the answers. All but one question out of
around 20 were answered, with the quality level described by the tester as satisfactory.
One answer was incorrect, however.
The incorrectness of the answer stem from the model incorrectly processing the ele-
ment, which resembles a two-column table without any visible separator lines between
the columns or rows. The question asked was about one element from the first column,
44
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:52==
and the expected answer should contain the information found in a corresponding ele-
ment in the second one, in the same row. The model responded with information parsed
from a few different rows, however, all joined together, which could indicate that this table
was not processed correctly.
Lastly, the tester suggested three important upgrades regarding the core functionalities
of LingoFlow. The first one is to integrate it with some file cloud storage provider (or
potentially multiple) such as Google Drive or Microsoft OneDrive. In that way, the user
won’t have to upload the documents from their file system, but instead the PDFs would
be downloaded from there.
The second suggested functionality would be to turn LingoFlow into a desktop app, for
instance using a library such as Electron [89], to avoid having to re-implement the tool
from scratch.
Lastly, the tester suggested an option to re-implement the app as a user-side only tool,
disregarding the server-side app altogether. That would mean having to re-implement
almost the entire logic from scratch, and use a browser-only database such as PouchDB
[90]. The biggest benefit of such approach would be the possibility to host the app on
GitHub Pages [91], a static site hosting service which takes the corresponding repository,
builds the project and publishes the website, and since this is a public repository, according
to GitHub’s policy would make the hosting free.
5.2.3
Session #3
The last user testing session was performed together with a PhD student of biotechnology.
They prepared two publications they authored, to be able to verify the answers with a high
degree of certainty.
This session’s focus was put mostly on verifying the IR functionality on the figures from
the papers, however, the tester had some general remarks regarding the user experience
of the GUI.
The process remained largely the same as in the previous cases - starting from logging in
with their Google account, the user created a library and uploaded the documents directly
to it. Two things have to be noted at this point, firstly, that they remarked that after logging
in, the website is completely blank, with no pointers as to what each element does and
what is the workflow. Only after opening the library panel, it became clear that one needs
to create a library. The user suggested that to reach that point, one has to click around
and experiment, which they deemed as a non-intuitive design. The second remark is that
the user has not even noticed the functionality of creating directories, until told that it is
an option.
The tester then proceeded to ask questions about the documents, which were short, less
than 20 pages conference papers, which, among other things, both contained multiple
plots and photos. The person asked in total around a dozen questions, most of which
were about the content of the different plots and photos, and one which was automatically
suggested by LingoFlow.
Since the plots were quite simple, all of them being bar charts or scatter plots, it is difficult
to verify if the GPT-4V is good at processing plots in general, or only the simple ones. The
user asked different questions regarding the values of the bars as well as asked to directly
summarize one of the plots, which is essentially what the tool does in the processing
phase, therefore it just quoted the text that was already there. This is an unintended
functionality which stems from the way of working of the algorithm itself, however, it is a
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
45
==PAGE:53==
welcome one.
The questions about the photos proved that the IR functionality worked as intended. All
the answers were correct, described as of high quality by the tester. One of the figures, for
instance, was divided into four sections, each containing a photo of a few potted plants,
each with a label such as ”Control” or ”Group 1” in front of it. When the tester asked to
summarize the top-left part of the figure, the AI response returned a very long, multipoint
description, which surprised even the tester, who described it as even too descriptive but
of extremely high quality. The screenshot of the question and the AI response can be
seen on Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: User question and the AI’s response
46
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:54==
6
Discussion
6.1
End-user testing summary
As one could conclude from the previous chapter, the results of the testing sessions were
for the most part promising. All three testers were satisfied with the proposed solution,
even though that, interestingly, they all focused on different parts and provided vastly
different suggestions as to what can be improved in the system.
Most importantly, the quality of the answers of the AI was most of the time satisfactory.
Apart from occasional hallucinations, which, due to the nature of the LLMs, most likely
cannot be avoided for now, the majority of the responses provided detailed enough infor-
mation to answer the questions, sometimes even surpassing the expectations as was the
case with the IR functionality tested during the third session.
It should be noted, that the Assistants API is capable of providing answers which rely on
information from different parts of the document, and it quotes the relevant parts as well.
It is not clear whether the underlying solution uses word embeddings or not, but it seems
to work good enough during the testing done by the author as well as the three usability
testing sessions.
Another feature of LingoFlow which was considered good was the user experience, apart
from the lack of initial guidance suggested during the third testing session. The GUI was
described as modern, sleek and professional by all three testers. It also seemed that
navigating the libraries and creating new ones, as well as adding more directories, was
an intuitive process, once the user has been informed of these functionalities.
The testers provided multiple suggestions for what could be improved or even re-implemented,
they will be summarized and described in the next chapter, in the section 7.1 Future work.
6.2
Comparison with existing solutions
The final solution, while it can still be vastly improved in multiple ways, seems good enough
to surpass most of the existing solutions presented in the earlier chapters. Apart from the
almost-unusable for big files ChatGPT OCR solution, none of the other ones had any IR
capabilities, which is a feature that LingoFlow supports.
In terms of usability by larger groups, the ChatGPT solutions don’t scale too well - having to
pay per each user makes these solutions vastly more expensive compared to LingoFlow,
which, thanks to it being a free and open-source project, lets the user pay only for the
actual usage.
Moreover, another way LingoFlow improves the existing solutions is a comprehensive
library management - apart from unriddle, which provides only a simple list of files, the
other solutions do not have such functionality at all.
Furthermore, thanks to the usage of the Assistants API, the proposed solution could poten-
tially become even better, as this feature seems to be heavily invested in by the OpenAI
which still constantly develops it. For instance, there is no output streaming functionality
as of now - the user can receive the response only when it’s generated in its entirety, as
opposed to what ChatGPT or unriddle do, which is displaying the response as it’s being
generated. However, this is a known limitation of Assistants recognized by OpenAI, and
the official documentation mention this feature will be eventually added. In the same way,
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
47
==PAGE:55==
DALL-E, an image generation model will be also added as a tool to the Assistants API,
which, depending on what it will be able to do, could enable some interested functionalities
such as generation of figures and visualization of the concepts in the papers.
Overall, the proposed solution seems to combine all the features which exists in sepa-
rate existing solutions, and adds more functionalities on top of that. As it was evaluated
through user testing, their quality is satisfactory, and there seems to be a possibility that
it will help with overcoming the problem mentioned in the first chapter.
48
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:56==
7
Conclusion
In this master thesis, a solution in a form of a full-stack application has been proposed
to solve the problem of overabundance of research papers that have to be processed by
the researchers all over the world. The proposed solution, aptly named LingoFlow, helps
with extracting the knowledge from the papers and summarizing them. Apart from the
plethora of functionalities developed from scratch by the author, as well as some open-
source ones, it also utilizes a cutting-edge technology developed by OpenAI, a family of
GPT-4 GenAI models, in particular GPT-4V for processing the figures inside the papers,
and then GPT-4 Turbo for processing the papers themselves.
Moreover, I managed to go through a full engineering process of how such software should
be developed - starting with analyzing the problem and verifying whether the existing
solutions are enough and if not, what areas they could be lacking in.
Subsequently, I verified my claims by interviewing people, who have already encountered
the problem I was trying to solve, while at the same time gathering the ideas for the
features I could introduce in LingoFlow. After processing the knowledge gathered this
way, I formed a set of requirements before developing the final solution which fulfills all
the points.
Lastly, once the solution was ready, I evaluated it as almost any software should be - by
doing user testing, in this case in a form of 1:1 usability testing sessions. As a result of
that, I managed to successfully confirm that the proposed solution has big potential with
tackling or at least helping with the problem.
The proposed solution was deemed as high quality and performing what it was supposed
to do well. It fixes the many pain points of the other, partial solutions while combining their
strengths and adding some more features on top of that. Since the software was being
developed as an open-source project, after fixing some bugs and making sure no sensitive
information is left in the code, it will be published on my GitHub account, available for any
interesting party, be it a group or an individual user.
There is of course still plenty of room for improvements, which will be discussed in the
next section.
7.1
Future work
When it comes to the future improvements, the ones which can be considered a low-
hanging fruit but vastly beneficial for the users are the ones related to adding more func-
tionalities to the library management and user experience. As mentioned in the previous
chapters, adding options for dragging and dropping new files, supporting multiple file up-
loads, renaming them, adding some kind of beginner’s guide for people new to the system,
and integrating it with a cloud file storage, are all requested features which were suggested
during the user testing sessions.
Moreover, it could be a good idea to turn the web app into an Electron app, to enable the
possibility to run it as a desktop app and therefore integrate it with the user’s file system.
This would also remove the necessity for the user to upload the documents manually.
Another improvement worth mentioning is adding more OAuth2 service providers such as
GitHub and Facebook, perhaps also adding an authentication mechanism which doesn’t
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
49
==PAGE:57==
rely on OAuth, which would also enable the users to register directly in the app, without
having to use other websites’ accounts for that. In general, the user login and account
management functionality could be vastly improved, with features such as personalized
settings, better landing page, and replacing user sessions with JWT, JSON web tokens,
which could be an ever safer option for authentication.
Lastly, an interesting change which could be considered is, as mentioned before, turning
the app into a serverless and client-side only. This would make it arguably even easier for
the interested users to use it, as they would not even have to run it themselves - courtesy of
GitHub pages. There are two main concerns I can see with that feature, however. Firstly,
such a deep re-implementation would be extremely time-consuming, as it would have
to be analyzed from multiple angles such as scalability and data security, and secondly,
I would have to analyze whether it is even possible - right now the server-side part is
composed of four separate elements (DB, file storage server, document parser, and of
course the server app itself), and shifting their functionalities to be handled by the client-
side app could be impossible.
50
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
Muhammad Usman Hadi et al. Large Language Models: A Comprehensive Survey
of its Applications, Challenges, Limitations, and Future Prospects. July 10, 2023.
DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.23589741.
[2]
Must-Know Chat GPT-4 Statistics [Recent Analysis] • Gitnux. Section: Market Data.
Dec. 8, 2023. URL: https://gitnux.org/chat-gpt-statistics/.
[3]
The History and Development Timeline of ChatGPT | by Jake Land | Medium. URL:
https://medium.com/@jacob.land/the-history-and-development-timeline-of-chatgpt-
165c250450cf.
[4]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. Aug. 1, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
1706.03762. arXiv: 1706.03762[cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[5]
Alec Radford and Karthik Narasimhan. “Improving Language Understanding by Gen-
erative Pre-Training”. In: 2018. URL: https : / / www . semanticscholar . org / paper /
Improving-Language-Understanding-by-Generative-Radford-Narasimhan/cd18800a0fe0b668a1cc19f2ec
[6]
Mohammad Taher Pilehvar and Jose Camacho-Collados. Embeddings in Natural
Language Processing: Theory and Advances in Vector Representations of Meaning.
Google-Books-ID: U90MEAAAQBAJ. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, Nov. 13, 2020.
177 pp. ISBN: 978-1-63639-022-2.
[7]
Michael Fire and Carlos Guestrin. “Over-optimization of academic publishing met-
rics: observing Goodhart’s Law in action”. In: GigaScience 8.6 (June 1, 2019), giz053.
ISSN: 2047-217X. DOI: 10.1093/gigascience/giz053. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
gigascience/giz053.
[8]
MarekFijolek - Overview. GitHub. URL: https://github.com/MarekFijolek.
[9]
PDF’s popularity online – PDF Association. URL: https://pdfa.org/pdfs-popularity-
online/.
[10]
Hui Chao and Jian Fan. “Layout and Content Extraction for PDF Documents”. In:
Document Analysis Systems VI. Ed. by Simone Marinai and Andreas R. Dengel.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2004, pp. 213–
224. ISBN: 978-3-540-28640-0. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-28640-0_20.
[11]
Matthew Hardy et al. The application/pdf Media Type. Request for Comments RFC
8118. Num Pages: 12. Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 2017. DOI: 10.17487/
RFC8118. URL: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc8118.
[12]
Cartic Ramakrishnan et al. “Layout-aware text extraction from full-text PDF of sci-
entific articles”. In: Source Code for Biology and Medicine 7.1 (May 28, 2012), p. 7.
ISSN: 1751-0473. DOI: 10.1186/1751-0473-7-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/1751-
0473-7-7.
[13]
Sarah Brady. ChatGPT unveils PDF analysis features. Verdict. Oct. 30, 2023. URL:
https://www.verdict.co.uk/chatgpt-unveils-pdf-analysis-features/.
[14]
Eric Hal Schwartz. OpenAI Teaches ChatGPT to Read PDFs and Pick Tools Without
Being Asked. Voicebot.ai. Section: Ai. Oct. 30, 2023. URL: https://voicebot.ai/2023/
10/30/openai-teaches-chatgpt-to-read-pdfs-and-pick-tools-without-being-asked/.
[15]
Unriddle | Faster research. URL: https://www.unriddle.ai/new.
[16]
OpenAI Platform. URL: https://platform.openai.com.
[17]
Ziwei Ji et al. “Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation”. In: ACM
Computing Surveys 55.12 (Mar. 3, 2023), 248:1–248:38. ISSN: 0360-0300. DOI:
10.1145/3571730. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3571730.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
51
==PAGE:59==
[18]
Joshua Maynez et al. “On Faithfulness and Factuality in Abstractive Summarization”.
In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. ACL 2020. Ed. by Dan Jurafsky et al. Online: Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, July 2020, pp. 1906–1919. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.173.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.173.
[19]
AskYourPDF: The Best PDF AI Chat App. AskYourPDF. URL: https://askyourpdf.
com/.
[20]
ChatGPT. URL: https://chat.openai.com.
[21]
ChatGPT plugins. URL: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt-plugins.
[22]
AskYourPDF: The Best PDF AI Chat App. AskYourPDF. URL: https://askyourpdf.
com/upload.
[23]
Image inputs for ChatGPT - FAQ | OpenAI Help Center. URL: https://help.openai.
com/en/articles/8400551-image-inputs-for-chatgpt-faq.
[24]
ChatGPT’s Code Interpreter is now Advanced Data Analysis. URL: https://www.
pluralsight.com/resources/blog/data/ChatGPT-Advanced-Data-Analytics.
[25]
Advanced Data Analysis (ChatGPT Enterprise version) | OpenAI Help Center. URL:
https : / / help . openai . com / en / articles / 8437071 - advanced - data - analysis - chatgpt -
enterprise-version.
[26]
PyPDF2 ∙PyPI. URL: https://pypi.org/project/PyPDF2/.
[27]
scikit-learn: machine learning in Python — scikit-learn 1.4.0 documentation. URL:
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html.
[28]
Terms of use. URL: https://openai.com/policies/terms-of-use.
[29]
Introducing ChatGPT Plus. URL: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt-plus.
[30]
Zotero | Your personal research assistant. URL: https://www.zotero.org/.
[31]
Mendeley - Reference Management Software. URL: https://www.mendeley.com/.
[32]
Functional requirements examples and templates. Jama Software. URL: https://
www . jamasoftware . com / requirements - management - guide / writing - requirements /
functional-requirements-examples-and-templates/.
[33]
Steve Krug. Don’t make me think, revisited: a common sense approach to Web [and
mobile] usability. third edition. Berkley: New Riders, 2014. 200 pp. ISBN: 978-0-321-
96551-6.
[34]
Docker: Accelerated Container Application Development. URL: https://www.docker.
com/.
[35]
OpenAI Vision. URL: https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/vision.
[36]
Yang Wu et al. An Early Evaluation of GPT-4V(ision). Oct. 25, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/
arXiv.2310.16534. arXiv: 2310.16534[cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16534.
[37]
Pricing. URL: https://openai.com/pricing.
[38]
What are tokens and how to count them? | OpenAI Help Center. URL: https://help.
openai.com/en/articles/4936856-what-are-tokens-and-how-to-count-them.
[39]
Samuel Hoffstaetter. pytesseract: Python-tesseract is a python wrapper for Google’s
Tesseract-OCR. Version 0.3.10. URL: https://github.com/madmaze/pytesseract.
[40]
A. Simon, J.-C. Pret, and A.P. Johnson. “A fast algorithm for bottom-up document
layout analysis”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence 19.3 (Mar. 1997). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, pp. 273–277. ISSN: 1939-3539. DOI: 10.1109/34.584106.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/584106.
[41]
L. O’Gorman. “The document spectrum for page layout analysis”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 15.11 (Nov. 1993). Conference
Name: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp. 1162–
52
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
==PAGE:60==
1173. ISSN: 1939-3539. DOI: 10.1109/34.244677. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/244677.
[42]
BobLd/simple-docstrum: A step-by-step C# implementation of the Docstrum algo-
rithm. URL: https://github.com/BobLd/simple-docstrum.
[43]
Chulwoo (Mike) Pack. chulwoopack/docstrum. original-date: 2018-02-23T02:00:27Z.
Dec. 19, 2023. URL: https://github.com/chulwoopack/docstrum.
[44]
PDFFigures 2.0. URL: http://pdffigures2.allenai.org/.
[45]
allenai/pdffigures2. original-date: 2016-05-09T22:39:41Z. Feb. 8, 2024. URL: https:
//github.com/allenai/pdffigures2.
[46]
Christopher Clark and Santosh Divvala. “PDFFigures 2.0: Mining Figures from Re-
search Papers”. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM/IEEE-CS on Joint Conference on
Digital Libraries. JCDL ’16. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machin-
ery, June 19, 2016, pp. 143–152. ISBN: 978-1-4503-4229-2. DOI: 10.1145/2910896.
2910904. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2910896.2910904.
[47]
Layout Parser. URL: https://layout-parser.github.io/.
[48]
Layout-Parser/layout-parser. original-date: 2020-06-10T20:22:54Z. Feb. 11, 2024.
URL: https://github.com/Layout-Parser/layout-parser.
[49]
Ruben Winastwan. Analyzing Document Layout with LayoutParser. Medium. Jan. 11,
2022. URL: https : / / towardsdatascience . com / analyzing - document - layout - with -
layoutparser-ed24d85f1d44.
[50]
OpenAI. OpenAI Assistants API. URL: https://platform.openai.com.
[51]
GPT-4 Turbo | OpenAI Help Center. URL: https://help.openai.com/en/articles/
8555510-gpt-4-turbo.
[52]
MongoDB: The Developer Data Platform. MongoDB. URL: https://www.mongodb.
com.
[53]
File Storage for web apps - Total.js Platform. URL: https : / / www . totaljs . com /
openfiles/.
[54]
Taufan Iskandar et al. “Comparison between client-side and server-side rendering
in the web development”. In: IOP Conference Series Materials Science and Engi-
neering 801 (June 2, 2020), p. 012136. DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/801/1/012136.
[55]
What is a REST API? URL: https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/api/what-is-a-rest-
api.
[56]
Roopa Kushtagi. Exploring Data Fetching Patterns: Short Polling, Long Polling,
and WebSockets. Medium. Dec. 15, 2023. URL: https : / / medium . com / @roopa .
kushtagi/exploring-data-fetching-patterns-short-polling-long-polling-and-websockets-
52d408b45d30.
[57]
The WebSocket API (WebSockets) - Web APIs | MDN. Jan. 30, 2024. URL: https:
//developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API.
[58]
Vue.js. URL: https://vuejs.org/.
[59]
Express - Node.js web application framework. URL: https://expressjs.com/.
[60]
Node.js. URL: https://nodejs.org/en.
[61]
Kai Lei, Yining Ma, and Zhi Tan. “Performance Comparison and Evaluation of Web
Development Technologies in PHP, Python, and Node.js”. In: Dec. 1, 2014, pp. 661–
668. DOI: 10.1109/CSE.2014.142.
[62]
Tailwind CSS - Rapidly build modern websites without ever leaving your HTML.
Nov. 15, 2020. URL: https://tailwindcss.com/.
[63]
Font Awesome. URL: https://fontawesome.com/.
[64]
PrimeVue | Vue UI Component Library. URL: https://primevue.org/.
[65]
markdown-it/markdown-it. original-date: 2014-12-19T22:54:53Z. Feb. 11, 2024. URL:
https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it.
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
53
==PAGE:61==
[66]
Antoni André. Splitpanes - Documentation. Splitpanes. URL: https://antoniandre.
github.io/splitpanes.
[67]
PSPDFKit GmbH. PSPDFKit - Complete PDF SDK, Fast Setup & Fully Supported.
PSPDFKit. URL: https://pspdfkit.com/.
[68]
PDF.js. URL: https://mozilla.github.io/pdf.js/.
[69]
Patrick Spiegel. “NOSQL INJECTION FUN WITH OBJECTS AND ARRAYS”. In: ().
URL: https://owasp.org/www-pdf-archive/GOD16-NOSQL.pdf.
[70]
Mongoose ODM v8.1.2. URL: https://mongoosejs.com/.
[71]
Welcome to Flask — Flask Documentation (3.0.x). URL: https://flask.palletsprojects.
com/en/3.0.x/.
[72]
Passport.js. Passport.js. URL: https://www.passportjs.org/.
[73]
multer. npm. May 30, 2022. URL: https://www.npmjs.com/package/multer.
[74]
OpenAI API Reference - Files. URL: https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/
files.
[75]
websockets/ws. original-date: 2011-11-09T22:32:45Z. Feb. 11, 2024. URL: https:
//github.com/websockets/ws.
[76]
cookie. npm. Nov. 7, 2023. URL: https://www.npmjs.com/package/cookie.
[77]
cookie-parser. npm. Nov. 16, 2021. URL: https://www.npmjs.com/package/cookie-
parser.
[78]
OAuth 2.0 — OAuth. URL: https://oauth.net/2/.
[79]
Jenko Hwong. “IAM Concerned: OAuth Token Hijacking in Google Cloud”. Black hat
Europe 2020. Dec. 9, 2020.
[80]
passport-google-oauth. Passport.js. URL: https://www.passportjs.org/packages/
passport-google-oauth/.
[81]
WSTG - Latest | OWASP Foundation. URL: https://owasp.org/www-project-web-
security-testing-guide/latest/4-Web_Application_Security_Testing/11-Client-side_
Testing/03-Testing_for_HTML_Injection.
[82]
express-mongo-sanitize. npm. Jan. 14, 2022. URL: https : / / www . npmjs . com /
package/express-mongo-sanitize.
[83]
helmetjs/helmet. original-date: 2012-02-01T22:54:45Z. Feb. 11, 2024. URL: https:
//github.com/helmetjs/helmet.
[84]
￿Javascript Injection￿Definition, Examples, and Prevention. Running Time: 473
Section: Vulnerability Prevention. Oct. 4, 2022. URL: https://crashtest-security.com/
js-injection-attack/.
[85]
Clickjacking | OWASP Foundation. URL: https : / / owasp . org / www - community /
attacks/Clickjacking.
[86]
What Is Cross Site Scripting (XSS) and How Does It Work? | Synopsys. URL: https:
//www.synopsys.com/glossary/what-is-cross-site-scripting.html.
[87]
mot. motdotla/dotenv. original-date: 2013-07-05T18:25:05Z. Feb. 11, 2024. URL:
https://github.com/motdotla/dotenv.
[88]
8 Usability Testing Methods That Work (Types + Examples). URL: https://www.
hotjar.com/usability-testing/methods/.
[89]
Build cross-platform desktop apps with JavaScript, HTML, and CSS | Electron. URL:
https://electronjs.org/.
[90]
PouchDB, the JavaScript Database that Syncs! URL: https://pouchdb.com/.
[91]
GitHub Pages. GitHub Pages. URL: https://pages.github.com/.
54
LingoFlow - Enhancing scientific understanding through AI-powered conversational assistants
