==PAGE:1==
Development of a railway alignment optimi-
sation model considering geometrical, topo-
graphical and land-use factors
MSc Thesis
Claudio Panieri, s153796
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
English tile: Development of a railway alignment optimisation model considering geo-
metrical, topographical and land-use factors
Danish tile: Udvikling af en model til optimering af jernbanelinjeføringer under hensynta-
gen til geometriske, topografiske og arealanvendelsesmæssige faktorer
MSc Thesis
May, 2024
By
Claudio Panieri
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
By the author (Claudio Panieri), 2024
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared at the Department of Technology, Management and Eco-
nomics of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment of the require-
ments for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering (Transport and Logistics) .
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of railway track design
and operations research.
Claudio Panieri - s153796
Signature
13.05.2024
Date
Supervisors
R. Hoogervorst, Postdoc
Operations & Supply Chain Management Section, Management Science Division, De-
partment of Technology, Management and Economics
A. Larsen, Professor, Deputy Head of Division, Head of Section
Operations & Supply Chain Management Section, Management Science Division, De-
partment of Technology, Management and Economics
H. Sylvan, Head of Center
Transport Division, Department of Technology, Management and Economics
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The design of new railway alignments is a lengthy and resource intensive task that is
traditionally performed manually, an effort that requires experienced professionals with
knowledge about a wide variety of topics. These requirements create a significant bottle-
neck in the process, which leads to compromises on the number of alignment alternatives
that can be explored in detail in the early phases of railway projects.
This thesis illustrates a proposal to address some of the above-mentioned issues through
the employment of a heuristic alignment optimisation method. The proposed algorithm
focuses on the minimisation of the construction costs of a railway, while taking the most
important geometrical and geographical constraints into account. This is achieved through
the use of a realistic mathematical representation of the the track geometry and a cost
function that details all the main cost components of a railway alignment. A genetic algo-
rithm is then formulated to find realistic alignment alternatives that reduce the construction
costs to a minimum.
The design requirements of the proposed optimisation method are based on the anal-
ysis of a case project, the planned high-speed railway between Copenhagen and the
Kattegat fixed link. The official feasibility study (cf. [1]) of the project forms a good bench-
mark against which the functionalities and performance of the algorithm can be measured.
Since the chosen case project is a representative example of the typical design require-
ments of greenfield railway projects in Denmark, the design of the proposed optimisation
algorithm can easily be extended to other projects with minimal changes.
The proposed algorithm is promising, as it offers great flexibility to the user with regards to
which cost factors and constraints should be included in the analysis. The only remaining
uncertainty is the real-world performance of the algorithm, a question that can only be
answered once the algorithm has been implemented and extensively validated.
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Case description
5
3
Theory and Literature
9
3.1
Core aspects of railway alignment design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Overview of genetic algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Problem formulation
21
4.1
Costs and constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Representation of variables and data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Optimisation model
31
5.1
Representation of the alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Alignment optimisation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6
Genetic algorithm
57
6.1
Genetic encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.2
Initial population
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.3
Fitness computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.4
Ranking, selection and replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.5
Crossover and mutation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.6
Convergence and termination criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
7
Discussion
71
8
Conclusion
75
Bibliography
77
A Learning objectives
79
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Railway alignment design is a very resource and time intensive task. When boiled down to
its core, the optimisation problem that needs to be solved can be be thought of as having to
find the cheapest possible feasible alignment from a point A to a point B. This definition is
very simplistic and hides the the true scale and difficulty of the endeavour. The designers
are faced with a virtually unlimited set of possible solutions and a plethora of different
factors that influence the feasibility and performance of said solutions, ranging from track
design constraints to geographical and environmental factors, as well as construction and
maintenance costs.
Railway alignments have traditionally been designed manually, a process that, besides
being very time-consuming, also depends on human factors like experience and specific
knowledge about the minutiae of every design phase. The design of a railway alignment is
usually performed in multiple steps that gradually narrow down the area where the railway
is to be built. The whole process requires a team of many people, where each person
specialises in a specific area of the design, for example track geometry, cut/fill balance
and mass haul, environmental factors, economy and regulatory aspects.
Historical background
Since at least the sixties, many attempts have been made to automate at least part of the
design process, with varying degrees of success. The early attempts were constrained by
the computing power available at the time, which forced their proponents to either simplify
the representation of the alignment, leave out some of the constraints and cost factors or
to focus on a specific component of the alignment, for example the vertical profile.
The main reason for the initial difficulties was thus the very reason why an automated
process was desirable, namely the high degree of complexity of the task. The cost of
the alignment depends on many different factors, which complicates the formulation of
the cost function, and many different constraints are present, both pertaining to the track
geometry an to the geography of the study region. Additionally, the decision variables are
continuous, leading to a potentially infinite set of possible solutions.
A breakthrough in the field of alignment design automation was achieved during the
nineties, where the combination of increased computing power and a greater focus on
heuristic optimisation methods led to the first implementations of realistic alignment opti-
misation algorithms, that took both the horizontal and vertical profiles into account. Since
then, the interest in this field of research has steadily increased, with an ever increasing
amount of articles being published every year. The focus of research has now moved
from simply achieving a feasible and realistic alignment to the inclusion of more and more
details about specific aspects of alignment design, like geological factors, environmental
hazards and regulatory aspects like expropriation.
Goals of the project
This study aims to develop and implement an alignment optimisation method that incorpo-
rates some the most important features found in recent research and applies them to the
Danish context. The objective is to construct an algorithm that, at a minimum, comprises
all the features that are necessary to yield realistic alignment solutions that can be used
in the preliminary design stages.
These objectives are set to be achieved with the help of a case project, the planned railway
line between Copenhagen and Kalundborg. The project, still in the planning stage, is
1
==PAGE:10==
part of the wider Kattegat fixed link project, the biggest greenfield railway project that is
currently being planned in Denmark.
The case project is a useful benchmark that plays an important role both during the de-
sign of the optimisation model and during the implementation, verification and testing
phase. Its usefulness during the latter is self-explanatory, since a real-world example is
necessary to measure the model performance, but its usefulness during the design of the
model shouldn’t be underestimated either. The case project is in fact also useful to eval-
uate which cost components and model constraints are useful or necessary to include to
achieve a satisfactory result.
The chosen case project is particularly suitable in this regard, as it has already been
subject of an official feasibility study. The study will be a useful tool for comparison, both
to decide which factors to include in model and for comparison with the model results.
Key requirements
A key issue when designing a railway alignment is the relation between the track geometry
and the topography of the study area. In order to reduce costs, it is advantageous for the
alignment to follow the existing terrain elevation as much as possible. This reduces the
amount of earthworks, tunnels and bridges that are necessary, which are some of the
biggest cost components of a railway project. Meanwhile, the track geometry constraints
reduce the ability of the alignment to follow the existing terrain. This effect is strongly
speed-dependent, i.e. railways with a higher design speed have a more constrained track
geometry. The balancing between these two opposite factors is a fundamental conundrum
of railway alignment design. It is thus imperative to include all the necessary to reflect this
trade-off in the proposed optimisation model.
Regarding the requirements set to the solution algorithm, a review of previous research on
the subject shows that the class of optimisation methods that is by far the most successful
at solving an alignment optimisation model is that of the heuristic optimisation methods
(cf. section 3.2 for details).
Most attempts at utilising exact methods, like linear programming (LP) and mixed-integer
programming (MIP), have either yielded unsatisfactory results or have focused on specific
aspects to be optimised, for example mass haul optimisation (i.e. the optimisation of
the movement of the excavated soil to the areas where extra soil is required). These
limitations are mostly a consequence of the complexity of the search space, which is
neither linear nor convex. Because of the above mentioned issues, this study will focus
on heuristic optimisation methods only.
2
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Research question
Based on the requirements set out in the previous section, it is thus possible to formulate
a research question that summarises the key objectives of this study:
Is it possible to develop and apply a heuristic approach to determine viable railway align-
ment alternatives for greenfield railway projects, with a special focus on Danish greenfield
railway projects?
To help achieve the goal of answering the research question, it is helpful to define some
additional sub-questions:
• Is it possible to develop a mathematical description that can represent realistic rail-
way alignments, both in terms of track geometry and in relation to their location in
the 3-dimensional space?
• Is it possible to formulate a cost function that accurately reflects the most important
cost components of a railway alignment?
• Is it possible to develop and implement a heuristic method to find feasible and real-
istic solutions that minimise said cost function?
• Is the quality of the solutions found by the heuristic algorithm satisfactory? Both in
terms of their general realism and in relation to the specific alternatives proposed in
the preexisting reports about the case scenario.
1.2
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is divided into 8 main chapters:
1. Introduction: The current chapter
2. Case description: Description of the chosen case and the method and conclusion
of the pre-existing study
3. Theory and Literature: Description of the most important theoretical aspects of
track geometry and genetic algorithms, and review of the existing literature about
alignment optimisation algorithms
4. Model requirements: List of high-level requirements for the optimisation model
5. Optimisation model: Description of the alignment representation model, as well
as of the cost function of the alignment and other additional constraints
6. Genetic algorithm: Detailed description of the chosen heuristic method
7. Discussion: Assessment of the study in relation to the stated goals and proposals
for possible improvements
8. Conclusion: High-level overview of the most important findings
NOTE 1: Due to time constraints, it has not been possible to implement the heuristic
algorithm and analyse its results. The discussion chapter contains a detailed assessment
of this deficiency and its consequences.
NOTE 2: The complete list of learning objectives for the thesis is located in appendix A.
3
==PAGE:12==
4
==PAGE:13==
2
Case description
To help create a model and solution algorithm suitable for a real world scenario, the pro-
posed alignment optimisation algorithm is formulated with the goal of optimising of the
planned high-speed railway that will connect the future Kattegat fixed link with Copen-
hagen. This case has been chosen because it is one of the few greenfield railway projects
that are being planned in Denmark in the coming years, and is is thus a good example of
how alignment optimisation algorithms can be applied in the Danish context.
The Kattegat fixed link is a new combined railway and road connection across the Kattegat
strait, between the Jutland peninsula and the island of Zealand, via the smaller island of
Samsø. The project is expected to reduce the travel time by train between Copenhagen
and Aarhus, the two biggest cities in Denmark, by almost 50 %, which would greatly
contribute to the overall economic welfare of the country.[1] Additionally, the project would
also achieve significant time savings for the highway traffic.
The project is still at a feasibility study stage, and thus the exact alignment is not decided
yet. Moreover, it is still unclear if the sea crossings will consist of tunnels or bridges.
Therefore, the feasibility study explores multiple different corridor proposals for both the
railways and the motorways, as shown in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Alignments proposed in the official feasibility study [1]
This project focuses on the alignment corridors marked in yellow on the right side of the
figure, which represent the railway alignment alternatives between the Kattegat fixed link
and Copenhagen, on island of Zealand. These alignments are not expected to have any
railway stations between their end points, which makes them suitable for the proposed
model, which doesn’t focus on any demand-side considerations.
Corridor selection criteria
The feasibility study defines a number of corridor alternatives, which are analysed and
ranked according to a series of criteria. Because of the early-phase nature of the feasi-
bility study, the alternatives are not formulated as well-defined alignments. Instead, the
alternatives are defined as roughly 1 km wide corridors.
5
==PAGE:14==
The screening of the alternatives in the feasibility study is performed in two stages. In
an early stage, all the proposed alternatives are evaluated qualitatively by looking at the
technical aspects and their environmental and social impact, and the worst performers
are discarded.[2]
Afterwards, in the second stage, the remaining corridor alternatives are refined and then
evaluated with an extended list of criteria, namely:
1. Estimated passenger demand
2. Travel time
3. Construction costs
4. Resiliency of the railway network
5. Technical aspects of the design
6. Environmental and social impact
7. Railway traffic scheduling
The corridor alternatives shown in figure 2.1 constitute the alternatives that have been
evaluated in stage two of the screening.[3] Regarding the area of interest of this study,
the island of Zealand, two main alternatives have been identified: a Northern corridor,
between Kalundborg and Roskilde, and a Southern corridor, between Kalundborg and
Ringsted.
The Southern corridor is considered by the feasibility study to be the most promising solu-
tion, mainly because of railway traffic scheduling concerns at the eastern end of the North-
ern corridor. The existing railway between Roskilde and Copenhagen has in fact almost
reached saturation and is thus ill-suited to absorb the extra traffic from the new railway.
Additionally, the Southern corridor also shows a lower impact on protected nature com-
pared to the Northern corridor, as well as a lower total length and thus presumably lower
costs. The Southern corridor also opens up for the possibility of good connections be-
tween the Kattegat fixed link and the Fehmarn belt fixed link (i.e. connection to Germany)
at Ringsted station.[1]
Characteristics of the preferred alternative
The feasibility study (cf. [1]) draws some preliminary conclusions by comparing perfor-
mance of the Southern corridor to the evaluation criteria set out in the previous subsection.
The score in criteria 1 and 2 is similar across all corridor alternatives, as the travel time
reductions between Copenhagen and Aarhus are overwhelmingly a consequence of the
fixed link over the Kattegat strait, and not of the land-side connections. Regarding cri-
terion 3, the construction costs of the Southern corridor are likely to be lower than the
alternatives, as its total length is the lowest. The criterion number 4 is fulfilled equally well
by all the alternatives, as the new Kattegat fixed link creates an alternative route in case
the Great Belt fixed link further south is disrupted.
Regarding criterion 5, the feasibility study highlights that the linking with the existing rail-
way near Ringsted is relatively straightforward because of favourable terrain. The main
obstacles found in the corridor are a series of existing railways and motorways, especially
near Kalundborg, and an area of relatively difficult terrain immediately east of the lake of
Tissø (area marked with a 3 and 4 in figure 2.2), with elevation differences of up to 60
meters, which may require a viaduct. Additionally, the area in the immediate vicinity of
Tissø and to the west of the lake are characterised by the presence of soft soil and the
risk of flooding.
6
==PAGE:15==
Regarding the impacts on the environment and society (criterion 6), figure 2.2 highlights
which areas of significant environmental and cultural value are affected by the corridor.
The most critical area is once again the area around Tissø, which is a protected area
for both environmental and cultural reasons. Additionally, a few woodland areas (green
areas in the figure) are also marginally affected by the corridor.
Figure 2.2: Ringsted-Kalundborg corridor [1]
Lastly, regarding criterion 7, the Southern corridor compares favourably with the alterna-
tives, as the railway terminates near Ringsted station, which has recently been connected
to Copenhagen with a new high speed railway, ensuring fast connections to the city and
spare capacity for future traffic.
Comparison with the thesis objectives
The alignment optimisation algorithm proposed in this study does not consider the demand
side issues of railway alignment design, as well as issues outside of the corridor area. As
a consequence, the quantification of criteria 1, 2, 4 and 7 is out of the project scope.
The proposed alignment optimisation algorithm is intended to be used in the feasibility
study phase of railway design, but only as a tool to provide the exact location and geometry
of the alignment alternatives, considering the construction costs, geometrical constraints
of the alignment, and to a limited extent, also the environmental and social impact via the
use of penalty costs. Therefore, using the feasibility study as an example, the algorithm
could be used in the early stages to locate the corridor alternatives, and as a support tool
to help in the evaluation and ranking of the alternatives. In addition, taking the Southern
corridor from figure 2.2 as an example, the algorithm could then be employed to help
refine the boundaries of the corridor.
Influence on the proposed algorithm
The official feasibility study provides important clues regarding the design parameters that
the alignment optimisation algorithm should consider. Regarding the design parameters
7
==PAGE:16==
of the railway itself, the study assumes that the railway will be built with a maximum design
speed of 250 km/h and that the railway will be for passenger train traffic only.[2] These
assumptions will affect not only the model parameters, but also some of the geometrical
constraints.
Another important aspect to consider is the topography of the study area. Figure 2.3
shows the digital elevation model of the region, covering a 50 x 40 km area. The two
points correspond to the start and end points of the Southern corridor shown in figure 2.2.
The city of Kalunborg is on the upper left corner and Ringsted in the lower right corner.
The data is shown in a grey scale, with darker coloured areas being at lower elevation
and lighter coloured areas being at a higher elevation.
Figure 2.3: Digital elevation model (DEM) of the project area
The minimum elevation of the study area corresponds to the sea level, while the point of
highest elevation lies at a height of 118 meters. Despite the challenges highlighted in the
feasibility study regarding the steepness of certain areas, the region cannot be considered
to have a very challenging topography, which is an important consideration in relation to
the chosen solution algorithm, as will become apparent in the coming chapters.
All of these observations will be considered when the design requirements for the algo-
rithm are formulated in the coming chapters.
8
==PAGE:17==
3
Theory and Literature
This chapter is composed of three main parts. The first part describes the most important
theoretical aspects of railway alignment design in general (section 3.1), with a focus on
the relevant danish railway standards that form the core constraints of alignment design.
The second part contains a literature review that gives a chronological overview of the
alignment optimisation approaches that can be found in the literature, and their strengths
and weaknesses (section 3.2). The last part focuses on the theoretical aspects of genetic
algorithms, the family of algorithms that the solution algorithm chosen in this project is a
part of (section 3.3).
3.1
Core aspects of railway alignment design
3.1.1
Railway cross-section
In order to better understand the challenges related to the definition of an optimisation
model for railway alignments, it is useful to describe a number of important aspects of
railway design. A good starting point is to look at the physical dimensions of the railway
infrastructure, which influences its cost and constrains where it can be built.
Figure 3.1 shows the shape and elements of a typical cross-section of double tracked
railways, as defined in the danish railway standards (Danish: Banenormer).[4] The railway
infrastructure composed of multiple layers of materials, with the tracks being the topmost
layer. The successive layers of ballast, sub-ballast (Danish: Underballast) and sub-grade
(Danish: Råjordsplanum, which refers only to its topmost surface) are needed to distribute
the forces exerted by the trains over a bigger area, in order to reduce the pressure on
the ground and thus avoid excessive deformations. The layers above the sub-grade are
collectively known as the superstructure of the railway, while the layers beneath make up
the substructure (i.e. embankments, bridges and tunnels).
Figure 3.1: Typical cross-section of a double tracked railway in Denmark [4]
Each layer has well-defined material requirements and dimensions, which may vary de-
pending on the importance of the track (e.g. mainline, siding, etc.), the geometry of the
alignment (e.g. horizontal and vertical curves), the presence track elements like turnouts
and the design speed of the railway section.
It is out of the scope of this project to further describe all the detailed characteristics of
the cross-section, as the project focuses on generating good alignments to be used in
the early phases of railway projects, and not on detailed railway design. Further details
about which cross-section related costs and constraints are considered relevant for the
optimisation algorithm can be found in section 4.1.1.
9
==PAGE:18==
3.1.2
Alignment geometry
Since the key goals of alignment optimisation is to generate feasible and realistic railway
alignments, this section will focus on the description of the most important features of the
geometry of a railway alignment. In this project, the alignment geometry is measured from
the centreline of the railway, an imaginary line placed halfway between the two tracks, at
the same height as the top of the rails (cf. figure 4.1).
In order to better describe the properties of railway alignments, it is useful to distinguish
between the horizontal and vertical alignment (also known as vertical profile) of a railway.
The horizontal alignment is defined as the projection of the 3-dimensional alignment on a
2D plane XY , defined by the longitude and latitude coordinates x and y, which effectively
eliminates the height coordinate z. The vertical alignment is also 2-dimensional, but differs
in the represented coordinates, with the first being the length of the horizontal alignment
(h) and the second being the elevation (z) coordinate. Therefore, the vertical alignment
can be said to be located on the HZ plane.
Figure 3.2: Elements of a horizontal and vertical alignment
The geometry of railway alignments is composed of a predetermined set of geometric
elements. The horizontal alignment is composed of three geometric elements: tangent
segments, (horizontal) circular curves and transition curves (Figure 3.2, left). The tangent
segments represent the straight track sections, and follow the geometry of a line segment.
The circular curves are located where the railway changes direction, and follow the ge-
ometry of a circular arc. The transition curves are located between the tangent segments
and the circular curves, and their geometry usually corresponds to a clothoid, or more
rarely a third degree (cubic) or fourth degree (bi-quadratic) parabola.[5] The purpose of
the transition curve is to smooth out the changes in lateral acceleration and thus increase
the passenger comfort and decrease wear and tear of the infrastructure and railway ve-
hicles.[6]
The vertical alignment is instead composed of only two elements: tangent segments and
(vertical) circular curves (Figure 3.2, right). The tangent segments are line segments of
constant gradient, while the circular curves (arcs) are placed where the gradient of the
alignment changes. Since the allowed gradient values lie in a relatively small interval and
the required minimum curve radius is much bigger than in the horizontal curves (cf. 4.1.2),
the vertical accelerations are much milder than in the case of the lateral accelerations and
thus the transition curves are not necessary in the vertical alignment.
10
==PAGE:19==
During the design of a railway alignment, it is useful to abstract the horizontal and vertical
alignments as a series of line segments delimited by so called points of intersection (PI),
which represent the points where the alignment changes direction (cf. figure 3.2). Once
this piece-wise linear alignment has been designed, the curves and transition curves can
be fitted at each point of intersection to yield a feasible alignment.
Cant, cant deficiency and cant excess
Another important aspect of railway alignment design is the track cant (h), or superel-
evation. The superelevation is a vertical lifting of one of the two rails that is applied in
the curved sections of the alignment to counteract the lateral acceleration that affects the
railway vehicles. The cant is usually measured in millimetres and defined as the height
difference between the the top of the two rails (ha in figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3: Railway vehicle in a balanced cant scenario [5]
The purpose of the cant is to increase passenger comfort and reduce wear and tear on
the railway infrastructure and the rolling stock. The following paragraphs describe how
the optimal, minimum and maximum track cant can be determined.
Absent any superelevation of the track, the lateral acceleration is equal to the square
function of the speed divided by the radius of the curve:
ac = V 2
R
(3.1)
It is theoretically possible to cancel out the lateral acceleration by applying a sufficiently
high cant, so that the resultant acceleration K caused by the gravitational acceleration g
and lateral acceleration ac coincides with the centreline of the vehicle (cf. figure 3.3). This
is achieved when the angle α between the resultant acceleration K and the gravitational
acceleration g is equal to the angle between the track gauge n and the cant ha. In the
described case, the following equality is true:
tan α = ha
n =
V 2
R
g
(3.2)
11
==PAGE:20==
The balanced cant (or superelevation) can then be found by isolating ha in the equation.
Assuming that g = 9.81 m/s2 and n =
1500mm, and that the speed is in km/h, it is
possible to express the balanced cant ha as:
ha = V 2 · n
R · g =
1
3.62 · V 2 · 1500
R · 9.81 = 11.8V 2
R
(3.3)
In practice, it’s not always possible to achieve a balanced cant, and thus it is useful to
define a measure called cant deficiency (I):
I = ha −h = 11.8V 2
R −h
(3.4)
Conversely, if the the cant more than balances the lateral acceleration, the curve is said
to have cant excess (E):
E = h −ha = h −11.8V 2
R
(3.5)
The cant deficiency is typically found in curves of small radius and/or where the speed
of the trains is very high. In these cases, the maximum allowable cant is not sufficient to
achieve a balanced superelevation. The cant excess mostly affects low speed trains, like
freight trains, that move well below the maximum speed allowed by the alignment. A com-
mon dilemma when designing mixed traffic railways, where both passenger and freight
trains are present, is the need to find a compromise between the reduction of cant defi-
ciency for passenger trains and the reduction of the cant excess for freight trains. These
concerns are not relevant for this study, as the railway is assumed to be for passenger
trains only (cf. 2).
Regarding the application of the cant to the alignment, the cant is almost never present in
tangent track sections. Conversely, it is present in most circular curves, with the possible
exclusion of very high radius curves. The transition curves usually coincide with the su-
perelevation ramps, which are those sections where the track cant is gradually increased
or decreased when moving between tangent track and circular curves or between cir-
cular curves of different radius. In the case of clothoid transition curves, the cant usually
changes linearly along the whole transition curve length, to minimise the changes in lateral
acceleration and tilt.
12
==PAGE:21==
3.2
Literature review
This section gives a chronological overview of the most consequential alignment opti-
misation (AO) models and methods that have been developed through the years. Note
that the cited research articles mostly cover highway, not railway, optimisation problems.
This is not an issue, as the mathematical modelling of highway and railway alignments
is almost identical, with only minor differences in the constraints and cost function. Most
major differences are found in the value of the input parameters, which only affects the
implementation phase.
3.2.1
Early studies
Horizontal alignment optimisation
The first method to be proposed for alignment optimisation was the calculus of variations.
The method was first applied to horizontal AO problems in the sixties.[7] The core idea
of the calculus of variations is to find a curve connecting two points in space that has the
property of minimising the integral of a function.[8] When applied to AO problems, the
function in question is a continuous, differentiable cost surface that defines the costs of
building an alignment through every point of the project area. The calculus of variations is
then utilised to find the alignment (i.e. the curve) that minimises the total cost of traversing
the area between the two points. The great advantage of this approach is that the end
result is a continuous and globally optimal curve. The main weaknesses of this method
are the difficulty of defining a local cost function for each point of the study area, especially
because the function has to be continuous. For complex cost functions that take multiple
cost factors into account, this endeavour is practically impossible.
Another approach that was explored early in the field of horizontal AO is the use of network
optimisation algorithms.[9] In this case, an alignment is represented as a set of arcs on
a graph, and the optimal alignment can be found with well-studied optimisation methods,
e.g. shortest path, transportation problem, network flow problem. The most arduous
parts of this method are the estimation of realistic costs coefficients for the arcs,[10] and
the determination of the optimal grid structure for the graph, to maximise the amount of
alignment alternatives.[11]
The main disadvantages of the network optimisation method are that the output is a very
approximate, piece-wise linear alignment that needs further processing before it can be
used, and that the cost of every arc in the graph needs to be determined in advance, which
is computationally intensive. In addition to the already mentioned disadvantages, all of the
horizontal alignment optimisation methods suffer from the same inherent problem, which
is that the feasibility and optimality of a horizontal alignment is strongly influenced by the
position of the alignment in the vertical dimension. Ignoring elements like cut/fill balance
and gradient constraints risks to make the results unusable for any practical purposes.
Vertical alignment optimisation
The optimisation of vertical alignments has seen more early successes, as the models are
less complex and can be used to fine tune the vertical alignment after the railway alignment
has been manually designed. Typically, the goal of these models is to optimise the cut/fill
volumes of the earthworks (cf. 4.1.1 and 5.2.2), to minimise construction costs.[12]
Four methods have been examined in the field of vertical AO: Enumeration, Dynamic
programming, Linear programming and Numerical/heuristic search.
The enumeration
method generates a number of vertical alignments based on a predetermined, discrete
set of variables. The alignments are then checked for feasibility. The detailed earth-
work balance and mass haul of the feasible alignments is then optimised using a linear
programming model, which then yields a globally optimal and realistic vertical profile.[13]
13
==PAGE:22==
The disadvantage of this method is the inefficiency of the enumeration approach and the
requirement of having to decide on a discrete set of decision variable values in advance,
which limits the search space.
The dynamic programming method is a popular method for vertical AO. The basic ap-
proach is to divide the vertical alignment in sections of equal length on the horizontal axis.
Each section is delimited by station points, which also represent the stages of the dy-
namic programming algorithm. At each stage, the algorithm determines the elevation of
the alignment at a station point from a discrete set of values, taking the cut/fill balance and
alignment constraints into consideration. Once all the elevation values are determined,
the vertical alignment can be generated by interpolation.[14] Like with the enumeration
method, the discrete set of decision variable values limits the search space of this ap-
proach. In addition, the final alignment is generated after the decision variables have
been determined, which limits the precision of the cost estimates. This is an inherent lim-
itation of dynamic programming, as it determines the decision variable values in stages.
A great advantage of the dynamic programming approach, which made it successful and
popular, is its computational efficiency.
In the linear programming (LP) method the alignment is represented as a 5th order poly-
nomial function. The is to optimise the coefficients of the function with the aim of minimis-
ing the earthwork costs, taking the gradient constraints into consideration. The decision
variables of the model are the coefficients of the polynomial.[15] The advantage of this
approach is that the alignment is represented as a continuous function, from which it is
easy to derive the relevant measures. Another advantage is its ability to find a global
optimum. The great disadvantage is that the 5th order polynomial function is not a good
approximation of a real vertical alignment.
In the heuristic search methods, the vertical alignment is defined as a function of a set
of points of intersection (cf. 3.1.2 and 5.1.2 for details). The alignment is constructed
either by fitting a spline function or by fitting curves to the piece-wise linear alignment
found by determining the values of the points of intersection and then connecting them.
The points of intersection can have any real number as their value.[16] Compared to the
previously discussed methods for vertical AO, the heuristic search methods have the big
advantage of having a continuous search space, greatly increasing the amount of possible
solutions. The disadvantage is that the search space is often nonlinear and non-convex,
which increases the time complexity of the solution algorithms.
Early attempts at 3D-alignment optimisation
Up until the nineties, very few models can be found that attempt to optimise a three-
dimensional alignment, taking both the horizontal and vertical components into account.
The probable reason is that the computing power at the time was insufficient to solve
realistic 3D-alignment models. The cost function of realistic 3D-alignments is in fact not
continuous, nonlinear and very ”uneven”, with many local optima, while the solution space
in nonlinear and non-convex.[12]
The few models that attempted 3D-alignment optimisation tried to circumvent these limi-
tations with various strategies. Some examples of these are: utilising a two-stage model
where the horizontal and vertical alignment are optimised sequentially,[17] discretising the
solution space into a 3D grid,[18] representing the alignment with a continuous, differen-
tiable function.[19] All of these approaches have to sacrifice the realism of the alignment
in order to reduce the computational requirements of the algorithm.
14
==PAGE:23==
3.2.2
Three-dimensional alignments
A new approach to the optimisation of three-dimensional alignments was pioneered in the
nineties, based on the family of metaheuristics called Genetic Algorithms (GA, cf. 3.3 for
details). This approach was pioneered in the PhD dissertation ”Optimizing highway align-
ments with genetic algorithms”,[20] which has formed the basis for most further research
in the field of GA-based alignment optimisation.
The advantages of utilising a genetic algorithm to optimise 3D alignments are numerous.
The model and algorithm proposed in [20] can yield realistic alignment geometries, in-
cluding tangent segments and circular curves, and can be expanded to include transition
curves. The search space is continuous, as the variables are encoded as real numbers.
There are no limitations to the type of cost function and constraints, as it can accept both
continuous and discontinuous functions.[21] None of the models previously discussed
achieve all of these properties.
Since the publication of [20], many research articles have been published that expand on
various aspects of the model and solution algorithm. Some examples of how the method
has been extended are listed below (cf. section 3.3 for details about the technical aspects
of GAs):
1. Feasible Gates, which are bounds to the values of the genes that are enforced
during the generation of the initial population and during the crossover and mutation
operations. Gene values that would incur in penalty costs are discarded, to reduce
the computation time that is ”wasted” on evaluating the sub-optimal solutions.[22]
2. Pre-screening and Repairing, a strategy similar its goals to the Feasible Gates. The
generated chromosomes are pre-screened to check for the violation of some of the
easy-to-evaluate soft constraints before the fitness is determined. If the violations
are small, the chromosome is repaired so that it doesn’t incur in the related penalty
cost when the fitness is calculated. Chromosomes that have big violations of the
soft constraints are discarded.[23]
3. Concurrent Optimisation of Alignments and Station Locations, a model and solu-
tion algorithm that can optimise the placement of stations along the alignment, in
addition to the alignment in itself, taking the demand factors and station layout into
consideration. The proposed model is geared towards urban railways.[24]
4. Multi-objective Alignment Optimisation, modifies the genetic algorithm to take multi-
ple objectives into account, instead of only the total costs. The solutions are ranked
according to Pareto-optimality.[25]
3.2.3
Recent research
In the latest 30 years, since genetic algorithms have been introduced to the field of align-
ment optimisation, multiple other alternative methods have been proposed to solve AO
problems. The main contenders are Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) and Distance
Transform (DT) based methods.
The PSO method is a metaheuristic first proposed in 1995,[26] that simulates the be-
haviour of bird flocking and fish schooling to find good solutions. The idea behind the
method is that flocks and swarms can take advantage of both the information and intel-
ligence of the individuals and the information sharing between the flock members. This
idea translates into the model by having a certain number of individuals, similar in role
to the chromosomes of a GA, that move in the search space via a modified local search
heuristic. At each iteration, the individuals try to improve their fitness via the heuristic by
15
==PAGE:24==
taking into account both their individual current best solution and the current best solution
of the entire population. The algorithm was adapted to alignment optimisation problems
in [27].
The Distance Transform method is based on a technique that makes it possible to cal-
culate approximate euclidean distances between each cell in a rectangular grid and its
neighbouring cells with a simple and fast algorithm. The distance transform algorithm
makes it easy to apply a shortest path algorithm between two points in the modified dis-
tance matrix. When applied to AO problems, the euclidean distance is replaced by the
cost function of the alignment between the two cells. The algorithm yields a piece-wise
linear alignment candidate, so further processing is needed to yield a realistic alignments.
The DT method has seen increasing interest in recent years, and many variations and
hybrid approaches have been proposed.[28][29]
Additionally, an numner of other less researched methods have also been explored, like
Mixed-integer Nonlinear Programming, Ant Colony Optimisation, Tabu Search, Simulated
Annealing and Monte Carlo Simulation.[12] Even more recently, the fist Machine Learning
(ML) based methods have been researched.[30]
3.2.4
Why genetic algorithms
This study chooses to focus on a genetic algorithm approach to alignment optimisation,
mainly because of the presence of extensive literature in the field, as it was the first algo-
rithm to successfully produce realistic 3D-alignments, and because of its relative simplicity
of implementation.
The algorithm can yield realistic alignments with no major weaknesses compared to more
recent algorithms (i.e. distance transform and particle swarm optimisation), when the spe-
cific conditions of the case study are considered. One of the main strengths of DT-based
algorithms in particular is their performance in mountainous areas, which is noticeably
better than that of GAs. This advantage is not relevant to the case study, as the area
doesn’t present a difficult terrain morphology (i.e. mountainous terrain). In addition, the
algorithm and its associated alignment representation are easily customisable to better fit
the individual case, and many research articles already exist that detail possible modifi-
cations to the method.
16
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Overview of genetic algorithms
Genetic algorithms are a class heuristic optimisation methods that are inspired by the prin-
ciples of natural selection. Genetic algorithms imitate the most important features of natu-
ral evolution, such as reproduction and the related concepts of mutation and crossover of
the chromosomes, fitness and selection through evolutionary pressure, and the relation
between the genotype and phenotype of an individual.[31] The idea of imitating natural
selection to evolve artificial systems was first popularised by Ingo Rechenberg and Hans-
Paul Schwefel,[32] while the first application of genetic algorithms to solve optimisation
problems was pioneered by John Holland.[33]
The following sections discuss the most important constituent elements of genetic algo-
rithms, as well as their strengths and weaknesses.
3.3.1
Basic principles
The basic principles of genetic algorithms are simple. At the beginning of the algorithm,
the initial population is generated according to a procedure or set of procedures of choice.
Afterwards, the fitness of each individual of the initial population is determined. Once
this initialisation procedure is complete, the main part of the algorithm begins, where the
population or a portion of the population is selected, based on their fitness, for crossover
and mutation. Then, the fitness of the new individuals is computed, and the whole or
part of the previous generation of the population is replaced. These steps are repeated
multiple times in a loop. After a certain amount of iterations, the termination conditions of
the algorithm are met and the algorithm ends.
All of the above steps are summarised in the following procedure:
Genetic algorithm
• Initialise
Generate the initial population and compute the fitness of the individuals
• Main loop
1. Select individuals for crossover and mutation
2. Apply crossover and mutation operations to the selected individuals
3. Compute the fitness of the new individuals
4. Substitute individuals of the old generation with those of the new
• Stop when termination conditions are met
A more detailed breakdown of each step is given in the following subsections.
3.3.2
Genetic encoding
Before a genetic algorithm can be implemented, it is necessary to devise a relation be-
tween the candidate solutions to the optimisation problem that is being solved and the
chromosomes of the population in the genetic algorithm. Typically, the set of parame-
ters that mathematically defines a solution to the optimisation problem constitutes the
genes of a chromosome, i.e. the genotype of the individual. Meanwhile, the solution that
is represented by the set of parameters is called the phenotype of the individual. The
performance of the phenotype constitutes the fitness of the individual.[34] The relation
17
==PAGE:26==
between the genotype and the phenotype may be direct or, more often, the phenotype
may be a function of the parameters of the solution candidate (i.e. the genotype).
To summarise, the parameters of a possible solution to the optimisation problem that is
being solved are encoded in a chromosome that represents an individual. The fitness of
the individual is a function of the performance of the solution to the original problem that
is encoded by the chromosome.
3.3.3
Generation of the initial population
The initial population can be generated using many different strategies. The simplest
strategies would be to either assign random values to the chromosomes of the initial
population, or to devise a greedy algorithm that assigns values to chromosomes that
represent trivial solution candidates to the problem. A more advanced strategy is to assign
values to the chromosomes that are estimated to have a good fitness value, in order to
obtain an initial population with good fitness. This strategy may help achieving faster
convergence towards a good solution, but requires previous knowledge about the problem
to estimate what solutions may have reasonable fitness values.[35]
3.3.4
Fitness, selection and replacement
The raw fitness of an individual is usually some function of the performance of the solution
in the corresponding optimisation problem, for example the objective function value if the
problem is modelled as a mixed-integer program. It is not advisable to directly utilise the
raw fitness of an individual to decide which individuals should be selected for crossover
and mutation, as the measure has many biases that risk compromising the performance
of the algorithm. A particular risk of using the raw fitness is the premature convergence
of the algorithm. This phenomenon happens because the genes of a few individuals with
a very high raw fitness value dominate the the rest of the genes, causing the population
to drift towards a local optimum.
In order to avoid this, a better idea is to somehow quantify the relative fitness of the
individuals compared to the rest of the population. In this way, the absolute value of the
fitness doesn’t affect the selection. A popular strategy to quantify the relative fitness is
fitness ranking. In this strategy, the individuals are sorted in descending order according
to their raw fitness value. Afterwards, an adjusted fitness value is assigned according
to their rank in the ordered list of individuals. The adjusted fitness can be sampled from
different distributions, in order to achieve a linear, exponential or other relations between
the rank and the fitness.[31] The strategy for the selection of the individuals that are to
be replaced can also vary, with the most common being random selection and inverse
fitness rank.
3.3.5
Crossover and mutation
Once the fitness of the individuals has been computed and a subset of the population has
been selected for reproduction, it is possible to apply the crossover and mutation oper-
ations. The crossover operator combines the genes from two individuals of the current
generation (i.e. the parents) and generates two new individuals (i.e. the offspring) which
inherit some of their genes from one parent and some from the other. Meanwhile, the
mutation operator changes the value of some or all the genes of an individual according
to predefined rules.
Figure 3.4 shows the two most basic types of crossover and mutation operations as an
example, applied to chromosomes with binary encoded genes. The crossover operator
to the left is applied by selecting a crossover point at a random gene position, and then
swapping around the two resulting chromosome fragments to form the two offspring. This
18
==PAGE:27==
type of crossover is called a single-point crossover or simple crossover. The mutation
operator (right side of figure 3.4) selects a random gene from an individual and changes
its value. In this case, the gene is binary, so a simple bit-flipping is performed. If the gene is
encoded as a real number, the corresponding mutation is called uniform mutation, and the
value of the gene is replaced with a random number sampled from a uniform distribution.
Figure 3.4: Basic examples of crossover and mutation operations
The most common strategy is to first apply the crossover operator to the selected popula-
tion, or a subset of it, and then apply the mutation operator with a low probability, so that
only a small subset of the individuals are mutated. Because of that, the mutation operator
is often defined as a background operator. Its function is to add genetic diversity to the
population. This helps to avoid the drift of the majority of the population towards a local
optimum and adds an element of random search to explore the solution space.
Some other common crossover techniques are the two-point crossover, where the genes
of the parents’ chromosomes are split at two points instead of one, and the uniform
crossover, that selects the genes of the offspring from each parent according to a ran-
domly generated crossover mask. Another common strategy is to devise problem-specific
crossover operators that utilise knowledge about the phenotype of the individuals to select
the genes. [36]
3.3.6
Termination conditions
Since genetic algorithms are a heuristic method, it isn’t possible to guarantee that the
algorithm finds the globally optimal solution to the problem, nor is it possible to demon-
strate that a solution is the global optimum. One way to mitigate this problem is to track
the fitness of the current best individual and the average fitness of all individuals. When
the average fitness approaches the current best, and the current best hasn’t improved for
a number of iterations, the algorithm can be said to have converged and the algorithm is
stopped.[34] In the case of very complex problems, convergence can be very slow. In this
case it is possible to set a fixed amount of iterations or run time and stop the algorithm
when the threshold is reached. With this approach it is still possible to find ”good enough”
solutions to the problem in a manageable time.
The precise details on how the genetic algorithm is implemented in the proposed AO
algorithm can be found in chapter 6.
19
==PAGE:28==
20
==PAGE:29==
4
Problem formulation
The first section of this chapter lists which model constraints and cost components are
included in the proposed alignment optimisation model and explains the rationale for their
inclusion (section 4.1). The second section defines some important assumptions on how
the alignment is mathematically represented in the model (section 4.2).
4.1
Costs and constraints
4.1.1
Cross-section
As briefly mentioned in section 3.1.1, the cross-section elements are not modelled in detail
in the proposed algorithm. Instead, most of the costs related to the cross-section are
consolidated into a single length-dependent unit cost, measuring all infrastructure costs
that are not dependent on the geographical location of the railway (e.g. superstructure,
signalling, catenary, etc.). It has to be noted that earthworks costs are heavily location
dependent, so they cannot be simplified into a single kilometre cost (cf. 5.2.2 for details
on the earthworks cost calculation).
The physical dimensions of the cross-section that are most relevant for the decfinition of
the model are summarised in figure 4.1. The most important dimension to be defined in
the alignment optimisation model is the total width of the alignment. The width is needed
to calculate the total footprint of the alignment on the surrounding land, which influences
many location dependent costs and constraints (cf. 4.1.3 for further details), as well as the
earthworks cost calculation. With reasonable approximation, the width of the alignment
at the base of the superstructure can be assumed to be fixed for a given design speed.
Meanwhile, the total width including earthworks and drainage is variable, as it depends
on the height of the alignment relative to the ground level.
Figure 4.1: Relevant cross-section features in alignment optimisation models
In addition to the width of the railway, the vertical clearances are also important when
21
==PAGE:30==
building a realistic optimisation model, as they affect the design, and thus the cost and
location, of bridges, tunnels and underpasses. The minimum clearance above the railway
is mostly dictated by the chosen railway clearance profile, which is defined in the railway
norms,[37] while the minimum clearance under the railway is mostly dictated by the design
height of the superstructure and substructure (i.e. the civil works).
4.1.2
Track geometry
The railway norms and standards define a set of constraints to the alignment geome-
try that needs to be followed to yield a feasible railway alignment. In the danish case,
most geometrical constraints are defined in the standard Sporregler 1987.[5] The follow-
ing paragraphs explain the most important geometrical constraints that are defined in said
standard, taking the scope of the project into account. The shown constraints are valid
under the assumption that the railway has a design speed of 250 km/h and that no freight
traffic is allowed.
Tangent track
The length of the tangent segments (LS), measured between the end points of the adja-
cent curves, must be at least:
LS ≥0.67 · V
for 200 < V ≤250 km/h
(4.1)
In exceptional circumstances, the value can be lowered to:
LS ≥0.40 · V
for 200 < V ≤250 km/h
(4.2)
Circular curves
The minimum curve radius Rmin depends on two factors: 1) the design speed of the align-
ment, which for the purpose of this project is assumed to be constant along the whole study
area; 2) the cant and cant deficiency of the curve. The empirical relationship between the
curve radius R, the speed V and the balanced cant ha is explained in section 3.1.2, and
in particular by the equation 3.3.
The design standards suggest a desirable curve radius equal to:
h = 8 · V 2
R
⇔R = 8 · V 2
h
for h ≤115 mm
(4.3)
While the minimum curve radius Rmin is defined as:
h + I = 11.8 ·
V 2
Rmin
⇔Rmin = 11.8 ·
V 2
h + I
for h ≤160 mm, I ≤100 mm
(4.4)
Where h = 160 mm, I = 100 mm are the maximum allowed cant and cant deficiency
under normal circumstances. In exceptional cases, the maximum cant deficiency can be
increased to I = 153 mm, thus decreasing the minimum curve radius.
The length of the curve arcs (LC) must be at least:
LC ≥0.67 · V
for 200 < V ≤250 km/h
(4.5)
In exceptional circumstances, the value can be lowered to:
22
==PAGE:31==
LC ≥0.40 · V
for 200 < V ≤250 km/h
(4.6)
Transition curves and superelevation ramps
The preferred transition curve type in the Danish design standards is the clothoid, so the
listed requirements are based on the assumption that clothoids are being used. Under
normal circumstances (i.e. without applying for an exemption), clothoid transition curves
must be long enough to comply with the following two requirements:
dI
dt = ∆I · V
3.6 · L ≤50 mm/s
for 200 < V ≤250 km/h
(4.7)
L ≥20 m
(4.8)
Where dI
dt is the rate of change of the cant deficiency per unit of time, ∆I is the change in
cant deficiency between the two elements that are connected by the transition curve and
L is length of the transition curve.
As the superelevation ramps are assumed to coincide with the transition curves, the fol-
lowing additional requirements apply to the transition curve:
dh
dt = ∆h · V
3.6 · L ≤50 mm/s
for 200 < V ≤250 km/h
(4.9)
s = ∆h
L ≤2.0 ‰
(4.10)
Formula 4.9 limits the rate of change of the cant ( dh
dt ) per unit of time, while formula 4.10
limits the slope (s) of the cant, i.e. its change per unit of length.
In an effort to simplify the implementation of the alignment optimisation model and its
solution algorithm, this project does not include the transition curves in the model. In
order to minimise the effects on the loss of realism of such a compromise, the project
considers the following geometrical properties of clothoid transition curves. Figure 4.2
shows the most important elements and measures of a clothoid transition curve. The
x-axis in the figure coincides with the direction of the tangent segment preceding the
curve. The tangent segment, which is not shown in the figure, ends at point O, which is
consequently also the starting point of the transition curve. The transition curve itself is
marked with the letter L, and its endpoint corresponds to the starting point of the circular
curve marked with radius R in the figure.
When the transition curve L is fitted to the alignment, the circular curve R shifts its position
along the y-axis of the figure. The displacement, marked as ∆R in the figure, is called the
Shift (S). In addition to being displaced, the circular curve arc is also shortened by τ · R.
The projection of this length on the x-axis is equal to X
2 −∆X. Meanwhile, the shortening
of the tangent track along the x-axis is equal to X
2 + ∆X in the figure. The sum of the
shortening of the circular curve and of the tangent track is equal to the projection X of the
length L of the transition curve on the x-axis.
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.2: Geometrical features of a clothoid [38]
If the distances ∆X and ∆R are sufficiently small, the length of the tangent segments
adjacent to the curve is shortened by approximately L
2 , i.e. half of the transition curve
length. Additionally, considering the relation between the transition curve length L and
the circular curve radius R shown in 4.11, it is possible to conclude that the maximum
length of the transition curve is achieved at the minimum curve radius.
L ∝1
R
(4.11)
Considering all of the properties described above, it is possible to determine the approxi-
mate value of ∆X with equation 4.12 (cf. [38]). The calculations assume the worst case
scenario, which is the highest possible value of ∆X within the design parameters of the
project (i.e. V = 250 km/h with exception on normal regulations). In the described worst
case, the radius is assumed to be Rmin = 2400 m and the transition curve length is
Lmax = 230 m. With these parameters, the displacement ∆X is approximately equal to:
∆X ≈
L3
max
16 · R2
min
=
(230 m)3
24 · (2400 m)2 = 0.13 m
(4.12)
Which means that with the worst case design parameters the dimension ∆X is negligible
and it is thus reasonable to assume that the length of the tangent track sections Ls shrinks
at most by approximately Lmax, considering that each tangent section is connected to
two different transition curves. It can be concluded from the above that the transition
curves can be omitted with reasonable approximation, if the minimum length of the tangent
sections Ls is increased by Lmax. With such a provision, it is possible to fit the transition
curves ex post while still guaranteeing sufficiently long tangent sections to avoid overlap
between successive curves.
In addition to the above observations regarding the relation between transition curve
length and tangent track length, it is also important to consider the effects of the lack
of transition curves on the alignment costs. The calculations assume the worst case
24
==PAGE:33==
scenario, which is the highest possible value of ∆R within the design parameters of the
project (i.e. V = 250 km/h with exception on normal regulations). In the described
worst case, the radius is assumed to be Rmin = 2400 m and the transition curve length
is Lmax = 230 m. With these parameters, the shift S (distance ∆R in figure 4.2) of the
clothoid is approximately equal to (cf. [38]):
S ≈
L2
max
24 · Rmin
=
(230 m)2
24 · 2400 m = 0.92 m
(4.13)
Which means that if the transition curves were fitted into the alignment ex post, the re-
sulting offset of the alignment on the horizontal plane would be minimal, in this case at
most 1 meter. As a consequence, the costs that depend on the location of the alignment
would also change minimally. It can thus be concluded that, at the conditions listed above,
an alignment model without transition curves can yield a reasonable approximation of a
feasible alignment.
Vertical alignment
In the case of passenger only railways, the gradient g of the tangent sections of the vertical
alignment has to comply with the following:
g ≤12.5 ‰
(4.14)
g ≤25.0 ‰
for max 10 km
(4.15)
g ≤35.0 ‰
for max 6 km
(4.16)
Furthermore, the vertical curve radius RV and arc length LV are subject to the following
requirements:
RV ≥0.35 · V 2
for 200 < V ≤250 km/h
(4.17)
20000 m ≤RV ≤40000 m
for 200 < V ≤250 km/h
(4.18)
LV ≥20m
(4.19)
4.1.3
Terrain model
As mentioned in the introduction, one of the most critical functions that a good alignment
optimisation model needs to fulfil is the ability to take the relation between the topogra-
phy of the terrain (i.e. the elevation model) and the geometrical constraints into account.
In fact, if all terrain features are ignored, the problem becomes trivial but also highly un-
realistic, as the best solution would become a simple straight line from start to finish.
Conversely, when the terrain is taken into account, the feasible solutions become much
more circuitous, and thus non-trivial.
In practice, the terrain is modelled via a digital elevation model (DEM), a data structure
that describes the altitude of the surface of the study area. The addition of a terrain model
renders the solution space 3-dimensional, thus making the vertical alignment constraints
described in section 4.1.2 relevant. Of particular relevance is the interaction between
the gradient constraints 4.14 - 4.16 and the elevation model. These constraints are the
main reason for the circuitousness of the feasible alignments, as many of the more direct
alignment alternatives will inevitably become infeasible because of the excessive gradient
25
==PAGE:34==
(steepness). This is especially true for railway alignments, which have particularly strict
gradient requirements, compared to highway alignments.
Another important consequence of the addition of a digital elevation model is its effect
on the estimation of the costs of the alignment. In particular, the elevation model makes
it possible to calculate a detailed estimate of the the earthworks costs, as the difference
between the elevation of the railway track and the surrounding ground level is a funda-
mental piece of information to be able to do so. In addition to the earthwork costs, the
calculation of many other location-dependent costs (cf. 4.1.4) depends on the knowledge
about the exact area footprint of the railway at a particular location, which again depends
on the vertical distance between the ground level and the alignment.
4.1.4
Area features
In addition to the geometrical constraints and the earthworks costs, the alignment model
can be expanded by adding many of the other costs and constraints that play a role in
choosing a railway alignment. Most of the additional costs and constraints can be repre-
sented as area features (polygons) or line features. The first category comprises a high
number of different features, like protected nature, built-up areas, relevant geological and
environmental conditions (e.g. soft soil, flood risk areas, landslide prone areas, etc.) and
natural features like lakes, lagoons, and marshland.
All these features can be represented in the model as either area costs or soft constraints.
Soft constraints are modelled by adding a penalty cost if the alignment traverses the area
covered by a certain feature, while area costs are modelled by adding a cost per unit of
area that the alignment traverses. As the area costs depend on the physical location of
the alignment in the study area, they are often also called location-dependent costs.
In some cases, adding a third vertical dimension to some of the area constraints may be
useful, thus making the area feature into a polyhedron. For example, this may be the
case when modelling tunnels, where the geological conditions underneath the surface
can be relevant with regard to feasibility and cost. Such modification is out of the scope of
this project, because of time constrains and lack of available data. Therefore, the project
focuses on 2-dimensional area features only.
4.1.5
Line features
In contrast with the area features, most linear features require to take the vertical dimen-
sion into consideration, as they constrain the position of the vertical alignment. Exam-
ples of linear features are rivers and other waterways, energy infrastructure (power lines,
pipelines) and transportation infrastructure (roads, other railways).
All these features can be represented as a constraint that puts a minimum clearance (i.e.,
distance) over and/or under the features themselves, so that the alignment must pass
over or under them. This constraint can if necessary be modelled as a soft constraint that
adds a penalty cost if the clearance requirements are violated. In addition, an extra cost
can be added to the alignment, depending on the type of crossing (bridge, underpass,
etc.). The factors that determine the exact value of the minimum clearance are discussed
further in section 4.1.1.
Because of time constrains, the model does not include line features. If the model were
to be expanded, the highest priority features to add would be the waterways and road
networks, as these features are the most common and thus must constraining for the
definition of the railway alignment.
26
==PAGE:35==
4.1.6
Summary of the model requirements
Building on all the cost factors and constraints that are discussed in the previous sec-
tions, it is possible to imagine a generic alignment optimisation model that considers and
incorporates all of said factors. A representation of such a theoretical model is shown
below. The model does not intend to be an accurate mathematical representation of the
problem, but simply a useful aid to summarise all the most important factors that need to
be considered.
Minimise CT = CA + CL + CP
Subject to:
−Horizontal geometry constraints
−Gradient constraint
−V ertical geometry constraints
−Inaccessible regions
−Alignment continuity constraint
The cost function of a typical alignment optimisation model is defined as the sum (CT ) of all
location-dependent costs (CA), alignment length-dependent costs (CL) and penalty costs
(CP ). Note that most of the listed constraints can be modelled either as a hard constraint
or as a penalty cost, depending on the type of model and solution method chosen and on
the priority given to the design constraint in question. As the solution algorithm proposed
in this study is a genetic algorithm, the preferred method to handle the constraints is to
relax them to soft constraints.
An important additional constraint is the last one listed in the model, the alignment conti-
nuity constraint. This constraint is the only one that cannot be relaxed and modelled as
a penalty cost, as it ensures that the alignment is continuous, i.e. without any gaps, a
fundamental and non-negotiable requirement for a railway alignment.
27
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Representation of variables and data
4.2.1
Spatial data representation
Spatial data plays a vital role when designing railway alignments, as many important
factors are related to the topography of the area traversed by the railway and on other
location-dependent factors. To render the model less computationally and memory in-
tensive, and due to the discrete nature of many data sources, it isn’t always feasible to
represent all spatial data as continuous. Therefore, the spatial data is instead represented
as a set of discrete values.
Figure 4.3: Grid representation of the study area
In order to do so, the study area is divided into a 2D grid of square cells of a fixed size, each
of which contains a single value for each type of spatial data. The size of the cells is called
the resolution of the data. Each cell is identifiable by its x and y coordinates, which are
measured from the lower left corner of the grid (Figure 4.3). The present project assumes
that all spatial data is discrete and that the data is represented as explained above.
It has to be noted that, depending on the chosen model and solution algorithm, the align-
ment isn’t necessary tied to the grid system (cf. figure 4.3, segments S to E). It is in fact
possible to utilise continuous variables to represent the alignment even if the spatial data
is discrete. Such an approach has the advantage of allowing for a more fine grained, and
thus more precise, alignment. This project does indeed make use of continuous decision
variables to represent the alignment.
4.2.2
Backtracking and non-backtracking alignments
An important feature of some railway (and road) alignments is the presence of back-
tracking sections in their horizontal alignment. Empirically, railway alignments can be
described as non-backtracking if each successive point of intersection gets closer to the
end point E than the previous. In contrast to that, backtracking alignments have certain
sections where two or more consecutive points of intersection move away from the end
point, forming a switchback.
28
==PAGE:37==
In mathematical terms, non-backtracking alignments always intersect with the lines N
that cut perpendicularly through segment SE exactly once (cf. figure 4.4, left), while
backtracking alignments can have multiple intersections with the same line N (cf. figure
4.4, right). The segment SE is defined as the line segment that connects the starting point
S of the alignment with its end point E, while the lines N are from now on defined with the
expression of ”cutting lines” for brevity.
Figure 4.4: Non-backtracking (left) vs Backtracking (right) alignment
In real world scenarios, backtracking alignments may be desirable if the terrain has very
steep changes in gradient that force the alignment to be more circuitous in order to re-
duce the gradient, or if there are many impassable areas to be avoided. An additional
advantage of backtracking alignments is the absence of constraints to the placement of
the points of intersection (cf. figure 4.5, right), which were bound to the cutting lines in the
non-backtracking representation (cf. figure 4.5, left).
Figure 4.5: Non-backtracking (left) vs Backtracking (right) decision variables
The main disadvantage of the backtracking representation is the additional complexity of
the variables that describe the position of the points of intersection. In non-backtracking
alignments, a single variable, the distance di along the cutting line from the segment SE
to the point of intersection, is sufficient (cf. figure 4.5, left). In backtracking alignments,
the points of intersection can be freely located in the whole study area, which means that
29
==PAGE:38==
two variables, the coordinates x and y on the horizontal plane, are now needed to repre-
sent the points of intersection instead of one. The added complexity of having an extra
variable manifests itself both in terms of implementation complexity and in time/memory
complexity. Another possible issue, which can be mitigated with a sufficiently robust im-
plementation, arises from the additional degrees of freedom given to the placement of
the points of intersection. If the model and solution algorithm implementation aren’t well
tuned, there is a higher risk of generating bad solutions which are too circuitous and thus
sub-optimal.
For the purpose of this project, a non-backtracking alignment model is deemed sufficient,
as the project area is not mountainous and thus has a relatively smooth topography, which
limits the utility of the backtracking representation and doesn’t justify its added complexity.
30
==PAGE:39==
5
Optimisation model
The purpose of this chapter is to illustrate the detailed characteristics of the proposed
alignment optimisation model, which is then solved via the genetic algorithm presented in
chapter 6. This chapter consists of two main parts. The first one, section 5.1, describes
how the 3-dimensional alignment can be described mathematically as a function of the
decision variables of the model, while the second part, section 5.2, describes the cost
function and constraints of the model.
All spatial information is assumed to be stored in a 2D matrix format, as defined in section
4.2.1. The proposed alignment representation is 3-dimensional and non-backtracking (cf.
4.2.2), and is represented via points of intersection (cf. 3.1.2). Both the horizontal and
vertical alignments are composed of line segments and circular curves.
5.1
Representation of the alignment
5.1.1
Piece-wise linear horizontal alignment
Assuming that the alignments are non-backtracking (cf. section 4.2.2 for details), a piece-
wise linear horizontal alignment between the points S and E in figure 5.1 can be repre-
sented simply by utilising an array of scalar decision variables di, one for each point of
intersection Pi.
Figure 5.1: Representation of the decision variables in 2D alignments
As shown in the figure, this is achieved by first linking the start (S) and end (E) points
with a line segment. Afterwards, the segment SE is divided in n + 1 equally spaced
(with spacing length Ds) segments by placing n cutting lines perpendicularly to it. The
intersection between segment SE and each cutting line is called Oi (origin of the cutting
line). Since the starting and ending points of the alignment, as well as the number of
cutting lines n, are determined before the alignment optimisation model is solved, it is
possible to calculate the coordinates (xOi, yOi) of each point Oi in advance. Therefore,
these coordinates are not a decision variable but only a parameter.
31
==PAGE:40==
The coordinates of each point Oi can be calculated by adding the horizontal and vertical
components of the distance from starting point S to Oi to the coordinates of the starting
point. These components are calculated by taking the distance between S and E and
multiplying it with the ratio between the current cutting line i and the total number n + 1 of
segments of length Ds (cf. figure 5.1), as shown in equations 5.1.
xOi
yOi

=
xS
yS

+
i
n + 1
xE −xS
yE −yS

(5.1)
Once the coordinates of points Oi are determined, it is possible to express the position of
each point of intersection Pi as the distance di to the intersection Oi between the cutting
line i and segment SE.
Figure 5.2: Relation between the segment SE and the angle θ
Since the set of distances di are the only decision variables in the model that describe the
horizontal alignment, it is necessary to define the exact mathematical relation between
the variables di and the coordinates of the points of intersection Pi. As shown in 5.2, this
is achieved by adding together the coordinates of the points Oi and the horizontal and
vertical components of the distances di from Oi to Pi.
xPi
yPi

=
xOi
yOi

+ di
cos θ
sin θ

(5.2)
Note that the angle θ is defined in 5.3 as the arctangent of the slope of segment SE plus
90°. It is also important to note that the value of di is positive in the upward direction from
Oi, and negative in the downward direction.
θ = θ′ + 90° = tan−1
 yE −yS
xE −xS

+ 90°
(5.3)
32
==PAGE:41==
The geometrical relation between the angles θ, θ′ and the slope of segment SE is shown
more clearly in figure 5.2. In the shown example, di is negative, as it lies beneath point
Oi. When using equations 5.2, the multiplication of di with the trigonometric functions
ensures that xPi ≥xOi and yPi ≤yOi.
Note that it’s useful to define the angle θ as θ′ + 90° because θ is the angle between the
horizontal axis and all the n cutting lines perpendicular to SE. This definition is utilised in
section 5.2.1 to define a mathematical expression for the maximum and minimum bounds
of the decision variables di.
5.1.2
Three-dimensional piece-wise linear alignment
Section 5.1.1 defined the relation between the decision variables di of the horizontal
alignment and the x and y coordinates of the points of intersection. In order to define
a 3-dimensional alignment, it also is necessary to add a decision variable for the vertical
dimension.
Figure 5.3 shows the representation of a 3-dimensional non-backtracking alignment. Sim-
ilarly to the cutting lines in the 2D alignment case, the alignment is represented by first
defining a set of cutting planes that are orthogonal to the segment SE, and then placing the
points of intersection Pi, one on each cutting plane. The properties of non-backtracking
alignments explained in section 4.2.2 are still valid for cutting planes, which means that
the alignment crosses each cutting plane exactly once. A piece-wise linear 3D alignment
can thus be generated by connecting each successive point of intersection with line seg-
ments.
Figure 5.3: Representation of the decision variables in 3D alignments
To mathematically define the 3-dimensional alignment, it is necessary to add an additional
decision variable for each cutting plane. The distance from the points of origin Oi on the
horizontal plane is still defined with variables di, as seen in the case of the 2-dimensional
alignment. In addition to that, a new set of decision variables zi is introduced to represent
the altitude of the points of intersection Pi. These variables are placed on the z-axis of
the coordinate system.
33
==PAGE:42==
The relation between the decision variables and the coordinates of the points of intersec-
tion Pi can then be expressed by expanding on equations 5.2, yielding the set of equations
shown below (5.4).


xPi
yPi
zPi

=


xOi
yOi
0

+


di · cos θ
di · sin θ
zi


(5.4)
The equations make it clear that, contrary to the xPi and yPi coordinates, the zPi coordinate
of the points of intersection Pi is not dependent on the z coordinate of the points of origin
Oi.
5.1.3
Geometrical elements of the alignment
While the approach described in sections 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 is sufficient to represent piece-
wise linear alignments, real world railway alignments are composed of more than just line
segments, as described in section 3.1.2. This section focuses on deriving the equations
of the geometrical elements of a realistic alignment. The formulas derived in this section
are based on [39].
Horizontal alignment
In the horizontal alignment, circular curves are inserted at each point of intersection Pi as
shown in figure 5.4, to achieve smooth transitions between line segments. The curves
are inserted if the absolute value of the intersection angle α is greater than 0°. If the
angle is exactly 0°, no curve is necessary as the following line segment will simply be the
continuation of the first.
Figure 5.4: Relation between the intersection angle (αi) and the curve radius (Ri)
The minimum value of the curve radius Ri is determined as explained in section 4.1.2,
while the relation between the intersection angle αi and the points of intersection is defined
in equation 5.5. Together with equations 5.4, it is thus possible to express the angle αi as
a function of the decision variables di.
34
==PAGE:43==
αi = cos−1



⃗Pi −⃗Pi−1

·

⃗Pi+1 −⃗Pi

⃗Pi −⃗Pi−1

⃗Pi+1 −⃗Pi



(5.5)
Equation 5.5 derives from the definition of the dot product between two vectors. Equation
5.6 shows an inverse function of the dot product ⃗a·⃗b where the angle α has been isolated.
α = cos−1
 
⃗a ·⃗b
∥⃗a∥∥⃗b∥
!
(5.6)
The definitions of vectors ⃗a and ⃗b and their respective magnitude, as a function of the
points of intersection ⃗Pi, are shown in 5.7 - 5.10. Equation 5.5 is then obtained by substi-
tution in equation 5.6. Note that the origin of the vectors is assumed to coincide with the
origin of the coordinate system.
⃗a = ⃗Pi −⃗Pi−1
(5.7)
⃗b = ⃗Pi+1 −⃗Pi
(5.8)
∥⃗a∥=
⃗Pi −⃗Pi−1

(5.9)
∥⃗b∥=
⃗Pi+1 −⃗Pi

(5.10)
Equations 5.11 - 5.17 show the definition of the geometrical elements of the circular
curves. These definitions are utilised in many of the constraints and cost components
of the model, as well as in the alignment generation algorithm (cf. section 5.1.4). Figure
5.5 (left) shows an example of how the geometrical elements in the equations are indexed.
The distance LT (i) between the start (Ci) / end (Ti) point of the circular curve and the
point of intersection Pi can be calculated using equation 5.11.
LT (i) = Ri · tan αi
2
(5.11)
The length of the curve arc LC of each circular curve, assuming that the angle αi is ex-
pressed in radians, is equal to:
LC(i) = Ri · αi
(5.12)
The vector of the starting point of each curve arc ⃗Ci, i.e. the extreme of the arc closest to
the starting point S of the alignment, is equal to:
⃗Ci =
xCi
yCi

= ⃗Pi + LT (i)
⃗Pi−1 −⃗Pi
⃗Pi−1 −⃗Pi

(5.13)
The vector of the ending point of each curve arc ⃗Ti, i.e. the extreme of the arc closest to
the ending point E of the alignment, is equal to:
35
==PAGE:44==
⃗Ti =
xTi
yTi

= ⃗Pi + LT (i)
⃗Pi+1 −⃗Pi
⃗Pi+1 −⃗Pi

(5.14)
The length of the line segment LS of between two successive circular curves, as a function
of the vectors of the start/end points of the curve arcs, can be calculated as:
LS(i) =
 ⃗Ci −⃗Ti−1

(5.15)
Another important feature of each circular curve is the centre point of the circle (δi). In
order to calculate the coordinates of this point it is useful to first calculate the coordinates
of the middle point Mi between points Ci and Ti. As it can be observed in figure 5.4, this
point has the useful property of being located on line segment Piδi. This property can
be utilised to calculate coordinates of point Mi via the principle of proportionality. The
coordinates of vector ⃗Mi of the middle point are equal to:
⃗Mi =
xMi
yMi

= 1
2( ⃗Ci + ⃗Ti)
(5.16)
Given the vectors ⃗Pi and ⃗Mi, the radius of the curve Ri and the angle αi, it is then possible
to compute the coordinates of vector ⃗δi as shown in 5.17. Note that the ratio of ∥−−→
Piδi∥
over ∥−−−→
PiMi∥scales up the vector −−−→
PiMi to the length of segment Piδi.
⃗δi =
xδi
yδi

= ⃗Pi +
−−→
Piδi

−−−→
PiMi
−−−→
PiMi

where
−−→
Piδi
 = Piδi =
Ri
cos αi
2
,
−−−→
PiMi = ⃗Mi −⃗Pi
(5.17)
In the case of the horizontal alignment, adding the circular curves is not a sufficient con-
dition to yield a feasible alignment, as transition curves are usually needed between the
tangent segments and the circular curves (cf. section 3.1.2). As argued in section 4.1.2,
the transition curves can be omitted in this project, given the conditions explained in said
section. The omission of the transition curves helps reduce the computation time and is
thus deemed to be a reasonable trade-off.
Vertical alignment
The curve fitting procedure for the vertical alignment is similar, but the points of intersection
and coordinate system to be used are different, as the alignment is located on the HZ
plane (cf. section 3.1.2). Since the h coordinate of the HZ plane depends on the length
of the horizontal alignment, it is necessary to place the points of intersection Vi of the
vertical alignment somewhere on the horizontal alignment, taking into consideration the
presence of the horizontal circular curves.
To achieve that, each vertical point of intersection Vi is defined as lying on the middle
point of its correspondent horizontal circular arc LC(i) (cf. figure 5.5, left). Note that
this definition implies that each the vertical curve Vi is located near a horizontal point of
intersection Pi and that no vertical curves can be present between two horizontal curves.
36
==PAGE:45==
This assumption is in line with the overall philosophy of only having changes in direction
at the cutting planes.
Figure 5.5: Important geometrical elements of horizontal (left) and vertical (right) align-
ments
In order to further simplify the calculations, the elevation of the alignment at each point
Vi is defined as being the same height zi present at the points of intersection Pi. This
assumption is reasonable, given that the points Vi represent the vertical alignment and
are thus utilised for all the elevation-related calculations. The coordinates of vector ⃗Vi
on the horizontal plane can thus be defined as a function of the coordinates of vector ⃗δi
(centre of the circular curve) plus a vector of length equal to the radius Ri of the curve (cf.
5.18), that lies on the segment that connects ⃗δi with ⃗Pi.
xVi
yVi

=
xδi
yδi

+ Ri
⃗Pi −⃗δi
⃗Pi −⃗δi

(5.18)
Knowing the position of the points of intersection Vi on the horizontal plane XY is not
sufficient, given that the vertical alignment lies on the HZ plane. Therefore, the coordi-
nates on the HZ plane also need to be defined. The zVi coordinate is simply defined as
the zi decision variable, while the hVi coordinate needs to be defined as a function of the
horizontal alignment.
hVi = 0
if i = 0
(5.19)
hVi =
i
X
k=1
LS(k) +
i−1
X
k=1
(Rk · αk) + 1
2 (Ri · αi)
if 1 ≤i ≤n
(5.20)
hVi =
n+1
X
k=1
LS(k) +
n
X
k=1
(Rk · αk)
if i = n + 1
(5.21)
Equations 5.19 - 5.21 define the value of the hVi coordinate. The value of the hVi coor-
dinate at the start point S = V0 of the alignment is equal to 0 (cf. 5.19), while at the end
point E = Vn+1 it is equal to the sum of the lengths of all line segments and curve arcs
in the alignment (cf. 5.21). Meanwhile, the value of hVi at each cutting plane is equal to
37
==PAGE:46==
the sum of all preceding line segments and curve arcs plus half of the curve arc of the
current point of intersection (cf. 5.20). Once the coordinates hVi and zVi of each point
of intersection Vi of the vertical alignment are known, it is possible to insert the vertical
curve arcs by utilising the same equations 5.5 - 5.17 utilised for the horizontal alignment,
keeping in mind that the variables Pi need to be substituted by variables Vi (cf. figure 5.5,
right).
Another important geometrical property that is unique to the vertical alignment is the gra-
dient gi of the tangent segments. Taking figure 5.5 (right) as a reference, the gradient of
a tangent segment ViVi+1 is defined as the ratio between the height difference zVi+1 −zVi
and the distance dv(i) between the two vertical points of intersection (cf. 5.22 - 5.23).
gi = 1000 ·
zVi+1 −zVi
dv(i)
(5.22)
dv(i) = hVi+1 −hVi
(5.23)
The gradient in the equation is expressed in per mille, as is usual in the railway sector.
5.1.4
Curve radius determination
The geometric elements described in section 5.1.3 can be determined for each point of
intersection (Pi, Vi) using the intersection angle αi and minimum curve radius Rmin ap-
propriate for the design speed of the railway (cf. section 3.1.2). This simple approach is
not viable if the distance between two points of intersection is too short, as the tangent
section between the two curves risks to become shorter than allowed. In the worst case
two successive curves might overlap, creating a discontinuity in the alignment.
In order to ensure the continuity of the alignment, which is a hard constraint in the model,
the radii of the curves need to be decreased. This causes the radii to become smaller
than the minimum radius Rmin, because the continuity of the alignment takes precedence
over the minimum radius constraint. The violation of the minimum radius constraint is then
modelled as a penalty cost in the cost function (cf. section 5.2.2).
The issue of the tangent section length is described mathematically in inequality 5.24.
The inequalities state that the sum of the segments LT of the two curves, plus the extra
allowance for the transition curve fitting Lmax (cf. section 4.1.2) must be smaller or equal
to the segment between the two points of intersection PiPi+1. By substitution of equation
5.11 into the LT variables, the inequality can be expressed as shown in 5.25.
LT (i) + LT (i + 1) + Lmax ≤PiPi+1
(5.24)
Ri · tan αi
2 + Ri+1 · tan αi+1
2
+ Lmax ≤PiPi+1
(5.25)
Assuming that the radii of the two curves adjacent to the tangent section are decreased
equally, the radii can be set equal to expression 5.26. The equation is derived by isolating
Ri = Ri+1 in the previous inequality.
Ri = Ri+1 =
PiPi+1 −Lmax
tan(αi/2) + tan(αi+1/2)
(5.26)
38
==PAGE:47==
When this procedure is applied to the entire alignment, it is better to determine the the
reduced radii of the most critical section first. The procedure is then repeated on the sec-
ond most critical section and so on (cf. figure 5.6), until no section is left with a deficiency
in the tangent segment length D(i) (cf. equation 5.27).
Figure 5.6: Radius determination algorithm
If the radius has already been reduced in one of two adjacent curves in a previous iteration,
the biggest of the two radii is reduced (cf. equations 5.28 - 5.29).
Di = Ri · tan αi
2 + Ri+1 · tan αi+1
2
+ Lmax −PiPi+1
(5.27)
Ri = PiPi+1 −Lmax −Ri+1 · tan(αi+1/2)
tan(αi/2)
(5.28)
Ri+1 = PiPi+1 −Lmax −Ri · tan(αi/2)
tan(αi+1/2)
(5.29)
The detailed procedure of the radius determination algorithm for the horizontal alignment
is described below. The algorithm can be equally applied to the vertical alignment, by
substituting points Pi with Vi in the equations, utilising the minimum vertical curve radius
instead of the horizontal, and removing the Lmax term from equations 5.26 - 5.29, as the
vertical alignment does not have transition curves.
Radius determination algorithm
0. Initialise
(a) Set all the radii equal to Rmin.
(b) Calculate the tangent segment length deficiency D(i) for all the line segments
n + 1, except the start and end segments i = 0 and i = n + 1, using equation
5.27.
(c) Save the index Ii of the most critical tangent section. If D(i) ≤0 for all sections,
exit the algorithm.
39
==PAGE:48==
1. Select the two curves adjacent to the most critical section Ii:
• If Ri = Ri+1, use equation 5.26 to determine the new radii. Then update the
deficiencies D(i −1) and D(i + 1) of the adjacent tangent segments.
• If Ri > Ri+1, use equation 5.28 to determine the new radius. Then update the
deficiency D(i −1) of the preceding tangent segment.
• If Ri < Ri+1, use equation 5.29 to determine the new radius. Then update the
deficiency D(i + 1) of the following tangent segment.
2. Update the index Ii of the most critical tangent section. If D(Ii) > 0, go to step 1,
otherwise exit the algorithm.
5.1.5
Overview of the alignment representation
As seen in the previous sections, multiple steps are necessary to go from the decision
variables di and zi to a complete, continuous alignment composed of line segments and
circular curves. The following procedure summarises the all the necessary steps, in order
to give a high level overview of the whole process.
Alignment representation procedure
1. Determine the horizontal alignment of the railway.
(a) The coordinates of the horizontal points of intersection Pi in the 3-dimensional
space are calculated as a function of the decision variables di and zi, using
formula 5.4.
(b) The intersection angle αi of each point Pi is calculated using formula 5.5.
(c) The radius Ri of each curve is determined by using the ”Radius determination
algorithm”.
(d) Other important measurements, to be used in the cost function and constraints
of the model, are calculated in section 5.1.3.
2. Determine the vertical alignment of the railway.
(a) The coordinates of the vertical points of intersection Vi in the 3-dimensional
space are defined using formula 5.18 for the x and y coordinates. The elevation
coordinate z is defined as being equal to the decision variable zi.
(b) The coordinates of the vertical points of intersection Vi on the HZ-plane are
determined using formulas 5.19 - 5.21 for the h coordinate, while the coordinate
z is defined as being equal to the decision variable zi.
(c) The intersection angle of each point Vi is calculated using formula 5.5.
(d) The radius RV (i) of each curve is determined by using the ”Radius determina-
tion algorithm”.
(e) Other important measurements, to be used in the cost function and constraints
of the model, are calculated in section 5.1.3.
40
==PAGE:49==
5.2
Alignment optimisation model
5.2.1
Model constraints
As the model is to be solved via a genetic algorithm, the number of hard constraints
is limited. The alignment representation procedure described in section 5.1.5 implicitly
enforces the continuity constraint on the generated alignment, as it fits curve radii that
avoid discontinuities. In addition, the algorithm also tries to minimise the violations of the
minimum horizontal and vertical radius constraints by choosing the biggest possible radii
that don’t create a discontinuous alignment.
The only set of constraints that is explicitly modelled are the decision variable bounds,
which limit the minimum and maximum value of the decision variables di. The constraints
are enforced during the generation of the initial population and the mutation operations in
the genetic algorithm, creating an upper (diU) and lower (diL) bound to the allowed values
of the decision variables. Note that the zi decision variables are not explicitly bounded,
but their value is instead limited by the gradient penalty cost (cf. section 5.2.2).
Figure 5.7: Bounds of the decision variables di
The value of the upper and lower bounds can be determined based on two main cases
(cf. figure 5.7). If the angle θ between the x-axis and the cutting line is 0° < θ < 90° ,
the upper and lower bounds can be determined as shown in functions 5.30. Note that θ
is determined as shown in equation 5.3.
diL = max
xO −xOi
cos θ
,
yO −yOi
sin θ

diU = min
xmax −xOi
cos θ
,
ymax −yOi
sin θ

(5.30)
If the angle θ between the x-axis and the cutting line is 90° < θ < 180°, the upper and
lower bounds can be determined as shown in functions 5.31.
diL = max
xmax −xOi
cos θ
,
yO −yOi
sin θ

diU = min
xO −xOi
cos θ
,
ymax −yOi
sin θ

(5.31)
41
==PAGE:50==
Note that the calculation method for the two cases changes depending on where the
cutting line intersects with the boundaries of the study area, hence the min/max function.
As exemplified by figure 5.7, the cutting line may intersect with the x- or y-axis, depending
of their relative position.
In addition to the two cases described above, two additional edge cases need to be taken
into account. If the angle is θ = 90°, the cutting line is parallel to the y-axis. In this case
the bounds are calculated as shown in equations 5.32.
diL = yO −yOi
diU = ymax −yOi
(5.32)
If the angle is θ = 0° or θ = 180°, the cutting line is parallel to the x-axis. In this case the
value of the decision variable increases when moving right of the segment SE, and the
bounds are calculated as shown in equations 5.33.
diL = xO −xOi
diU = xmax −xOi
(5.33)
All the remaining constraints, e.g. the minimum element length constraints, the mini-
mum radius constraints, the gradient constraint and the inaccessible areas constraints
are treated as soft constraints, and are added to the cost function as penalty costs (cf.
section 5.2.2).
5.2.2
Cost function
The cost function is particularly important when solving the model with a genetic algo-
rithm, as the fitness computation of each individual depends on it. The cost function can
be divided in multiple components. A first distinction can be made between the actual
monetary costs and the penalty costs. The penalty costs need to dominate the actual
monetary costs in order to push the solution algorithm towards selecting solutions that
don’t incur in penalties.
Within the actual monetary costs, a further distinction can be made between the location-
dependent costs, such as earthworks costs (cut/fill balance) and area costs, and the
length-dependent costs, such as the costs of the railway superstructure. Meanwhile, the
penalty costs can be divided into penalty costs related to the violated geometrical con-
straints and penalty costs related to the violation of inaccessible region constraints. The
precise determination of each type of cost is discussed in detail in the following subsec-
tions.
Length-dependent costs
All the length-dependent cost parameters of the alignment can be added together into a
single cost parameter KL, which expresses all the costs that are directly proportional to
the length of the alignment only, and not on other factors, such as the gradient, alignment
width and geographical location. In the case of the railway alignment, the most important
length-dependent costs are the costs for the construction of the superstructure, the sig-
nalling system and the electrification system. These costs are only weakly dependent on
the location and width of the alignment, and can be modelled as length-dependent costs
with good approximation.
42
==PAGE:51==
Given the assumptions discussed above, the total length-dependent cost CL can thus be
expressed as shown in equation 5.34, where KL is the unit cost of a meter of railway
alignment and LT is the total length of the horizontal alignment.
CL = KL · LT
(5.34)
Note that the total length of the the horizontal alignment has already been determined with
function 5.21, where hVn+1 = LT . The length of the horizontal alignment is a reasonable
proxy for the length of the 3-dimensional alignment, as it simplifies the estimation and
because the distances on the horizontal plane dominate the distances on the vertical
plane.
Location-dependent costs
In addition to the length-dependent costs, the alignment may incur in costs and penalty
costs that are location-dependent. These costs are also called area costs, because they
cover a specific portion of the surface of the study area. As discussed in section 4.1.4,
there is a huge number of costs and soft constraints that can be represented as area
costs, but for the purpose of the cost calculations their exact nature isn’t relevant. What
follows is the derivation of the location-dependent cost function, which is based on the
equations found in [20].
As explained in section 4.2.1, the study area is divided in cells of equal size, forming a grid
shape (cf. figure 4.3). The area costs can be added to the model by adding a unit cost
KA(j, k) to each cell in the study area. This cost is set equal to the sum of all location-
dependent cost factors that affect a cell (j, k), including both normal costs and penalty
costs. The unit cost KA(j, k) is expressed as a cost per unit of area.
The total location-dependent costs can then be expressed as the sum of the area costs
incurred by the alignment in each cell (j, k) it traverses. Since the unit cost KA(j, k) is ex-
pressed per unit of area, the costs incurred in each cell depend on the length L(j, k) of the
alignment section that is located in the cell and on the width of the alignment. To simplify,
the width W of the alignment is assumed to be fixed. Given the assumptions above, the
total location-dependent costs can then be expressed as shown in formula 5.35, where
Jmax and Kmax are the maximum cell indexes for the x- and y-axis, respectively.
CA = W ·
Jmax−1
X
j=0
Kmax−1
X
k=0
[L(j, k) · KA(j, k)]
(5.35)
To calculate CA, the length of the alignment in each cell L(j, k), as well as the cell index
(j, k), need to be defined first. The calculation of the length L(j, k) depends on the nature
of the alignment element it is part of. There are two possible cases, which are that the
element is a tangent segment or that it is a circular curve. The derivation of the length
L(j, k) can thus be split in these two cases:
CASE 1: Tangent segment
First, each tangent segment i is divided into l smaller sections, delimited by the coordi-
nates (x(i)
Ql , y(i)
Ql ) of the intersection points Q(i)
l
between the tangent segments and the grid
lines of the study area (cf. figure 5.8).
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.8: Intersection points Q(i)
l
of tangent segment Ti
The number of intersection points l depends on the length of tangent segment i, on the
slope mi of the tangent segment and on the resolution of the grid cells. The coordinates
(x(i)
Ql , y(i)
Ql ) of the intersection points Q(i)
l
can be determined by inserting the x-coordinates
of the vertical grid lines located between xPi and xPi+1 in the line function, as shown in
equation 5.36.
y(i)
Ql+1 = y(i)
Ql + mi · (x(i)
Ql+1 −x(i)
Ql )
(5.36)
Considering that the ith tangent segment of the alignment is delimited by points Ti and
Ci+1, the slope mi of the tangent segment can be computed as shown in equation 5.37.
mi =
yPi+1 −yPi
xPi+1 −xPi
(5.37)
If the slope is mi = 0, the tangent segment will only intersect the vertical grid lines and the
intersection points Q(i)
l
are sorted by their x-coordinate. If the slope tends to mi = ±∞,
the tangent segment will only intersect the horizontal grid lines and the intersection points
Q(i)
l
are sorted by their y-coordinate. For all other values of mi the intersection points Q(i)
l
will be sorted by their x-coordinate.
jl =


x(i)
Ql + x(i)
Ql+1

/ 2 −xO
Dx

(5.38)
kl =


y(i)
Ql + y(i)
Ql+1

/ 2 −yO
Dy

(5.39)
44
==PAGE:53==
Once the intersection points Q(i)
l
are determined and sorted, the (j, k) index of the cells
that each segment section l traverses can be computed with formulae 5.38 and 5.39,
where xO, yO are the coordinates of the origin of the coordinate system and Dx, Dy the
step increase of the coordinate value between each vertical and horizontal grid line, re-
spectively. The two formulae utilise the coordinates of the middle point of each section
l to determine its index (j, k). Finally, the length of each section l of segment i can be
computed using equation 5.40.
L(i)
l
=
q
(x(i)
Ql + x(i)
Ql+1)2 + (y(i)
Ql + y(i)
Ql+1)2
(5.40)
The total location-dependent costs for each tangent segment i can then be calculated by
adding together the products of the length of the each section L(i)
l
and the cost factor of
the cell where the section l is located, KA(j, k).
CASE 2: Circular curve
The overall procedure is similar to the tangent segments, but the the intersection points
O(i)
l
between the ith circular curve and the grid lines are sorted differently, and the length
of the tangent sections is replaced by the length of the arc segments. A graphical repre-
sentation of the intersection points O(i)
l
can be seen in figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9: Intersection points O(i)
l
of curve Ci
The intersection points O(i)
l
are determined using the function that defines a circle, shown
in 5.41, where (xδi, yδi) are the coordinates of the centre point of the curve (cf. function
5.17). The points O(i)
l
can be found using formula 5.41 by inserting the x-coordinates of
all the grid lines within the range shown in functions 5.42 and 5.43.
(x −xδi)2 + (y −yδi)2 = R2
i
(5.41)
45
==PAGE:54==
[min(xPi, xCi, xTi), max(xPi, xCi, xTi)]
for the vertical grid lines
(5.42)
[min(yPi, yCi, yTi), max(yPi, yCi, yTi)]
for the horizontal grid lines
(5.43)
Once the points O(i)
l
are found, they can be sorted using the sorting base shown in formula
5.44, where ⃗O(i)
l
are the vectors of points O(i)
l . The quantity D(i)
l
represents the distance
between each intersection point and the start point of the circle curve.
D(i)
l
= ∥⃗O(i)
l
−⃗Ci∥
(5.44)
Once the vectors ⃗O(i)
l
are sorted, the middle point ⃗F (i)
l
of the arc segment l inside each
cell delimited by points O(i)
l
and O(i)
l+1 can be determined by vector analysis, using formula
5.45.
⃗F (i)
l
=


x(i)
Fl
y(i)
Fl

= ⃗δi + Ri
( ⃗O(i)
l
−⃗δi) + ( ⃗O(i)
l+1 −⃗δi)
( ⃗O(i)
l
−⃗δi) + ( ⃗O(i)
l+1 −⃗δi)

(5.45)
When the middle points of the arc segments l have been determined, the indexes (j, k) of
the cells where the points F (i)
l
are located can be calculated, similarly to the principles of
formulae 5.38 and 5.39. Specifically, in the case of the circular curves, the formulae are
as shown in 5.46 and 5.47.
jl =
$x(i)
Fl −xO
Dx
%
(5.46)
kl =
$y(i)
Fl −yO
Dy
%
(5.47)
Finally, the length of arc segment l can be computed using equation 5.48, where α(i)
l
is
the angle subtended by arc segment l.
L(i)
C (l) = Ri · α(i)
l
= cos−1


( ⃗O(i)
l
−⃗δi) · ( ⃗O(i)
l+1 −⃗δi)
( ⃗O(i)
l
−⃗δi)

( ⃗O(i)
l+1 −⃗δi)



(5.48)
The total location-dependent costs for each circular curve i can then be calculated by
adding together the products of the length of the each arc segment L(i)
C (l) and the cost
factor of the cell (j, k) where the arc segment l is located.
The total location-dependent costs for the whole alignment can now be computed as the
sum of the location-dependent costs of the tangent segments and those of the circular
curves.
46
==PAGE:55==
Earthworks costs
Earthworks costs constitute a special kind of location-dependent cost, where information
about both the horizontal and the vertical alignment is needed to obtain a good cost esti-
mate. This project makes use of the average end-area method (cf. [40], [41]) to estimate
the earthwork volumes of the railway alignment. The derivation of the equations to cal-
culate the earthworks volumes is based on [20], modified to take into account that the
vertical alignment of railways in Denmark must use circular curves instead of parabolic
curves.
The first step of the method is to compute the cross-section area of the the embankmen-
t/excavation at a set of predetermined and equally spaced station points Sj along the
horizontal alignment. In addition, the elevation of both the ground level and the alignment
are computed at each station point. Once the elevations and cross-section areas are
known, the cut/fill balance can be computed between each pair of adjacent station points.
For ease of calculation, the elevation of both the alignment and the ground surface be-
tween two station points is approximated as changing linearly. Lastly, the cut/fill balances
between each station point pair are added together to yield the total cut/fill balance. The
results can then be multiplied by a cost factor to get the cost estimate for the earthworks.
The next paragraphs explain each of the steps in detail.
ns =









LT
Ls

−1
if
LT mod Ls = 0
LT
Ls

if
LT mod Ls ̸= 0
(5.49)
As mentioned, the station points Sj are equally spaced along the alignment with a distance
of Ls between them. The total number of station points ns is then defined as shown in
function 5.49, where LT is the total length of the alignment. The index of the station points
Sj is j = [0, ns], with S0 being the staring point S and Sns+1 being the end point E. As
the distance between station points Ls is user set, the number of station points ns along
a given alignment varies according the user’s choice of spacing.
Figure 5.10: Cross-section area calculation parameters
47
==PAGE:56==
As discussed in section 4.1.1, the width of the superstructure of the alignment Wa a can
be considered approximately fixed for a given set of design parameters, while the width at
the ground level Wg varies depending on the location. Looking at figure 5.10, the relation
between these two widths can be modelled as a function of the height difference between
the ground level zg and the height of the alignment za. In addition, the cut (θc)/fill (θf)
angles also influence the width at the ground level. Taking all of the above into consider-
ation, the width of the alignment at the ground level Wg can then be calculated as shown
in equation 5.50, with the two different cases being for the fill and cut, respectively.
Wg =
(
Wa + 2 · (za −zg) · tan−1 θf
if
za > zg
Wa + 2 · (zg −za) · tan−1 θc
if
za < zg
(5.50)
Once the width is known, the cross-section area Ac can be easily calculated with the
trapezium area formula (cf. 5.51).
Ac = 1
2(Wa + Wg)|za −zg|
(5.51)
To calculate the width and cross-section area, it is necessary to know the ground and
alignment elevations at each station point Sj. In order to do so, the location of the station
points along the horizontal alignment needs to be defined first. Formula 5.52 defines the
distance hSj along the horizontal alignment as being equal to the product of the distance
between two stations Ls and the current station point index j. A special case applies for
the end station E = Sns+1, because the total alignment length LT is not perfectly divisible
by the distance Ls.
hSj =
(
j · Ls
if
j = [0, ns]
LT
if
j = ns + 1
(5.52)
In order to calculate the ground (zg(j)) and alignment (za(j)) elevations at Sj, it is useful
to determine on which geometrical element of the alignment the point Sj is located. If
hCi ≤hSj ≤hTi, then Sj is located between the ith circular curve and the ith tangent
segment of the alignment, while if hTi ≤hSj ≤hCi+1, then Sj is located between the ith
tangent segment and the (i + 1)th circular curve (refer to figure 5.5 for an example of how
the curves and tangents are indexed).
The location of the circular curves and tangent segments on the horizontal alignment can
be determined in a similar way as shown for the vertical points of intersection in equations
5.19 - 5.21. The location hTi of the start point Ti of the ith tangent segment is determined
with formula 5.53, while the location hCi of the start point Ci of the ith circular curve is
determined with formula 5.54.
hTi =











0
if
i = 0
i−1
X
k=1
LS(k) +
i
X
k=1
(Rk · αk)
if
1 ≤i ≤n
(5.53)
48
==PAGE:57==
hCi =
i
X
k=1
LS(k) +
i−1
X
k=1
(Rk · αk)
if
1 ≤i ≤n + 1
(5.54)
The procedures to calculate the ground and alignment elevations are very different from
each other, so their derivation is explained separately in the following paragraphs.
A. Ground elevation
Once the position of the starting point of the element where Sj is located is determined,
it is necessary to the calculate the coordinates (xSj, ySj). Here there are two cases, one
when the station point is on a circular curve and another when the station point is on
a tangent section. The two cases require different calculations, and are thus explained
separately.
CASE 1: the station point is located on a circular curve
If the element is a circular curve, it possible to determine the angle αi,j of the arc between
the starting point of the curve Ci and point Sj by using the inverse function of the curve
arc length, as shown in 5.55. Figure 5.11 illustrates the curve arc between Ci and Sj and
the corresponding angle αi,j.
Figure 5.11: Station Sj and the corresponding angle αi,j
Given that the intersection angle αi is also known, the complementary angle α
′
i,j of αi,j
can be calculated as shown in 5.56.
αi,j =
hSj −hCi
Ri
(5.55)
α
′
i,j = αi −αi,j
(5.56)
Using the definition of the dot product between two vectors, it is possible to derive equa-
tions 5.57 and 5.58 via vector analysis.
49
==PAGE:58==
cos αi,j =
−−→
δiCi · −−→
δiSj
−−→
δiCi

−−→
δiSj

=

⃗Ci −⃗δi

·

⃗Sj −⃗δi

R2
i
(5.57)
cos α
′
i,j =
−−→
δiTi · −−→
δiSj
−−→
δiCi

−−→
δiSj

=

⃗Ti −⃗δi

·

⃗Sj −⃗δi

R2
i
(5.58)
By substitution of the vector coordinates in the equations and with some rearrangement
of the terms, it is possible to obtain a linear system of two equations, namely equation
5.59 and 5.60.
(xCi −xδi)(xSj −xδi) + (yCi −yδi)(ySj −yδi) = R2
i cos αi,j
(5.59)
(xTi −xδi)(xSj −xδi) + (yTi −yδi)(ySj −yδi) = R2
i cos α
′
i,j
(5.60)
The only unknown variables in the linear system are xSj and ySj , since the radius of the
curve is known, the angles αi,j and α
′
i,j are found in equations 5.55 and 5.56, and co-
ordinates xδi and yδi are calculated with equation 5.17. Being a linear system of two
equations with two unknown variables, the system can be solved analytically. The solu-
tions are shown in 5.61 and 5.62.
xSj = xδi +
(yTi −yδi)R2
i cos αi,j −(yCi −yδi)R2
i cos α
′
i,j
(xCi −xδi)(yTi −yδi) −(xTi −xδi)(yCi −yδi)
(5.61)
ySj = yδi +
(xCi −xδi)R2
i cos α
′
i,j −(xTi −xδi)R2
i cos αi,j
(xCi −xδi)(yTi −yδi) −(xTi −xδi)(yCi −yδi)
(5.62)
CASE 2: the station point is located on a tangent segment
If the element is a tangent segment, it possible to determine the variables xSj and ySj in a
similar manner to formula 5.18, by shrinking vector ⃗Ci+1 −⃗Ti proportionally with the ratio
between the distance from Ti to Sj and the length of the vector
 ⃗Ci+1 −⃗Ti
.
"
xSj
ySj
#
=
xTi
yTi

+ (hSj −hTi)
⃗Ci+1 −⃗Ti
 ⃗Ci+1 −⃗Ti

(5.63)
Once the horizontal coordinates of the station points Sj are determined, the corresponding
ground elevations zg(j) can be read from digital elevation model used in the project.
B. Alignment elevation
To the determine the elevation of the alignment at the station points Sj, it is first necessary
to determine the position of the vertical alignment curves CV
i and tangent segments T V
i
on the HZ plane. This is achieved via the the known location of the vertical points of
intersection Vi, which are by definition halfway through the curves on the h-axis (cf. figure
5.5, right). The position of points CV
i and T V
i on the h-axis is thus calculated by adding or
50
==PAGE:59==
subtracting half of the curve arc length from the position of point Vi, as shown in equations
5.64 and 5.65.
h
CV
i = hVi −0.5 · LV (i)
if
1 ≤i ≤n + 1
(5.64)
h
T V
i
= hVi + 0.5 · LV (i)
if
0 ≤i ≤n
(5.65)
Correspondingly, the position of CV
i and T V
i
on the z-axis can be determined by adding
or subtracting the elevation difference from the elevation of point Vi, which is known and
equal to zi. The calculation is shown in equations 5.66 and 5.67, where LV
T (i) is the length
of the segment between CV
i /T V
i
and its respective vertical point of intersection Vi.
z
CV
i = zVi −0.5 · LV
T (i) · gi−1
1000
if
1 ≤i ≤n + 1
(5.66)
z
T V
i
= zVi + 0.5 · LV
T (i) ·
gi
1000
if
0 ≤i ≤n
(5.67)
If the station point is on a circular curve, the alignment elevation za(i) can be calculated
by adding together the elevation at the start of the curve arc CV
i
and the difference in
elevation between the start of the curve arc CV
i and station point Sj. Equation 5.68 shows
the details of the calculation.
za(j) = z
CV
i + Ri ·

cos
αi
2 −αi,j

−cos αi
2

(5.68)
If the station point is on a tangent segment, the alignment elevation za(i) can be calculated
via the use of the line function, considering that the position of the extreme points of
the segment T V
i CV
i+1 on the HZ plane is now known. The alignment elevation is thus
calculated as shown in 5.69.
za(j) = z
T V
i + (hSj −h
T V
i )
z
CV
i+1 −z
T V
i
h
CV
i+1 −h
T V
i
(5.69)
C. Cost function
Once the ground zg and alignment za elevations are determined, the alignment widths Wg
and consequently the cross section areas Ac can be calculated for each station point Sj
by substituting the elevations into formulas 5.50 and 5.51. All the variables derived in the
previous paragraphs can then be utilised to determine the earthwork volumes between
each station point pair Sj and S(j+1). There are 4 possible cases, each of which requires
different formulas to calculate the cut volume Ec and fill volume Ef.
1. If zg(j) ≥za(j) and zg(j + 1) ≥za(j + 1)
The entirety of the alignment between Sj and S(j+1) is excavated, as it lies completely
under the ground level. In this case, the cut and fill volumes are determined as shown in
5.70 and 5.71.
51
==PAGE:60==
Ec(j) = 1
2 · [Ac(j) + Ac(j + 1)] · Ls
(5.70)
Ef(j) = 0
(5.71)
2. If zg(j) ≤za(j) and zg(j + 1) ≤za(j + 1)
The entirety of the alignment between Sj and S(j+1) lies on an embankment, as it lies
completely over the ground level. In this case, the cut and fill volumes are determined as
shown in 5.72 and 5.73.
Ec(j) = 0
(5.72)
Ef(j) = 1
2 · [Ac(j) + Ac(j + 1)] · Ls
(5.73)
3. If zg(j) > za(j) and zg(j + 1) < za(j + 1)
The alignment between Sj and S(j+1) is initially excavated, but transitions to an embank-
ment between the two station points. In this case, the cut and fill volumes are determined
as shown in 5.74 and 5.75.
Ec(j) = 1
2 ·
zg(j) −za(j)
zg(j) −za(j) + za(j + 1) −zg(j + 1) · Ac(j) · Ls
(5.74)
Ef(j) = 1
2 ·
za(j + 1) −zg(j + 1)
zg(j) −za(j) + za(j + 1) −zg(j + 1) · Ac(j + 1) · Ls
(5.75)
4. If zg(j) < za(j) and zg(j + 1) > za(j + 1)
The alignment between Sj and S(j+1) initially lies on an embankment, but transitions to
excavation between the two station points. In this case, the cut and fill volumes are de-
termined as shown in 5.76 and 5.77.
Ec(j) = 1
2 ·
za(j) −zg(j)
za(j) −zg(j) + zg(j + 1) −za(j + 1) · Ac(j) · Ls
(5.76)
Ef(j) = 1
2 ·
zg(j + 1) −za(j + 1)
za(j) −zg(j) + zg(j + 1) −za(j + 1) · Ac(j + 1) · Ls
(5.77)
While the derivation of the first two cases is trivial and based on the area of a trapezium,
the last two are slightly more complex. The idea behind the formulas is best explained
by the example in figure 5.12. This example shows the situation that is described in case
3, but case 4 is just the mirrored version. The cut and fill volumes are determined by
calculating the area of the triangles shown in the figure. The long fraction present of the
formulae expresses the ratio of the length Ls that is in the excavation and embankment
sections. The total excavation and embankment volumes can then be determined by
adding together the cut (Ec(j)) and fill (Ef(j)) quantities for all the sections ns.
52
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.12: Earthwork volume calculation parameters
The final step is to calculate the total earthwork costs CE via equation 5.78. The parame-
ters KC and KF are the cost factors for cut and fill, respectively, while EC and EF are the
total cut volume and the total fill volume, respectively.
CE = KC · EC + KF · EF
(5.78)
Alignment geometry penalty costs
The penalty costs for the violated geometrical constraints ensure that the alignment alter-
natives that do not respect the geometrical constraints set out in the railway norms and
standards get a low fitness score in the solution algorithm, making them far less likely
to be chosen for crossover and mutation. As the railway standards allow exemptions
to the regulations in exceptional circumstances (cf. section 4.1.2), the relaxation of the
geometrical constraints is reasonable.
The penalty cost functions can be divided in the following cases:
1) Horizontal and vertical curve radii.
For each horizontal curve that violates the minimum radius Rmin, a penalty
costs is applied determined by function 5.79. The penalty is divided into a
fixed cost for violating the constraint β0, plus a variable cost β1 dependent on
the ratio between the minimum and actual radius.
Cr(i) =



β0 + β1 ·
Rmin
Ri

if 0 < Ri < Rmin
0
if Ri ≥Rmin
,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(5.79)
The penalty cost of each curve radius is then added to the total penalty cost
for the radius constraints (cf. 5.80).
CR =
n
X
i=1
Cr(i)
(5.80)
The penalty costs functions for the vertical alignment are identical, apart from
the change in variables and parameters appropriate for the vertical curves. In
particular, variable Ri is replaced with variable RV (i).
53
==PAGE:62==
2) Horizontal and vertical curve arc length
The overall structure of the penalty cost function for the curve arcs is identical
to the one explained in case 1. Note that the variable LC(i) in function 5.81
can be calculated using equation 5.12. As it can be observed in equation 5.12,
the constraint on the curve arc length can also be interpreted as an indirect
constraint on the minimum value of the intersection angle αi, for a given curve
radius.
Clc(i) =



γ0 + γ1 ·
LC min
LC(i)

if 0 < LC(i) < LC min
0
if LC(i) ≥LC min
,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(5.81)
The penalty cost of each curve arc determined by function 5.81 is then added
to the total penalty cost for the curve arc constraints (cf. 5.82).
CLC =
n
X
i=1
Clc(i)
(5.82)
As in case 1, the penalty costs functions for the vertical alignment are identical,
apart from the change in variables and parameters appropriate for the vertical
curves. In particular, variable LC(i) is replaced with variable LV (i).
3) Horizontal tangent length
The the penalty cost for the horizontal tangent segment length can be deter-
mined in a similar manner to the functions in case 1 and 2. The only major
difference is the presence of the term Lmax in the denominator of the fraction
in function 5.83. This term ensures that the extra allowance for the transition
curves is subtracted from the tangent segment length LS(i) before it is com-
pared with the minimum tangent segment length LS{min}. The variable LS(i)
can be calculated using equation 5.15.
Cls(i) =



δ0 + δ1 ·

LS{min}
LS(i) −Lmax

if 0 < LS(i) < LS{min}
0
if LS(i) ≥LS{min}
, ∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(5.83)
The penalty cost of each tangent segment determined by function 5.83 is then
added to the total penalty cost for the tangent length constraints (cf. 5.84).
CLS =
n
X
i=0
Cls(i)
(5.84)
Note that there are no constraints and thus no penalty costs for the vertical
tangent segment length.
54
==PAGE:63==
4) Gradient
The the penalty cost function of the gradient constraint is also similar to the first
3 cases. The only major difference is that the variable |g(i)| is in the nominator
of the fraction in function 5.85, whereas the variables were in the denominator
in the other cases. The reason for the change is that, contrary to the other
cases, the constraint is violated if the variable is too high, not when it is too
low. The variable |g(i)| can be calculated using equation 5.22.
Cg(i) =



ϵ0 + ϵ1 ·
 |gi|
gmax

if |gi| > gmax
0
if 0 ≤|gi| ≤gmax
,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(5.85)
The penalty cost of each vertical tangent gradient determined by function 5.85
is then added to the total penalty cost of the gradient constraints (cf. 5.86).
CG =
n
X
i=0
Cg(i)
(5.86)
5.2.3
Model overview
All the costs and constrains discussed in the previous sections can now be incorporated
into the initial model described in section 4.1.6.
The resulting alignment optimisation
model is shown below.
min
di,zi CT = CL + CA + CE + CP
subject to:
1) CP = CR + CRV + CLC + CLV + CLS + CG
2) Alignment representation procedure (cf. section 5.1.5)
3) diL ≥di ≥diU
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
4) di ∈R
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
5) zi ∈R
∀i ∈{0, ..., n + 1}
Looking at the objective function, the goal is to minimise the total cost of the alignment
CT , which is equal to the sum of the length-dependent costs CL, location-dependent costs
CA, earthworks costs CE and alignment geometry penalty costs CP .
Constraint 1) defines the penalty costs CP as the sum of all the penalty costs discussed
in section 5.2.2. Constraint 2) refers to the application of the alignment representation
procedure described in section 5.1.5. Constraint 3) ensures that the decision variables
di are kept within their lower and upper bounds (cf. section 5.2.1). Finally, constraints 4)
and 5) define the domain of the decision variables.
While the alignment optimisation model presented in this section has, for ease of compre-
hension, an overall appearance similar to that of a MIP model, the structure can easily be
adapted to be solved using a genetic algorithm approach. The details of how the model
can be solved with a genetic algorithm are discussed in chapter 6.
55
==PAGE:64==
56
==PAGE:65==
6
Genetic algorithm
The model presented in section 5.2.3 can be easily modified so that it can be solved with
a genetic algorithm. The decision variables di and zi form the base for the genetic encod-
ing of each solution (section 6.1), while the alignment representation procedure (i.e. the
phenotype) and the cost function are used to compute the fitness of each solution (section
6.3). Meanwhile, the upper and lower bounds of decision variables di are enforced when
the initial population is generated (section 6.2) and when the genetic operators (mutation
and crossover) are applied (section 6.5).
Note that before the solution algorithm can be run, the user has to decide on the total
number of points of intersection n to be used in the algorithm. There are no fixed rules
for it, but there is a clear trade-off between lower computation time and higher degrees of
freedom for the alignment geometry. A low number of points of intersections is expected
to decrease the time complexity, while a high number of points of intersection makes it
easier for the alignment to adapt to the terrain and constraints, potentially leading to lower
penalty costs and thus better solutions, at the expense of higher run time. Another factor
that sets a practical lower bound to the number of points of intersection is the minimum
length of the geometrical elements of the alignment. Under a certain spacing between
the points, which depends on the chosen parameters for the alignment geometry, there
is no more space to fit curves to the alignment with a reasonable radius, which make the
additional points of intersection redundant.
The goal of this chapter is to illustrate how each step of the genetic algorithm, as described
in section 3.3, is applied to the alignment optimisation model described in chapter 5. Pop-
ulation generation procedures 1 to 3, mutation operators 1 and 2, crossover operators
1 to 3 and the selection/replacement procedure are based on the algorithm proposed in
[42]. The population generation procedure 4, mutation operator 3 and crossover operator
4 are proposals by the author of this thesis.
6.1
Genetic encoding
As described in section 5.1.2, each point of intersection Pi of the alignment is defined by
two variables, its position di on cutting line i, and its height zi in the coordinate system of
the study area. The genetic encoding of each solution adopts the definitions above, and
each chromosome Λ is defined as in 6.1, where λj is the jth gene of the chromosome
and n is the total number of points of intersection.
Λ = [λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4, ..., λ2n−1, λ2n] = [d1, z1, d2, z2, ..., dn, zn]
(6.1)
Since each point Pi is defined by two variables, two genes are necessary to encode one
point of intersection, which means that there are 2n genes in each chromosome Λ. The
mapping shown in 6.2 is utilised to define the relation between the genes λj and the
variables di and zi, as a function of the index of the points of intersection i ∈{1, ..., n}.
λ2i−1 = di,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
λ2i = zi,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(6.2)
57
==PAGE:66==
Thus, according to the equations above, the odd genes λ2i−1 encode the variables di,
while the even genes λ2i encode the variables zi.
The genes λ2i−1 have an upper (diU) and lower (diL) bound, defined by the domain con-
straint 3) in the model of section 5.2.3, which is discussed in detail in section 5.2.1. The
genes λ2i don’t have a general upper and lower bound, but their values are, in some cases,
bound by the gradient constraint when the initial population is generated and when the
mutation and crossover operators are applied, as explained in sections 6.2 and 6.5.
6.2
Initial population
The overall population size is set to be proportional to the number of points of intersec-
tion n, as an increase in the number of points of intersection leads to an increase in the
complexity of the solution, leading to the need for a larger population to better explore
the solution space. Considering that each point of intersection is encoded in two genes,
the total population size np should be determined as shown in equation 6.3, where kp is
a user set coefficient.
np = kp · 2n,
kp ∈N
(6.3)
In order to maintain a high genetic diversity, the generation of the initial population must
contain a degree of randomness. At the same time, good initial guesses might help to
rapidly find good solutions. To balance these requirements, the initial population is gener-
ated using 3 different procedures, which are discussed in the following subsections. The
ratio of usage between the 3 procedures is set by the user, and the optimal value is likely
to vary case by case, depending on the complexity of the solution space.
1) Points of intersection equally spaced along the line segment SE
The points of intersection Pi are placed on a straight line from the start point S to the
end point E of the alignment. The population generated with this procedure contains
useful genetic information, as it represents the shortest possible alignment, and thus the
alignment with the lowest possible length-dependent cost. The chromosome of such an
alignment is defined as shown in 6.4.
Λ = [λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4, ..., λ2n−1, λ2n] =
h
0, zO1, 0, zO2, ..., 0, zOn
i
(6.4)
The genes λ2i−1, representing the variables di, are set equal to 0, as all the points of
intersection lie per definition exactly on the origin Oi of each cutting plane.
The genes λ2i, representing the variables zi, are set equal to the elevation of the origin
Oi of each cutting plane. The elevation zOn of each point of origin can be determined as
shown in equation 6.5, assuming that the height of the start point (zS) and end point (zE)
are known.
zOi = zS + i ·
zE −zS
n + 1

,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(6.5)
The equation above is, in effect, simply a linear function where the slope m of the line
segment zSzE is equal to
zE −zS
n+1 .
58
==PAGE:67==
2) Points of intersection randomly placed on the cutting planes
The points of intersection Pi are placed randomly on their respective cutting planes i. The
population generated with this procedure maximises the its genetic diversity.
The genes λ2i−1, representing the variables di, are randomly generated from continuous
uniform distributions, with their boundaries being defined by the upper (diU) and lower
(diL) bounds of the variables di. Equation 6.6 gives the mathematical definition, with rc
being the continuous random value assigned to each gene.
λ2i−1 = rc [diL, diU ] ,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(6.6)
The genes λ2i, representing the variables zi, are randomly generated from continuous
uniform distributions, with their boundaries being defined by the gradient constraint. As-
suming that the value of the genes is calculated sequentially, from λ2 to λ2n, the lower
(ziL) and upper (ziU) bounds of the variables zi can be calculated as shown in functions
6.7 and 6.8. Note that when i = 1, the elevation zVi−1 is equal to the elevation of the start
point zS.
ziL = max
(
zVi−1 −dv(i −1) gmax
1000

,
 
zVn+1 −
n
X
k=1
dv(k) gmax
1000
!)
,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(6.7)
ziU = min
(
zVi−1 + dv(i −1) gmax
1000

,
 
zVn+1 +
n
X
k=1
dv(k) gmax
1000
!)
,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(6.8)
The parameter gmax represents the maximum allowable gradient, while variables dv(i)
represent the distance between two vertical points of intersection Vi (cf. figure 5.5, right)
on the h-axis (i.e. the length of the horizontal alignment), and can be determined as
discussed in section 5.1.3, and in particular with equations 5.19 - 5.23.
The first term of equations 6.7 and 6.8 represents the lower/upper bound of the elevation
zi that derives from the application of the gradient constraint on segment Vi−1Vi, i.e. the
segment preceding the current point of intersection. It is an inverse function of equation
5.22, where zVi is isolated and gi = gmax. The second term of equations 6.7 and 6.8
represents the lower/upper bound of the elevation zi that derives from the application
of the gradient constraint on segment ViVn+1, i.e. the portion of the vertical alignment
successive to the current point of intersection. It is derived in the same way as the first
term, except for the fact that it covers multiple vertical line segments.
To summarise, The first term ensures that the chosen elevation zi allows for a feasible
gradient between the preceding and the current point of intersection, while the second
term ensures that the chosen elevation zi allows for a feasible gradient between the cur-
rent point of intersection and the end of the alignment. The maximisation/minimisation
function ensures that the elevation complies with the strictest of the two constraints.
Once the lower and upper bounds are determined, the value rc assigned to each gene
λ2i can be randomly generated similarly to the genes λ2i−1, as shown in equation 6.9.
λ2i = rc [ziL, ziU ] ,
∀i ∈{1, ..., n}
(6.9)
59
==PAGE:68==
Note that this procedure implies that the horizontal alignment is generated beforehand,
as the variables dv(i) are a function of the horizontal alignment.
3) Points of intersection randomly placed on the cutting lines at a height close to
the terrain elevation
The variables di of the points of intersection Pi are placed randomly on their respective
cutting lines i, while the height zi is set as close as possible to the ground elevation zg(i).
The population generated with this procedure balances useful genetic information, as it
minimises the earthworks cost of the alignment, with genetic diversity, as the horizontal
alignment is randomly generated.
The genes λ2i−1, representing the variables di, are generated using the same procedure
as in case 2. Meanwhile, the genes λ2i are set equal to the ground elevation zg(i) at point
of intersection Vi, provided that the ground elevation doesn’t violate any of the terms of
equations 6.7 and 6.8 (i.e. ziL ≥zg(i) ≥ziU ). If any of the terms are violated, the
elevation is set to be equal to ziL, if zg(i) < ziL, and to ziU , if zg(i) > ziU .
The ground elevation zg(i) at point of intersection Vi is determined by using function 5.18
to compute the x and y coordinates of point Vi, and then reading the elevation data from
the digital elevation model at the coordinates of Vi.
4) Points of intersection placed on the cutting lines via a heuristic, at a height
close to the terrain elevation
The variables di (i.e. the genes λ2i−1) of the points of intersection Pi are determined via
a greedy heuristic that tries to minimise the area costs, while the height zi is set as close
as possible to the ground elevation zg(i). For the procedure to determine the height zi,
refer to case 3.
Figure 6.1 illustrates the basic idea of the heuristic. The dotted segments represent the
segments that connect to discarded points of intersection (PI). These PI’s were discarded
because they would force the alignment through a high cost area. Conversely, the chosen
solution, marked with the solid line segments, does not incur in any area costs.
Figure 6.1: Example of the heuristic placement of the Pi’s
60
==PAGE:69==
A step by step explanation of how the greedy heuristic works is given below. Note that the
heuristic is called ”greedy” because the area costs are estimated based on a simplified,
piece-wise representation of the alignment and on a simplified cost estimate.
Greedy heuristic
0. Draw a random binary number. If the outcome is 0, begin from the start point of the
alignment S = P0. Otherwise, begin from the end point E = Pn+1. The rest of the
algorithm illustrates the first case as an example. If the algorithm starts from the
end point, the indexes are changed so that they follow a descending order.
1. Check if the current point of intersection Pi lies in a grid cell (j, k) with an area cost
factor KA(j, k) (cf. section 5.2.2) greater than zero.
2. If the point Pi lies in a cell with a non-zero area cost (e.g. point Pi in the figure):
(a) Set the value of the following point of intersection Pi+1 by sampling a random
value of di+1, as shown in equation 6.6.
(b) If the point of intersection Pi+1 encoded by the sampled value lies in a cell with
a non-zero area cost, draw a new value from the distribution. The process is
repeated until a valid value is found or the iteration count reaches a user defined
limit. If the second is true, then a random value is sampled and accepted
regardless of area cost.
3. If the point Pi lies in a cell with an area cost equal to zero (e.g. point Pi+2 in the
figure):
(a) Set the value of the following point of intersection Pi+1 by sampling a random
value of di+1, as shown in equation 6.6, so that the segment PiPi+1 doesn’t
traverse cells with a non-zero area cost. This is checked using the procedure
for the location-dependent cost calculations for tangent segments illustrated in
section 5.2.2.
(b) If the point of intersection Pi+1 encoded by the sampled value is connected by
a segment PiPi+1 that traverses cells with a non-zero area cost, a new value of
di+1 is drawn from the distribution. The process is repeated until a valid value
is found or the iteration count reaches a user defined limit. If the second is true,
then the procedure in steps 2.(a) and 2.(b) is applied.
4. Repeat the process for each point of intersection up to and including Pn−1. The last
point of intersection Pn is then connected to the end point E.
6.3
Fitness computation
The raw fitness function is equal to the objective function CT of the model shown in section
5.2.3, i.e. it is the sum of all the costs and penalty costs of the alignment encoded by the
chromosome of the solution. In order to calculate the fitness of a solution it is thus first
necessary to follow the procedure set out in section 5.1.5 to generate the alignment, and
then calculate all the costs and penalty costs as shown in section 5.2.2.
6.4
Ranking, selection and replacement
The proposed ranking, selection and replacement procedure is based on a fitness ranking
approach and (partial) generational replacement, plus an element of elitist selection. An
overview of the procedure is shown in the following paragraph.
61
==PAGE:70==
Ranking, selection and replacement procedure
1. Rank the np individuals by fitness, in descending order.
2. Select ns parents from the population, with the probability of selection being propor-
tional to the rank of the individual. One individual may be selected multiple times.
3. Apply crossover or mutation operators to the ns parents, producing exactly ns off-
spring. The mutation and crossover operations are exclusive, i.e. only one is applied
to each parent.
4. Select ns chromosomes to be replaced, according to their inverse fitness ranking.
5. Replace the selected chromosomes with the ns new offspring, and clone the re-
maining np −ns individuals.
When selecting the parents for reproduction, the selection probability of the kth ranked in-
dividual is determined using equation 6.10, where q ∈R is a user defined parameter, with
values 0 < q < 1. A value closer to 0 will decrease the selective pressure by decreasing
the probability difference between higher and lower ranked individuals, while values closer
to 1 will increase the selective pressure. The optimal parameter value varies on a case
by case base, and thus needs to be refined during the implementation of the algorithm on
each individual scenario.
pk = q(1 −q)k−1
1 −(1 −q)np
(6.10)
The selection probability function is similar to a geometric distribution, where the number
of possible states is finite and equal to np. The function was first proposed in [43], where
the detailed derivation can be found. The behaviour of the probability function is easiest
shown with an example.
Figure 6.2: Selection probability function example
62
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.2 shows the probability mass function and the cumulative distribution function
for two dummy examples, one with the parameter q = 0.25 (p_k low in the legend) and
one with q = 0.75 (p_k high in the legend). The total population is set to np = 20 in
both examples. The selection probability for each ranked chromosome is shown in the
bar charts, while the cumulative probability is shown in the line charts. It is evident from
the example in the figure that high values of q strongly favour the selection of the highest
ranked individuals, while low values of q increase the chance that low ranked individuals
get selected.
The example also provides insights into the derivation of the function. Looking at the
selection probability of the ranked individuals (right-hand axis of figure 6.2), it is possible
to observe that p1 = q, p2 = q(1 −q), p3 = q(1 −q)2 and so on. This means that the
probability that a k-ranked individual is chosen is pk = q(1 −q)k−1, i.e. the probability of
a sequence of k Bernoulli trials.
Once the probability of selection is determined, the ns parents are sampled by generating
ns random numbers rc[0, 1]. The size of the sample ns that is selected from the total
population np is user defined. Each random number rc[0, 1] is then compared with the
cumulative probability function 6.10. If the number lies between the cumulative probability
of the (k −1)th and kth individual then the kth individual is selected. The process is
repeated for all ns random numbers. Note that there is also a very small probability that
no individuals are selected, in which case the sampling is repeated.
The same approach is used to select the individual to be replaced, with the only difference
being that once the kth individual has been sampled with the procedure described above,
the actual individual that is selected for replacement is the (np −k + 1)th individual, i.e.
the inverse of the rank. In addition, if the 1st individual is selected for replacement, the
selection is discarded and a new sample is taken. This strategy applies an elitist selection
approach which ensures that the best ranked individual of each generation remains in
the population, guaranteeing that the fitness of the best individual in each successive
generation cannot decrease.
6.5
Crossover and mutation
Some of the features that characterise the proposed model make it difficult to directly
apply some of the most common (e.g. those in section 3.3) genetic operators. Firstly, the
genes in the chromosomes are real numbers, so any operator that assumes integer or
binary values wouldn’t work or would need extensive changes.
Secondly, the relation between the genes and the alignment is very indirect, in particular
because the fitting of circular curves to the alignment makes the actual alignment deviate
considerably from the piece-wise linear alignment obtained by directly linking the points
of intersection together.
Lastly, the genes are not independent of each other, both because of the alignment gen-
eration algorithm and because of the cost function. Regarding the first point, a change in
one point of intersection may lead to a change of the curve radius of curves encoded by a
different gene. Regarding the second point, some of the soft constraints may be violated
even if only a single gene changes. It can then be concluded from the above examples
that a change in the value of multiple genes is often necessary to generate a new ”good”
solution.
To address these issues, 7 problem-specific operators are used, 3 mutation operators and
4 crossover operators.
63
==PAGE:72==
6.5.1
Mutation operators
1) Modified uniform mutation
In most genetic algorithm implementations that use real numbers to encode the genes,
the uniform mutation is applied by first selecting a random gene λk from a chromosome
Λ, with the index k selected from a discrete uniform distribution (cf. equation 6.11). The
gene λk is then replaced by a new gene λ
′
k, whose value is selected from a continuous
uniform distribution, similarly to equation 6.6.
k = rd[1, n]
(6.11)
This strategy has issues when applied to the proposed alignment representation, as it
doesn’t play well with the phenotype expressed by the chromosome. Looking at figure
6.3, if the mutation is applied to only one gene, there is often the risk of not improving
or even worsening the fitness of the chromosome, because of the interactions with the
adjacent genes.
In the particular example in the figure, if only gene λk is mutated, the resulting piece-wise
linear alignment from λk−1 to λk+1 (thin dotted line in 6.3) is still crossing the shaded high
cost area. When the curves are fitted to the alignment, the new solution encoded by gene
λ
′
k might even worsen the fitness of the solution. This issue may favour local minimums
over global minimums, as the mutated solution is likely to be discarded due to low fitness.
Additionally, the mutation strategy has to be modified to take into account that each point
of intersection in a 3d-alignment is encoded into two different genes. Therefore, a modified
uniform mutation operator is utilised instead.
Figure 6.3: Uniform mutation example
The operator is modified so that two new genes λ2i−1 and λ2j−1 are selected, with indexes
i and j respectively. The indexes are selected from two discrete uniform distributions, as
shown in equations 6.12 and 6.13. The bounds 0 and n + 1 represent the start and end
points of the alignment.
64
==PAGE:73==
i = rd[0, k −1]
(6.12)
j = rd[k −1, n + 1]
(6.13)
After the two genes are selected, the horizontal alignment between λ2i−1 and λ2k−1, and
between λ2k−1 and λ2j−1 is straightened, as shown in figure 6.3 (dashed lines). This
procedure will be called called the ”Curve elimination procedure”, as the intersection angle
α at the points of intersection between i and k, and between k and j, is set to 0 by the
procedure. Note that this implies that the value of all the genes from λ2i−1 to λ2j−1 is
mutated.
Once the horizontal alignment is updated, the the genes that encode the vertical align-
ment, λ2i to λ2j, also need to be mutated, according to a procedure which will be called
the ”Elevation determination procedure”. This procedure updates the elevation accord-
ing to three different cases. If the average gradient between λ2i to λ2j is higher than the
gradient constraint, the gradient is set to increase/decrease linearly between λ2i to λ2j,
to minimise the violation of the gradient constraint. If the constraint is not violated, the
elevation procedure is determined by a random binary number (i.e. a coin flip). If the out-
come is 0, the elevation of λ2i to λ2j is set to follow the ground elevation closely, while if
the outcome is 1, the elevation is set to be randomised, within the bounds of the gradient
constraint.
A detailed description of the ”Curve elimination procedure” and the ”Elevation determina-
tion procedure” is given below.
Curve elimination procedure
1. Generate the two indexes i and j, according to functions 6.12 and 6.13.
2. Mutate the intermediate genes between the ith and kth gene, as shown in equation
6.14 (i.e. linear function of line segment λ2i−1λ2k−1).
λ
′
2l−1 = λ2i−1 + (l −i) ·
 
λ
′
2k−1 −λ2i−1
k −i
!
,
∀l ∈{i + 1, ..., k −1}
(6.14)
3. Mutate the intermediate genes between the kth and jth gene, as shown in equation
6.15 (i.e. linear function of line segment λ2k−1λ2j−1).
λ
′
2l−1 = λ2k−1 + (l −k) ·
 
λ2j−1 −λ
′
2k−1
j −k
!
,
∀l ∈{k + 1, ..., j −1}
(6.15)
Elevation determination procedure
1. Generate the horizontal alignment according to the procedure in section 5.1.5, using
the genes generated by the ”Curve elimination procedure”. The horizontal alignment
is needed to locate the position of the vertical points of intersection Vi and Vj and
thus the distance between them.
65
==PAGE:74==
2. Check if the gradient between Vi and Vj violates the gradient constraint shown in
inequality 6.16. If the gradient constraint is violated, go to step 3, otherwise go to
step 4.

(λ2j −λ2i)
Pj−1
k=i dv(k)
 ≤gmax
1000
(6.16)
3. Mutate all the genes λ2l that encode the elevation between Vi and Vj, as shown in
equation 6.17 (i.e. linear function of line segment λ2iλ2j).
λ
′
2l = λ2i +
l−1
X
k=i
dv(k) ·
 
λ2j −λ2i
Pj−1
k=i dv(k)
!
,
∀l ∈{i + 1, ..., j −1}
(6.17)
Then, exit this procedure.
4. Generate a random binary number from the discrete distribution rd[0, 1] and set l =
i + 1.
5. If l ≤j −1, continue. Otherwise, exit this procedure.
6. Determine the lower and upper bounds for the mutation of λ2l, by using functions
6.18 and 6.19. The functions are derived similarly to functions 6.7 and 6.8.
zlL = max
(
zVl−1 −dv(l −1) gmax
1000

,
 
zVn+1 −
n
X
k=1
dv(k) gmax
1000
!)
(6.18)
zlU = min
(
zVl−1 + dv(l −1) gmax
1000

,
 
zVn+1 +
n
X
k=1
dv(k) gmax
1000
!)
(6.19)
7. If rd[0, 1] = 0, then mutate the gene λ2l so that it follows the ground elevation zg(l)
closely, similarly to the 3rd procedure for the generation of the initial population.
There are three possible cases:
• If zlL ≥zg(l) ≥zlU , then set λ
′
2l = zg(l).
• If zg(l) < zlL, then set λ
′
2l = zlL.
• If zg(l) > zlU , then set λ
′
2l = zlU .
Then, set l = l + 1 and go back to step 5.
8. If rd[0, 1] = 1, then mutate the gene λ2l randomly within the bounds determined with
functions 6.18 and 6.19, as shown in function 6.20.
λ
′
2l = rc [zlL, zlU ]
(6.20)
Then, set l = l + 1 and go back to step 5.
66
==PAGE:75==
2) Alignment straightening mutation
This mutation straightens the alignment between two randomly selected genes λ2i−1 and
λ2j−1, so that the alignment becomes a straight line in the 3-dimensional space. As a
consequence, the horizontal and vertical alignments between the two genes are also a
straight line, and the spacing between each point of intersection is constant. An example
of the procedure, applied to the horizontal alignment, is shown in figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Straight mutation example
The procedure is applied as follows. Two random indexes i and j, where i < j, are
sampled from two discrete uniform distributions, shown in 6.21 and 6.22. Note that index
i is drawn before j, as the lower bound of j depends on i.
i = rd[0, n + 1]
(6.21)
j = rd[i + 2, n + 1]
(6.22)
Afterwards, the intermediate genes between λ2i and λ2j−1 are mutated using function 6.23
for the odd genes (i.e. the di decision variables) and function 6.24 for the even genes (i.e.
the zi decision variables). The functions are similar to functions of the ”Curve elimination
procedure” described in the 1st mutation operator.
λ
′
2l−1 = λ2i−1 + (l −i) ·
λ2j−1 −λ2i−1
j −i

,
∀l ∈{i + 1, ..., j −1}
(6.23)
λ
′
2l = λ2i + (l −i) ·
λ2j −λ2i
j −i

,
∀l ∈{i + 1, ..., j −1}
(6.24)
3) Neighbourhood mutation
The chromosome Λ is changed so that the genes λ2i−1 that encode the horizontal align-
ment are mutated within a certain distance dC from their original position, set by the user.
67
==PAGE:76==
The mutation is performed by adding a random number rc to the value of the genes,
sampled from a distribution whose bounds are placed a constant distance dC from the
alignment. In this way, a corridor of width 2·dC is explored around the chromosome. Note
that the minimum and maximum bounds of the variables di also need to be taken into
account when calculating the bounds of the distribution from which the random number
rc is sampled. Taking everything above into consideration, the value of each each gene
λ2k−1 of the chromosome Λ is mutated according to equation 6.25.
λ
′
2k−1 = λ2k−1 + rc [min {λ2k−1 −diL, −dC} , min {λ2k−1 −diU , dC}]
(6.25)
The genes λ2i that encode the vertical alignment are then updated by applying the ”Eleva-
tion determination procedure” described in the 1st mutation operator, taking into account
that Vi = V0 = S and Vj = Vn+1 = E.
6.5.2
Crossover operators
1) Simple crossover
The chromosomes of two parents, Λi =

λi1, λi2, ..., λi(2n)

and Λj =

λj1, λj2, ..., λj(2n)

,
are crossed after gene λ2k, where k is a random number sampled from the discrete uni-
form distribution rd[1, n]. The resulting offspring are shown in equations 6.26 and 6.27.
Λ
′
i =

λi1, λi2, ..., λi(2k), λj(2k+1), ..., λj(2n−1), λj(2n)

(6.26)
Λ
′
j =

λj1, λj2, ..., λj(2k), λi(2k+1), ..., λi(2n−1), λi(2n)

(6.27)
Figure 6.5 shows an example of a simple crossover, highlighting its utility. In the example,
offspring no. 1 inherits some good genes, as the resulting alignment avoids both high
costs areas, while offspring no. 2 likely has lower fitness than the parents. When the
fitness of the offspring is determined and ranked in the next iterations, the hope is that
offspring no. 1 is selected for further crossover and mutation, leading to a possible new
best fitness solution, while offspring no. 2 may be replaced with other better solutions.
This outcome is better than the two initial average fitness solutions, that might get the
algorithm stuck in a local optimum.
Figure 6.5: Simple crossover example
2) Two-point crossover
The chromosomes of two parents, Λi =

λi1, λi2, ..., λi(2n)

and Λj =

λj1, λj2, ..., λj(2n)

,
are crossed at two positions, after gene λ2k and after gene λ2l, where k and l are sampled
68
==PAGE:77==
from two discrete uniform distributions, shown in 6.28 and 6.29. Note that index k is drawn
before l, as the lower bound of l depends on k.
k = rd[1, n]
(6.28)
l = rd[k + 1, n]
(6.29)
The resulting offspring are shown in equations 6.30 and 6.31.
Λ
′
i =

λi1, λi2, ..., λi(2k), λj(2k+1), ..., λj(2l), λi(2l+1), ..., λi(2n−1), λi(2n)

(6.30)
Λ
′
j =

λj1, λj2, ..., λj(2k), λi(2k+1), ..., λi(2l), λj(2l+1), ..., λj(2n−1), λj(2n)

(6.31)
The two-point crossover plays a very similar role to the simple crossover, but the extra
crossover point ensures a higher genetic diversity of the offspring.
3) Arithmetic crossover
The arithmetic crossover performs a linear combination of the two parents, which means
that each single gene in the offspring is a combination of the parents’ genes. Since the
feasible region of the di decision variables is convex and the feasible region of the zi
variables is unbounded, all linear combinations of the parents’ genes are per definition
feasible.
Figure 6.6 shows an example of an arithmetic crossover, where ω is close to 0.5. In this
case, the two offspring are close to equivalent, so only one is shown in the figure. The
ω = 0.5 is in fact a special case, as it represents the average of the two parents.
Figure 6.6: Arithmetic crossover example
The chromosomes of two parents, Λi =

λi1, λi2, ..., λi(2n)

and Λj =

λj1, λj2, ..., λj(2n)

,
are crossed according to equations 6.32 and 6.33, yielding the offspring Λ
′
i and Λ
′
j.
69
==PAGE:78==
Λ
′
i = ωΛi + (1 −ω)Λj,
where ω = rc[0, 1]
(6.32)
Λ
′
j = ωΛj + (1 −ω)Λi,
where ω = rc[0, 1]
(6.33)
4) Modified arithmetic crossover
This crossover operator applies the same crossover operation as operator number 3, but
then checks the area cost factor KA(j, k) of the grid cell (j, k) of every gene λ
′
2k−1 of
the two offspring, Λ
′
i and Λ
′
j. If the area cost is non-zero, the value of the gene λ
′
2k−1
is updated, as described in the ”Greedy heuristic” of section 6.2, steps 2.(a) and 2.(b).
Otherwise, the existing value is kept.
Each gene λ
′
2k corresponding to the subset of the genes λ
′
2k−1 that have been updated
in the previous step is then updated by applying the ”Elevation determination procedure”
described in the 1st mutation operator. The procedure is applied between the preceding
gene λ
′
2(k−1) and successive gene λ
′
2(k+1) of each updated gene λ
′
2k. If multiple adjacent
points of intersection have been updated, the procedure is applied between the gene
preceding the first gene in the series and the gene immediately after the last gene of the
series.
6.6
Convergence and termination criterion
Since the proposed solution algorithm belongs to the class of the genetic algorithms, it is
a heuristic method, and it is thus not possible to know if and when a global optimum has
been found. As a consequence, a higher number of iterations is always preferable, if time
permits. A possible termination criterion would be to apply the convergence criterion de-
scribed in section 3.3.6. The issue with this approach is that problems with very complex
solution spaces with many local minima might not improve for many iterations but then
suddenly improve again.
Therefore, the simplest approach is to decide on a fixed number of generations or running
time in advance. To increase the ease of use of the implementation, it is also possible to
implement an interruptible algorithm code and let the user decide when to stop while the
algorithm is running.
70
==PAGE:79==
7
Discussion
The proposed alignment optimisation (AO) algorithm has the potential to allow for an af-
firmative answer to the research question stated in the introduction of the thesis. Many of
the necessary elements are in place: a procedure to represent realistic alignment geome-
tries, a cost function that includes all the most important cost components and a genetic
algorithm that is designed to find good solutions to the aforementioned alignment rep-
resentation and cost function. The ”only” missing element is the implementation of the
algorithm, a deficiency that sadly makes it difficult to come with a definitive answer to
the research question. Despite the missing implementation, it is fortunately still possi-
ble to make a preliminary assessment of the proposed AO algorithm and to infer what
challenges might be encountered if the algorithm were to be implemented.
The mathematical representation of the alignment considers the most important geometri-
cal elements of a railway alignment, the tangent track sections and the circular curves, and
guarantees that no discontinuities are are present, regardless of input parameter values.
The use of the points of intersection to represent the alignment reflects how alignments
are usually represented when they are manually designed, which makes it easy to fit the
algorithm in the existing design pipeline and regulatory environment. There is of course
still room for further improvement, and here the addition of transition curves to the repre-
sentation of the horizontal alignment comes to mind. Another useful addition that was not
previously mentioned would be to allow for a more free placement of the vertical curves,
which are bound to the horizontal points of intersection in the proposed model. These two
additions would be welcome, but are not strictly necessary for the stated goal of finding
alignment alternatives in early planning phases.
The cost function includes most of the features that are needed to accurately depict the
cost of a railway alignment, and can be thought of more as a framework to enable the
estimation of the alignment cost than an exhaustive list of all the cost components. The
cost function offers a tool to compute each type of cost, like the length-dependent and
location-dependent costs. It’s then up to the user to find all the necessary data sources
to properly take advantage of the tools. One area of possible improvement would be the
addition of a tool to calculate the penalty costs related to the vertical clearance over and
under line features like waterways and roads. These features are very common in the
case scenario and more generally in greenfield railway projects, so the addition would
significantly increase the realism of the cost function.
The proposed genetic algorithm design incorporates genetic operators that are specifi-
cally tailored for the optimisation of railway alignments. The operators draw on the math-
ematical representation of the alignment to infer useful information about the fitness of
the individuals, and some are also capable to give a rough estimate of some of the cost
components without the need to evaluate the complete alignment and cost function.
The high level overview given above suggests that most of the features that are neces-
sary to find accurate alignment candidates for the chosen case scenario are present, with
only a few extra functionalities needed to achieve optimal capabilities. Compared to the
official feasibility study, the proposed algorithm offers a much more detailed and realistic
representation of the alignment, and models some of the most important cost components
in much greater detail. A good example of this is the estimation of the earthwork costs,
which is achieved via parametric estimation in the feasibility study,[2] while the AO al-
71
==PAGE:80==
gorithm offers the potential for accurate estimation cut and fill volumes based on a good
approximation of the topography near the alignment.
The comparison with the feasibility study offers a good indication of what could be the
role of the proposed algorithm during the early phases of a railway project. The feasibility
study is much wider in its scope, compared to the AO algorithm. It includes demand-
side considerations, effects outside of the project area, strategic considerations about the
effects on the structure of the transportation network and soft factors like the effects of the
project on the landscape. The aim of the proposed algorithm is not to match the feasibility
study in scope, but instead to offer a tool that makes it viable to explore multiple realistic
and detailed alignment alternatives already in the feasibility study stage.
The considerations set out in the previous paragraphs do not only apply to the specific
case project, but can be extended to other greenfield railway projects in Denmark too. In
fact, the norms and standards that form the base for the track geometry constraints are
equally valid for all railway projects in Denmark, while the topography of the project region
can be considered representative of the conditions in most of the Danish territory. The
only project specific conditions that might need to be changed are the design speed and
the assumption that the railway is reserved for passenger trains only. These two factors
influence which track geometry regulations are applicable for the project, so they might
affect some of the soft constraints for the alignment geometry.
The main question that remains unanswered is the practical performance of the algorithm
in a real world scenario. The AO algorithm presents a high number of parameters that
need to be tuned before its viability can be assessed. Of particular interest are the penalty
cost parameters in the cost function. Since the penalty costs are used to model most of
the geometrical constraints, these costs need to dominate the other costs components,
so that the fitness of the individuals that violate the soft constraints is strongly penalised.
While the base idea is simple, the exact quantification of the parameters is difficult. These
costs have a out-sized influence on the fitness computation, so it is important to calibrate
their value according to their perceived relative importance with respect to the other cost
components. The weighting of the parameters can be tricky, as it is not clear if, for ex-
ample, a violation of the radius constraint should weigh higher than that of the gradient
constraint, or if a single violation of a soft constraint should cost more than the length-
dependent costs of the alignment, etc. As is apparent from the examples, this process
involves a high degree of trial and error.
The input data can also greatly affect the real world performance of the algorithm. As
discussed previously, the cost function can be easily expanded to include additional cost
factors. Thus, the question arises as to which cost components should be included at a
minimum to yield realistic railway alignment alternatives. For the length-dependent and
earthworks costs, the answer is simple. The length-dependent cost calculation requires
one parameter, the alignment cost per unit of length, while the earthworks cost requires
two parameters, a costs per unit of volume for the cut volumes and one for the fill volumes.
These costs components are guaranteed to be included. The answer is a lot less clear-cut
for the location-dependent (area) costs. The location-dependent costs comprise a wide
variety of possible costs parameters, plus the penalty costs for the inaccessible areas.
One location-dependent cost parameter that is highly relevant for the case study is the
additional cost for traversing lakes or other bodies of water, as a number of large lakes
is present in the study region. Other cost parameters are less critical, but could help to
further improve the quality of the solutions.
The viability of the design choices in the representation of the alignment geometry would
72
==PAGE:81==
also need to be assessed. For example, during the design of the algorithm a choice was
made to settle on an alignment representation that doesn’t allow backtracking alignments
and limits the placement of the points of intersection. This design choice is justified by the
nature of the topography in the project area, but would need to be validated with real world
data. If the choice turns out to be too constraining, one expected outcome would be the
presence of too many solutions that violate the gradient constraint or ignore impassable
areas.
The genetic algorithm also contains parameters that need to be tested and validated be-
fore the AO algorithm can be applied. For example, the number of points of intersection
n is a fundamental user-set parameter, which needs to be set before every run of the
algorithm and greatly influences the geometry and cost of the solutions. Additionally, pa-
rameters like the selection probability of the genetic operators, the size of the selected
population ns and the selection probability parameter q also have a great impact on the
results, despite being less ”visible” to the user than the number of points of intersection.
The optimal value of all these parameters is likely to vary on a case-by-case basis, and
thus extensive testing and validation is required before the genetic algorithm can be used
to find the desired alignment alternatives.
In addition to the tuning of the parameters, the implementation of the genetic algorithm
also reserves uncertainties regarding the computation time of the genetic operators and
fitness function. The fitness computation requires the generation of the alignment and
evaluation of the cost function for every new generation of individuals, both of which may
be quite resource intensive operations at scale. This hypothesis needs to be tested during
the implementation and tuning of the algorithm, but if it turns out to be the case, a possi-
ble workaround would be to devise a simplified representation of the alignment and cost
function, and only run the complete functions in some of the iterations. In order for this
strategy to work properly, it is necessary to construct simplified functions whose output
strongly correlates to the fitness value of the complete functions.
The time complexity of the genetic operators can only be assessed after the implemen-
tation of the algorithm, as testing is required to check if the complexity of the operators
is justified by their performance. Many of the operators are in fact very specialised and
problem specific, so their complexity might be offset by their better ability to find good
solutions.
The proposed AO algorithm shows a high degree of flexibility and the ability to incorporate
most of the factors that influence the design of a railway alignment, depending on the
needs of the project. Further work is required to give a definitive assessment of the real
world performance of the algorithm, as the high amount of model parameters and the
complexity of the fitness computation and genetic operators suggest caution in drawing
conclusions just from looking at its mathematical representation.
73
==PAGE:82==
74
==PAGE:83==
8
Conclusion
As mentioned in the introduction, the design of railway alignments is a very demanding
task in terms of human and financial resources, and is influenced by many different factors
covering a variety of different professional fields. These characteristics limit the level of
detail and the amount of alignment alternatives that can be explored in the early design
stages, which negatively affects the quality of the policy decisions in the early phases of a
project. To try to address these issues, the thesis set the goal of developing and applying
a heuristic method to find good and realistic railway alignment alternatives in the Danish
context.
In the thesis, the Kattegat case study has been utilised to derive a set of requirements
for the alignment optimisation algorithm. A mathematical representation of the railway
alignment and a cost function have then been presented that try to cover all the said
requirements. These elements have been used to form the basic building blocks from
which the genetic algorithm has been developed. The result is a heuristic algorithm with
a high degree of flexibility and adaptability that has the potential to be applied not only to
the case study, but also to other greenfield railway projects in Denmark.
The stated objective, to design and apply a heuristic method for alignment optimisation,
can be considered partially achieved. The proposed design has the potential to cover
the listed requirements, but the implementation of the algorithm wasn’t carried out, which
creates uncertainties about its real word performance. If the proposed algorithm were
to be implemented, the correct tuning of the model parameters would be of fundamental
importance to achieve the full potential of the proposal. Besides the parameter tuning,
questions remain about the performance of the design choices that have been made,
which can only be answered once the algorithm is implemented and tested.
To conclude, the design of the proposed alignment optimisation algorithm shows great
promise, as it covers all the main requirements and offers a highly adaptable structure and
solution algorithm that can be easily expanded, should the need arise. Looking forward,
an implementation of the algorithm has the potential to remove the remaining uncertainties
about its real world performances, which would finally enable an affirmative answer to the
research question.
75
==PAGE:84==
76
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
Sund & Bælt og Trafikstyrelsen Vejdirektoratet. En fast forbindelse over Kattegat -
Forundersøgelse - Kombineret vej- og jernbaneforbindelse - Sammenfattende rap-
port. 2022.
[2]
COWI. Forundersøgelse af en Kattegatforbindelse, Landanlæg - Anlægsteknik og
Miljø - Vej og Bane. 2022.
[3]
Sund & Bælt og Trafikstyrelsen Vejdirektoratet. Bilag til sammenfatningsrapport -
Udvælgelse af løsninger - vej og bane. 2022.
[4]
Banedanmark. Tværprofiler for ballasteret spor - Banenorm BN1-6-7. 2023.
[5]
Banedanmark. Sporregler 1987. 2017.
[6]
M. Ali Yücel Atınç Pırtı. The fourth-degree parabola (bi-quadratic parabola) as a
transition curve. 2012.
[7]
Shaw Jocelyn F.B. Howard Bernard E. Bramnick Zacarias. Optimum Curvature
Principle In Highway Routing. 1968.
[8]
Frederick Y. M. Wan. Introduction to the calculus of variations and its applications.
Chapman & Hall, 1994.
[9]
Miles Robert D. Turner A. Keith. The GCARS System - a Computer-Assisted Method
of Regional Route Location. 1971.
[10]
Calogero V. Athanassoulis G.C. Optimal location of a new highway from a to b - A
computer technique for route planning. 1973.
[11]
Trietsch D. A Family of Methods for Preliminary Highway Alignment. 1987.
[12]
Hao Pu Taoran Song Paul Schonfeld. A Review of Alignment Optimization Research
for Roads, Railways and Rail Transit Lines. 2023.
[13]
S. M. Easa. Selection of roadway grades that minimize earthwork cost using linear
programming. 1988.
[14]
Puy Huarte J. Optimisation and automatic design of highway profiles. 1973.
[15]
Civil and Environmental Systems Engineering. 1997.
[16]
Hayman R.W. Optimization of vertical alignment for highways through mathematical
programming. 1970.
[17]
Parker N.A. Rural highway route corridor selection. 1977.
[18]
Parker N.A. Experience with OPTLOC: optimum location of highway by computer.
1973.
[19]
Fwa T.F. Chew E.P. Goh C.J. Simultaneous optimization of horizontal and vertical
alignments for highways. 1989.
[20]
Jyh-Cherng Jong. “Optimizing highway alignments with genetic algorithms”. PhD
thesis. University of Maryland, 1998.
[21]
Paul Schonfeld Min-Wook Kanga Manoj K. Jhab. Applicability of highway alignment
optimization models. 2012.
[22]
Jong J.-C. Kang M.-W. Schonfeld P. Highway alignment optimization through fea-
sible gates. 2007.
[23]
Yang N. Kang M.-W. Schonfeld P. Prescreening and repairing in a genetic algorithm
for highway alignment optimization. 2009.
[24]
Schonfeld P. Lai X. Concurrent optimization of rail transit alignments and station
locations. 2016.
[25]
P. Schonfeld et al. N. Yang M.-W. Kang. Multi-objective highway alignment optimiza-
tion incorporating preference information. 2014.
[26]
Russell Eberhart James Kennedy. Particle Swarm Optimization. 1995.
77
==PAGE:86==
[27]
M. Bagherian Y. Shafahi. A customized particle swarm method to solve highway
alignment optimization problem. 2013.
[28]
M.J. de Smith. Determination of gradient and curvature constrained optimal paths.
2006.
[29]
H. Pu et al. A three-dimensional distance transform for optimizing constrained moun-
tain railway alignments. 2019.
[30]
T. Gao et al. A deep reinforcement learning approach to mountain railway alignment
optimization. 2022.
[31]
Ralph R. Martin David Beasley David R. Bull. An Overview of Genetic Algorithms:
Part 1, Fundamentals. 1993.
[32]
I. Rechenberg. Evolutionsstrategie- Optimierung technischer Systeme nach Prinzip-
ien der biologischen Evolution. 1971.
[33]
J. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. 1975.
[34]
Oliver Kramer. Genetic Algorithm Essentials. 2017.
[35]
L. Davis J.J. Grefenstette. Genetic Algorithms and Simulated Annealing, Chapter 4
- Incorporating problem specic knowledge into genetic algorithms. 1987.
[36]
Ralph R. Martin David Beasley David R. Bull. An Overview of Genetic Algorithms:
Part 2, Research Topics. 1993.
[37]
Banedanmark. Fritrumsprofiler. 2014.
[38]
Georgios Kaliabetsos Nikolaos Eliou. A new, simple and accurate transition curve
type, for use in road and railway alignment design. 2014.
[39]
Paul Schonfeld Jyh-Cherng Jong Manoj K. Jha. Preliminary Highway Design with
Genetic Algorithms and Geographic Information Systems. 2000.
[40]
Paul H. Wright. Highway engineering. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996.
[41]
Hoel L.A. Garber N.J. Traffic and Highway Engineering. CL Engineering, 1996.
[42]
Paul Schonfeld Jyh-Cherng Jong. An evolutionary model for simultaneously opti-
mizing three-dimensional highway alignments. 2003.
[43]
Michalewicz Z. Genetic algorithms + data structures = evolution programs. Springer,
1996.
78
==PAGE:87==
A
Learning objectives
• Discuss the existing reports about the Kattegat case and outline the main findings re-
garding the selected alignment alternatives and the method utilised to choose them.
• Analyse the key aspects and challenges related to alignment selection as identified in
the academic literature, both in general and in relation to the case.
• Compare the main alignment optimisation models and algorithms that can be found in
the existing literature and select the heuristics approach that fits best to the project scope.
• Formulate a detailed conceptual and mathematical model for alignment optimisation,
considering the specific requirements for Kattegat case.
• Develop a heuristic algorithm that can be used to solve the mathematical model for
alignment optimisation.
• Implement the chosen alignment optimisation algorithm to solve the proposed model,
analyse the results, and validate them against the model constraints.
• Evaluate the quality of the results by comparing them against the alignment alternatives
found in the preexisting Kattegat case reports.
• Criticise and evaluate the proposed approach, focusing on its viability in alignment opti-
misation problems different to the specific case.
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
