==PAGE:1==
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial
Perception in a Room
Master Thesis
DTU Acoustic Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
Master Thesis
April, 2024
By
Rahul Roy Chowdhury
Supervisors:
Efren Fernandez Grande
Oliver Schueregger
Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu
Antonio Andrés Figueroa Durán
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Rahul Roy Chowdhury, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Ørsteds Plads, Building 352, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/research/research-areas/electro-technology/acoustic-
technology
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months (= 30 ECTS) at the Acoustic Technology Group,
Department of Electrical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Engineering Acoustics, MSc.
Rahul Roy Chowdhury ­ s214002
Signature
Date
ii
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Several studies have conducted various forms of subjective testing to identify how audio­visual
cues influence the Room Divergence Effect by using Externalization as the metric for evaluation
[26, 25]. Although numerous studies have assessed the level of reconstruction necessary for a
satisfactory experience, encompassing factors like personalized HRTFs (Head­Related Transfer
Functions), head­tracking, direction­dependent externalization, and the length of RIR [25], it re­
mains unclear which specific signal attributes enhance the overall experience. Leclère [18] found
a significant correlation between externalization and the binaural cues in reverberation, i.e. the
interaural differences improve externalization.
The purpose of the master thesis is to investigate the perceptual quality of binauralized signals
which are generated using different models of the reverberation tail. The performance of two IR
synthesis models were compared with a microphone reference along with the IR of a different room
and the results were analyzed objectively and subjectively. To explore Room Divergence Effect,
half the subjects were primed by providing them with information on the auralizations and given
some visual cues, while the other half received no information. Please note that this investigation
will not explore the influence of visual cues, and instead focus purely on the auditory aspects.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Oliver Schueregger for his commitment in the
work and invaluable support. You motivated me to keep searching for the right answers through
your passion, interest and curiosity. Huge thanks to my two other supervisors Antonio Andrés
Figueroa Durán and Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu for your positive encouragement, showing
interest in my work at all times and always being there to help. I really appreciate the dedication
shown by the three of you throughout this project.
I am deeply indebted to all the listeners who volunteered to come and participate in the perceptual
task, the outcome of the study would certainly have not have been possible without their contribu­
tion. Furthermore, I would like to thank Henrik Hvidberg and Brandon Madsen for their assistance
in providing me with the relevant tools and software that was needed for the measurements of the
room impulse response.
A special thanks to my friends Cathrina and Adriana who were always available to distract me
when I needed breaks, providing me with ways to release the pressure when things were not going
as planned. Lastly, I am grateful for the love and encouragement my parents and my brothers have
given me throughout the project, it would not have been the same without their support.
iv
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Nomenclature
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Physical Domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Perceptual Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Metrics for Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Measurements
8
3.1
IEC Listening Room
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Transmission Room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Implementation
11
4.1
Models of the Reverberant Tail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Creation of Binaural Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Subjective Testing
17
5.1
Testing Principle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Programme Material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3
Parameters of the Listening Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Results and Discussion
20
6.1
Objective Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
Subjective Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Conclusion
29
Bibliography
31
A Appendix : Post­Screening of Assessors
33
B
Appendix : Position of Microphone for Both Rooms
34
C Appendix: Additional Results and Test for Normality
35
D Appendix: Pictures of the Rooms
38
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
AFC Alternative Forced Choice
ANOVA Analysis of Variance
BRIR Binaural Room Impulse Response
DRR Direct to Reverberant Ratio
EDC Energy Decay Curve
HRIR Head Related Impulse Response
HRTF Head Related Transfer Functions
IACC Interaural Cross Correlation
IHL In Head Localisation
ILD Interaural Level Difference
ITD Interaural Time Difference
LUFS Loudness Units Full Scale
MUSHRA Multiple Stimulus with Hidden Reference and Anchor
RDE Room Divergence Effect
RIR Room Impulse Response
SH Spherical Harmonics
SRIR Spatial Room Impulse Responses
vi
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Perceptual evaluation surrounding binaural reproduction of acoustic spaces have been thoroughly
investigated in literature for several decades. One example of this is G. Plenge’s work: On the
Problem of ”In Head Localisation” from 1972, where the author argues that the origin of In Head
Localisation (IHL) is not directly related to the device that is playing the sound, but it is a result of
a break­down in the learning process of the characteristics of the source and room properties [27].
The importance of a perceptually accurate binaural sound is more relevant than ever due to the
increasing popularity of binaural reproduction systems and the advent of virtual and augmented
reality devices. The ability to recreate virtual environments via headphone playback allows for a
more immersive experience for the listener. Plenge introduces a model consisting of two stages:
the localizability of the sound source, which is stored in the long­term memory and reliant upon the
Head Related Impulse Response (HRIR); while the room characteristics and information on the
source is stored in a short­term memory. This can be linked to the adaptation towards new Room
Impulse Responses which take place very quickly each time one enters a new room.
Sound field in a Room
The sound field in a room is described using a Room Impulse Response (RIR). It comprises of
three stages, the direct, early, and late part. The first two stages are responsible for providing the
directional cues and change depending on the positions of the source and the receiver [28]. As
the density of reflections at a point accumulate over time, there reaches a stage where the room
may be considered diffuse, whereby the arrival of sound from all directions are equally probable
and the average density of energy is the same at any point in the room [11]. This region of the
impulse response is classified as the reverberation tail, and it is responsible in providing several
spatial attributes such as Distance and Spaciousness [23, 30]. The moment when early reflections
fade and the reverberation tail begins is known as the mixing time.
Binaural Hearing
Binaural hearing refers to the method of gathering information about an auditory event based on
the sound received by two ears. The brain uses the different features of the two channels such as
intensity, phase etc. to determine the location of the sound source. Reproducing this sound over
headphones is known as binaural auralization and the filter that is associated with the path that
sound travels from the source and into both ears is known as Binaural Room Impulse Response
(BRIR). This study uses some signal processing techniques to create a binaural auralization using
spherical microphone array recordings of a room along with a generic HRIR dataset. The HRIR is
a filter which only accounts for the scattering effects caused by the ears, the head and the torso.
Room Divergence Effect
Werner defines Room Divergence Effect (RDE) as a decrease in the perceptual quality external­
ization as a result in an acoustic mismatch between the actual listening room and the virtually
synthesized room [26]. This can be related to the filter model described in [14], whereby the pref­
erence mapping could be linked to the expectations and memory of the listener. If the sounds
they are listening to are not congruent towards their expectations, then this results in a violation
in internal expectations, which in turn leads to an In Head Localization [12]. Klein compares this
phenomenon to the use of generic Head Related Transfer Functions (HRTF) in creating binau­
ral sounds, where the internal model can create an accurate auditory event when the expectations
match, otherwise this results in localization blur [26]. Some studies look into adaptation strate­
gies of the auditory model, concluding that the room divergence effect reduces when the subject is
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
1
==PAGE:10==
trained on incongruent data [26, 16, 15]. This is similar to adapting to generic HRTFs [26]. Some
sources tried to establish a relationship between acoustic descriptors and perceptual attributes. [18,
12] found that interaural cues such as Interaural Cross Correlation (IACC) help improve External­
isation. Others were interested in specific aspects of the source such as the position and the audio
content. [13, 25] found that the choice of stimulus is critical in performing localization tasks due to
the spectral content of the program material, while another found that externalization increases in
lateral directions, possibly due to increase in interaural differences [22, 26, 18]. In summary, the
reduction of externalisation in this context is caused by incongruent visual and acoustic cues and
it depends on the direction and spectral content of the source. It is crucial to note that these studies
compare rooms with vastly different sizes and acoustic properties, such as the reverberation time,
which varies between 0.2 s to 2 s [26]. This study is only investigating rooms small in volume, to
mimic a living room environment.
1.2
Research Focus
The project focuses explicitly on the late reverberant part of the RIR. The importance of the IR
tail is investigated on the perceptual quality of binauralized signals. To investigate this, the tail of
an RIR is modified using several models and their influence on the perceived quality is examined
through a listening test. An impulse response acquired from a different room is also included to
see how it compares to the other models. To avoid changing too many spatial attributes at once,
the direct and early reflections of the RIR was fixed for all conditions to ensure that the changes in
localization did not dominate the perceived differences. Please note that a lot of the work in this
study has been done following the literature on Room Divergence Effect.
2
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
This section follows a brief discussion on human perception of acoustic spaces. The theory will
revolve around the principles of the sound localization model described by Plenge [27] as well as
the Filter Model which is explained in [14]. According to the latter, an auditory event is created
when a physical stimulus is perceived after being filtered by the senses. This model is shown in
Figure 2.1. Please note that this study aims to compare perceptual results with objective measures,
and therefore anything beyond the Perceptual Domain is not considered.
Figure 2.1: The Filter Model consisting of a physical, perceptual and affective domain. Each
domain is separated by the sensory and cognitive filter [14].
2.1
Physical Domain
The relationship between a source and a receiver in an enclosure is best described by a Room Im­
pulse Response (RIR). The RIR typically comprises of three stages which reflect different proper­
ties of the room. The first sound that arrives to the receiver is the direct sound. This is illustrated in
Figure 2.2. This onset appears after a propagation delay td. This is followed by early reflections,
originating from nearby obstacles like the floor or the walls. As the number of reflections increase
in time due to finite volume, they begin to interact with each other and increase the reflection
density, this is characterized as late reflections [30]. This last part of the impulse response is of
particular interest to this study.
Figure 2.2: An example of how the path traveled by the sound waves corresponds to the impulse
response. Here, the red line indicates the direct path and in the impulse response, the direct sound.
This is followed by the early reflections which are caused by the sound reflecting from nearby
obstacles such as the floor, walls and ceiling. This is followed by the reverberant tail.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
3
==PAGE:12==
Most of the theory presented here is based on Chapter 8 from [5]. On average, due to the high
density of reflections, the energy distribution in a regular enclosure throughout the space at any
given moment is roughly constant. Furthermore, the acoustic energy diminishes exponentially over
time. In the frequency domain, this corresponds to a high modal overlap, and a statistical approach
to modelling the sound field in an enclosure is justified when the modal overlap is above 3
M = 3 = 12 ln 10V
Trevc3 f2
(2.1)
Here, M is the modal overlap, V is the room’s volume and Trev is the reverberation time. The
frequency above which the statistical theory is valid is known as the Schroeder Frequency
fSchroeder ≈2000 ·
√
T60
V
(2.2)
This assumption is justified for this study, since the tail of the impulse response is being synthe­
sized, which is inherently a sound field with high reflection density in time domain. The statistical
model presented is a sound field in a reverberation room that consists of coherent plane waves with
random phases arriving from all directions. This is a pure tone model which can be extended to a
broadband signal. Although the probability of the sound pressure level being in a certain interval
is the same at all positions, the sound pressure level still depends on the position. Temporal corre­
lation functions between linear quantities are measured at two positions depend on the positions,
although the probability of a given correlation function being in a certain interval depends only
on the distance between the two points. The model is idealized since infinitely many plane waves
with completely random phases are assumed, but it gives a good approximation to the sound field
in a reverberation room above the Schroeder frequency. The resulting sound pressure at a given
position is described as
p(r1) = lim
N→∞
1
√
N
N
∑
i=1
Aiej(ωt−ki·r1) = lim
N→∞
1
√
N
N
∑
i=1
Aiej(ωt−kx·x1−ky·y1−kz·z1),
(2.3)
where Ai is the complex amplitude of the i’th wave, and ki is the wavenumber vector of the wave
i. The amplitudes are independent random variables with uniformly distributed phases, and all
directions of the wavenumber vectors are equally probable. At another position in the sound field,
the sound pressure is
p(r2) = lim
N→∞
1
√
N
N
∑
i=1
Aiej(ωt−ki·r2) = lim
N→∞
1
√
N
N
∑
i=1
Aiej(ωt−ki·r1)ej(ki·r),
(2.4)
Here, r is the vector that separates the two points. Thus ki · r is the term which accounts for
the phase shift between the two points. The statistical properties of the sound field with respect
to position can be determined by studying the ensemble statistics of sums of the type given in
Equation 2.3. The spatial correlation [5] of the sound pressure can obtained by using both Equations
2.3 and 2.4
E{ˆp(r1) ˆp∗(r2)} = E{|p2|}sin kr
kr
(2.5)
4
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:13==
The interpretation of this, is that sound pressure signals recorded at positions less than quarter
of a wavelength apart in a reverberation room are likely to have almost the same amplitude and
phase. On the other hand, if there is more than half a wavelength between the two points, then
the knowledge of the amplitude and phase of one of the signals provide no knowledge of the other
signal. This will be the underlying theory for one of the models for generating the tail described
in Chapter 4.
2.2
Perceptual Domain
This section relates to the perception created by the auditory event. Localization cues are intro­
duced and briefly discussed and then the perceptual mixing time is introduced. The mixing time
is an important attribute when investigating the reverberant tail, as it represents a singular point in
time where the early reflections cease and the tail begins.
2.2.1
Localization Cues
In binaural hearing, sound source localization is primarily done using two temporal cues: Interaural
Time Difference (ITD) and Interaural Level Difference (ILD). ITDs relate to the difference in the
time of arrival of a wavefront between the left and right ears, while ILDs relate to the sound level
difference between the two ears. This, however is not enough to explain the localization of binaural
sounds, since there are ambiguities in regions where the ITDs and ILDs are the same, these regions
are known as the Cone of Confusions.
An additional spectral cue is the direction­dependent filters, which take place each time the sound
enters into the ear canal. These are known as Head Related Transfer Functions, they vary based
on the direction due to the shape of the ear, the head shadow effect and torso reflections. This cue
resolves the ambiguities mentioned earlier and also provides the cue for elevation. In connection
to Plenge’s work, this is the event which is stored in the long­term memory. Since each unique
person has a different anatomy of their ears, shape of head and torso, the HRTF is individual. As a
result, the performance of an HRTF on a different subject may be very different compared to their
individualized HRTF. Studies have found that prolonged exposure to non­individualized HRTFs
result in improved localization, which suggests that the auditory system adapts to HRTFs [32].
2.2.2
Mixing Time
According to Lindau and Weinzierl, the mixing time is defined as the moment when the diffuse
reverberation tail of an impulse response begins [4]. Here, a diffuse sound field is characterized
by an equidistribution of acoustical energy. Perceptually, they define this as the moment where the
diffuse tail can no longer be distinguished from another position or the listener’s orientation in the
room. They present and compare the performances of signal­based and model­based tools for the
estimation of the perceptual mixing time by performing a listening test. According to them, if an
impulse response is available, then the average perceptual mixing time can be predicted using the
echo density approach suggested by Abel and Huang [29]. For a better estimation of the perceptual
mixing times, they fit a linear model to the mixing time acquired from the Echo Density approach,
this is shown in Equation 2.6. It is also specified that for robustness, this must be an average of
several measurement positions.
tmp95 = 1.8 · tmix,Abel −38
(2.6)
A more recent work published by Deppisch [9] uses a subspace method to extract the direct, early
and late part of the impulse response. This is obtained using generalized singular value decompo­
sition and the residual is treated as the reverberation estimate. This technique results in a transition
phase between the direct and reverberant part of the IR, it does not return a single point in time
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
5
==PAGE:14==
where the IR can be split. Although this method has a perceptual significance, it will result in a
reverberation tail which may have components in the direct and early reflection stages.
Although it may not be perceptually relevant, a well defined mixing time provides control over
which regions need to be fixed and which ones need to be processed. A large mixing time results
in a very low contribution from the reverberation tail and therefore imperceivable differences in
the rendered BRIRs. In contrary, a small mixing time results in large contribution from the tail,
however, this results in an incorrect modelling of the early/salient reflections. During the imple­
mentation stage, the mixing time was found to be 30 ms using Lindau and Weinzierl’s approach.
A pilot study revealed that 30 ms resulted in unwanted changes in other spatial attributes such
as localization. Using a mixing time of 10 ms resulted in imperceivable differences in the RIR.
Therefore, the mixing time was set to be 20 ms as it created perceivable differences both among
subjective and objective metrics.
2.3
Metrics for Evaluation
The metrics presented below will be used to evaluate the RIRs, they have been selected due to
their relevance to the topic of this study. Objective metrics provide quantitative assessments of
physical properties of sound, while subjective metrics capture perception of the sound experienced
by a listener.
2.3.1
Objective Metrics
Metrics for objective evaluation can be grouped into signal based metrics, and perceptually mo­
tivated metrics. Signal based metrics include the Direct to Reverberant Ratio and Reverberation
Time. The DRR is defined in Equation 2.7, where d is the direct part, e and r are the early and re­
verberant components respectively [17]. It is a measure of how much reverberant energy is present
in the IR in comparison to the direct part.
DRR = 10 · log10
∑d[n]2
∑e[n]2 + ∑r[n]2
(2.7)
The reverberation time refers to the time taken for the amplitude of sound to decay by 60 dB
from its starting value when the excitation signal ceases. It is estimated by taking the slope of the
Energy Decay Curve [21]. Perceptually motivated metrics include ITD, ILD and Interaural Cross
Correlation. The first two have been described above, IACC refers to the degree of similarity
between the signals arriving at both ears. The ISO 3382­1 standard [34] defines it as
IACCt1,t2 = max |IACFt1,t2|
for
−1ms < τ < +1ms
(2.8)
where IACF is the normalized interaural cross correlation function
IACFt1,t2(τ) =
∫t2
t1 pL(t) · pR(t + τ)
√∫t2
t1 p2
L(t)dt
∫t2
t1 p2
R(t)dt
(2.9)
Here, t1 and t2 are the bounds of the impulse response, pL and pR are the left and right channels of
the BRIR respectively and τ is the delay. IACC can be measured to describe the dissimilarity of
the early reflections (t1 = 0 ms, t2 = 80 ms), or for the reverberant sound (t1 = 80 ms, t2 = ∞)
and it is usually stated as an average across octave bands from 125 Hz to 4 kHz. The mixing time
is set to be 80 ms here, which is quite large for a small room, it is more appropriate for concert
halls or auditoriums where the late reflections begin much later in the impulse response. For the
IACC calculations, 20 ms will be used as the mixing time.
6
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:15==
2.3.2
Subjective Metrics
As described in [14], subjective metrics can be split into source related and space related attributes.
The focus is on the latter, this includes attributes such as Spaciousness, Externalization, Envelop­
ment etc. Externalization was selected as the appropriate attribute for the study due to its popularity
in the literature surrounding RDE. Best [12] attempts to explain what Externalization is according
to past and current literature. Their findings indicate that a binaural signal is externalized when
all cues that would be provided in a natural listening environment is also present in the signal.
Following this, Internalization is a breakdown of internal expectations, or a failure of distance
perception. Their review makes it evident that distinguishing between the auditory perception of
distance and externalization are challenging in experimental approaches. Externalization was also
selected since it was thought to be easy to explain to a naive listener.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Measurements
This section describes the process for acquiring Room Impulse Responses (RIR), the next section
describes the post­processing and creation of the binaural signals. The measurements of the RIR
were taken using an EigenMike em32 from MH Acoustics. This is a rigid spherical microphone
array with a radius of r = 4.2 cm and consisting of 32 channels, which means that the highest
order of Spherical Harmonics is limited to N = 4. Measurements were taken for two small rooms
with varying acoustic properties such as reverberation time etc.
The loudspeakers used for the measurements were the Dynaudio acoustics BM6. Two loudspeakers
were positioned at a distance of 3 m for 10° azimuth and 2.5 m for 330° azimuth from the listener’s
position. The latter was placed closer due to restrictions in the room’s size. This was done to see
whether lateral sources would affect the perceived Externalisation. Both speakers were facing the
microphone corresponding to the listener’s position. For one of the reconstruction methods and for
the estimation of reverberation time, five additional recordings were taken at arbitrary positions
around both rooms while keeping the speakers fixed at their positions. Both the speaker and the
microphones were fixed at a height of 1.2 m which is an industry standard recommendation for
sitting height [35]. The coordinates of the measurement positions along with the speaker locations
are shown in Figure 3.1 and listed in the appendix (Table B.1). The excitation signal was an 8
s sweep signal followed by a 2 s silent period sampled at 48 kHz. The sweep covered the audi­
ble range from 20 Hz up to 20 kHz. The impulse responses were truncated to 0.5 s because the
response had already reached the noise floor.
3.1
IEC Listening Room
This is an IEC standardized listening room situated at the Department of Acoustic Technology in
DTU. The dimensions of the room are 7.52 m × 4.75 m × 2.76 m. The average relative humidity
was measured at 36.4% and the temperature was 22.7° C. When measuring the room, there was
only a small desk and a chair for the measurement setup, otherwise the room was empty. Taking
the measurements from all positions and across all 32 channels, the average reverberation time
was found to be 0.44 s across 6 octave bands spanning from 125 Hz to 4 kHz. This is very similar
to what was found from the measurements conducted by another study [33]. This, along with the
other room’s reverberation time is illustrated in Figure 3.3. The reverberation time is acquired
using the method from [21].
8
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:17==
Table 3.1: Reverberation Time, RT60, across octave bands for both rooms for a given direction of
source (10° & 330°).
Condition
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Mean
Listening Room Left
0.50
0.42
0.46
0.41
0.46
0.41
0.44
Listening Room Right
0.51
0.42
0.45
0.40
0.45
0.40
0.44
Transmission Room Left
0.53
0.49
0.46
0.48
0.46
0.48
0.48
Transmission Room Right
0.54
0.41
0.38
0.41
0.43
0.44
0.43
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Figure 3.1: Measurement positions of the Listening Room. Red indicates the position where the
listener should be seated. The Left Speaker is placed at 10° while the Right Speaker is at 330°.
3.2
Transmission Room
This is a transmission room. The dimensions of this room are 4.44 m × 3.45 m × 3.21 m. The
average relative humidity was 45.8% and the temperature was 20.6° C. The average reverberation
time was found to be 0.46 s across all measurements in this room. This was a little bit surprising
since the perceived reverberation was much higher when the room was evaluated in person. One
of the directions had rigid walls which created resonant frequencies. Pictures of both rooms can
be found in the Appendix D.
Interestingly, the reverb times for Listening Room behave similarly when the impulse response
is recorded from either source, but for the Transmission Room, the reverberation times are very
different. Generally, for the Transmission Room, the measurements recorded using the left source
appear more reverberant than the right source.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2: Measurement positions of the Transmission Room. Red indicates the position where
the listener should be seated relative to the position of the speakers. Similar to the Listening Room,
the Left Speaker is placed at 10° while the Right Speaker is at 330°.
125 
250 
500 
1000
2000
4000
0.36
0.38
0.4
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.5
0.52
0.54
Figure 3.3: Reverberation Time, RT60, across 6 octave bands ranging from 125 Hz to 4 kHz for
both rooms. The reverberation time is calculated as an average across all six measurement positions
for each direction of source.
10
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:19==
4
Implementation
In this section, the method for auralizations of the binaural signals are described. The section also
explains the steps taken to create the binaural signal from the BRIR.
Two popular techniques for recording of BRIRs are:
• Placing binaural microphones inside the subject’s ear and measuring the BRIR. This is typ­
ically done using dummy heads such as the Head and Torso Simulator from B&K. The
dummy head or the subject needs to rotate or change their position depending on the desired
receiver location and orientation.
• Recording the room impulse response using a spherical microphone array and multiplying
with an HRTF dataset in the Spherical Harmonics (SH) domain. This is much more con­
venient and only requires one measurement per position of the speaker and receiver. This
approach multiplies the Spatial Room Impulse Responses (SRIR) with the HRIR in the SH
domain and allows for head rotation [7].
All models described below will create a 32 channel SRIR, and then put into REAPER which will
create the BRIRs. REAPER is a Digital Audio Workstation (DAW) that has plug­ins for spatial
audio processing. All IRs are normalized per measurement basis by taking the maximum absolute
value across the 32 channels, i.e. max |s| = 1, where s represents one recording measurement of
dimensions (32, 24000) and 24000 is the length of the SRIR corresponding to 0.5 s at fs = 48000
Hz. This is done to account for changes in the loudspeaker gain for the different rooms.
4.1
Models of the Reverberant Tail
All models for synthesizing the reverberant tail are presented below. In addition to the transmission
room, two methods are presented, one which is a perceptually motivated approach as it uses the re­
verberant time, while the other is a statistical approach as it employs the properties of a reverberant
sound field.
4.1.1
Listening and Transmission Room
The Reference represents the ground truth. The reveberant part of the RIR acquired from the
Listening Room will be treated as the reference method.
The reverberant part of the RIR acquired from the Transmission Room will be included in the
subjective tests to investigate the presence of RDE since it is a recording of a different room with
different acoustic properties such as reverberation time and DRR.
4.1.2
Decaying Gaussian Noise: A perceptually motivated approach
This method is typically seen as the most simplistic approach to obtain the reverberant tail. It uses
the properties of sound decaying in a room along with the reverberation time to create the tail. In
an impulse response, the rate of decay is measured by Reverberation Time.
−60 = 20 · log10
|a(t60)|
|a(t0)|
|a(t60)| = 0.001 · |a(t0)|
(4.1)
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
11
==PAGE:20==
Mathematically, this corresponds to the time elapsed before the amplitude decays by a factor of
1000. As the reverb tail can be accurately described by a diffuse field, the amplitude follows a
decaying exponential with time [36]
a(t) = A · e
−t60
τ
where τ is the time constant and it refers to the time taken for the amplitude to decay to 0.37 · A.
The time constant can be determined if the RT is known. This will provide us with a way to model
the decay of the tail based on just the RT of the room.
a(t60)
a(t0) = 0.001 = A · e
−t60
τ
A · e
−t0
τ
0.001 = e
(−t60+t0)
τ
= e
(t0−t60)
τ
= e
−RT
τ
ln (0.001) = −RT
τ
τ ≈6.91 · RT
(4.2)
There is now a function which decays according to a specified reverb time, the next step is to add
noise; this is done by multiplying the amplitude A with a random number between ­1 and 1 for
each instant of time. Since the reverb time is frequency dependent, a separate reverb time was
calculated per octave band. A reverb tail was generated for each octave band, bandpass filtered
and then added together to generate an estimate of the reverb tail as shown in Figure 4.1. The
values of RT were taken from Table 3.1. This method will be referred to as the noise method.
Figure 4.1: Procedure for estimating the reverb tail for the decaying gaussian noise method. First
a reverb tail is generated using a band­specific RT, this is then bandpass filtered and then added to
the other bandpass filtered signals which have band­specific RT.
12
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:21==
4.1.3
Kernel based reconstruction: A statistical approach
A Kernel based sound field reconstruction for a reverberant field is presented in [2, 3]. The sound
field is modelled using a set of infinite plane waves with random phase traveling in random di­
rections as outlined in Subsection 2.3.1. In summary, the model takes the recordings of a few
measurement points and reconstructs the sound field at a desired point. Using Equation 2.3, the
model casts the sound field reconstruction as an optimization task, where the cost function is
J(a) = ||p −Ha||2
2 + λ||a||2
2
(4.3)
Here, H ∈CM×N represents N plane waves measured a M different positions, a ∈CN is the
complex amplitude of each wave, p ∈CM is the measured data for a specific frequency and λ is
a regularization parameter. Once the coefficients a are obtained, they can be used to extrapolate
the measured data basing the reconstruction on a linear combination of plane waves as described
in Equation 2.3. A kernel trick is presented to overcome the infinite number of coefficients as
N →∞is required to solve Equation 4.3. This kernel function replaces Ha with a positive
definite function, this allows for estimation of the sound pressure at a reconstruction point p• in a
high dimensional space without the need of the coefficients Ai. This kernel function corresponds
to the spatial correlation of a sound field
E{ˆp(r1), ˆp(r2)∗} = σ2 · sin(k||r1 −r2||)
k||r1 −r2||
(4.4)
Here, σ2 = E{|p|2} is the variance of the acoustic pressure and || · || is the 2­norm in an euclidean
space. This is a suitable kernel as it captures the properties of a reverberant sound field based on
ensemble statistics. The reconstructed pressure using the kernel trick requires only the measured
data and the spatial correlation, and can be obtained as follows
p• = KT
MN(KMM + λI)−1p
(4.5)
where KT
MN ∈RM×N and KMM ∈RM×M are mapping matrices defined by Equation 4.4.
Modeling the Energy Decay and Anchor Points
The reconstruction is based on the Bessel kernel and it underestimates the energy of the sound
field when extrapolating far from the measurement points. This is natural for spatial correlation
values kr >> 1. Since the reconstruction relies on this correlation and it decreases far from the
aperture, the reconstructed energy is also expected to be low far from the measurement points.
This presents a problem when measuring with a distributed set of microphone arrays, given that
the energy density can be considered spatially uniform for a reverberant room.
To take this into account, the paper proposes additional synthesized pressure values that anchor
the correlation at locations where there are not enough measurements to infer the sound field with
sufficient energy. These values are termed anchor points, and they are not directly measured but
rather drawn (as samples) from the statistical distribution of the measured pressure. In particu­
lar, in a reverberant field the values of sound pressure pf follow a complex normal distribution.
The pressure is calculated per frequency, where the starting frequency is 20 Hz and the highest
frequency is 8 kHz at a resolution of 1 Hz.
First the measured data within a short time window is used to find the mean and standard deviation
of the normal distribution by fitting the pf histogram. Then this is used to draw the anchor point
values that are statistically similar to the data and preserve the energy density across the room.
Since the spacing between anchor points should be relative to the wavelength, a different number
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
13
==PAGE:22==
of anchor points will be used depending on the frequency. It must be noted that rather than a
deterministic extrapolation of the data, the primary aim is to obtain a qualitative reconstruction
that preserves the statistical properties of the sound field.
The number of measurements need to be high enough to have a statistically meaningful sample
of the sound field. Only then will the complex normal distribution which describes the pressure
accurately represent the statistics of the sound field everywhere in the room. The 5 measured points
in the listening room were put into the model, and the model returned an estimate of the reverb tail
at the Listener’s position.
4.2
Creation of Binaural Samples
Below, the procedure for creating the BRIR and the binaural samples are explained, this is also
illustrated in Figure 4.3.
• For each direction (Left and Right source), the Direct and Early Reflections are extracted
from the Listening Room’s RIR. The Direct part is taken by locating the first maximum
among the 32 channels and then taking 32 samples from either side. This is shown in Fig­
ure 4.2. The Early part is then extracted by taking 20 ms of the RIR after the Direct part.
This is the mixing time which was determined in Section 2.2.2.
• For the listening room reference method, the reverberant part of the IR is simply the remain­
der of the RIR. To clarify, this method refers to the raw measurements from the EigenMike
without any processing.
• The transmission room reference method takes the Direct and Early Reflections from the
listening room and then attaches the reverberant part of the transmission room measure­
ments towards the end. To account for minor differences in the path delay resulting in phase
shifts for the different rooms, the RIR recordings are aligned in time. This means that all 32
channels will be shifted by the same value in order to preserve interchannel time differences.
• The kernel method estimates the reverberation tail by taking microphone recordings at other
positions in the listening room and generates an estimate at the listening position. The reverb
tail is then attached to the Direct and Early Reflections from the listening room as previously
described.
• The noise method attaches the decaying exponential signal to the Direct and Early parts in
the same manner. The starting value of the exponential, A, is taken as the maximum value
of the last 50 samples of the Early part to ensure that the transition between the Early and
Reverberant part is smooth. This is done for every microphone channel separately.
• Once the Spatial Room Impulse Response (SRIR) with dimensions (32 x 24000) for the four
methods are created, they are multiplied with an HRIR set in the Spherical Harmonics (SH)
domain in REAPER. The resulting signal is then binauralized from the SH domain. All this
was done using the open­source Spatial Audio Real­Time Applications (SPARTA) plug­in
in REAPER. This is a toolbox primarily developed by Leo McCormack, and it is provided
under the GPLv3 License [19]. The Direct to Reverberant Ratio (DRR) of the binaural signal
(2×24000) is then computed and compared with the DRR of the listening room’s reference.
If the DRR is not within 0.5 dB of the reference DRR, then a suitable gain is applied on
the reverberation tail for the chosen method, followed by the complete rerun of the BRIR
creation process. As a result, the noise and kernel method of reconstruction will have the
same DRR as the reference listening room, while the transmission room reference method
will have the DRR corresponding to the original DRR of the transmission room’s reference
recording. The reverberant properties were partially preserved by keeping the DRR the same
as the original measurement in the Transmission Room. The final DRR values are presented
14
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:23==
in Table 4.1. One of the reasons behind the differences found between the left and right
source in the DRR could stem from the fact that the right source was 0.5 m closer, which
meant that the contribution of the direct part was higher.
• Once the BRIR match the DRR of the original, they are convolved with the Programme
Material as well as a Headphone Equalizer which accounts for the frequency response of the
Headphones used in the listening task. The Headphone Equalizer was implemented using
the SoundID Reference Plugin in REAPER. Finally the binaural signals are normalized to
­23 Loudness Units Full Scale (LUFS) to ensure all signals have the same loudness level.
Table 4.1: Direct to Reverberant Ratio for all Methods for Left and Right Source.
Methods
Left Source
Right Source
Listening Reference
­4.3
­2.0
Kernel
­4.2
­2.0
Noise
­4.1
­2.1
Transmission Reference
­5.5
­3.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
10-3
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 4.2: Direct component of the RIR, in this example the earliest onset occurs at around 0.69
ms which corresponds to the 33rd sample.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
15
==PAGE:24==
+
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
HRIR Set
𝐷𝑅𝑅−𝐷𝑅𝑅!"# ≤0.5 ?
Compute DRR
BRIR [2×24000]
No
Yes
Programme 
Material (Speech, 
Music etc.)
*
Binaural Sound [2×480000]
SRIR [32×24000]
Normalize to -23 LUFS
Headphone 
Equalizer
Binaural [2×480000]
Apply gain or 
attenuation
Direct + Early
Reverberant
SH 
Domain
×
Figure 4.3: Algorithm for creating BRIRs. The HRIR is multiplied with the SRIR in the Spherical
Harmonics domain. The reverberant tail (top right plot) is the only thing that is changing for a
given direction of source. The Direct + Early part stays fixed for all methods for a given source
direction.
16
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:25==
5
Subjective Testing
A subjective test was carried out to investigate the magnitude of perceptual differences in exter­
nalization in the methods. First the principle of the listening test is presented, followed by the pro­
gramme material, parameters of the listening experiment and the section concludes by discussing
how the participants are split. Head­Tracking was initially considered to be included in this study,
however there were some difficulties in obtaining the equipment in the period of the investigation.
5.1
Testing Principle
A pilot test with a 3 Interval 2 Alternative Forced Choice (AFC) task was initially undertaken
in the form of an ABX test with 6 subjects [31]. An AFC task is a procedure where the subject
is presented with a series of intervals and they have to identify which interval was either similar
or different to the reference interval which is usually presented first. In this case, the reference
interval was presented in the middle, while the intervals for comparison were presented before and
after. This turned out to be too difficult and subjects were unable to focus on relevant features of
the signal and reported that they were focusing on any and all differences in the signals instead
(such as Timbre, Localization etc.). This was therefore considered an intermediate quality feature.
The subjective test is an adapted version of the ITU­R BS.1534 standard Multiple Stimulus with
Hidden Reference and Anchor (MUSHRA) framework [20]. The subject is asked to evaluate the
quality of several intervals in comparison to a reference. This study is investigating externaliza­
tion of sound sources, which falls under the Environment quality in the standard. Therefore, the
conventional scale has been modified into a scale that is perceptually relevant for this study. The
modified scale is shown in Figure 5.1. This scale is motivated by the work on Room Divergence
Effect using externalization from Klein and Werner [26]. The poorest form of externalization
is labeled as “Centre of Head,” analogous to the perceived externalization of an anechoic mono
recording. The labels then represent a qualitative increase in externalization until “Imperceptible.”
This label represents the point where the signal is externalized as much as the Reference to the
extent that the perception is indistinguishable. It is worth noting that here it is assumed that the
reference creates the most externalization among all signals. The anchor used for this study is a
mono anechoic recording of the programme material, they must always be rated 0 since they have
no spatial cues or interaural differences.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5.1: The MUSHRA scale has been modified to be more perceptually relevant, the scale
ranges from Centre of Head to Imperceptible. The subject is asked to rate 4 conditions in compar­
ison to the visible Reference.
5.2
Programme Material
Two programme materials were chosen to study the impact of spectral characteristics on external­
ization. To be compliant with ITU­R BS.1534, the length of the test signals was fixed to 10 s. The
first programme material is a Guitar and Vocal anechoic track taken from Cologne University of
Applied Sciences’ website [24]; it was chosen for its fairly periodic temporal properties. The sec­
ond material is a Drum track created using Garageband, this was chosen due to the transient nature
of its instruments. Looking at the power spectrum of both recordings in Figure 5.3, the drum track
has more energy in the frequencies below 200 Hz as well as above 2 kHz when compared to the
Guitar track. As mentioned in Section 4.2, all intervals presented to the listener have been scaled
to −23 LUFS to ensure that the perceived loudness does not change between intervals. This was
further confirmed with an expert listener. The spectrogram of the programme material is shown in
Figure 5.2. The presence of higher frequencies is clearly distinguishable between the Guitar and
the Drums. Moreover, there is a transient sound clearly present between 4 and 6 seconds for the
Drum track which comes from a cymbal.
(a) Drums
(b) Guitar
Figure 5.2: Spectrogram of the Programme Material.
18
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:27==
102
103
104
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Figure 5.3: Power Spectrum of the Programme Material used for the Subjective Test. The Drums
have more energy below 200 Hz and above 2 kHz.
5.3
Parameters of the Listening Experiment
A training phase with 2 pages are presented to the listener so that they can familiarize themselves
with the setup, programme material and the testing procedure. Each trial consists of a visible
reference and 4 intervals, two of which are a hidden anchor and a hidden reference. Subjects were
told not to adjust the volume in the beginning and at any point during the experiment. Information
regarding the reference as well as the remaining three intervals can be found under Chapter 4.
Since there are 2 Directions, 2 Programme Materials and 3 Methods (Noise, Kernel, Transmission
reference), this results in 12 trials where each trial contains a comparison of two methods for a
given direction and programme material.
As this is a MUSHRA test, the order of the intervals in a trial is randomized as well as the order of
the 12 trials. It common practice to repeat the same trail to assess the consistency of the subject’s
response, therefore the 12 trials are presented twice with a break in between. The break is necessary
to avoid listening fatigue. Once the subject has completed the training phase with 2 trials, they
begin the experiment comprising of 24 trials. The listening experiment took place in the listening
room where the measurements were taken. For the listening test, a Sennheiser HD 650 headphone
was used and paired with a Focusrite Scarlett audio interface and connected to a laptop which
had the MUSHRA interface. Thus, the headphone equalization applied on the BRIR was for the
Sennheiser HD 650 headset.
5.4
Participants
For the subjective evaluation, 20 subjects participated in the listening test between ages 23 to 33.
No hearing loss was reported by any subject. To further evaluate differences in externalization in
the presence of RDE, subjects were split into two groups, those that were primed to the listening
room and those that were not. The group that was primed was told that the recordings were au­
ralisations of the room they were present in and were provided some visual aid on the location of
the virtual sound sources by placing speakers in the positions where the sound would appear from.
The other group was not provided with any information on the test signals and did not receive any
visual aid and were simply told to rate the externalization of the signals. Of the 20 subjects, half
of them were primed. The results for the subjective tests are presented in Section 6.2.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
19
==PAGE:28==
6
Results and Discussion
This section presents the evaluation of the auralizations. As mentioned in Chapter 4, different
signals are compared to a reference where each signal has an altered reverberation tail. This com­
parison is done using objective and subjective measures and the results are presented.
6.1
Objective Metrics
Andreapoulou and Katz [1] compare perceptually relevant methods for the estimation of Interaural
Time Differences (ITD) and they present the work by Algazi et al. [6] as a good estimate for ITD.
It is calculated by detecting the first onset using a low relative threshold of ­30 dB, applied on a
3 kHz low­pass filtered BRIR. Since the Direct and Early part of the RIR is kept constant for all
methods at a given direction, the ITD is the same for all cases. It was found that the ITD was
approximately ­83 µs for the left source (10°) and 125 µs for the right source (330°).
The Interaural Level Differences are calculated by taking the differences between the left and right
discrete time fourier transform coefficients
ILD[ω] = 20 · log10
XR[ω]
XL[ω]
(6.1)
Where,
X[ejω] =
N
∑
n=0
x[n]e−jωn
(6.2)
Where N is the length of the impulse response. This result is presented in Figure 6.1. For all of
the methods, the ITD followed the same trend for the left and right source.
Figure 6.1: Interaural Level Differences for the Left and Right sources
The Interaural Cross Correlation (IACC) is calculated for the early (0 ms < t < 20 ms) and late
(20 ms < t < 0.5 s) part of the BRIR. The result is computed as an average of 6 octave bands
20
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:29==
spanning from 125 Hz to 4kHz in accordance to ISO3382 standards [34]. As discussed in Section
2.2, a lower IACC results in improved Externalisation. For the early part, the IACC was reported
as 0.60 for the Left source and 0.77 for the Right source. For the IACCLate, the highest values
are reported between 0.4 −0.5 for the Right source. With the exception of the Left source in the
transmission method, all the left source IACCLate are quite low at around 0.2.
ListeningRef
Kernel
Noise
TransmissionRef
IACCEarly
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Figure 6.2: Interaural Cross Correlation for the early and late part of the signal for both sources.
The IACC for the early part is the same for all conditions since the early part is a fixed condition
for all methods.
Below, in Figure 6.3 the Energy Decay Curve (EDC) estimates for the Left and Right sources are
presented for each method. The EDC is split into 3 bands, the bass (Lowpass, fL = 200 Hz),
midrange (fL = 200 Hz, fH = 2000 Hz) and treble (Highpass, fH = 2000 Hz). Note that this
is for the right channel of the BRIR, the left channel’s EDC is illustrated in Figure C.1. The late
part of the transmission method has more energy than the other methods. It is worth highlighting
that the noise method follows a pink noise spectrum as expected. For the left source, the listening
and kernel methods are close to one another, however, for the right source, the listening method is
about 10 dB higher and almost at the same level as the transmission method. A similar behavior
is observed for the left channel as well.
The similarity between the listening and transmission room is consistent with the RT values stated
in the measurement section, as the mean RT for the left source (0.48 > 0.44) is higher in the
Transmission Room, while they are very similar for the right source (0.43, 0.44).
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 6.3: Energy Decay Curves across 3 different frequency bands for the Right Channel.
6.2
Subjective Metrics
Following the recommendations of the ITU­R BS.1534 standard, post screening is first undertaken
to test the reliability of the data. Then a general summary of the results are presented by looking
at the descriptive statistics of the data. This is followed by a more comprehensive Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA) study.
6.2.1
Post­screening of Listeners
The scores acquired from each subject were evaluated with 3 criteria in order to assess the subject’s
reliability. The Identification of Hidden Anchor was computed as the percentage of time the anchor
was given a score of 5 or less. The MUSHRA standard suggests that the low­range anchor should
be 20­30 points below a mid­range anchor. And the mid­range should not be rated above 90 for
more than 15% of the test items. Therefore, the low­range anchor should not be rated above 60 for
more than 15% of the test items. All subjects, with the exception of two, successfully identified
the hidden anchor among all 24 pages.
The Identification of Hidden Reference was computed as the percentage of time the hidden ref­
22
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:31==
erence was given a score of 90 or more. This is done in accordance to the MUSHRA standard
(Reference), which recommends that an assessor should be excluded if they rate the hidden refer­
ence below a score of 90 for 15% of the test items. On average, the subjects were able to identify
the hidden reference in 21 out of the 24 pages.
Finally, as the listening experiment has a repeating stage, the accuracy of the listener can be as­
sessed by exploring the rank for each page and comparing it to that of the repeated set of trials.
The Rate of Reversal is defined as the percentage (out of 12) of time the subject gave a different
ranking in the repeated stage. If the subject rated two intervals very close to one another, then the
criterion also allows for the rank to be switched to account for minor differences in the scores. A
threshold of 50% was chosen for the rate of reversal, i.e. if the subject was providing the same
ranking for more than 5 out of the 12 pages, only then would their results be evaluated. Across
all listeners, the rate of reversal was 4.8, which meant that out of the 12 unique pages, almost 5 of
them were reversed when repeated. These metrics are presented for each subject in Table A.1.
Post­screening, the responses from 4 Subjects were removed from further analysis, namely subjects
7, 10, 12 and 13 since their Identification of the Hidden Reference was well below 80% and their
Rate of Reversals was quite high. Please note that the terms Reference and Listening Room will
be used interchangeably as they refer to the method which represents the best reproduction of the
auralization.
6.2.2
General Results
Figure 6.4a and Figure 6.4b show the distribution of the Externalization Scores for each method.
The listening room method is clearly the highest among all with an average score of 99, while the
transmission room and kernel methods have a similar mean, 72 and 73 respectively, however the
kernel has higher variance. The noise has a slightly lower mean at 64 and the Hidden Anchor is
centered around 0. It is also interesting to see that the noise method follows a bimodal distribution.
(a) Histogram
(b) Boxplot
Figure 6.4: Distribution of Externalization Scores across each Method
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 6.1: Results of the Repeated Measures ANOVA, the factors highlighted in bold represent the
statistically significant results as the p value is below 0.05.
Factors
F value
P value
Method
5763.4
< 2e­16 ***
Prog Mat
50.567
0.22854
Direction
3.7732
0.90692
Prime
0.5318
0.47789
Repeat
0.3099
0.57784
Method x Prog Mat
16.282
4.63e­13 ***
Method x Direction
13.596
6.85e­11 ***
Method x Prime
2.1236
0.07562 .
Method x Repeat
1.3815
0.23804
Prog Mat x Direction
0.9021
0.34238
Prog Mat x Prime
1.5312
0.21613
Prog Mat x Repeat
0.8313
0.36203
Direction x Prime
1.1900
0.27550
Direction x Repeat
0.1322
0.71619
Prime x Repeat
0.0001
0.99134
6.2.3
Statistical Analysis
A repeated­measures analysis of variance (rmANOVA) consisting of 4 within­subjects factors
(Method, Direction, Programme Material, Repetition) and 1 between­subject factor (Prime) was
performed on these results. This led to a total of 16 Subjects × 24 Pages × 4 Ratings per Page =
1536 Ratings. The fixed factor Subject ID was set as a random effect, which aimed to capture vari­
ability that was not explicitly accounted for by the fixed effects in the model. Prior to conducting
the ANOVA analysis, suitable tests for normality of residuals as well homogeneity of variances
were conducted. These are outlined in the Appendix C. The results are presented in Table 6.1
Main effects were found significant for the Method (p < 0.001). A post hoc Tukey’s Honest Sig­
nificance Difference (HSD) analysis indicated that the kernel (73) and transmission (72) method
were evaluated more externalized than the noise method (64). The reference (99) was also evalu­
ated as more externalized than the all of the other methods. As expected, the dry (0) method was
evaluated the least externalized. For the rest of the analysis, the results of the dry and listening
methods are not mentioned, as they are rated the lowest and highest in each and every comparison.
There was no significant effect found between the kernel and transmission methods.
Two significant two­way interactions were also observed: Method × Programme Material (p <
0.001) and Method × Direction (p < 0.001). A post hoc HSD analysis for interaction terms was
carried out. For the interaction Method × Programme Material, Guitar was evaluated to be more
externalized than the Drums for the kernel, transmission and noise methods. The improvement in
externalization was most significant within the noise method, where the Guitar was rated 10 more
than the Drums on average. Concerning the interaction Method × Direction, the Left source was
evaluated as more externalized than the Right source for the transmission method. However, for the
kernel method, the Right source was rated more externalized than the Left source. No significant
effect was found between either direction for the noise method.
The results for the two­way interaction effects are presented in Table 6.2, where the Estimate rep­
resents the difference in the mean of the externalization scores. These results are also visualized
in Figure 6.5a and Figure 6.5b. These interactions were complemented with Effect Size tests (Eta
and Omega Squared Test), and it was found that the main interaction Method had the largest effect
24
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:33==
Table 6.2: Results from the Two Way Interactions, presented in the form of a Pairwise Comparison
test. The Estimate represents the difference in the mean of the pair.
Method x Prog. Mat.
Estimate
P value
K G ­ K D
3.8
0.04
N G ­ N D
10.5
<0.0001
T G ­ T D
3.8
0.04
Method x Direction
Estimate
P value
K L ­ K R
­7.0
<0.0001
N L ­ N R
­3.0
0.3245
T L ­ T R
4.5
0.005
(0.88), while the two­way interactions had a medium effect (0.04, 0.04). The interested reader is
referred to [10], [8] for further studies on this topic.
(a) Method × Direction
(b) Method × Programme Material
Figure 6.5: Two Way Interactions
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
25
==PAGE:34==
6.3
Discussion
6.3.1
Comparison between Objective and Subjective metrics
It is crucial to recognize that the objective metrics stem from BRIRs, while the subjective ratings
arise from perceptual tests conducted on binauralizations of anechoic signals. This section makes
comparisons and observations from both results.
From the ANOVA results, the Method factor was found to have a significant effect. The Hidden
Reference was rated the highest, while the dry signal (Hidden Anchor) was rated the lowest. The
kernel and transmission methods were rated similarly and a post­hoc test did not reveal a significant
difference between their scores. They were however rated above the noise method. The transmis­
sion and kernel methods are more sophisticated models of reverb synthesis, one is a microphone
recording of a different room while the other uses several measurements in a room to estimate the
sound field at a desired position. In comparison to this, the noise method just requires a reverb
time to model the decay rate of the tail. The results between the transmission room and kernel
method suggest that it doesn’t matter if the reverb tail is extracted from several measurements of
the reference room, or a microphone recording of a different room, the externalization rating will
be same. Perhaps what is driving these results is how complex the models are for synthesizing the
reverb tail. For the two rooms considered in this study, which had similar geometry, the results
did not show any difference between the rooms.
In the two­way interaction: Method x Programme Material, it was found that the Guitar in gen­
eral was rated as more externalized than the Drums for each method (excluding dry and Hidden
Reference). This is probably because the spectral energy present at frequencies below 200 Hz
and above 2 kHz for the Drums, make it easier to hear differences in spatial cues when compared
to the Guitar. In the time domain, the Guitar is very periodic in nature, while the Drums track
contains transient sounds. The results from the Guitar track may not offer much insight into the
performance of the various methods since the listeners were unable to discriminate the differences
between them. Observing difference in the various methods for the Guitar stimulus could have
been difficult, especially given that temporally, the Guitar did not change very much. Moreover,
since there were no other interaction effects involving the Programme Material, it is possible that
the bimodal distribution of the noise method could be explained by the rating between the Drums
and the Guitar, this is shown in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Distribution in Externalization Scores for the Noise method between the Guitar and
Drums track.
26
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:35==
Concerning the last two­way interaction effect of Method x Direction, the higher externalization
observed for the Left source than the Right source for the transmission method could be explained
by the following:
• The IACCEarly was higher for the right (0.77) than the left (0.60) source.
• The IACCLate was very similar and within the JND for IACC (0.075) [34].
• The DRR was higher for the right (­3.8 dB) than the left (­5.5 dB) source.
• The average reverberation time (RT60) was higher for the left (0.48 s) than the right (0.43
s) source.
The first point is in agreement with the work of Leclère [18], who showed that interaural differences
(which negatively correlate with IACC) improve Externalization. Secondly, DRR relates directly
to reverberance [17], where a lower DRR corresponds to larger contribution of the late energy.
The increase in DRR for the right source may be attributed to the reduced distance between the
source and receiver. Generally, the RT should not change depending on source­receiver location.
However, the higher RT for the left source could explain why it was perceived as more externalized,
a larger RT corresponds to a longer tail, which is typically present in larger rooms. The magnitude
of ITD suggests that the frontal source should have been perceived less externalized, since lateral
sources create more interaural differences.
This behavior is not observed for the kernel method, where the right source was more externalized
than the left. This may be explained by the ITD, which as previously mentioned was larger for the
right source, resulting in larger interaural differences. However this time:
• The IACCEarly was higher for the right (0.77) than the left (0.60) source.
• The IACCLate was higher for the right (0.54) than the left (0.24) source.
• The DRR was higher for the right (­2.0 dB) than the left (­4.2 dB) source.
• The average reverberation time (RT60) was similar.
The trend of the DRR could be explained by the same argument as above. Both the early and
late IACC values contradict the relationship between ITD and IACC. As previously outlined, an
increase in ITD or lateralization results in higher interaural differences. Thus, it is expected that the
IACC should be lower for the right source since IACC is inversely related to interaural differences
[18]. The average reverberation time remains consistent across both sources.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
27
==PAGE:36==
6.3.2
Reliability of Measurements
Although the subjective results have indicated certain significant results, the objective measures
have highlighted some disagreements within each other. Looking back at Figure 3.3, the reverb
times are similar for both sources in the listening room, but they are very different for the trans­
mission room. The right source was very close to the boundary for the transmission room, which
may have contributed to the increased RT.
The DRR is consistent with the expectation that for a more reverberant room (transmission room),
the DRR in general should be lower compared to the listening room. In regards to the directions,
the DRR should be higher for the Right source as the source­receiver distance decreases, this is
observed in 4.1.
Concerning the ITD, the Left source has an ITD of −83 µs while the right source produced an
ITD of 125 µs. Comparing these values to the ITD of the HRIR corresponding to 10°and 330°,
the ITD is consistent for the left source, however the ITD for right source is supposed to be around
260 µs. It is possible that the microphone was sightly offset to the right during the recording stage
which resulted in slight increase in ITD for the left and an decrease in ITD for the right source. It
is unclear how this relates to the differences observed in Figure 6.2. The IACCLate was found to be
very similar for both sources in the Transmission Room for the same source­to­receiver positions.
28
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:37==
7
Conclusion
The thesis has highlighted some key acoustic descriptors for room acoustics. A listening task was
designed where the subject would rate binaural auralizations of different impulse responses. These
impulse responses would be synthesized using a perceptually motivated model, a statistical model
and microphone measurements of two different rooms. The study was able to demonstrate the
importance of the choice of stimulus as the changes in the reverberant properties turned out to be
more noticeable for the Drums track since it covered a larger band of frequencies in comparison to
the Guitar track.
Among the methods used, the study found that the kernel method was rated at a similar level of
Externalization as the transmission method, and noise was rated the lowest. For the chosen rooms,
this investigation did not find a difference in perceived Externalization between two methods of
synthesizing the tail; one which used the microphone recordings of several positions of the refer­
ence room, while the other was a single microphone measurement of another room. In addition to
this, the priming of subjects did not lead to any significant results, as they yielded similar scores.
The comparisons made between the left and right sources may have been inconclusive due to the
differences in the source­receiver distance (2.5 m vs. 3 m), or a small rotation of the microphone
during the measurement stages.
Looking at the summary statistics, it is clear that a lot of the scale was not utilized. There was a lot
of data present in the border of At the Ear and In the Room. This was probably the case since par­
ticipants found it difficult to distinguish between Centre of Head and In the Head. Furthermore, the
assumption that the reference was the most externalized did not always hold as some participants
reported that some intervals appeared more externalized than the reference.
In future research, it may be worthwhile keeping more factors controlled, so that changes in objec­
tive metrics could be better explained. It could be interesting to study adaptation effects throughout
the experiment. Another line of research would be to improve the scale for rating Externalization,
especially one which utilizes the entire range. Finally, a Principal Component Analysis could be
conducted on all objective metrics versus the Externalization scores.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
Andreopoulou A. and Katz B. “Identification of perceptually relevant methods of interaural
time difference estimation”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 142 (2017).
[2]
Figueroa­Duran A. and Fernandez­Grande E. “Navigable Reconstruction of Reverberant
Sound Fields Using Distributed Microphone Arrays”. In: (2023).
[3]
Figueroa­Duran A. and Fernandez­Grande E. “Room Impulse Response Reconstructuin
From Distributed Microphone Arrays Using Kernel Ridge Regression”. In: (2023).
[4]
Lindau A. and Weinzierl S. “Perceptual Evaluation of Model­ and Signal­Based Predictors
of the Mixing Time in Binaural Room Impulse Responses”. In: Journal of Audio Engineer­
ing Society 60 (2012).
[5]
Jacobsen F. Molares A.R. The ensemble variance of pure­tone measurements in reverbera­
tion rooms. Vol. 127. 2010.
[6]
Algazi R. et al. “Estimation of a spherical­head model from anthropometry”. In: Journal of
the Audio Engineering Society 49 (2001).
[7]
Andersson C. et al. Headphone auralization of acoustic spaces recorded with spherical mi­
crophone arrays. 2016.
[8]
Cohen J. et al. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers, 1988.
[9]
Deppisch T. et al. “Direct and Residual Subspace Decomposition of Spatial Room Impulse
Responses”. In: Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing 31 (2023).
[10]
Frieman J. et al. Principles & Methods of Statistical Analysis. SAGE Publications, Inc; 1st
edition, 2017.
[11]
Markovic M. et al. “Usage of measured reverberation tail in a binaural room impulse re­
sponse synthesis”. In: Acustica United 97 (2011).
[12]
Best V. et al. “Sound Externalisation: A Review of Recent Research”. In: Trends in Hearing
24 (2020). DOI: 10.1177/2331216520948390journals.sagepub.com/home/tia.
[13]
Gari S. et al. “Towards determining thresholds for room divergence: A pilot study on per­
ceived externalisation”. In: Immersive and 3D Audio: from Architecture to Automotive (2021).
DOI: 10.1109/I3DA48870.2021.9610835.
[14]
Kaplanis N. et al. “Perception of Reverberation in Small Rooms: A Literature Study”. In:
International Conference for Acoustic Engineering Society (2014).
[15]
Klein F. et al. “A Summary on Acoustic Room Divergence and its Effect on Externalization
of Auditory Events”. In: International Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience
(2016). DOI: 10.1109/QoMEX.2016.7498973.
[16]
Klein F. et al. “Auditory adaptation in real and virtual rooms”. In: International Symposium
on Auditory and Audiological Research 7 (2019).
[17]
Larsen E. et al. “On the minimum audible difference in direct­to­reverberant energy ratio”.
In: Jounal of Acoustic Society of America (2008). DOI: 10.1121/1.2936368.
[18]
Leclère T. et al. “On the externalization of sound sources with headphones without reference
to a real source”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (2019). DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1121/1.5128325.
[19]
McCormack L. et al. “Real­time conversion of sensor array signals into spherical harmonic
signals with applications to spatially localised sub­band sound­field analysis”. In: Audio
Engineering Society (2018).
[20]
Schoeffler M. et al. “webMUSHRA — A Comprehensive Framework for Web­based Lis­
tening Tests.” In: Journal of Open Research Software 6 (2018). DOI: 10.5334/jors.187.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
31
==PAGE:40==
[21]
Schroeder M. et al. “New method of measuring reverberation time”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 37 (1965).
[22]
Udesen J. et al. “Vision Affects Sound Externalisation”. In: International Conference for
the Acoustic Engineering Society (2014).
[23]
Wendt F. et al. “How binaural room impulse responses influence the externalization of
speech”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (2019).
[24]
Woirgardt M. et al. Cologne University of Applied Sciences ­ Anechoic Recordings. 2012.
[25]
Begault D. and Wenzel E. “Direction Comparison of the Impact of Head­Tracking, Rever­
beration, and Individualized Head­Related Transfer Functions on the Spatial Perception of
a Virtual Speech Source”. In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 49 (2001).
[26]
Klein F., Werner S., and Mayenfels T. “Influences of Training on Externalization of Binaural
Synthesis in Situation of Room Divergence”. In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society
65 (2017). DOI: https://doi.org/10.17743/jaes.2016.0072.
[27]
Plenge G. “Über das Problem der Im­Kopf­Lokalisation. (German) [On the problem of In
Head Localisation]”. In: Acustica 26 (1972), p. 5.
[28]
Kuttruff H. Room acoustics. Crc Press, 2016.
[29]
Abel J. and Huang P. “A Simple, Robust Measure of Reverberation Echo Density”. In: Con­
vention of the Audio Engineering Society (2006).
[30]
Blauert J. Spatial Hearing: The Psychophysics of Human Sound Localization. The MIT
Press, 1996. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/6391.001.0001.
[31]
Zacharov N. Sensory Evaluation of Sound. CRC Press, 2018. Chap. Chapter 5: Sensory
Evaluation Methods of Sound, pp. 117–124.
[32]
Klein F. Werner S. “HRTF adaptation and pattern learning”. In: International Symposium
on Auditory and Audiological Research (2013).
[33]
”Verburg S.” and ”Ferandez­Grande E.” “Reconstruction of the sound field in a room using
compressive sensing”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (2018).
[34]
Danish Standards. “Acoustics ­ Measurement of room acoustic parameters ­ Part 1: Per­
formance Spaces”. In: Advanced technical ceramics. Monolithic ceramics. Gerneral and
textural properties. 2 (2009).
[35]
International Telecommunication Standards. “Recommendation ITU­R BS.1116­1: Meth­
ods For The Subjective Assessment of Small Impairments in Audio Systems Including Mul­
tichannel Sound Systems”. In: (1994­1997).
[36]
Hanyu T. “A theoretical framework for quantitatively characterizing sound field diffusion
based on scattering coefficient and absorption coefficient of walls.” In: Journal of Acoustic
Society of America (2010).
32
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:41==
A
Appendix : Post­Screening of Assessors
Table A.1: Pre­processing results for each subject.
Subject ID
Priming Condition
Hidden Anchor (%)
Hidden Reference (%)
Reversal Rate
1
Primed
100
96
4/12
2
Not Primed
100
96
4/12
3
Primed
100
92
4/12
4
Not Primed
100
100
4/12
5
Primed
100
100
3/12
6
Not Primed
100
79
5/12
7
Not Primed
100
50
9/12
8
Primed
100
96
2/12
9
Not Primed
100
100
3/12
10
Not Primed
96
63
9/12
11
Not Primed
100
83
5/12
12
Primed
100
63
9/12
13
Primed
92
58
10/12
14
Primed
100
100
4/12
15
Not Primed
100
100
4/12
16
Primed
100
96
4/12
17
Primed
100
92
3/12
18
Not Primed
100
100
4/12
19
Primed
100
100
4/12
20
Not Primed
100
100
2/12
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
33
==PAGE:42==
B
Appendix : Position of Microphone for Both
Rooms
Table B.1: Listening Room, left and right speaker represent the position of the speakers in each
room. The positions starting with M represent the additional measurement locations taken for the
kernel method and estimation of RT.
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
Left Speaker
5.88
2.89
1.20
Right Speaker
5.10
1.12
1.20
Listening Position
2.93
2.37
1.20
M1
3.66
1.86
1.20
M2
2.35
0.95
1.20
M3
2.88
3.38
1.20
M4
2.06
2.60
1.20
M5
1.11
0.82
1.20
Table B.2: Transmission Room, left and right speaker represent the position of the speakers in each
room. The positions starting with M represent the additional measurement locations taken for the
estimation of RT.
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
Left Speaker
3.92
2.23
1.20
Right Speaker
3.13
0.46
1.20
Listening Position
0.97
1.71
1.20
M1
1.26
0.84
1.20
M2
1.62
2.32
1.20
M3
1.87
1.93
1.20
M4
2.03
3.01
1.20
M5
2.42
1.55
1.20
34
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:43==
C
Appendix: Additional Results and Test for
Normality
Figure C.1: Energy Decay Curves across 3 different frequency bands for the Left Channel.
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
35
==PAGE:44==
The test for normality was done for the entire dataset. Due to the nature of the MUSHRA test which
includes the full range of the scale from 0 to 100, the normality results appear differently depending
on the inclusion of both reference and anchor, which are supposed to represent the boundaries. The
Quantile­Quantile plots shown in Figure C.2 compare normality of residuals for the entire data in
Figure C.2a as well as the dataset excluding the methods: Hidden Anchor and Hidden Reference in
Figure C.2b. It is clear from these plots that the deviation from normality is caused by the extreme
values of the Anchor and Reference.
(a) QQ plot for the residuals of the entire dataset.
(b) QQ plot for the residuals of the entire dataset ex­
cluding the anchor and reference.
Figure C.2: QQ Plots
This is further evident in the summary statistics presented in Table C.1. Dataset A corresponds to
the data used for the first QQ plot, while Dataset B removes the Anchor and Reference. Removal
of these methods significantly reduces the variance in the data. Furthermore, the skewness which
should be between ­1 and 1 also reduces. Skewness is a measure of how asymmetric the distribution
of the dataset is. Kurtosis is a measure of how heavy or light tailed the distribution is in comparison
to a normal distribution. The kurtosis should also be between ­1 and 1. The kurtosis drops from
−1.12 to 0.09. Finally, the Shapiro­Wilk Test, which is a test of normality, showed that there is a
lot of evidence to reject its null hypothesis that the samples come from a normal distribution. This
is still the case for Dataset B, but the p value is much closer to 0.05.
Table C.1: Summary statistics for the two datasets. A represents the entire dataset, while B is
without Anchor and Reference.
Dataset
n
Mean
Std Dev
Min
Max
Skew
Kurtosis
Shapiro­Wilk Test
A
1536
59.5
37.9
0
100
­0.61
­1.12
<2e­16
B
768
69.4
14.6
25
100
­0.29
0.09
0.0119
36
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:45==
Finally, a Bartlett’s Test was conducted to assess the homogeneity of variance per factor basis,
this is presented in Table C.2. If the p > 0.05, there isn’t sufficient evidence to reject the null
hypothesis that the variance of the samples are equal. For both the Datasets and all factors, the p
value is well above 0.05 with the exception of the Method factor, but this drastically reduces when
the reference and anchor are removed.
Table C.2: Bartlett’s Test
Factor
A
B
Method
2.2e­16
0.0261
Direction
0.795
0.2291
Prog Mat
0.648
0.488
Prime
0.9323
0.0182
Repeat
0.9747
0.8056
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
37
==PAGE:46==
D
Appendix: Pictures of the Rooms
Figure D.1: Transmission Room
(a) Listening Room facing forward.
(b) Listening Room looking backwards
Figure D.2: Listening Room
38
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
==PAGE:47==
Modifying Reverberation and Exploring its Spatial Perception in a Room
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/research/research-areas/electro-technology/acoustic-technology
