==PAGE:1==
Characterization and Performance Evaluation
of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
Master Thesis
Author: Benjamin Nobre Hauptmann
Supervisor: Irfan Kuvvetli
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
Master Thesis
April, 2024
By
Benjamin Nobre Hauptmann
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Irfan Kuvvetli, 2024
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Elektrovej Building 327, 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis is submitted as the final project for the MSc. Earth and Space Physics
and Engineering degree at the Technical University of Denmark. The work described was
carried out from the 1st of November 2023 through the 15th of April 2024. This follows a
smaller synthesis project in the spring of 2023, where the laboratory was set up in prepa­
ration for this project.
Benjamin Nobre Hauptmann ­ s183832
Signature
Date
ii
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
From studying supernovae and AGN to detection of tumors in the human body, devel­
opment of X­and gamma­ray detectors continues to remain a field of vibrant scientific
interest. Although historically, these technologies have performed best either at low en­
ergies (< 100 keV) or very high energies (> 10 MeV). The so­called MeV gap in detector
sensitivity between these two regimes remains elusive.
Our team at DTU Space, in collaboration with Kromek, have developed three new, large
area 40 mm x 40 mm x 5 mm CdZnTe detectors in an attempt to fill this gap. In addition to
spectroscopy, the detectors allow for accurate 3D positioning of photon interaction events
within the detector, as well as identification of interaction types.
This work covers the development and improvement of algorithms and measurement
techniques used to characterize the new detector prototypes. In addition to taking IV­
curve measurements of all detectors and developing a new procedure for taking radioac­
tive scan measurements, the main focus of this work has been the production of a com­
plete detector data­analysis program. Using measured charge signals from the detector,
this program is able to calibrate each detector and calculate x­ and gamma­ray interaction
positions and energies.
This new software also provides interaction­position­based correction of the photon en­
ergies to further improve performance. After correction, we achieve spectral resolutions
as low as 6.6 % @ 122 keV, 1.35 % @ 661.7 keV and 1.04 % @ 1460 keV for our best
detector model. From scan measurements, we find that the detectors achieve sub­mm
position determination, with measured resolutions of < 0.7 mm in the detector z­axes and
< 0.5 mm in the x­axes for all detectors.
Further measurements found the bulk leakage of the detectors not to exceed 42 nA at op­
erating voltages ­ meaning the detector resistivities are measured to > 5 · 109 Ωcm. Sur­
face leakage is generally measured to ∼2 nA between neighboring electrodes, although
defective electrodes are identified where this current is far greater. Finally, electronic
noise in the detectors is found to contribute to ∼5.0 keV of the total noise.
We anticipate that future developments will improve these spectral and spatial resolutions
further.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgement
I give my sincerest thanks to everyone involved in helping me bring this thesis to fruition.
As I was so fortunate as to have a foreign studentship for the duration of this project, I was
entirely unable to access the laboratory. Therefore, Irfan Kuvvetli’s assistance in the lab
was invaluable. Without Irfan to move radioactive sources, mount new detectors, rotate
the tower for scan measurements or install a new remote control system for the laboratory,
the project would have been utterly impossible to undertake. Furthermore, Irfan provided
critical assistance and guidance weekly over online meetings.
I am deeply grateful to Selina Howalt Owe, who was a constant source of enlightenment
and clarification throughout the project. Answering any questions I had clearly and in
record time, even late into the night. Selina also provided the basis for nearly all code
used in this project, in the form of her analysis scripts developed for the 20 mm detectors.
Finally, together with Irfan, I am especially grateful for Selina’s efforts in getting my results
published in SPIE and helping me attend my first international conference.
iv
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
X­ and gamma­ray sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
X­ and gamma­ray interaction with matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Solid­state detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Signal formation in drift­strip detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Drift­strip detector performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Hardware preparation
19
3.1
Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Lab setup overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Motor movement software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.4
Data collection with the SIS digitizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Data analysis algorithms
32
4.1
Program structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
Noise­suppression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Pulse­height determination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
Event characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.5
X­position algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.6
Z­position algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.7
Drift­time algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.8
Y­position algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.9
Cathode windowing algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.10 Gaussian fitting algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5
Measurement and calibration
57
5.1
Test plan and measurement procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.2
Gain normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.3
Y­axis energy correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.4
X­axis position correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
5.5
X­Z energy correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
6
Detector Performance Results
83
6.1
Inspection of interaction homogeneity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
6.2
Electronic noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
6.3
Spectral performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
6.4
Imaging performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
6.5
Leakage current analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
v
==PAGE:8==
7
Discussion and future work
101
7.1
Bad electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7.2
Mobility­lifetime evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
7.3
Improved pulse­height algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
7.4
Z­axis algorithm considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
7.5
On­the­fly analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
8
Conclusion
107
Bibliography
108
A Appendix
111
A.1 Appendix A: Gain normalization data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
A.2 Appendix B: X,Z energy correction graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
A.3 Appendix C: Background spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
A.4 Appendix D: Surface leakage currents for all electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . 118
A.5 Appendix E: Single­electrode bulk leakage currents for all electrodes . . . . 130
vi
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
X­ and gamma­ray detectors are broadly applicable in fields of advanced science, from
nanoscale fabrication to medical scans to astrophysics. Especially in astrophysics, cur­
rent detector technology is largely split in two camps: photoelectric­absorption­based de­
tectors for low­energy x­rays, and pair­production­based detectors for very high energy
gamma­rays. However, in the 100 keV to 10 MeV region between these two, there is a
large gap in detector sensitivity due to a low efficiency of both photoelectric and pair­
production interactions [1].
At DTU Space, a new, large­area generation of 3DCZT (3­dimensional Cadmium­Zinc
Telleuride) detectors have been developed in collaboration with Kromek in an attempt
to improve sensitivity in this regime. These new modules are 4 times larger and more
sensitive than any detectors of their kind built before. They can provide both high spectral
resolution, and high­spatial resolution for 3D localization of photon interactions within the
detector. And they can accomplish this without requiring expensive cooling technology,
such as with e.g. germanium­based detectors.
In the medical field, this technology can revolutionize breast cancer screenings. Current
mammography scan techniques utilize low­energy x­rays. However, this method is highly
susceptible to false positives, requires illumination of the entire breast, and is often limited
by the x­rays’ ability to penetrate dense tissue. Using the DTU 3DCZT detectors, these
problems can be overstepped by moving up from x­rays to gamma­rays. With this solu­
tion, the patient is injected with a radioactive tracer which sticks to tumor cells [2]. These
will then emit gamma­rays, which can easily pass through tissue and into the 3DCZT de­
tector. With the detector’s imaging capabilities and high sensitivity, even small tumors
should be easily detectable.
In the astronomical field, these detectors can cover the elusive MeV­gap in space­mission
sensitivity, providing new insights into the highest energy phenomena in the universe.
Especially distant supernovae or active galactic nuclei. And their ability to function as
Compton cameras can make them extra favorable for exotic space telescope concepts,
such as the Laue lens design [3].
Although, before these lofty dreams can be realized, much work must still be done. The
new detector prototypes must first be measured and characterized, to see if their perfor­
mance lives up to the stringent requirements that these scientific goals place on them.
This thesis covers the process by which new measurement tools and algorithms are de­
veloped in order to understand these detectors and bring them to their full operational
potential.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Project formulation
The overall goal of this project is to plan, design, and perform characterization of the three
new 3DCZT detectors developed at DTU Space. This is broken down into five smaller
milestones that are to be reached throughout the project:
1. Measurements of bulk and leakage current of each electrode on each of the detector
modules. This is used to identify bad or non­connected electrodes.
2. Measurement of the full­illumination spectra from multiple gamma­ray sources. These
spectra are used to perform energy correction and calibration.
3. Improve the existing 3D positioning algorithms and gain normalization.
4. Implement a system for conducting 2D scans of a gamma­ray source over each
detector.
5. Evaluate detector imaging performance and 3D spatial resolution.
2
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
This chapter lays out the theoretical background for this project. It is by no means a
thorough investigation of the field, instead only focusing on exactly what is needed to
understand this work. It covers the basics of x­and gamma­ray interaction with matter,
and how these interactions form the signals we expect to see in our detector. The limiting
factors of solid­state detectors and how to combat these will also be covered.
2.1
X­ and gamma­ray sources
X­and gamma­rays are terms to describe the highest region of the electromagnetic spec­
trum. These photons are generated by atomic or nuclear processes, and can have en­
ergies ranging from some few keV up to far in the TeV range. Detecting and measuring
these photons is the primary function of our 3D CZT detector.
X­and gamma­rays are emitted when massive particles undergo sudden energy transi­
tions. This can be in the change of a free particle’s kinetic energy, such as in bremsstrahlung,
or in the relaxation of an atomic nucleus to a lower energy state [4]. In this project, gamma­
rays are generated by decay of unstable nuclei, either via electron capture or beta decay.
Decay processes of the two radioactive sources used are shown in Figure 2.1.
2.1.1
Radioactive decay
The cobalt­57 source used in this project decays to iron­57 via electron capture. In this
process, the proton­rich cobalt nucleus absorbs an electron from the innermost electron
shell, transforming a proton into a neutron and electron neutrino. Electrons from higher
shells then fall to fill the new vacancy in the inner shell. Gamma­rays are produced with
energy equal to the electron energy transition [4]. This produces gamma­rays of three
different energies, as shown in the decay scheme in Figure 2.1.
For high energy photons, a Cs­137 source is used. This nucleus produces 661.7 keV
photons via beta­decay. A neutron in the neutron­rich cesium nucleus can spontaneously
decay into a proton, an electron and an electron antineutrino, leaving behind a Ba­137 nu­
cleus. This nucleus quickly decays to its ground state by emission of a 661.7 keV gamma­
ray [5], as shown in Figure 2.1.
2.1.2
Radioactivity
The activity of a given radioactive isotope describes it rate of decay. Generally, the number
of nuclei, N in a source decrease over time, following an exponential decay with decay
constant λ. The activity is then given with Equation 2.1 [4].
dN
dt

decay
= −λN
(2.1)
Often times, it is more convenient to use the half­life of the radioisotope, which defines
the time for half the nuclei to decay. It is given by Equation 2.2 [4].
t1/2 = ln(2)
λ
(2.2)
The SI unit of radioactive activity is the Bequerel [Bq], defined as one disintegration per
second.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
3
==PAGE:12==
(a) Co­57 decay
(b) Cs­137 decay
Figure 2.1: Decay schemes for Cs­137 and Co­57, showing only mahor transitions. Taken
from Knoll, page 11 [4].
2.1.3
Background photons
Even when no radioactive sources are used, an x­ and gamma­ray detector will detect a
constant, low­level of activity from the natural background. In the keV ­ MeV range, this
background is primarily produced by radioactive decay chains stemming from the long­
lived isotopes: Th­232 and U­238 [6]. The decay of these naturally occurring isotopes and
their daughter particles produce many spectral lines and a power­law shaped continuum.
One of the strongest spectral lines, however, is not from these decay chains but instead
from decay of potassium­40. This is a primordial isotope with a half­life of over 1 billion
years. K­40 decays both via beta­decay and electron capture, illustrated in the decay
Figure 2.2: Decay scheme for K­40. Notable is the 1.46 MeV photon emission from the
Ar­40 excited state to the ground state. Taken from Bhaumik [7].
scheme in Figure 2.2, but only the electron capture produces a gamma­ray. This is at
E = 1460.8 keV and is very prominent above other background sources. In this work, this
background line is used for detector calibration.
4
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:13==
2.2
X­ and gamma­ray interaction with matter
High energy photons can interact with materials via several mechanisms. The three major
ones to consider when working with an x­ and gamma­ray detector are photoelectric ab­
sorption, Compton scattering, and pair production. Figure 2.3 shows how the probability
Figure 2.3: Relative likelihood of the three main gamma­ray interaction mechanisms, plot­
ted over energy and atomic number of absorbing material. Taken from Knoll [4].
of the three different interaction types changes as a function of the photon energy. For low
energies, photoelectric absorption is dominant. But in the 100 keV to 2 MeV range stud­
ied in this project, both photoelectric absorption and Compton scattering occur with high
frequency [4]. These different mechanisms produce different signals within a detector, as
described in the following.
2.2.1
Photoelectric absorption
This is the simplest interaction mechanism, and is the same mechanism used in lower­
energy UV, optical, and IR detectors. In photoelectric absorption, the full photon energy,
Eγ, is absorbed by en electron bound to an atom. Part of the photon energy is used to
Figure 2.4: Illustration of photoelectric absorption, from Choppin et al [8], p 184
unbind the electron from the atom, while the remaining energy goes to kinetic energy, Ee
in the electron.
Ee = Eγ −Eb
(2.3)
Where Eb is the binding energy of the electron. In a solid­state detector, the remaining
kinetic energy will quickly be dissipated in the detector, freeing more electrons in the
process. The higher the kinetic energy, the more electrons freed. Therefore, the number
of freed electrons n, is a proportional measure of the original photon energy
ne = Eγ
ω
(2.4)
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
5
==PAGE:14==
Where ω is the mean energy required to free an electron. A solid state x­ and gamma­ray
detector measures the charge of these electron clouds as a proxy for the photon energy.
For a monoenergetic source interacting only via photoelectric absorption, this would pro­
Figure 2.5: Measured photopeak from a single, monoenergetic source of energy hν. From
Knoll [4].
duce a single photopeak, shown in Figure 2.5. The peak is a Gaussian centered around
the photon energy, Eγ. The Gaussian spread comes from several detector imperfections,
described in subsection 2.5.1.
2.2.2
Compton scattering
In Compton scattering, the incident photon scatters off an atomic electron, depositing
some of its energy into the electron and changing direction, as illustrated in Figure 2.6.
In the rest­frame of a stationary detector, the energy of the outgoing photon is always
Figure 2.6: Illustration of Compton scattering of a γ­ray, from Choppin et al [8], p 184
less than the energy of the incoming photon, and is dependent on the scatter­angle, θ by
Equation 2.5 [9].
Eγ,1 =
Eγ,0
1 + (Eγ,0/mec2)(1 −cos(θ))
(2.5)
Where mec2 = 511 keV is the electron rest­energy. The maximum energy that can be
deposited by a single Compton interaction is at θ = π, when the photon is backscattered.
The photon is left with energy Ec
EC =
Eγ,0
1 + 2Eγ,0/m0c2
(2.6)
As Compton interactions can occur at a continuum of scattering­angles, they produce
a continuum spectrum in a detector, shown in Figure 2.7. In the figure, this Compton
continuum stretches from E = 0 to E = hν −Ec, where hν is the monoenergetic source
energy.
6
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.7: Energy spectrum of Compton scattering interactions from a monoenergetic
photon source of energy hν. From Knoll [4].
2.2.3
Pair production
Pair production is only briefly mentioned, as it is not as relevant for this project, given that
it only occurs well into the MeV range. In short, it can happen when the energy of a γ­ray
exceeds 1.022 MeV ­ i.e. twice the rest­energy of an electron. At these energies, the
γ­ray is able to spontaneously produce an electron­positron pair, which each carry half
the photon energy. The positron quickly annihilates to produce more gamma­rays, while
the electron bleeds off its kinetic energy in the detector.
Having now described the fundamentals of x­ and gamma­ray interactions, we can begin
to understand how these interactions would be measured in a detector.
2.3
Solid­state detectors
Many kinds of x­ and gamma­ray detectors exist ­ from scintillators to Cherenkov detec­
tors to ionization chambers. But here we will only describe solid­state detectors, which are
the focus of much modern detector research. The operating principle of every solid­state
detector is relatively simple. High­energy interactions in a large dielectric block of mate­
rial creates free moving charges. These charges induce signal on electrodes which are
mounted onto the dielectric. By measuring this signal, the energy of the interaction can
be inferred. [10]. A more detailed description is given by the Shockley­Ramo theorem.
2.3.1
Shockley­Ramo theorem
Much of this section is a condensation of Zhong He’s excellent review of the theorem [11].
We first imagine a simple solid­state detector, consisting of a cubic dielectric sandwiched
between a planar cathode and a planar anode (see Figure 2.8). The anodes are positively
biased with respect to the cathodes, such that a linear electric potential falls over the de­
tector. A high­energy interaction occurs in the middle of the detector, freeing a cloud of
electrons and a corresponding cloud of electron holes. The number of charge carriers
is proportional to the interaction energy. These charges are soon forced to move by the
electric potential ­ the holes towards the cathode and the electrons towards the anode ­
thereby inducing charge on the electrodes. This induced charge is what is used to infer
all information about the high­energy interaction.
How much charge is induced is dependent on the weighting potential, φ0, of the elec­
trodes. This is essentially a description of the shape of the electric field generated by an
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.8: Illustration showing the movement of electrons and holes within a solid­state
detector, taken from [11]. As the charges move through the weighting potential, an output
signal is generated.
electrode. It is entirely independent of any actual electric potentials in the detector [11].
Even in a very complex detector with many electrodes and different biases, the weighting
potential of any given electrode can be found with this simple procedure: [12].
1. Set the voltage of the given electrode to 1 (unitless)
2. Set the voltage of all other electrodes to 0
3. Ignore trapped charge.
4. Solve the Laplace equation for the detector.
That is to say, given the movement of the charge carriers, the induced charge on a single
electrode can be calculated without having to consider any of the other electrodes. The
Shockley Raymo principle then states that the induced charge, Qi on an electrode is
proportional to the freed charge, q, and the amount of weighting potential that this charge
traverses [11].
Qi = −q(φ0(xf) −φ0(xi))
(2.7)
Where φ0(xi) is the value of the weighting potential at the point where the free charges
are generated, xi, and φ0(xf) is the value of the weighting potential at the final location
of the free charges, xf.
In the very simple example in Figure 2.8, both the cathode and anode weighting potentials
are linear (shown in the bottom of the figure). The electrons, carrying charge q and freed
at the interaction location Z, will induce the charge Qi,e = −q · (1 −Z) on the anode,
while the holes will induce charge Qi,h = −q · Z. The opposite charge would be induced
8
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:17==
on the cathodes. We note that, so long as both the holes and the electrons move
unimpeded, the amount of induced charge on either electrode is equal to the free
charge, q. This applies even if the weighting potentials had a different shape.
2.3.2
Drift­strip detectors
The detector described above works well for producing spectra of x­ray sources, as it will
always collect a charge proportional to the interaction energy. However, there is no way
to determine the interaction location within the detector. Worse still, the assumption that
electrons and holes move unimpeded is far from true in physical detectors. The further
the charge­clouds drift in the detector, the more charge carriers will be trapped by mate­
rial impurities. Finally, electrons and holes do not move equally well through the detector.
Electrons typically have much higher mobility and lower rates of trapping than holes [13].
All these effects result in a reduction of induced charge and a worse spectral resolution.
One way to mitigate these issues is by using expensive materials like high purity germa­
nium (HPGe) [4]. These have excellent charge mobility properties, but require cooling to
cryogenic temperatures.
A different solution was proposed by Pamelen and Budtz­Jørgensen, inspired by the Fr­
ish grid design, namely the drift­strip detector. Instead of worrying about improving hole
mobility, the detector is made of Cadmium­Zinc­Telleuride (CZT) which has poor hole mo­
bility. In fact, it is designed to have low sensitivity to holes intentionally so that it effectively
becomes unipolar sensing [14].
Instead of using one planar anode, a drift strip detector employs an array of long, nar­
row anode strips. The smaller width causes their weighting potentials to be much more
compressed, such that the vast majority of the potential falls over a very small area very
near the anodes, as in Figure 2.9. The detector in this figure is actually a precursor to the
ones used in this project. With their compressed potentials, the induced charge on the
anodes becomes almost independent of the interaction location. Whether the interaction
happens at y = 5 mm or at y = 1 mm, the electron cloud will move through almost the full
anode potential, and so the measured energy in both cases will be nearly the full interac­
tion energy. And nearly all hole movement can be ignored for the inverse reason. They
move in the opposite direction, through almost none of the anode potentials.
Negatively biased ”drift­strips” are placed in­between these anodes. These ensure that
moving electrons are collected at the anodes, as well as helping to ”screen” the anodes
from hole movement [14]. Finally, on the opposite side of the detector are an array of
negatively biased cathode strips, which provide an electric field to push electrons towards
the anodes. They are arranged perpendicularly to the anode strips, so if the anodes go
along the x­axis, the cathodes go along the z­axis.
A major advantage of this detector design is its ability to accurately determine interaction
position using relatively few electrodes. An electron cloud produced by a high­energy in­
teraction will drift towards the anodes, but (nominally) only be collected by a single anode.
The x­position of the anode serves as a first estimate of the interaction x­position (using
the axis nomenclature in Figure 2.9). Studying the induced signals on the neighboring drift
strips can further improve the x­position accuracy. Next, since the cathode strips go along
the z­axis, then comparing their induced charges can give an estimate of the interaction
z­position. Finally, by comparing the charge induced in all cathode strips with the charge
induced in the collecting anode, once can determine the interaction y­position. Thereby,
with only 35 electrodes, the 20x20x5 mm 3DCZT detector developed by DTU space was
able to provide a 3­dimensional localization of photon interactions to sub­mm accuracy
[15].
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.9: Weighting potentials for all electrodes of the 20x20x5 mm 3DCZT detector
developed by DTU space. Anodes are shown above, cathodes in the center, and drift
strips below. Figure by Owe [12].
The following sections go into detail on the signals generated in drift strip detectors, and
how these can be used to infer information about photon interactions.
2.4
Signal formation in drift­strip detectors
2.4.1
Single­interaction events
The most simple type of event that can occur is a single­interaction, so it will be used
to demonstrate the basics of signal formation in a drift­strip detector. These interactions
generally occur via two mechanisms, either a photoelectric absorption event or a Compton
scatter event where the scattered photon escapes the detector before interacting again.
A single­interaction event is illustrated in Figure 2.10. The electron cloud (shown in yellow)
formed by a photoelectric absorption gradually drifts downwards away from the cathodes
and towards an anode. The negative electric field of the neighboring drift strips provides a
”push” to the electrons towards the anode strip. As the electrons move through the anode
potential, the induced charge on the collecting anode will increase over time. As most
of the weighting potential is concentrated in a small region around the anode, the vast
majority of the charge will be induced in the last moments before the cloud is collected.
Plotting the anode induced charge over time yields a gradual rise, followed by a steep
increase just before collection, as shown in Figure 2.11.
This step­like shape of the collecting anode is characteristic for this type of detector.
Assuming limited hole movement and electron trapping, the final amplitude of the signal
10
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.10: Diagram showing the trajectory (dashed­gray line) of an electron cloud (yel­
low) produced by a photoelectric absorption event in a drift­strip detector. The cloud drifts
towards the anodes (red) and is pushed by the drift­strips (blue) Hole movement is as­
sumed to be insignificant. Modified from Owe’s original figure [16].
Figure 2.11: Example of the measured signals from the 20x20 mm detector at DTU Space,
corresponding to the interaction diagram shown in Figure 2.10. Anode 2 is the collecting
anode, and drift­strips 2 and 3 are its neighbors. Original figure by Owe [16].
step is directly proportional to the interaction energy. All other anode signals appear flat,
as the electrons end in a region where their weighting potentials are zero.
The two drift strips that neighbor the collecting anode will also receive a significant induced
charge. First, a positive current is induced as the electrons approach the drift­strips.
But nearing the collection time, the electrons suddenly move away from the drift­strips ­
towards regions of lower weighting potential ­ inducing a negative current. The induced
charge on the drift strips ends around 0, or even slightly negative. The characteristic
shape for a drift­strip signal, seen in Figure 2.11, is an initial rise followed by a steep
decline at collection time.
Finally, the cathodes all receive an induced signal from the electrons. As the cathode
strips are much wider than the anodes, their weighting potentials are closer to linear. A
plot of their induced charge over time resembles a linear rise from interaction time to
collection time (Figure 2.11). The closer a given cathode is to the interaction location in
the z­axis (into the paper in Figure 2.10), the more charge is induced. When the cathodes
are summed together act as a planar electrode. The amplitude of their summed signal,
(shown in black in Figure 2.11), is then directly related to the depth of the interaction in
the detector (again, assuming limited hole movement).
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4.2
Single­anode multiple­interactions
If a photon undergoes two Compton scattering interactions, or a scatter followed by a
photoelectric absorption both within the detector, two electron clouds are produced. If
both of the interactions happen within the same drift cell (the region wherein electrons are
drawn to a given anode) then they both induce charge on the same anode. An illustration
Figure 2.12: Illustration of a single­cell double event in a drift­strip detector. Electron
clouds (yellow) drift towards the anodes (red) and are pushed by the drift­strips (blue).
Modified from Owe’s original figure [16].
of such an event is shown in Figure 2.12. This is a typical example of a Compton scatter
followed by a photoelectric absorption, producing two electron clouds. The movement
of each of these clouds in the collecting anode weighting potential generates a step­like
response in the anode, each offset in time. Figure 2.13 illustrates the collecting anode
signal of an event similar to the one illustrated in Figure 2.12. Both charge clouds are
Figure 2.13: Collecting anode signal from a Cs­137 multiple­interaction single­cell event
in one of the 40x40 mm 3DCZT detectors at DTU Space. This event is thought to originate
from a Compton scatter at y ≈4 mm and a photoelectric absorption at y ≈1 mm.
produced within the span of one nanosecond, while the time for the electrons to traverse
the detector is on the scale of several hundred nanoseconds. So the time at which they
are collected at the anode does not depend on which was generated first, but rather the
time for each cloud to drift through the detectors. In this case, the cloud generated by the
photoelectric absorption is collected very quickly, causing the first step in the anode sig­
nal. The short interaction­to­collection time indicates that it occurred close to the anode
plane. The charge cloud generated by the Compton scatter interaction is collected some
12
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:21==
500 ns later. The longer drift time indicates that it had to drift through nearly the entire
detector before reaching the anodes. The longer drift time also gives time for the electron
cloud to spread out, which is why the second ”step” in the induced signal is far less steep
than the first.
2.4.3
Multiple­anode multiple­interactions
Events can also occur where multiple anodes collect charge. The general case of this is,
as before, a series of Compton scatter interactions, potentially ending with a photoelectric
absorption in the detector. The only difference here is that the scattering distance is long
enough that charge clouds generated by each interaction occur in different drift cells.
Figure 2.14 illustrates en example of a multiple­cell Compton scatter and photoelectric
Figure 2.14: Illustration of a multiple­cell double event in a drift­strip detector. Electron
clouds (yellow) drift towards the anodes (red) and are pushed by the drift­strips (blue).
Modified from Owe’s original figure [16].
absorption event. These events are relatively simple to categorize. Instead of producing
a step­shaped signal in one anode, they do so in two anodes, as in Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: Signals from select anodes in a 40x40 mm 3DCZT detector, produced from
a multiple­cell double­interaction event.
Shared events
Generally, multiple­cell events are thought to come from multiple photon interactions. But
single­interaction events can also produce signal in multiple anodes. If an electron cloud is
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.16: Illustration of a shared event. The electron cloud (yellow) is split and be­
comes absorbed by two anodes (red).
generated very close to the border between two drift cells, it can become split so that part
of the cloud drifts towards the one cell while the other drifts in the opposite direction. This
would induce signal in two anodes, appearing indistinguishable from the true multiple­
interaction described above.
2.4.4
Cosmic­ray events
A completely different source of radioactive energy is high­energy massive particles.
These are not discussed in depth, as they are not the point of focus in this project.
But, in short, individual massive particles from high­energy astronomical sources can have
kinetic energies on the scales of many GeV [4]. As they pass through a material, they
bleed­off this energy continuously along their entire trajectories. Like a truck ploughing
through snow. In a detector, cosmic rays are visible as very high amplitude signals (equiv­
alent to several MeV deposited energy), in multiple neighboring electrodes.
2.5
Drift­strip detector performance
Having described the functionality of drift­strip detectors, we can begin to investigate their
limitations, the causes of these, and how to best mitigate them.
2.5.1
Energy resolution
When taking the energy spectrum of a monoenergetic source, the measured energy will
never exactly match the source energy. Instead, it is normally distributed about the source
energy, where the energy resolution of the detector describes the width of this normal
distribution. The energy resolution is probably the most important measure of quality of an
x­ and gamma­ray detector, as it determines how well spectral lines can be distinguished
from each other as well as the background. A detector with good resolution will have
a narrow Gaussian energy spread, whereas one with poor resolution will have a wider
spread, as illustrated in Figure 2.17. To determine the resolution, the photopeak of a
monoenergetic source with energy Eγ is fit to a Gaussian. The resolution is then [4]:
R = FWHM
Eγ
(2.8)
Where FWHM= σ ·
p
8ln(2) is the full­width half­maximum of the Gaussian, and σ is the
standard deviation.
In a solid­state detector, the energy resolution is determined by three main factors, the
statistical noise, the electronic noise, and charge trapping.
14
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.17: Comparison of spectra of a monoenergetic source, taken by a detector with
good resolution and a detector with poor resolution. Image from Knoll [4].
Statistical noise
The statistical noise represents the lower bound of the possible achievable resolution for
any x­ and gamma­ray detector. It is by far the smallest factor for our 3DCZT detectors.
It is due to the discrete nature of the measurement. Meaning that even though interaction
energies can take a continuum of values, the amount of charges freed by a given inter­
action will always be a discrete number (see Equation 2.4). A first assumption would be
that charge generation follows a Poisson process. With this assumption, the lower­limit
of detector resolution due to statistical noise can be expressed as [4]:
R|Poisson limit = 2.35
√
N
(2.9)
Where N is the number of charge carriers generated. As the resolution increases with
more charge carriers, it is desirable for a detector material to have a low binding­energy,
so each interaction frees as many charges as possible. It also means that the relative
importance of the statistical noise decreases with energy, as more charges are freed.
Now, in practice, the statistical noise of radiation detectors is often better than would be
expected by a Poisson process. The Fano factor is an empirical coefficient to quantifies
the departure of the observed fluctuations from a Poisson distribution [4].
Electronic noise
This is often the dominating noise component in our drift­strip detectors. It stems from
every electronic component in the detector system, from the detector crystal all the way
to the analog/digital converter. The two main culprits, however, are leakage current in the
detector material itself and the signal amplifier circuits [10]. A large part of the leakage
current is due to thermal generation of charge carriers in the bulk material. This can be
minimized by reducing the detector temperature (as in Ge detectors) or using a material
with a higher binding energy, as in CZT detectors [10]. Leakage current is described
further in subsection 2.5.3.
Trapping noise
Incomplete charge collection due to trapping of charges as they drift through the detector
is another statistical process that introduces noise. As the trapping of charges follows
an exponential decay (see Equation 2.11), the ratio of charges trapped is independent of
the number of charges generated. This implies that the limiting resolution due to charge
trapping is independent of energy.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
15
==PAGE:24==
Total noise
The total noise is given by the quadrature sum of these three contributors.
FWHM 2
T = FWHM 2
X + FWHM 2
E + FWHM 2
D
(2.10)
Where FWHMT , FWHMX, FWHME, and FWHMD are the total, trapping, electronic,
and statistical noise components respectively. An example of the contribution of each
Figure 2.18: Contribution of the three different noise components to the total noise,
FWHMT . The resolution of this detector is trapping­limited above 300 keV. From Knoll
[4].
of these to the total energy is seen in Figure 2.18. In our CZT detectors, the ratios are
different, but the shapes of the curves remain the same. With increasing energy, electronic
and statistical noise become less and less relevant for the total detector resolution.
2.5.2
Tailing effects
Tailing is the effect on the spectrum measured by a radiation detector, where otherwise
Gaussian features are given long, low­energy ”tails”. Instead of being centered at the
source energy, a highly tailed photopeak is smeared into an exponential shape, which
rises up to the photopeak energy (Figure 2.19). This effect vastly reduces the effective
resolution of the detector. Therefore, a large portion of the work in this project is the
minimization of these tailing effects. There are two main causes of tailing in the 3DCZT
detectors.
Charge trapping
This is a critical source of tailing in all solid­state detectors [10]. As mentioned above,
as a free charge, q0, moves through a detector, it will decay due to trapping following an
exponential equation [17]
q(t) = q0e−t/τ
(2.11)
Where t is the time and τ is the charge lifetime. The drift time of charges, and therefore the
amount of charges lost, increases with distance from the collecting anode. This means
that charge trapping causes the measured energy to decrease with increasing distance to
the collecting anode. Fortunately, this means that if the location of the interaction is known
to some accuracy, the trapping can be largely compensated for. Although the worsened
resolution due to the statistical nature of trapping cannot be corrected.
16
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.19: 3DCZT measured spectrum showing a Cs­137 photopeak with clear tailing
(black). The gray curve shows the spectrum after applying tailing reduction methods.
Weighting potentials
The other major cause of spectral tailing is a simple consequence of the anode weighting
potentials. Although they are highly compressed towards the anodes, there is a not­
insignificant variation of potential over the detector thickness. The shape of the weight­
ing potentials causes the measured energy to decrease with decreasing distance to the
collecting anode. As with the trapping, this can be largely corrected by accounting for
interaction depth. There is also some (much smaller) variation in the potential over the
x­axis, which also causes tailing and requires correction.
2.5.3
Leakage current
Leakage currents are a large source of electronic noise in semiconductor detectors. In
an idealized detector, each electrode on a can be considered an insulated unit, that does
not interact electronically with the neighboring electrodes. However, in a real detector,
there will always be a small amount of leakage current through the detector material, the
amount of which is dependent on the voltage applied to the detector electrodes. When
characterizing semiconductor detectors, measurements are made of this current­voltage
(I,V) relation to better understand the detector properties and defects. We distinguish
between two types of leakage current: bulk leakage and surface leakage.
Bulk leakage current
Bulk leakage current is the leakage from an electrode into the bulk CZT material, and
is caused by two sources. In a typical semiconductor detector, metallic electrodes are in
direct contact with a semiconductor detector crystal, creating a metal­semiconductor junc­
tion [10]. A depletion region is formed at this junction, preventing current flow between the
two materials. This type of barrier is a Schottky barrier. When the electrodes are biased
with a negative voltage, the junction becomes reverse­biased, which further widens the
depletion region. However, a small, current of minority charges will always diffuse across
the junction [4].
The other source of bulk leakage is thermal. Electron­hole pairs can be generated within
the depletion region, causing a current leakage proportional with the detector temperature
[4].
Surface leakage current
Surface leakage current occurs on the surface of the detector and is due to large voltage
gradients between electrodes. This is especially a problem for drift­strip detectors, where
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
17
==PAGE:26==
highly negatively­biased drift­strips are placed very closely to grounded anodes. Surface
leakage is made worse by surface contamination or even increased humidity [4].
Ohmic contacts
While a nominal metal­semiconductor junction forms a Schottky barrier, an Ohmic contact
is often more desirable for a detector [10] [18]. In an Ohmic contact, the current changes
linearly with the voltage in both directions. If the contact resistance is kept low, this can
prevent the exponential increase in leakage current associated with Schottky barriers un­
der high voltage (see Figure 2.20). In addition to measuring the leakage current at the
operating voltage of the detector, it is interesting to study how the current changes over
different applied voltages by measuring an IV­curve) in order to determine the degree to
which the junctions are Ohmic.
Figure 2.20: Comparison between IV­curves measured from Ohmic contacts and Schottky
contacts. From Owens [10]
18
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:27==
3
Hardware preparation
All experiments made in this project took place in the x­ray laboratory in the basement
of the DTU Space building. Before the results of these experiments can be discussed,
we must first lay out the critical components used in the laboratory. Beginning with the
3DCZT detectors themselves.
3.1
Detectors
Three semiconductor x­ and gamma­ray detectors are used in this project. Each of them
consists of a single crystal of Cadmium­Zinc­Telleuride (CZT) of size 40 mm by 40 mm
wide and 5 mm thick [19], manufactured in collaboration with Kromek. All three detectors
are manufactured to the exact same specifications. They are named detector #1, detector
#2 and detector #3. Collectively, they are called 3DCZT detectors, for their material and
their ability to locate photon interaction positions in 3 dimensions.
The design of the detector is a drift­strip design with electrodes laid planar to the two
largest, square detector faces, defined as the ”top” (y = 5 mm) and bottom (y = 0 mm)
of the detector. On the top surface (called the cathode­side) are 20 cathode strips, each
stretching 40 mm along the detector x­axis, with width wca = 1.8 mm and a pitch of Pca =
2 mm between the center of each strip. On the bottom surface (also called the anode­
side) are 99 identical electrodes stretching 40 mm along the detector z­axis. They all
have width wan = 0.2 mm, and a pitch of 0.4 mm. In this project, these electrodes are
electrically biased such that every fourth electrode on this surface functions as an anode.
The three electrodes between each pair of anodes are negatively biased to function as
drift strips. In this configuration, they are all electrically shorted together such that they act
as a single drift electrode of width wd = 1.0 mm. All electrode geometries are illustrated
in Figure 3.1.
3.2
Lab setup overview
The setup of the laboratory was largely carried out before the project start by Kuvvetli,
Tcherniak and Hauptmann [21]. This included connection and testing of all electrodes to
the detector, establishing motor control, and verifying detector functionality. However, in
this project, it was necessary to control as much of the laboratory as possible remotely,
as the author was abroad. Cameras were installed to constantly monitor the state and
position of the detector. Code was developed to control the motors and high­voltage power
supplies remotely. And instead of having to manually swap between different radioactive
sources, all sources had to be illuminating at all times. The detector could then be remotely
controlled to move in between the different sources. This is shown in the block diagram in
figure Figure 3.2, along with other critical elements in the laboratory. In the figure, arrows
illustrate transfer of information, while the large, bidirectional arrows show the movement
of the Velmex motors. For a photograph showing the physical layout of these components,
see Figure 3.4. The following sections detail the function of each of these components.
3.2.1
Passive component PCB
The detector itself is mounted onto the passive component PCB, which is fixed to the
tower. It is responsible AC coupling of every electrode signal, so that the charge­sensitive
preamplifiers aren’t exposed to high­voltage from the HV power supply. Furthermore, this
PCB also biases the anode­ and cathode­side electrode, usually keeping the cathodes
and drift strips at a negative bias, with the anodes at 0V.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.1: 3D image showing electrode geometry of the 40 mm 3D CZT detectors. Cath­
ode strips shown in blue and labelled C0 to C19. Anode strips shown in red and labelled
A0 to A23. Drift strips in gray. Bottom diagram, as well as specifications to make upper
diagram, taken from an internal design document [20]
3.2.2
Charge­sensitive preamplifiers
Electron clouds generated within the detector induce a charge on the detector electrodes
as described in subsection 2.3.1. The purpose of the charge­sensitive preamplifiers is to
convert this charge into a proportional voltage, which can be read by the SIS digitizers.
The basic structure of such a device is a simple operational amplifier with a feedback ca­
pacitor. The charge induction process results in a sharp pulse of current in the electrode,
which is then converted to a step in voltage by the preamplifier, as illustrated in Figure 3.3.
The preamplifiers used in this project are supplied power from a DC power supply at two
ports, with +15 V drawing ∼900 mA total at the one input and ­15 v s∼350 mA at the other.
Due to the high power draw, small computer fans are installed in the detector tower to cool
these and reduce their noise level.
20
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.2: Block diagram illustrating the most crucial components of the laboratory setup.
Modified from a diagram from previous work [21]. The entire detector tower can be moved
in the x,z axes to be placed in front of the different available sources.
Figure 3.3: Working principle of a charge­sensitive preamplifier, taken from [22].
In order to estimate the electronic noise of the detector, the preamplifier modules can
also be fed an input voltage pulse by our electronic pulser. This circumvents the charge­
sensing circuit, and the voltage pulse proceeds in the circuit to the digitizer. This signal will
pick up electronic noise from components in the tower circuitry, so measuring the noise of
the electronic pulse serves as an accurate measurement of the system electronic noise.
3.2.3
Radioactive sources
In this project, three radioactive sources are used. For low energies, we have a Co­57
source, manufactured in 2012 with an original activity of 3700 MBq. Since then, it has
decayed with a half­life of 270.9 days [23] to an activity of roughly 0.05 MBq (calculated
using Equation 2.2).
For analysis of the higher­energy performance of the detector, two Cs­137 sources are
used. These are both far stronger than the Co­57 source, in part due to their longer decay­
times of roughly 30 years [23]. The strongest source, manufactured in 2012 to a strength
of 18.5 MBq, is used for scanning a collimated, narrow beam of gamma­rays over the
detector, while the weaker one, made in 1968 to a strength of ∼0.7 MBq only used for
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
21
==PAGE:30==
full­illumination of the detector.
Source
Peak energy [keV]
Manufacture year
Half­life [23]
Activity in 2024 [MBq]
Co­57
122.05
2012
270.9 d
0.05
Cs­137 (weak)
661.7
1968
30 yr
0.19
Cs­137 (strong)
661.7
2012
30 yr
14.0
Table 3.1: Overview of the radioactive sources used in the laboratory. Peak energies from
Greenwood et al. [24]
All sources, as well as their calculated current­activities, are listed in Table 3.1
3.2.4
Collimator
Two of the radioactive sources are placed without any blocking material in front of them
to provide full illumination of the detector. The stronger Cs­137 source, however, has two
blocks of tungsten in front of it that function as a collimator. A small separation between
Figure 3.4: Laboratory setup during a scan measurement. The detector (2) is mounted
onto the tower (1). The strong Cs­137 source (6) illuminated the detector through a nar­
row opening in the collimator (3). Red and yellow lead blocks (5) shield the rest of the
laboratory from the harmful radiation. Red and green lasers (7) are used to help align the
detector and the collimator. A video camera (4) records, so the system can be controlled
remotely. Photo taken by Irfan Kuvvetli.
the blocks creates a vertical slit with a finely adjustable slit­width. This is used for scan
measurements, where a narrow beam of radiation is gradually scanned over the detector.
Figure Figure 3.4 shows a photograph of the laboratory setup for one of these scan mea­
surements. During a scan, the detector is gradually scanned from right to left. For each
step in the scan, the beam covers a different part of the detector, until the entire surface
has been covered.
22
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:31==
3.2.5
Tower
The tower is the name given to the large structure housing the preamplifiers. It provides
cooling to the preamplifiers with simple computer fans, and routes their signals to the SIS
digitizers where they are measured. The preamplifier signals are carried via 80 coaxial
cables which are plugged into the tower in 4 connectors. The detector and its passive
component PCB are mounted directly onto the front of the tower. Velmex motors attach
to the back of the tower and can move it around the laboratory in 3D.
3.2.6
High­voltage power supply
A FAST SHQ 224M high­voltage power supply provides bias voltage for the cathodes and
drift strips. Under normal operation, the cathodes are biased to −450 V and the drift strips
to −150 V. The power supply can be controlled remotely, using a LabView script provided
by Owe.
3.2.7
SIS 3316 digitizers
The SIS 3316 digitizers function as analog/digital converters (ADC), and are directly re­
sponsible for measuring signals output from the charge­sensitive preamplifiers. They
sample the output voltage from each preamplifier at with a 14­bit ADC at a rate of ei­
ther 250 or 125 MHz [25]. The gain and offset of the A/D conversion are set such that
a 0V input corresponds to a value of roughly 8000 ADC channels, and the signal from a
charge­induced anode increases the measured ADC value by roughly 1 ch per keV de­
posited energy in the detector.
The exact operation of these digitizers is described further in section 3.4.
Figure 3.5: 5 SIS 3316 digitizers daisy­chained together in the detector lab. Each with
only one coaxial cable plugged in, for validation purposes.
In total, 5 SIS systems are used, as each one only has 20 channels. They are daisy­
chained together with one master system on top and four slaves, as seen in Figure 3.5.
In the beginning of the project, they were supplied 75 W each with switch­mode power
supplies. It was discovered that these caused substantial noise in the signal measured
from the detectors. To mitigate this, a cooling system was implemented to reduce their
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
23
==PAGE:32==
noise contribution, before they were eventually replaced with linear power supplies to­
wards the end of the project.
3.2.8
Velmex motors
The tower is mounted onto a VXM­3 multiple­axis bi­slide. This is a 3­dimensional assem­
blage of linear motors which can move the detector in x, y and z directions to an accuracy
of 0.05 mm [26] [21]. In this project, the motors are used to move the detector in front of a
desired radioactive source, or to accurately scan the detector past the collimated beam to
perform a scan measurement. The software developed to control the motors is described
further in section 3.3.
3.2.9
Electronic pulser
An EG&G Ortec 448 Research Pulser is plugged into the detector preamplifiers. It gen­
erates periodic electronic pulses, with adjustable voltage, pulse frequency, rise­time and
decay­time. The purpose of this pulser is to send electronic signals through the detector
Figure 3.6: Photo of the EG&G Ortec electronic pulser used in the laboratory. Taken by
Kuvvetli.
that mimic the signals generated by a high energy interaction in the detector. This can be
used to evaluate noise characteristics of each electrode.
This is one of the few instruments that has not been programmed for remote work, and
must therefore be activated manually for every use.
3.2.10
Cameras and remote­control
Three cameras are placed in the laboratory and constantly monitor the detector from dif­
ferent directions. This is useful for aligning the detector with the different radioactive
sources remotely. They are especially necessary in this project, as it was impossible for
the author to work in the laboratory in Denmark. For controlling the motors as well as
the data collection software, and high­voltage power supply, a windows RemoteDesktop
interface was necessary. Unfortunately, some work still required on­site assistance from
the project advisors. This was primarily the mounting of detectors, rotation of detectors
between x­ and z­axis scans, and adjustment of the electronic pulser.
3.2.11
IV­curve measurement system
To measure the bulk and surface leakage current of the detectors, an IV­curve measure­
ment device, constructed by Jonas Christoffersen and Denis Tcherniak [27]. This device
24
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:33==
works by applying high voltage to pairs of electrodes on a detector, and measuring the
current flow in between them.
For surface leakage current measurements, high voltage is applied to a single electrode
either on the anode­side or on the cathode­side. The neighboring electrode is grounded
and the current between the two is measured.
Figure 3.7: Figure illustrating the measurement of surface leakage current on the IV­curve
measurement system.
For bulk leakage current measurements, all anode­side electrodes are shorted together,
as are all cathode­side electrodes. High voltage is applied to one side, and the current
flow across the detector is measured. Alternatively, this measurement can be made with
the outermost cathode­ and anode­side electrodes grounded to minimize edge­effects by
reducing leakage current over the detector sides.
Finally, bulk leakage current measurements can also be measured for a single electrode.
The setup is the same as for the full bulk­leakage current measurement, except one cho­
sen electrode is not shorted to its neighbors, and the current flow through this electrode
is measured.
Note, that the measurement system considers each physical electrode separately, that is
to say that each of the 3 electrodes comprising a single drift­strip unit is considered one
at a time. This gives, in total, 99 electrodes on the anode­side.
3.3
Motor movement software
Having now presented all the elements of the laboratory, we can now describe some of
the software developed in order to operate them. The following two sections describe in
detail the operation of the Velmex motors and the SIS 3316 digitizers. Developing code
for these systems was not the primary focus of the project, yet it was a necessary step to
obtaining the data needed.
We begin with the motor control software. The three Velmex motors are controlled by
a LabView script originally developed by Ørum [28]. When this project was started, the
basic code to move the motors via LabView worked well. But the script to run scans did
not cooperate with the updated LabView software used with these newer detectors, so it
had to be rewritten.
This script works as a middleman. On one side, it interacts with the Velmex motors via a
serial connection and through Ørum’s motor movement script in order to move the tower.
On the other side, it interacts with the other LabView SIS 3316 scripts used to record
data from the detectors once the tower is in position. Fortunately, the entire program is
relatively simple, and can be shown in a simple flowchart in Figure 3.8.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.8: Flowchart illustrating overall function of the LabView program used to take 1d
scans of the 3DCZT detectors.
The user only needs to interact with the program once at the start, and from then it can
continue to take days of scan measurements. This is done by modifying the scan settings
shown in Figure 3.9. The sample length, trigger threshold, elements per bank, trigger
delay, peaking time and gap time all define the SIS 3316 data collection settings.
Figure 3.9: Screenshot of the user interface of the scan measurement LabView program.
The settings below these define the motor movement. The program is told how many
steps to take for the entire scan, far to move the motor for each step of the scan, in which
axis to move, and how long to hold still and record data for on each step. For each step,
26
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.10: Illustration of the SIS 3316 digitizer sampling system. The top figure shows
a graph of the sampled signals over time, while the bottom array shows the buffer holding
the values of these samples. The system triggered on the gray dashed line, once the
sampled signal exceeded the threshold.
a new data file is recorded. The location and naming scheme for these files is defined on
the right side in Figure 3.9.
Once these values have been defined, the program steps the motor forwards one step
by sending commands through a serial connection. It then initializes another LabView
program, which records and saves data at that step for the user­defined amount of time.
This continues until all measurement steps have been completed, at which point the scan
is done.
3.4
Data collection with the SIS digitizers
The SIS 3316 digitizers are responsible for sampling and recording data from the detector.
For best results, the sampling parameters must be finely tuned to get exactly the data that
we want, while rejecting potential noise. The following section details how the SIS systems
are configured, and what kind of data they produce.
3.4.1
Sample buffer
Each of the 80 channels on the SIS 3316 digitizers constantly samples its voltage in­
put. 69 of these are plugged into the outputs of the charge sensitive preamplifiers. They
are sampled at fixed time intervals (either every 4 ns or every 8 ns) as 14­bit integers.
The measured samples enter a first­in­first­out cyclic buffer, with a length given by the
user­defined sample length, as shown in Figure 3.10. The user also defines a trigger
threshold. If the sampled signals from an anode exceed this threshold, it tells the system
that some interaction likely occurred within the detector. The system then measures a few
more sampled (how many is defined by the trigger delay parameter) before dumping
the cyclic buffers from all channels at once into the PC via a 10 Gbit Ethernet connection.
Thereby, the data collected from all electrodes, at the time of a photon interaction, are
stored.
More precisely, the trigger delay controls how offset the trigger time is from the start
of the sample buffer. In this work, we always set the trigger delay to half of the sample
length. This is useful, as data is needed on both sides of the trigger­time for analysis.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
27
==PAGE:36==
For data collection with detector 1, we used a 4 ns sampling time with sample length=700
and trigger delay=350. For detector 2 and 3, once the lower­rate sampling was worked
out, we used an 8 ns sampling time with sample length=380 and trigger delay=190.
In both cases, this corresponds to a data collection time of ∼3 µs for each event.
3.4.2
Event filtering
Now, in practice, the SIS systems do not trigger simply based on the sampled signal am­
plitude. This would make the system highly sensitive to noise. Instead, the anode signals
must be filtered first, using the in­built moving­average filter illustrated in Figure 3.11. This
Figure 3.11: Diagram illustrating the moving­average­window used by the SIS 3316 sys­
tem. MAW is the profile of the moving average window, which is applied to the ADC signal
to produce the moving­average, MA.
moving average, shown as MA in the figure, is, in essence, an integration of the anode
signal under a trapezoidal window (shown as MAW). The trapezoidal window is defined
by the user parameters peaking time (width of the rising slope) and gap time (width
of the trapezoid top). To prevent accidental registration of noise spikes as events, the
peaking­time must be similar to the rise­time of the anode signal, while the gap­time must
be longer than the time­scale of the noise. A wide gap­time is especially important in
rejection of high­amplitude noise wavelets, which are discussed further in section 4.2. In
this work, we use a peaking­time of 160 ns and a gap­time of 800 ns.
The final parameter in event­filtering is the trigger­threshold. Only when the trapezoid­
filtered signal exceeds this threshold is an event registered. This is carefully set to limit
the lower energy of events registered, so as not to record thousands of unnecessary
background events when, e.g. taking a Cs­137 spectrum.
When using a 125 MHZ sampling rate, the gap­time is equal to 100 samples. As the ADC
pulse­amplitude from a photon interaction is roughly equal to the photon energy in keV,
the integrated signal under the trapezoidal window would be roughly equal to 100 times
the photon energy. So to get a Cs­137 spectrum down to 400 keV (just below the Compton
edge of 477 keV), we use a trigger­threshold of 40000. In general, the trigger threshold
should be set to the minimum desired energy times the gap­time in terms of samples.
trig_threshold ≈Emin [keV ] · gap_time [nsamples]
(3.1)
3.4.3
Data banking
In previous work, the system would transmit each event individually to the user’s PC [21].
However, as there is some latency in transmission and reception of each data­packet,
this limited the event rate. Therefore, it was instead chosen to ”bank” events into groups
28
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:37==
of several hundreds before transmission of the entire bank at once. This increased the
limiting event­rate from 10 events/s to 100 ev/s. The bank size is defined by the no. of
elements per bank parameter in the LabView software for the SIS systems. Typically, it
is set to 1000. For collection of data with a very low rate of events, so the data transfer
rate is not a limitation, it is set to 200.
3.4.4
SIS system data structure
Finally, with the SIS system measurement settings in place, this next section details the
data output from them and how to parse it.
For each photon interaction event, the SIS systems are typically set to produce hundreds
of 16­bit integer samples for each of the 80 channels. Within the data file output from
the SIS systems, the samples from a given channel and given event follow each other in
sequence. Preceding the sampling data for each channel is a channel header, illustrated
in Figure 3.13. Figure 3.12 below illustrates how the headers and data are structured in a
data file. For data that isn’t banked, the procedure for loading it into an analysis software is
Figure 3.12: Example of SIS 3316 data structure for banked data from the 80­channel
detector. In this example, each bank contains 1000 events.
simple. For each event, there are 80 channels. Each channel has some number, nsamples
of uint­16s sample points, and a single header of 6 uint­16s. After loading in the entire
file into memory, it is simply broken into chunks of length nsamples + 6, the chunks are
sorted by channel and event number, and the first 6 uint­16s (the header data) of each
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
29
==PAGE:38==
are discarded.
For data that has been banked, the procedure is more complicated. For example, a bank
set to hold 1000 events (as in Figure 3.12) begins with a bank header and is followed
by the first 1000 events of data, from the first channel. The 1000 events data from the
second channel follow in the next bank, and so on.
For each new bank, the bank header has a length of Bbank_header = 16 uint16s, and the
channel header for each event in each bank has a length of hch_header = 6 unit16s. In
order to read bank number n from a data file that has nsamples samples per event and
nevents events per bank, the following procedure is followed.
1. Access the data file and navigate to uint16 number B0 = n · nsamples · Bbank · 80
Where Bbank = (Bch_header + nsamples) · nevents + Bbank_header is the total number of
uint16s in one bank.
2. Load the following B = Bbank · 80 uint16s into memory, corresponding to 1 bank of
data from all 80 channels
3. Remove all bank headers from data
4. Reshape data structure so that instead of being sorted by channel first, it is sorted
by event first. That is to say, we can access event number 6, and then from there
extract data for any given channel.
Of course, this procedure presumes that the user already knows the number of events
per bank and the number of samples per event. The first time a data file is read, this
information must be extracted from the channel header and bank header. The location of
this information within each header is illustrated in Figure 3.13. The information about the
channel header is adapted from a similar figure in the SIS 3316 manual [25]. However,
that manual only explains the channel header. As far as could be found, the structure of
the bank header was completely undocumented.
In order to determine the contents of the bank header, many data files had to be taken with
a variety of different user input settings. The individual bits from the headers in each of
these files had to be manually compared to see which values changed and which stayed
the same. From this, we could reverse­engineer the header structure.
It was found that the first and last 32 bits of the header were always the same, regardless
of the file settings. From that, it was inferred that they were start and stop codes. Fur­
thermore, information about the size of the bank in bytes, the number of events contained
within, and the index of the particular bank was also identified. Data contained by three
uint32s of the header could not be reverse­engineered, but fortunately they were not nec­
essary to work with the data.
Lastly, in Figure 3.13, we note a single bit in the channel header marked with an asterisk.
This is not an intended feature of the SIS data format, but rather a hack thrown together
for this project. As we moved over from working with data sampled at 250 MHz to data
sampled at 125 MHz, we needed a way for the data analysis program to know which was
which. However, information on the sample rate is not natively stored anywhere in the
data! Fortunately, it was found that the last bit of the channel ID was unused. By changing
the SIS system configuration files, this bit is set to be equal to 1 when the sample rate is
125 MHz, and 0 when it is 250 MHz.
At last, the hardware is ready to collect detector data.
30
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.13: SIS 3316 data structure for a single channel’s recorded data from a single
event within a bank of events. Small numbers indicate bit indices. In this example, 1000
samples per event are used. Adapted from the SIS3316 manual [25]. The asterisk in­
dicates a modification made to SIS’s data structure, the inclusion of a single 1­bit flag to
indicate the sample rate.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
31
==PAGE:40==
4
Data analysis algorithms
The bulk of the work performed in this project is the development and implementation
of a software to analyze measured data from the three detectors. The following chapter
goes into detail about this software. The first part of the chapter lays out how the overall
data analysis program is planned and structured. The second part describes each of the
algorithms used to analyze photon interactions in the detector.
4.1
Program structure
The data analysis software is designed with a large focus on flexibility and usability for
future researchers working on similar detectors.
4.1.1
Program development guidelines
In an attempt to improve on the previous script, a number of design guidelines are laid
out for development. The program must
1. Be flexible enough to allow easy implementation of new analysis methods and re­
sults.
2. Generalize all functions. Allow for use with arbitrary detectors, sampling settings, or
radioactive sources, without the user having to hassle with program settings.
3. User­friendly, with simple UI guides for the most basic analysis tools.
4. Have an understandable, well­organized structure.
Keep variable names clear,
keep functions separated in reasonably named .py files, and store analysis results
in consistent, easy to find locations.
5. As fast as possible while remaining readable and flexible. Avoid unnecessary re­
calculation of results, and apply numpy array methods wherever possible.
By following these guidelines from the start of the project, it became much simpler to load
in vast amounts of data later in the project, and even to implement new ways to analyze
data.
4.1.2
Data products
To provide sufficient statistics, over 2 million photon interaction events are needed for
each detector. Given 380 uint16 samples per event and 80 channels of data, This would
correspond to a data file of over 100 GB! Therefore, to save on read­time, the analysis
software must access the data as few times as possible. And it would be impossible to
hold all this data in memory at one time, as was done for previous, smaller detectors.
These hundreds of gigabytes of raw data are only useful insofar as they are needed to
calculate photon interaction positions, energies, etc. These products, derived from the
raw data, are what are directly used for further analysis. They are as follows
• Event type: stores what type of physical interaction the event corresponds to.
• Pulse­height: Stores the amplitude of the recorded signal for each event and every
channel. Used to generate energy spectra, calculate interaction positions etc.
• X,Y,Z position of each interaction, in mm.
32
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:41==
• The electron drift time, consisting of ts ­ the time in nanoseconds of the photon
interaction in the detector ­ and tc, the time at which the electron cloud is collected
by the anodes.
These products are not independent of each other. To calculate e.g. the drift time, both
the pulse­heights and interaction y­position are needed. The full dependency diagram is
illustrated in Figure 4.1. These dependencies are explained in chapter 4.
Figure 4.1: Flow­chart of dependencies for all data products. Raw sampling data not
shown, as it is required by all products.
Fortunately, all products correspond to very few numerical values per event. Products
from millions of events can easily be contained in computer memory at a time. They must
be calculated from the raw sampling data. Thereafter, they are saved into separate, much
smaller numpy files which can be loaded almost instantaneously. This prevents the need
to recalculate them every time they are needed
These products must then be associated with the original data files, so that the program
can fetch and manipulate them easily. This is accomplished with a comprehensive filelist.
4.1.3
Master filelist
In the previous iteration of the data analysis software, only one raw data file could be
processed at a time, and it had to be manually selected from the file system each time
the software was run. Furthermore, it assumed that all data was recorded with the same
settings. This would obviously not work in this project, where hundreds of data files from
multiple different detectors and with different settings were desired.
A master filelist solves these problems by storing all the necessary information about every
raw data file. In practice, this is a simple CSV file, where every row gives information for
a single data file. Each row includes a link to the data file in the user’s file system, a link
to all the associated data products that have been calculated, information on the settings
and radioactive sources used when recording the data, as well as information on the data
file’s structure so that it can be parsed in software.
4.1.4
Data product calculation pipeline
With the filelist in place, the data analysis software can be run. The core of it is a 3­step
process, which updates the filelist with new files, calculates data products for these, and
saves and loads them.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
33
==PAGE:42==
File registration
When a new raw data file is added to the filesystem, the software isn’t aware of its exis­
tence. It must first be registered into the filelist. The user chooses which file they want
to register. By extracting the first 32 bytes of the file, the program is then able to deter­
mine the file structure. First, it looks for the bank header and channel header stop codes
(shown in Figure 3.13) to determine the header sizes and whether the data is banked or
not. If the data is banked, the number of events per bank is extracted from the header
and stored in the filelist. The number of samples per event, and the sample rate of the
data are also extracted and saved. With these, the total number of events in the file can
be calculated from the file size.
Some information is not available in the file itself, and must be manually input by the user
the first time the file is registered. This is information about the detector used, the radioac­
tive source used, the cathode and drift strip bias voltages, and which type of measurement
the file corresponds to (e.g. a full­illumination, a background measurement, a scan etc.).
If the data is from a scan, more information is needed. These data are stored as many
files ­ one for each step of the scan ­ in a single folder. When registering, this folder is
selected, and the user is also prompted on the scan direction and the distance between
steps in the scan. These are saved in the master filelist for every data file in the scan.
Data loading and calculation
Once the files are registered, the analysis software is able to read them properly. The
procedure for loading in these files and calculating the data products from them is illus­
trated in Figure 4.2. First, the user selects which detector they want to read data from,
and then which raw data files measured with that detector that they want to analyze. The
program then asks the user which products they want to calculate from these files. As
these calculations can take many minutes, it is important that the user can choose only
the products they need. If the desired products have already been calculated and saved
previously, they will be recalculated. Any other products that have been calculated for the
user’s selected files will also be loaded into memory.
From there, the raw data file is read into memory several hundred events at a time. If the
data file contains banked data, then one bank is read at a time ­ otherwise, 1000 events
are read at a time. Loading in many events at once, rather than one at a time as done
in previous work [21], reduces the time used in accessing the computer storage. It also
gives further speedups by allowing for some products to be calculated much faster using
numpy’s array methods.
For each group of events loaded into memory, the program calculates the user’s desired
data products. It then continues to iterate over these large groups of events, calculating
products for each, until reaching the end of the file. The data products are saved to numpy
files, which are then linked to the original raw data file in the master filelist.
4.1.5
Management of detector calibration data
Using the data products calculated, each detector can be uniquely calibrated to yield best
results. There are several different steps to detector calibration, and the results of each
of these calibration steps should be easy to access and modify. They are as follows
1. Gain­normalization of anodes, cathodes, and drift strips. Essentially, calculation of
the conversion factors from measured ADC values to interaction energy.
2. Correction of energy along the detector y­axis
3. Correction of the x­position along the detector y­axis
4. Correction of energy along the x,z axes.
34
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.2: Flow­chart illustrating the overall structure of the data analysis program.
The last three are described in more detail in chapter 5. In the software, they are saved
as a single file for each detector. The first one, the gain normalization, is slightly more
involved and is saved as multiple separate files.
Gain normalization data handling
Gain normalization consists of finding a conversion factor for each electrode, from the
measured ADC pulse­heights to the interaction energy. In this work, we calibrate to three
energies: the Co­57 line at 122 keV, the Cs­137 line at 661.7 keV, and the background
K­40 line at 1460.8 keV. The details of gain­normalization are described in more detail in
section 5.2. Here, we suffice to say that for each radioactive line­energy considered, the
algorithm determines the equivalent pulse­height corresponding to that energy for every
electrode. These calibration points are then used to define a continuous function, which
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
35
==PAGE:44==
converts from ADC pulse­height to energy. Figure 4.3 shows such an example, where
3 calibration points are used to determine a conversion from measured pulse­height to
energy in keV, for anode 15 of detector 2. In this example, the calibration points are fit
Figure 4.3: Example showing gain­calibration of anode 15 of detector 2. 3 calibration
points are used to convert from measured ADC pulse­height to energy.
to a 1st degree polynomial, but it is desirable that they can be fit to any function if re­
quirements change in the future. And the calibration points must be able to be updated
if measurements are refined in the future, or if we want to add calibration points at more
energies. The structure settled on is to save a list of calibration points for each electrode
type (anode, cathode or drift­strip) and each detector. So 9 saved files in total. Each
calibration point is a struct, which contains the relevant line­energy as well as the corre­
sponding pulse­heights for all electrodes. The list of calibration points can be appended
with new ones, or if measurements of e.g. a Cs­137 source are improved, the calibration
point corresponding to this energy can be replaced. Every time the calibration points are
updated, a gain­calibration function (a polynomial) is fit to these points, and the polynomial
coefficients are saved into a separate file. Whenever any data needs to be calibrated, it
is a simple matter of loading these polynomial coefficients and applying their calibration
factor. However, to do this, these calibration files must be linked to the relevant detector.
Detector list
Similar to the filelist described before, the solution is a detector list. A csv file with a row
for each detector, which links that detector to the location of the calibration data files. It
contains links to files containing:
1. Calibration points for all three electrode types
2. Gain calibration polynomial coefficients for all electrodes
3. Energy­correction values for each segment of the detector, broken into the x,y,z
directions (see Equation 5.5)
4. Polynomial coefficients for correction of the measured interaction x­position (see
section 5.4)
The user never has to interact with this list directly. Once a detector is chosen, the ac­
cessing and management of the calibration files happens entirely under the hood.
Now that the overall program skeleton has been constructed, the rest of this chapter goes
into detail in the algorithms employed by the program to analyze detector data.
36
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:45==
4.2
Noise­suppression
Some electronic noise is inevitable in the measured signals from the detector, as de­
scribed in the theory section. However, as the digitizers are so sensitive, they are also
able to pick up noise from other sources in the laboratory. Especially in the beginning
of the project, non­linear power supplies were used to supply the digitizers, and were
thought to be the cause of noisy ”wavelets” in the measured signals. These fluctuations
appear as ”wave packets” with a frequency of roughly 4 MHz and lasting some 2 µs, as
shown in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Example of a Cs­137 single interaction in detector 1, contaminated by wavy
noise.
The figure shows a typical Cs­137 single­event interaction, but where all signals are clearly
contaminated by the same wavelet. They all show the same strong first peak at t ∼1.2 µs,
except the cathodes, which show a negative peak at this time because the cathode sig­
nals are measured with reversed polarity.
We did not want to reject events that are contaminated by this noise, as especially in
the beginning of the project, a large portion of events were contaminated by noise in
some portion. Several solutions were proposed to remove this noise. Simple time­filtering
could not be used, as the scale of variation of the noise was similar to the scale of the
changes in anode and drift charge signals, which must be preserved. Fortunately, the SIS
3316 digitizers have 80 channels, only 69 of which are actually plugged into the detector.
The wavy noise can be estimated as the mean of all of these signals, shown in black
in Figure 4.5 This noise is subtracted from all drift and anode signals and added to the
negative­polarity cathode signals. Of course, this procedure introduces a small amount
of sample­to­sample noise in favor of rejecting the larger scale wavelets, but this is con­
sidered a favorable compromise.
However, to prevent the algorithm increasing the noise level where it is not necessary, it
is only applied on events wavy noise actually is present. The noise signal is determined
to be worth subtracting when its standard deviation exceeds 1.5 ADC channels. This is
a somewhat arbitrary value, chosen because it seemed to appeared noise only in cases
where the waves were visible in the signal. Regardless, noise reduction is applied to
the same electrode signals shown in Figure 4.4, the result of which is presented in Fig­
ure 4.6. Although some small waves remain, the algorithm clearly improves the signal
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.5: Signals measured at the 11 unconnected channels of the SIS 3316 digitizers,
from the same event shown in Figure 4.4. Mean of all signals plotted in black.
Figure 4.6: The same signals from Figure 4.4, after noise­suppression by subtraction of
the not­connected signal shown in Figure 4.5.
shapes. The cathodes, for example, are now much easier to distinguish.
Towards the end of the project, as the digitizer power supplies were replaced with linear
supplies, this solution was no­longer necessary.
4.3
Pulse­height determination
The ”pulse­height” of electrode signals refers to the difference in induced charge before
a photon interaction and after the charges freed by the interaction have stopped moving.
It is a direct measure of the induced charge in a given electrode. Equation 4.1 expresses
the pulse­height, ADC_PH, as follows
ADC_PH = Apeak −Ainitial
(4.1)
Where Apeak is found as the mean of the final 800 ns of samples of each event, and Ainitial
is the mean of the first 400 ns of samples. This is illustrated in Figure 4.7 for a cathode
38
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:47==
signal from a single­interaction event. The reason more samples are used for the peak
Figure 4.7: Example illustrating pulse­height determination for a single cathode signal
from a single Cs­137 interaction in detector 2. Ainitial = 0.32 ADC ch. is the mean of the
first 400 ns of samples, while Afinal = 86.88 ADC ch. is the mean of the final 800 ns of
samples. The resulting pulse­height is just above 87 ADC ch.
than the initial value is simply that there are more samples available. With the SIS 3316
digitizer settings used, the trigger point (roughly the anode collection time) is exactly in the
middle of the sampled data. As the cathode signals begin to rise well before this trigger
point, a smaller window must be used to calculate Ainitial in order to avoid accidentally
including the cathode rise in the estimate of the initial signal.
4.4
Event characterization
While the pulse amplitude is simple to calculate for single­interaction events, things be­
come more complicated for multiple­interactions. Therefore, the software must be able
to distinguish between different interaction types. These are named and numbered as
follows:
­1. Undefined
0. Single­interaction­events
1. Single­cell multiple­events
2. Multiple­cell multiple­events
3. Cosmic­ray events
These are the same categories as in previous work with this detector [21], and the algo­
rithms for determination of event type have only undergone minor changes since then. Of
most interest in this work are single­interaction events. This, and the other event types,
are described in the theory section 2.4.
Detection of multiple­cell multiple­events is very simple. These are all events where more
than one anode has a significant induced charge. Here, it is all events where 2 or more
anodes have an energy­calibrated pulse­height above 20 keV.
Similarly, cosmic ray events are identified as events with measured energy in excess of
3 MeV, or where more than 3 anodes are triggered. In reality, there is no reason why
either of these two criteria should guarantee that the event stems from a cosmic ray. But
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
39
==PAGE:48==
as events of such high energy or triggering so many anodes are not of use in this work,
this classification suffices.
More difficult is the distinction between multiple­ and single­events that only trigger in one
anode. A multiple event can be identified by multiple steps in the anode signal. The num­
ber of steps can be found by counting the number of peaks in the anode signal gradient.
Figure 4.8 shows a case in detector 2 where two interactions trigger the same anode
within a 1µs timespan. In this case, one interaction deposits roughly 100 keV in the de­
Figure 4.8: Figure illustrating how a single­cell event is categorized as a multiple­event.
A single anode in detector 2 detects two separate interactions. The collection times,
t = 1088 ns and t = 1672 ns for each interaction are found as peaks in the anode gradient,
shown in red.
tector while the other deposits 300 keV. The collection times of the two interactions can
clearly be seen as two peaks in the anode gradient, highlighted with red.
In order to prevent detection of noise as a peak, the signals are filtered using Savitzky–
Golay filters, with finely­tuned values chosen by visual experimentation. The full proce­
dure to detect multiple­interaction single­anode events is thus:
1. Filter the anode signal with a Savitzky–Golay filter of size 200 ns (84 ns if Esource <
200 keV).
2. Take the gradient of the anode signal and apply a Savitzky–Golay filter of size 40 ns
(84 ns if Esource < 200 keV).
3. Search within 1.5 µs of the middle of the sampling data for a peak in the filtered
gradient.
4. Peaks are found using the scipy function find_peaks. Only peaks with a height of
h > 0.15 ADC_ch ns−1 and a prominence of p > 0.05 ADC_ch ns−1 are considered.
40
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:49==
For sources with Esource < 200 keV, use instead a height of h > 0.25 ADC_ch ns−1
and a prominence of p > 0.02 ADC_ch ns−1
5. If there is exactly one peak, the event is categorized as a single­event. If there is
more than one, it is categorized as a multiple event.
Note, that different values are used if the source energy, Esource is less than 200 keV. The
first set of values are tuned for Cs­137, but when using the lower­energy Co­57, the noise
component of the signal is more significant. These values avoid mischaracterization of
noise as a peak.
These values are not final, and could likely be tuned to be more accurate. In the case of
this project, the algorithm would have a slight tendency to mistakenly categorize single­
interaction events as multiple­interaction events. This is favorable, as in this project, if any
double­interaction events are mistakenly registered as single­interaction, it would affect
the measured single­interaction spectra and have a substantial effect on detector calibra­
tion. So it was decided to err towards mis­categorizing single events as multiple, rather
than multiple as single. In future projects, where multiple events are to be worked with
directly, these values should be reevaluated.
4.4.1
Drift strip signal absorption
In addition to these four event types, a fifth was discovered.
When studying the spectra of single­interaction events from a Cs­137 source, one ex­
pects many events in the Compton continuum, and many in the photopeak. However,
it was found that there were many more events in­between the Compton edge and the
photopeak than expected. Almost as if photopeak interactions were somehow losing en­
ergy by some mechanism. Even for the cases where we were certain that only one anode
collected any charge.
Investigating these events, it was found that the drift strip signals behaved unexpectedly.
Normally, the induced signal from a drift strip should peak, before dropping and stabilizing
Figure 4.9: Example of a drift­absorption event in detector 3, where some of the electron
cloud collected by anode 10 is also absorbed by drift strip 11.
at a negative value, as drift strip 10 in Figure 4.9. However, some drift strips registered
a net positive induced charge signal, as seen by the (energy­calibrated) charge signal
of drift strip 11 stabilizing around 100 keV. Although the drift strips are negatively biased,
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
41
==PAGE:50==
their close proximity to the anodes and the growing size of the charge cloud with time, can
apparently cause some electrons to be collected by drift strips. This leaves the anodes
with less collected charge, resulting in a reduced anode signal. These events account
for a surprising >10% of all events in all three detectors. They are rejected by taking all
events where any drift­strip pulse height exceeds 20 kV (similar to the sorting of multiple
anode events), and sorting them into a new event type, namely type 4.
4.5
X­position algorithm
With the event types sorted, we can move on to determination of interaction position.
Note, that all of these algorithms are only developed to work with single­interaction events.
The algorithm for calculation of the x­position is adapted from Budtz­Jørgensen and Kuvvetli
[15], and differs slightly from the implementation previously used for this detector in [21].
As an electron cloud moves downwards to an anode, it induces a current in the two neigh­
boring drift regions. If the interaction took place closer to the left drift strip than the right
one, more current will be induced in that one. The induced current can be estimated by
taking the derivative of the charge signal produced by the drift strips [15]. An example of
the signals and currents measured at two neighboring drift strips is shown in Figure 4.10.
Budtz­Jørgensen and Kuvvetli fit the negative derivative of the charge signals to a linear
Figure 4.10: Typical drift strip signals. The top plots show the raw ADC signals from the
strips to the left (DL) and right (DR) of the triggered anode respectively. The bottom plots
show the negative derivatives of these with the ADL and ADR values marked in red. In
all plots, the gray signal is unfiltered and the black one is filtered with a Savitzky–Golay
filter.
drop and a Gaussian peak. They then use the peak amplitudes, ADL and ADR of the left
and right drift strips respectively to estimate the offset of the interaction position from the
42
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:51==
center of the anodes.
xoffset = F · ADR −ADL
ADR −ADL
· Pan
(4.2)
Where Pan is the anode pitch (here, 1.6 mm) and F is an empirical coefficient. For the 40
x 40 mm detectors, F = 0.9 is found to work well, but a better, y­dependent expression
for F is found in later in section 5.4. The interaction x­position, x, can then be found by
adding this offset to the x­position xan of the triggered anode.
x = xan + xoffset
(4.3)
Where the anode x­position is given by Equation 4.4, where ian is the index of the anode
(from 0 to 23) and x0 is the offset of the first anode from the detector edge.
xan = x0 + Pan/2 + ian · Pan
(4.4)
These three equations are convenient rephrasings of one expression from [15]. In this
work, instead of fitting a Guassian, the ADL and ADR values are found my direct mea­
surement of the peak amplitude of the negative gradient, shown by a red X in Figure 4.10.
In the figure, it is clear that the interaction is slightly further to the right than the left, as
ADR > ADL.
In principle, taking the difference between the peak and trough of the gradient should
provide a value roughly equal to the Gaussian amplitude. This was attempted at first,
however in practice the noise spikes in the data often exceed the depth of this trough.
If the bottom of the trough is found as the lowest point in the data near the peak, then
this will result in over­estimation of the amplitudes of small drift currents. In this work,
only using the peak values proves satisfactory. And for improved noise­resistance in the
charge gradient, the charge signal is filtered with Savitzky–Golay filter with a window size
of 56 ns. The gradient itself is further filtered with a window of 40 ns. The filtered signals
are shown in black in Figure 4.10 over the gray unfiltered signals. In cases where the
source energy is known to be less than 300 keV (e.g. our Co­57 source), larger filters are
used to mitigate the larger effect of noise on these smaller amplitude signals. The charge
signal is then filtered with a window of 120 ns, while the gradient is filtered with a window
of 72 ns.
These values were chosen after much experimentation. The filter must be small enough
to capture the peaks in the data closely. A small amount of over­filtering the charge signal
can greatly reduce the gradient amplitude. But with too little filtering, the gradient is easily
noise­dominated.
4.6
Z­position algorithm
The z­position algorithm proved the most cumbersome to develop. Previous work had
already adapted it for use with the 40 mm detector [21], however this version presented
new flaws, especially for interactions near the detector edges and the cathode plane. The
following sections detail the three iterations of the algorithm that were developed for the
40 mm x 40 mm detectors.
4.6.1
20 mm detector algorithm
This first version of the algorithm is the one used for the smaller 20x20 mm detectors. The
fundamental principle is as such: The electron cloud from an interaction should induce
some charge in every cathode, with less charge induced in the ones further from the
interaction location. Ignoring interactions near the cathode plane for the moment, the z­
algorithm described by Budtz­Jørgensen and Kuvvetli simply uses the center­of­mass of
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
43
==PAGE:52==
all the cathode signals to estimate the interaction location [15].
z =
P ica · Qci
P Qci

· Pca + Pca/2
(4.5)
Where ica are the cathode indices (from 0 to 19), Qci is the charge induced on cathode i
and Pca = 2 mm is the cathode pitch.
For a smaller detector, this method works well, as a substantial signal is induced in all
cathodes. For the larger detector, however, it is found that the signal induced in cathodes
more than 10 mm away from the interaction position can be very small indeed, as seen
in Figure 4.11. The figure shows a typical example of a Cs­137 single­interaction right in
Figure 4.11: Cathode pulse­heights for a single, Cs­137 photopeak event at y ≈2.5 mm.
Pulse­height center­of­mass (in terms of cathodes, rather than z­pos) shown in red.
the middle of the detector y­axis, around the z­position of the 13th cathode. Note how
pulse­heights fall to zero more than 4 cathodes from the interaction position. In fact, all
pulse­heights from cathode 0 to cathode 8 are entirely dominated by noise. Despite this,
however, the pulse­height center­of­mass seems to match where one would expect the
interaction to occur. A more pathological example is shown in Figure 4.12. Because this
is a lower­energy interaction at a lower y­position, the cathode signals are smaller, and the
noisy cathode signals begin to ”pull” the CoM more substantially away from the interaction
position. This problem is exacerbated for events taken at lower energies with the Co­57
source. In fact, it is later found that even at high energies, the noise­dominated signals
far from the interaction location greatly reduce the position resolution in the z­axis (see
section 7.4. To remedy this, the algorithm we developed in previous work ignores these
distant, noise­dominated signals [21].
4.6.2
Windowed cathode amplitudes
This iteration of the algorithm, developed in 2023, only considers pulse­heights within a
small window around the interaction location. An example ­ using a window of 4 cathodes
to either side of the interaction ­ is shown in Figure 4.13. The figure shows how the win­
dowing provides a much more useful estimate of the cathode center­of­mass. Although
the algorithm of course requires a first estimate of the interaction position for the window
itself to be defined around. This is not entirely a trivial problem to solve, so the cathode
windowing algorithm is given a much more thorough description in section 4.9.
For calculation of the z­position, a window size of 8 is used. That is to say, that we
include 3 cathodes to either side of the interaction location.
44
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.12: Cathode pulse­heights for a single, ∼400 keV interaction at y ≈0.5 mm.
Here, the pulse­height center­of­mass (red) clearly deviated from the expected interaction
position.
Figure 4.13: The same cathode pulse­heights from Figure 4.12, but now where the CoM
(shown in red) is only calculated from the pulse­heights near the interaction location (these
are highlighted in black).
4.6.3
Improved performance near cathode plane
Interactions near the cathode plane will induce far more charge in the nearest cathode
than any other cathode. In fact, the signal measured at neighboring cathodes actually
becomes negative shortly following the photon interaction, as seen in Figure 4.14. This
causes the estimated z­position to degenerate to the nearest cathode position. This is
evident from the black cathode pulse­height histogram in Figure 4.15, where only one
cathode has significant induced charge. For events within 1.5 mm of the cathode plane,
a modified algorithm is therefore used.
Instead of measuring the collected charge, Qci from the interaction time, ts, to the collec­
tion time, tc, Budtz­Jørgensen and Kuvvetli [15] wait until the electron cloud has moved
some distance down the y­axis, and begin measuring from there. This assures that the
electrons move through a more similar proportion of all the cathode’s weighting potentials.
The charge collected in this period is named Q∗
ci.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.14: Cathode signals for a single Cs­137 event occurring less than 0.2 mm from
the cathode plane. Interaction time, ts, collection time tc and new start­time, t∗
s shown
with dotted lines.
Figure 4.15: Collected charge Qci from cathodes for a single Cs­137 event occurring less
than 0.2 mm from the cathode plane (black). Limited charge, Q∗
ci shown in red.
In practice, Q∗
ci is estimated as the difference between the cathode signal at tc and the
signal at a delayed start­time, t∗
s, as shown in Figure 4.14. The algorithm for estimating tc
and ts is, itself nontrivial and explained in section 4.7. The new start time is then chosen
such that it intersects the neighboring cathode signals when they are most negative. It is
found with Equation 4.6.
t∗
s = tc −dt∗for dt > dt∗
t∗
s = ts for dt < dt∗
(4.6)
Where dt = tc −ts is the electron drift time, and dt∗is chosen as 400 ns empirically. This
is chosen just as the value which produces visually convincing plots (Figure 4.14) for the
46
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:55==
most events, but a better value (close to 400 ns) could be found with more analysis. This
is much smaller than the 640 ns value used by Budtz­Jørgensen and Kuvvetli [15]. But
that is because the voltage over their detector was only 350 V, whereas in this work it is
450 V, causing electrons to traverse our detector faster.
The benefit of using these new, Q∗
ci charge estimates is evident by figure Figure 4.15
showing the pulse heights of the same event that produced the charge signals in Fig­
ure 4.14. Whereas the total charge Qci histogram is dominated by cathode 8, the his­
togram of Q∗
ci more resembles a Gaussian, preventing the z­position from degenerating
to cathode 8’s position.
There are more considerations for the z­position algorithm, such as replacing the CoM
calculation with a Gaussian fit. Or which size window to use. These are discussed further
in section 7.4.
4.7
Drift­time algorithm
The drift­time is the time between photon interaction and electron cloud absorption into an
anode. In addition to determining z­positions, measuring this time can help model charge
carrier mobility in the given detector [29].
Owe et al. estimate the start and end­times of this drift period by fitting a linear function
to the summed cathode signal. The start time is taken as the intersection of this linear
function with the x­axis, while the end time is taken as the time at which the linear func­
tion reaches the summed cathode pulse­height. This method implicitly assumes that the
summed cathode signal is roughly linear, and that it plateaus at the time of absorption.
However, the former assumption fails for interactions near the cathode plane, and the
latter in cases where hole­mobility is significant.
In this work, a more complex, iterative approach is developed which works robustly for
many different interaction positions. The entire algorithm is illustrated by figure Figure 4.16.
Collection time
Firstly, the collection time is determined solely from the triggered anode signal, as the
anode is the one collecting the electrons. Theoretically, the middle of the electron cloud
reaches the anode right in the middle of the anode signal’s steepest slope. The exact time
is found as the peak location of the anode derivative. For the derivative, an aggressive
Savitzky–Golay filter of size 200 ns is used (the black curve in Figure 4.16). The high filter
removes the noisy peaks in the gradient while preserving the location of the overall peak.
Once this is done, the start time must be determined from the summed signal of all cath­
odes. As described in the theory section, the cathodes when summed together act as a
single, planar cathode with a near­linear weighting potential. The shape of the summed
cathode charge signal is therefore usually relatively linear, however for events at high y­
interaction positions, it can appear very convex Figure 4.16. This is mostly due to move­
ment of holes near the cathodes [13]. Fortunately, the curved portion of the cathode signal
is not needed. We only need to determine the time when the signal intersects 0.
Start time
To determine the interaction time, one could look backwards from tc, and find the first time
when the cathode signal crosses the x­axis. However, this method is highly sensitive to
noise in the data. Instead, a series of linear fits are carried out. As the algorithm doesn’t
yet know how long the cathode signal is, the first fit, f0(t), (yellow in Figure 4.16) is done
from tc and down to tc −100 ns. If the cathode signal were linear, this would intersect
the x­axis at ts. But in most cases the signal is at least somewhat convex, so the x­axis­
intersection falls at t < ts. Instead of taking this as the start point, the linear fit is traced
backwards a short distance to a point t1. This is then taken as the centerpoint for the next
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.16: Illustration of how the drift­time algorithm determines the interaction time ts
and collection time tc from anode and cathode signals. Iterative linear fits to the cathode
signal are shown in dashed colored lines, with colors going from yellow at iteration 0 to
blue at iteration 5. As usual, raw data are shown in gray and Savitzky–Golay filtered data
are shown in black.
iteration of the algorithm.
Precisely, t1 is found where f0(t1) = Qc 1
k. Here, Qc is the amplitude of the cathode signal
and k > 0 is a constant that determines how far down to follow the linear fit. A new linear
fit, f1(t), is then fit to a small window around t0. From this fit, a similar process is followed
to generate the next linear fit. Precisely, n linear fits are carried out, f0(t)...fn(t), where the
centerpoint, ti+1 for fitting fi+1 is determined by the previous fit with the updating formula
in Equation 4.7.
fi(ti+1) = Qc
1
k + i
|
i > 0
(4.7)
It is found that k = 0.5 is a small enough to prevent the iterations from diverging far away
from the cathode signals, while still allowing convergence after few iterations. In short,
this whole process produces a series of linear fits, that progressively follow the cathode
signal lower and lower until converging on its base.
This is the basic principle of the algorithm, but there are a few tweaks for it to work as
consistently as possible
• After n = 5 iterations with k = 0.5, ts usually converges.
• For high interaction y­positions, the cathode signal is very flat near tc. So for y >
48
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:57==
4 mm, the start point of the first fit is set some distance back from the collection time,
at t0 = tc −300 ns
• For 1.5 mm < y < 4 mm, the start point is t0 = 150 ns·
y
ysize , where ysize is the detector
thickness
• For the first iteration, a fitting region of 100 ns around the start point are used.
• For subsequent iterations, a width of 70 ns is used. This is mostly because, as
interactions near the anode plane, the drift time becomes shorter and shorter. Using
a small fit width ensures that we don’t fit wider than the width of the cathode signal.
70 ns allows the drift­time to remain accurate down to y ∼0.3 mm at best.
• Safeguards are used to prevent ts estimates of ts > tc or ts < tc­1000 ns.
• As stated in subsection 4.6.2, cathode signals far from the interaction position are
noise­dominated. A window is applied, so only the 4 cathodes nearest the interac­
tion position are summed to produce the cathode­sum signal. This is fine, as the
precise cathode amplitude is not needed for this algorithm, only the signal shape. It
greatly reduces unwanted noise­induced fluctuations.
• This summed signal is Savitzky–Golay filtered with a filter size of 200 ns.
After much experimentation and tweaking of these values, the algorithm proves surpris­
ingly stable for all three detectors, even as they display different behavior.
4.8
Y­position algorithm
4.8.1
Original version
The original iteration of the y­position algorithm is taken verbatim from Budtz­Jørgensen
and Kuvvetli [15], and by the expression
y = Qcathode
Qanode
· ysize
(4.8)
Where Qcathode and Qanode are the charges induced on all cathodes and the collecting
anode respectively, and ysize = 5 mm is the detector thickness. Essentially, electrons
generated from interactions nearer the cathode plane will pass through more of the cath­
ode potential before being absorbed, thereby inducing more charge. This relationship is
roughly linear, assuming negligible hole­mobility and electron trapping [15]. Furthermore,
it also implicitly assumes that the anode induced charge is independent of y­position.
These assumptions are not entirely valid for the 3D CZT detectors, and therefore the y­
position needs further correction, which is described in section 5.3.
In order to calculate Qcathode, all cathode signals are summed together, and the pulse­
height of this is found using the algorithm in section 4.3. An example of such a cathode
sum signal is shown in the gray curve in Figure 4.17. Unfortunately, this also introduces
the noise present in all cathode signals. To mitigate this, we again apply cathode window­
ing.
4.8.2
Y­position with windowed cathodes
Just as with the z­position, reducing the number of cathodes considered in calculation of
the y­position can greatly improve the y­position resolution. This is evident in Figure 4.17.
By reducing the summed cathode signal to a sum of only the 8 neighboring cathodes
(rather than all of them) the majority of the noise is alleviated.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.17: Sum of cathode signals for a single, Cs­137 single­interaction in detector 2.
The gray curve shows the sum of all cathode signals, while the black curve shows the
sum of only the 8 cathode signals which are closest to the interaction location. Note the
reduction in noise in the windowed signal.
However, this is not as clear­cut as it was for calculating the z­position. For the y­position,
it is very important that the induced cathode charge from the entire detector is considered.
If even a small amount of signal is left out, then the cathode sum will be reduced and the
calculated y­position will be smaller than the actual interaction y­position.
So the question becomes: how few cathodes can we get away with summing, while keep­
ing the summed cathode charge as close as possible to the actual induced charge in all
cathodes. Say, for example, that by summing only 10 cathodes, we lose 1% of the cath­
ode signal, but gain 50% in the y­position resolution by reducing the cathode noise. It
becomes a question of balancing the y­position accuracy against the precision. This is
very difficult to evaluate on an event­by­event basis. Instead, large populations of data
must be considered to determine an appropriate cathode window size.
100.000 Cs­137 single­interaction y­positions are calculated for detector 1, using multiple
different window sizes. These are compared to the y­positions as calculated using all
cathodes. As expected, the fewer cathodes included, the lower the y­position estimate
becomes. The average error (the mean difference between the y­position calculated with
and without a window) is listed for all window sizes in Table 4.1. We can see that the size
of this error increases for decreasing window sizes
On the other hand, smaller windows improve the y­axis precision. In want of a y­axis
scan to evaluate this, a comparison with the electron drift time serves to help estimate y­
resolution. This works drift time is expected to grow linearly with respect to the y­position
[16].
In Figure 4.18, the two parameters are plotted against each other for select window
sizes. Each plot is fit to a linear regression. From the figure, a clear linear relationship is
evident from the two rightmost plots. And the y­position with a window size of 8 is clearly
more precise than that found with no windowing. This is evident by the fact that it visually
has less spread than the y­position calculated using all 20 cathodes. And the root­mean­
square error (RMSE) calculated between the y­positions and the blue linear fit curve is
smaller when using a window of 8 cathodes than using one of 20 cathodes.
50
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.18: 2d histograms showing calculated y­position versus the electron drift time
for detector 1, Cs­137 single­interaction events. The 3 histograms compare calculations
done with different amounts of cathode windowing. All three are fit to 1st degree polyno­
mials (blue), and the root­mean­square error (RMSE) for these fits is listed.
On the other hand, a window size of 4 is also obviously too small, as the drift­time ceases
to grow linearly with the y­position. This indicates that the measured y­position is begin­
ning to diverge aggressively from the actual interaction y­position.
Table 4.1 compares the accuracy and the precision of the various window sizes.
Window size
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
20
Average error [µm]
­322
­111
­50
­30
­21
­16
­8
0
RMS spread [µm]
249
232
236
244
253
262
272
312
Table 4.1: Table over the effect on the y­position of using different cathode window sizes.
Smaller windows lead to y­positions smaller than they should be, but also to reduced
variation in the y­position.
Based on the table, a window size of 10 is chosen. This window size provides the
largest reduction in y­position RMS spread compared to the error incurred. For the Co­57
source, however, the spread in the y­positions is far greater, due to the lower signal/noise
at low energies. In fact, the y­position estimates for Co­57 interactions are so poor, that
many events are calculated as having y­positions falling well outside the detector edge at
y > 5, as seen in Figure 4.19.
From the figure, it is clear that we should use an even smaller cathode window in order
to reduce the y­position variance. As before, the variance and mean error are analyzed
for different window sizes, producing the results in Table 4.2.
Window size
4
6
8
10
20
Average error [µm]
­232
­71
­19
­3
0
RMS spread [µm]
650
673
732
797
1043
Table 4.2: Table over the effect on the y­position (of interactions from a co­57 source) of
using different cathode window sizes. Smaller windows lead to y­positions smaller than
they should be, but also to reduced variation in the y­position.
Based on the numbers in this table, it is decided that When using low­energy radioactive
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.19: 2d histograms showing calculated y­position versus the electron drift time
for detector 1, Co­57 single­interaction events. The 3 histograms compare calculations
done with different amounts of cathode windowing, as in Figure 4.18 All three are fit to 1st
degree polynomials (blue), and the root­mean­square error (RMSE) for these fits is listed.
sources (Eγ < 200 keV), a window size of 6 is chosen.
4.9
Cathode windowing algorithm
Finally, we get to a description of the cathode windowing algorithm, which has become
crucial in the y and z­position calculations.
This algorithm tries to find the N cathodes nearest to the interaction location, where N
can be chosen by the user. The actual algorithm for windowing cathodes is similar to the
one developed in previous work [21], with some small changes.
Figure 4.20: Example of the cathode windowing algorithm applied to a Cs­137 interaction
very close to the anode plane in detector 1. The black steps show the cathode pulse­
heights, while the red steps show the moving mean of these. The window (shown in blue)
is defined out to 3 cathodes to the left and right of the peak of the moving mean.
The first function of the algorithm is to estimate which cathode the interaction happened
52
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:61==
closest to. This will be the center of the cathode window. For most cases, this is the cath­
ode with the highest pulse­height, but if the cathode amplitudes are very low, this isn’t
always the best estimate, as seen in Figure 4.20. Here, the interaction position is actually
below cathode 8, even though cathodes 7 and 9 have higher pulse­heights. This effect
is simply due to noise in the cathode pulse­heights. To determine a better center of the
cathode window, a moving mean of size 3 is applied to the cathode pulse­heights (shown
in red in the figure). The cathode at the peak of this moving mean, Camid, is then set to
the middle of the window. In this case, the window is chosen to go from 3 cathodes to
the left of this peak to 3 cathodes to the right, giving a window size of 7. Cathode signals
outside this window can be disregarded for e.g. z­position calculations.
4.9.1
Interactions between cathodes
By default, the window size is odd. That is to say, it goes out to n cathodes to the left and
right of the middle.
Figure 4.21: Example of the cathode windowing algorithm applied to a Cs­137 interaction
in detector 1. As the interaction position is right between cathodes 6 and 7, the window
is given an even width and centered about both these cathodes.
However, when an interaction occurs right between two cathodes, then we should still
want the window to include the same number of cathodes to either side of the interaction,
such that it is not biased towards one side. Therefore, in these cases, the cathode window
should have an even width. An example of this is shown in Figure 4.21, where the interac­
tion occurs right between cathodes 6 and 7. By default, cathode 6 would be chosen as the
center cathode, and the window would go from cathode 3 to cathode 9. However, as the
algorithm can see that the interaction is just in­between 6 and 7, then the window is ex­
panded by one cathode on the right side, so as to be symmetric about the interaction point.
In the software, this is accomplished with the following steps:
• Find the middle of the window PHmid
• Check the pulse­heights of the two cathodes PHmid−1 and PHmid+1 to the left and
right of the window midpoint.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
53
==PAGE:62==
• If PHmid+1 > 2/3 PHmid and PHmid−1 < 2/3 PHmid, then the upper­limit of the window
is increased by one.
• If PHmid−1 > 2/3 PHmid and PHmid+1 < 2/3 PHmid, then the lower­limit of the window
is lowered by one.
This algorithm is self­explanatory. If two neighboring cathodes have similar pulse­height,
then the interaction must occur close to the edge between them, and an even window is
used.
However, the coefficient of 2/3 seems arbitrary. This can be explained by the following
consideration: assuming interactions are evenly distributed along the detector z­axis, we
would expect half of the interactions to be closer to the middle of a cathode, and the other
half to be closer to the edge of a cathode. In the case of interactions near the cathode
edge, one of the neighbors of the peak cathode will have a pulse­height similar to the
peak cathode pulse­height. We can then determine the value k < 1, such that when the
neighbor cathode pulse­height exceeds k · PHpeak, it means the interaction is closer to
the edge between these cathodes than the center of the peak cathode. k = 2/3 is then
found empirically, as the value that splits interactions evenly into those near a cathode
edge, and those near a cathode center.
Finally, we encounter a problem very near the detector edge. For example, if cathode
1 is chosen as the middle of the window, the window will necessarily be biased towards
the middle of the detector, as there are more cathodes on that side than remain towards
the detector edge. For the z­position estimate, this effect causes it to be ”pulled” slightly
away from the edge of the detector. Attempts were made to fix this problem by making
cathode windows get progressively smaller towards the detector edge. But this instead
caused the z­position algorithm to degenerate, as too few cathodes were included.
In the end, the final algorithm does not at all change the window size for these edge­cases.
It remains an unsolved problem.
4.10
Gaussian fitting algorithm
Lastly, is a general­purpose algorithm used many places in the data analysis software to
fit a histogram to a Gaussian function. This algorithm is used for, e.g. determining posi­
tion or spectral resolution, as well as detector calibration and energy correction.
Usually, curve fitting is a procedure that is done manually with diligent user oversight. But
for many aspects of the detector data analysis, we need to fit hundreds of Gaussians rela­
tively quickly. So this algorithm needs to be robust in order to provide convergent results
for a large variety of cases. This is especially difficult, since many of the e.g. spectral
histograms do not resemble perfect Gaussians, but instead have large amounts of tailing.
The basis of the algorithm is an iterative curve­fit, where the fitting region and the his­
togram binning are updated with each iteration. It takes the following input parameters:
• d: Data which is to be fit
•

dlow,0; dhigh,0
	
: Initial fitting range
• µ0: First estimate of Gaussian mean
(defaults to center of fitting range)
54
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:63==
• σ0: First estimate of Gaussian standard deviation
(defaults to 1/5 of the width of the initial fitting range)
• nσ: Size of the fitting range for each iteration, in terms of standard­deviations
(defaults to 2.35 σ)
• δ: How much the fitting range is to be skewed in either direction,
(defaults to 0)
• niter: The number of iterations to run the algorithm for.
All of these parameters can be set by the user, but the algorithm also works if only the
first two are set, as the other parameters will simply be set to their defaults.
The first step of the program is to generate a histogram to fit. It is important that the
histogram has enough bins so that there is enough data to fit, without being so many that
the fit fails because the data are too spread. Freedman and Diaconis have derived an
optimal­binning algorithm that serves as a good rule of thumb [30].
wb =
IQR
3√ncounts
(4.9)
Where wb is the bin­width, ncounts is the total number of counts in the histogram, and IQR
is the interquartile range of the data.
In the first iteration, the data, d are binned using the Freedman­Diaconis rule to the range

dlow,0; dhigh,0
	
. Using the scipy function curve_fit. These are fit to a Gaussian with the
initial mean, standard deviation and amplitude set to µ0, σ0, A0, where A0 is the maximum
amplitude of the histogram.
The Gaussian parameters found from this fit, µ1, σ1 are then used to calculate a new fitting
range,

dlow,1; dhigh,1
	
, to bin the histogram to. By default, the new binning range is updated to
be centered around the Gaussian mean, µ1, and have a width of nσ standard deviations.
However, for data with long tails, it can be useful to only fit to the rightmost part of the
histogram. The user­defined parameter δ moves the centerpoint of the new binning range
to the right. For δ = 1, the fitting range starts at the Gaussian mean, dlow = µ and
continues until nσ standard deviations to the right of the mean dhigh = µ + nσσ. For
δ = −1, the range is instead set to be left of the Gaussian mean. The general equation
for updating the histogram range following iteration i of the algorithm is as follows.
dlow,i+1 = µi −σi · (1 −δ) · nσ/2
dhigh,i+1 = µi + σi · (1 + δ) · nσ/2
(4.10)
The data, d, are now rebinned to this range using Equation 4.9, where ncounts is the num­
ber of datapoints in the new range. This process of updating the range and rebinning
is repeated again and again until the desired number of iterations is reached. Usually,
10 iterations give a sufficient convergence of the Gaussian mean to 4 significant figures.
The entire algorithm is visualized for a particularly tailed photopeak in Figure 4.22. In this
case, the algorithm is run with a high δ = 0.75, to fit only the right part of the photopeak
and ignore the tail entirely. Although the first fit estimate is far from accurate, the high δ
value manages to pull the second iteration much closer to the photopeak. By the 10th
iteration, the algorithm has fully converged on the right half of the photopeak.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.22: Example illustrating the iterations of the Gaussian fitting algorithm on a
highly­tailed anode­pulse height spectrum (black) for detector 1. Fitting region in each
iteration shown filled in orange. The Gaussian fit to the histogram is plotted in blue, with
the segment of the histogram within the fitting region highlighted in red.
It is said that when the only tool you have is a hammer, every problem looks like a nail. As
we will see in the next chapters, this general­purpose Gaussian fitting algorithm proves
to be a very robust hammer.
56
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:65==
5
Measurement and calibration
With all the fundamental analysis tools having been laid out, the following section covers
the measurements taken with the detectors, and how these are used to calibrate the de­
tector’s spectral and imaging capabilities. The section begins with a description of all the
measurements taken and their purpose, followed with a description of how these mea­
surements are used to correct for gain variation between the detector electrodes. Finally,
the lengthy process of energy­and position­correction in all three axes is described.
5.1
Test plan and measurement procedure
Many different measurements are taken for each detector in order to characterize them.
5.1.1
Full­illumination measurements
The simplest measurement is a uniform illumination of the entire detector surface by a
single radioactive source. This is done by moving the detector in front of one of the two
unobstructed radioactive sources, and taking a measurement until ∼500 thousand events
are recorded. This number of events provides sufficient statistics for gain­calibration of
anodes and cathodes, as well as x­ and y­position calibrations.
These measurements are done with both the Co­57 and the weak Cs­137 sources.
5.1.2
Background measurement
Even when not illuminated by a source, the detectors constantly register interactions stem­
ming from the radioactive background, described in subsection 2.1.3. In absence of a
higher­energy source than Cs­137, analysis of the 1460.8 keV photopeak from K­40 in
the background provides a measure of the > 1 MeV performance of the detector. In order
to resolve this peak clearly and estimate its FWHM, over four days of measurement are
required. Over a week of data is preferable. For these measurements, the detector is
moved far away from the laboratory radioactive sources, and the trigger threshold is set
to reject events below 1 MeV.
5.1.3
Scan measurements
In these measurements, a radioactive beam is slowly scanned past the detector. The
strong Cs­137 source is placed behind the collimator, which is adjusted to let photons
through a narrow vertical slit of 0.2 mm width. The detector is moved past the slit in steps
of 0.5 mm. At each step, it collects incoming photons from this narrow slit for 1800 sec­
onds, corresponding to roughly 10000 Cs­137 interactions. The scan can be done in
either in the x­ or z­axis by rotating the detector on the tower. In total, a scan in each axis
takes roughly 2 days.
The primary purpose of these measurements is to determine the x­ and z­position reso­
lutions. For each scan­step, an image of the narrow Cs­137 beam can be made from the
interaction positions of the detected photons. The width of the beam in the image will be
greater than the actual slit width, due to the limited resolution of the detector. The beam
width therefore is a measure of the position resolution.
This gives the position precision, but the accuracy can also be evaluated from these mea­
surements. It is known that the beam moves exactly 0.5 mm between each step, so if the
image of the beam does not move the same amount, it indicates flaws or limitations in the
positioning algorithms.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
57
==PAGE:66==
5.1.4
Electronic noise measurements
For these measurements, the detector is moved away from any radioactive sources and
fed pulses from the electronic pulser. In all cases, the pulser is used with a short rise­time
of 20 ns and a long decay time of 1000 µs to produce a step­like response. The voltage
is always set to 37 mV, as measured with an oscilloscope at the input of the SIS 3316
digitizer. This gives pulse shapes and amplitudes similar to the anode signal produced by
a 661.7 keV photoelectric absorption interaction in the detector, as shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Electronic pulse signals as measured at every channel on detector 2. As
cathodes are negatively biased, their signals are given negative polarity in the SIS 3316
systems.
By measuring the standard deviation of the pulse­heights, we can estimate the electronic
noise in the detector.
5.1.5
IV­curve measurements
Bulk­ and surface leakage currents are measured for all 3 detectors over the course of
roughly 4 days per detector, using the measurement system developed by Christoffersen
and Tcherniak [27]. The different types of measurements are described earlier in subsec­
tion 3.2.11.
Whole­detector bulk leakage currents are measured from −450 V to +450V in steps of
5V. When initially biasing the electrodes to −450 V , the system waits 240 s for the electric
fields to settle. For each subsequent measurement, as the voltage step is only 5 V, we
suffice with settle time of 20 s.
The single­electrode bulk­leakage current is measured from −200 V to +200V in steps of
3 V. These measurements were taken before the above­mentioned settle times were de­
cided on. So the system waits a full 120 s after each voltage step before measuring the
current.
Finally, the surface leakage current is measured for each neighbor­pair of electrodes from
­50 V to 50 V in steps of 5 V. As with the full detector bulk leakage, an initial settle time of
240 s is used, followed by a 20 s settle time between measurements.
We note that these settle times were arrived at after much experimentation with the IV
curve system by Owe and Christoffersen. For many of the measurements taken, in fact,
the IV curve measurement software was still under development. For the first measure­
ments taken, the voltage was actually reset to 0V between each voltage step. These
huge swings in electrode bias drastically affected the measurement stability. Many of
these measurement points aren’t included as their data are invalid. Regardless, the data
that are not erroneous prove useful.
58
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:67==
5.1.6
Test plan
Each of these measurements takes time, so must be planned out in order that they may
be completed for all 3 detectors by the end of the project, allowing for mistakes. While
mounted on the tower, all 8 measurements shown in Table 5.1 must be carried out for
each detector.
Measurement type
Source
No. events
Duration [h]
122 keV full illumination
Co­57
500 000
1.5
661 keV full illumination
Cs­137 (weak)
500 000
1.5
122 keV drift calibration
Co­57
500 000
1.5
661 keV drift calibration
Cs­137 (weak)
500 000
1.5
X­axis scan
Cs­137 (strong)
850 000
(10 000 per step)
44
Z­axis scan
Cs­137 (strong)
850.000
(10 000 per step)
44
Background
N/A
100 000
100
Electronic noise
HV power supply
20 000
0.2
Table 5.1: Overview of all measurements to be taken with the 3 3DCZT detectors mounted
onto the tower.
In total, each detector must be mounted to the tower for at least 8 days to perform all
measurements. And even though the SIS systems limit the detectors to 100 ev per sec­
ond, an increase in the event rate would not improve the schedule. This is because the
background measurements and the scan measurements take by far the longest, and they
are limited by the rate of interactions on the detector, not the SIS system. In addition to
these, the IV curve measurements take roughly 4 days to perform per detector. Luckily,
these do not require the tower, and so can be run while another detector is undergoing
measurements on the tower.
5.2
Gain normalization
Having obtained these full illumination measurements, the pulse heights for all electrodes
and for every event are calculated. Plotting the anode pulse­heights of a Cs­137 mea­
surement as a histogram results in an approximation of the Cs­137 spectrum, as seen for
all three detectors in Figure 5.2.
In all cases, the photopeak lies at roughly 750 ADC channels and has a very wide
FWHM on the scale of 50 ADC channels. Notably, detector 2 shows a double­peaked
histogram. This is because the histogram is a combination of pulse­height histograms
from all anodes. And as some anodes have lower electronic gain than others, their re­
sulting histogram could peak at lower or higher values. This also causes the photopeak
to appear much wider than the photopeak of an individual anode. In order to correct for
difference in gain of the anodes and convert these histograms into actual energy spectra,
the anode signals must be multiplied by a calibration factor such that each anode’s pho­
topeak is shifted to the Cs­137 photopeak at 661.7 keV. When this is done, the histogram
becomes an energy spectrum rather than just a pulse­height histogram.
In general, the procedure for calibrating an electrode is to determine the mean pulse­
height, µPH of that electrode that corresponds to the photopeak of the source measured,
Ephotopeak. Using a series of pulse­heights and corresponding source­energies taken with
different radioactive sources, one can produce a general formula that converts any cal­
culated pulse­height histogram to an energy histogram. f(µPH) →Ephotopeak
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.2: Uncalibrated pulse­height spectra for all three detectors after illumination by
a Cs­137 source. Photopeak visible in all cases around 750 ADC ch. Compton edge is
around 500 ADC ch.
5.2.1
Anode gain normalization
The process for gain­normalization of anode histograms is very similar to the work done
by Hauptmann, Kuvvetli and Tcherniak [21]. In that work, a 3­step Gaussian­fitting algo­
rithm was developed to model the photopeak in the pulse­height histogram. In this work,
we can simply use the general­purpose Gaussian fitting tool described in section 4.10.
Firstly, the histogram is limited to the range 0.85Eγ to 1.45Eγ, where Eγ is the source en­
ergy. µ0 = Eγ provides a first estimate of the Gaussian mean for the fitting algorithm. For
low energy sources (below 300 keV), the photopeak is fit to a width of 1 FWHM (nσ = 2.35),
and slightly offset to the right (δ = 0.3, seeEquation 4.10). For high energies, it is fit to
3 standard deviations (nσ = 3) and the fitting region is highly skewed to the right of the
photopeak (δ = 0.6).
The procedure is carried out automatically for all anodes and converges when run on both
the Co­57 and Cs­137 photopeaks. Although each histogram fit must be verified by the
user, so the fit regions can be manually adjusted if the results are unsatisfactory. This pro­
cedure yields the results below for the Co­57, Cs­137 and K­40 photopeaks (Figure 5.3).
Figure 5.3: Example demonstrating the anode calibration algorithm on photopeaks from
Co­57, Cs­137 and K­40. Orange highlighted regions of histograms are fit to Gaussians
(red). Here, shown for anode 15 of detector 2.
60
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:69==
The K­40 source proved very difficult to fit for individual anodes. Even when combining 4
days of background data together with 4 days of x­ and z­axis scan data (these scans also
picked up stray background as they ran), the photopeak is barely visible above the back­
ground continuum. The fitting regions had to be carefully, manually adjusted for each
anode before the algorithm would converge. But converge it did, as the above figure
shows.
For detector 3 in particular, the K­40 spectrum was very difficult to fit for individual anodes.
In order for the photopeak to be prominent enough, a y­axis correction (see section 5.3)
had to first be applied to the energy histogram. After fitting the corrected photopeak, the
equivalent uncorrected photopeak, µPH, was then be calculated in order for the calibra­
tion point to be used in concert with the Co­57 and Cs­137 calibration points.
Normalization results
Finally, once this procedure is done, we are left with a list of 3 calibration energies and their
corresponding pulse­heights for all anodes and all detectors. The calibration equation is
then a simple linear fit from the pulse­heights, PH to the energies, E, with the formula
given by
E = k1 · PH + k2
(5.1)
Where k1 is the fit slope and k2 is the intercept. This simple model is the same used in
previous work [31]. The inclusion of an intercept is somewhat debatable. If it is less than
greater than 0, then it implies that a positive pulse­height should be recorded even when
there are no interactions within the detector. This is clearly nonsensical, so we must be
weary of energies measured near zero. The intercept, however, is kept in the model, as
it can account for some non­linearities in the detector. For example, if there is a minimum
interaction energy required to induce signal in the detector (a perfectly reasonable case),
this would be captured by a positive gain­normalization intercept. This linear fit then is
applied to the calibration points of each anode (see Figure 4.3 for an example). The
calibration coefficients k1,k2 are listed in Appendix A. Clearly, the problems of using an
intercept are not too critical, since the intercepts are only on the order of single­digit keV
at most.
Figure 5.4: Gain­calibrated energy spectra of a Cs­137 source for all three detectors. 1
million single­events are included in each spectrum. The photopeak in each case is fit to
a Gaussian, with mean and FWHM shown. The Compton edge can be seen around the
expected E = 477 keV (from Equation 2.6)
After gain­normalization, the pulse­height histograms have far narrower peaks, the width
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
61
==PAGE:70==
of which can now be meaningfully measured, as seen in Figure 5.4. The photopeaks
in the spectra are still very wide due to tailing effects (see subsection 2.5.2), which will
be corrected later. Although, notably, detector 2 shows much better energy resolution
than the other detectors. All the way down to 1.85% @ 661.7 keV before any further
corrections, while detectors 1 and 3 have 5.4% and 4.4% resolution respectively. The gain
normalization proved successful for all anodes, with the small exception of two anodes
on detector 1.
Dead Anodes
On detector 1, anodes 0 and 4 proved difficult to calibrate. Their pulse­height histograms
show very low responses even for high­energy Cs­137 signals.
Figure 5.5: Cs­137 pulse­height histograms for bad anodes 0 and 4 on detector 1.
These anodes were also dysfunctional in previous work done with this detector [21]. At
that time, the charge­sensitive preamplifiers were tested, and the cables connecting these
anode signals to the SIS digitizers were moved around in an attempt to isolate the fault.
It was determined to be a problem on the detector side.
It is uncertain what the problem is, since the histograms in Figure 5.5 do not show any
structures resembling the Cs­137 spectrum as they should. If they ­ for whatever reason
­ have a very low gain, then any Cs­137 interactions collected by these anodes would
induce a charge signal that is below the trigger threshold of the SIS digitizers systems, so
no event would be triggered. For the moment, nothing can be done about them, so their
calibration values are set to 0.
5.2.2
Cathode gain normalization
As the cathode strips are much wider than the anodes, their weighting potentials are
much closer to linear than the anodes’. The pulse­height histogram of a single cathode is
then strongly dependent on the interaction y­position. Instead of a clear photopeak and
Compton continuum, it resembles a single continuum stretching from 0 and dropping off
sharply.
When the cathodes are properly calibrated, the cutoff of the histogram will be at the source
energy. This work uses a similar algorithm to the one described by Magelund and Kuvvetli
[31] to determine this cutoff. In short, µPH is found as the peak of the negative gradient
of the cathode pulse­height histogram, as shown in Figure 5.6.
62
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.6: Illustration of the cathode gain­calibration algorithm. The photopeak is found
as the steepest cutoff in the pulse­height histogram. Which is determined as a peak in
the negative derivative of the histogram. Here, the data is from measurements taken with
a Cs­137 source.
More specifically, the algorithm for determining this peak is as follows:
1. For each cathode, the pulse­height histogram is calculated in the range
{0.8 · Eγ, 1.6 · Eγ} using the Freedman­Diaconis rule (Equation 4.9).
2. The negative gradient of the histogram is calculated
3. The peaks of the gradient are found using the scipy.signal algorithm find_peaks.
These are filtered to keep only the most prominent peaks (peaks with at least half
the prominence of the most prominent one)
4. The cutoff­value is found as the right­most of these peaks.
Given how simple it is, this algorithm is surprisingly robust, as the Freedman­Diaconis
binning prevents even data with few samples from yielding noisy gradients. Of course,
each calibration is manually reviewed by the user, and fitting ranges and binning amounts
can be adjusted manually.
This procedure is done using the Co­57 and Cs­137 sources to obtain two calibration
points. These are fit to a linear function, like the curve used for anodes (Equation 5.1),
but where the axis intercept is forced to 0. The calibration equation for cathodes is then
simply:
Ecathode = k1 · PH
(5.2)
The reason for this is that, as opposed to with the anodes, we need to use even the very
low­amplitude cathode signals. The z­axis algorithm in particular requires that the cathode
pulse­height drops to precisely zero when the interaction energy is zero. Otherwise, the
center­of­mass calculation done could severely diverge, ruining the z­position estimate.
For similar reasons, a non­zero intercept would also negatively affect the y­position inter­
cept.
All cathode calibration coefficients are noted in the tables in Appendix A. Notable in these
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
63
==PAGE:72==
tables are a few cathodes in detectors 2 and 3, which proved especially difficult to cali­
brate. The following section details the investigation into the cause of strange behavior
observed in these cathodes.
5.2.3
Bad cathodes
Several cathodes on detectors 2 and 3 displayed odd behavior, without appearing to be
explicitly dead (negligible charge signal). Namely, cathodes 15 and 17 on detector 2 and
cathodes 2, 12 and 17 on detector 3 appear to have very low signal gains. Their gain­
calibration slopes, k1, all varied between k1 = 2 to k1 = 2.8, whereas for all other cathodes
k1 is in the range 0.85 to 0.95.
Figure 5.7: Pulse­height histograms for detector 2, cathode 15, recorded with a Co­57
source (left) and a Cs­137 source (right). Photopeak in each case is estimated to be ∼50
ADC channels and ∼250 ADC channels respectively.
On its own, this wouldn’t be an issue. Figure 5.7 shows that although the cathode pulse­
height histograms are low in amplitude (cutting off at less than half the pulse­height that
other cathodes’ histograms cut off at), they still retain the correct shape. They both show
a steep drop­off corresponding to the photopeak and the Cs­137 histogram even shows
a second drop­off at around 180 ADC channels, corresponding to the Compton edge.
Clearly, the cathodes are measuring actual charge induction signal.
Figure 5.8: Histograms of selected calculated interaction y­positions in detector 2. De­
tector edge at y = 5 mm shown in grey. Interactions near cathode 15 and 17 show long
”tails” stretching to unrealistic y­positions outside the detector.
64
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:73==
Unfortunately, the problem is more complex than this.
It was discovered that the y­
positions calculated for interactions near these cathodes are inaccurate. Figure 5.8 com­
pares the y­position histograms for events near cathodes 15 and 17 on detector 2, with
events near cathode 10 for reference. Many y­positions for events near cathodes 15 and
17 are calculated to be outside of the detector. They go nearly up to y = 10 mm, far above
the top of the detector at y = 5 mm. For reference, events near cathode 10 appear to stop
cleanly at y = 5 mm (with some few events going slightly past that, due to noise). This
seems to indicate that the gain calibration for these cathodes is far higher than it should be
This would increase the measured cathode charge, Qcathode in Equation 4.8, to be higher
than the actual induced charge, thereby increasing the calculated y­position.
To investigate this further, we study the charge signals of events near these cathodes.
Specifically, the signals from the Cs­137 interaction events where the calculated y­position
is far greater than should be possible.
Figure 5.9: Example of the charge signals from cathode 17 on detector 2 and its neigh­
bors. This signal is chosen for a Cs­137 event where the calculated y­position exceeds
7 mm (i.e. it is more than 2 mm above the detector).
Such an event is shown in Figure 5.9. Note here that the charge signals are energy­
calibrated. As expected for events near the top of the detector, the signal amplitude from
the cathode nearest the interaction (here cathode 17) approaches the Cs­137 energy of
661.7 keV. However, unexpected for events near the detector top are the relatively high
signals of the two neighboring cathodes. A typical interaction near the cathode plane
would only induce significant charge in the cathode nearest the interaction point, while the
neighboring signals end around 0, as in Figure 4.14. Instead, the shapes of the signals
shown in Figure 5.9 ­ and for all other near cathode­plane interactions around cathodes 15
and 17 ­ more resemble what is to be expected from interactions occurring at y ≈4.0 mm,
rather than at the top of the detector.
First theory: sharing of signal
All the bad cathodes in detectors 2 and 3 were shown to display this behavior, where
their neighbors’ signals were higher than they should be. At first, it was thought that the
circuitry between the bad cathodes and their neighbors was somehow ”sharing” signal
to the neighbor cathodes. Although the exact details of how this was possible could not
be understood. If it were true that the signals between adjacent cathodes somehow in­
fluenced each other, i.e that there was some electrical connection between them, then
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
65
==PAGE:74==
this should affect the surface leakage IV­curve measurements. However, as shown later
in section 6.5, the surface leakage current at these cathodes is reasonable. At least for
detector 2.
Clearly, there is no large amount of charge sharing between the cathodes. The question
as to what causes these bad cathodes still remains. One clue, however, is that all of
the cathodes appear to be malfunctioning very similarly. All with gain­calibration values
around 2, and all with neighbor signals that failed to resemble the expected signals near
the cathode plane.
Solution: 0 bias voltage
Given that there is no cross­talk between cathode signals, and yet the neighbors to the
bad cathodes also seem to be acting strange, the implication is that there must be some
difference in the actual movement of the charge clouds within the detector.
Consider the electrical field generated by a single cathode biased at ­450 V. These fields
take on an elliptical shape, stretching out from the edge of the cathodes.
Figure 5.10: Illustration of the movement of electrons (yellow) in a detector with a dead
cathode (central green bar). Far from the dead cathode, electrons are pushed away from
the cathode plane. Near the dead cathode (within the black dotted ellipse), they are pulled
towards the cathode plane.
Under normal operation, when all cathodes are negatively biased, their fields cumula­
tively push electrons towards the anode plane. What if one cathode were not properly
connected to the high voltage, and instead left at 0V? Figure 5.10 illustrates that elec­
trons near this cathode (within the black dotted ellipse) would actually be pushed by the
negative electric fields of the neighbor cathodes into the unbiased cathode. While elec­
trons generated sufficiently far from the cathode plane will be pushed by the bulk E­field
of all the neighbor cathodes towards the anode plane.
The bad cathodes on detectors 2 and 3 are thought to be not properly biased. But the
exact way this would lead to the observed problems is nontrivial, and must be laid out
delicately:
• So long as the unbiased cathodes are still connected to the preamplifiers, they will
still register signal as normal. This is because, as the Shockley­Ramo theorem
states, the induced charge in these cathodes is independent of their bias voltage.
• Electron clouds from interactions sufficiently far from the cathode plane (ca. y <
4 mm) will be pushed by the bulk cathode field towards the anode plane, and induce
signal in all cathodes as normal.
66
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:75==
• Electron clouds generated above an unbiased cathode and close to the cathode
plane (ca y > 4 mm) will be absorbed by the unbiased cathode. Because these
electrons move through only a tiny portion of the anode weighting potentials, the
anode signal is small, and these interactions do not trigger the SIS 3316 event­
detection systems.
• The only events detected near the bad cathodes are therefore ones where y <
4 mm. This is far enough from the cathode plane that the neighboring cathodes will
always receive a substantial induced charge, as shown in Figure 5.9.
• A distance of 1 mm from the cathode plane represents (extremely roughly) 50% of
the cathode weighting potential. Electrons generated at y < 4 mm will therefore only
move through ­ at most ­ half of any cathode’s weighting potential. This explains why
the pulse­height histograms for the bad cathodes (Figure 5.7) drop off at half of the
expected pulse­height.
• Considering this, it is wrong to use the pulse­height histograms to calibrate the bad
cathodes, as the histogram drop­offs do not correspond to a full charge induction.
Doing so would over­calibrate the cathodes.
Meaning, their ”calibrated” signals
would be much higher than they should be, therefore leading to a higher calculated
y­position around these cathodes.
This theory seems plausible, as it is able to explain the errors in the y­position, the strange
calibration histograms, and the apparent ”signal­sharing” with neighboring cathodes. To
prove this theory, we must make a testable prediction.
Proof
If the unbiased cathode theory is true, it should have an effect on the electron drift times.
Fortunately, even if the cathode calibrations are completely wrong, the measured drift
times should still be accurate, as they are only calculated from the shapes of the cathode
signals, not the amplitudes.
First intuition would say that since only interactions at <4 mm are actually registered near
these cathodes, then we should expect shorter drift times due to the shorter drift distances.
Actually plotting the drift times, however, shows something different.
Figure 5.11 illustrates 2d histograms of the drift times against the calibrated cathode
amplitudes. These histograms are split by which cathode they occur nearest to. The bad
cathodes, 15 and 17, do in fact produce different plots than the good cathodes. But unex­
pectedly, drift times for electrons generated above these cathodes are slightly longer than
for the other cathodes. Although this goes against first intuition, it can be explained by
cathodes 15 and 17 having 0 bias voltage. The lower electric field strength above these
cathodes would cause the electrons to move slower through the detector and thereby in­
crease the drift time.
What is to be done about these cathodes? Since charges behave fundamentally differ­
ently above them, there is no way that they can be calibrated using radiation measure­
ments. However, they cannot be ignored either, as this would ruin y­ and z­position calcu­
lations for interactions occurring anywhere near them. Therefore, the gain­normalization
values of bad cathodes are set to the average of the gain­normalization values of
all the good cathodes on the same detector.
Lastly, we note that cathode 3 on detector 2 is also identified as a bad cathode, but in­
spection of its charge signals show that they are entirely dominated by noise. And its
pulse­height histograms cutoff far lower than even the other bad cathodes. The problem
with cathode 3 is not fully understood, but it is thought that there is poor electrical con­
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.11: 2d histograms plotting cathode drift time against the calibrated cathode pulse
heights for detector 2. The drift times for cathodes 15 and 17 are some 100 ns longer than
for the other cathodes.
nection not only to the high­voltage supply, but also to the charge­sensitive preamplifiers.
Regardless, its calibration point is also set equal to the other cathodes’ calibration points.
5.2.4
Drift­strip gain normalization
The drift­strip normalization is very similar to the anode normalization. The main differ­
ence is that the data must be taken with the drift­voltage set to 0, so that they act as
anodes.
Another consideration is that the drift­strips are much wider than the anode strips. Whereas
each anode comprises a single 0.2 mm electrode, a drift cell is made of 3 adjacent elec­
trodes of 0.2 mm width with 0.2 mm in­between each. The total width is therefore 1.0 mm.
This extra width leads to a much less compact weighting potential, resulting in far more
tailing of the photopeak. Fortunately, the photopeak is still distinct enough that it can be
fit using the general­purpose Gaussian fitting algorithm, as for the anodes. The only dif­
ference is that the Gaussian must be fit further on the right of the photopeak, to avoid the
low­energy tail.
The fitting algorithm is run in the range 0.8Eγ to 1.5Eγ, where Eγ is the source energy,
and also the first estimate of the photopeak. For high energy sources (Eγ > 300 keV), the
algorithm is used with δ = 0.8 and nσ = 3, while for low­energy sources we use δ = 0.5
and nσ = 2.35. As always, each histogram fit must be verified by the user, and the fit
regions can be adjusted if needed.
68
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:77==
Figure 5.12: Example demonstrating the drift­strip gain calibration algorithm on photo­
peaks from Co­57, Cs­137. Here, shown for drift­strip 15 of detector 3.
The drift­strips are calibrated both to the Co­57 and Cs­137 sources, illustrated in Fig­
ure 5.12. The calibration function used is, again, a linear slope with an intercept (Equa­
tion 5.1). The effect using an intercept is far less critical for the drift strips than for the
cathodes. The reason is that the drift­strip signals are only used in calculation of the
x­position. As described in section 4.5, this is calculated from the gradient of the drift
signals, which is not at all affected by the gain normalization intercept.
All the calibration coefficients are noted in the tables in Appendix A. Notably, the detec­
tor 2 gain calibration has no intercept. This is because the Co­57 drift­strip calibration
data were entirely unusable, due to simple human error. The drift strips in detector 2 are
therefore only calibrated with a straight line fit from 0 to the Cs­137 calibration point.
5.2.5
Dead drift strips
The calibration of nearly every single drift strip appears flawless, with reasonable and
similar pulse­height histograms. However, identically to the dead anodes in subsubsec­
tion 5.2.1, some drift strips show virtually no significant response in their pulse height
histograms. Fortunately, this is only a problem with detector 1, on drift strips 0, 2 and 8.
Drift strip 0 and 2 are known from previous work to be defective. However, drift strip 8 was
not previously identified as dead in the initial analyses done on this detector [21]. This indi­
cates that there was a physical change in the laboratory between the two projects. Likely,
the detector was physically pushed a small amount, such that drift strip 8 lost proper elec­
trical connection to the passive component PCB. Regardless, the gain­calibration of all
three of these is set to 0.
Even despite this, however, later inspections of the measured x­positions for detectors
1 and 3 show conspicuous gaps around several drift strips, despite their calibrations ap­
pearing normal. This is discussed further in section 6.1.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
69
==PAGE:78==
5.3
Y­axis energy correction
Even after gain calibration, the energies and interaction positions, as found with the al­
gorithms described in section 4.5, section 4.6, and section 4.8, are not initially accurate.
The measured energy is dependent on the interaction location within the detector, and
the measured x­ and y­positions also need correction dependent on the y­axis location of
interaction. In summary, once the detector anodes, cathodes and drift strips have been
calibrated, and interaction type, positions and energies calculated, the following correc­
tions need to be applied.
1. Correct energy for y­position of interaction
2. Correct y­position given the new corrected energy
3. Correct x­position along the y­axis
4. Correct energy dependence on x­ and z­ interaction­positions simultaneously
The following sections detail the procedures for each of these corrections, starting with
the y­axis corrections
5.3.1
Exponential fitting method for y­axis correction
Assuming negligible hole­mobility, the entirety of the current induced in the detector an­
odes is from the movement of electrons from the interaction point. This induced current is
highly dependent on the depth of the interaction within the detector, which causes spec­
tral tailing. Figure 5.13 shows that induced charge in an anode drops off steeply as the
interaction approaches the anode plane at y = 0. The two major mechanisms for this
y­dependence are charge trapping ­ which reduces the induced charge with increasing
distance to the anodes ­ and the shape of the anode weighting potentials ­ which reduces
the induced charge with decreasing distance to the anodes. As the induced charge drops
off closer to the anodes, we see that the weighting potentials are the dominant effect of
spectral tailing.
Figure 5.13: 2D histogram showing the energy vs y­position for single­event interactions
on detector 1, anode 16, when illuminated by a Cs­137 source. The blue line shows a fit
of the histogram to Equation 5.3
In the histogram, the photopeak can be clearly made out as a bright orange line, stretch­
70
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:79==
ing from 661.7 keV photopeak at y = 5 mm to about 550 keV at y < 1 mm. It is clearly
distinguished with a large gap from the Compton edge at 477 keV, which also exhibits an
drop over the y­axis.
Magelund [31] attempts to model this depth­dependence of the energy using two different
methods: first a simple curve fit, and later a more complex ”y­slicing” method. Although
she eventually rejected the curve fit method, it is attempted again in this work, in hopes
that a new, iterative approach could improve it. First, the induced charge is expressed as
an exponential function of the interaction y­position [31]:
Emeas
Eγ
= p0 · ep1·y + p2
(5.3)
Where Emeas
Eγ
is the ratio between the source energy Eγ and the energy measured from
an interaction at depth y. Nominally, p2 ≈1, so that the measured energy at the cathode
plane approximately equals the source energy. Furthermore, −p2 < p0 < 0, such that
the energy measured at the anode plane, y = 0 is 0 (or greater). Finally, p1 < 0 gives
the slope of the exponential curve. In practice, plotting the energy over the y­position as
calculated with Equation 4.8, we see that the 2d histogram in Figure 5.13 does indeed fit
well to the blue exponential curve.
Equipped with the y­positions of each interaction, one can correct the measured energy
by fitting the 2d histogram to Equation 5.3, and dividing the measured energy by this ratio.
This fitting process is carried out for each anode. One of the problems with the fitting is
that we only want to fit the photopeak interactions, not any interactions at lower energy.
But it proves difficult to separate these two.
In the algorithm, first Equation 5.3 is fit to the histogram of a single anode. Then, this fit
is used to calculate a corrected energy. Any events with a corrected energy more than
5% way from the photopeak energy are rejected for the next fit iteration. The fit is then
repeated on the uncorrected energy, but with this new restriction. After 5 iterations, the fit
tends to converge, giving the curve fit in Figure 5.13. At first glance, the function appears
to fit well. However, plotting the corrected spectrum (Figure 5.14) reveals problems.
Figure 5.14: 2D histogram from Figure 5.13, with energy and y­position corrected using
a fit to Equation 5.3. Cs­137 line­energy, shown in blue.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
71
==PAGE:80==
The function isn’t able to fully fit the curve of the histogram, overcorrecting at y ≈2 mm
and undercorrecting at y < 1 mm. Furthermore, the fitting algorithm is highly sensitive to
its parameters. If slightly more or slightly fewer of the values are rejected for fitting, the
results can vary wildly. Finally, it is easy to imagine that the exponential fitting formula
in Equation 5.3 is a gross oversimplification of the cumulative effects of trapping and
anode weighting potentials on the measured energy depth­dependence. Especially since
it relates the measured energy to the measured y­position, which itself is dependent on
the measured energy.
5.3.2
Slicing method
For these reasons, the exponential fit is rejected in favor of Magelund’s y­slicing method
[31]. The interaction events are sorted by their y­position, and binned into a discrete
amount of y­axis slices. I.e. interactions at depths 2.5 mm< y <2.6 mm are considered
separately from interactions at 2.6 mm< y <2.7 mm. Then, a histogram is produced
for each y­slice. The lower the slice is in the y­axis, the lower energy the measured
photopeak of that histogram will have. For each slice, the photopeak is fit to a Gaussian,
and a correction value is found which relates the Gaussian peak energy to the actual
source energy. This entire process is carried out for each anode. The fitting of each slice
to a Gaussian is illustrated in figure Figure 5.15, where select y­axis slices are shown for
anode 5 of detector 1. In this case, the detector is divided into slices of 0.1 mm width. For
Figure 5.15: Y­slice correction algorithm, here shown for 3 slices from detector 1, anode
5. Figures show the measured, Cs­137 energy histogram for interactions at different y­
slices. The photopeak of this histogram is fit to a Gaussian (blue and red), with the fitting
region highlighted in yellow.
each anode and each slice, the photopeak is fit using 10 iterations of the Gaussian fitting
algorithm described in section 4.10. The fitting region is bound from 95 % of the Compton­
edge energy (Equation 2.6) up to 1.15 times the photopeak energy. The iterative fit is offset
from the middle of the photopeak, so that excessive tailing isn’t included in the fit. As the
amount of tailing increases with decreasing y­position (as seen in Figure 5.15), the amount
of offset is increased with decreasing y­position. The parameter δ (see section 4.10) is
varied linearly from 0.6 at y = 0 mm to 0 at y = 5 mm. These values have been tuned
to work consistently for all three detectors. And in the few cases where the Gaussian fit
does not converge for a given slice, the algorithm makes a second attempt, now reducing
the fitting region to a small interval ({0.95µ, 1.1µ}) around the photopeak location of the
previously fitted slice, µ.
The energy­correction value, k for a given anode an and y­slice yi is given by Equation 5.4
ky,an = Esource
µyi,an
(5.4)
72
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:81==
Where µyi,an is the mean of the Gaussian photopeak fit for that slice. The correction
values found with this algorithm, for all anodes, are illustrated in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16: Y­axis correction­values for detector 1, calculated with the y­slicing method.
Values below 1.4 mm cannot be trusted.
For y > 1.2 mm, this method works well. The photopeak can be easily fit to a Gaussian
and a correction value found. However, for low y­values, the photopeak becomes wider
and wider and begins to blend more with the Compton edge, as seen on the left of figure
Figure 5.15. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that fewer events are even registered
by the SIS digitizers at these low y­positions, as their lower induced charge will cause the
signal amplitudes to be below the digitizer’s trigger threshold. To mitigate this problem,
values between y = 0.85 mm and y = 1.8 mm (determined empirically to give consistent
results) are fit to Equation 5.4 for each anode. The fit is then extrapolated, and used to
replace all values from y = 1.4 mm and below, giving the results for detector 1 shown in
Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.17: Y­axis correction­values for detector 1. Values below y = 1.4 mm are re­
placed with values calculated by Equation 5.3, where the equation parameters are deter­
mined by a fit to the values between the two black dashed lines.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
73
==PAGE:82==
The same process is carried out for detectors 2 and 3, producing the correction values in
Figure 5.18 and Figure 5.19.
Figure 5.18: Y­axis correction­values for detector 2.
Figure 5.19: Y­axis correction­values for detector 3.
Comparing these three figures, it is striking how different they are. Detector 2 shows
a remarkably consistent energy­depth­dependence for all anodes. This shows that the
detector material is very homogenous, with a near­constant amount of charge trapping
over the entire detector x­axis.
Whereas for detector 1, the correction factors increase with decreasing x­position. This
can be explained by the bad drift strips identified at low x­positions. If these drift strips
are not properly biased to ­150 V as they should be, this would influence the movement
of charges through the detector depth, causing them to move faster in the vicinity of
these bad drift strips than they would in regions where drift strips are properly biased.
This would reduce the electron drift­time, which in turn reduces the amount of trapping,
changing the slope of the y­axis energy dependence. An analysis of the drift­time for
interactions collected by different anodes should be done to verify this. However, it could
not be completed in this work due to time constraints. Theoretically, a lower drift bias could
also increase the amount of drift­absorption events measured in these regions. However,
initial investigations showed no strong increase in drift­absorption events here.
74
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:83==
Lastly, detector 3 shows a large variation in the y­axis energy dependence, even for an­
odes that are near each other. Instead of a simple gradient along the x­axis as for detector
1, detector 3 appears to have a more complex distribution of inhomogeneity throughout.
Like with detector 1, some of this might also be due to improper drift strip biasing.
With the energies now corrected for interaction depth, the new y­position can be calcu­
lated. Remembering Equation 4.8, we can determine a more accurate interaction position
by multiplying the y­position by the ratio between the measured and the y­corrected en­
ergy.
ycorrected = y ·
Emeas
Ey­corrected
(5.5)
Applying both energy and y­correction with the slicing method results in a consistent en­
ergy over the entire y­axis. Shown for anode 16, in Figure 5.20. This is a clear improve­
Figure 5.20: 2D histogram from Figure 5.14, with energy and y­position corrected using
the y­axis slicing method. Cs­137 line­energy shown in blue.
ment over the fitting method (Figure 5.13), and is therefore chosen as the algorithm for
y­axis energy correction. Following this, the next step is to use these corrected y­positions
to apply corrections to the x­axis.
5.4
X­axis position correction
An electron cloud from an interaction at y ≈5 mm right in the middle of a drift cell will
move vertically through the detector y­axis and induce roughly the same currents in the
drift strips on either side of the cell. However, an interaction at y ≈0 will be much more
sensitive to tiny offsets of the interaction position from the middle of the anode. An offset
of hundreds of microns towards one drift strip means that the cloud moves through much
more this strip’s potential compared to its neighbor, because the drift weighting potentials
are compressed near y ≈0 mm.
For this reason, the x­position calculated with Equation 4.3 will be dependent on the
y­position, having less spread for interactions at high y­positions, and more for ones at
low y­position, as seen in Figure 5.21. The y­dependence of the x­position causes gaps
between drift cells near the top of the detector and overlap from events in neighboring
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure 5.21: 2D histogram showing x­ and y­ single­interaction event positions for detector
2, for data taken with a Cs­137 source. Y values are energy­corrected.
drift cells near the bottom of the detector. To better understand the exact dependence of
the interaction depth on the x­position, we can instead plot how y relates to the x­offset,
shown in Figure 5.22. Recall that this is the distance of an interaction in the nth drift cell,
from the center of the collecting anode Ann.
Figure 5.22: 2D histogram showing (corrected) y­position and x­offset (as calculated with
Equation 4.2 using F = 0.9) for all anodes in detectors 1, 2 and 3. Anode boundaries
plotted in white.
The variation in the x­offset can be compensated for by varying the F­factor (see Equa­
tion 4.2) with the interaction y­position. In order to determine an equation for the F­value
as a function of y­position, the detector is again divided into y­axis slices. For every slice,
the x­offset of every interaction from the collecting anode is calculated using Equation 4.3.
Plotting the offset for each slice (Figure 5.23), it is even clearer to see that interactions at
low y­positions are offset more from the detector center.
If everything were perfect, the density of interaction x­positions would be uniform over the
entire detector. Near the boundary between two anodes (ignoring shared events), one
would expect half of the interactions to be absorbed by the anode to the left, while the
other half would go to the anode on the right. Thus, each of the two anodes would have
76
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5.23: Histograms of x­offsets for Cs­137 photopeak interactions on detector 1.
Offsets calculated for 35 y­slices, colored from blue to red for y = 0 mm to y = 5 mm.
Anode boundaries shown in dashed black lines. Interaction count density normalized to
average count density within anode boundaries.
a density of ρx/2 interactions per unit length associated to it exactly on the anode border,
where ρx is the average interaction density in the rest of the anode. Therefore, in order
to correct the F­factor for each y­slice, the average interaction density, ρx for every anode
is determined. Then the F­factor is chosen such that the density is ρx/2 at the drift cell
boundaries. As each y­slice histogram has a unique shape, it is not trivial to determine
the F­factor just by sampling the interaction densities. An iterative approach is developed.
For a first approximation, the F­factor is adjusted such that 90% of interactions have an
x­offset within the drift cell they are collected by. The new F­factor, F1 is therefore given
by Equation 5.6
F1 = F0 ·
Pan/2
|xoffset|90%
(5.6)
Where F0 (here, 0.9) is the initial F­factor used for calculation of the x­position, and
|xoffset|90% is the 90th percentile of the absolute­value of the x­offset.
Following this, many incremental adjustments are made to bring the interaction density
at the anode boundary to ρx/2. First, the x­offset of each iteration, i, is updated with the
new F­value
xoffset(i+1) = xoffset(i) · Fi+1
Fi
(5.7)
In each iteration, the mean density of interactions within a drift cell, ρx, is found by Equa­
tion 5.8. This is the number of interactions falling within the drift cell boundaries, divided
by the width of the drift cell (also called the anode pitch), Pan.
ρx(i) =
1
Pan
X
(
xoffset(i)
 < Pan/2)
(5.8)
Then, the density of interactions on the edge between neighboring drift cells, ρedge is found
as the density of events within a small range, w of the drift cell boundary.
ρedge(i) = 1
w
X
(
xoffset(i) −Pan/2
 < w)
(5.9)
Here, w = 0.1 mm is used. If ρedge > ρx/2, then the interaction x­positions are overdense
at the anode boundaries and the F­factor needs to be reduced. Otherwise, there is a gap
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
77
==PAGE:86==
in the x­positions between anodes and the F­factor needs to be increased.
For each iteration, F is updated proportional to the ratio between ρx and ρedge by Equa­
tion 5.10.
Fi+1 = Fi ·

1 −α + α ·
ρx(i)
2ρedge(i)

(5.10)
Where α is a small number that determines how much to update F by in each iteration.
α = 0.05 is used, and convergence is reached after 50 iterations.
Following this, the x­offsets (and then x­positions) are recalculated using Equation 5.7
and Equation 4.3. The resulting x­offsets are visualized in Figure 5.24, where it is clear
that the x­positions for each y­slice now all drop­off cleanly at the drift cell boundaries.
This same procedure is carried out for all 3 detectors, producing the F­values as a func­
Figure 5.24: Histograms of x­offsets for Cs­137 photopeak interactions on detector 1,
after correcting for y­position. Anode boundaries in dashed black lines.
tion of y as shown in Figure 5.25. Instead of using the actual F­values for each slice to
Figure 5.25: F­value over the y­axis for all 3 detectors. Initial F­value shown as a gray,
dashed line, fitted F values for each y­axis slice shown as black circles. Piecewise linear
fit to these values shown as two red lines joined at y = 1.1 mm.
correct the x­positions, these values are fit to a piecewise linear function with one part
going from y = 0 mm to y = 1.1 mm, and another from y = 1.1 mm to y = 5 mm. Splitting
the fit at y = 1.1 mm is a somewhat arbitrary choice, made after noticing that the F­values
78
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:87==
appeared to curve­off roughly at that point. Interestingly, however, the bend of the curve
appears much more modest for detector 2. At higher y­positions, a far greater F­value
is required to fix the x­spread than for the other detectors. This again points towards a
difference in charge mobility and trapping for this detector compared to the two others.
After applying these corrections, the interaction positions are now much more uniformly
distributed around each anode. The corrected x­positions for the entire detector 2 are
shown in the 2D histogram in Figure 5.27, while the corrected x­offsets is plotted for all
detectors in Figure 5.26.
Figure 5.26: 2D histogram showing y­position and x­offset after correcting for y­position
for all anodes in detectors 1, 2 and 3. Anode boundaries plotted in white.
Figure 5.27: 2D histogram showing corrected x­ and y­ single­interaction event positions
for detector 2, for data taken with a Cs­137 source.
The gap around xoffset = 0 at low y­pos is still present, however this is more difficult to
correct for, and is a natural consequence of the shapes of the drift weighting potentials. It
will not be considered in this work.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
79
==PAGE:88==
5.5
X­Z energy correction
Some spectral tailing remains in the spectrum even after y­axis correction, due to small
variations in the x, z axes. An electron cloud formed directly above an anode in the x­axis
will move straight down to the anode, while one generated near the drift cell boundaries will
have to move farther along the x­axis before reaching the anode. Because of the longer
path length, these clouds will experience more trapping, resulting in a lower measured
energy near drift cell boundaries. The 2D energy vs x­position histogram in Figure 5.28
shows how this causes low­energy tails at the edges of drift cells.
Figure 5.28: 2d histogram showing variation with measured (y­pos corrected) energy over
the x­axis for detector 2. Figure shows Cs­137 photopeak interactions, with a blue line at
the Cs­137 661­7 keV line for reference.
Inhomogenities in the detector material can also cause variation in the measured energy
along the z­axis. These effects occur over much larger distance scales than the x­axis
tailing, as illustrated in Figure 5.29.
Figure 5.29: 2d histogram showing variation with measured (y­pos corrected) energy over
the z­axis for detector 2. Cs­137 661.7 keV line­energy shown in blue, for reference.
As both of these effects are much smaller than the y­axis tailing, it is not difficult to correct
them simultaneously using a similar method to the slicing method described in subsec­
80
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:89==
tion 5.3.2. The detector is divided into a number of x,z voxels, and the Cs­137 photopeak
of interactions in each voxel is to a Gaussian. The energy correction coefficient, kx,z for
voxel, x, z is given by the mean of the Gaussian fit to the photopeak, µx,z with Equa­
tion 5.11.
µx,z = Eγ
µx,z
(5.11)
As the spatial scale of variation in the x­axis is much smaller than that in the z­axis, the
detector is broken into more divisions in the x­axis than in the z­axis. The detector is
sliced into 16 slices per drift cell. For the z­axis, 2 slices per cathode suffice. This gives
400 x 40 voxels in the x and z­axes respectively. Or 16000 voxels in total. In order to
provide sufficient statistics in each voxel, around 1 million Cs­137 photopeak events are
needed for fitting each detector. For detector 1 specifically, as fewer Cs­137 events were
recorded, only 1 slice per cathode is used.
To go into detail on the algorithm: for each slice, an energy histogram of events falling in
that slice is made. A Gaussian is fit to this histogram in the range 0.85Eγ; 1.05Eγ, where
Eγ is the photopeak energy. The iterative fit width is set to 2.35 standard deviations, sym­
metric about the Gaussian mean (i.e. δ = 0). The main difference between this algorithm
and the y­correction algorithm is in handling of cases with limited data. It is inevitable that
some voxels (especially between drift cells) will have too few events for the Gaussian fit
to converge. What energy­correction value should these voxels then be given? Giving
these cells a default energy correction of µx,z = 1 (i.e. no correction is applied) does not
make sense, as if the voxel falls between drift cells, we know that higher corrections are
needed. The following procedure is therefore chosen:
1. Firstly, an entire x­axis slice is considered, without regard to divisions in the z­axis.
The energy histogram is iteratively fit to provide an energy correction value for the
entire x­axis slice.
2. Then, all of the x,z voxels within the x­slice are considered, and each of them is
iteratively fit to a Gaussian to provide a new correction value.
3. In the cases where there is insufficient data in the voxel, its correction value is set
to that of the corresponding x­axis slice.
Doing this for all voxels produces a map of energy correction values over the entire de­
tector X,Z plane, as seen for detectors 1, 2 and 3 in Appendix B, Figure A.1. The scale
of the corrections can be seen easier if they are plotted for the x­ and z­axes separately,
which is done in Figure A.2 in appendix B. The figures show that the x­axis corrections
are much more important than the z­axis corrections. Along the x­axis, corrections are on
the scale of ∼2%, while the on the z­axis they are on the scale of ∼0.2 %
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
81
==PAGE:90==
Lastly, the actual function of these correction algorithms can be evaluated by plotting the
2D energy histograms above with the newly corrected energy. This is seen for the x­ and
z­axes in Figure 5.30 and Figure 5.31. Clearly, the energy now has no clear dependence
on either the x­ or the z­position. Now it is symmetrically distributed about the source
energy.
Figure 5.30: 2d histogram showing x,y,z­corrected energy over the x­position. Blue line
shows the Cs­137 661.7 keV line­energy for reference.
Figure 5.31: 2d histogram showing x,y,z­corrected energy over the z­position. Blue line
shows the Cs­137 661.7 keV line­energy for reference.
With the x,y,z corrections complete, the detectors are now fully calibrated and operational.
82
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:91==
6
Detector Performance Results
Once the detectors have been fully calibrated and corrected, we can finally evaluate their
performance as detectors. This section covers determination of the spectral and imaging
resolutions of all three detectors, and analysis of IV­curves and detector defects. But first,
a brief overview of the measurements obtained.
6.1
Inspection of interaction homogeneity
Nominally, all the regions on the detector would function equally well, and interaction po­
sitions would be evenly distributed across the detector axes. However, due to calibration
imperfections, dead electrodes, and even material defects in the detector crystal, this is
not observed. This section examines the 2D interaction histograms for Cs­137 interac­
tions on all detectors to identify any problematic areas. Starting with detector 1.
Figure 6.1: 2d interaction position histograms for Cs­137 interactions on detector 1, an­
notated to highlight locations of dead anodes and drift strips.
Figure 6.1 shows the interaction positions of photopeak Cs­137 interactions on detector
1. Here, we see that the decision to exclude anodes 0 and 4, as well as drift strips 0, 2
and 8 have greatly reduced the effective detector size. We also see that the area around
drift strip 13 (ca. 21 mm on the x­axis) has a surplus of events. Potentially due to material
homogeneity or lower bias voltage of the neighboring drift strips. Although, investigating
the channel signals for events around this area failed to show anything strange, other
than the fact that drift strip 13 often had higher amplitude than its neighbors. This, and
other gaps in the x­axis could be caused by small material inhomogeneities, or perhaps
improper biasing of the drift strips to the desired voltages.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
83
==PAGE:92==
For detector 2 (Figure 6.2), the anodes and drift strips are much more nicely behaved.
They appear to all be calibrated flawlessly. The bad cathodes identified earlier, however,
are especially noticeable in the 2d position histogram.
Figure 6.2: 2d interaction position histograms for Cs­137 interactions on detector 1, an­
notated to highlight faulty cathodes.
After their calibration values were set to the average of other cathodes’, the y­positions
measured at these cathodes now only go up to ca. 4 mm. This lends credence to the the­
ory that they have 0 bias voltage, and therefore collect electron clouds from interactions
above y > 4 mm.
Some faint shadows around 25 mm< x < 28 mm and 30 mm< z < 36 mm could poten­
tially indicate grain boundaries, but they are unclear.
Finally, the 2D position histograms for detector 3 are very interesting. A very prominent
grain boundary is visible in the lower z­positions as a sharp shadow. Stretching backwards
from this clear boundary is a larger, less visible shadow, which is likely also part of the
same grain boundary. In fact, this region is also visible as an area of higher x,z­axis
correction values, in Figure A.1 in Appendix B. Again, as with detector 2, bad cathodes
2 and 12 do not register interaction depths any higher than y = 4 mm, bolstering the
unbiased cathode theory. The same is not true for cathode 16, however, in­spite of it
having similar calibration problems as the other cathodes. Perhaps it is properly biased
with high voltage, but just less than the expected ­450 V.
Finally, more drift­strip problems are visible as large gaps in the x­axis around x = 6 mm,
x = 10 mm and x > 34 mm. As stated before, there weren’t any problems with the drift
calibration process for detector 3, which makes it again likely to be a bias voltage problem.
This problem would not be detectable in the calibration data, as the drift strips are set to 0V
for these measurements regardless. The IV­curve analysis (section 6.5), expands further
84
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:93==
Figure 6.3: 2d interaction position histograms for Cs­137 interactions on detector 1, an­
notated to highlight grain boundaries and faulty cathodes.
on these drift strips.
6.2
Electronic noise
The electronic noise is measured as the FWHM of the pulse­height histograms of the
electronic­pulse­generated signals. These pulse­heights are measured using the same
pulse­height algorithm as for the photon interaction data, but where wider peaks and base­
lines can be used, because the pulses are much steeper and more consistent than the
induced charge signals from photon interactions.
The FWHM is found with the Gaussian fitting algorithm, using 20 iterations and fitting sym­
metrically out to nσ = 2.35, to produce Figure 6.4, Figure 6.5 and Figure 6.6. Note here,
Figure 6.4: Electronic noise for all electrodes on detector 1. SIS 3316 channels which
aren’t connected to the detector shown in gray.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
85
==PAGE:94==
that although the electronic pulses do not actually correspond to interaction energies, the
pulse­height data are gain­calibrated in order to determine the equivalent noise in keV in
an actual spectrum measurement, that stems from electronic noise. This also means that
dead channels, where the gain is set to 0, are ignored here.
Beginning with detector 1, we see a fairly consistent electronic noise in all channels in
Figure 6.4.Anodes have an average noise contribution of 4.6 keV, and cathodes and drift
strips are similar with 5.0 keV and 5.3 keV respectively.
Figure 6.5: Electronic noise for all electrodes on detector 2.
Figure 6.6: Electronic noise for all electrodes on detector 3.
Detector 2 and 3 interestingly both show higher electronic noise around anodes and drift
strips 7 and 19. Either they both happen to have similar defects from when these strips
were initially mounted on the detector crystal, or there is a problem with the other elec­
tronics in the system. Other than that, both detectors have higher electronic noise than
detector 1. This is in spite of the fact that the power­supplies were changed to reduce
electronic noise when detector 2 was mounted. The anodes have an average noise of
5.0 keV for both, while the cathodes are much noisier with 6.3 keV and 7.8 keV FWHM
each. Especially the first 8 cathodes on detector 3 are extremely noisy, which be due to
the grain boundary around that area of the detector. And cathode 16, which was previ­
ously identified as performing poorly, here shows an over 10 keV FWHM.
Having examined the electronic noise, we can begin to investigate how it affects the de­
tectors’ spectral resolution.
86
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:95==
6.3
Spectral performance
The spectral performance of the detector is evaluated at the Co­57, Cs­137 and K­40
photopeaks, after energy calibration and x,y,z correction. The spectra shown here are
from single­interactions events over the entire detector volume, ignoring cases at 4 mm<
z < 36 mm, where the z­position algorithm fails.
6.3.1
Co­57
Starting with the Co­57 line at 122 keV (Figure 6.7) the photopeak FWHMs for detectors
1, 2 and 3 improve to 9.02 keV, 8.07 keV and 9.68 keV respectively after x,y,z axis correc­
tions. These correspond to resolutions of 7.4 %, 6.6 %, and 7.9 %.
This is only a modest improvement over the uncorrected spectral resolutions. In fact, after
Figure 6.7: X,y,z axis corrected Cs­137 spectra for all detectors.
position corrections, the line at 136 keV appears visually to blend more with the 122 keV
line. This is partly a consequence of the correction algorithms being optimized for higher
energies. At lower energies, interactions don’t penetrate as far into the detector, so the
vast majority occur within the top 2 mm of the detector. This results in vastly less tailing
due to the anode weighting potentials.
Another reason the resolution is not better is because, below 10 keV FWHM, the resolu­
tion gradually begins to approach the electronic noise limit.
We also note that for detector 3, the photopeak is centered at 2 keV lower than it should be.
This is thought to be due to the calibration values used. If the detector is only calibrated
to the Co­57 source and the Cs­137 source, then both photopeaks appear exactly where
they should be in the spectra. However, with this calibration, the resulting K­40 line en­
ergy from the background measurement is consistently measured at ∼30 keV lower than
it should be.
If the same is done for detectors 1 2 ­ if they are not calibrated to K­40 ­ then the K­
40 line energy is within a couple keV of the expected 1460.8 keV. This indicates that
detector 3 has a far less linear energy response than detectors 1 and 2. Likely due to large
inhomogeneities throughout the detector volume which elude the x,y,z axis corrections.
6.3.2
Cs­137
At higher energies, the performance improves significantly. The large amounts of tail­
ing have now been corrected, leaving the sharp photopeaks and Compton edges in Fig­
ure 6.8. The spectral resolutions at the 661.7 keV line for detectors 1,2 and 3 are 1.38 %,
1.35 %1.48% respectively. From the spectra, the photopeak tails are virtually nonexistent.
However, there is still a large shelf of events between the photopeak and the Compton
events. Normally, this kind of feature in an x­ray spectrum originates from multiple Comp­
ton scatter events [4]. However, the spectra here show only single­interaction events.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure 6.8: X,y,z axis corrected Cs­137 spectra for all detectors. Photopeak and Compton
edge visible at 661 keV and 477 keV.
Since they also include data from the scan measurements, a large amount of this shelf
will be due to the x­ray background collected over the 4­day scan measurement period.
However, even when the scan data are ignored, some amount of this shelf still remains,
with an amplitude of roughly 1/10 of the Compton edge amplitude. This can be due to:
• Absorption of <20 keV worth of electrons into the drift cells could evade detection
by the drift­absorption detection algorithm (subsection 4.4.1)
• Very low­energy Compton scatter events (or shared events where very little of the
electron cloud is shared), where the induced charge in the second collecting anode
cannot be detected above the noise level.
Other effects, such as y­axis correction inaccuracies due to cathode noise, cannot be the
cause of this shelf as they would cause a more symmetric spread of energy about the
photopeak rather than primarily spreading to the low energies. Regardless, the effect of
this edge on the spectral resolution is minimal.
We now consider the single­event interactions collected by each individual anode to de­
termine which anodes contribute most to the spectral resolution. This is done very simply
by fitting the histograms of events collected by each anode to a Gaussian. Figure 6.9
illustrates the photopeak FWHM for each anode, as calculated with both y­corrected data
and with x,y,z corrected data, and then compares them with the electronic noise at each
anode.
First to note is that the figure reassures us that the x,z correction consistently improves
the resolution (by ca. 1 keV) compared to the data where only y­correction is applied.
Secondly, we see that the FWHM is fairly consistent among all anodes (with two excep­
tions) between 8 and 11 keV. And in all cases, the electronic noise accounts for roughly
half of the total noise. The remaining spread in the Cs­137 photopeak must be caused
by trapping noise and limitations in the data analysis algorithms (see section 7.3). Some
small amount will also be due to statistical noise, but at 661.7 keV, this is less significant.
Very interestingly, anodes 7 and 19 stand out in this figure, just as they did in the elec­
tronic noise measurements. Particularly, anode 7 has far worse resolution for every single
detector. Investigating some of the charge signals from this anode (Figure 6.10), we note
that it consistently displays some long­period (ca. 1000 ns) oscillations in all detectors. A
normal signal response would appear much more flat around the beginning and end.
88
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:97==
Figure 6.9: FWHM of the Cs­137 photopeak for all anodes on all detectors. Measured for
y­axis corrected data and x,y,z, axis corrected data, and plotted against electronic noise
contribution. Data for several anodes at detector 1 are missing, due to dead anodes and
neighboring drift strips.
Figure 6.10: Typical (energy­calibrated) charge signal from anode 7 in detector 2, dis­
playing long­period wavy structures
At first glance, these waves might look like induced charge from multiple­interactions. But
they do not flatten out as they would from these interactions, instead oscillating up and
down by some tens of ADC channels. The problem is even more extreme for anode 19
in detector 2.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
89
==PAGE:98==
Figure 6.11: Typical (energy­calibrated) charge signal from anode 19 in detector 2.
It is unsure what causes these oscillations. However, since they are a problem for anode 7
of all detectors, it is likely that they are a fault with either the charge sensitive preamplifiers
in the tower, or the channel on the SIS system itself. As for anode 19, the situation is less
certain. Resolution at this anode is is slightly poorer for detectors 1 and 3, compared to
the other anodes, however it is far worse for detector 2. As detector 2 was the last one
data was collected for, it is possible that the preamplifier for anode 17 degraded ­ or the
cable for anode 17 on the SIS system was bumped ­ after data collection completed for
detectors 1 and 3.
As a final quick analysis of the Cs­137 data, it was found that the resolution (perhaps
unsurprisingly) greatly improves if the bad anodes 7 and 19 are excluded, and also if
events too near the anode plane (y < 2 mm) are excluded. Doing this, the resolutions
for detectors 1, 2 and 3 become 1.26 %, 1.20 % and 1.33 % @661.7 keV respectively.
However, this rejection of a large portion of measured data does incur a loss in detector
sensitivity, so for the rest of the work, we continue to evaluate resolution using events
from all anodes and at all interaction depths.
6.3.3
K­40
Finally, the K­40 spectral line at 1460 keV shows even better resolutions due to the de­
creased importance of statistical and electronic noise at higher energy. Figure 6.12 illus­
trates part of the measured background spectrum, showing clear K­40 and Bi­214 peaks
(and another Bi­214 peak at 1764 keV if you squint). The full background spectrum from
900 keV to 3 MeV can be seen in Appendix C. Resolution @ 1460 keV for detectors 1, 2
and 3 is 1.09% 1.03% and 1.59% respectively. Here again, detector 3 stands out as far
worse than the other two. As stated above, this is likely due to the detector not having
as linear an energy response as the other 2. An additional part of the problem can also
be the difficulty in calibrating to K­40 for detector 3. The background could unfortunately
only be measured for half as long for this detector, as seen by the reduced countrate in
Figure 6.12.
6.3.4
Summary
In all cases, detector 3 performs significantly worse than detectors 1 and 2. As its elec­
tronic noise is not greater than the other detectors, this must be due to worse material
properties, as evident by the large grain boundaries in the 2D position histograms.
Detector 2 has the best energy resolution by a good margin. Although the power supplies
were improved to be less noisy with the introduction of detector 2, it does not appear that
its electronic noise is reduced compared to the other detectors. Instead, its improved
spectral resolution must be a consequence of its high material homogeneity ­ at least as
far as is apparent from the y­axis energy dependence (section 5.3).
90
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:99==
Figure 6.12: X,y,z axis corrected background spectra for all detectors. Bi­214 photopeak,
K­40 photopeak, and K­40 Compton edge visible at 1583 keV, 1460 keV, and 1343 keV
respectively.
Lastly, we can estimate the different noise contributions to the three detectors. For the
moment, we choose to ignore the statistical noise. Even at 122 keV the Poisson limit, (by
Equation 2.9 and assuming a band gap of 1.6 eV [16]) only corresponds to 1.04 keV of
the total 9 keV FWHM measured at this energy. The statistical noise can be deemed irrel­
evant. Therefore, the total spectral noise should be dominated by the constant electronic
Figure 6.13: Estimation of the different noise contributors to the total spectral FWHM in
each detector. Measured data (crosses) are fit to the quadrature sum (dotted) of a linear
noise component (solid) and a constant noise component (solid).
noise, and trapping noise, which increases linearly with energy. The measured FWHM at
different energies are fit to the quadrature sum of these two noise components, as illus­
trated in Figure 6.13.
The modelled trapping noise for detectors 1, 2 and 3 are 0.9%, 0.87 % and 1.41 %, which
again points towards a significantly higher trapping in detector 3. The modelled electronic
noise for each detector is 8.2 keV, 7.6 keV and 8.1 keV respectively. These are all far
above the actual measured electronic noise of ∼5 keV for all detectors, shown in black
in Figure 6.13. Clearly, there is still room for improvement. Further optimizations of the
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
91
==PAGE:100==
data analysis algorithms should hopefully bring the actual limiting resolution closer to the
electronic noise limit. This is discussed further (and partially achieved) in section 7.3.
6.4
Imaging performance
The imaging performance of the detector was evaluated in the x,z axes using the data
from the x­ and z­axis scan measurements. Figure 6.14 illustrates what a single step
of these scans look like. The figure shows how a narrow, collimated beam of Cs­137
(a) X­axis scan
(b) Z­axis scan
Figure 6.14: XZ, XY and YZ 2d position histograms of single­interaction events for select
steps of the x­ and z­ scans for detector 3.
radiation creates a small strip of high­density of events on the detector. For the x­axis
scan (Figure 6.14a), this strip is progressed 0.5 mm left over the detector for each step
in the scan. In the z­axis scan (Figure 6.14b), it is progressed 0.5 mm downwards. By
measuring the spread of this narrow beam of interactions in either axis, one obtains a
measure for the resolution in either axis.
6.4.1
Z­axis imaging performance
The scan beams are meant to be aligned perfectly perpendicular to the scan axis. How­
ever, as it was difficult to perfectly align the beam, there is a slight angle with respect to the
desired axis. This shows up as a barely­visible rightward shift of the beam with increasing
z­position in Figure 6.14a, or a downward shift in the beam with increasing x­position in
Figure 6.14b. This causes the beam’s spread along the relevant axis to be slightly larger
than if it were perfectly aligned.
To remedy this for the z­axis scan, we find the average z­position for photopeak interac­
tions at each individual anode, then we correct for this slight offset, and find the spread
of the corrected z­position. The average z­position for each anode is found by fitting the
z­position histogram to a Gaussian, as shown in Figure 6.15. The figure shows how the
beam center position decreases slightly with each successive anode. The histogram is
binned with a bin­width of 0.1 mm. After the z­positions for all anodes are aligned, the
aligned z­positions for each scan step are again fit to a Gaussian. This provides an esti­
mate for the mean z­position of the scan step, as well as the z­position FWHM.
92
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:101==
Figure 6.15: Z­position histogram of Cs­137 photopeak events for step 35 of the z­scan
of detector 1. Events separated by the triggered anode, with histogram for three selected
anodes shown and fit to Gaussians (blue)
Z­position accuracy
As the detector is moved 0.5 mm between each step of the scan, the beam z­position
is expected to increase by exactly 0.5 mm for each step. However, the actual number
should be slightly smaller, as the beam is slightly angled wrt. to the z­axis. The distance
between the measured z­position for each scan step is plotted in Figure 6.16. As seen,
for all detectors the average distance between scan steps is very close to, but less than,
the expected 0.5 mm. Although the step­distance varies slightly from one scan step to the
next. As seen in the figure, much of the variation is periodic, oscillating with a period of 2
mm. This is due to a slight variation in the behavior of the z­position algorithm for events
between cathodes compared to events directly over cathodes.
Taking the standard deviation of the z­scan step distance for detectors 1, 2 and 3 yields
25 µm, 42 µm and 30 µm respectively. These numbers roughly represent the non­stochastic
error in z­position, caused by the interactions being either closer to or further from the
cathode edges. Furthermore, detectors 2 and 3 exhibit even larger variations in the z­
step near the previously identified bad cathodes. For detector 2, this is around z = 5 mm
and z = 31 mm, while for detector 3 it is at z = 3 mm, z = 25 mm and z = 31 mm.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure 6.16: Z­axis distance between beam from one scan step to the next in z­axis scans
for all 3 detectors. The expected difference is 0.50 mm. Average distance in each case
shown with red. Steps where the beam is near the detector edge (z = 0 and z = 40 mm)
are ignored.
In short, the z­position estimates are fairly accurate. If many interactions occurred in the
same z­position, the mean of the calculated z­positions would deviate only by tens of µm
from the actual interaction positions.
Z­position precision
The precision, or z­position resolution, on the other hand, describes the spread of the
calculated z­position, not their deviation from the actual interaction position. This spread
is caused by noise in the cathode signals. It is taken as the FWHM of the Gaussian fit
Figure 6.17: Z­position resolution for all 3 detectors. This is found as the Gaussian FWHM
of each step in a z­axis scan. The average of the z­axis FWHM is shown for each detector
in red. Steps where the beam is near the detector edge (z = 0 and z = 40 mm) are ignored.
to the z­axis scan steps and shown in Figure 6.17. Detectors 1 and 3 are similar, with
little variation over the detector and resolutions of 0.58s mm and 0.61 mm respectively.
Detector 2, however, has a larger resolution of 0.67 mm, and far worse performance near
the middle of the z­axis.
6.4.2
X­axis imaging performance
The x­position resolution is found using the same methods as for the z­position. The main
difference is that an x­axis scan is used instead of a z­axis scan. Furthermore, the small
angle of the scan beam is corrected for each cathode, rather than for each anode as with
the z­axis data.
X­position accuracy
Plotting the distance between sequential scan steps in the x­axis yields the plot in Fig­
ure 6.18. As before, with the z­scan, the step­distance appears to be periodic, this time
94
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:103==
with a period of three steps. That is to say, every third step, the calculated x­position of
the beam moves only by about 0.4 mm rather than the expected 0.5 mm.
Figure 6.18: X­axis distance between beam from one scan step to the next in x­axis scans
for all 3 detectors. The expected difference is 0.50 mm. Average distance in each case
shown with red. Holes are visible in the plot for detector 1, representing the location of
dead anodes and drift strips. In all cases, the mean distance is just over 0.5 mm
This is, due to the behavior of the x­position algorithm near the drift cell boundaries. Even
though the F­factor was tuned as described in section 5.4, there are still fewer events
observed right in the gaps in­between anodes because of a higher incidence of shared
events in these regions. Shared events are ignored in this work, as we have not yet de­
veloped the software to process them. Therefore, we only retain very few of the events
on the anode boundaries. This affects the apparent position of the x­scan beam. The
Figure 6.19: Histogram of the measured interaction x­positions for three different steps of
the x­axis scan for detector 3. Drift cell boundaries shown in red. Note how the histograms
become asymmetric near the cell boundaries.
effect of this is illustrated in Figure 6.19. When the beam is in the middle of a drift cell, the
measured x­positions follow a Gaussian distribution. However, when the beam is near
the cell boundaries, events that land closest to the boundary will be shared events, and
therefore not included in these histograms.
Regardless, the error in the x­position largely stays within ±100 µm. The standard devi­
ation of the x­axis step distance is 94 µm, 61 µm and 134 µm for detectors 1, 2 and 3 re­
spectively. This represents the average non­stochastic error in the measured x­position
for all three detectors ­ i.e. the error only due to the interaction location on the detector.
For detector 3, this is especially large near around x = 35 mm and x = 10 mm, which are
where large gaps are seen in the 2D interaction­position histograms (section 6.1). Again,
bad drifts are to blame.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
95
==PAGE:104==
X­position resolution
The x­axis resolution is slightly better than that in the z­axis. As shown in figure Fig­
ure 6.20, the average x­resolution is 450 µm, 473 µm and 427 µm for detectors 1,2, and 3
respectively.
Figure 6.20: X­position resolution for all 3 detectors, plotted over the x­axis. This is found
as the Gaussian FWHM of each step in an x­axis scan. The average of the x­axis FWHM
is shown for each detector in red.
The resolution is largely consistent for the length of the detectors. Again, some periodicity
is observed, caused by event sharing at the anode cell boundaries. Figure 6.19 shows
how event sharing will cause the x­position histogram to appear narrower near the cell
boundaries, giving the illusion of a better resolution.
6.5
Leakage current analysis
Finally, the last step of detector characterization is the IV curve analysis. Normally, this
should precede any other measurements with a detector. But in this project, this was not
possible, as the IV­curve measurement system was still under active development until
near the project end.
6.5.1
Whole­detector bulk leakage current
The bulk leakage IV curves, measured for the entire detector with edge­electrodes grounded
to mitigate edge­effects, are shown for all 3 detectors in Figure 6.21. These curves show
very similar characteristics to the well­performing 20x20 mm DTU Space detectors [18].
In fact, the bulk leakage for detectors 1,2, and 3 at the operating bias voltage of ­450 V
are only 35, 42 and 40 nA respectively. This is even less than measured for the 20 mm
detectors, indicating acceptable crystal material properties. Critically, these currents cor­
respond to bulk resistivities of 6.2 · 109 Ωcm, 5.3 · 109 Ωcm and 5.6 · 109 Ωcm, which are
well above the design requirements of 1.0 · 109 Ωcm [19].
Regarding the shapes of the curves, detectors 1 and 3 specifically appear to display favor­
able, Ohmic contacts, as their curves are linear and symmetric about the origin. Detector
2 shows a higher leakage at positive bias voltages. Kromek claims that this is due to dif­
ferences in the crystal orientation [18]. However, the amount of leakage is not excessive,
and regardless, the detector is not operated at positive bias voltages.
96
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:105==
Figure 6.21: Bulk leakage current (measured with edge­electrodes grounded to mitigate
edge­effects) plotted for all 3 detectors.
6.5.2
Individual electrode leakage currents
As there are so many anodes in this detector compared to previous, smaller modules, it is
unhelpful to plot the leakage current for every electrode. Instead, we plot a step­diagram
relating the leakage current of a given electrode to its position on the detector. This allows
for us to easily relate regions of high leakage with the locations of problematic electrodes
uncovered in previous sections. For the anode­side specifically, it is important to note
that there are 99 electrodes, which we refer to as S0 through S98. When mounted on the
tower in a 3­electrode­drift­strip configuration, S0 through S2 would correspond to drift
strip 0 and S3 would be used as anode 0. However, the electrodes are identical, and their
different roles as anodes and drift strips are only due to the different bias voltages they
are given. This must be kept in mind when the anode­side leakage currents are related
to the problematic anodes and drift strips.
It must also be noted that the leakage currents at the operating voltages could not be
measured. So the currents corresponding to the largest negative bias voltage (­50V) are
shown instead. The full IV­curves for all electrodes are seen in Appendix D and Appendix
E.
6.5.3
Detector 1
Figure 6.22 shows the single­electrode bulk and surface leakage currents for all electrodes
in detector 1. In the plot here, the surface leakage current refers to the leakage between
one electrode, and the electrode immediately to its right.
With this being said, we begin with the anode­side leakage. Drift strips 0, 2 and 8, as well
as anodes 0 and 4 had already shown poor performance when mounted on the tower,
so their gain was set to 0. Here, we see that the surface leakage is especially high for
all electrodes from S0 to S10, peaking at 20 nA for electrode S7 (part of drift strip 1).
For comparison, nearly all other anode­side electrodes have surface leakage currents of
∼2 nA.
The bulk leakage currents here are also above the median of 0.1 nA. S4 has a bulk leakage
of 0.24 nA, while S1 (part of drift strip 0) is off the charts with a current of 0.8 nA.
All of this indicates that there is not a problem with just a single electrode, but with the
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure 6.22: Single­electrode bulk (BLC, red) and surface (SLC, black) leakage currents
measured at ­50 V, for all electrodes on detector 1, plotted with a 2d interaction­position
histogram of Cs­137 single­interaction events. For reference, positions of cathodes and
anodes are also shown.
entire first few mm of detector 1s x­axis. Perhaps surface contamination near the detector
edge. Although it must also be stated that detectors 2 and 3 display abnormal surface
leakage between anodes 0 and 2 as well. This implies that the problem is with the IV
curve measurement system, rather than the detectors. However, the extreme amplitude
of the detector 1 leakage in concert with the high bulk leakage in the same area seem to
show that there is a provable defect with the detector in this area.
Around anode 20­21, the surface leakage is also abnormally high for all 3 detectors. But
in this case, as there is no visible problem with detector 1 in this region, this is likely an
issue with the IV­curve measurement system.
With regard to the cathodes, no single cathode stands out as having any problems. They
all have surface leakages of 1­1.5 nA and bulk leakages of 2 −3 nA.
6.5.4
Detector 2
Unfortunately, nearly all data taken for single­electrode bulk leakage currents for detector
2 are erroneous. Here, we suffice with only surface leakage measurements.
Figure 6.23 shows the same high leakage currents between anodes 0­2 and 20­22 as
for detector 1. Assuming these are an IV current system error, there is nothing strange
about the anode­side electrodes on detector 2. They all have surface leakages from 2 nA
to 3 nA.
On the cathode side, we note unusually low leakage currents of only 0.5 nA at cathodes
2 and 3. This indicates poor electrical connection to cathode 3, which would explain why
98
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:107==
Figure 6.23: Single­electrode bulk (BLC, red) and surface (SLC, black) leakage currents
measured at ­50 V, for all electrodes on detector 2, plotted with a 2d interaction­position
histogram of Cs­137 single­interaction events. For reference, positions of cathodes and
anodes are also shown.
it measures exceptionally low charge signals as discussed in subsection 5.2.3.
The surface leakage of the other cathodes is nearly twice as high as for detector 1, rang­
ing from 3.7 nA to 4.7 nA. Cathode 9 stands out with a leakage of 5.6 nA. An imperfect
mounting of this cathode to the detector crystal might explain the reduced z­axis reso­
lution at 16 mm < z <24 mm (see subsubsection 6.4.1). Finally, we note that although
cathodes 15 and 17 behaved poorly, as described in subsection 5.2.3, they do not stand
out in these measurements. The reason they behaved poorly on the tower could be sim­
ply due to poor mechanical connection, such that they did not get electrical contact to the
high­voltage supply.
6.5.5
Detector 3
For detector 3, a select few cathode bulk leakage measurements were erroneous, but
otherwise the measurement system performed as advertised. Again, in Figure 6.24, the
surface leakage spikes between anodes 0­2 and anodes 20­22. In this case, however,
these spikes appear to correlate with conspicuous gaps in the x­positions in the 2d his­
togram. Unfortunately, it is not possible to identify to which degree this increased current
is the fault of the detector or the measurement system.
We also note that the increased surface leakage in the electrodes surrounding anode 6
correlates nicely with the gap in x­positions in the 2d histogram. Likely, there is a small
amount of surface contamination around these electrodes. The same can be said for
the region of increased surface leakage near anode 23, and the corresponding gap in
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
99
==PAGE:108==
Figure 6.24: Single­electrode bulk (BLC, red) and surface (SLC, black) leakage currents
measured at ­50 V, for all electrodes on detector 3, plotted with a 2d interaction­position
histogram of Cs­137 single­interaction events. For reference, positions of cathodes and
anodes are also shown.
x­positions in that area.
Perhaps most interesting is the grain boundary visible in the 2d position histogram in
Figure 6.24. This region is associated with a large bulk leakage of 0.3 nA, providing yet
another confirmation that the grain boundary has severe effects on detector performance.
Finally, in regard to the cathodes, it appears that the bad cathodes identified in subsec­
tion 5.2.3, all have high bulk leakage currents of 5 nA. This is interesting in contrast to the
relatively uninteresting surface leakage of 5 nA, which is consistent with the other cath­
odes and other detectors. Although subsection 5.2.3 concluded that the problem with
these cathodes was likely a lack of proper high­voltage biasing, the bulk leakage seems
to suggest that there is a problem within the detector material beneath the cathodes. Or,
at the very least, that the problem with these cathodes isn’t solely a matter of poor me­
chanical connection to the tower.
Remarks on leakage currents
In addition to the insights about each detector, we also note that anode number 7, which
consistently showed a poor resolution in section 6.3 for all detectors, has no noticeable
increase in bulk or surface leakage current for any detector. This all but proves that the
problem with this anode must either be in the SIS system channel for this anode, or in its
charge sensitive preamplifier in the tower. Anode 19 also shows a worse resolution for all
3 detectors, but it is especially poor for detector 2. Bulk leakage current measurements
at this anode in detector 2 would be interesting.
100
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:109==
7
Discussion and future work
Although much work was done in this project to improve on existing data analysis meth­
ods, much can still be done to further enhance the detector performance. The following
sections go into some considerations for future projects, as well as some discussion on
the results obtained in this project.
7.1
Bad electrodes
Several electrodes displayed poor spatial and spectral performance. If the source of the
problems with these electrodes can be fully understood, hopefully some of them can be
solved entirely.
7.1.1
Andoes 7 and 19
Anodes 7 and 19 appeared to display odd behavior on all detectors when mounted on
the tower. Both with extreme signal fluctuations compared to any other anodes. This
behavior could not be identified in the IV­curve measurements, which seems to point to
the problem being in the tower or the SIS 3316 digitizers. Future work should attempt to
isolate the source of this electrical noise. First, by plugging the signal cables from these
anodes into different channels on the SIS 3316 system to see if the problem is caused by
the digitizers. If not, then the passive component PCB and charge­sensitive preamplifiers
can be swapped out to see if the problem moves.
7.1.2
Bad cathodes and connectors
The bad cathodes on detector 2 are thought not to be biased to the correct voltage. The
connectors used to connect the detector to the tower have long been known to be loose, so
perhaps a simple loose connection is the cause of some of these errors. These connectors
should be inspected closer and, further down the line, entirely replaced with a stronger
connector type.
The bad cathodes on detector 3 were thought to be caused by the same problem, but IV­
curve measurements pointed towards a material difference around these cathodes. More
work is needed to understand them. Perhaps, the IV­curves only reflects the effects of
the grain boundary on the z­axis.
7.1.3
Bad drift strips
Detectors 1 and 3 have many gaps in the x­axis, even where no strange behavior from
the drift strips could be noticed. As discussed previously, if these gaps are caused by
the drift strips not being properly biased to 0V, it can explain the variations in the depth­
energy dependence for detectors 1 and 3. But more studies are needed to verify this.
More excitingly, an unbiased drift strip might even be why anodes 0 and 4 in detector
1 appear to be dead. Perhaps drift strip 0 is ”stealing” electrons that would otherwise
be collected by anode 0, preventing it from registering enough signal to trigger the SIS
digitizers. One way to test this would be to change the detector configuration so that
different combinations of electrodes are used as anodes and drift strips.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
101
==PAGE:110==
7.2
Mobility­lifetime evaluation
A critical tool to get a better understanding of the detectors’ performance and explain why
these electrodes appear to misbehave is mobility­lifetime evaluation. This is full assess­
ment of how long electrons and holes can move in the detector before being trapped, as
well as how quickly they move [13]. This analysis would require more illumination mea­
surements with all detectors and at different voltage biases. These measurements are
currently underway, but are out of scope for this project. Presumably, they would validate
that detector 2 has far more homogenous trapping than detector 3.
7.3
Improved pulse­height algorithm
The pulse­height is the backbone of all other calculated products, so if its noise can be
reduced, all other products are improved.
7.3.1
Wider sample length
As explained in section 4.3, the pulse­height is calculated as the difference between the
average signal amplitude at the end of the event and the start of the event. Specifically, it
averages the first 400 ns and last 800 ns of samples. Having more samples per event in
the LabView data collection settings could reduce the variation in the pulse height estimate
by providing more data to average over. In previous work, 4 µs of samples were collected
for each event. But in an attempt to save on storage requirements, this was reduced
to 3 µs in this work ­ seemingly without much negative repercussions. However, a full
analysis on the optimal sample length was never carried out. Using more samples is not
perfect, of course, as it increases the risk of pileup, as well as making the algorithm more
susceptible to long­term variations in the signal amplitude. But as it is likely that a longer
sample length would reduce the noise level, this should absolutely be investigated further.
7.3.2
Better estimation of peak and baseline
A better solution would be to average over more of the data that is already available.
Preferably, by averaging the baseline right up to the interaction time, and the peak starting
from the collection time. But this also runs the risk of averaging over part of the rising part
of the charge signal, which would ruin the peak and baseline estimates.
The new solution utilizes the interaction and collection times found in section 4.7. The
baseline is calculated from the start of the event, all the way up to 200 ns before the
interaction time and the peak is calculated from the end, up to 500 ns after the collection
time. These values have been slightly tuned to prevent accidental inclusion of meaningful
charge signal, but they are by no means finalized. However, in most examples, they
seem to avoid the important signal formation period as seen for a noisy cathode signal
in Figure 7.1. The figure compares the new algorithm with the old one. Here, we see
how inclusion of more datapoints right up until the cathode rise period causes the pulse­
height to decrease slightly from PH = 43.39 to PH = 40.46. In and of itself, this is not
an impressive result. However, in the following, we see how this small reduction in noise
improves results across the board.
Example results
Pulse heights are recalculated for detector 2 using the new algorithm.
Then, the y­
positions and z­positons are recalculated using the new pulse­heights. The x­position
is not recalculated, as it does not depend on the pulse­heights.
Immediately, the new results provide far better results than with the previous algorithm.
Starting with the position resolution, the new Z­positions (Figure 7.2) show a modest im­
provement over the previous iteration, with resolution increasing from 670 µm to 597 µm.
The X,y,z corrected spectra, illustrated in Figure 7.3, have far improved resolutions over
102
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:111==
Figure 7.1: Illustration comparing the improved pulse­height algorithm (red) with the orig­
inal algorithm (blue) described in section 4.3. The original averages the signal over a
fixed­width, while the new algorithm has a dynamic width dependent on the interaction
time (ts) and the collection time (tc).
Figure 7.2: Detector 2 z­axis position resolution, as calculated using the new pulse­height
algorithm. Average resolution shown in red.
the previous iteration. With the new algorithm, the spectral resolution is improved to 5.8 %
@122 keV, 5.84 % @122 keV, 1.09 % @661.7 keV, and 0.88 % @122 keV. These are then
plot over energy, and fit to an electronic and trapping noise model, as in section 6.3.
The new spectral resolution is brought much closer to the electronic noise limit, as seen
in Figure 7.4. The new noise model (again, ignoring statistical noise), yields a constant
noise limit of 6.5 keV and a trapping noise of 0.75 %. These are both improved over the
results found in section 6.3. More importantly, the constant noise floor has been brought
significantly closer to the measured electronic noise limit of 5 keV. The improved pulse­
height algorithm is clearly approaching the physical limit for the resolution obtainable with
the current laboratory setup.
What’s more, ll these results do not even represent the full potential of the new algo­
rithm, as they use the same gain­normalizations calculated previously. For even better
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
103
==PAGE:112==
Figure 7.3: X,y,z corrected spectra of the Co­57, Cs­137 and K­40 photopeaks, as mea­
sured with detector 4 using the new pulse­height algorithm.
Figure 7.4: Measured spectral resolution of detector 2 with refined pulse­height data
(crosses), fit to the quadrature sum (dotted) of a linear (dashed) and constant (solid) noise
component.
results, the gain­normalization values would be recalculated from the new pulse­height
histograms. With further improvements, the Cs­137 resolution could likely drop under
1 %.
Limitations
This new algorithm should absolutely be used in future work, but several difficulties pre­
vented it from being included in full in this work. First and foremost, it has not yet been
optimized, and more work should go into determining exactly how wide of a range to av­
erage over to estimate the pulse peak and baseline.
Secondly, the algorithm requires a consistent and accurate calculation of the electron drift
time. While this algorithm has demonstrated itself to be remarkably consistent, any cases
where it fails will completely ruin the pulse­height calculation. This is especially bad for
low y­pos, where accurate calculation of the drift time is difficult. In events where the
estimates for interaction time and collection time are identified as being completely non­
sensical, the refined pulse­height is simply replaced with the regular pulse­height. But this
does not necessarily filter out all the cases where the drift times are inaccurate enough to
ruin the pulse­height.
104
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:113==
Finally, it would require a complete restructuring of the order of product calculations. Since
the improved pulse­heights, y­positions and z­positions are all dependent on an accurate
electron drift­time.
Given more time, these issues should not be too difficult to iron out. But more time was
not available in this project.
7.4
Z­axis algorithm considerations
The z­axis algorithm could also stand to be improved. Currently, the z­resolution is worse
for all detectors than the x­resolution.
The current method for determining the z­position is by calculating the cathode center­of­
mass, using Equation 4.5. The cathodes here are windowed using a window size of 8,
meaning that only the 8 cathodes nearest the interaction position are considered. Wider
and narrower windows were experimented with. It was found that with anything narrower
than 8 cathodes, the z­position began to degenerate towards the cathode positions. And
using more than 8 cathodes begins to degrade the z­axis resolution due to inclusion of
more noise.
A problem with this algorithm is that it relies on few datapoints, and as such it can be
susceptible to cathode noise. Especially for interactions near the cathode plane. Another
Figure 7.5: 2D histograms illustrating interaction­positions from a single step of the de­
tector 1 z­axis scan. On the left, the z­position is calculated with the typical windowed
center­of­mass model, while the z­positions on the right are calculated with a Gaussian
fit to the cathode pulse­heights.
solution is to apply a Gaussian fit to the cathode pulse­heights for every event. This is
shown to significantly improve the z­resolution, as shown for a single step of a z­axis scan
for detector 1 in Figure 7.5. Especially for interactions at low y­positions. However, it was
not without its problems. Experimentation found that the z­position begins to degenerate
to individual cathodes when the interactions are at high y­positions. Even using the near­
cathode­plane fixes described in subsection 4.6.3. The reasoning for this can be that the
shape of a given cathode potential along the z­axis only approximates a Gaussian when
measured sufficiently far from the cathode plane. At the cathode plane, the weighting
potential over the z­axis of course looks like a single step that is has a value of 1 along
the given cathode and 0 elsewhere. So perhaps instead of a Gaussian, a more complex
function should be fit to the cathode amplitudes. Or perhaps the pulse­height used in
the z­axis algorithm should only be measured as the induced charge over the very last
portion of the electron drift time. Such that the interaction position ”appears” to be nearer
the anode plane, where the Gaussian fitting algorithm works better.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
105
==PAGE:114==
Regardless, as the future goal of this data analysis software is for it to run live, a slow
Gaussian fit for z­axis calculation of every event is not desirable.
7.5
On­the­fly analysis
Of course, if this detector is intended to be used in astronomical or medical environments,
it must be able to analyze x­and gamma­ray events as they are detected. Currently, all the
data are saved and downloaded first before they are run through the analysis software.
The most recent benchmarks estimate that the data analysis software can calculate all
required data products at a rate of ∼1200 events per second. With the SIS systems being
limited at the moment to only 100 events per second, this is fast enough to allow for on­
the­fly analysis. However, as higher event rates are desired in the future, the code must be
sped up. This means that costly curve fitting tools are to be avoided whenever possible.
Preferably, as much analysis as possible can be diverted to the SIS 3316 digitizers. They
already have the capability of calculating signal pulse­heights as they are measured [25].
If the improved pulse­heights and y,z positions (section 7.3) are also desired, this could
limit the analysis speed further.
106
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:115==
8
Conclusion
We can safely conclude that all the project objectives laid out in the start of the project
have been met. Throughout this project, we have successfully developed procedures
for measurement and analysis of the three 40x40 mm 3DCZT detector modules. This in­
cludes a development of software for conducting 2D scans of a radiation beam over the
detectors, as well as a new data management system for handling the large volume of
files and calibration data produced for all detectors. Some small amount of further work
with the data analysis pipeline should hopefully make it easily accessible for the next gen­
erations of detector researchers.
Future students will hopefully build upon the substantial improvements made in the data
analysis algorithm. Both the event­type determination and position algorithms have been
tuned from previous work to provide as consistent and reliable results as possible. And
the new procedures for corrections in the x,y, and z­axes have proven to considerably
improve detector spatial and spectral resolutions. For detectors 1, 2 and 3, spectral reso­
lutions of 1.38 %, 1.35 % and 1.48 % were obtained @662 keV, and 7.4 %, 6.6 % and 7.9 %
@122 keV. All of these represent a noticeable improvement over the < 1.6% @662 keV
and < 9% @661.7 keV achieved for the smaller 20x20 mm detectors [18]. And favorable
performance was demonstrated at even higher energies than these previous analyses,
with resolutions approaching 1.0 % @ 1460 keV.
The spatial resolutions were evaluated at a respectable < 0.5 mm in the x­axis and <
0.7 mm in the z­axis for all detectors @ 661.7 keV. This is not better than, but comparable
to the < 0.5 mm and < 0.6 mm resolutions achieved in the x­ and z­axes with smaller
detectors [18]. Following this, IV­curve measurements helped to highlight some detector
limitations ­ for example, the effect of grain boundaries on detector 3. More IV­curve anal­
ysis will help illuminate the differences between the detectors. But current results already
seem to point towards detector 2 having a highly homogeneous crystal, while detector 3
is more inhomogeneous.
In future, further improvements in the pulse­height measurement system should hope to
bring the detector performance even further. We have shown that there are still sub­
stantial gains to be made before hitting the electronic noise limit. And if some sensitivity
is sacrificed by ignoring interactions near the anode plane, then the resolution will likely
drop under 1 % @662 keV. But even disregarding these improvements, the three de­
tectors considered here have shown themselves to be more than adequate to meet the
standards set by previous generations.
The next step for the 3DCZT modules is a full mobility­lifetime analysis. Once these results
are complete and published, it hopefully shouldn’t be long before the 3DCZT detectors
see active use for tumor detection in hospitals.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
107
==PAGE:116==
Bibliography
[1]
Giulio Lucchetta et al. “Introducing the MeVCube concept: a CubeSat for MeV ob­
servations”. In: Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics 2022 (Aug. 2022),
p. 013. DOI: 10.1088/1475-7516/2022/08/013.
[2]
Henrik Bendix. Space technology can be used for better breast scans. 2022. URL:
https://www.dtu.dk/english/news/all-news/nyhed?id=77e2d697-b18a-4311-807c-
fa80acbf203d.
[3]
Niels Lund. “A new tool for MeV astrophysics: the tunable Laue­lens”. In: Astronom­
ical Telescopes + Instrumentation. 2020.
[4]
Glenn F. Knoll. Radiation detection and measurement. 4th ed. Wiley, 2010.
[5]
D Delacroix et al. “Radionuclide and radiation protection data handbook 2nd edition
(2002)”. In: Radiation protection dosimetry 98 (Feb. 2002), pp. 9–168. DOI: 10.1093/
oxfordjournals.rpd.a006705.
[6]
S. Bruenner et al. “Radon daughter removal from PTFE surfaces and its application
in liquid xenon detectors”. In: The European Physical Journal C 81 (Apr. 2021). DOI:
10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09047-2.
[7]
Bidhan Bhaumik. Radioactivity. This article is written for earth science students who
intend to take a course on crustal radioactivity. May 2014. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.
4813.2649.
[8]
G. Choppin et al. “Absorption of nuclear radiation” in Radiochemistry and Nuclear
Chemistry. Butterworth­Heinemann, 2002. Chap. 6.
[9]
John H. Hubbell. “Radiation Physics”. In: Encyclopedia of Physical Science and
Technology (Jan. 2003), pp. 561–580. DOI: 10.1016/B0- 12- 227410- 5/00634- 7.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B0122274105006347.
[10]
Alan Owens. Compound Semiconductor Radiation Detectors. CRC Press, 2012.
[11]
Zhong He. “Review of the Shockley­Ramo theorem and its application in semicon­
ductor gamma­ray detectors”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Re­
search (2001).
[12]
Selina Owe. Lecture on Signal formation and semiconductor detectors. DTU Space,
2022.
[13]
SelinaR.H.Owe, IrfanKuvvetli, and CarlBudtz­Jørgensen. “Three­Dimensional Map­
ping of Carrier Lifetime and Mobility”. In: High­Z Materials for X­ray Detection : Mate­
rial Properties and Characterization Techniques. Ed. by L. Abbene and K. Iniewski.
Springer, 2023, pp. 87–110.
[14]
M.A.J van Pamelen and C. Budtz­Jørgensen. “Novel electrode geometry to improve
performance of CdZnTe detectors”. In: Elsevier Nuclear Instruments and Methods
in Physics Research (1998).
[15]
Carl Budtz­Jørgensen and Irfan Kuvvetli. “New Position Algorithms for the 3D CZT
Drift Detector”. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science PP (Apr. 2017), pp. 1–1.
DOI: 10.1109/TNS.2017.2696574.
[16]
Selina Howalt Ove and Irfan Kuvvetli. Characterization of New Generation 3D CZT
High Resolution X­ and Gamma­ray Detector for High Energy Space Mission Con­
cept. 2018.
[17]
Linxiang Li et al. “Gamma­ray energy spectrum response tailing in CdZnTe detec­
tor”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accel­
erators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 1037 (2022). https:
108
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:117==
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168900222003710, p. 166922. ISSN:
0168­9002. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2022.166922.
[18]
Selina Howalt Ove et al. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON RADIATION AND PLASMA
MEDICAL SCIENCES 2 (2023).
[19]
Irfan Kuvvetli. 3D MBI Final Prototype Modules – Design concept and specs. 2022.
[20]
Irfan Kuvvetli. crystal drawing 40mm. DTU Space, 2022.
[21]
Benjamin Nobre Hauptmann, Irfan Kuvvetli, and Denis Tcherniak. Evaluation and
Validation of the Characterization System for 40mm x 40mm x 5mm 3D CdZnTe
Drift Strip Detector Test Units. June 2023.
[22]
Cremat. Charge sensitive preamplifiers explained. https://www.cremat.com/why-
use-csps/. 2023.
[23]
University of Alabama at Birmingham Radiation Safety Procedures Manual Ninth
Edition. University of Alabama, 2007.
[24]
R.C. Greenwood, R.G. Helmer, and R.J. Gherke. “Precise comparison and mea­
surement of gamma­ray energies with a Ge(Li) detector I. 50–420 keV”. In: Elsevier
Nuclear Instruments and Methods (1970).
[25]
Struck. SIS3316 16 Channel VME Digitizer. SIS GmbH. 2019.
[26]
Velmex. Increments with VXM and steppers. https://www.velmex.com/Downloads/
OEM-Spec_Charts/IncrementswithVXMandSteppers.pdf. 2023.
[27]
Denis Tcherniak Jonas Christoffersen. Documentation of IV measurements setup
at DTU Space detector laboratory. DTU Space. 2023.
[28]
Sinon V. Ørum. Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Test
Modules. DTU Space, 2022.
[29]
Selina Howalt Owe, Irfan Kuvvetli, and Carl Budtz­Jørgensen. “Carrier Lifetime and
Mobility Characterization Using the DTU 3­D CZT Drift Strip Detector”. In: IEEE
Transactions on nuclear science 68 (2021).
[30]
David A. Freedman and Persi Diaconis. “On the histogram as a density estima­
tor:L2 theory”. In: Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verwandte Gebiete
57 (1981), pp. 453–476. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14437088.
[31]
Mie Sambleben Magelund and Irfan Kuvvetli. Characterization of New Generation
3D CZT High Resolution X­ and Gamma­ray Detector for High Energy Space Mis­
sion Concept. Mar. 2021.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
109
==PAGE:118==
110
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:119==
A
Appendix
A.1
Appendix A: Gain normalization data
Detector 1
Anode
Cathode
Drift
k1
k2
k1
k2
k1
k2
0
0
0
0.873
0
0
0
1
0.947
­7.82
0.89
0
0.927
­2.608
2
0.92
­1.863
0.874
0
0
0
3
0.927
­2.767
0.894
0
0.9
­1.386
4
0
0
0.901
0
0.932
­4.072
5
0.908
­2.671
0.863
0
0.889
­0.933
6
0.884
0.427
0.862
0
0.901
­1.143
7
0.87
1.125
0.881
0
0.948
­0.737
8
0.884
1.837
0.919
0
0
0
9
0.877
­1.022
0.88
0
0.856
­0.488
10
0.871
­0.261
0.888
0
0.88
­1.282
11
0.866
­0.61
0.889
0
0.842
0.059
12
0.896
­1.354
0.903
0
0.884
­2.431
13
0.86
0.287
0.869
0
0.898
­2.36
14
0.892
­1.297
0.877
0
0.935
­1.869
15
0.898
­1.677
0.932
0
0.905
­1.659
16
0.882
0.451
0.87
0
0.904
­0.806
17
0.882
1.949
0.892
0
0.915
­0.473
18
0.877
1.54
0.88
0
0.911
­1.078
19
0.896
1.757
0.874
0
0.925
­1.084
20
0.879
1.225
0.904
­1.141
21
0.893
1.352
0.955
­0.104
22
0.876
0.225
0.913
­0.604
23
0.849
1.038
0.919
­0.793
24
0.894
2.003
Table A.1: Gain normalization values for all electrodes of detector 1. Drift strips 0, 1 and
8, as well as anodes 0 and 4 could not be properly calibrated, and are given calibration
values of 0.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
111
==PAGE:120==
Detector 2
Anode
Cathode
Drift
k1
k2
k1
k2
k1
k2
0
0.923
0.532
0.872
0
0.982
0
1
0.942
0.702
0.901
0
0.961
0
2
0.927
­0.576
0.864
0
0.946
0
3
0.932
­0.007
0.88
0
0.947
0
4
0.928
0.322
0.874
0
0.943
0
5
0.913
­0.006
0.856
0
0.921
0
6
0.891
0.788
0.857
0
0.951
0
7
0.873
0.584
0.877
0
0.983
0
8
0.888
­0.452
0.927
0
0.925
0
9
0.877
0.542
0.892
0
0.9
0
10
0.872
0.371
0.901
0
0.91
0
11
0.868
0.128
0.877
0
0.88
0
12
0.894
0.691
0.905
0
0.903
0
13
0.863
0.928
0.87
0
0.905
0
14
0.889
0.697
0.87
0
0.955
0
15
0.897
0.786
0.88
0
0.919
0
16
0.885
0.77
0.867
0
0.916
0
17
0.89
0.627
0.88
0
0.926
0
18
0.882
0.533
0.878
0
0.925
0
19
0.907
0.419
0.874
0
0.927
0
20
0.885
0.078
0.909
0
21
0.899
1.21
0.964
0
22
0.878
1.169
0.925
0
23
0.858
­0.193
0.932
0
24
0.932
0
Table A.2: Gain normalization values for all electrodes of detector 2. Drift calibration has
0 intercept, as the Co­57 drift­calibration point is missing due to the data being taken with
the wrong settings. Cathodes 3, 15 and 17 are highlighted. Due to problems described in
section, these cathodes’ calibration points were replaced with the average of all remaining
cathode calibration points.
112
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:121==
Detector 3
Anode
Cathode
Drift
k1
k2
k1
k2
k1
k2
0
0.888
­2.871
0.844
0
0.986
­1.76
1
0.907
­2.002
0.865
0
0.898
1.747
2
0.894
­2.504
0.861
0
0.916
­1.134
3
0.901
­1.465
0.872
0
0.929
­3.803
4
0.902
­2.807
0.875
0
0.94
­2.901
5
0.897
­4.784
0.837
0
0.934
­3.752
6
0.888
­7.889
0.841
0
0.906
0.251
7
0.854
­0.766
0.86
0
0.976
­2.053
8
0.872
­2.588
0.899
0
0.92
­0.726
9
0.874
­7.179
0.856
0
0.89
­0.639
10
0.855
­2.188
0.878
0
0.906
0.138
11
0.859
­4.887
0.849
0
0.877
­0.119
12
0.877
­1.787
0.861
0
0.881
2.202
13
0.849
­2.826
0.837
0
0.895
0.045
14
0.868
­0.547
0.87
0
0.967
­2.202
15
0.881
­2.569
0.892
0
0.922
­0.491
16
0.869
­2.102
0.861
0
0.906
0.807
17
0.878
­4.581
0.877
0
0.929
­1.01
18
0.871
­4.334
0.854
0
0.942
­2.917
19
0.891
­4.142
0.853
0
0.913
1.784
20
0.864
­0.735
0.915
­0.757
21
0.888
­3.937
0.933
0.814
22
0.864
­3.204
0.936
­2.51
23
0.83
1.134
0.947
­6.622
24
0.917
0.19
Table A.3: Gain normalization values for all electrodes of detector 3. Cathodes 2, 12
and 17 are highlighted. Due to problems described in section, these cathodes’ calibration
points were replaced with the average of all remaining cathode calibration points.
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
113
==PAGE:122==
A.2
Appendix B: X,Z energy correction graphs
(a) Detector 1
(b) Detector 2
(c) Detector 3
Figure A.1: X,z energy correction values for detectors 1, 2 and 3. Note, that for detector
1, some parts of the detector are colored black. These are interactions which are ignored,
as they involve dead anodes or drift strips.
114
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:123==
(a) Detector 1
(b) Detector 1
(c) Detector 2
(d) Detector 2
(e) Detector 3
(f) Detector 3
Figure A.2: X,z energy correction values for detectors 1, 2 and 3. Averaged for each
x­axis slice (left) and z­axis slice (right)
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
115
==PAGE:124==
A.3
Appendix C: Background spectra
The histograms below show the background spectra as measured for all three detectors.
In addition to the K­40 photopeak at 1460 keV, the spectra show lines from
1. Th­228 at 908 keV
2. Ac­228 at 969 keV
3. Bi­214 at 1112 keV
4. Bi­214 at 1764 keV
5. Tl­208 at 2616 keV
Isotopes and energies taken from Bruenner et al. [6].
Figure A.3: Background spectrum measured for detector 1
116
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:125==
Figure A.4: Background spectrum measured for detector 2
Figure A.5: Background spectrum measured for detector 3
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
117
==PAGE:126==
A.4
Appendix D: Surface leakage currents for all electrodes
A.4.1
Detector 1
Figure A.6: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 1
118
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:127==
Figure A.7: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 1
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
119
==PAGE:128==
Figure A.8: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 1
120
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:129==
Figure A.9: Surface leakage current for cathode­side electrodes on detector 1
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
121
==PAGE:130==
A.4.2
Detector 2
Figure A.10: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 2
122
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:131==
Figure A.11: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 2
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
123
==PAGE:132==
Figure A.12: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 2
124
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:133==
Figure A.13: Surface leakage current for cathode­side electrodes on detector 1
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
125
==PAGE:134==
A.4.3
Detector 3
Figure A.14: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 3
126
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:135==
Figure A.15: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 3
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
127
==PAGE:136==
Figure A.16: Surface leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 3
128
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:137==
Figure A.17: Surface leakage current for cathode­side electrodes on detector 3
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
129
==PAGE:138==
A.5
Appendix E: Single­electrode bulk leakage currents for
all electrodes
A.5.1
Detector 1
Figure A.18: Bulk leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 1
130
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:139==
Figure A.19: Bulk leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 1
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
131
==PAGE:140==
Figure A.20: Bulk leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 1
132
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:141==
Figure A.21: Bulk leakage current for cathode­side electrodes on detector 1
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
133
==PAGE:142==
A.5.2
Detector 3
Figure A.22: Bulk leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 3
134
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:143==
Figure A.23: Bulk leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 3
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
135
==PAGE:144==
Figure A.24: Bulk leakage current for anode­side electrodes on detector 3
136
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
==PAGE:145==
Figure A.25: Bulk leakage current for cathode­side electrodes on detector 3
Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D MBI Detector Modules
137
==PAGE:146==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej Building 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
