==PAGE:1==
Colocalizing Fluorescent Nanodiamonds with
Lysosomes in THP­1 Monocytes for Quantum
Sensing of Free Radicals
Madison Lauren Wright
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Colocalizing FNDs with Lysosomes in THP­1 Monocytes for Quantum Sens­
ing of Free Radicals
Master’s Thesis
April 30th, 2024
By
Madison Lauren Wright
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Madison Wright, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørestads Plads, Building
349, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Magnetic Reso­
nance, Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree of Master of Science and Engineering in
Biotechnology, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of biotechnology.
Madison Lauren Wright ­ s213450
Date
ii
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
THP­1 cells and their lysosomes were studied to understand better the relation­
ship between foreign particle ingestion and free radical formation. Colocalization
studies have important applications within cellular biology as they help us under­
stand the mechanism behind the complex processes that make up so much of
the living world around us [1]. Diana plugin for ImageJ/Fiji software was used to
take multiple measurements to determine the degree of colocalization or spa­
tial co­occurrence.
In this study, THP­1 cells can internalize FNDs through a
phagocytotic­mediated process, but their uptake varies over time. Across all time
points measured, 25h of incubation lysosome­labeled THP­1 cells with FNDs
had the highest degree of spatial overlap measured via center­center distance
frequency and colocalization events measured partly by overlapping volumes of
FNDs and lysosomes. While overall FND uptake increased over time, there was
a decrease in the amount of FNDs found in cells at the 6h and 8h time points.
Overall, the results from this study prove that there were positive colocalization
events, or spatial overlap, occurring between FNDs and lysosomes. Free radicals
can indicate the presence of cellular stress, and in this study, only one round of
experiments was done for their detection. The future of free radical detection in
THP­1 cells remains bright, as there is much research to be done and the tech­
nique of taking T1 measurements for detecting free radical concentration is robust
and already proven functional [2]. Combined with the confirmation of this colocal­
ization study, cellular processes could eventually be understood in new ways.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Kirstine Berg Sørensen, Professor, Group Leader
Department of Health Technology
My deepest thanks to Kirstine, the head of our research group within Magnetic
Resonance in the Department of Health Technology, for supporting this project
and allowing me to ask her any questions, no matter how small they may seem. As
soon as you join her group, you can sense the incredible, inclusionary environment
she has created. This work would not have been possible without her.
Maria Noira, PhD Student, Department of Health Technology
My sincerest thanks to Maria for her invaluable patience and feedback. I appreci­
ate all your time explaining things and guiding me throughout this thesis. Direction
that gave me a renewed sense of self­determination to come to the answers on
my own, as much as possible.
Arthur Dervillez, PhD Student, Department of Health Technology
I am also grateful for Arthur, who was always willing to answer questions and
provide support whenever needed. You provided invaluable insight in between
waiting times tht
Mike and Kara Ragusa
To my Mom and Dad, thank you for always answering my calls. Throughout my
last 6­year education, my parents have always supported me and listened to every
complaint, every success, and every moment of feeling overwhelmed. I could not
have done this without you.
Evie and Ella Sørensen
Last but certainly not least, I’d like to thank my children for their unwavering belief
in me and what I am capable of. You have kept my spirits and motivation, and I
am so grateful to be your mother.
iv
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question and Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Macrophages and Immunology Background . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
THP­1 Cells and their Lysosomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Free Radicals and Cellular Damage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4.1
Importance of Free Radical Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Nanodiamonds and Their Relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Colocalization to Study Correlation and Co­occurence . . . . . . .
7
1.7
Significance in THP­1 Monocytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.8
Image Acquisition and Confocal Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.9
ImageJ Fiji and DiAna Plugin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.10 Quantum Sensing and T1 Relaxometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Methodology
13
2.1
Thp­1 Cell Cultivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.1
Splitting of THP­1 Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Staining of Live THP­1 Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Cellular Uptake of Nanodiamonds and Colocalization Analysis
. .
15
2.4
SD Confocal Image Acquistion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Image Analysis with ImageJ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.1
DiAna Plug­in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
T­1 Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Results
20
3.1
LysoStain Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
FND Uptake over Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Colocalization of FNDs and Lysosomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.1
T test for statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
FND and Lysosomal Feret Diameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
T­1 Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Discussion
29
4.1
LysoStain Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
FNDs Over Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Temporal Analysis of FNDs and Lysosomes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Colocalization Analysis Using DiAna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.1
Image pre­processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.2
The Relationship Between Pixels and Real Space . . . . .
33
4.4.3
Quantification of Cellular Uptake of FNDs in Lysosomes . .
34
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
v
==PAGE:7==
4.4.4
A Review of Colocalization Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
T1 Measurement for Free Radical Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5.1
Future Prospects and Current Limitations of Magnetic Res­
onance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Conclusion
42
Bibliography
44
A Appendix
51
vi
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Research Question and Hypothesis
How do FNDs interact with lysosomes in THP­1 cells over time, and what are the
implications of these interactions for quantum sensing of free radicals?
I hypothesize that fluorescent nanodiamonds (FNDs) are internalized by THP­1
cells and are trafficked by lysosomes differently over time. Colocalization analysis
of lysosomes and THP­1 cells is a positive result if the co­occurrence of two ob­
jects in a 3D space is measured as having an overlapping volume. Furthermore,
I anticipate that the presence of FNDs within lysosomes and phagolysosomes in­
fluences the redox environment, leading to alterations in free radical levels. We
predict that FND­induced oxidative stress within phagolysosomes will produce re­
active oxygen species (ROS), which can be detected and quantified using quan­
tum sensing techniques.
1.2
Macrophages and Immunology Background
Macrophages are versatile immune cells that play a crucial role in innate and
adaptive immunity [3]. Derived from monocytes, macrophages are found in vari­
ous tissues throughout the body and serve as emergency responders to infection,
tissue repair, and immune regulation. Their functions include phagocytosis, anti­
gen presentation, and cytokine production. THP­1 cells are a human monocytic
line that exhibits characteristics similar to primary monocytes and can be differen­
tiated into macrophage­like phenotypes as seen in Figure 1.1 [3].
Phagocytosis contributes to host defenses by aiding in tissue remodeling and
repair, extracellular and intracellular function, and inflammation. It also assists
in clearing senescent, necrotic, and apoptotic cells, a process called autophagy
[3][4]. Phagocytosis can be defined by the cellular uptake of particles greater
than 0.5 µm in size within a plasma membrane envelope. Once internalized, the
phagosome vacuole can actively and selectively fuse with a nearby primary lyso­
some and form a secondary phagolysosome. This extensive membrane­recycling
process drastically reduces pH, leading to progressive acidification and ultimate
digestion of cargo [4].
Antigen presentation initiates the adaptive immune responses by presenting said
antigens to T cells. This process occurs by presenting antigenic peptides on major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, leading to T cell activation and the
adaptive immune response [4].
Cytokine production is a process that is carried out by macrophages, and they are
potent cytokine producers [5]. A standard nomenclature for designating cytokines
is interleukins, and the first to be named were IL­1 and IL­2, also concerning their
role among leukocytes [6]. Depending on their stimuli, macrophages can secrete
pro­inflammatory cytokines such as IL­1, IL­6, TNF­α, and sometimes IL­10 [6].
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
1
==PAGE:9==
These cytokines help to shape the immune environment by serving as signaling
molecules between cells of the immune system. They first bind to specific recep­
tors present on the surface of target cells, initiating signaling pathways that lead
to various cellular responses [7]. Interestingly, cytokines are pleiotropic and can
cause multiple effects on different cell types. A single cytokine may stimulate pro­
liferation in one cell type while promoting differentiation or apoptosis in another
[8]. They affect nearly every biological process, from embryonic development to
non­specific responses to antigens to the progression of degenerative processes
of aging [9].
1.3
THP­1 Cells and their Lysosomes
Figure 1.1: THP­1 monocyte depicted with known surface markers, its Lysosome zoomed
in, and its phenotypes as described by Genin et al. The classical M1 phenotype is clas­
sically activated, and the M2 phenotype is alternatively activated. Classical activation
follows after injury or infection, and alternatively, activated macrophages are polarized by
IL­4 and IL­13 [10][5].
As depicted in Figure 1.1, THP­1 monocytes or macrophages are characterized
by their large size, high phagocytic activity, and ability to differentiate into various
macrophage lineages [11][12]. They have a notably large cell body, a single nu­
cleus, and a large cytoplasm. Inside of their large cytoplasm are their lysosomes.
On the cell surface of THP­1 cells, they express various surface markers, such as
CD14, CD68, and CD163; these markers are characteristic of macrophages [13].
THP­1 cells also express various intracellular proteins, such as the major histo­
compatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules [14]. Here, we can see a 100x (oil
immersion) capture of THP­1 cells in Figure 1.1.
2
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:10==
Lysosomes comprise a double­membrane envelope, an inner lumen, and a lyso­
somal lumen. The outer membrane contains proteins involved in recognizing and
engulfing pathogens, while the inner membrane contains enzymes responsible for
the degradations of cellular waste products [15]. Therefore, they play a vital role
in maintaining cell homeostasis. They also contribute to the clearance of extracel­
lular proteins and lipids, essential for maintaining the integrity of the extracellular
matrix.
They are regulated by various signal­
ing pathways, such as the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway,
which regulates cell growth, prolifer­
ation, and autophagy.
Thus, dys­
functional lysosomes have been im­
plicated in various diseases, such as
Alzheimer’s disease and atherosclero­
sis [16]. In Alzheimer’s disease, the ac­
cumulation of amyloid­beta peptides in
lysosomes can lead to dysfunction and
impairment in cellular waste degrada­
tion.
Understanding the role of lyso­
somes in cellular function can provide
valuable insights into the mechanism
underlying these processes.
Phagolysosomes, the dynamic cellular organelles formed by the fusion of phago­
somes with lysosomes, play a crucial role in the degradation and processing of
engulfed materials within immune cells [15]. These structures serve as the primary
intracellular degradation compartments, where various biomolecules, pathogens,
and foreign particles are subjected to enzymatic breakdown and recycling. The
intricate interplay between phagolysosomes and their contents is fundamental
for cellular homeostasis and immune defense mechanisms, antigen presentation,
and overall cellular function [17].
Based on the literature, in THP­1 cells, PMA is the most effective induced differ­
entiation means to obtain a mature THP­1 monocyte­derived macrophage. This
process can occur after 48 h of incubation [11]. This varied application of THP­1
cells is also shown in their ability to be cultured for up to three months without
any notable changes in cell activity or sensitivity. With an average doubling time
of 35 to 50h, they are considered to have a relatively high growth rate compared
to other peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)­derived monocytes. THP­1
cells can be stored in liquid nitrogen as PBMC­derived monocytes cannot, and
this cell line can be recovered without any effects on the doubling time and their
viability [11][18]. This process can even be undergone for several years without
any apparent signs or effects on monocyte­macrophage features.
1.4
Free Radicals and Cellular Damage
ROS are highly reactive and destructive molecules [21]. Many common life­threatening
diseases have free radical reactions as an underlying mechanism of damage, in­
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: ROS effect on cells depicted with healthy cells in orange and red cells that are
damaged from oxidative stress. Significant effects occur in the mitochondria, resulting in
a total shutdown of mitochondrial metabolism [19]. ROS can pass through the membrane
as they directly affect the homeostasis of the Ca2+ channels that typically have tightly
controlled access through the plasma membrane and other intracellular compartments.
The nucleus (depicted in dark red) directly affects transcription regulation depending on
their origin and concentration [20].
cluding cancer, diabetes, and aging [22]. While we are exposed to them in our
daily lives from sunlight and pollution, they are also generated endogenously [23].
Tissue injury mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a final common path­
way for several disease processes.
Their unpaired electrons characterize them, and the evolutionary story of their
origin is extensive. Oxygen appeared in the atmosphere in significant amounts
over 2.2 billion years ago due to the evolution of cyanobacteria and photosynthe­
sis [24]. Molecular oxygen (O2) is the primary biological electron acceptor that
plays a crucial role in fundamental cellular functions. However, due to regular
metabolic activity and exposure to environmental stressors such as pollutants,
toxins, radiation, etc., O2 can generate reactive excited states known as ROS (re­
active oxygen species). These ROS include superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, or
hydroxyl radicals. If left unchecked, they can pose a severe threat and potentially
lead to the death of aerobic cells [22]. Aerobic metabolism using oxidative phos­
phorylation is highly efficient in producing energy from organic compounds and
is the standard form of energy production in virtually all animals. However, ROS
are produced wherever there is disease and cell damage, especially in the case
of infection where they are made in large quantities [25]. In healthy animals, up
to 25% of the oxygen inhaled forms free radicals [24]. Aerobic organisms evolved
a mechanism of mitigating the potentially harmful effects of ROS through nonen­
zymatic and enzymatic antioxidant defenses, including vitamin E and glutathione
peroxidase [26].
Typically, cells can tolerate mild oxidative stress, which often results in the up­
regulation of antioxidant formation to restore cell homeostasis [26]. Through the
changes in gene expression, cells can protect themselves against more severe
4
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:12==
oxidative stress [27]. Therefore, cell injury can occur if the adaptation doesn’t im­
prove with the body’s natural response to antioxidant defenses. Permanent injury
alters the homeostasis state of the cell and begins a prolonged wounded state that
may or may not lead to cell death [28]. Evidence supports oxidative stress’s role
in aging due to the progressive decline of mitochondria from molecular oxidative
damage. Although the latest theories of telomere shortening with repeated cell
division are the leading cause of aging, mitochondrial damage has been shown
to decrease the replicative life span of cells. Therefore, mitochondrial ROS have
a part in cells’ telomere­dependent replicative life span, but this theory has yet to
be confirmed entirely [29]. This process is depicted in Figure ??.
1.4.1
Importance of Free Radical Detection
Abnormally high concentrations of free radicals in the body can be caused by pro­
longed exposure to ionizing radiation or other environmental toxins [30]. When
ionized radiation hits a molecule in a cell, an electron may be lost, thus forming a
free radical. Unsurprisingly, environmental toxins include cigarette smoke, which
may contain large amounts of free radicals and stimulate the body’s cells to pro­
duce more free radicals [31][29].
Free radicals provide a good platform for understanding how cells react to stress
and cancer­inducing irritation. The cause of the poisonous properties of oxygen
was unknown until researchers in 1954 stated that the ”toxicity of oxygen is due
partially to reduced forms of oxygen” [32]. As early as the 1970s, researchers had
already observed hydrogen peroxide being produced in the mitochondria [33][34].
In recent years, it has been shown that superoxide production occurs mainly within
the mitochondria [21]. As the primary source of ATP in the cell, the electron trans­
port chain in the mitochondria is essential for life. As energy transduction occurs,
a few electrons leak to oxygen prematurely, forming oxygen­free radical super­
oxide – a compound implicated in several diseases [35]. These free radicals,
detached electrons, must find either an antioxidant or a redox molecule to attach
to for avoiding accumulation inside the cell. The term ”oxidative stress” is an im­
balance between the generation of oxidants and the local anti­oxidative defense.
The main characteristic of redox signaling is that it involves an oxidation­reduction
reaction or covalent adduct formation between the sensor signaling protein and
the second messenger. The redox­responsive signaling pathways control sev­
eral physiological functions. Some of the tasks that are controlled include I. ROS
production by phagocytic NAD(P)H oxidase (oxidative burst); II. Redox regulated
production of NO; III. Regulation of vascular tone (dilation of blood vessels); III.
Redox regulation of immune responses (ROS­producing cytokines); IV. Redox
regulation of cell adhesion. These are not all the functions that are characteristic
of this signaling pathway, and we expand upon the four listed below [21][26][29].
ROS plays a primary role in apoptosis, DNA damage responses, cell­cycle ar­
rest, inflammation, and autophagy. The body defends itself against these reactive
species through antioxidants. Thus, an appropriate balance between antioxidants
and ROS is crucial to maintain regular, regulated physiological function. Proteins,
lipids, and nucleic acids are ROS’s main molecular targets, and DNA is one of the
more significant biological targets. ROS has been observed to attack and harm
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
5
==PAGE:13==
nucleotide bases and the sugar­rich backbone of DNA [36].
1.5
Nanodiamonds and Their Relevance
In recent years, the exploration of nanomaterial interactions with biological sys­
tems has garnered significant interest due to their potential applications in diverse
fields, ranging from medicine to environmental science [37][38][39]. Nanodia­
monds, in particular, have emerged as promising candidates for various biomed­
ical applications owing to their unique physiochemical properties, including bio­
compatibility, surface functionality, and fluorescence properties. Understanding
the interactions between FNDs and cellular compartments such as phagolyso­
somes holds profound implications for elucidating the mechanisms underlying
nanoparticle trafficking, biodegradation, and potential biomedical applications [39].
Figure 1.3: Demonstration of the major crystallographic structures defined by Torelli et al.
[40]. Here, you can see that different structures create different color centers in diamonds
and physical properties that prevent biomedical applications. N3, H3, and our type N.V.
centers are responsible for blue, green, and red fluorescence. These complexes are
composed of a vacancy with differing numbers of nitrogen atoms. A negatively charged
N.V. center also possesses a spin state that varies by external agitation and can be read
optically. Negatively charged N.V. centers can be polarized upon applying the laser’s
light, microwaves, and weak magnetic fields. This polarization transfers to C13 nuclei in
nearby carbon atoms so that diamonds can be visualized in magnetic resonance imaging
[40][41].
First, it is essential to note that the fluorescence in diamonds originates from the
radiative relaxation of electronic transitions after light absorption by different struc­
tural defects within the diamond lattice [2]. Diamond brightness depends on the
particle volume, so the more significant the particle, the more intense the bright­
ness. This is due to the greater number of color centers when the particle volume
is higher. FNDs are currently documented as being a potential drug delivery tool,
as in the case of the work done by Gvozdev et al., where they use FNDs as a
delivery platform for photosensitizers to cancer cells [42] for their photodynamic
treatment. When compared to traditional fluorescent probe techniques, FNDs
promise to offer a non­toxic, safe way to track lysosomal activity or as a fluores­
cent imaging probe.
6
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:14==
The interaction of FNDs with cells is an important design consideration for biolog­
ical use. Niora et al. demonstrated that THP­1 cells’ cellular uptake of FNDs did
not show signs of cytotoxic effects [43]. In addition to this finding, many other cell
lines have been studied for the biocompatibility of FNDs, including C. elegans.
Research shows a similarity between the uptake mechanism in cancer and non­
cancer cells [44]. Although there is a correlation between this mechanism, there
is a significant difference in the number of FNDs that cancer cells uptake, far ex­
ceeding the number that non­cancer cells are capable of. This variability in the
FNDs traveled internalization pathways, including intracellular trafficking, sorting,
and localization of particles, remain topics of interest [44][38][37].
NVs are responsible for the visible color seen while imaging, and they are the
only known solid­state system where single electron spins can be manipulated at
room temperature [45]. Figure 1.3 explains this effect in more detail. How FNDs
enter cells is a process that offers some fascinating background for the subse­
quent pathways that involve foreign particle digestion. When the cell’s exterior
is reached, particles can interact with the extracellular matrix and enter the cell,
mainly through endocytosis [46].
1.6
Colocalization to Study Correlation and
Co­occurence
In the study of cell biology, investigations are frequently performed to understand
the coincidence of two or more signals within the volume of a sample [47]. Spatial
coincidence analysis is an essential initial step in understanding the interactions
between molecular players. It typically happens when a protein or object of inter­
est is present locally on a structure, or their concentrations are locally linked. This
phenomenon is evaluated based on the representation of a biological sample as
a set of images [48].
Some early work achieved on colocalization was done by Manders et al., where
they were the first to demonstrate the ability of DNA to replicate at a specific do­
main [1]. Not only did they make a groundbreaking discovery about DNA, but they
also proved the relationship between DNA replication and time. They achieved
this understanding of spatial relationships by staining cell nuclei with two different
fluorescent signals. Through this staining, they analyzed the workings of DNA
replication by tracking changes during cell proliferation over time. [1] Discovered
by the author mentioned above, the Manders overlap coefficient is a quantitative
measurement for analyzing colocalization events. This measurement can be de­
fined as a co­occurrence or correlation of two labeled objects in a space. Most
software will calculate this value, but their definitions may vary. [49][1]
These studies can be performed on various interesting processes like gene tran­
scription, cell signaling, pharmacokinetics, and vesicular transport [48]. The two
main themes for defining positive colocalization events are reference correlation
or co­occurrence as a defining trait of measurements performed by software [49].
Correlation means a relationship exists between the variation in concentrations of
two molecules, and co­occurrence is where both molecules appear in the same
pixels. Reporting on both is essential for interpreting the results of colocalization
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
7
==PAGE:15==
events correctly [49].
While the true definition of colocalization is any spatial overlap between two flu­
orescent channels, studies are generally left to define their terms of definition for
colocalization [48]. Terms are subjective based on the protocols and analysis tools
used [50]. Since many different software and image processing tools are avail­
able, choosing the right one is critical in any good colocalization study. Due to
this readability of tools, the investigations into spatial co­occurrence must be well­
documented. Then, there is a higher chance of the results being proven, thereby
strengthening any hypothesis of colocalization [48].
1.7
Significance in THP­1 Monocytes
THP­1 monocytes offer a unique platform for studying immune responses and
cellular processes. They are derived from the peripheral blood of a childhood
case of acute monocytic leukemia. These cells, capable of differentiation into
macrophage­like phenotypes, present an ideal model for investigating the intri­
cate mechanisms underlying the production and detection of free radicals. The
average doubling time in THP­1 monocytes is between 30­50 hours, and under
the correct growth conditions, can be expected to quadruple within three and a
half days. This cell line can be cultured in vitro up to passage 25 (approximately
three months), making it advantageous for long­term studies. The homogenous
genetic background of THP­1 cells minimizes the degree of variability in cell phe­
notype, facilitating the reproducibility of results. However, this could also be seen
as a slight disadvantage since effects on cells may be genome­dependent [11].
In humans, the frequencies of the populations of T cells, B cells, and N.K. cells
vary significantly across individuals. When they are stimulated with LPS, PBMC
monocytes produce more significant amounts of inflammation­related cytokines,
e.g. TNF­α, IL­6, IL­8, and IL­10, than THP­1 monocytes do [51]. That being said,
it is known that THP­1 cells express low levels of CD14, so concerning LPS re­
sponses, THP­1 cells can appear to be a poor model for primary monocytes. Also,
THP­1 cells are not entirely suitable for testing parent drug compounds since hep­
atocytes primarily metabolize drugs in the liver. Still, they can be ideal for studying
inflammation responses provoked by drugs that cause immune­meditated liver in­
jury. In some research, WGA­functionalized THP­1 cells could take up 55% of
nanoparticles, suggesting an approach for treating infectious diseases provoked
by parasites, bacteria, and viruses [52].
In THP­1 cells, FNDs can and are used to study Lysosome and FND colocaliza­
tion [43]. THP­1 cells are also documented as having a high density of lysosomes,
which is essential because they provide a direct method to study the function and
regulation of lysosomes in vivo. Combined with confocal microscopy and fluores­
cent labeling techniques, this technique is helpful for imaging and analysis. The
interaction between lysosome degradation and FNDs was quantified by analyz­
ing the fluorescence intensity and using ImageJ image analysis. The study will be
expanded upon in the following section. The regulation of cellular trafficking and
transport of FNDs and their spatial overlap can eventually provide insights into the
molecular mechanisms underlying this movement.
8
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:16==
1.8
Image Acquisition and Confocal Microscopy
Acquiring high­quality images is an essential aspect of microscopy. The imaging
technique used laser scanning to capture images of a sample with high resolution
and contrast. The Nikon Ti2 spinning disc (SD) confocal microscope is a powerful
tool for imaging live cells, including THP­1 cells, with high spatial and temporal
resolution. This microscope is equipped with a Yokogawa spinning disc confocal
system, which provides fast and sensitive imaging by rapidly scanning a disc with
thousands of micro­lenses, thereby allowing for the simultaneous acquisition of
multiple z­planes.
An ideal fluorophore for imaging is expected to exhibit high fluorescence bright­
ness, no photodegradation, small size, perfect biocompatibility, and exclusively
attach to or detect the analyte of interest within the cells [40]. Due to physics,
achieving all of these simultaneously is next to impossible. For experimental de­
sign, some important considerations are the cells’ susceptibility to photodegrada­
tion and the molar presence of label targets.
Depending on the magnetification for desired image acquisition, different tech­
niques can be used to give optimized results. Magnefication of 100x for example,
can be used with oil immersion, which helps to reduce spherical aberrations and
further improve image quality. Immersion oil can be placed between the objective
and the coverslip to ensure proper refractive index matching and to minimize light
scattering. This is important for achieving high­resolution images and maintain­
ing the objective’s focus during imaging. The microscope as defined in relation to
this study, can utilize silicone­based and water­immersion high­resoultion images
based
on
the
desired
magnefication
level.
At its core, the spinning disc unit em­
ploys a unique illumination method
that enhances imaging speed and sen­
sitivity while minimizing ”photodam­
age” to biological specimens [40][53].
The system generates multiple focal
planes simultaneously by utilizing a
spinning disk with precisely patterned
apertures, enabling rapid acquisition of
high­resolution, three­dimensional im­
ages.
This technique facilitates real­
time observation of dynamic cellular
processes and provides exquisite de­
tail of subcellular structures with mini­
mal disturbance to living samples. Be­
yond its imaging capabilities, the Nikon Yokogawa Spinning Disc Unit offers ver­
satility and adaptability to diverse experimental setups. Its modular design allows
seamless integration with various microscope platforms, leading to various re­
search applications.
1.9
ImageJ Fiji and DiAna Plugin
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.4: The distance analysis performed in the DiAna plugin. A­C: Distance analysis
measurements performed by DiAna are center­center (A), edge­to­edge (B), and center­
to­edge (C). D: Percentage of colocalizing volumes normalized to the volume of either one
or both objects. E: Contact surface measurements for overlapping and distant objects.
The user­defined maximum distance between objects (blue arrow) sets the extent of the
object contour for which the contact is defined. More details on this image can be found
in the paper by Gilles et al. [50]
10
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:18==
ImageJ is a powerful open­source image processing software that provides a wide
range of tools for image analysis. Fiji was developed as its complement for analyz­
ing bioimages [54]. Modern software engineering, in combination with cultivated
software libraries, creates the backbone to enable rapid prototyping of script plu­
gins as efficiently as possible. The scale at which images can be assessed on
this platform leads to results that far exceed any subjective observation [54]. The
Diana plugin is designed to analyze colocalization between two overlapping ob­
jects of interest [50]. Including filtering, segmentation, and final measurement
measurement, you can obtain reproducible results from calibrated images [50].
The Diana plugin provides a user­friendly for analyzing selected regions of interest
(ROIs) in the image for the degree of colocalization between objects either over­
lapping heterogeneously or, on the contrary, wholly occupying the same space
entirely, i.e., in the case of FNDs being measurably smaller then lysosomes of
THP­1 cells [43]. The plugin calculates the Pearson’s correlation coefficient (PCC)
and the Manders’ overlap coefficient (MOC) for each ROI, commonly used metrics
for quantifying colocalization [50].
Three different segmentation procedures are implemented with the DiAna­ImageJ
plugin [50]. First, global intensity maxima is used to threshold the image. Sec­
ond, spot segmentation is used to determine the borders of each object. Once the
voxels around the local maximum are examined and successively included in the
segmented object, each 3D neighbor voxel is reviewed and included if it’s above
the threshold. Lastly, the final segmentation process is based on a mathematical
morphology data structure representing an image through the hierarchical rela­
tionship of connected components resulting from different thresholds [55]. Also,
based on the MSER technique [56], Diana uses a simplified version of this first
published by Gul­Mohammed et al. [57].
After labeling and segmenting objects in an image, you can obtain results proving
the potential colocalization of two sets of objects; see Figure 1.4. In addition
to spatial overlap percentages, some measurements can be done within another
portion of the plugin, Measures. Here, you can obtain an extensive array of values
that can offer valuable insights into your sample and how the objects of interest
interact. In the broad scheme of things, it can help the biologist understand the
inner workings of major cellular organelles and how their processes unravel [50].
1.10
Quantum Sensing and T1 Relaxometry
In biomedical research, the quest for non­invasive and susceptible techniques to
probe cellular structures has led to the convergence of magnetic resonance imag­
ing (MRI) methodologies and quantum sensing technologies. T1 relaxometry can
measure ROS based on changes in relaxation time through spin noise. Relaxom­
etry takes advantage of the specific crystal lattice effect found in FNDs, the NV
centers. An intense laser pulse is applied to a sample, starting to polarize the NV
centers in the FNDs. The laser pulse is turned off, and the NV centers are given
time to decay stochastically into the mix of states during equilibrium. The polarized
configuration of the FNDs exhibits stronger fluorescence than at the equilibrium
state, and this change in fluorescence is optically visual and used to determine its
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
11
==PAGE:19==
relaxation (T1) rate. This process is faster when there are high levels of magnetic
noise. This can also be alternatively used to measure the time it takes for the
NV centers to go from the dark to light equilibrium state by applying a microwave
pulse. This brings the BV centers into the ­1 state instead of the 0 state. There are
three recorded ways to conduct relaxometry experiments: scanning magnetron,
relaxometry in a stationary bulk diamond and a sample on top, or relaxometry in
moving or stationary FNDs [2].
Relaxometry of living cells is essential for continued research into their complex
systems and processes. High­resolution quantitative detection of events at single­
cell and subcellular levels can help us unravel some remaining mysteries in cel­
lular behavior. In many biological samples, relaxometry can be detected in many
ways. Naturally occurring metallo­species exist in various organisms, including
iron, copper, and manganese [58]. NV­center­based research has been done
into the signals coming from each species, and ROS have already been detected
in cells using similar methods [59]. Recently, this type of research has even found
applications for in situ detection of ROS. FNDs are notably very bio­compatible,
and this, combined with techniques capable of in situ monitoring, offers a valuable
platform for the future of disease research. Owing to their bio­compatibility, FNDs
can easily be carried inside cells to perform relaxometry measurements in more
complex 3D systems. The high spatial resolution they offer allows for detecting
ROS that is produced localized, like in the mitochondria [59][2]. The technique
also offers high temporal resolution, providing more detailed insight into dynamic
biological processes. Reloxmetry measurements can be performed in stationary
and mobile cells, requiring generally less biological material than other standard
methods for detecting metal­interacting species.
Although this technique can be done in living cells, there still must be control
measurements to determine the amount of natural magnetic signal that comes
from the target of interest [38]. This has been done by stimulating and inhibiting
specific processes with known effects, such as the natural generation of ROS. The
trafficking of these events has proven difficult, as the interaction of FNDs changes
as it moves away from its excitation source. Therefore, there is emerging research
into functionalization strategies of FNDs to ensure delivery to areas of interest and
specific locations inside cells. Imaging of living cells through magnetic force, as
Sage et al. demonstrated, using NV centers to demonstrate resonance throughout
magnetotactic bacteria. They could positively correlate to optical images acquired
by the same instrument [59].
T­1 relaxometry is a robust measurement for characterizing cellular compartments
of interest by employing radiofrequency pulses and monitoring the subsequent re­
covery of longitudinal magnetization. This approach extends beyond conventional
anatomical imaging, delving into the microscopic world of cellular organelles and
their intricate behaviors. These measurements can provide valuable insights into
organelles and are greatly influenced by molecular composition. Different tissues
and cellular components exhibit distinct T1 values due to variations in water con­
tent, macromolecular content, and interactions with other molecules [2][59].
12
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:20==
2
Methodology
Outlined is my experimental plan as of the last day in the lab, March 31st, 2024,
which commenced on the project start date of October 9th, 2023. The original
project plan and any deviations can be found in the Appendix.
Figure 2.1
Experimental works were carried out in the Department of Health Technology at
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
13
==PAGE:21==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (Technical University of Denmark), Building 349
Ørestads Plads, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, and image acquisition occurred in Build­
ing 421.
2.1
Thp­1 Cell Cultivation
THP­1 human monocytic line was purchased from the American Type Culture Col­
lection (ATCC) and was grown at 37◦C, 5% CO2, and 100% humidity in Sarstedt
cell culture flasks. Cells were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)
1640 medium modified with two mM L­glutamine, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM sodium
pyruvate, 4500 mg/L glucose, 10% fetal bovine serum (FSB), and 100 U/mL peni­
cillin combined with 100 µg/mL streptomycin. Full recipe is outlined in Appendix
Figures ??, ?? and . Other research confirming the method is outlined by Niora
et al., 2023 [43].
Cells were prepred for passaging at an optimal cell density that exceeded 900,000
cells/mL. Prior to spltting of cells, some passages were well­below the defined
cellular density wished to achieve before splitting of cells. Maintaing proper cell
density contributes positively to healthy cell growth. This was achieved by adding
≈300 mL of supplementary RPMI media in leiu of a cell passaging. The scheduled
days for maintaining the cell culture were defined and adhered to. ¨
2.1.1
Splitting of THP­1 Cells
Cells were maintained at the conditions mentioned above while maintaining a cell
density of at least < 1 million cells/mL. A cell count and optical check were per­
formed every three to four days to ensure proper cell density before splitting the
cells into new Sarstedt Inc T25 Tissue Culture Flasks produced by Fisher Scien­
tific.
Cells passaged to maintain ≈80% confluency across all passages. Flasks were
removed from the incubator and counted in EVE NanEntek Cell Counter by mixing
10 µL cells into 10 µL Tryptan Blue and mixing before analyzing the cell count
needed to calculate the volumes in the subsequent steps.
2.2
Staining of Live THP­1 Cells
Lysosome staining was optimized through control experiments and rounds of test­
ing varying stain concentrations under different time points, including concentra­
tions of 250 nM, 500 nM, and 750 nM of LysoTracker Blue DND­22 (Invitrogen;
Exc/Em 373/422 nM). The starting concentration of LysoTracker was one mM,
and 1 µL was diluted in 9 µL Fluorobrite (FB).
Before staining cells, cells were counted using an EVE NanEntek Cell Counter
and calculated based on a final optimal density of 200,000 cells per well in a Ibidi
µ­slide 8­well chamber. Based on this, cells were transferred into a 15 mL conical
tube, and PBS was added up to approximately 1 mL. The cell pellet was then
resuspended in 100 µL FB per well.
LysoStain was added at 25 µL, 50 µL, 75 µL, and 100 µL based on the listed
concentrations above and incubated at 37◦C, 5% CO2, and 100% humidity for
14
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:22==
up to one hour. Lastly, the achieved final concentration of 500 nM performed
most successfully under SD microscopy; therefore, it was chosen for a round of
control experiments where the concentration stayed the same, but the time varied
(including 30, 45, 60, and 75 min). From there, 60 minutes was chosen as the
most successful time duration at 500 nM.
Analysis of stain performance was first done with a Nikon Ti2 Spinning Disc (SD)
microscope with an objective of 100x oil immersion (CFI Plan Apochromat Lambda
NA 1.45 WD 0.13 mm). The laser was configured using pre­designed protocols,
and images were processed in the excitation color, the z­points, and the time
points. ND acquisition consisted of initially just using a DAPI filter 405nm; image
slices were taken on a z­stack (7um stack with a 0.4um step) over several time
points and, on average, was limited to 7 z­stack steps.
2.3
Cellular Uptake of Nanodiamonds and
Colocalization Analysis
The following protocol had been previously optimized for surface­carboxylated
nanodiamonds with three ppm nitrogen­vacancies, corresponding to 1200 NV−1
per particle, and approximately 120 nm in diameter. First, FNDs were vortexed
at max speed for 10 seconds. Based on the number of samples, 1 µL plus an
additional 0.5 µL per sample was placed in a 1 mL Eppendorf Tube and sealed
with Parafilm. Bath­sonication was performed at 80 kWz for 10 minutes at 40◦C.
During this time, cells were counted and calculated as previously described but
at a desired final density of 500,000 cells/mL into a 96­well plate. Each sample
was washed separately in its conical tube, adding PBS to a final volume of 1 mL,
and centrifugation at 800 rpm for 3 minutes (Thermoscientific Sorvall ST16). After
centrifuging, the cells were allocated at a concentration of 500k cells/mL for 100
µL per well. Plus 1 µL FNDs per well/sample. The suspensions were then placed
in the incubator under the previously mentioned conditions to incubate for up to
25 hours. Samples with the same 500 nM LysoStain, 60­minute incubation period
were chosen for further colocalization analysis, procedures of which are outlined
in this section. Varying time points were tried for the FNDs for a well­defined study,
and to test the research hypothesis. This is elucidated in more detail in Section
3.1.
Here, we define colocalization more broadly to include results that would indicate
a relative spatial overlap but where FNDs could merely adhere to the surface of a
THP­1 cell rather than being inside its lysosomes. The hypothesis for colocaliza­
tion is that there will be a change in spatial overlap between FNDs and lysosomes
over time.
2.4
SD Confocal Image Acquistion
FND and lysosome­labeled THP­1 cells were captured via brightfield and fluores­
cence on a Ti2 Nikon Spinning Disc (SD) microscope. Signals were acquired by
excitation with 405 nm, and the emission was collected at the 360­460 nm range
for the lysosomes, while the FNDs were excited with 488 nm and detected in the
500­530 nm range. The cross­sectional z­scan images on the cells were done
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
15
==PAGE:23==
at changing positions in the Z­axis with a 1­µm step from the top to allow for the
precise localization of FNDs and lysosomes. Sets of images were typically done
in batches of up to 8 samples at a time plus controls.
Images were captured using a 7­step pre­designed protocol, acquiring 16­bit im­
age stacks, and capturing the space in 3D. Lasers were kept at ≈20­30% intensity
in order to maximize the number of times the cells were exposed to the radiation
before losing their viability visibly. While imaging, THP­1 cells were maintained at
37◦C, and 5% CO2. Humidity was unable to be controlled while imaging.
2.5
Image Analysis with ImageJ
Files were saved as ”nd.2” images as 3D representations acquired over a z­stack.
ImageJ, created by Wayne Rasband at the US National Institute of Health [60],
was used for THP­1 cell image analysis. Further guidelines are outlined by Schin­
delin et al. for the use of the open­source platform. as used for THP­1 cell image
analysis and can be [54]. All images were calibrated based on the pixel to µm
ratio, and > 100 images were analyzed, with an average of ≈five cells per image.
Each image was analyzed after drawing ROIs per cell boundary, clearing the back­
ground of all values, and adjusting for auto­contrast levels. These steps were fol­
lowed for each image, including testing contrast levels against thresholding values
as demonstrated in Figure 2.2.
2.5.1
DiAna Plug­in
DiAna [50] can be downloaded for free and found via ImageJ to accompany FIJI
[54]. Note that the subsequent analyses were also done after incorporating the
Bio­Format [61] package into my version.
Two different thresholding values were set: 3800 pixels for the FND­labeled chan­
nel and 5600 pixels for the lysosomes. These pixel values were finally selected
after several rounds of testing the limits of the sizes that could be used. I originally
started with the lowest possible interpretation of the reported FND size of 140 nm
= 0.14 µm [43], and tested finally to the 3800­pixel threshold for measuring FND
objects that were then returning results from DiAna that coincided with biological
relevance, according to the outline of its use defined by the authors of the plug­in
[50]. The same­labeled pixel threshold of 5800 depended on the smallest possi­
ble size I could set for the plug­in to distinguish visible FNDs. In addition, this was
kept consistent across all samples to provide reproducibility to all results. This
was done with the size analysis of FNDs and lysosomes over time, seen in Figure
2.4.
Once the threshold was input, I clicked ”Valide” to filter the image and then ”Seg­
ment.” This is demonstrated in Figure 2.2. Following segmentation, I ”Initialized”
followed by ”Analyze,” as seen in Figure 2.3 to measure objects just filtered in the
previous step for colocalization results. Labeled and segmented images (slice 3
or 4) from the center of the average 7­step, 16­bit image stack2D plane) were
used to measure the overlapping volume and distances between the FNDs and
lysosomes. The data was collected and processed in Excel, and statistical anal­
yses were performed on the results (paired t­test). Center­center distances were
16
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.2: ImageJ / Fiji analysis software. DiAna plug­in I: The BF image of the single­
cell ROI is on the bottom right. A threshold was set (top left), generating two new filtered
images based on their channel (top right). This filter then excludes anything smaller than
the minimum object size and anything larger than the maximum object size. The threshold
was chosen based on literature for the reported size of THP­1 cells and the same FNDs
[50][43].
plotted as histograms; colocalization results given by DiAna as overlapping vol­
umes normalized to percentages, as boxplots; FND objects per measured cell
over time; and size and FNDs and lysosomes plotted over hours.
FND and Lysosome Size Determination
Figure 2.4: After labeling and segmentation in DiAna, I performed the distance analysis
under ”Measures.” The Feret diameter value was used in all distance determinations.
Taken as the Feret diameter value.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: DiAna plug­in II: No filter type is used during depicted steps because ROIs are
drawn, backgrounds are cleared, and images deconvoluted for each analysis performed
by the plug­in in this report [50]. This image was compiled together in BioRender.
This step included the same thresholding and segmentation as the previous sec­
tion, but I only now used the ”measure” function with DiAna. Details are seen in
Figure 2.4. Here, we get a table that includes the Feret diameter; this measure­
ment was used for the size determination previously described by other research
[62][63]. Feret diameters are measurements independent of orientation. There­
fore, it felt the most appropriate determination of size in a 3D image of nearly
spherical lysosomes and FNDs with a more irregular shape [38][64]. In addition,
the size determination for each hour time point was from combined data with the
same parameters of 500 nM LysoStain for 60 minutes at 37◦C and with varying
sample sizes across more than one experiment.
2.6
T­1 Measurements
Cells were prepped for T­1 measurements in the same way that they were prepped
for imaging in the SD microscope. They were seeded at a concentration of 500,000
cells/mL for 100 µL per well in a 96­well plate. FNDs were incubated with THP­
1 cells for 4 hours at 37◦C, 5% CO2, and 100% humidity.
Each with varying
LysoStain concentrations of 250, 500, 750, and 1000 µM. Cells were put into 35
mm MatTek dishes after incubation time had been achieved for both FNDs and
lysome­staining, followed by washing with PBS.
The T1 measurements were carried out on a home­built microscope. The free
electron spin of free radicals served as a source of magnetic noise due to the NV
centers of the FNDs. NV centers were pumped to their ms = 0 state of the ground
18
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:26==
state using a 532 nm laser pulse. The NV centers can relax between laser pulses
during a variable dark time τ. During this stage, NV centers return to the ”dark
times” between m s = 0 and m s = ±1. Photoluminescence signals were analyzed
based on the number of NV centers that stay relaxed or excited. The T1 relaxation
curve was fitted with a single/stretch­exponential function. Plotting the dark times
against the fluorescence intensity recorded courtesy of Arthur Dervillez results in
curves as shown in Figure 3.11.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
19
==PAGE:27==
3
Results
3.1
LysoStain Optimization
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.1: (b) LysoStain concentration of 500 nm for 60 min. (d) LysoStain 17.85 μM for
75 min.
Before starting the colocalization protocol, the concentration of LysoStain had to
be optimized. I started with a 500 nM concentration. Fluorescence microscopy
was used to assess the effect of varying LysoStain concentrations (250nM, 500nM,
and 750nM) for the lysosomal staining of live cells. Images were acquired and an­
alyzed to evaluate the degree of lysosome staining and assess the suitability of
each concentration for robust visualization. Visual inspection of the cells observed
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.2: (b) LysoStain concentration of 750 nm for 60 min. (d) LysoStain 1000 nm for
60 min.
during microscopy and the subsequently acquired images revealed noticeable
differences in lysosome staining intensity across the tested concentrations. At
250nM, lysosome staining appeared relatively weak, with fewer discernible lyso­
somal structures and lower overall fluorescence intensity than at higher concen­
trations. Oppositely, at 750nM, lysosome staining exhibited signs of saturation,
characterized by excessive fluorescence signal and potential signal bleaching.
Signal bleaching during analysis showed that the signal was so bright from 750
nM that an entire half of the cell would be regarded as one object. This can be
seen in A.2.
20
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:28==
3.2
FND Uptake over Time
Figure 3.3
For this, >200 cells were analyzed individually for the number of FND objects
present, either phagocytosed or adhering to the cell surface. All data points were
included in the absence of FNDs. The results were tested with the DiAna plug­in
on all images composed of the 7­step stack and are displayed in the final table in
pixels. Before obtaining a final table, from the apparent spatial overlap between
lysosomes and FNDs, I received a ”Log” result that counted the number of objects
in from the FND­ and lysosome­labeled objects.
It was found that the average of FNDs in cells increased over time, as each sample
was measured as a single cell, and only FNDs inside of or adhering to a single
cell were counted as objects measured. In agreeance with what has been found
from previously published works by Niora et al. [43], there was an increase from
an average of 4.6 FNDs per cell at three h to an average of 44.25 FNDs per cell
at 26h. There was a marked effect of time and the number of FNDs located at or
near labeled lysosomes.
3.3
Colocalization of FNDs and Lysosomes
Figures 3.4 ­ 3.9 are the results compiled from the DiAna ImageJ plug­in and input
into Excel. Image A is the FND­labelled, and Image B represents the lysosome­
labelled image. The AB is an overlap measurement determined by the software as
a calculation based on the total area volume of overlap divided by the total area
of each signal in images A and B. This is done based on the methods outlined
in Section 2.6 in previous sections with a graphic from the plug­in authors that
gives this concept more nuance in figure 1.4. I performed a paired t­test on the
colocalization results to see if there was a significant difference in the observed
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
21
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.4: 3H FND, 500nM LysoStain result. (d) merged.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.5: 5H FND, 500 nM LysoStain result. (d) merged.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.6: 6H FND, 500nM LysoStain result. (d) merged.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.7: 25H FND, 500 nM LysoStain. (d) merged.
22
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:30==
spatial overlap between FNDs and lysosomes (p­value was < 0.06).
From the results seen in Figures 3.7 and 3.8, we see the highest degree of spatial
overlap in the 5h (3.7f) and the 25h (3.8d) time points, with the lowest degree of
spatial overlap, or instance of colocalization, in the 6h and 8h time points. When
compared to the center­center distance frequency, I was able to determine that
the 25h FNDs had the highest degree of colocalization. While the results reflected
this, also as an average of the total number of FNDs detected per cell, these
results are not entirely reflective of the entire cell population.
In some cases, cells were present under brightfield, yet their fluorescence under
the other two channels was not bright enough to detect the number of objects
within the cell. These results are not included in the tables below since there are
no colocalization results when the signal is not bright enough to give any certainty
on object measurements. For example, the cell is again clearly visible under BF
and, in some cases, located near FNDs. Still, the lysosomes are not stained bright
enough (more frequently occurring as a one­off event when analyzing an entire
sample set).
The statistical analysis of these results from the colocalization tables provided
by the DiAana plug­in showed that the low p­value rejected the null hypothesis.
Therefore, I could say there is a significant effect on spatial overlap between FNDs
and lysosomes in relation to time. This is in good agreeance with the center­center
distances observed for the 25h time point, in which the lysosomes and FNDs
are closer together. The longer the FNDs were incubated in the cells, the more
time they had to engulf FNDs. Yet, this phenomenon is also interesting because
there are even more FNDs on average over time, suggesting that something is
happening between the interaction in the peripheral space between the cells and
FNDs in suspension.
The overall volume shared between FNDs and lysosomes was depicted in the
graphs, showing their spatial distribution that coincided with what was clearly vis­
ible during imaging. When looking at the degree of overlap between the FNDs
and the lysosomes at the 4h time point, almost the entire spatial overlap volume
from the FNDs is shown. On average, this suggests a complete degree of spatial
association for this time point. The same can be said regarding FNDs occupying
more space, except for in the time points from >8h where there is a clear larger
volume from FNDs. However, there is a high margin of error is present in all the
samples from the colocalization volumes.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
23
==PAGE:31==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 3.8: In the following description, n equals the number of total cells imaged and
their corresponding time point. Note that some images analyzed contained more then one
cell. Cocalization I: 3h FNDs n > 80, 19 cells; 4h n < 30, 5 cells; 5h n > 60, 6 cells; 6h n >
70, 6 cells. Here, n represents the number of objects measured. (a), (c), (e), and (g) are
distance measurements between the centers of FNDs and lysosomes. These neighbor­
ing objects are used for spatial distribution analysis to assess the correlating parameters
(colocalization percentages) from the lysosomes and FNDs object pair. b), (d), (f), and
(h) is the percentage of the co­localizing volumes for each object pair (lysosome + FND).
The co­localizing volumes are a ratio between the volume measured of the overlap and
the volume of the measured object.
24
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3.9: Colocalization II: 8h FNDs n = 29, 7 cells; 25h n > 120, 22 cells; and 26h n =
10, 2 cells. (a), (c) and (e) are distance measurements between the centers of lysosomes
and FNDs. These neighboring objects are used for spatial distribution analysis. The
correlating parameters (colocalization percentages) from the lysosomes and FNDs object
pair can be assessed. b), (d), (f), and (h) is the percentage of the co­localizing volumes
for each object pair (lysosome + FND). The co­localizing volumes are a ratio between the
volume measured of the overlap and the volume of the measured object.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
25
==PAGE:33==
3.3.1
T test for statistical analysis
T­test results are gathered in the supplementary material. The method chosen
was a paired two (dependent) t­test to determine if there was any significance or
relationship between time and FND + lysosome colocalization results. This test
was chosen due to the two factors being tested (lysosomal and FND colocalization
results provided by DiAna) being related to one another in terms of apparent spa­
tial closeness, as again, the results demonstrated in terms of colocalization are
only a result of positive results as negative results will not generate any data on
spatial overlap volumes [50]. To reiterate, the measurements from colocalization
are only a result of pixels that have been measured to overlap across channels,
thereby generating measurable volumes. Contrarily in terms of diameter mea­
surements, the data was acquired and compiled, regardless of positive colocal­
ization event. This independent variable only added to the robustness of overall
colocalization results.
3.4
FND and Lysosomal Feret Diameters
These measurements were taken using the same DiAna plug­in. I measured the
size of the objects by taking the Feret value provided in the table after initializing
and analyzing the lysosomes and FNDs within the selected cell. The Feret value
measures the size of an object along two specified directions, typically horizontally
and vertically [65]. Then, the Feret diameter is calculated as the distance between
the two parallel planes, restricting the object perpendicular to that direction [65].
In other words, it measures the widest point of an irregularly shaped object, thus
helping to describe the overall size or volume of an object in an image. The Feret
diameter was used to measure the center­center distance frequencies in Figures
3.8 and 3.9 and the graph in Figure 3.7. The equation used for this measurement,
taken by DiAna, is below. Again, since the size measurements for lysosomes and
FNDs were taken regardless of their colocalization result, there was a large data
set comprised of these measurements to draw a standard deviation.
The results in Figure 3.10 are in good comparison with the percentage of colo­
calization in Figures 3.8 and 3.9. Specifically, in Figure 3.8 (b), we see that the
overlap rate differs, and the medians are lying far apart. This aligns with what
we see in the results in Figure 3.10, where the respective sizes of lysosomes
and FNDs are at their most significant difference of all the time points. Three h
results had the most prominent peak distribution 0.34 µm apart. As incubation
time increased, there was a smaller spread between the lysosomes and FNDs,
indicating a more significant degree of successful colocalization at 25h and 26h.
F = P
π
(3.1)
In this case, where we are analyzing a projection of a 3D image on a 2D plane,
this diameter is defined as the distance between two parallel tangential lines rather
than planes [66].
26
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.10: Feret diameter [65] measured for each found object within a single cell. The
first time point of 3H showed lysosomes at their largest size, while over time, the average
size decreased until a plateau occurred around 0.050 µm. Interestingly, the FNDs followed
a similar plateau inttern between 5h and 26h. Since these measurements are a function of
the entire Feret diameter [65], or the perimeter of two overlapping objects is counted. This
means that in some cases, there could be an instance wherein a lysosome has completely
engulfed an FND; therefore, only the lysosome is being virtually measured.
3.5
T­1 Measurements
T­1 measurements were carried out on a homebuilt microscope at only one FND
time point of 4 hours and LysoStain of 500nm for 60 min. The results seen in Fig­
ure 3.11 are found in the following table. FNDs were 120 nm in size with an excita­
tion of ≈560 nm and emission of ≈680 nm. The T1 measurements were carried
out on a home­built microscope. The free electron spin of free radicals served as
a source of magnetic noise due to the NV centers of the FNDs. NV centers were
pumped to their ms = 0 state of the ground state using a 532 nm laser pulse. Sum­
marized in more detail in previous sections, it’s worth reminding the reader again
that the T1 relaxation curve was fitted with a single/stretch­exponential function.
T1
320.7 us +/­ 170.6
β
0.82 +/­ 0.34
A
1.13 +/­ 0.41
B
28.9 +/­ 0.3
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
27
==PAGE:35==
A ∗exp(−x
T1
β
) + B
(3.2)
T1 is the longitudinal relaxation time, or the average time it takes for the nuclear
magnetization to return to equilibrium. Beta governs the shape of the decay curve.
Parameter A scales the amplitude of the exponential decay and determines how
rapidly the signal decays at its maximum. The number of spins influences this pa­
rameter during the relaxation process. Parameter B is a constant offset or baseline
in the signal.
It is difficult to determine if the results here indicate a relatively short T1 relaxation
time due to this measurement’s seemingly large margin of error. This suggests
that FNDs are rapidly taken up by the cells, and this rapid uptake could indicate
favorable interactions between the FNDs and the cellular environment. However,
there is a considerable uncertainty of the T1 value.
Since the degree of uncertainty is so large, it is challenging to say the results of
this sample with absolute certainty. If there was a low T1 value, I could generally
associate it with a higher concentration of ROS in the cell [67]. In comparison, a
significant increase in T1 values indicates a lower concentration of ROS in a cell.
One would assume that there is some relationship between the trafficking and
processing of FNDs within a cell, and knowing the stress they are under during this
process can help determine their inclusivity in the biomedical application space.
Figure 3.11: The curve and fit done was courtesy of Arthur Dervillez in MatLab from
results of THP­1 cells incubated with FNDs for 4h and a concentration of 750 nM LysoStain
for one hour.
28
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:36==
4
Discussion
4.1
LysoStain Optimization
Before studying the uptake of FNDs
in the lysosomes of THP­1 cells and
determining the best concentrations
of lysosome stain to visualize the or­
ganelles of the tested LysoStain con­
centrations, the 500 nM provided the
best results for the most clearly la­
beled lysosomes. I tested over many
rounds to find the most clearly labeled
organelles, including 1000 nM [68] and
up to 17850 nM. The results of the lat­
ter are seen and explained in the Ap­
pendix.
Lysosomes are broadly located through­
out the cytoplasm. Here, we see their
dispersion was demonstrated best by
smaller outlines of lysosomes about what could be considered an accurate bio­
logical context [50][68].
Here, I want to note that in the future, a more thorough analysis should be done
into the linear detection range of the system. The images acquired were cali­
brated, and I set the scale to the known measurements of FNDs and lysosomes;
however, I did not plot the measured intensities of the signals generated from the
labeled FNDs and lysosomes. This would have ideally shown a linear relation­
ship over the range of concentrations tested. The constant slope of the plot would
have verified the detection range after testing additional images at concentrations
within the plotted range. I confirmed that the relationship remained linear. This
step should be included before further colocalization studies for future research
and experimental design.
4.2
FNDs Over Time
During the analysis of >100 samples, each cell with a count of FNDs was logged
and compiled into the results shown in Figure 3.3. This raises an important ques­
tion about how long lysosomes take to phagocytose their targets entirely. Re­
cently, studies have been done to fully understand the role of phagolysosomes ­
the state wherein a lysosome has already carried out phagocytosis. Time­lapse
studies have revealed that the export of degraded phagolysosomal content is one
of the critical final steps in the action of this organelle. The phagolysosome be­
gins tubulation and vesicle release within an hour of cargo membrane breakdown.
Ultimately, this means that these processes happen pretty quickly in real time.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
29
==PAGE:37==
Studying the uptake of FNDs over time has verified the findings of Noira et al. and
their demonstration that a longer incubation time of FNDs would lead to a higher
amount within the cell.
In my experiments, I noticed a few takeaways based on the visual analysis done
during image acquisition. Firstly, when a sample was incubated for less time,
the FNDs were dispersed more evenly. This led to less background signal when
assessed for fluorescence, which meant that the FNDs observed in or near the
cells were more easily distinguished. Compared to the 25h incubation time with
FNDs, where you could see that the nanoparticles had started to aggregate and
clump together. Forming large ”islands” of extreme fluorescence intensity made
other signals appear weaker than they may have been. They were not excluding
the other alternative, which was that the signals from the lysosomes could have
just been inherently weak.
4.3
Temporal Analysis of FNDs and Lysosomes
The center­center distances are com­
puted based on classical Euclidean
distances.
Regarding Sections 3.2
through 3.4,
we can see that the
longer the samples were incubated
with FNDs, the more likely they were
to be in or near the target organelle. It
is important to note here that Gilles et
al. reference testing several different
values for the parameters and validate
the segmentation by visually inspect­
ing the segmentation result [50]. This
means one should be able to visually
assess if the result aligns with reality. I
previously mentioned that in the quest
to determine my results, I changed the
parameters for the segmentation pro­
cedure. When I input the original sizes based on the exact documented size of
lysosomes being approximately 1 µm and FNDs being 0.12 µm, the segmented
images no longer showed visually apparent objects. Perhaps this could be partly
due to the limitations of the image acquisition. This could be the reason for calcu­
lating the optical limits of the resolution of the acquisition. The limits of the optical
resolution are 2.805 pixels for the 561 nm (FND) channel and 2.025 pixels for
the 405 nm (lysosome) channel. When you take their sizes above and convert
them into pixels, the size of the FNDs in pixels (1.09) is smaller than the theo­
retical limit of the image acquisition. This would suggest why it proved difficult to
attain results when the objects were filtered and segmented using smaller values.
Through multiple attempts at varying threshold limits, I found the set of limits that
provided results confirming what was visually observable.
After the segmentation procedure, which was the best for identifying lysosomes
and FNDs in THP­1 cells, I began compiling the results depicted in the previous
30
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:38==
sections. Here, I will discuss the results of each time point in more detail and how
they correlate to existing research. The first thing to note is that in my instance,
the sizes of FNDs closely followed previous research ranging from approximately
0.05 µm to 0.15 µm [43]. While the early incubated samples, namely three h,
diverged from the last report on lysosomal size at over 2 µm. There are several
reasons why lysosomes are so large at this point, and most of those reasons are
merely theories, as I would have liked to run similar experiments in the future.
That being said, some hypotheses include an increase in metabolic activity [69],
cellular stress [70], cell age [71], or nutrient availability. One or a combination of
the reasons could affect the size difference.
In the case of cell age, I theorize that this could be one of the more likely scenar­
ios. While the samples were all grown and incubated under the same conditions,
not every experiment was done with the same passage. For the third hour time­
point time, I ran this experiment at a higher passage number (P22) than the other
results. This is one of my highest passage numbers and positive colocalization
results. Aging cell culture has been documented to affect the cellular redox state,
coupling efficiency, and transcription levels [72]. Srut et al. showed a distinct
difference between young and old cells in Zebrafish cells. They also discuss the
need for a separate study on the effect of metabolic capacity when analyzing cells
from different passage numbers. Their research showed that a higher passage
number did elevate metabolic capacity and increased cellular DNA damage [72].
There are generally several hundred lysosomes within a single cell, but upon nu­
trient starvation, that number can be as low as < 50 per cell. My experimental work
did not include a count of lysosomes per cell. As shown in Figure 3.10, the size of
our measured lysosomal objects was between < 0.05 µm and 0.2 µm. Typically,
they are uniform in size between 0.1 µm and 0.5 µm, correlating well with what is
revealed in Figure 3.10. When cells are under starvation or extreme stress, there
can be an increase in lysosomal size of up to 1.5 µm due to membrane fusion
[73]. In addition to morphology changes due to cell starvation, lysosomes change
their distribution, moving to the perinuclear region of a cell or closer to the nu­
cleus [73]. It would be interesting to investigate the effect of passage number and
lysosomal distribution throughout the cell for future studies. Understanding the
complexity of THP­1 cells and their interaction with their environment and each
other will enhance colocalization studies in the future.
FNDs are typically irregularly shaped structures with either cuboidal, flat, or block­
like 3D shapes. There are better­documented cases of the visualization of these
nanoparticles wherein they describe the importance of the size of FNDs. Wilson
et al. describe that the particle size of FNDs is critical for use in biological ap­
plications because the brightness of the fluorescent signal strongly depends on
the particle size. In this study, I used 120 nm sized FNDs, which are noted as
having a notably brighter signal than FNDs that are 10 nm, for example, [74]. This
is due to the distribution of color or NV centers throughout the diamond lattice.
The size of FNDs also critically influences the particles’ interaction with biologi­
cal systems like THP­1 cells. This has been shown for nanoparticles in general
but also for FNDs [74]. The colloidal stability of FNDs is of note here, as aggre­
gates and their adsorption into biological systems are processes that continue to
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
31
==PAGE:39==
be investigated to date. In deionized water, FNDs that are not bioconjugated are
generally colloidally stable due to their stabilized surface charge, which is a solid
electrostatic mechanism for particle­particle repulsion. Biological media contains
typically high concentrations of ions, which reduces the Debye screening length,
ultimately weakening the repulsion between particles and leading to their instabil­
ity. The presence of biomolecules like amino acids and proteins can become at­
tached to the particle surface and form a protein corona ­ leading to an enhanced
stabilization of the colloids in solution. Researchers demonstrated the colloidal
properties of FNDs in cell culture media, namely DMEM. They showed that by
pre­incubation of the particles in FBS, FNDs form a stabilizing protein corona.
The size of the FNDs for this study had observed measures between < 0.05 and
0.105 µm or 50 and 105 nm (Figure 3.10) and was incubated with FB for imag­
ing and designed to enhance the signal­to­noise ratio of fluorophores without the
background fluorescence from phenol red [75].
The size of FNDs has also been shown to affect protein secondary structure and,
therefore, the function of said proteins, specifically on lysosomes where the FNDs
were below 0.05 µm or 50 nm in size [74]. The smaller the reported FND size, the
higher the instances of lysosomal loss of function and degradation. Lysosomes
adsorbed to FNDs larger than 0.1 µm retain their functional structure [64].
4.4
Colocalization Analysis Using DiAna
Colocalization was determined by detecting overlapping objects and measuring
colocalizing volumes for each pair of objects. The calculation is based on the pix­
els of the corresponding objects labeled in the image or the two targets of interest.
In the program, object 1 (Image A) is labeled
with value 1, and object 2 (Image B) is labeled
with value 2. The number of voxels with a value
of 3 will correspond to the number of colocal­
ized voxels [50]. These values help the soft­
ware to determine the relative overlap between
two labeled volumes, lysosomes, and FNDs in
this case. Determining pixel values for each
channel also helps provide the software with
guidelines on where to go in the same biolog­
ical 3D image. It gives a relatively detailed in­
sight into the distance between objects and rel­
ative size. It provides a time­based analysis of
its function over the change in said co­occurrence. These clues into the traffick­
ing of FNDs in and around the cells are a valuable tool in helping to confirm the
potential for future studies.
4.4.1
Image pre­processing
These operations include ROI selection, cropping, noise reduction, deconvolution,
and normalization. Pre­processing can improve the quality of the image data and
make it easier for the DiAna model to extract functional attributes and data from the
images. ROI manager combined with built­in Fiji deconvolution [54] made using
a filter within the DiAna plug­in obsolete, at least judging based on early results
32
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:40==
from image analysis protocols. Initial rounds of thresholding protocols based on
previous work had a maximum threshold set ≤20,000 pixels.
Not previously mentioned in the report thus far, due to the extreme unreliability of
results, The original filter I thought to use, based on previous experiments, was a
Gaussian filter. A Gaussian filter is a linear filter for smoothing images and reduc­
ing noise. It convolves with a Gaussian kernel, a 2D bell­shaped curve. The shape
of the Gaussian kernel determines the extent of smoothing applied to the image.
In simple terms, it gives more weight to pixels closer to the center of the kernel,
gradually decreasing the weight as you move away from the center. The ”center
of the kernel” method proved to discredit reliable signals that were otherwise con­
sidered a successful colocalization [50]. During image acquisition, subsequent
analysis in Fiji, and results given by DiAna, signals included visual observations
of an unmistakable fluorescent signal from both channels. Even occurring at the
same apparent 3D spatial volume. These results can only be positive for lyso­
some ”objects” and FND ”objects.” This study’s use of this terminology is based
on the (objects) results provided by thresholding/labeling followed by segmenta­
tion procedures wherein the two
The protocol was slightly altered when identifying samples with positive results.
The use of a Gaussian filter created completely blank images. This happened
perhaps due to the size of the lysosomes and FNDs and the relationship between
µm and pixels (9.0645 pixels per µm). Therefore, the data had to be adjusted
from the colocalization tables defined by the DiAna plug­in. Pixels to µm is one
pxl / 9.06452. From this conversion, we can accurately measure the size of our
targets of interest. Based on previous literature and consistent findings, I chose a
threshold of 3800 for the FNDs and 5600 for the lysosomes—the lower threshold
of 3 px that I kept the same for both.
Initially, I tested several thresholds to determine the software limit for positively
identifying visible signals. In some cases where the lysosome stain was too satu­
rated, you could get an entire portion of the cell (not the smaller expected signals
that would be nearing the edges of the cell) being registered as a single object.
When a large portion of the cell was registered as a single object, there were false
positive results of large FNDs in a single, abnormally large lysosome. This finding
can be mostly excluded due to size inaccuracies.
4.4.2
The Relationship Between Pixels and Real Space
Image analysis remains a point of contention for colocalization studies. In optical
microscopy, the analysis of images is plagued with inconsistency. The complex­
ity of some analysis tools makes it difficult to implement the appropriate method
and reflects that most colocalization scenarios demand customized approaches.
Not all ”all­around” analysis tools fit all circumstances as cells contain a plethora
of structures, all with different morphologies, including linear elements of the cy­
toskeleton, punctate and isotropic compartments such as vesicles, endosomes,
or vacuoles, all the way to complex anisotropic forms such as Golgi stacks and the
endoplasmic reticulum [53]. In this case, isotropic means these elements operate
independently of direction, whereas anisotropic elements depend on direction.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
33
==PAGE:41==
From this analysis, the limits of resolution in optical microscopy imply an un­
certainty of the physical dimensions and location of small objects in the two­
dimensional and even more in three­dimensional space. In many ways, Pixels
define the word image; thus, the critical relationship between the way images are
acquired and processed requires some precautions to ensure the reliability and
reproducibility of results. Pixels imply some precautions in image acquisition. To
resolve two points and avoid over­ or under­sampling, the pixel size should equal
the lateral resolution limit between the two points divided by two according to the
Nyquist sampling theorem [53]. Overlay images help to visualize estimates of
colocalization events in a two­dimensional space; however, they don’t reflect the
three­dimensional nature of the biological probe nor the limited resolution along
the Z­axis [50].
4.4.3
Quantification of Cellular Uptake of FNDs in Lysosomes
The colocalization results seen in Figures 3.3­3.6 are the chosen images from
each time point, while additional photos, including some results directly from the
colocalization, are found in the Appendix. DiAna [50] provided data on the colo­
calized objects, with varied observations over time that aligned with previous re­
search [43]. Single­cell spatial analysis, lysosome and FND measurements, and
colocalization analysis between the two­labeled channels confirm with relative
certainty that FNDs and lysosomes can be colocalized. There were varied results
in FND and lysosome colocalization over time, as hypothesized in my research
question. The change in results had no apparent adverse effect on cell integrity,
especially when considering the incubation time of FNDs of over 24h, where the
cells, in many cases, were still imagable with contact lysosomes and clear cellular
definition.
The 3h time point showed different results, re­
flected in Figures 3.8 (a) and (b), compared
to the average spatial volume occupied by the
more giant lysosomes, which showed a dis­
tribution that reflected as much.
The higher
percentage of lysosome volume compared to
FND volume indicates that lysosomes within
the cell occupy more space and that the FNDs
are found within the three­hour time point to
a significant extent.
At the same time, the
center­center distance frequencies are pretty
substantial compared to the longer incubation
time points. This could suggest more dynamic
movement or trafficking within the cell, making them more dispersed. In other
words, some FNDs are located closer to lysosomes while others are further away.
This dynamic movement could result from FNDs undergoing processes like en­
docytosis or exocytosis ­ so they would be found at varying distances [46].
Figures 3.8 (c) and (d) show a larger colocalizing volume from the FNDs than from
the lysosomes. Depicted above is one of the positive colocalization events, where
we can see more clearly the spatial overlap between the FNDs and lysosomes.
34
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:42==
In the zoomed­in image above, red represents the FNDs, blue represents the
lysosomes and light blue represents the AB volume or the volume of lysosomes
and FNDs (scale bar of 1 µm). This composite image is a good representation
of quantified results where there were 100% spatial overlap volumes from FNDs
compared to lysosomes. It results from positive colocalization events, as defined
by this paper, and more can be said about where, in the process, the FND is
being ”digested.” I found an increase in colocalization events over time and that
the FNDs are actively progressing in their association with lysosomes over more
extended incubation periods. I observed a minor center­center distribution at the
4h time point as well, and this suggests that, on average, the distance between
the FNDs and lysosomes has decreased since the initial time point of 3h. I was
implying that over time, there is an increased propensity for FNDs to associate
with lysosomes. It is worth mentioning that since the FNDs are taking up a more
significant portion of the colocalizing volume, we imagine that the cell has a more
substantial number of FNDs present. Or that an aggregate of FNDs is attached
to the cell’s surface, providing an intense fluorescent signal. Aggregates were
typically visually observable during image acquisition and avoidable when cells
were seeded into imaging wells at accurate densities and can be seen in Figure
4.1.
In the results shown in Figures 3.8 (e) and (d), the FNDs occupy approximately
100% of the colocalization volume. This indicates a fully overlapped volume from
the FNDs, meaning that they are inside the lysosomes. Similarly to the four h
samples, the 5h showed positive colocalization results.
To the right, we see an image from the 25­h incubation point, where lysosomes
are shown in blue and FNDs in red. The light pink color in the center of the image
depicts the spatial overlap or, according to the data tables given by DiAna, the AB
volume. To refresh, all photos were processed with FNDs labeled Image A and
lysosomes labeled Image B. The calculations for determining the volume of both
FNDs and lysosomes are shown below in equations 4.1 and 4.2.
Coloc from A = ABvolume ∗100
Avolume
(4.1)
Coloc from AB =
ABvolume ∗100
Avolume + Bvolume
(4.2)
This helps to visualize the spatial relationship between the organelles and the
FNDs. In the example shown above, we can see that the FND is almost entirely
located inside the lysosome, with a bare FND hovering on the outside of it. When
looking at the center­center distance frequencies of the 25h samples (Figure 3.9
(c) and (d)), there was a minimal distance between the two. When including the
error bar in the colocalization percentage, you can see that the FNDs occupy
almost 100% of the total overlap volume. The 25h results showed a high colo­
calization between lysosome­labeled THP­1 cells and FNDs. The closeness in
center­center distances between the two can be considered an additional verifi­
cation of results since several different parameters were tested. When decrypting
the colocalization result, referring back to Figure 1.4 can help to recall the real­
world spatial relevance [50].
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
35
==PAGE:43==
The best colocalization results were obtained from the 5h and 25h time points.
This is due to their apparent spatial overlap and minimum center­center distance
frequencies. Specifically, their center­center distance frequencies fell between
0.01 and 0.33 µm. I depict this overlap in the figures in this section, although they
are not to scale and merely a simple visualization of the results in Section 3.3. In
these two cases, these samples had a high correlation and co­occurrence.
The 5h time point colocalization percentages show that the FNDs occupied most
of the total overlap volume, seen in Figure 3.5. This would indicate that the lyso­
somes almost entirely encapsulated the FNDs. This was also the case for the
4h time point in Figures 3.8 (c) and (d). Interestingly, the 6h and 8h FNDs re­
sults show the most considerable center­center distance and the most significant
difference in overlapping volumes or colocalization. This could be partly due to
THP­1 cells’ morphological changes expected to undergo during culturing [43].
These morphological changes include spontaneous differentiation into more ma­
ture phenotypes, resulting in heterogeneous monocyte populations. This sponta­
neous cell differentiation in THP­1 monocytes can happen without external stimuli
and before FND exposure. Previous studies with other non­phagocytotic cell lines
state, ”During cell mitosis, the daughter cells share the internalized FNDs of the
parent cells until no FNDs are observed in the cells several generations later.” [43]
[76] [77] This varying level of FND uptake and internalization at the earlier time
points of 6 and 8 h FND incubation demonstrates the sometimes uneven assumed
phagocytic capacity of THP­1 cells.
4.4.4
A Review of Colocalization Techniques
A visual and quantifiable assessment of how lysosomes, critical to cell functionality
and, by extension, our immune system, can provide invaluable aids in discover­
ing emerging advancements in developing cancer therapies. Hu et al. outline a
potential platform for induced Lysomal cell death (LCD), where the mechanism
becomes automated after lysosomal compartments are compromised, leading to
a chain reaction that can trigger nearby cells. The apparent sensitivity of the lim­
ited lysosomal membranes in cancer cells has the potential for future therapeutic
research [78].
For this study, we defined colocalization results from the measurements done
by the DiAna plug­in as positive when (a) FNDs were detected overlapping with
lysosomes in the same measured space across two channels and (b) the co­
occurrence of objects was biologically valid. In this case, the results for positive
colocalization events are described, where we can assume the spatial overlap of
lysosomes and FNDs based on size distribution and normalized overlap volumes.
Biological validity is broadly defined for this experiment as living, biological objects
that were stained and therefore limited to quantifiable and relative known size dis­
tribution. I researched the sizes of THP­1 cells and their lysosomes through liter­
ature and independent, practical experimentation. While this is the working defi­
nition I utilize to say whether results are ”good” or not, other studies have different
definitions based on their experimental designs and needs [48][79]. Defining your
understanding of colocalization based on known, documented object sizes and
reproducible image acquisition and processing techniques is critical for any good
36
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:44==
initial step in understanding colocalization results [54].
I saw a co­occurrence of FNDs and lysosomes in which there was apparent over­
lap, but they were not distributed proportionately. So, while there was a high de­
gree of overlap, the overlapping volume from the two objects was not proportional.
Whenever these images are obtained and then moved to the subsequent image
analysis, one can observe that the intermediate color given by ImageJ and DiAna
is highly dependent on the two fluorescent channels of similar intensity. If one
channel has an increased intensity over the other, it can lead to results skewed
from the actual spatial relevance [48].
Within the DiAna ImageJ plug­in, there is a predefined Pearson’s coefficient (PC)
test that is modeled off of a method previously defined by Costes et al. [50] [79].
They confronted the PC of an image pair with correlation coefficients obtained
between one channel (1) and randomized images of the other channel (2). To
randomize said images, they shuffled pixel blocks of channel 2 in a randomized
manner and measured the PC following each round. After randomization, they
obtained a Gaussian distribution of the PC. They found that the PC obtained for
the image pair would be statistically significant if it is not included in the area of
the Gaussian curve.
With the DiAna plug­in, Gilles et al. use a similar method from a spatial statistical
technique that can be applied to object­based colocalization [80] [50]. I will not
discuss much of the Manders coefficient, another range used for colocalization
analyses [49]. They are mathematically similar enough, and DiAna doesn’t include
them in her measurements [50]. In the previous section, I discussed the possible
effects morphology and cell differentiation have on the results of FND uptake and
colocalization in lysosomes. It is important to note, however, that research shows
regardless of the phenotype of THP­1 cells, there is an observable increase in
FND uptake over time. Their un­polarized, differentiated (macrophages) had an
enhanced ability for phagocytosis.
An enhanced capacity for phagocytosis could lead to a higher uptake of FNDs
due to increased metabolic activity, which could have either a positive or negative
long­term effect on cells. Either their daughter cells could pass down traits that
make them even more FND­compatible [43], or their increased metabolic activity
causes a spike in cellular proliferation and perhaps stress.
Here, the results also confirm an observed effect on FND uptake over time, which
is confirmed by statistical analysis results, wherein I can safely object to the null
hypothesis that there is no difference in uptake over time. Referring back to the
results shown in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, there is not only a relation between the
uptake over time, but I demonstrate that there is also a difference in the apparent
spatial overlap between FNDs and any lysosomes over time. I have shown the
results at the 25h time, with the highest degree of positive colocalization result.
FNDs are unique also in that they allow biologists to study cellular trafficking with­
out having any effect on the overall integrity of the nanoparticles [38][37]. Many
studies to date discuss the difficulties that can arise when working with lysosomes
for colocalization studies [81]. There is much that can be learned from unraveling
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.1: THP­1 cells incubated with FNDs for 5h captured with 100x oil­immersion
lens. FND (red) and BF (grey) merged to form a composite image. Cells were stained
with 250 nM LysoStain (results not shown here in composite).
their processes. Some challenges may occur, however, including how the shape
of cells over time affects the labeling of lysosomes [81]. There are spatial differ­
ences in which cellular size shape would directly affect lysosomal size and mor­
phology, so it is essential to remain aware of this for future studies when analyzing
the capacity for FND uptake and overall cellular function. Lastly, the large margins
of error from the results given in the colocalization percentages or spatial overlap
volumes could be due to several reasons. One possibility is that since there was
a 100% spatial overlap in lysosomes and FNDs, some pixels could become sat­
urated [50], leading to uneven measurements across overlapping volumes, thus
skewing the final result.
To summarize, DiAna labeled two separated channels, one for FNDs and the other
for lysosomes, by numbers correlated to pixel values used to quantify measure­
ments for determining the colocalization degree of each object pair. Among the
values measured include the percentage of overlapping volumes and distances
from varying edge­center combinations [50]. When the results were analyzed
against the results from the single­object measurements of FNDs and lysosomes,
there was a strong indication of time’s significant influence on the number of pos­
itive colocalization results. Interestingly, lysosomes are documented as having
varying sizes with an increase in cytosolic pH [82]. They are also characterized
by their heterogenous size dispersed throughout the cytoplasm, but still maintain
38
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:46==
a minimal, documented size range [15]. A difference in size was not seen to an
extreme extent in the results of this study. Lysosomes showed a relatively stable
size measurement across all time points, with the largest difference in size from
the mean coming the early time points.
The results from nearly all time points could be repeated for more well­rounded
data, where more samples may inffluence final results in a major way. There is
some evidence of this in the results displayed in the table of Average FND Uptake
Over Time, shown in A.3 located in the Appendix. Here we saw that there was
a notable difference in average FND uptake in relation to time for the 26h time
point, and this could be due to the small sample size of only two imaged cells.
The cells from this time point had a noticeably different morphology, perhaps due
to prolonged FND incubation, where the cells appeared to have ruptured. Oddly,
the results from these cells still showed lysosomes in patterns that would indicate
the outline of a relatively intact cell. The outline could have been left behind by
sedimented lysomomal fragments that were still able to fluoresce under excitation,
not exlucsively ruling out the option that they were in fact still living. A majority of
samples had ≈10 FNDs per cell, and the average amongst the 26h time points
was an extraordinary 40 FNDs.
4.5
T1 Measurement for Free Radical Detection
Significantly, T1 measurements are affected by pH, and lower pH results in a
longer T1 [83]. While lysosomes notably have a pH of between 4.5 ­ and 5, one
cannot rule out that pH may affect the overall T1 measurement, particularly within
acidic organelles [84].
These measurements were done on a homebuilt microscope. There was only
one measurement done on this setup due to time constraints. In theory, we would
leave out evident aggregates of FNDs and unusually high T1 values when analyz­
ing the measurements. The subsequent magnetic noise, originating from the free
electron spin of ROS, was detected by NV centers inside the FNDs. These NV
centers were excited to their bright and polarized ms = 0 state of the ground using
532 nm laser pulses. From there, photoluminescence signals were analyzed to
determine the number of NV centers that remained polarized or returned to the
dark equilibrium state between ms = 0 and ms = +1 or ­1.
In Figure 3.11, the lifetime measurement number refers to the fluorescence lifetime
of the FNDs. Fluorescence lifetime is the average time for an excited fluorophore
to return to its ground state, emitting a photon during the process. Specifically,
concerning the formation of ROS, these observed changes in the fluorescence
lifetime of the FNDs could indicate alterations in the cellular micro­environment
caused by the presence of free radicals.
The results demonstrated in Figure 3.11 show the one result I obtained from sam­
ples incubated with FNDs for one hour. These results have a large margin of error;
thus, it is difficult to determine if this was a sample­dependent phenomenon or if
this would vary based on a larger sampling size. Since there is such a variance
in the results, I will discuss what both a long and short T1 value would indicate.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
39
==PAGE:47==
A lower T1 value would suggest a higher concentration of ROS [2]. In dynamic
cellular processes, it could indicate that the FNDs are actively interacting with
cellular components undergoing endocytosis or other cellular trafficking processes
[59]. If there were a constant return of short T1 values, it would lead to questions
about the long­term stability of such an interaction since, as we discuss in earlier
sections, the formation of ROS can have detrimental effects on the cell [85][86].
A higher T1 value generally indicates that there is a lower concentration of ROS.
ROS can interact with water molecules and other nearby spins, leading to a more
rapid return to their ground state after being brought to the excitation state. I also
want to mention here that lysosomal staining can influence the T1 relaxation time
since the staining process can alter the local environment of the lysosomes [87].
Water molecules’ availability and dispersion throughout the area of interest can be
influenced by the type of staining agent used, the concentration, and the proper­
ties of the FNDs themselves [87]. For future research, it would be ideal to consider
an additional array of control samples with differing LysoStain concentrations and
separate controls with varying FND sizes to fully understand the relationship be­
tween FNDs and lysosomes. Through understanding their interaction, the overall
cellular trafficking processes can be better understood.
FNDs are extremely sensitive and can detect even the faint magnetic resonance of
a single electron. These signals are strongly distance­dependent because FNDs
can only sense their immediate surroundings up to a few nm [67][2]. Therefore,
FNDs and their target molecules or organelles must be spatially close enough for
accurate detection. The results demonstrated by the curve provided by Arthur De
4.5.1
Future Prospects and Current Limitations of Magnetic
Resonance
As previously discussed, using FNDs for bioimaging has gained traction over the
years. Some current limitations include magnetic field inhomogeneity, radiofre­
quency pulse imperfections, magnetization transfer effects, motion artifacts, tem­
perature dependence, and limited sensitivity. As with any emerging technology,
understanding the limitations of a system helps to guide researchers on what to
solve next. And as with any system, many of the results or measurements that
are obtained are a direct result of well­done or poor experimental technique.
Magnetic field inhomogeneity can lead to errors in T1 measurements, affecting
the spin­lattice relaxation process [88]. Kellman et al. found that an increase in
the magnetic field strength led to a more excellent signal­to­noise ratio but sig­
nificantly affected the B values that dictate the shape of the decay curve [88].
Radiofrequency pulse imperfections should be absorbed by the three­parameter
model shown in Equation 3.2, but the cost of estimating the parameter is that it
leads to a loss of precision. While the other two­parameter models might help al­
leviate this loss, there is always a trade­off between accuracy and precision when
deciding which parameter fitting to use.
Magnetization transfer has a significant effect on T1 and on inversion recovery
techniques, which are used when taking samples located in tissues with signals
that are insignificant to the signals of the target of interest [88][87]. Motion artifacts
40
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:48==
can affect the T1 value, and in this case, since the THP­1 cells are suspended in
liquid media for this technique, it can lead to differences in apparent T1 values
from sample to sample. If a set of samples is prepared, incubated, and moved to
the microscope, the cells can be floating or ”moving” across the stage in a way that
is not reproducible. Or lead to cells that are difficult to capture due to the floating,
providing inaccurate measurements and blurry images. Temperature is another
factor that can lead to a lack of reproducibility, as demonstrated by Birkl et al.[89],
where the longer cells are exposed to imperfect temperatures, the more cellular
stress is observed. Knowing how a sample will potentially interact will imaging
and measuring can help avoid early sample degredation, as personally observed
over many sample sets, that can severely affect results.
According to the results seen from the fitted curve in Figure 3.11, there is a large
margin of error that could indicate either a short or long T1 time. A short T1 time
indicate a higher number of FNDs, wheres a longer one would demonstrate a
lower number of FNDs. While one cannot definitively determine what is the case
for this sample, there are good findings from other research that would suggest
these measurements can be performed with success [2].
Lastly, while T1 values can offer a great insight into the effect of ROS on THP­
1 cells and their phagocytic capacity about FNDs, there is still more research to
be done to determine the sensitivity of these methods for ROS detection in live
cells or living systems [63][90]. Living cellular systems including those related to
lysomes s the recycling centers of the cell. The location of the signal near the
object being measured is an essential considerations that can directly influence
a samples apparent results [2]. Influencing a sample in any way leads to irrepro­
ducibility of results, among other conflicts. Efforts have to be taken in advance to
ensure that targeted, cellular compartments of interest are given their best shot at
visualization.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
41
==PAGE:49==
5
Conclusion
Immunological understanding of how lysosomes and the processes they carry
out remains an important topic that continues to be published about today [43].
Meanwhile, applications of colocalization studies give researchers a heightened
understanding of complex processes at a molecular level [78]. Understanding
the oxidative stress cells can undergo when digesting foreign pathogens directly
relates to the lysosomes and their role as the cell’s recycling center. If one un­
derstands these complex processes, especially in relation to their processing of
FNDs, there could be more potential opportunities in biomedical imaging capaci­
ties [38][11]. I achieved an in­depth colocalization analysis of lysosomes­labeled
THP­1 cells and FNDs. I used DiAna and Fiji for ImageJ, which provided the
results that helped me to outline the results and follow the discussion of this re­
search. [54][50]
ImageJ/Fiji was used together with a plugin provided by Gilles et al. called DiAna
[50], which measured the percentage of overlap between FNDs and lysosomes,
including their overall size described as the Feret diameter, amount of FND ob­
jects since cells over time, and the percentage of overlap between the organelles
and the FNDs. Inputs for the software included thresholding and segmentation
steps, followed by compiling results and performing a paired t­test with p values
< 0.06 for all time points. I had the best results from a positive colocalization
after 25h of incubation of FNDs in THP­1 cells. Confirming previous research
and observed relationship between THP­1 cells and their environment [11][43]. I
demonstrated the capability of FNDs to change and increase uptake/adhesion in
THP­1 cells over time. The center­center distance frequencies changed as the
cells were incubated longer, and the colocalization percentage also varied over
time. The center­center distance frequencies became closer together, showing
the lysosomes and FNDs fully converge. Lysosomes changed slightly over time,
decreasing in size, then plateaued at approximately 0.05 µm in Feret diameter.
Their size had only a major jump at the initial time point, where lysosomes were
measured to be on the larger side of average [70], yet demonstrated no physio­
logical indicators as a response.
The combined efforts of including a colocalization study like this research with the
continued NV­labeled­based ROS sensing techniques and efforts will only allow
for further insight into how complex molecular processes take place. This includes
more insights into spatial resolution, cellular stress responses, and more accurate
timing predictions of phagocytotic behavior [2]. Future studies can only elaborate
on bioimaging efforts that influence clinical applications, such as colocalization
studies for cancer research [78], wherein total spatial resolution is obtained. Colo­
calization was proven over time, and there is potential for more discovery within
the intricacies of subcellular activty.
42
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:50==
Acknowledgments
I would like to once again thank everyone in the Magnetic Resonance group under
Kirstine Berg­Sørensen for their combined efforts in contributing positively to those
around them including my own learning. And specifically again to Kirstine for
ultimately making this work possible.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
43
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
EMM Manders et al. “Dynamics of three­dimensional replication patterns
during the S­phase, analysed by double labelling of DNA and confocal mi­
croscopy”. In: Journal of cell science 103.3 (1992), pp. 857–862.
[2]
Aldona Mzyk, Alina Sigaeva, and Romana Schirhagl. “Relaxometry with ni­
trogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond”. In: Accounts of Chemical Re­
search 55.24 (2022), pp. 3572–3580.
[3]
Mohamed A Elhelu. “The role of macrophages in immunology”. In: Journal
of the National Medical Association 75.3 (1983), p. 314.
[4]
Siamon Gordon. “Phagocytosis: an immunobiologic process”. In: Immunity
44.3 (2016), pp. 463–475.
[5]
Kristian W Pajtler et al. “Molecular classification of ependymal tumors across
all CNS compartments, histopathological grades, and age groups”. In: Can­
cer cell 27.5 (2015), pp. 728–743.
[6]
Uwe Lendeckel, Simone Venz, and Carmen Wolke. “Macrophages: shapes
and functions”. In: ChemTexts 8.2 (Mar. 2022). ISSN: 2199­3793. DOI: 10.
1007/s40828-022-00163-4. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40828-022-00163-
4.
[7]
Vicki P Losick, Donald T Fox, and Allan C Spradling. “Polyploidization and
cell fusion contribute to wound healing in the adult Drosophila epithelium”.
In: Current Biology 23.22 (2013), pp. 2224–2232.
[8]
Günter P Wagner and Jianzhi Zhang. “The pleiotropic structure of the genotype–
phenotype map: the evolvability of complex organisms”. In: Nature Reviews
Genetics 12.3 (2011), pp. 204–213.
[9]
Joost J Oppenheim. “Cytokines: past, present, and future”. In: International
journal of hematology 74 (2001), pp. 3–8.
[10]
Marie Genin et al. “M1 and M2 macrophages derived from THP­1 cells dif­
ferentially modulate the response of cancer cells to etoposide”. In: BMC
Cancer 15.1 (Aug. 2015). ISSN: 1471­2407. DOI: 10.1186/s12885-015-1546-
9. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12885-015-1546-9.
[11]
Wasaporn Chanput, Jurriaan J. Mes, and Harry J. Wichers. “THP­1 cell line:
An in vitro cell model for immune modulation approach”. In: International
Immunopharmacology 23.1 (Nov. 2014), pp. 37–45. ISSN: 1567­5769. DOI:
10.1016/j.intimp.2014.08.002. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2014.
08.002.
[12]
Giuseppe Carbotta et al. “A new clinical­ultrasound score to predict difficult
videolaparocholecystectomies: A prospective study”. In: Annals of Medicine
and Surgery 35 (Nov. 2018), pp. 59–63. ISSN: 2049­0801. DOI: 10.1016/j.
amsu.2018.09.015. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2018.09.015.
[13]
Paulomi B Aldo et al. Effect of culture conditions on the phenotype of THP­1
monocyte cell line. Tech. rep. Wiley Online Library, 2013.
[14]
Carrie J Riendeau and Hardy Kornfeld. “THP­1 cell apoptosis in response
to Mycobacterial infection”. In: Infection and immunity 71.1 (2003), pp. 254–
259.
44
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:52==
[15]
J Paul Luzio, Paul R Pryor, and Nicholas A Bright. “Lysosomes: fusion and
function”. In: Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 8.8 (2007), pp. 622–632.
[16]
Jeannie Hwang et al. “The Role of Lysosomes in a Broad Disease­Modifying
Approach Evaluated across Transgenic Mouse Models of Alzheimer’s Dis­
ease and Parkinson’s Disease and Models of Mild Cognitive Impairment”.
In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 20.18 (Sept. 2019), p. 4432.
ISSN: 1422­0067. DOI: 10.3390/ijms20184432. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
3390/ijms20184432.
[17]
Aryan Morita et al. “Cell Uptake of Lipid­Coated Diamond”. In: Particle &
Particle Systems Characterization 36.8 (2019), p. 1900116.
[18]
Robert J Cousins et al. “A global view of the selectivity of zinc deprivation
and excess on genes expressed in human THP­1 mononuclear cells”. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100.12 (2003), pp. 6952–
6957.
[19]
Chunyan Guo et al. “Oxidative stress, mitochondrial damage and neurode­
generative diseases”. en. In: Neural Regen. Res. 8.21 (July 2013), pp. 2003–
2014.
[20]
Shirisha Chittiboyina, Yunfeng Bai, and Sophie A. Lelièvre. “Microenvironment­
Cell Nucleus Relationship in the Context of Oxidative Stress”. In: Frontiers
in Cell and Developmental Biology 6 (Mar. 2018). ISSN: 2296­634X. DOI:
10.3389/fcell.2018.00023. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2018.00023.
[21]
Wang Wang et al. “Superoxide flashes in single mitochondria”. In: Cell 134.2
(2008), pp. 279–290.
[22]
Don Dreher and Alain François Junod. “Role of oxygen free radicals in can­
cer development”. In: European Journal of cancer 32.1 (1996), pp. 30–38.
[23]
S.J.S. Flora. “Role of free radicals and antioxidants in health and disease”.
In: Cellular and Molecular Biology 53.1 (Apr. 2007), pp. 1–2. URL: http:
//cellmolbiol.org/index.php/CMB/article/view/1100.
[24]
Lester Mandelker. “Oxidative Stress, Free Radicals, and Cellular Damage”.
In: Studies on Veterinary Medicine. Humana Press, 2011, pp. 1–17. ISBN:
9781617790713. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-61779-071-3_1. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-61779-071-3_1.
[25]
PETER A. SOUTHORN and GARTH POWIS. “Free Radicals in Medicine. I.
Chemical Nature and Biologic Reactions”. In: Mayo Clinic Proceedings 63.4
(Apr. 1988), pp. 381–389. ISSN: 0025­6196. DOI: 10.1016/s0025-6196(12)
64861-7. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0025-6196(12)64861-7.
[26]
MA Milesi. “Oxidative, diseases and antioxidants”. In: Agro Food Ind Hi Tech
25.7 (2006), pp. 4–9.
[27]
Yannick Morel and Robert Barouki. “Repression of gene expression by ox­
idative stress”. In: Biochemical Journal 342.3 (1999), pp. 481–496.
[28]
Ilaria Liguori et al. “Oxidative stress, aging, and diseases”. In: Clinical inter­
ventions in aging (2018), pp. 757–772.
[29]
J Passos and T Von Zglinicki. Oxidative stress in aging. 2008.
[30]
PA Riley. “Free radicals in biology: oxidative stress and the effects of ionizing
radiation”. In: International journal of radiation biology 65.1 (1994), pp. 27–
33.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
45
==PAGE:53==
[31]
Funda Sibel Pala and Hakan Gürkan. “The role of free radicals in ethiopatho­
genesis of diseases”. In: Advances in Molecular Biology 1.19 (2008), p. 9.
[32]
Barry Commoner et al. “Biological activity of free radicals”. In: Science 126.3263
(1957), pp. 57–63.
[33]
Alberto Boveris, Nozomu Oshino, and Britton Chance. “The cellular produc­
tion of hydrogen peroxide”. In: Biochemical Journal 128.3 (1972), pp. 617–
630.
[34]
Alberto Boveris and Britton Chance. “The mitochondrial generation of hy­
drogen peroxide. General properties and effect of hyperbaric oxygen”. In:
Biochemical Journal 134.3 (1973), pp. 707–716.
[35]
Lu Miao and Daret K St Clair. “Regulation of superoxide dismutase genes:
implications in disease”. In: Free Radical Biology and Medicine 47.4 (2009),
pp. 344–356.
[36]
Neeraj Prabhakar et al. “Intracellular trafficking of fluorescent nanodiamonds
and regulation of their cellular toxicity”. In: ACS omega 2.6 (2017), pp. 2689–
2693.
[37]
Moones Rahmandoust and Majid R Ayatollahi. Nanomaterials for advanced
biological applications. Vol. 104. Springer, 2019.
[38]
Santanu Sasidharan et al. “Nanomaterial synthesis: chemical and biological
route and applications”. In: Nanomaterials synthesis. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 27–
51.
[39]
Lifeng Dong et al. Applications of nanomaterials in biology and medicine.
2012.
[40]
Marco D. Torelli, Nicholas A. Nunn, and Olga A. Shenderova. “A Perspective
on Fluorescent Nanodiamond Bioimaging”. In: Small 15.48 (June 2019).
ISSN: 1613­6829. DOI: 10.1002/smll.201902151. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1002/smll.201902151.
[41]
Rémy Pawlak et al. “Local Detection of Nitrogen­Vacancy Centers in a Nan­
odiamond Monolayer”. In: Nano Letters 13.12 (Oct. 2013), pp. 5803–5807.
ISSN: 1530­6992. DOI: 10.1021/nl402243s. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
nl402243s.
[42]
D.A. Gvozdev et al. “Nanodiamonds as a platform for targeted delivery of
chlorin­based photosensitizers to cancer cells”. In: Diamond and Related
Materials 120 (Dec. 2021), p. 108676. ISSN: 0925­9635. DOI: 10.1016/j.
diamond.2021.108676. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.diamond.2021.108676.
[43]
Maria Niora et al. “Quantitative evaluation of the cellular uptake of nanodia­
monds by monocytes and macrophages”. In: Small 19.11 (2023), p. 2205429.
[44]
E. Perevedentseva et al. “Nanodiamond internalization in cells and the cell
uptake mechanism”. In: Journal of Nanoparticle Research 15.8 (July 2013).
ISSN: 1572­896X. DOI: 10.1007/s11051-013-1834-8. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s11051-013-1834-8.
[45]
Daiki Terada et al. “Nanodiamonds for bioapplications–specific targeting
strategies”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) ­ General Subjects
1864.2 (Feb. 2020), p. 129354. ISSN: 0304­4165. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.
2019.04.019. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.04.019.
[46]
Shahed Behzadi et al. “Cellular uptake of nanoparticles: journey inside the
cell”. In: Chemical society reviews 46.14 (2017), pp. 4218–4244.
46
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:54==
[47]
Fabrice P Cordelieres and Susanne Bolte. “Experimenters’ guide to colocal­
ization studies: finding a way through indicators and quantifiers, in practice”.
In: Methods in cell biology 123 (2014), pp. 395–408.
[48]
Kenneth W. Dunn, Malgorzata M. Kamocka, and John H. McDonald. “A
practical guide to evaluating colocalization in biological microscopy”. In:
American Journal of Physiology­Cell Physiology 300.4 (Apr. 2011), pp. C723–
C742. ISSN: 1522­1563. DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00462.2010. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00462.2010.
[49]
Jeremy Adler and Ingela Parmryd. “Quantifying colocalization by correla­
tion: The Pearson correlation coefficient is superior to the Mander’s overlap
coefficient”. In: Cytometry Part A 77A.8 (Mar. 2010), pp. 733–742. ISSN:
1552­4930. DOI: 10.1002/cyto.a.20896. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cyto.
a.20896.
[50]
Jean­François Gilles et al. “DiAna, an ImageJ tool for object­based 3D co­
localization and distance analysis”. In: Methods 115 (2017), pp. 55–64.
[51]
Anita Schildberger et al. “Monocytes, peripheral blood mononuclear cells,
and THP­1 cells exhibit different cytokine expression patterns following stim­
ulation with lipopolysaccharide”. In: Mediators of inflammation 2013 (2013).
[52]
VE Plattner et al. “Alteration of the glycosylation pattern of monocytic THP­1
cells upon differentiation and its impact on lectin­mediated drug delivery”.
In: European journal of pharmaceutics and biopharmaceutics 73.3 (2009),
pp. 324–330.
[53]
Susanne Bolte and Fabrice P Cordelières. “A guided tour into subcellular
colocalization analysis in light microscopy”. In: Journal of microscopy 224.3
(2006), pp. 213–232.
[54]
Johannes Schindelin et al. “Fiji: an open­source platform for biological­image
analysis”. In: Nature Methods 9.7 (June 2012), pp. 676–682. ISSN: 1548­
7105. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.2019. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2019.
[55]
Roberto Souza et al. “An overview of max­tree principles, algorithms and
applications”. In: 2016 29th SIBGRAPI conference on graphics, patterns
and images tutorials (SIBGRAPI­T). IEEE. 2016, pp. 15–23.
[56]
Luis A Tavares et al. “Interactive max­tree visualization tool for image pro­
cessing and analysis”. In: 2015 International Conference on Image Process­
ing Theory, Tools and Applications (IPTA). IEEE. 2015, pp. 119–124.
[57]
Jaza Gul­Mohammed et al. “A generic classification­based method for seg­
mentation of nuclei in 3D images of early embryos”. In: BMC bioinformatics
15 (2014), pp. 1–12.
[58]
Reto Gieré. “Magnetite in the human body: Biogenic vs. anthropogenic”. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113.43 (2016), pp. 11986–
11987.
[59]
David Le Sage et al. “Optical magnetic imaging of living cells”. In: Nature
496.7446 (2013), pp. 486–489.
[60]
Michael D Abràmoff, Paulo J Magalhães, and Sunanda J Ram. “Image pro­
cessing with ImageJ”. In: Biophotonics international 11.7 (2004), pp. 36–
42.
[61]
Melissa Linkert et al. “Metadata matters: access to image data in the real
world”. In: Journal of Cell Biology 189.5 (2010), pp. 777–782.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
47
==PAGE:55==
[62]
Jacob Lam et al. “A universal approach to analyzing transmission electron
microscopy with ImageJ”. In: Cells 10.9 (2021), p. 2177.
[63]
Shujuan Chen et al. “Quantification of microplastics by count, size and mor­
phology in beverage containers using Nile Red and ImageJ”. In: Journal of
Water and Health 19.1 (2021), pp. 79–88.
[64]
Thomas L Moore et al. “Nanoparticle colloidal stability in cell culture media
and impact on cellular interactions”. In: Chemical Society Reviews 44.17
(2015), pp. 6287–6305.
[65]
Slobodan Dražić, Nataša Sladoje, and Joakim Lindblad. “Estimation of Feret’s
diameter from pixel coverage representation of a shape”. In: Pattern Recog­
nition Letters 80 (2016), pp. 37–45.
[66]
Henk G Merkus. Particle size measurements: fundamentals, practice, qual­
ity. Vol. 17. Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
[67]
Romana Schirhagl et al. “Nitrogen­Vacancy Centers in Diamond: Nanoscale
Sensors for Physics and Biology”. In: Annual Review of Physical Chemistry
65.1 (Apr. 2014), pp. 83–105. ISSN: 1545­1593. DOI: 10 . 1146 / annurev -
physchem- 040513 - 103659. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/ANNUREV-
PHYSCHEM-040513-103659.
[68]
“Novel site­selective fluorescent probes for lysosomes and acidic organelle
staining and long­term tracking”. In: Cytometry 7 (1994).
[69]
Tino Kurz, John W Eaton, and Ulf T Brunk. “The role of lysosomes in iron
metabolism and recycling”. In: The international journal of biochemistry &
cell biology 43.12 (2011), pp. 1686–1697.
[70]
Paul Saftig and Rosa Puertollano. “How lysosomes sense, integrate, and
cope with stress”. In: Trends in biochemical sciences 46.2 (2021), pp. 97–
112.
[71]
Ana Maria Cuervo and J Fred Dice. “When lysosomes get old￿”. In: Exper­
imental gerontology 35.2 (2000), pp. 119–131.
[72]
Maja Šrut Bettina Peer Birgit Fiechtner, Margit Egg Adolf Michael Sand­
bichler, and Martina Höckner. “Aging cell culture­genetic and metabolic ef­
fects of passage number on zebrafish Z3 cells”. In: Cell Physiol Biochem 56
(2022), pp. 50–65.
[73]
Haoxing Xu and Dejian Ren. “Lysosomal physiology”. In: Annual review of
physiology 77 (2015), pp. 57–80.
[74]
Emma R Wilson et al. “The effect of particle size on nanodiamond fluo­
rescence and colloidal properties in biological media”. In: Nanotechnology
30.38 (2019), p. 385704.
[75]
Alexey M. Bogdanov, Elena I. Kudryavtseva, and Konstantin A. Lukyanov.
“Anti­Fading Media for Live Cell GFP Imaging”. In: PLoS ONE 7.12 (Dec.
2012). Ed. by Kurt I. Anderson, e53004. ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0053004. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0053004.
[76]
Kuang­Kai Liu et al. “Endocytic carboxylated nanodiamond for the labeling
and tracking of cell division and differentiation in cancer and stem cells”. In:
Biomaterials 30.26 (2009), pp. 4249–4259.
[77]
Chia­Yi Fang et al. “The exocytosis of fluorescent nanodiamond and its use
as a long­term cell tracker”. In: Small 7.23 (2011), pp. 3363–3370.
48
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:56==
[78]
Michelle Hu and Kermit L. Carraway. “Repurposing Cationic Amphiphilic
Drugs and Derivatives to Engage Lysosomal Cell Death in Cancer Treat­
ment”. In: Frontiers in Oncology 10 (Dec. 2020). ISSN: 2234­943X. DOI:
10.3389/fonc.2020.605361. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2020.605361.
[79]
Sylvain V Costes et al. “Automatic and quantitative measurement of protein­
protein colocalization in live cells”. In: Biophysical journal 86.6 (2004), pp. 3993–
4003.
[80]
Philippe Andrey et al. “Statistical analysis of 3D images detects regular spa­
tial distributions of centromeres and chromocenters in animal and plant nu­
clei”. In: PLoS computational biology 6.7 (2010), e1000853.
[81]
Aura Maria Moreno­Echeverri et al. “Pitfalls in methods to study colocal­
ization of nanoparticles in mouse macrophage lysosomes”. In: Journal of
Nanobiotechnology 20.1 (Oct. 2022). ISSN: 1477­3155. DOI: 10.1186/s12951-
022-01670-9. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12951-022-01670-9.
[82]
John Heuser. “Changes in lysosome shape and distribution correlated with
changes in cytoplasmic pH.” In: The Journal of cell biology 108.3 (1989),
pp. 855–864.
[83]
Takahiro Fujisaku et al. “pH nanosensor using electronic spins in diamond”.
In: ACS nano 13.10 (2019), pp. 11726–11732.
[84]
Jialiu Zeng, Orian S Shirihai, and Mark W Grinstaff. “Modulating lysosomal
pH: a molecular and nanoscale materials design perspective”. In: Journal
of life sciences (Westlake Village, Calif.) 2.4 (2020), p. 25.
[85]
Rokshana Sharmin et al. “Intracellular Quantum Sensing of Free­Radical
Generation Induced by Acetaminophen (APAP) in the Cytosol, in Mitochon­
dria and the Nucleus of Macrophages”. In: ACS Sensors 7.11 (Nov. 2022),
pp. 3326–3334. ISSN: 2379­3694. DOI: 10.1021/acssensors.2c01272. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acssensors.2c01272.
[86]
S. Fan et al. “Diamond Quantum Sensing Revealing the Relation between
Free Radicals and Huntington’s Disease”. In: ACS Central Science 9.7 (June
2023), pp. 1427–1436. ISSN: 2374­7951. DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.3c00513.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.3c00513.
[87]
Kaiqi Wu et al. “Diamond Relaxometry as a Tool to Investigate the Free Rad­
ical Dialogue between Macrophages and Bacteria”. In: ACS Nano 17.2 (Jan.
2023), pp. 1100–1111. ISSN: 1936­086X. DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.2c08190.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c08190.
[88]
Peter Kellman and Michael S Hansen. “T1­mapping in the heart: accuracy
and precision”. In: Journal of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance 16.1 (Dec.
2014), p. 2. ISSN: 1097­6647. DOI: 10.1186/1532-429x-16-2. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1186/1532-429X-16-2.
[89]
C Birkl et al. “Temperature Dependency of T1 Relaxation Time in Unfixed
and Fixed Human Brain Tissue”. In: Biomedical Engineering / Biomedizinis­
che Technik (Jan. 2013). ISSN: 0013­5585. DOI: 10.1515/bmt-2013-4290.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/bmt-2013-4290.
[90]
Yufan Zheng et al. “Sensitivity of T1/T2­weighted ratio in detection of cortical
demyelination is similar to magnetization transfer ratio using post­mortem
MRI”. In: Multiple Sclerosis Journal 28.2 (May 2021), pp. 198–205. ISSN:
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
49
==PAGE:57==
1477­0970. DOI: 10.1177/13524585211014760. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1177/13524585211014760.
50
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
(a) THP­1 cells BF; 100x oil
immerison
(b) THP­1 cells lysosomes
stained with 17850 nM
LysoStain; 561nm 100x oil
immersion
(c) THP­1 cells BF; 100x oil
immerison
(d) THP­1 cells lysosomes
stained with 17850 nM
LysoStain; 561nm 100x oil
immersion
Figure A.1: Due to incorrect calculations, there was a round of samples (n < 8) (n =
wells) that were incubated for one hour at 17850 nM LysoStain concentration. These
results were not usable for the colocalization study that followed due to the oversaturation
of the stain. This could lead to channel bleed­through or oversaturated pixels that would
be counted twice when analyzing two images due to their brightness.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.2: Over­saturation of the pixels, so subsequent analysis results are inconsistent
with how we would typically see lysosomes dispersed without the cell.
52
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.3: Average amount of FNDs per sample over time. The table is taken from the
average per sample, where not every sample was counted due to some samples being
too blurry to achieve accurate cell imaging.
(a) Brightfield
(b) Lysosomes 405nm
(c) FNDs 561nm
Figure A.4: THP­1 cells incubated with FNDs for 3h, captured with 100x oil immersion
lens. The three channels separately and their colocalization results are shown in Figure
3.4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.5: THP­1 cells incubated with FNDs for 5h, captured with 100x oil immersion
lens. The three channels are shown separately, and their colocalization results are shown
in Figure 3.5.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
53
==PAGE:61==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.6: THP­1 cells incubated with FNDs for 6h, captured with 100x oil immersion
lens. The three channels are shown separately, and their colocalization results are shown
in Figure 3.6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.7: THP­1 cells incubated with FNDs for 25h, captured with 100x oil immersion
lens. The three channels separately and their colocalization results are shown in Figure
3.7.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.8: (I) Labeled A (FNDs) and B (lysosomes) channels of samples with positive
colocalization results.
54
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:62==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.9: (II) Labeled A (a and c)(FNDs) and B (b and d)(lysosomes) channels of
samples with positive colocalization results.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.10: FNDs captured adhering to or inside of THP­1 cells. 100x oil immersion.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.11: Lysosome labeled THP­1 cells. (a) 750 nM LysoStain, (b) 500 nM LysoStain,
(c) 500 nM LysoStain, and (d) 1000 nM LysoStain.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
55
==PAGE:63==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.12: Additional images of THP­1 cells from 100x oil immersion lens from 3h
incubation with FNDs.
Figure A.13: Over­saturation of the pixels so subsequent analysis results are inconsistent
with how we would typically see lysosomes dispersed without the cell.
56
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:64==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.14: Brightfield images of THP­1 cells that tested positive for colocalization.
(a) 3h FNDs paired t­test out­
put
(b) 4h FNDs paired t­test out­
put
(c) 5h FNDs paired t­test
ouput
Figure A.15: Paired t­test results of measurements done from different time points.
(a) 6h FNDs paired t­test out­
put
(b) 5h FNDs paired t­test out­
put
(c) 6h FNDs paired t­test
ouput
Figure A.16: Paired t­test results of measurements done from different time points.
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.17: THP­1 cells incubated with 25h FND, and 1 hour 500 nM LysoStain.
58
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.18
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.19: Due to time constraints because of personal circumstances, I was unable to
meet the final stages of the original experimental plan of performing more than one round
of T1 measurements.
60
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:68==
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
61
==PAGE:69==
62
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
==PAGE:70==
Colocalization of FNDs with Lysosomes
63
==PAGE:71==
Master’s Thesis
Department of Health Technology
Department of Biotechnology and Health Technology
Madison Lauren Wright ­ s213450
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørestads Plads, Building 349
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 45 25 17 00
www.dtu.dk
