==PAGE:1==
Atomically precise patterning by
thermal scanning probe lithography
By: Philip Holm - s183695
Master’s thesis
Department of Physics DTU
April 10, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Preface
The work presented in this thesis has been prepared from 28th of August 2023 until 10th of April 2024 at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Department of Physics, Nanomade section, as the nal fullment for the
degree Master of Science (MSc) in Engineering (Physics and Nanotechnology). It was supervised by Associate
Professor Tim Booth, PostDoc. Nolan Lassaline and PostDoc. Matías Vázquez all at the DTU Nanomade section.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of physics and nanofabrication.
2
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Tim Booth for helping me realize that a good researcher is a good detective. That we must hunt
our suspect, the hypothesis, with clarity and assiduity. Furthermore, we must convict our suspect based on rm
evidence and not on a blurry memory or optical image.
Thanks to Nolan Lassaline for an educational and approachable introduction to the NanoFrazor and for
making plenty of room for me at the bottom. Thanks to Matías Vázquez for reminding me that, while the nature
of our work is necessarily complicated, we should not unnecessarily complicate it. Thanks to Ganesh Ghimire
for providing all the high quality exfoliated samples used in this project and generally being pleasant to be around.
Thanks to Robert Steen Raunsgaard Jensen for helping me sharpen both my experimental practice and,
more importantly, my bullsh** detector.
Thanks to (Albert) Elias Edvardsen for wandering far o into uncharted intellectual territory with me away
from the watchful eyes of our supervisor (and maybe his own project). His erce independence, ironically, helped
me realize how essential time away from our supervisors can be to thinking in new ways.
Thanks to Christina Rochat for the company and emotional support that was all the more valued because it
came from a place I never expected to nd it.
3
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This project investigates the viability of a novel liquid separation technology. A porous heterostructure with two
layers of conductive graphene and insulating hBN, where we propose that by applying appropriate voltages to the
conducting layers, ions can selectively be swept through. We investigate thermal Scanning Probe Lithography as a
potential fabrication method for the small, high-quality pores. We demonstrate a pore with a 40 nm FWHM and
successful pattern transfer, but cannot conrm the pore goes through the ake (making it useless as a channel). I
propose a theory that a geometrical etching eect manifests when etching hBN with SF6 because there is a spatial
distribution of activation energies from ions as they scatter o the patterned resist. Next, we move on to the making
the porous heterostructure, which fails with t-SPL due to various diculties at each stage of the fabrication process.
Finally, we make a pore through the heterostructure using focused ion beam lithography, attempt to stop an ionic
current due to a 1 M KCl solution and conclude that the graphene layers must be electrically insulated.
4
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
7
1.1
How do we separate compounds? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
How do we fabricate our proposed structure?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Materials and methods
10
2.1
Fabrication techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
Mechanical exfoliation (Step 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Stacking (Step 1.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Spin coating (Step 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.4
thermal Scanning Probe Lithography (t-SPL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Characterization techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Optical microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Prolometer measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Experimental design of the nanofabrication process
19
3.1
Appropriate resist thickness for perfect resist patterning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Appropriate resist thickness for realistic patterning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Changing and estimating the resist thickness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Thickness of hBN
22
5
Making small pores in hBN
26
5.1
Multi-pixel geometries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Making a (w)hole array
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.2
FWHM of the hole array
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Single pixel patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.1
Fabricating a line and a dot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Are multi-pixel or single pixel geometries better? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Attempts at making pores heterostructure over a SiN membrane
35
6.1
Trying to get a smooth resist lm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Trying to pattern deep enough
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Etching from the front and back
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Locally material dependent etch rates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
==PAGE:6==
7
Trying to make a Wet Transistor
42
7.1
Membrane fabrication using FIB
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
Controlling using an ionic current using a gated membrane
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
Discussion
48
8.1
Is there a geometrical etching eect? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.2
Is an etch rate locally material dependent?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
10 Appendix
54
10.1 Polymer quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
10.2 Heterostrucures on SiN membrane fabrication processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10.3 Back-side etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
How do we separate compounds?
How do we separate A from B?, is a pretty big question in a lot of applications, including, but not limited to,
recycling rare earth elements (REE) from magnets [18], separating salt from seawater for clean drinking water [1]
and separating alcohol from beer [22]. REE's can for example be recycled by dissolving them in an acid or an ionic
solution and precipitating the relevant compounds. Salt can be separated from seawater by applying a pressure
gradient across a semi-permeable membrane, so the salt is forced in one direction. Alcohol can be separated from
beer by heating it so that it evaporates. But all these processes are thermodynamically expensive - relying on high
pressures or high temperatures. Considering we are in an energy crisis [24], we want energy ecient separation
technology.
Therefore, we propose an electronically gated membrane - shown in Fig. (1.1) - to separate liquids based on their
charge and mass. There are two electrically conductive layers separated from each other and their surroundings by
electrically insulating layers. The idea is to selectively sweep charged particles - ions - by applying voltage signals
to each conductive layer (V1 and V2) with a phase dierence between them. The selectivity comes from tuning the
voltage signal(s) to the specic charge and mass of the ion to be separated. By doing work on individual molecules,
we expect to save energy compared to heating the entire solution or applying high pressures, thereby enabling an
energy-ecient separation technology.
What, then, should the conductive and insulating layers, of which our membrane is composed, be made of? The
thinner the membrane, the higher the ux through it [28]. So we want the membrane to be as thin as possible. 2D
materials - characterized by being stable even when atomically thin - are the ideal material. Beyond being thin,
they can also be chemically inert and bio-compatible. Specically, we use graphene (Gr) as the conductive layer
and hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN) as the insulating layer.
Gr is a single atomic layer of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice. It is the thinnest known material
being only 0.334 nm thick [29]. It has both a high electron mobility of 2 · 105 cm2
V s and is mechanically strong with
a Young's modulus of 1 TPa [29]. The high electron mobilty means we can use it to eectively apply our voltage
and the mechanical strength makes it suitable as a membrane.
Hexagonal-boron nitride (hBN) is an allotrope of boron nitride with a honeycomb lattice  like graphene (Gr) 
except with alternating boron and nitride atoms in the unit cell. It is electrically insulating, with a bandgap of 5.97
eV, even when atomically thin. It also has a Young's modulus of 0.865 TPa even as a monolayer [26]. Therefore,
we expect it can insulate and not break with our graphene even when making our membrane very thin.
The in-plane bonds of hBN and Gr are dierent, but they share the same out-of-plane van der Waal bonds, so
7
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1: Illustration of the synthetic active transport membrane.
8
==PAGE:9==
they can be assembled into heterostructures like lego blocks. This is another advantage of 2D materials for our
application - we can make the composite membrane without compromising on its structural integrity. The close
conformity of the unit cells of Gr and hBN ensure close adhesion, so we can expect the hBN to protect Gr from the
ambient liquid environment, which may be corrosive if lled with salts.
1.2
How do we fabricate our proposed structure?
The ultimate aim of this project is to build the proposed synthetic membrane and use it to demonstrate proof of
concept. Proof of concept for liquid separation is beyond the scope. Instead, we aim to show that we can stop an
ionic current using the described heterostructure - henceforth called the synthetic membrane. Stopping an ionic
current would show that we can do work on ions and thus the rst step towards liquid separation.
Assembling the heterostructure of Gr and hBN is rather straightforward using stacking - a method where one
2D material is picked up and placed on another[25]. The resulting composite material is called a heterostructure.
The same method can be used to transfer the heterostructure to a suitable substrate that can be housed in a cell
for wet experiments.
The pores need to be small. If the pores are large and we apply a potential, the ions in the liquid will reorient
themselves to screen the potential we apply. The length-scale of this screening is known as the Debye length and
is characteristic of a liquid. So, ideally, we need to make the pores on the scale of the debye length (which is 0.3
nm for 1M KCl for example) otherwise our applied potential will be screened and we can't do work on the ions.
Additionally, the interface of the graphene and the liquid must be clean because with a single atom thick and
nanoscale pore, we are very dependent on the interface. What fabrication techniques can we use to fabricate a small
high-quality pore?
Two techniques come to mind: focused ion beam lithography (FIB) and thermal scanning probe lithography
(t-SPL).
Focused ion beam lithography (FIB) uses a source of ions which are then accelerated towards the sample to
remove material. It can be used both directly on the material and with an intermediary resist. While this is a high-
resolution technique (10 nm feature size), it may also compromise the quality of the material around the pattern
[27]. This can be through various mechanisms such as ion implantation in the material. The patterned material
can also become amorphous where it loses its crystalline order and associated desired properties [3]. So perhaps we
are better o with a lithography technique that reduces damage to the sample, while still being high-resolution.
thermal Scanning Probe Lithography (t-SPL) is a high-resolution (10 nm feature size) technique [6]. A sample
is covered with a resist, the resist is patterned using a hot sharp tip which is pulled down to remove material. The
patterned resist is then transferred into the underlying sample using an etching method. In the patterning step, the
tip only interacts with the resist, so the sample is completely undamaged, unlike FIB. The quality of the contact is
ultimately decided by the etching step, which is a main point of discussion in this work.
The aim of this work is to fabricate our synthetic membrane using t-SPL to make the smallest possible pores.
9
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Materials and methods
2.1
Fabrication techniques
Fig. (2.1) shows an overview of the minimal nanofabrication process for making pores in 2D materials using t-SPL
that we use in this project. Here, a single 2D material is used an example. We could also pattern a heterostructure
of hBN and Gr, the assembly of which will be described presently. At any point in the process, we might perform
additional steps to improve adhesion or remove contaminants. Let's look at each step in more detail.
2.1.1
Mechanical exfoliation (Step 1)
2D materials have strong chemical in-plane bonds and weak physical van der Waals forces to bind individual layers.
The aim of exfoliation is to break inter-plane forces and isolate single layers from a bulk crystal. In mechanical
exfoliation, the van der Waals force are broken by a mechanical force exerted by pulling a piece of tape stuck to a
bulk crystal. We use this method because it yields clean, high-quality crystals [4]. The disadvantage of this method
is that the mechanical force also breaks in-plane bonds, leaving thin, but fractured akes.
We exfoliate the bulk crystal, graphite or hBN, onto a Si/SiO2 substrate where the SiO2 substrate is 300 nm
thick. We use this thickness to enhance the visibility of graphene [5]. Blue tape (EPL BT-150E-KL Nitto Denko
tape) is used for hBN and ordinary Scotch tape is used for graphite. The blue tape has is less sticky, so it leaves
less contaminants. It is harder to exfoliate Gr rather than hBN, so we use the stickier, but more contaminating,
conventional Scotch.
2.1.2
Stacking (Step 1.1)
We use the hot pick-up method[25] to assemble our heterostructure. After, we transfer them to a substrate that
can be mounted in a liquid cell for wet experiments. The method is as follows. A Si/SiO2 substrate with exfoliated
akes, for example hBN, is mounted on a sample stage that can be heated. The sample is held in place by a vaccum
chuck.
A glass slide is prepared with a small piece of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), which acts as an intermediary
substrate, and a thin slice of polypropylene carbonate (PPC), ontop, which acts as an adhesive to pick up the
akes. We prepare the PPC thin lm by depositing a polymer solution of PPC and chloroform as a solvent in a 15
wt % solution on the glass slide. Two glass slides are pressed together and pulled apart to form a thin lm. A sort
10
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Nanofabrication process of 2D materials process using t-SPL used in this project.
11
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Si/SiN membrane chip with an aperature and electrical contacts.
of poor mans spin coating, if you will. Since we use chloroform as a solvent, we can use it to dissolve the residual
PPC lm on the assmebled stack.
The PDMS substrate and PPC adhesive are kept in place by a piece of scotch tape with a window cut out. The
glass slide mounted on an actuator that is positioned vertically over the ake to be picked up, so that it is aligned
with the PDMS and the PPC. The glass slide is slowly lowered until it makes contact with the ake at which point
the temperature is raised. Once the ake is covered with the PC polymer, the temperature is lowered and the
glass slide retracted. The hBN ake now sits on the PDMS stamp and can be lowered onto a Gr ake in the same
manner. By repeating this process, we can assemble our desired structure of two layers of Gr seperated from each
other and on both sides by hBN akes.
An assembled heterostructure on the PDMS stamp, can be transfered to another substrate suitable for wet
experiments. The base layer is Si, on top of which is a layer of SiN. A square section of the Si has been removed,
exposing the SiN. At the center of the substrate, is a 14 micron hole through both the Si and SiN. On the top
surface are gold contacts we can use for electrical connection. We assemble the heterostructure so the each of the
Gr draps over one electrical contact or the other. This is how we make electrical connection to our Gr layers.
The assembly and transfer process is shown in Fig. (2.3).
2.1.3
Spin coating (Step 2)
Spin coating is used to coat a sample with a resist layer. The resist layer is made by depositing a solution of a
base polymer in a solvent, known as a polymer solution, onto the sample which is then spun to form a thin lm and
subsequently baked on a hotplate to drive o the solvent. The sample could be a SiO2 substrate with exfoliated
12
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the assembly of a heterostructure and transfer to a Si/SiN membrane substrate.
13
==PAGE:14==
akes or a heterostructure on a SiN membrane.
Resist
We use the resist, Phoenix 81 (E-beam resist AR-P 8100 series) because of its high thermal sensitivity, which is
essential for thermal Scanning Probe Lithography. The thermal sensitivity manifests as fast and direct sublimation
(on the order of microseconds), at temperatures within the capability of the t-SPL tool we use - below 1400 °C.
The direct sublimation of the resist - as opposed to an intermediate liquid transition - makes for clean patterns and
the speed of sublimation means we can pattern micron-sized areas in minutes [13].
The polymer solution is made from a solution of the base polymer, Anionically polymerized polyphalaldehyde
(PPA), and a solvent, anisole in a proportion given by the weight percent (wt %):
mP P A
mP P A+manisole · 100. The weight
percent is used to tune the resist thickness ie. a higher weight percent will yield a thicker resist thickness. Anisole
is the only polymer solvent used in this project. We prepare the solution using the procedure described here [23]
except with dierent materials. PP lids are used instead of PTFE lids, Eppendorf pipettes are used instead of
PTFE tips and a sterile syringe is used instead of PTFE syringes.
A natural storage consideration of the thermally sensitive polymer is the temperature. I keep both the base
polymer powder, PPA, and the polymer solution in a freezer at -20°C. Before using either, they must warm up
to room temperature, which takes an hour, otherwise condensed water might contaminate them when opening the
lid. The polymer solution can also be kept in a fridge at 4°C, so it only takes 15 min to warm up. I keep it in a
freezer in an attempt to preserve the quality better, which a co-student, Elias Edvardsen, and I have observed to
be sub-standard (see Appendix).
Spin coater
We use a spin coater (Electronic Micro Systems Ltd.
Photo Resist Spinner Controller EMS 6000) where the
acceleration, spin speed and spin time could be set. A faster spin speed, yields a thinner resist. This relationship is
often approximated quantitatively as: : t ∝ω−1/2 where t is the resist thickness and ω is the spin speed in rounds
pr. minute (RPM). While spinning, the polymer solution loses solvent, either it is ung o or it evaporates leaving
the resist behind, and it changes color accordingly. The spin time must be long enough so the resist thickness has
reached a steady-state - observable by no color change. This takes 40 seconds for the PPA polymer solution. As
soon as the polymer solution is deposited, the solvent begins to evaporate. So the acceleration should be fast, so
that minimal solvent has evaporated - thereby changining the viscosity of the solution - before the intended spin
speed is reached. Initially, I used 500 RPM/s, but later discovered the spin coater was capable of 1000 RPM/s.
The specic acceleration is given in the experiment. In each experiment, the spin speed and polymer solution wt
% is used to to tune the resist thickness.
2.1.4
thermal Scanning Probe Lithography (t-SPL)
thermal Scanning Probe Lithography (t-SPL) is a lithography technique that can be used to pattern a resist, where
after the pattern can be transferred to the underlying structure using a complementary etching technique. The
resist is patterned by raster-scanning a nanometer-sharp, hot probe tip- attached to a cantilever- across the surface,
pulling it down to remove material by mechanical indentation, chemical sublimation or both. The same tip can be
used cold to read in tandem allowing active feedback control of the patterning conditions - tip temperature and
downward force - to reach the target geometry.
We use the Heidelberg Instruments NanoFrazor Scholar as our t-SPL tool. An image of the cantilever can be
seen in Fig. (2.4).
14
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Image of the cantilever of the Heidelberg NanoFrazor taken from [9]
The cantilever has two micro-heaters: a reader and a writer. To write, a voltage is applied to the writer micro-
heater which is ohmically heated and in turn heats the tip. It is important to note that only the temperature of
the micro-heater is calibrated - not the temperature of the tip. The eective temperature at the tip is a complex
problem which depends, for example, on the immediate environment around it as this dictates thermal ux. The tip
is pulled downwards to the sample by applying a voltage between the center plate of the cantilever and the metal
sample stage resulting in a capacative force. The force is unknown because it depends on the specic dielectric
environment between the tip and the sample stage. Therefore, the force is expressed as the voltage between the
tip and the stage - value between 0 and 9 V. Henceforth, for simplicity, I refer to this voltage as a force.
To read, the tip is moved across the sample while being in contact with the sample. The cooling of the tip depends
on the topography immediately underneath the sample. By monitoring this cooling - detectable by a change in
current through the reader microheater even for constant applied voltage - the topography can be reconstructed
with nm-precision.
The target geometry is described by a greyscale bitmap where the color of each pixel indicates the relative depth
of the feature. In this project, we only use binary patterns: white or black ie. write or don't write. The NanoFrazor
can write, moving left to right, and the read the same line, moving right to left, in tandem. The dierence between
what it reads and the actual target geometry is used as the input for a Kalman feedback loop which adjusts the
patterning conditions line by line to converge to the target geometry. Alternatively, we can disable the feedback
and specify the writer temperature - maximum 1400°C- and the writer force. This removes a black box element
to the fabrication procedure.
Dry etching (Step 5)
Once we have patterned the resist, we can transfer the pattern using dry etching. In this technique, a plasma is used
to anisotroptically remove material - both resist and the underlying structure - downwards[14]. We use a Mooreld
Minilab 026 chamber equipped with a high-vacuum parallel plate plasma etcher. In this system, one can set the
owrate of gas(es), setpoint power of the applied radio frequency (RF) signal at 13.56 MHz and the etching time.
The resulting DC bias on the sample stage can be measured.
We use two chambers - called chambers A and B - which are identical except that chamber B has two features
that chamber A does not. First, it has a window to the plasma chamber, so that the onset time of the plasma can
be noted - detectable by a change in color. Second, the voltage of the RF signal can be used to regulate the DC
bias to a setpoint. So instead of operating with a setpoint power, you can operate with a setpoint DC bias.
The RF signal voltage signal is applied to the plasma chamber's plates at 13.56 MHz when the plasma is struck
15
==PAGE:16==
Chamber A
Gas
Flowrate
[sccm]
Power [W]
DC bias [V]
hBN etch
recipe A
SF6
5
25
(40 ± 2)
hBN
cleaning
recipe A
O2
10
15 W
(160 ± 2)
Chamber B
Gas
Flowrate [sccm]
Power [W]
DC bias [V]
Color
Onset time
Heterostructure etch recipe B
SF6/O2/Ar
15/5/15
30
(100 ± 20)
(Purple/pink)
(6s ± 1s)
hBN cleaning recipe B
O2
10
15 W
(160 ± 2)
(Yellow/golden)
(2s)
Table 2.1: Etching recipes used in this project. Parenthesis indicates measured values and non-parenthesis indicates
setpoints. hBN cleaning recipes A and B are applied for 30 seconds.
resulting in ions, radicals and electrons. These are gradually separated so that the light electrons accumulate on
the sample stage, yielding the DC bias, while the heavy ions and radicals stay closer to the center of the chamber.
Since the plasma now has an excess of ions and the stage has an excess of electrons, a voltage dierence results and
both ions and radicals are accelerated to the now negatively charged sample stage.
An overview of the various etching recipes used in this project, their input parameters and nominal measured
values can be seen in Table (2.1).
We use SF6 to etch hBN and O2 to etch Gr, based on a work that showed they have exclusive selectivity[17]
- one does not etch the other. The combination of owrate and power for hBN etch recipe A and hBN cleaning
recipe A was chosen by my co-supervisor, Nolan, based on what generated a stable plasma. The etch rate for hBN
is khBN = 2.5 ± 0.25 nm
s
and for the PPA resist is kP P A = 1.25 ± 0.25 nm
s
which he obtained from trial and error.
Heterostructure etch recipe B is an appropriation of the etch recipe for hBN and Gr respectively[17]. In this
work, hBN is etched using SF6 at a owrate of 80 sccm and a forward power of 75 W. Gr is etched using O2/Ar
at 15/5 sccm at 20 W power. I chose the maximum power of our system - 30 W - to approach the high power
they used for SF6. In hindsight, I believe this was a poor choice, because I observed instabliities in the plasma -
oscillations in the brightness of the plasma color and DC bias- which could be due to the system working at the
extreme of its capability. They use an Inductively Coupled Plasma Reactive Ion Etching (ICP-RIE) system[14].
Since they, however, turn the coil power o, I assume the recipe to be applicable to our CCP-RIE system.
Dry etching for cleaning (Plasma cleaning)
Since oxygen does not etch hBN with this recipe[17], we can use it to clean hBN samples, which is what we do in
hBN cleaning recipe A in Table (2.1). This could be used prior to spin coating to improve adhesion of the PPA
polymer solution. We do not understand the mechanism by which this improves adhesion. Additionally, the same
cleaning recipe can be used to remove contaminants from a preceding SF6etch ie. a ourinated surface[17].
2.2
Characterization techniques
2.2.1
Optical microscopy
Optical microscopy is the rst line of attack for characterizing our sample since it can quickly and easily reveal a host
of information. The resist color corresponds to its thickness, the color of a hBN ake can be used to quantatively
16
==PAGE:17==
Justication
Mode
Magnication Exposure
time
Bright-eld
5x
3 ms
Optimal contrast for a 300 nm Si/SiO2
substrate and hBN akes
Bright-eld
100x
10 ms
Optimal contrast for a 300 nm Si/SiO2
substrate and hBN akes
Bright-eld
100x
25 ms
Optimal contrast for a 300 nm Si/SiO2
substrate and hBN ake
Dark eld
100x
1 s or 60 s
Sucient signal depending on the size of the
feature ie. whether a ake edge or a
nano-scale pattern.
Parameter
Value
Epi-
illumination
voltage
5.8 V
Optimal saturation for a 300 nm Si/SiO2
substrate and hBN akes
White
balance
R/B =
1.5/1.7
No justication. Ideally, a commercial white
card should be used for calibration.
Filter
Description
NCB11
Neutral
Color
Balance
Evening of the illumination spectrum of the
tungsten-based lament so that it is closer to
white illumination.
Table 2.2: Microscope settings used.
determine its thickness, as will be shown, and contamination can be spotted by a change in color of the substrate.
To be sure the color change is real, we need to control the settings of the microscope. An overview of the microscope
settings I used throughout the project and their reasons (or lack thereof) is summarized in Table (2.2).
Atomic force microscopy
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) is a scanning probe method, like t-SPL, that scans a nano-scale tip across a
surface the interaction of which can be used to measure the topography[32]. In this project, I assume the error
of comparing a topography image from the t-SPL tool with that of the AFM tool to be negligible - despite the
dierent working principles. Therefore, we measure patterns in the resist using the t-SPL tool and patterns etched
into a ake using AFM (AFM Icon PT 2).
Our ability to write a pattern using t-SPL is fundamentally limited by the tip shape. Likewise, our ability to
read a pattern using AFM is fundamentally limited by tip shape. If a feature has a higher-aspect ratio than the
AFM tip, the resulting image is tip-convoluted [21] as shown in Fig.(2.5).
In Fig. (2.5), the sidewall information is obscured. Granted, this can be obtained with knowledge of the tip
geometry using tip deconvolution [21]. Consider, however, if the feature were a hole instead of a protrusion, as we
work with in this project, and the opening of the hole were too narrow for the tip apex to reach the bottom. The
true depth would then be lost - regardless of whether the tip shape is known. Therefore, when we analyze AFM
17
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: Schematic illustration of the tip convolution eect taken from[21]
images of high-aspect ratio holes we should be wary of two artefacts. First, the width may be overestimated if the
image is convulted so we are imaging the tip - not the sample. Second, the depth may be underestimated if the tip
cannot reach the bottom.
Another, more beneign artefact, of AFM imaging is a linear tilt along the fast axis which results from the AFM
software trying (and failing) to level the image. This is easily xed using Gwyddion's line-by-line correction, which
we do on all AFM images.
2.2.2
Prolometer measurement
We use the method described in [23], to estimate the resist thickness for a specic spin speed and polymer solution
wt %. First a bare Si/SiO2 chip is placed on a hotplate at 200 °C for 5 min - a dehydration bake to improve
adhesion. The sample is then spun at the desired spin speed and polymer solution wt %. We scratch the resist
down to the wafer surface. We measure the edge line prole of this scratch using a prolometer (Dektak 150 surface
prolometer), to estimate the resist thickness.
18
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Experimental design of the nanofabrication
process
In our fabrication process, success at the end, depends on choices at the beginning. For example, successful etching
comes down to the choice of spin-coating parameters to get the right resist thickness. So let's start by stating our
criteria for the nal product and work our way backwards from there.
We formulate the following two criteria for the dry etching of our pores. First, the patterned pore needs to be
etched all the way through the structure. Otherwise, it can't be used as a channel for liquid ow. Second, the top
surface of the structure needs to be protected by a residual layer of resist after etching to avoid damage. In other
words, we don't want to exceed our resist budget. Additionally, we want to fulll these criteria while making as
small features as possible. Let's keep these considerations in mind and return to the start of the fabrication process.
First, we need to select akes of a suitable size. They need to be wide enough in area to cover the aperture of
the SiN membrane - a 14 micron diameter hole. They should also be as thin as possible, as described in chapter
(1). In the next chapter, we develop a method to determine the thickness of a hBN ake based on its color. If we
assemble a heterostructure, we know the total thickness from the sum of its parts.
3.1
Appropriate resist thickness for perfect resist patterning
Once we know the thickness of our structure, we can decide on a desired resist thickness. First assume, optimistically,
that we can pattern all the way through the resist (of thickness hresist), down to the structure (of height hstructure)
ie. the perfect patterning case. Assuming linear etch rates and no start-up blast, then the etched depth in the
material x is: zx = kx · T
⇐⇒T = zx
kx where zx is the etched depth, kx is the etch rate and T is the etching
time. Recalling our criteria of going all the way through the ake without exceeding the resist budget, we can write
an expression for the minimum and maximum etching time. The minimum time is the time needed to etch through
the structure:
Tmin = hstructure
kstructure
The maximum time is the time before the resist budget is exceeded:
19
==PAGE:20==
Tmax = hresist
kresist
(3.1)
Combining these expressions we can estimate a suitable resist thickness for some structure height:
Tmin = Tmax = hstructure
kstructure
= hresist
kresist
⇐⇒hresist =
kresist
kstructure
· hstructure
(3.2)
So the resist should be at least a factor
kresist
kstructure dierent from the structure height, because it is unlikely we
pattern all the way through the resist. For example, using hBN etch recipe A (see Table (2.1)), this ratio is 1
2, so
the resist should be at least half the hBN thickness.
3.2
Appropriate resist thickness for realistic patterning
To be more precise about the necessary resist thickness relative to the structure, we would need to know the pattern
depth we are going to achieve. This is dicult because the tip variation makes t-SPL patterning indeterministic[13].
Imagine we spin-coated a hBN ake of height, hhBN,with a resist layer of height, hresist, and then patterned
a hole of depth d. How long should we etch according to our criteria? The maximum etching time is the same as
before. But not the minimum etching time depends on the patterned depth, ie. the time needed to etch through
the residual resist (hresist −d) and the entire ake (hhBN):
Tmin = hresist −d
kresist
+ hhBN
khBN
(3.3)
Good experimental design ensures a safe margin between between Tmin and Tmax. One way to lower Tminwould
be to pattern deeper (increase d), but this comes at the expense of resolution as the t-SPL tip leaves a larger
imprint, the deeper it is pressed.
A note on the assumptions I have made: no start-up blast, no onset time for plasma striking and linear etch rates.
A start-up blast is when material is removed at the moment the plasma strikes after which the etching continues
at some rate. This can be accounted for by adding how an additional thickness to the resist corresponding to how
much is removed at startup: kresist ⇒kresist + dstartup. Likewise, an onset time, can be accounted for by adding
the onset time to the etching time: T ⇒T + Tonset. Finally, the linearity of etch rates is harder to defend and will
be discussed in due time. But the approximation is stronger in a narrow space of etching times.
3.3
Changing and estimating the resist thickness
As illustrated, the resist thickness is a big deal. We can tune it by changing the polymer solution wt % and the
spin speed. The manufacturer's data sheet gives guidelines for the expected thickness. For example, a 6 wt % PPA
polymer solution should yield an approximately 115 nm thick resist layer when spun at 2000 RPM according to
the Allresist datasheet. But, our concern is the resist thickness over the structure which diers from a at surface
because the edge causes beads - areas of higher resist thickness because the surface tension of the resist causes it
to bunch up. So what is the resist thickness over the ake, if we can't trust the datasheet?
My co-supervisor, Nolan, had the idea to use a test pattern at maximum force and temperature where the max-
imum achieved depth is used as an estimation of the resist thickness. The achieved depth is a valid underestimation
of the the resist thickness. Because, while it is very possible to pattern shallower than the resist, it is very unlikely
20
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: The resist thickness of the Test pattern method, where the maximum achieved depth is used as an
estimation of the resist thickness, versus a prolometer measurement.
to pattern all the way through the resist and remove some of the underlying structure. A co-student, Camilla
Sørensen, and I tested the accuracy of this method by comparing it to a reference spin-curve. We used the the
method described in section (2.2.2) to make the spin curve for a 5 wt % PPA polymer solution. The maximum
pattern depth, estimated depth from the prolometer and the spin-curve for a 6 wt % polymer solution from the
datasheet can be seen in Fig. (3.1).
Fig. (3.1) shows two unexpected features. The rst, is that our home-made spin curve - the blue line - does
not t the expected dependence of resist thickness on spin speed: t ∝ω−0.5and, in fact, does not t a function of
this form at all. The second feature is that the max depth of the pattern ts the data sheet very well, except for
the rst point. Obviously, this experiment needs repeating with more rigor. The test pattern should be repeated
multiple times so that error bars can be made on the achieved thickness.
The strength of this method is that it is a local measurement - what is the thickness here and now on this
specic ake? A potential weakness is it may depend on both the sample and the resist since the tip can begin
to cool o through the sample when the resist is thinner than 60 nm [13]. This could be tested by repeating the
experiment with a lower wt % solution (thinner resist).
In conclusion, we use the thickness of our structure, e.g. a hBN ake - to estimate a suitable resist thickness
using Eq. (3.2). To be sure we etch all the way through the ake without damaging it, we can nd the minimum
and maximum etching times using Eq. (3.3) and (3.1).
21
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 4
Thickness of hBN
In the previous chapter, we saw that the thickness of the structure to be etched is a critical parameter. We only use
two materials in this project: graphene and hBN. Since we only use one or two layers of graphene, there isn't much
debate about their thickness. The hBN layers, however, can vary in thickness and we need to know how thick an
hBN layer is so that we etch long enough for our pores to make it all the way through. I decided to use the method
developed by Anzai et al.[2], who showed that the color of an hBN ake taken by an optical microscope is an easy
and reliable method to determine the thickness from a few to hundreds of nanometers. The color is represented in
RGB color space and the thickness is quantied using Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). That's right: the color of
hBN, a transparent crystal, is an indicator of its thickness. How is this possible?
The hBN is supported by a wafer made of silicon (Si) and silicon dioxide (SiO2). These three layers each have
a specic thickness and refractive index. When white light is normally incident to the structure, the light wave is
partly transmitted and partly reected at the interface between the layers. The destructive interference between
waves results in a reectance spectrum characteristic of the thickness and refractive indices of the individual layers.
The Fresnel equations describe this relation quantitatively and are often appropriated for 2D materials[5].
An
example of the colors that result from the variation in thickness is shown in Fig. (4.1). This image also illustrates
the, as yet unexplored, prospective application of 2D materials within pop art.
We cannot use the results of Anzai et al directly because their work was based on a dierent SiO2 thickness
(they use 90 nm SiO2 and we use 300 nm SiO2) and a dierent microscope . We reconstructed the method as
follows. First, I recorded optical images of hBN akes with dierent thicknesses. Next, my co-supervisor, Matias,
took AFM images of each of the akes. I then processed these two sets of images to nd the color and thickness of
each ake using ImageJ and Gwydion respectively.
To nd the color from the optical image, I select a rectangular section of the ake with a uniform color and then
retrieve a color histogram using ImageJ to extract the modal R, G and B values. To nd the thickness from the
AFM image, I retrieve a height histogram where each peak corresponds to a at area of uniform thickness - either
a part of the ake or the substrate. I compare the AFM image with the optical image to nd the two peaks I am
interested in - the ake area with some color and the substrate - and nd the distance between these which gives
me the height of the ake. The results, the thickness of a ake versus the RGB color, are shown in Table (4.1).
Using the results in Table (4.1), we can say the color of a 28 nm hBN ake and a 34.9 nm hBN ake with
quantative precision. But what about the thickness of a hBN ake in between the two, say, 32 nm? We could try
to guess. Better yet, we can t an function to the thickness vs. RGB-color data, so we predict the color of hBN
thickness in between those measured by AFM. I tted a function of the form:
X(t) = A1 · exp(−t/a) · sin(k · t + phi) + A2
22
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.1: An optical image of a hBN ake on a Si/SiO2 substrate with a 300 nm SiO2 layer where dierent colors
result from dierent thicknesses.
23
==PAGE:24==
Table 4.1: The thickness of a hBN ake versus the color on a 300 nm Si/SiO2 substrate quantied in RGB-colorspace.
24
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.2: The RGB color of a hBN ake on 300 nm Si/SiO2 substrate versus thickness with a tted function of
the form: X(t) = A1 · exp(−t/a) · sin(k · t + phi) + A2
Where X can be either the R, G or B value, t is the thickness, A1is a tting parameter related to the intensity
of the optical signal. I would expect this to depend on the number of detected photons, which in turn depends on
the illumintation intensity. a is a tting parameter, related to to the decay of the signal versus thickness. k is a
tting parameter related to the period of the oscillations. ϕ is a tting parameter related to a phase shift of the
optical signal, which I expect to be dierent depending on the thickness of the underlying SiO2 substrate. A2is an
oset to the entire signal, which is aected by the color of the substrate. This is because if there was no ake, we
would only see the substrate color ie. X(0) = Xsubstrate. The results of the tted data are shown in Fig. (4.2) and
the tted parameters are shown in Table (4.2).
As a proxy for errorbars in Fig. (4.2), I measured the RGB color of the substrate in a series of images by
selecting a representative section (avoiding both akes and tape residues). The mean and standard deviation are
shown in Table (4.2).
Color
A1
a
k
ϕ
A2
R
372
196
35
0.04
-3
G
391
-49
212
0.01
0.3
B
59
177
2611992091
0.05
-0.4
Substrate color
Mean
Std
R
131
7
G
77
5
B
146
8
Table 4.2: Fitted parameters for the function in Fig. (4.2) (Left). Average and standard deviation of the substrate
color across images (right)
25
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 5
Making small pores in hBN
As a progression to the heterostructure described in the introduction, we make small pores in hBN akes.
The smallest possible geometry in t-SPL is a bitmap with a single write pixel  a single imprint of the tip.
But a successful nanofabrication process necessitates both successful patterning and successful etching. It does not
matter how small the pores are made in the resist, if the pattern cannot successfully be transferred to the ake.
Let's consider potential problems when patterning and etching a single-pixel pattern.
The pattern in the resist is a convolution of the target geometry, the tip shape, tip temperature and applied
force. The smaller the target geometry, the more the pattern will depend on the remaining factors. Imagine if you
wanted to draw and shade a circle on a piece of paper with a pencil. The pencil shape would matter less the bigger
the circle is. If you simply pressed the pencil to paper to make the smallest circle, the tip of the pencil and the
applied force would mean more.
A weakness of t-SPL is the variation in tip shape. A single tip can degrade throughout a patterning session
and individual tips can vary slightly from the manufacturer. I do not expect the degradation of a tip in a single
patterning session to be a problem, because single-pixel patterns have fewer pixels than typical patterns for which
the instrument was built. However, the tip-to-tip variation can be a problem for reproducing the same pattern
across dierent samples.
Also, it can be dicult to reach a pattern depth necessary for pattern transfer because the tip is more eectively
cooled o when surrounded only by resist. In a multi-pixel pattern, the tip would be surrounded by both resist
(what is to be removed) and air (what is already removed). The thermal resistance of air is higher than that of the
resist, so I would expect the heat ux to be directed towards the resist facilitating removal. In short, a single-pixel
pattern comes down to the tip, which is variable in t-SPL, and we might have diculties patterning deep enough
to transfer the pattern in the etching step.
The etched pattern in the ake is a convolution of the geometry patterned in the resist, the crystalline nature
of the material to be etched and the etching conditions. Specically, hBN has been shown to have an etch angle
of 66°(dened so that a 90°etch angle would yield a perfect step function) when etching using SF6 in a RIE, as we
do[8]. The precise mechanism remains unknown.
On the one hand, this can be used to downsize features as a hole narrows as it is etched. On the other hand,
the hole can close up making it useless as a channel. There is more to this point, which I will elaborate in the
discussion, since not all forms of hBN or pattern geometries exhibit the critical etch angle of 66 degrees [20, 12].
Nonetheless, I expect the shape of the resist pattern to matter for the etching process.
Ideally, we would want a vertical sidewall, so that we have a constant liquid resistance through out the channel
and the two graphene layers apply the same eld. If the hole through one graphene layer is bigger, the potential
26
==PAGE:27==
due to it at the the center of the pore will be weaker than the other, smaller, graphene layer. Single-pixel pattern
or not, I expect a slanted sidewall. A typical t-SPL tip has a bottom radius below 10 nm and a length of 750 nm.
Below 100 nm, the tip can be approximated as a cone with a half angle between 15 and 30 degrees [19]. So the
imprint of the tip will leave an angled sidewall when patterning. Beyond this, a hot tip can widen the removed
volume beyond the imprint of the tip[6]. In short, we expect a slanted sidewall from a conical tip, a widening of
features from thermal spread and an anisotropic etching of the hBN crystal.
My hypothesis is nonetheless despite these diculties that the best result will be obtained with a single pixel
pattern rather than a multi-pixel pattern. I tested this hypothesis by fabricating pores in hBN using both multi-pixel
patterns and single pixel patterns.
5.1
Multi-pixel geometries
5.1.1
Making a (w)hole array
My target geometry is an array of circles, with target diameters ranging from 100 nm to 850 nm in increments of
50 nm, to demonstrate the resolution for multiple sizes. The aim is to transfer the pattern in the resist so that the
holes are etched all the way through the ake, as described in chapter (3). As described, a slant is expected in the
sidewall. Therefore, I quantify the size of each hole using the FWHM, which is sensitive to both the diameter at
top and bottom of the hole. By comparing the FWHM of the pattern in the resist with the pattern in the etched
ake once the resist is removed (using an AFM image taken by my co-supervisor, Matias), we can quantify how the
pattern is changed during the etching process for example whether it gets bigger or smaller. We can also quantify
how close we are to the target diameter in both the patterning stage and the etching stage.
Before spin-coating, I bathed the sample in chloroform for 10 minutes in an attempt to remove organic con-
taminants. The ake to be patterned is 65 nm (based on color), so a resist layer of atleast 35 nm is necessary. I
spin-coated with a 5 wt % PPA polymer solution, at 6000 RPM, an acceleration of 500 RPM/s with a subsequent
soft-bake at 130°C for 2 minutes. The expected resist thickness was around 60 nm according to the datasheet. I
patterned the target geometry, an array of holes with target diameters from 100 nm to 850 nm in increments of
50 nm, using the Kalman feedback feature and a setpoint depth of 80 nm, in an attempt at patterning through
the entire resist. However, a maximum depth of around 90 nm was achieved meaning the resist was thicker than
expected. Assuming a thickness of 90 nm and the hBN etch recipe A etch rates (see Table (2.1)), yields Tmax = 72s.
To be sure of going through the ake, I etched using hBN etch recipe A for 70 s. We removed the residual resist using
a hotplate at 250 °C for 1 min and removed the ourinated surface using hBN cleaning recipe A. The patterned
resist and the nal etched ake (after resist removal and plasma cleaning) are shown in Fig. (5.1).
5.1.2
FWHM of the hole array
An example of a line prole as patterned in the resist and as etched into the nal ake for the pore with a 100 nm
target diameter is shown in Fig. (5.2). A representation of the tip with a bottom radius of 10 nm and a half-angle
of 30 ° is shown for comparison. The bottom diameter of the pattern matches the target diameter very well. The
deviation in the FWMH is due to the sidewall, which I attribute to the imprint of the tip and an additional thermal
broadening of the imprint [6]. The pattern in the resist is not symmetrical, which I attribute to the fact that the
NF cantilever is mounted at an angle [9] (not shown in the tip illustration. Also of note, is that the etched pattern
is slightly smaller than the resist pattern - the FWHM has gone down by 7 nm from 222 nm to 215 nm. A common
trend throughout the array, as will be shown.
The FWHM for the entire array of pores in both the resist and nal etched ake is shown in Fig. (5.3). My
interest is the pattern in the ake, not in the substrate, so I threshold the AFM image to the ake height (predicted
27
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.1: Optical images a hBN ake on a 300 nm Si/SiO2 substrate with pores of varying diameter in patterned
resist (left) and nal etched ake (right).
by color, conrmed by AFM). The FWHM for each pore in both the resist and the nal etched ake is shown in
Fig. (5.3). For reference, the perfect case where the FWHM is equal to the target diameter is shown.
The patterned resist is consistently oset from the target diameter. Specically, the error between the FWHM
in the resist and the target diameter has a mean value of 130 nm with 10 nm standard deviation. I attribute this
constant oset, as earlier, to the tip imprint and thermal broadening, which seems to be independent of the target
geometry size. This can be interpreted as that the tip did not change characteristics, for example size and thermal
ux, throughout the patterning. The etched pattern is consistently smaller than the patterned resist ie. the error
between the FWHM in the resist and the etched ake is -28 nm with a standard deviation of 10 nm. That the
deviation is small, indicates that the pattern is faithfully transferred from the resist in the etching stage. I think it
has become more narrow as a geometrical eect - as I will elaborate in the discussion. Importantly, the pores were
all etched all the way through the ake.
5.2
Single pixel patterns
The smallest of the multi-pixel patterns had a FWHM of 215 nm - that's the record to beat now with a single-pixel
pattern. I hypothesized earlier that it would dicult to reach a sucient patterning depth with a single pixel
because the tip would be surrounded only by resist. To test this hypothesis, my target geometry is both a dot - a
single pixel - and a 1.9 µm line - a single pixel wide. I would then expect the line to pattern deeper than the hole.
28
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.2: Line prole of the pore with a 100 nm target diameter in the nal etched ake as measured by an AFM.
29
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.3: FWHM of each pore in Fig. (5.1) for the patterned resist, the nal etched ake and the ideal case where
the FWHM is equal to the target diameter.
30
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.4: OM images of the patterned and nal etched ake for the line and dot patterns. Can you see the dot
next to the line? (Me neither)
5.2.1
Fabricating a line and a dot
Before spin-coating, I used the hBN cleaning recipe A on the 20 nm thick hBN ake (estimated by color) to improve
wetting. I spin-cotated with a 2 wt % PPA solution at 2000 RPM, an acceleration of 500 RPM/s and a subsequent
soft-bake at 130 °C for 2 minutes. We patterned the target geometry was a 1.9 µm line with a dot that are only
a single pixel wide at a tip temperature setpoint of 1000 °C and an applied force of 6 V (repeated four times for
repeatability). We also used a test pattern of concentric circles to gauge the resist thickness which was 70 nm based
on the maximum depth. The maximum achieved depth of the dot was 45 nm. Using hBN etch recipe A etch rates,
yields Tmin = 28s and Tmax = 56 s, so I etched for 40 s with hBN etch recipe A. We used the hBN cleaning recipe
A both before and after the removing the residual resist form the etching step. The nal etched and cleaned ake
can be seen in Fig. (5.4).
A topography image and line prole of one the lines and dots in the patterned resist and the etched ake can
be seen in Fig. (5.5). A zoom in of the line prole of the dot can be seen in Fig.(5.6).
The line in Fig. (5.5) achieved a depth of approximately 60 nm while the dot only achieved 45 nm. This supports
my hypothesis that the more the tip is surrounded by resist, the more it is cooled. Fig. (5.6) shows that the dot
was successfully transferred from the resist into the ake by etching. There is a strong change that these results
are tip-convoluted (see (2.2.1)). Therefore, we must treat the FWHM as a potential overestimation and the depth
as a potential underestimation. While the dot maybe did not etch through, the line certainly did. Is this because
the line had a larger pattern depth or because there is a geometrical etching eect at play?
I only used a force of 6 V, so I could of gone deeper by increasing that parameter. But this would of come at
the expense of resolution. Besides, the depth should of been sucient because Tmin = 28s and I chose T = 40 s
for the etching time. In my view, the dot either did etch through, and we can't see it because the results are tip
convoluted. Or it didn't and there might be a geometrical etching eect at play - a narrow hole etches slower than
a large one. Despite the evidence presented here being slim, I will return to this question in the discussion.
31
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.5: Example of the line and dot single-pixel pattern in both the resist and the etched ake.
32
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.6: Zoom in of the line prole of the dot in Fig. (5.5) ()
33
==PAGE:34==
5.3
Are multi-pixel or single pixel geometries better?
We started this chapter with the hypothesis that a single pixel pattern would yield a smaller pore, while still
satisfying our design criteria, than a multi-pixel pattern, despite the potential diculties.
But the results for
the single-pixel pore are likely tip-convoluted by the AFM and are only valid as an underestimation of the depth
and an overestimation of the FWHM. Ignoring whether the pore was etched through, the single-pixel geometry
is a substantial improvement on the multi-pixel - with a FWHM of 40 nm versus 215 nm. I therefore conclude,
tentatively, that the single-pixel patterns are better suited for our purpose.
Conrmation of whether the pore etched through would need more sophisticated characterization techniques
where two come to mind. The rst is the same AFM mounted instead with a high-aspect ratio tip. This, however,
proved very dicult to work with as the tip is extremely fragile.
The second option is Transmission Electron
Microscopy (TEM). This, however, necessitated a transfer of the akes from the opaque Si/SiO2 substrate to an
appropriately transparent TEM-grid, which failed on three attempts. It therefore fell outside the timeframe of
this project to properly characterize these patterns. Nonetheless, I conclude that single-pixel to be better since
the resolution was such a dramatic improvement and the pattern was successfully transferred to the ake - even if
maybe not all the way through.
34
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 6
Attempts at making pores heterostructure
over a SiN membrane
It's time to try and make the porous heterostructure we presented in the introduction, so that we can test our
main hypothesis - that we can stop an ionic current by applying voltage to the graphene layers. Spoiler alert - I
failed to make a working device. So in this chapter, we will instead look at the problems and possible diagnoses
and solutions at each fabrication stage.
6.1
Trying to get a smooth resist lm
There were signicant diculties in getting a smooth resist lm when spin-coating as seen in Fig. (6.1). Our
earlier approach - using hBN cleaning recipe A - works, but it is not a viable option when the graphene in the
heterostructure making electrical contact is not covered by hBN. An O2-plasma might etch the Gr and sever our
electrical connection.
We also tried using an alternative resist with better surface adhesion - PMMA-co-MA (ARP 617.03) - as an
underlayer to the usual PPA resist with some, substandard, scucess as seen in Fig. (6.2).
My best, untested, suggestion would be to anneal the sample prior to spin-coating. A co-student, Elias Edvard-
sen, and I found this solved wetting issues for PPA on hBN samples, so I expect it would work here as well. The
technique is non-destructive to 2D materials and can, additionally, mitigate blisters (see Fig. (6.4)) - which are a
catch all term for grouped together comtanimants[25].
6.2
Trying to pattern deep enough
There were also diculties achieving a sucient depth for pattern transfer when patterning the, poorly, resist-
covered heterostructure membrane as seen in Fig. (6.3). The patterned sample here is heterostructure C, shown in
Fig. (6.2).
My target geometry is four holes with target diameters of 1, 0.5, 0.25 and 0.1 microns with 0.5 micron spacing.
The holes are large, relative to the results in Chapter (5), so that we can rely on simple and easy optical microscopy
instead of TEM or AFM. I patterned the target geometry ve times in an arrangement as shown in Fig. (6.3), so
that the center pattern was as close to the center of the membrane as possible. Alignment itself was hindered by
the fact that the hole in the SiN membrane was, surprisingly, invisible to the t-SPL tool's reading function. As
35
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.1: Failing to get a smooth resist lm on heterostructure B (see appendix for full fabrication process).
36
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.2: Trying to improve adhesion with an alternative resist as an underlayer on heterostructure C (see
appendix for full fabrication process) .
37
==PAGE:38==
described in the material and methods, the t-SPL tool reads a topography based on how much the tip is cooled o.
The air-lled hole, which high thermal resistance of air, presumably, does not cool the tip more than the substrate
surface, and thus adds no thermal contrast. All were patterned at the maximum setpoint temperature - 1400°C -
either at a force of 6 V or 9 V (the maximum value). So, why did they only reach a depth of 30 nm?
I believe it is because the exible heterostructure is deecting as it is being patterned. Determining the actual
tip force is a complex problem involving the specic dielectric environment directly underneath the tip. But since
the tip has a sub-10 nm bottom radius: A ∝(10−9m)2so P = F
A ∝1018 · m2F. So it, perhaps, induces pressures on
the scale of the TPa Young's modulus of Gr and hBN[29, 26].
This would explain why the center pattern is shallower than the bottom pattern, despite having the same
patterning parameters, 1400 °C and 6 V, because the membrane can deect more in the center. It's like trying to
use a hot knife to cut through butter, but the butter can move away from you as you cut.
6.3
Etching from the front and back
As usual, we would spin coat the top, pattern the top and then etch. But we noticed peculiar cases where the stack
was gone - at least over the aperture - but we still had plenty of resist budget.
Fig. (6.4) shows a stack where the stack is gone over the aperture, but still present around it. I suspected - and
subsequently experimentally conrmed - that etchants were making it under the sample, through the aperture and
etching from the back (see appendix for experiment description).
A note to the skeptics. An over etched 2D material can leave a shadow - amorphous remains even after it is
gone. I assert that such a shadow will not have an outline when viewed in dark-eld (see Appendix). If you grant
this, then the stack in Fig. (6.4), is still present around the hole, as seen in Fig. (6.5).
Two solutions come to mind. The rst is to cover the aperture, so it is sealed from etchants. But, if it is sealed
too tight, the pressure dierence between the interior of the aperture ie. the pressure of the environment in which
it was sealed - and the surrounding environment - the etching chamber being pumped down to high-vaccum - might
blow a hole. Conversely, if the aperture is sealed too loose, etchants will get in.
The second solution is to drop cast a resist on the bottom side to cover the hole. This, however, only works if
the backside etches signicantly slower than the top side. Otherwise, the the pore can't be etched through from
the top, which has to rst penetrate the top resist and the entire membrane, before all the bottom resist is gone.
This solution is also undesirable because it adds a lot of thickness to the membrane, which was the whole point of
using 2D materials.
Therefore, I suggest the rst solution - covering the aperture with a suitable adhesive tape for a high-vaccum
environment.
6.4
Locally material dependent etch rates
Besides the stack being gone exactly over the aperture - which we assert is because it is etching from the backside -
the stack is also gone exactly over the gold contacts as seen in both Fig. (6.4) and (6.5). AFM is necessary for full
conrmation of this to the skeptical reader. This is a problem because it cuts the necessary electrical connection to
the Gr layers. The in-house technician, Robert, and I propose that etch rate is locally material dependent. We will
return to this in the discussion, but the short version is as follows. The negative DC bias induces a positive surface
charge on the sample surface when it is separated by the dielectric SiN layer. How this surface charge distributes
depends on the surface materials ability to conduct charge.
An insulator cannot redistribute the charge, so it
provides screening against an additional inux of positive ions and lowers the etch rate. Conversely, a conductor
can redistribute charge, so it does not screen and does not lower the etch rate.
38
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.3: Patterning issues on heterostructure C (same as in Fig. (6.2)).
39
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.4: The hole is getting etched faster than the rest of the structure. 1) The area over the hole is gone (it is
black). 2) The stack is still there around the hole. This is heterostructure C (see appendix for full fabrication
process)
40
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.5: Same sample as Fig. (6.4). The stack is still there around the hole because it has an edge in Dark-eld.
41
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 7
Trying to make a Wet Transistor
Our main hypothesis is that we can switch an ionic current using a gated heterostructure. Can we, by applying
a voltage to the intermediary graphene, stop a ow of ionic current though the membrane? That is the objective
this chapter.
In our experimental setup, to be described presently, we have two reservoirs of a salt solution (1 M KCl with
DI-water) separated by our synthetic membrane. We have two terminals made of a silver wire immersed in chlorine
- a Ag/AgCl terminal. We plug two terminals into each of the reservoirs like in a electrochemical experiment.
By applying a voltage between these two electrodes, we expect a current to ow as well. The magnitude of the
current will depend on the electrical resistance of the salt solution [30], the pore size and membrane thickness[7].
The current we get some applied voltage depends on the salt solution because of the number of charge carriers.
It depends the pore size and membrane thickness, indirectly, because these aect the ux of liquid - and thereby
charge carriers - through the liquid. We can therefore expect an additional electrical resistance due to the small
pore.
The electrical conductivity of 1 M KCl is 10.9 S/m [30], so we can estimate the conductance due to salt solution
using the approximate volume (two chambers with dimensions of L = 7.5 mm and A = π · R2 = π · (0.5 · mm)2
G = σ ·
A
2 · L = 0.57mS
Assuming a linear relationship the current for a 500 mV voltage is then given by Ohm's law:
I = G · V = 0.29nA
So we can expect a current of less than 0.3 nA, because there is also the additional resistance of the pore to
account for.
7.1
Membrane fabrication using FIB
The bulk of this project has been an attempt to develop a nanofabrication process for making pores in our 2D
membrane using t-SPL. As described in chapter (6), I failed to do this.
In this chapter, we instead try using
focused ion beam (FIB) lithography. As described in the introduction, this is not the ideal method because it can
compromise the quality of our contact. Nonetheless, going ahead with this less than ideal method may give insights
relevant to our hypothesis.
42
==PAGE:43==
Figure 7.1: Optical image of the resist-covered FIB-patterned heterostructure on a SiN membrane.
The sample was entirely fabricated by co-supervisor, Matias, who both assembled the heterostructure and
patterned it with FIB. Prior to patterning, we dropcasted a layer of PPA 10 wt % polymer solution with a
subsequent soft-bake at 110 °C for 5 min.
This was to provide electrical insulation between the gold contacts
and the surrounding liquid. To pattern the sample, he used a gallium ion source, with an acceleration voltage of 12
kV, beam current of 0.5 nA, feature size of 100 nm, z-size of 2 µm and dwell time of 10 µs. The dropcasted layer
of resist made visualization dicult in the FIB, therefore there are three holes in total - two of which missed - as
seen in Fig. (7.1).
That we have a hole in the gold contact might mean we have shorted the electrical contact to the surrounding,
conducting, liquid, which is a problem. That we have a hole in SiN membrane means that we can still expect a
current to ow even if the gate voltage successfully stops a current within the pore. We would therefore expect a
lower, but non-zero current, if we are successful.
7.2
Experimental setup
The patterned heterostructure is now housed in a chip with a SiN membrane and an aperture in the middle. This
must now be transferred to a liquid cell, shown in Fig. (7.2), so that it can immersed in liquid and we can apply
electrical signals.
When transporting liquids through a nano-scale pore, even nano-scale bubbles can disrupt the ow. We use the
excellent review by Graf & co.[11] to ll our liquid cell while minimizing bubbles. The general method is to rst
wet the setup with a wetting solution with low surface tension, remove said wetting solution (with the pore still
43
==PAGE:44==
Figure 7.2: Picture of the liquid cell in which we mount the SiN membrane between the O-rings in the zoomed
picture.
44
==PAGE:45==
wet), and add the intended salt solution for experiments. We prepared a 1:1 ethanol/water mixture as a wetting
solution. While isopropanal has a lower surface tension (better for wetting), it is incompatible with our PMMA
liquid cell - therefore we use ethanol which also has a low surface tension. I presume it is mixed with water, so that
it does not evaporate too fast. We use a 1 M KCl salt solution for our experiment.
The liquid cell is assembled by wetting it with the wetting solution at every step. For example, a droplet is
placed on the plate and then the O-ring is placed. Once we assemble the liquid cell, we place it in a desiccator to
remove air bubbles. We keep it long enough to see two prominent air bubbles rise to the surface through the inlet
and outlet.
With the liquid cell assembled, we can make the electrical connections of the interlayer printed circuit board
(PCB). Even though the heterostructure has two graphene layers, we only need one, in principle, to stop an ionic
current. Therefore, we short these two layers together so all connections on the PCB are connected on a breadboard.
We place a silver wire, previously immersed in chlorine to become a Ag/AgCl electrode, at the inlet and outlet ow
respectively. We call these the source and drain terminals as in a Field Eect Transistor (FET), because this is
want we want to make - not necessarily what we get. The connection to the graphene layer(s) in the pore is called
the gate. We use two independent Keithley Model 2450 Interactive SourceMeter Instrument to apply electrical
signals and measure voltage and currents to the source and gate respectively. The electrical connections are shown
in Fig. (7.3).
7.3
Controlling using an ionic current using a gated membrane
In this experiment we apply a constant voltage of 500 mV between the source and drain terminals so that we have
a ow of an ionic current from 1 M KCl solution. We then apply a bias to the gate voltage and monitor the change
in the current between the source and drain. This is shown in Fig.(7.4).
In Fig. (7.4), we observe a current between the source-drain as expected. But this current is mirrored between
the gate and drain - being equal and opposite in magnitude even when no gate voltage is applied.
Meaning
ISD = −ISG When the gate voltage is changed, this current changes accordingly. The magnitude of the current,
when the gate voltage is o, is approximately 12 nA, which is much higher than my expectation of 0.3 nA, which
was supposed to be an underestimation.
There are a number of potential experimental errors to consider. First, the hole in gold, seen in Fig. (7.1), could
of provided a lower resistance path than through the graphene. We will return to this in the discussion. Irregardless
of experimental error, we can conclude that we must electrically insulate the graphene. The graphene should not
draw a current, because if the ions discharge, through whatever mechanism, we lose the ability to do work on them.
45
==PAGE:46==
A
ISD
S
−
+
VSD
D
V
VSD
G
A
ISG
−
+
VGD
V
VGD
Figure 7.3: Electrical diagram of the measurement system. ()
46
==PAGE:47==
Figure 7.4: Times series for both the source-drain and the gate-drain terminals as the source-drain voltage is kept
constant at 500 mV and the gate-drain voltage is switched betwen various levels as indicated in the text boxes
with corresponding color.
47
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 8
Discussion
8.1
Is there a geometrical etching eect?
In Chapter (5), we saw that a large hole (with a patterned FWHM of 215 nm) was succesfully etched through
the ake, while a smaller hole (with a FWHM of 40 nm), apparently, did not. Despite the same methodology
encapsulated in the calculation of the etch time. There are two factors to consider before discussing a potential
eect of the geometry. First, there is a chance that the small hole in fact did etch through and the tip-convoluted
results are underestimating the depth. Second, the calculation of the etching time is only as good as the estimation
of the individual parameters: the resist thickness, ake thickness and the etch rates. I am condent in the thickness
of the ake because it was predicted by color and conrmed by AFM and reasonably, condent in the thickness of
the resist (see Fig. (3.1)). So I will now discuss how the etch rates could be dierent due to a geometrical eect
- whether a smaller hole etches slower than a larger one. Even if the discussion, is not relevant to these results
(because it actually did etch through or the etch rate was o due to a dierent process pressure), it can serve as
considerations for future work.
The specic chemistry and physics of etching hBN with SF6 does not seem to be thoroughly investigated as
far as I can tell [17, 20, 8, 12]. The literature on, SF6 etching on Si, however, is extensive[16, 15]. Therefore, we
will rst consider well-established geometrical eects when etching Si with SF6 and then attempt to transfer this
knowledge to etching hBN with SF6.
We use reactive ion etching (RIE) where ions can be used in synergy with chemically actives species, radicals,
to remove material. A solid (the material to be etched) forms a reaction with a gas (the etchant) to form a volatile
compound that is pumped away. This comes in two variants: Ion-enhanced RIE and ion-inhibitor RIE[16]. In
ion-enhanced etching, the material does not spontaneously react with the radical, so an energy boost from a ux
of ions is needed to etch. Since the ux of ions is anisotropic, the resulting pattern is anisotropic. In ion-inhibitor
RIE, the material does spontaneously react with the radical, so ions are needed to passivate the sidewalls to remove
material anisoptropically.
So there are three factors to consider: the ux of ions, radicals and inhibitors. If the proportion of these three
changes through a high-aspect ratio pattern, the resulting etch rate (and angle) will be aspect ratio dependent. This
is known as RIE lag[16] or in the case of high aspect ratio patterns, aspect ratio dependent etching (ARDE)[14]. If
the reaction byproducts a low vapor pressure, they will stay in the bottom of a pattern and inhibit further etching,
thereby reducing the etch rate. Is this what happened when trying to etch our dot versus the line in chapter (5)?
To answer this question, we cannot postpone the discussion of the specic physical and chemical mechanisms in a
SF6 etch of hBN.
48
==PAGE:49==
A hole in hBN has been demonstrated to have a 66°±1° etch angle, independent of crystallographic orientation,
when etched in a ICP-RIE with SF6 [8, 17]. Since the coil was switched o, with power only being applied to the
sample stage, I assume the results to transferable to our CCP-RIE. A hole in CVD grown hBN has also, however,
been demonstrated to have an etch angle over 80°with SF6 in a ICP-RIE[12]. Here, however, while the coil power
was not turned o. The authors ignore the eect of the coil power, because it had no eect when etching with
Cl2. They do not investigate the role of the coil power for SF6, unfortunately for us. Finally, intricate mandelbrot
patterns have been etched into hBN with an ICP-RIE with no anisoptropy beyond an amplication of the depth
by a factor of 1.5[20].
As described earlier, aspect ratio dependent etch rates can manifest the proportion of the ux of ions, radicals
and inhibiting species changes with the pattern geometry. Flourine and boron can combine to create BF3, which
has a high vapor pressure[12]. So I assume that the etch rate is not being slowed down by the ux of inhibiting
species. In other words, the reaction byproducts rise out of the pattern and are pumped away fast enough to not
slow down the etch rate. The etch rate itself, however, could still be limited by the ux of ions and radicals. So,
the next question is whether the process is ion-assisted or ion-inhibited? Or in other words, can ouride react with
boron to form BF3 without the energy boost of an ion?
A high etch angle above 70° has been demonstrated in an ICP-RIE only when the coil power is on[12]. The
coil can be used to induce a circular trajectory on the ions, so that they have a higher mean free path. Since, this
resulted in a higher etch angle than other works, I conclude that the process is ion-assisted and the kinetic energy,
corresponding to an activation energy, of ions increases the etch angle. In this picture, the etch angle of 66 °in
hole in hBN is because the ions have a lower average velocity - and thus average kinetic energy - near the sides of
the walls because they can collide with the patterned resist and slow down. The relevance of the crystal manifests
because the kinetic energy is only one part of the reaction kinetics the other being the preference to maintain a
bond versus form a volatile compound. I believe this is why complex mandelbrot patterns have been etched in a
similar conguration without anisoptropy - because the ions can maintain a high kinetic energy in the open area.
To conclude, I would expect a slower etch rate for a high aspect ratio, as the average kinetic energy of ions
decreases due to sidewall scattering. This can be tested by patterning an array of features with dierent aspect
ratio, but the same size (for example aperture opening). Alternatively, patterned geometries of varying side wall
angles would be patterned to monitor the change in etch angle. Here I would expect the same etch rate until the
sidewall scattering becomes prominent - likely between 60 ° and 90°.
8.2
Is an etch rate locally material dependent?
If you are sold on my argument that the stack in Fig. (6.4), is gone precisely over the gold but not around it, then
there must be a locally material-dependent etch rate (more rigirous conrmation could be provided by AFM). The
in-house technician, Robert, and I speculate the following mechanism for why this happens.
As described in section (2.1.4), a DC bias accumulates on the sample stage due to dierence in mobility between
the heavy ions and the light electrons. If the sample substrate is insulating - like SiN - then, we propose an opposing
charge will accumulate on the sample surface. How this surface charge distributes depends on the material - whether
it is electrically insulating or conductive. If the material is conductive, the charge can distribute itself in the interior.
This means that the incoming ux of ions is less eectively screened and the material on top is etched faster (as
in the case of the gold contacts). If the material is insulating, the charge can only distribute on the surface, which
provides screening for the ux of ions and lowers the etch rate (as in the case on top of the SiN substrate). Let's
now consider some arguments to why you might disagree with us.
Why does Gr etch faster than gold if it is about electrical conductivity?. Precisely because it is about con-
ductivity not conductance. While Gr has a superior conductivity to gold, it is also much smaller, being atomically
thin. So the large gold contacts have a higher conductance.
49
==PAGE:50==
The heterostructure is equal parts insulating hBN and conducting Gr. Why does what is underneath the stack
- whether gold or SiN - matter more?. This is a strong objection, which eectively comes down to the eective
length of the screening eect. This is dicult to speculate on and would require a proper simulation. The proposed
theory here, however, should be able to be simulated in a simple conguration.
Did we successfully stop an ionic current?
Short answer. No.
In Fig. (7.4), we saw the drain terminal is electrically indistinguishable from the gate terminal. I argue that
this is because the current is being bypassed past the graphene through the hole in the gold in the gold contact
seen in Fig. (7.1). The electrical contact resistivity of a perfect graphene edge contact is ρ = 100Ω· µm [31]
and the electrical resistivity of a 66 nm gold is ρ = 0.025Ω· µm[10]. The gold hole interface is much larger than
the graphene hole interface because it is not atomically thin. Our graphene edge contact is very likely far from
the perfect case because FIB can make the crystal amorphous[3]. Furthermore, there is the electrical resistance
between the graphene and gold interface which can be large. I cannot be more quantitative without an electrical
measurement of the various contact resistances, but I propose that the hole in the gold contact is a lower resistance
path than the graphene. Nonetheless, the consequence for our fabrication design is clear: the graphene must be
electrically insulated. If the ions can discharge through the graphene, we lose the ability to do work on this. In the
ideal case, then IGD = 0.
50
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
The project was based on a newly proposed liquid separation technology where a membrane is made of two electri-
cally conductive layers separated from each other and the surroundings by electrically insulating layers. By applying
time-varying voltages to the two voltages, the hypothesis is that ions can be selectively sweeped through to separate
them. The aim of this project was to build such a structure and show proof of concept by stopping an ionic current.
To maximize ux through the membrane, it had to be thin. So we used the 2D materials graphene and hBN as
the conductive and insulating layers respectively. We assembled them into a heterostructure successfully using the
hot pick up method. Next we wanted to use thermal Scanning Probe Lithography where a geometry -described by
a bitmap - is patterned into a resist covered sample and the pattern is transferred using dry etching.
As a progression we started with pores in just hBN. I proposed a methodology to nd how long you need to
etch based on the thickness of the ake, resist and the etching rates. We found out how to estimate the resist
thickness by the maximum patterned depth and determine the thickness of hBN based on the color. We proposed
the hypothesis that single-pixel bitmaps are better for making pores than multi-pixel bitmaps and tested it on
hBN. We achieved a multi-pixel pattern with a etched FWHM of 215 nm and conrmed it etch through. But while
we achieved a single-pixel pattern with a 40 nm with successful pattern transfer, we could not conrm it etched
through based on AFM. We concluded, nonetheless, that single-pixel patterns yield the highest resolution for our
purposes.
I proposed a theory for a geometrical etching eect where the ions kinetic energy - corresponding to an activation
energy in the etching reaction kinetics - acquire a spatial distribution due to scattering o the patterned resist.
This spatial prole of activation energies then results in a distrubution of etching rates together with the reaction
activity of the site.
I failed to make pores in the heterostructure assembled on a SiN membrane because of problems at the spin-
coating, patterning and etching step. Specically, the substrate had poor wetting, it was dicult to achieve a
sucient pattern depth for etching transfer and the structure was being etched both from the resist-covered front
side and the unprotected backside.
Finally, we went ahead with the less-ideal focused ion beam (FIB) lithography to make a pore. Despite likely
experimental error, we conclude that the exposed graphene in the pore must be electrically insulated from the liquid
for us to be able to do work on charged species (otherwise the ion will discharge).
51
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1]
Gary Amy et al. Membrane-based seawater desalination: Present and future prospects. In: Desalination 401
(Jan. 2017), pp. 1621. issn: 00119164. doi: 10.1016/j.desal.2016.10.002.
[2]
Yuto Anzai et al. Broad range thickness identication of hexagonal boron nitride by colors. In: Applied
Physics Express 12 (5 2019). issn: 18820786. doi: 10.7567/1882-0786/ab0e45.
[3]
B. S. Archanjo et al. The use of a Ga + focused ion beam to modify graphene for device applications. In:
Nanotechnology 23 (25 June 2012). issn: 09574484. doi: 10.1088/0957-4484/23/25/255305.
[4]
Md Sajibul Alam Bhuyan et al. Synthesis of graphene. June 2016. doi: 10.1007/s40089-015-0176-1.
[5]
P. Blake et al. Making graphene visible. In: Applied Physics Letters 91 (6 2007). issn: 00036951. doi:
10.1063/1.2768624.
[6]
Yu Kyoung Ryu Cho et al. Sub-10 Nanometer Feature Size in Silicon Using Thermal Scanning Probe Lithog-
raphy. In: ACS Nano 11 (12 2017). issn: 1936086X. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.7b06307.
[7]
David Cohen-Tanugi and Jerey C. Grossman. Water desalination across nanoporous graphene. In: Nano
Letters 12 (7 July 2012), pp. 36023608. issn: 15306984. doi: 10.1021/nl3012853.
[8]
Dorte R. Danielsen et al. Super-Resolution Nanolithography of Two-Dimensional Materials by Anisotropic
Etching. In: ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces 13 (35 2021). issn: 19448252. doi: 10.1021/acsami.
1c09923.
[9]
Berke Erbas et al. Combining thermal scanning probe lithography and dry etching for grayscale nanopattern
amplication. In: (). doi: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2023-x0r76. url: https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv-
2023-x0r76.
[10]
T. H. Gilani and Dian Rabchuk. Electrical resistivity of gold thin lm as a function of lm thickness. In:
Canadian Journal of Physics 96 (3 2018), pp. 272274. issn: 00084204. doi: 10.1139/cjp-2017-0484.
[11]
Michael Graf et al. Fabrication and practical applications of molybdenum disulde nanopores. In: Nature
Protocols 14 (4 Apr. 2019), pp. 11301168. issn: 17502799. doi: 10.1038/s41596-019-0131-0.
[12]
Samuel Grenadier et al. Dry etching techniques for active devices based on hexagonal boron nitride epilayers.
In: Journal of Vacuum Science I& Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 31 (6 Nov. 2013). issn: 0734-
2101. doi: 10.1116/1.4826363.
[13]
Samuel Tobias Howell et al. Thermal scanning probe lithography-a review. Dec. 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41378-
019-0124-8.
[14]
Michael Hu. Recent advances in reactive ion etching and applications of high-aspect-ratio microfabrication.
In: Micromachines 12 (8 Aug. 2021). issn: 2072666X. doi: 10.3390/mi12080991.
52
==PAGE:53==
[15]
Henri Jansen et al. A survey on the reactive ion etching of silicon in microtechnology. Mar. 1996. doi: 10.
1088/0960-1317/6/1/002.
[16]
Henri Jansen et al. RIE lag in high aspect ratio trench etching of silicon. In: Microelectronic Engineering 35
(1-4 1997), pp. 4550. issn: 01679317. doi: 10.1016/S0167-9317(96)00142-6.
[17]
Bjarke S. Jessen et al. Lithographic band structure engineering of graphene. In: Nature Nanotechnology 14
(4 Apr. 2019), pp. 340346. issn: 17483395. doi: 10.1038/s41565-019-0376-3.
[18]
Simon M. Jowitt et al. Recycling of the rare earth elements. Oct. 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.cogsc.2018.02.008.
[19]
Nolan Lassaline. Generating smooth potential landscapes with thermal scanning-probe lithography. In:
JPhys Materials 7 (1 Jan. 2024). issn: 25157639. doi: 10.1088/2515-7639/ad0f31.
[20]
Nolan Lassaline et al. Freeform Electronic and Photonic Landscapes in Hexagonal Boron Nitride. In: Nano
Letters 21 (19 Oct. 2021), pp. 81758181. issn: 15306992. doi: 10.1021/ACS.NANOLETT.1C02625/SUPPL_
FILE/NL1C02625_SI_001.PDF. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.nanolett.1c02625.
[21]
Francisco Marques-Moros et al. Mirror eect in atomic force microscopy proles enables tip reconstruction.
In: Scientic Reports 10 (1 Dec. 2020). issn: 20452322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-75785-0.
[22]
Luigi Montanari, Ombretta Marconi, and Paolo Fantozzi. Production of alcohol-free beer. 2008. isbn: 9780123738912.
url: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/permissionusematerial.
[23]
NanoFrazor Recipe Book.
[24]
Peterson K Ozili and Ercan Ozen. M P RA Munich Personal RePEc Archive Global energy crisis: impact on
the global economy Global energy crisis: impact on the global economy.
[25]
Filippo Pizzocchero et al. The hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of van der Waals heterostructures.
In: Nature Communications 7 (June 2016). issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11894.
[26]
Soumyabrata Roy et al. Structure, Properties and Applications of Two-Dimensional Hexagonal Boron Nitride.
2021. doi: 10.1002/adma.202101589.
[27]
David Barcons Ruiz et al. Engineering high quality graphene superlattices via ion milled ultra-thin etching
masks. In: Nature Communications 13 (1 Dec. 2022). issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-34734-3.
[28]
Myung E. Suk and N. R. Aluru. Water transport through ultrathin graphene. In: Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters 1 (10 May 2010), pp. 15901594. issn: 19487185. doi: 10.1021/jz100240r.
[29]
Akanksha R. Urade, Indranil Lahiri, and K. S. Suresh. Graphene Properties, Synthesis and Applications: A
Review. Mar. 2023. doi: 10.1007/s11837-022-05505-8.
[30]
K. Vlasov and H. Keppler. Electrical Conductivity of KCl-H2O Fluids in the Crust and Lithospheric Man-
tle. In: Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 127 (4 Apr. 2022). issn: 21699356. doi: 10.1029/
2022JB024080.
[31]
L. Wang et al. One-dimensional electrical contact to a two-dimensional material. In: Science 342 (6158
2013). issn: 10959203. doi: 10.1126/science.1244358.
[32]
Hang Zhang et al. Atomic force microscopy for two-dimensional materials: A tutorial review. In: Optics
Communications 406 (Jan. 2018), pp. 317. issn: 00304018. doi: 10.1016/j.optcom.2017.05.015.
53
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 10
Appendix
10.1
Polymer quality
The original hypothesis of this experiment was that the size of the ake underneath the resist one is patterning
matters for the patterned depth. The idea was that the size of the ake aects the heat capacity which in turn
aects the cooling of the tip and thereby the patterned depth. Instead we (co-student Elias Edvardsen and I) found
that the resist quality was insucient for our purposes. Furthemore, Elias had the idea that the polarazability of
the ake would aect the patterned force, since it is, really, a capactive force between the tip and the sample stage.
We conducted the experiment as follows.
We annealed a hBN sample, left it for a week, and were able to wet the sample in spin coating perfectly.
The method was to use a single-pixel geometry (to minimize tip contamination) and see if there was a correlation
between the patterned depth and the size of the ake. The hypothesis was that the larger the ake, the lower the
pattern depth, because the large heat capacity of the ake cools the tip. It was therefore essential we keep the same
patterning conditions - 1000°C setpoint tip temperature and 6 V force.
We look at three akes of dierent size called A, B and C. First we patterned ake A succesfully twice with a
depth of 23nm ± 2nm. Next, we achieved zero pattern depth on ake B and ake C.
We then returned to ake A, and patterned twice with a depth of 58nm ± 3nm. Then, we failed to pattern
on both ake B and beside ake B (on on top of the SiO2). Since we failed to pattern both on and o
the ake, we conclude it is not a eect due to the ake. Switching to a large concentric circle pattern
geometry achieved depth but with very poor resoluion, even when raising the tip temperature. My co-supervisor,
Nolan, suggested changing the tip, which we did with the same result. Since the pattern failed for the same
patterning conditions, despite the tip change, we conclude it is not an eect due to the tip.
Since we concluded it was not a ake eect and not a tip eect, the only remaining suspect was the resist itself.
So we removed the resist with a hotplate at 250°C for 1 minute, and spin-coated with the same recipe. We repeated
the original procedure, but now even ake A could not be patterned either on the ake or o the ake.
We therefore conclude that the resist quality is sub-optimal. As an attempt to preserve the quality better, I
began storing the polymer solution in the freezer as pr. the manufacturer's datasheet reccomendation.
54
==PAGE:55==
10.2
Heterostrucures on SiN membrane fabrication processes
My co-supervisor, Matias, and Ganesh assmebled three hBN/Gr/hBN/Gr/hBN heterostructures on a SiN membrane
for this project called A,B and C. The fabrication process for each is as follows.
We bathed heterostructure A in chloroform for 2 minutes to remove the PC-adhesive from the stacking
process.
Prior to spin-coating we applied hBN cleaning recipe B, and then spin-coated with a 10 wt % PPA
polymer solution at 2000 RPM, 1000 RPM/s acceleration and a subsequent softbake at 110°C for 2 min. After a
failed attempt at t-SPL patterning and etching, we removed the resist using a hotplate at 250 °C for 1 min, since
the ake was, apparantly, undamaged. In hindsight, it is very likely it was etched from the back. The remaining
fabrication process can be found in chapter (7).
After stacking heterostructure B was placed on a hotplate at 100 °C overnight to improve adhesion of the
stack to the substrate. We bathed it in chloroform for 5 minutes and then directly spin-coated it with 10 wt %
PPA polymer solution at 2000 RPM, 500 RPM/s acceleration and a subsequent softbake at 110°C for 2 min. I
chose a lower acceleration, to avoid a potential mechanical damage in spin-coating, which appears to have been
an unnescesary precaution. The target geometry was 4 holes with target diameters of 1, 0.5 0.25 and 0.1 microns
respectively seperated by 0.5 microns. We then etched the sample using heterostructure etching recipe B for 50
seconds. After etching, it looked as if there was plenty of resist budget left, so we put it back for another 50 seconds
of etching in which it was overetched. In hindsight, this is because it was being etched form the back, so it could
be overetched with still plenty of resist on the top.
We bathed heterostructure C in chloroform for 5 minutes. I spin coated with a new polymer solution as an
underlayer as an attempt to improve adhesion. The new polymer solution is a 33 wt % PMMA-co-MA co-polymer
(ARP-617.03). It was spin-coated at 2000 RPM, 1000 RPM/s acceleration, 60 s spin time with a subsequent soft-
bake at 200 °C for 2 minutes. These settings, according to the datasheet, should yield a 200 nm thick layer. While
this polymer solution can have good adhesion, it is dicult to pattern with t-SPL. I therefore spin-coated the usual
10 wt % PPA polymer solution on top at 2000 RPM, 1000 RPM/s acceleration, 60 s spin time and a subsequent
soft-bake at 110 °C for 2 minutes. The target geometry was the same as heterostructure B - 4 holes with target
diameters of 1, 0.5 0.25 and 0.1 microns respectively seperated by 0.5 microns. These were arranged in a 3x3 grid
according to the center of the membrane with 5 pattens along the central axes. I then etched the sample for 90
seconds using heterostructure etching recipe B.
10.3
Back-side etching
The hypothesis I wanted to test in this experiment is that the heterostructures are being etched from the front, as
usual, but also through the aperture in back. The method was as follows.
I rst placed a plain chip in an acetone bath for 2 minutes followed by an immediate swirl in DI-water and IPA
to remove the photoresist from the preeceding fabrication process. I then spin-coated it upside down with a 33 wt
% PMMA-co-MA co-polymer solution (ARP-617.03) at 2000 RPM, 1000 RPM/s acceleration and 60 seconds spin
time with a subsequent soft-bake at 200 °C for 2 min. Finally, I dry-etched it for 90 seconds using heterostructure
etching recipe B. An optical image of the sample after spin-coating and after etching can be seen in Fig. (10.1).
The SiN membrane is transparant, so we can it back see the backside coated resist from the front. Based on the
change in color, I conclude that the back side is being etched.
55
==PAGE:56==
Figure 10.1: The backside is being etched.
56
==PAGE:57==
Atomically precise lithography using TSPL
Learning objective 1: Fabrication of nanostructures in 2D materials and heterostrucutres
Learning objective 2: Establishment of protocols for fabrication procedure
Learning objective 3: 2D materials production and handling, heterostructure fabrication
Year
2023
2024
Month
Aug
September
October
November
December
January
February
Week nr.
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
TASK
Pore fabrication 
Polymer spin curves
Radius chirp
Single pixel pores
Channel designing
(Stacking)
Nanopore and channel systems fabrication 
Stacking
Homostructure/heterostructure fabrication
(Preliminary liquid transport experiments)
(Liquid transport experiments)
Thesis writing
Theory
Introduction
Results
First draft
Final draft
==PAGE:58==
Atomically precise lithography using TSPL
Learning objective 1: Fabrication of nanostructures in 2D materials and heterostrucutres
Learning objective 2: Establishment of protocols for fabrication procedure
Learning objective 3: 2D materials production and handling, heterostructure fabrication
Year
2023
2024
Month
Aug
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
April
Week nr.
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
TASK
Pore fabrication 
Polymer spin curves
Radius chirp
Single pixel pores
Channel designing
(Stacking)
Nanopore and channel systems fabrication 
Stacking training
Homostructure/heterostructure fabrication
Liquid transport experiments
Thesis writing
Theory
Introduction
Results
