==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Lumped and numerical models of
measurement condenser microphones and
their validation
Yanfei Du (s212372)
March 6, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Condenser Microphone Theory
4
2.1
Condenser Microphone Characteristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Analogous Circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Analogous Circuit of Mechanical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Analogous Circuit of Acoustical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Analysis of Microphone Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Measurement Sound Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology to Estimate the Parameters and Their Validation
17
3.1
COMSOL Model Construction and Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Selection of Geometric Dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Determination of Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.3
Mesh Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.4
Model Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
The Lumped-Element Model for Acoustic System . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Parameters Fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Adjusting Geometric Sizes in 3D Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Adjusting the Hole Size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Results
34
4.1
Estimating Acoustic Values by Existing Formula . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Estimating Acoustic Values by Numerical Model . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Estimating Acoustic Values by Parameters Fitting . . . . . . . . . . .
37
1
==PAGE:3==
4.3.1
Fitting Data for 2D Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
Assumption and Verification for Acoustic Behavior of Each
Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.3
Fitting Data for 3D Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
The Sensitivity of the 2D Model and 3D Model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.5
Results in COMSOL Multiphysics and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.6
Investigation of the Hole Size Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Conclusion
69
6
Appendix.A
71
6.1
The input impedance curve comparison at different gap heights. . . .
71
6.2
The acoustic components’ data measured from the numerical model .
74
6.3
The geometry of different hole sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
In acoustic measurement, condenser microphones play a crucial role due to their
exceptional stability, minimal uncertainty, and capacity to deliver a flat and extensive
frequency response. However, with different application conditions and customer
demand, measurement condenser microphones need ongoing optimization to meet
diverse requirements, such as broader frequency response or proper sensitivity. To
avoid wasting the cost and the energy of producing prototypes, employing a model
simulation technique represents a cost-efficient alternative to replace the traditional
approach if it can give an appropriate prediction about how to optimize the condenser
microphones.
This project is motivated by exploring the acoustic behavior of various acoustic
components in different structure conditions of condenser microphones, for instance,
reducing the distance between the diaphragm and the backplate, and having a
bigger hole size on the backplate, both are mainly implemented by building a
numerical model in COMOSL Multiphysics and researching the lumped model in
LTSpice.
The creation of the numerical model is based on the Br¨uel & Kjær
4134 condenser microphone, because its geometry and simulation instruction can
be found easily online. However, this project is limited by the complexity of 3D
modeling, the numerical model is built as a two-dimensional axisymmetric simplified
cylindrical shape, representing the basic structure of the condenser microphone with
the actual dimensions extracted from the geometry example of the Br¨uel & Kjær
4134 condenser microphone. A method on constructive the lumped model and the
numerical model is introduced in detail in the section 3.
An important aim of this project is to seek an appropriate way to estimate the
values of each acoustic component, which helps summarize the acoustic behavior
pattern and further predict the optimization direction. Two methods of estimating
parameters are applied in this project. The first one shows the limitations of the
lumped model, which requires a more precise circuit structure of the lumped model.
The second method provided a well-estimation of the acoustic parameters and the
behavior of acoustic components, and validated it within the lumped-element model.
In the result section 4 describes three ways to estimate the acoustic component
values and the disadvantages of two of those. Based on that effective method, the
acoustic losses are observed in the holes, not in the gap as theory said, and the
sensitivity can not be predicted accurately. However, the result from the numerical
model proved the result obtained in this project is not wrong, the reason will be
discussed at the end of the section 4.
The whole process was implemented in Matlab version R2021b, and in COMSOL
version 6.1, there might be deviations in the results after the decimal point in
different versions.
3
==PAGE:5==
2
Condenser Microphone Theory
The condenser microphone is named by its structure, illustrated in Figure 1. It
contains a diaphragm on the top of a capsule and an electrode backplate with holes
parallel to the diaphragm above. It connects to an isolator in the back chamber,
where a narrow circular slot exists between the backplate and capsule. Besides,
there is a gap between the diaphragm and the backplate. The gap between them
would form the plates of the active capacitor, which generates the output signal of
the condenser microphone. The distance between the backplate and the diaphragm
is typically 18 µm (±10µm).The thickness of the diaphragm may vary from about
2.2 to 4.4 µm depending on the microphone type.
Figure 1: The left side is the cross-sectional view of condenser microphones [1];
The right side is the appearance of the GRAS 40AG condenser microphone.
When the microphone receives a sound wave, the sound wave will hit the diaphragm
and cause the diaphragm to vibrate and shift, resulting in a change in the gap
distance between the diaphragm and the backplate. The capacitance will also be
changed following the distance difference, generating an AC voltage between the
diaphragm and the backplate. Thus, the electrical signal output by the microphone
is obtained. This process completes the process of converting sound energy into
electrical energy.
2.1
Condenser Microphone Characteristic
Typically, the sensitivity and frequency response are two essential indices to evaluate
the microphone. It is also the basis for choosing a suitable microphone for measuring
specific targets.
4
==PAGE:6==
In the context of sensitivity, it refers to the microphone’s ability (efficiency) to
convert acoustic pressure into an electrical signal, which is generally defined as
the open-circuit output voltage measured by the input excitation at a 94 dB sound
pressure level (SPL), or 1 pascal (Pa) pressure, applied on the diaphragm. Therefore,
the microphone’s sensitivity is usually expressed by the output voltage ratio to the
input pressure, with the units of mV/Pa, or dB(re.mV/Pa). There is the following
relationship between them to convert to each other:
SensitivitydB = 20log10
SensitivitymV/Pa
pInput
(1)
In terms of the sensitivity features, it will be influenced by several factors, such as the
diaphragm size, the diaphragm material, the distance between the diaphragm and
the backplate, etc. According to the formula 2 from the course [2], the polarization
voltage, the size and the material of the diaphragm, and the gap distance are all
significant factors that affect the sensitivity. In the aspect of microphone dimensions,
it is the reason that the changing of the gap distance is one of the main targets to
be researched in this project.
SensitivityM = ESDCMT
x0
(2)
where E is the static polarization voltage, SD is the effective surface of the diaphragm,
CMT is the total compliance within the analogy circuit, and x0 is the distance
between the diaphragm and the backplate.
Frequency response characterizes a microphone’s ability to reproduce audio signals
across a range of frequencies accurately, usually measured in Hertz (Hz).
It is
often depicted as a line graph showing the microphone’s output level in decibels
(dB) relative to the frequency of the input signal. The line graph illustrates how
evenly a microphone can capture sounds, from the lowest bass frequencies to the
highest treble frequencies. The ideal frequency response for a microphone depends
on its intended application, most condenser microphones can generally present a flat
response over the spectrum from 100 Hz to 20 kHz, and some can reach 140k Hz,
depending on the size of the diaphragm.
The frequency response of a condenser microphone is shaped by the similar factors
mentioned above, The size of the diaphragm and gap distance can significantly affect
how it vibrates in response to different frequencies, with larger diaphragms generally
having higher sensitivity to better at capturing lower frequencies. Low-frequency
measurements require a microphone with well-controlled static pressure equalization
and very slow venting. High-frequency measurements are susceptible to diaphragm
stiffness, damping, mass, and diffraction.
5
==PAGE:7==
2.2
Analogous Circuit
To easily represent the working principle of the microphone using the lumped-element
model, the analogies circuit is a simple way to combine electrical, mechanical, and
acoustical systems as a coupled system, which can be used in the same mathematical
logic to calculate these lumped elements. Two types of analogous circuits can be
used to model lumped circuits: impedance analogous circuits and mobility analogous
circuits. In the impedance analogous circuit, the voltage is the analog of force, and
the current is the analog of velocity. In the mobility analogous circuit, the current
is the analog of force, and the force is the analog of velocity.
2.2.1
Analogous Circuit of Mechanical Systems
In mechanical systems, the force f and velocity u act as the voltage and the
current, respectively. Depending on the different analogous types, the force is the
potential variable and the velocity is across variables in the impedance analogous
circuits. But in the mobility analogous circuits, the velocity is the potential variable
and the force is across variables. There are three passive elements like the above
shown corresponding to the resistor, inductor and capacitor in electrical systems
are resistance RM, mass MM and compliance CM, the mechanical compliance and
resistance are assumed to be linear as model here.
Correspondingly, if a circuit is transferred from one type to another, a series arrangement
should be transferred to a parallel arrangement and vice versa. Also, as seen in
Figure 2, on the right side of the figure, the inductor MM is shown as the conductor
on the second row, the conductor CM is shown as the inductor on the third row and
the resistor RM becomes GM which is the reciprocal of itself.
Figure 2: The left side shows the potential variable and the across variable in the
mobility analogous circuit (left) and in the impedance analogous circuit (right); The
right side shows the RLC element in the mobility analogous circuit (left) and in the
impedance analogous circuit (right). [3]
6
==PAGE:8==
According to Newton’s law, the relationship between the force and the mass is
f = MMa, where a is the acceleration. Since the acceleration is the time derivative
of velocity expressed by a = du/dt, the equation relating to the velocities is
f = MM · du
dt = jωMMu
(3)
The mechanical resistance is mainly caused by frictional losses acting as a viscous
damping, and the material is also a reason, for instance, the stiffness and density of
the diaphragm. The basic equation relating to the velocities is
f = RMu
(4)
The mechanical compliance denotes a relationship of spring with force, which gives
f = kMx, where kM is the spring constant, and the mechanical compliance can
be written as CM = 1/kM. Therefore, the equation for the spring relating to the
velocities is
f =
x
CM
=
u
jωCM
(5)
Either impedance or mobility analogous circuits can model mechanical systems,
but it is better to transfer a mechanical diagram to a mobility analog since the
currents in the impedance circuit are not the analogs of individual velocities but
velocity differences. In the mobility analog, the compliance is an inductor whose
side is always grounded because the velocity of the mass (the velocity is flow in the
impedance circuit) is a variable that is measured in relation to zero or rest velocity.
2.2.2
Analogous Circuit of Acoustical Systems
In acoustical systems, the impedance analogous is typically used for electro-acoustic
system shown in 3. In this analogy circuit, the pressure p and volume velocity U
correspond to the voltage and the current, where volume velocity equals velocity
u times cross-section S. The acoustic resistance ZA is defined as the ratio of the
average pressure p over its surface to the total volume velocity U, which gives ZA =
p/U, the unit of it is Ns/m5.
7
==PAGE:9==
Figure 3: The left side shows the potential variable and the across variable in the
mobility analogous circuit (left) and in the impedance analogous circuit (right); The
right side shows the RLC element in the mobility analogous circuit (left) and in the
impedance analogous circuit (right). [3]
The air volume shown in Figure 4 without being compressed but accelerated can
be considered an acoustic mass (when the length is smaller than one-eighth of the
wavelength). Regarding the cylindrical tube in the Figure 4, the mass of the air in
this tube is MM = ρ0Sl, where ρ0 is the density of air. If the air through the tube
is moved with volume velocity U by force f, then the input pressure should follow
the equation p = f/S, which can be expressed as
p = MM
S
· du
dt = MM
S2 · dU
dt = MA
dU
dt
(6)
Therefore, the acoustic mass of the air in the volume becomes:
MA = MM
S2 = ρ0l
S
kg/m4
(7)
Since the acoustic impedance is the ratio of acoustic pressure and volume velocity,
and the phasor pressure is related to the phasor volume velocity by p = jωMAU, so
the acoustic impedance of the mass is
ZA = p
U = jωMA
(8)
There is one thing that needs to be noted that an acoustic mass always accompanies
the acoustic resistance, even though it sometimes could be small.
The acoustic
resistance is a measure of the opposition that a system presents to the flow of an
acoustic wave. In the context of a tube, dissipative losses can occur due to various
factors, including thermal conduction and viscous losses in the medium itself, as
sound waves propagate through it. The acoustic resistance reflects how much sound
energy is converted into heat or absorbed by the medium through which the sound
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 4: A cylindrical tube of air with a length l and a cross-section S.
travels. And the acoustic mass relates to the inertial effects in the acoustic system.
It represents the opposition to the acceleration of the air particles (or medium) in
response to the sound wave. The acoustic mass is more about the mass of air that
moves in reaction to a pressure difference, and the mass of this part of air acts as
the acoustic mass [4].
Figure 5: An acoustic resistance consisting of a fine mesh screen.
As seen in Figure 5, a fine mesh screen acts as an acoustic resistance, where the
volume velocity goes through, causing the pressure difference from the enter terminal
to the outflow terminal, which is expressed by
p = p1 −p2
(9)
Hence, the relationship of pressure difference with the volume velocity gives
p = RAU
(10)
Relating to the structure of condenser microphones, several holes on the backplate
influence the diaphragm’s tension and the static pressure force for the gap. At the
same time, when the length of the hole meets the prerequisite from the book [5]
0.005 <
√
l < a < 0.002/
p
f
9
==PAGE:11==
where l is the length of the hole and a is the radius of the hole in meter, f is
the frequency in Hz. These holes can be considered as tubes with small physical
dimensions ), each of them can behave with both resistance and mass, which can be
expressed (when the end correction is neglected) by the equation below:
ZA = RA + jωMA N · s/m5
(11)
If a closed volume is full of compressed air by an applied force without acceleration,
it would act as an acoustic compliance. One side of the volume must always be at
“ground potential,” represented by a terminal residing outside of the volume, which
is subjected to the ambient atmospheric pressure, equivalent to a sound pressure
level of zero. Consequently, the acoustic masses and the acoustic resistances should
connect directly, and then acoustic compliances come [3]. An enclosed volume of
air is represented in Figure 6, where the force is applied to one side of the closed
volume, and the air is compressed by the motion. According to the mechanical
equation f = 1/CM
R
udt, rearranging the equation gives
p = f
S =
1
CM
R
Sudt
S2
=
R
Udt
CA
(12)
In this case, the acoustic impedance related to acoustic compliance is
ZA = p
U =
1
jωCA
(13)
Figure 6: The enclosed volume with compressed air acts as an acoustic compliance.
2.3
Analysis of Microphone Construction
To sum all the circuits mentioned above into one coupled system, a simple coupled
circuit from the course [2] is introduced in Fig 7.
The circuit parts present an
electrical system, mechanical system, and acoustic system from left to right.
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 7: The simple coupled circuit to represent condenser microphone referred
from [2]
In the acoustic system, the analogy process was mentioned in the section 2.2. The
definitions of different analogous acoustic components, which are acoustic mass M,
acoustic resistance R and acoustic compliance C, were declared in the literature [6]
[7]. Here, the holes on the measurement condenser microphone’s backplate can be
considered open tubes, the whole geometry of the backplate and the air gap between
the diaphragm and the backplate can be considered closed volume. In this case, the
lumped-parameter elements for the acoustical system could be calculated by the
given formula expressed below:
C = V
ρc2
(m4s2/kg)
(14)
M = ρl∗
S
(kg/m4)
(15)
where V is the volume of a certain cavity, ρ = 1.2kg/m3 is the mass density of the
air density, c = 343m/s is the speed of sound in the air, S is the effective section
area of the diaphragm, and l∗is effective length depending on how this tube exposed
in a sound field. The letter a in the formula below is the radius of the acoustic hole.
lf = 8a
3π = 0.8488a
Flanged tube
(16)
lu = 0.6133a
Unflanged tube
(17)
11
==PAGE:13==
A flanged tube in acoustics typically refers to a tube with an open end that is
terminated in a way that effectively increases its diameter at the end. This type
of tube can affect the acoustic impedance at the open end of the tube, modifying
the reflection and transmission of sound waves at that boundary. An unflanged
tube, by contrast, has a simple open end without any modifications that would
alter its effective diameter at the termination, which means the tube ends without
any extension or broadening at the edge.
A flanged end is often considered to
approximate an ideal radiation condition more closely into free space, as it helps
diffuse sound waves more efficiently than an unflanged end.
Apart from the acoustic system, the mechanical system is also an important part
due to the mechanical properties of the diaphragm. When the sound wave hits the
diaphragm, the different positions on the diaphragm are applied to an inequivalent
force moving in different directions because of the diaphragm vibration. By the
restriction of the edge, the fast movement happens in the center of the membrane.
Even though the previous section introduced that the size of the membrane and the
gap distance have a huge effect on receiving and transferring the sound waves. Still,
the tension, thickness, density of the membrane and the gain for the transducer
within the mechanical–electrical analogies will also cause a change in the sensitivity.
The mechanical gain can be calculated by
Gainmechanical =
E
CMDx0
(18)
where E = 200V is the static polarization voltage, CMD is mechanical compliance,
x0 is the distance between the diaphragm and the backplate.
Although the parameters of membrane material can be easily obtained from their
material properties, there is no exact method to measure the membrane tension
during the measurement microphone working by modern technology.
Thus, the
membrane tension is always an unknown value for simulating the numerical models,
which can be only approximately guessed.
According to the ideal formulas for
calculating the mechanical compliance and mass, which were introduced from [4]
representing by:
CMD =
1
8πT
(19)
MMD = 4
3πa2tρ1
(20)
where a is the radius of the membrane, t is the thickness of the membrane, ρ1 is the
membrane density, T is the membrane tension, which is typically greater than 2000
N/m from the book [3]. In this project, the parameters were adopted as a = 4.5mm,
t = 5µm, ρ1 = 8900kg/m3, and T = 3160N/m, which are given from the Br¨uel &
Kjær 4134 condenser microphone COMSOL instruction [8].
Regarding the electrical system, the condenser microphone structure needs to be
considered again. As shown in Figure 8, the right plate acts as the diaphragm of the
12
==PAGE:14==
microphone and the left plate acts as the backplate. When quiescent DC voltage e
is applied between two plates, the positive and negative charges are stored on the
right and left plates, respectively. The interaction of charges leads to the deflection
of the diaphragm so that the distance between two plates will be decreased until the
mechanical compliance of the diaphragm produces an opposing force that balances
the electrostatic force.
Figure 8: The model of the parallel-plate capacitor, referred from [4]
Since the static capacitance within the electrical circuit is
CE0 = ε0S/x0
(21)
and the electric gain within the circuit is
Gainelectric = E · CE0
x0
(22)
where the ε0 = 8.85∗10−12 is the permittivity of the air, and the entire theory could
be found in [4], which is used directly in this case, the electrical capacitance of the
plates can be expressed as
CE =
ε0S
x0 + x(t) =
ε0S/x0
1 + x(t)/x0
=
CE0
1 + x(t)/x0
(23)
where S is the area of the plates, x0 represents the static separation between the
two plates (the diaphragm and the backplate in actual condenser microphones) when
only a static polarization voltage Eis present. Consequently, x0 must always be less
than the actual distance x(t) between the two plates when the voltage is applied on.
13
==PAGE:15==
Accordingly, the total voltage across the plates is given by the total charge:
E + e(t) = Q + q(t)
CE
≃Q1 + x(t)/x0
CE0
+ q(t)
CE0
(24)
where the term q(t)x(t)/x0 is neglected due to it is small and nonlinearity.
Relating the relationship between the capacitor and the voltage, expression as E =
Q/CE0, the above equation can be rearranged with
e(t) = E x(t)
x0
+ q(t)
CE0
(25)
There are two ways that the condenser microphone can get the power supply: the
first is to use an external polarized power to get the DC voltage to the transducer
element, and the other is to use a pre-polarized material to get the power.
Prepolarized condenser microphones, also known as electret condenser microphones,
use a permanently charged material, which is electret, to provide the polarization
voltage between the microphone’s diaphragm and the backplate, so it does not
require an external power source for polarization but does require a power source,
such as phantom power or a battery, for operating the preamplifier and other
circuitry. Prepolarized microphones are typically used with Constant Current Power
(CCP) preamplifiers and can use standard coaxial cables, making them cost-effective
and versatile for various applications, including studio recording, acoustic measurement,
etc.
Externally polarized condenser microphones require an external voltage source (typically
around 200 volts) to apply the polarization voltage between the diaphragm and the
backplate, and there is no polymer coating in the backplate. This voltage is typically
provided through phantom power supplied by the audio interface or a dedicated
power supply. They are the more precise and stable types of microphones, but they
are also more expensive and complex to use than prepolarized microphones due to
the need for an external high-voltage supply.
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 9:
(a) shows pre-polarized microphone with internal negative charge
polarizing the capsule; (b) shows externally polarized microphone layout with
external positive charge polarizing the capsule. [9]
2.4
Measurement Sound Field
Depending on the measurement scenarios and intended applications, three types
of measurement microphones are used in different sound field scenarios: free field,
pressure field, and random incidence. These microphones operate similarly at lower
frequencies but differently at higher frequencies. Depending on the different applications,
one can meet the needs of a specific microphone application below.
A free field is a situation without reflection by any disturbing objects. The signal
the microphone receives is the zero-degree incident sound in this field type. The
anechoic chambers or larger open areas are ideal for acting as a free field. Unlike
the ideal occasion, the presence of the microphone would affect the measurement, but
it influences practical measurement. In this case, free-field microphones are designed
to measure the sound pressure as it was before the microphone was introduced to
the sound field, which can compensate for the disturbances caused by itself to the
sound field.
The free-field microphone is designed to decrease the microphone’s sensitivity by
the same amount as the acoustical pressure increases in front of the diaphragm
(due to the diffraction effect). This is obtained by increasing the internal acoustical
damping in the microphone cartridge. The result is an output from the microphone,
which is proportional to the sound pressure, as it existed before the microphone was
introduced into the sound field.
A pressure field means a situation in enclosures or chambers smaller than the
wavelength where the phase and magnitude are the same at any position in the field.
15
==PAGE:17==
It is widely used to test pressure inside a small structure and to test the calibration
of microphones. The pressure microphones are designed for this occasion to measure
the actual sound pressure on the surface of the microphone’s diaphragm because it
would measure the sound pressure on the boundary mounted on a boundary as a
part of a closed volume as an ear simulator.
A diffuse field is defined as a situation with the same sound pressure everywhere in
the room, and the sound arrives with equal probability and level from all directions.
To obtain such conditions, the room could be a reverberate room in practice to get
a reflection in each direction.
16
==PAGE:18==
3
Methodology to Estimate the Parameters and
Their Validation
In the previous chapter, the structure and working principle of a condenser microphone
were introduced.
Besides, the analogy circuit of the condenser microphone was
also discussed and constructed.
However, due to the complexity of the acoustic
components within the circuit, the results obtained from the established formula are
not accurate enough to represent the acoustic behavior. Additionally, the formula
for acoustic resistance is not available in existing books, making it difficult to design
microphones using lumped models.
To explore a new solution to better estimate the values of acoustic components, the
coupled lumped-element model and the finite element simulation software will be
used in a pure acoustic system to observe the trend of each component when changing
the dimensions of the microphone, i.e. the gap distance between the diaphragm and
the backplate, and the size of the hole in the backplate. Compared to the formula
estimation and validated by the lumped model, further research on the performance
of sensitivity as the physical dimension of the microphone changes.
3.1
COMSOL Model Construction and Simulation
In the actual physical world, some models have relatively complex structures, such
as irregular geometric shapes and nonlinear behaviors. Simple formulas often cannot
provide accurate prediction results. Therefore, the Finite Element Method (FEM)
and the Boundary Element Method (BEM) are introduced. The FEM uses approximation
methods to simulate actual physical models. It treats a huge and complex model
as thousands of or even millions of finite elements (depending on the mesh fine).
These finite elements are modeled into simple equations, which are then assembled
into larger systems of equations to model the overall problem. FEM then obtains
an approximate solution by minimizing the associated error function using the
variational method. The BEM only requires discretization of the domain’s boundaries
instead of the whole volume. BEM is based on transforming differential equations
that govern a physical phenomenon into integral equations rather than values in the
entire space defined by partial differential equations. This is done by applying the
boundary integral equation method to the domain’s boundaries.
The numerical model in this project is based on the example of Br¨uel & Kjær 4134
condenser microphone, because it offers the geometry model example and detailed
instruction freely and can be easily found online. And this model is implemented in
a numerical analysis software, COMSOL Multiphysics, by applying the FEM and
BEM. Before building the numerical model, the dimensions of Br¨uel & Kjær 4134
condenser microphone from different sources are not entirely the same.
That is
why the author chose to extract the dimension values directly measured from the
17
==PAGE:19==
geometry of the COMSOL example model to ensure research accuracy.
3.1.1
Selection of Geometric Dimensions
Since building and analyzing a similar three-dimensional model is relatively complicated.
Here, a two-dimensional axisymmetric simplified model will be implemented using a
numerical analysis software, COMSOL Multiphysics. If only considering the acoustic
system, the 2D simplified model contains the diaphragm (without mechanical properties),
the backplate (without electrical properties), and the holes in the backplate. Thus,
the gap, the hole, and the cavity were represented by different cylindrical sizes. (The
name could reference the section 3.2).
When extracting the dimensions from the geometry of the COMSOL example,
the diaphragm radius, hole size, and the distance between the diaphragm and the
backplate can be easily obtained. However, since the hole and the backplate were
represented separately in the 2D simplified model for this project, and the shape of
the backplate for Br¨uel & Kjær 4134 condenser microphone is not easy to calculate,
see Fig 10
Figure 10: The blue part is the extracted volume of the whole backplate including
the hole, represented in one-twelveth slice from the COMSOL model example.
Thus, the equivalent volume of the cavity is calculated by the total volume of the
backplate minus the volume of six holes, expressed by:
Vbackplate −Vhole = Vcavity
(26)
18
==PAGE:20==
Vbackplate = 1.132 ∗10−8 ∗12 = 1.3584 ∗10−7 m3
(27)
Vhole = π ∗(0.5 ∗10−3)2 ∗0.837 ∗10−3 ∗6 = 3.944 ∗10−9 m3
(28)
Vcavity = 1.3584 ∗10−7 −3.944 ∗10−9 = 131.9 m3
(29)
where the radius of the hole is 0.5 ∗10−3m.
In terms of the height of the hole, because the hole in the backplate is not a regular
shape and the bottom part of the hole was merged into the back cavity, that is why
the height of the hole in this project was only extracted from its shortest length,
and the length is 0.837 ∗10−3m. The entire dimensions could see Table 1
Radius of the diaphragm
Height of the gap
Radius of the hole
4.5(mm)
18.6(um)
0.5(mm)
Radius of the cavity
Height of the cavity
Height of the hole
4.5(mm)
2.1(mm)
0.837(mm)
Volume of the backplate
Volume of six holes
Equivalent volume of the cavity
135.84(mm3)
3.944(mm3)
131.9(mm3)
Table 1: The basic dimensions for building condenser microphone in COMSOL.
Therefore, from the bottom to the top, the gap, the hole, and the cavity are shown
respectively in Fig 11. The hole in the 2D axisymmetrical model could only be
placed in the center (which is next to the symmetry axis). Otherwise, the shape of
the hole will become a thin ring instead of a cylinder after the rotation.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 11: The geometry of the simplified condenser microphone model built in
2D axisymmetric in COMSOL.
Figure 12: The visualized 3D shapes formed by rotating the 2D model.
20
==PAGE:22==
3.1.2
Determination of Boundary Conditions
Properly setting boundary conditions is essential for obtaining accurate simulation
results, it can specify the behavior at the boundaries of the simulation domain.
The Thermoviscous Acoustic−Frequency Domain was chosen to solve the acoustic
problem because this physics domain provides the necessary equations and boundary
conditions to simulate acoustic waves while accounting for both thermal and viscous
effects. The COMSOL model in this project has very small dimensions and the
thermal and viscous effects in a fluid medium should be taken into account. The
thermal effect refers to changes in temperature within the fluid medium due to the
compression and rarefaction associated with acoustic waves. And the viscous effect
refers to acoustic energy dissipation due to internal friction. Both of the above will
cause losses happening in the simulation process.
In the list of subsections of this physics interface, the ’WALL’ is used to define
boundaries representing the enclosed spaces because when the sound moves to the
termination, it has a total reflection, which would affect the wave movement. In
this case, the ’WALL’ includes all solid/rigid boundaries to model the behavior of
acoustic waves at solid boundaries. Besides, under this physics interface, the velocity
with 1m/s speed should be applied on the bottom surface of the gap (which is the
diaphragm).
3.1.3
Mesh Selection
Another crucial step in the simulation process in COMSOL is to set the mesh on
the model. The mesh directly influences the model’s accuracy, convergence, and
computational efficiency. When the model is divided into many small pieces, it is
much more likely to have an accurate solution capturing more details of the physical
phenomena and geometry(e.g., regions where you expect rapid changes). However,
over-accuracy should not be considered because it will cost increased computational
resources and required time.
For determining a fine mesh, the relationship between the mesh size and the wavelength
should be carefully considered. Generally, the mesh element size should be no larger
than one-tenth to one-sixth of the shortest wavelength in the simulation domain to
limit the size of the largest elements. Since the wavelength is much shorter at higher
frequencies according to the wavelength equation, the wavelength is calculated by
λ = c
f = 343/31623 = 1.08 ∗10−2(m)
(30)
where c is the speed of the sound, f is the frequency, so the maximum element size
should be smaller than one-tenth of the wavelength, here was set 2.3 ∗10−4. The
minimum element size is 1.51 ∗10−6.
21
==PAGE:23==
The maximum element growth rate controls the rate at which element sizes change
by moving away from delicate regions to coarse regions in the mesh, which helps to
smooth mesh density transitions. Here, the value is set at 1.3, meaning an element’s
size will not increase by more than 30% compared to its neighboring element. The
curvature factor controls how the mesh adapts to a curved surface, in this case, 0.3
was set to denser meshes near curved regions. The narrow region resolves to control
the mesh density in thin or narrow features of the geometry; here, set 1 means the
resolution in narrow regions will be the same as the global element size.
Precisely in mesh setting, Boundary layer meshing is crucial when modeling processes
with significant gradients near surfaces, such as in fluid flow, heat transfer, and
boundary-layer-dominated phenomena.
That is why the boundary layers should
be used in the mesh setting.
From the definitions, the mesh in the boundary
layer should be fine enough to resolve the steep gradients near the wall, requiring
several layers of progressively finer elements near the boundary. The thickness of the
layer determines the extent of the boundary layer region where the viscous effects
domain is. Due to the different sizes of each geometry component, the properties
of two different boundary layers should correspond to the bigger and smaller sizes
separately.
Figure 13: The interpret graph for meshing the first boundary layer.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 14: (a) is the interpreted graph for meshing the second boundary layer;
(b) is the display of mesh details at both ends of the narrow gap during the second
boundary layer meshing.
Compared to the gap, the size of the hole and the size of the cavity seem much
larger. Thus, the first boundary layer see in Fig 13, was applied on the solid wall
of the hole and the cavity. To get an accuracy resolution, six layers were set in
the simulation with a 1.5 stretching factor, and the boundary layer thickness was
set twice smaller than the smallest geometry edge, here is 4 ∗10−6. The second
boundary layer for smaller sizes shown in Fig 14, only includes the three boundaries
of the gap. Since the gap size is too tiny to insert many layers, in this case, only
one layer with 1.2 stretching factor was used in the simulation, but the thickness is
the same.
Free Triangular is a common method to compute fluid dynamics (CFD) and finite
element analysis (FEA). The advantage is it offers flexibility in mesh generation,
which means complex geometries with irregular shapes or intricate features do not
limit it. Thus, this project used the free triangular mesh to mesh the remaining
geometry part.
3.1.4
Model Construction
In the process of estimating acoustic components, the primary objective was to
focus on a key parameter: the input acoustic impedance. Input impedance is a
critical measure that reveals how an acoustic system reacts to external stimuli, such
as sound waves, by comparing the relationship between incoming sound pressure
and the velocity of the sound wave as it enters the system.
This parameter is
essential for assessing how efficiently an acoustic system can convert sound waves
into mechanical vibrations. The input impedance is accomplished by calculating
two core components: the input pressure and the input volume velocity at the
diaphragm, which are directly measured by the boundary probes on the diaphragm
from the simulation environment.
23
==PAGE:25==
Mathematically, the input pressure is expressed as the ratio of the total pressure
(accounting for the entire acoustic energy) over the surface area of the diaphragm.
The input volume velocity quantifies the velocity of the sound wave over frequencies
as it enters the system. By examining the ratio of input pressure to input volume
velocity, the result shows the magnitude and the phase, which helps us understand
the acoustic features ranging from 1 Hz to 31,623 Hz.
To better observe the acoustic behavior of the numerical model in COMSOL, the
height of the gap gets focused, based on the point when the height of the gap is the
same as the height of the cavity, then research the height of the gap decreases to
the same height with the real microphone, even to much smaller to find potential
correlations.
Given an example, the 2D axisymmetric model with the 2.1 mm height of the gap
(the same height as the cavity, see Fig 15), the impedance graph is given by the
processing result, shown in Fig 16
Figure 15: The geometry of the simplified condenser microphone with 2.1 mm
height.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 16: The acoustic input impedance with 2.1 mm height from COMSOL
model.
Fig 16 shows that the lower the frequency f, the higher the impedance Z. The
attenuation of impedance keeps going until the resonance point has a trough, followed
by a short rise to a peak, then drops.
From this figure, the magnitude at the
trough represents the acoustic resistance RAS.
Due to the relationship between
total impedance and reactance, the acoustic compliance can be performed by
C =
1
iωZ
(31)
Then, the compliance curve is plotted by simulation processing in COMSOL, shown
in 17, where the flat-like part at middle frequencies is the combination of cavity’s
compliance and gap’s compliance, and the flattest part at higher frequencies is the
gap’s compliance. The flat part in the compliance curve characterizes the system’s
average ability to respond to acoustic pressures without the influence of resonance
effects. The system’s proper ’static’ or ’inherent’ compliance can be measured by
extracting the compliance value from this flat region. Since it is relatively hard
to find the flat part at higher frequencies, the magnitude at the flattest part by
calculating is assumed to be the compliance value of the gap.
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 17: The acoustic compliance with 2.1 mm height from COMSOL model.
Apart from the values above, the resonance frequency can be found under the lossless
condition, which means the dynamic viscosity, bulk viscosity, thermal conductivity,
and heat capacity at constant pressure were all set to infinitely small in the setting of
fluid properties in COMSOL, to avoid any intrinsic losses. Here, this trough typically
represents a resonance frequency where the microphone’s diaphragm vibrates most
freely. At this resonance frequency, the acoustic impedance primarily consists of the
acoustic resistance rather than the reactance components (mass and compliance).
Based on this way to estimate the value of each acoustic component corresponding
to the acoustic analogy circuit (see in Fig 19), the expression for this circuit is
Z =
1
iωCgap
+ (Ras + iωMas +
1
iωCcav
)
(32)
thus, by given impedance Z and other values, the acoustic mass can be easily
calculated by
Mas =
Z −
1
iωCgap −Ras −
1
iωCcav
iω
(33)
Besides, the curve of acoustic mass is represented in Fig 18 with a constant value
by a part of a flat curve at middle and high frequencies independent of frequencies.
The magnitude at the resonance frequency point is the expected mass value. In
terms of the example with 2.1 mm height of the gap, the acoustic mass is 2475.95
kg/m4 at the resonance frequency 2818 Hz and seems constant at the mid and
higher frequency range.
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 18: The acoustic mass with 2.1 mm height by calculating given known
values.
3.2
The Lumped-Element Model for Acoustic System
Circuit simulation is to use of specialized software to simulate a designed circuit,
simulate the actual circuit situation, and analyze it. In actual circuit testing, it
is difficult to reproduce the implementation environment, but simulation can be
easily achieved. The lumped-element mode simulation is implemented in LTSpice.
Through lumped-element analysis and simulation, the estimation method can be
tested to see if it is valid.
Familiarity with the acoustic analogous circuits makes it easier to pick the acoustic
system out of the entire analogous circuit for further research.
When only the
acoustic system is considered, the diaphragm is regarded as a whole entity to moves
back and forth, which means the vibrating diaphragm will transfer the constant
pressure or volume velocity to the back cavity through the hole.
In this case, it is assumed that the sound hits the diaphragm with 1 m3/s speed,
comes into a condenser microphone, then goes through the diaphragm and dives
into the backplate via the holes. According to the analogy circuit’s principles, the
acoustic impedance inside the hole should be series with the closed back cavity and
reach the ground. Another smaller cavity should be connected directly to the ground
and configured in parallel with the former circuit branch. One thing needs to be
noted: the air gap volume is called ’gap’, and the air volume of the volume of the
backplate minus the volume of holes is called ’cavity’ in the following sections.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 19: The acoustic analogous circuit with acoustic components including
acoustic compliance of the gap and the cavity, acoustic mass of the hole and acoustic
resistance of the hole, built and simulated in LTSpice.
From the description above, the acoustic analogous circuit drawn in LTSpice is
shown in Fig 19, the components Mas and Ras represent the acoustic mass and
acoustic resistance inside the hole due to viscous and thermal losses. The simulation
performs an AC analysis on the circuit, using an octave sweep with 1000 points,
from 10 Hz to 31623 Hz. When building the acoustic analogous circuit, ideally,
the resistance (Ω) of an inductor is often considered to be zero, which is to ensure
the inductor accurately represents inertial effects (like mass or density in a fluid
medium) without adding unwanted acoustic energy dissipation.
But the situation of capacitors is slightly different, the resistance (Ω) of a capacitor
does not need to be zero. The compliance represented by capacitors indicates the
ability of a system to store potential energy in the form of compressed air, and
mathematically, it is inversely proportional to the impedance, which is why some
level of resistive losses in this condition could be acceptable.
3.3
Parameters Fitting
For easily adjusting individual acoustical components for estimation, a visualization
way was implemented in MATLAB, which provides a Curve Fitting Toolbox to use
mathematical techniques to find the curve or surface that best represents a series of
28
==PAGE:30==
data points. The tool can represent the type of curve to fit the data with a given
mathematical model, which could be linear, polynomial, or non-linear but has a
customized function. The given mathematical model is the objective function with
several unknown variables, the tool uses the least squares method to minimize the
sum of the squares of the residuals, trying different values in the setting range to
fit the data closely. Once the best-fitting parameters are found, the fit’s quality is
evaluated using statistical measures such as the coefficient of determination (R2)
root-mean-square error (RMSE) and analysis of residuals to assess how well the
model describes the data, typically above 0.99 could be the well fit.
Based on that, the Curve Fitting Tool in MATLAB could be introduced as the second
way to estimate the parameters of the acoustic components. The implementation
procedure is to extract the input impedance from the numerical model and import it
into MATLAB, use the fitting tool and proper guessing point to find the approximate
values of each variable, then type them in the lumped model circuit in LTSpice and
simulate the model with given parameters.
Besides, since limitations of the initial lumped model circuit characterization microphones,
an improved version of the analogy circuit is introduced, especially considering there
might be losses inside the gap. The improved analogy circuit aims to increase the
accuracy of the lumped model for predicting the behavior of the acoustic system, so
two extra components are added: the acoustic resistance and the acoustic mass to
represent the impedance in the gap.
Figure 20:
The improved acoustic analogous circuit with each component in
LTSpice.
These new elements are connected in series with the volume of the gap, further
refining the model’s precision. According to the structure of the acoustic analogy
29
==PAGE:31==
circuit in Fig 20, the circuit is divided into two branches
Z1 = iωMgap + Rgap +
1
iωCgap
(34)
Z2 = iωMhole + Rhole +
1
iωCcav
(35)
followed, the equation of the total input impedance can be expressed by
Z =
1
1
Z1 +
1
Z2
=
1
1
iωMgap+Rgap+
1
iωCgap +
1
iωMhole+Rhole+
1
iωCcav
(36)
Since the logarithmic scale to both axes of a graph can make the graph more intuitive
and describe how specific properties change with the frequency, the value on the
x-axis is 10log(frequency), the value on the y-axis is 10log(abs(impedance)), the
corresponding equations for y(x) in the custom equation setting of Curve Fitting
Tool is written as
y = log10

1
1
Rhole+Mhole∗2iπ∗10x+
1
Ccav∗2iπ∗10x +
1
Rgap+Mgap∗2iπ∗10x+
1
Cgap∗2iπ∗10x

(37)
where Rhole, Mhole, Ccav, Rgap, Mgap, and Cgap are replaced by unknown parameters
a, b, c, d, e, f.
Due to the Curve Fitting Tool of MATLAB does not work well when dealing with
very small or huge numbers, to avoid the deviation of estimating from very small or
huge numbers, the function for y(x) is given in the way below:
y = f(x) = log10

1
1
a∗106+b∗2iπ∗10x+
1
c∗10−12∗2iπ∗10x +
1
d∗106+e∗2iπ∗10x+
1
f∗10−12∗2iπ∗10x

(38)
In addition to the fitting equation, the reliability of the fitting results is inherently
linked to the quality of the starting point and also requires our attention. There are
several parameters that control the behavior of the fitting algorithm to further fit
to data in Fit Options. The first one is ’DiffMaxChange’, which sets the maximum
change in coefficients that the fitting algorithm will use for a single iteration. If
set too low, the algorithm might take unnecessarily small steps, leading to a longer
convergence time, so 0.5 as the value is used in fitting processing.
The second one is ’MaxFunEvals’, which specifies the maximum number of function
evaluations that the fitting algorithm will attempt before stopping. Increasing this
number gives the algorithm more opportunities to find a good fit, which can be
30
==PAGE:32==
especially helpful for complex models or challenging datasets. Therefore, 2000 is
used as the value in fitting processing. The next one is ’MaxIter’, which determines
the maximum number of iterations (or steps) the fitting algorithm will take. Similar
to ’MaxFunEvals’, increasing ’MaxIter’ can allow more thorough exploration and
potentially a better fit, especially for complex models. Therefore, 2000 is used as
the value in fitting processing.
Last but not least, since the parameters of components of the acoustic analogy
circuit are all positive values, thus, the lower estimation number should be zero in
Fitting Options to make sure all values are greater than zero. Besides, it is essential
to give a proper starting point for this tool to estimate, here, the estimated values
from the first estimating way are used as the starting point, see in Fig 21.
Figure 21: The interface of the curve fitting tool under the example of 2.1 mm
gap height.
The corresponding parameters of acoustic components are shown below.
Rhole( kg
m4s)
Mhole( kg
m4)
Ccav (m4
kg )
Rgap( kg
m4s)
Mgap( kg
m4)
Cgap(m4
kg )
5.399 ∗106
2280
1.118 ∗10−12
7.945 ∗10−2
11.72
0.9957 ∗10−12
Table 2: The six parameters of acoustic components estimated by curve fitting
tool under the example of 2.1 (mm).
31
==PAGE:33==
3.4
Adjusting Geometric Sizes in 3D Models
With the existing microphone geometry from the Br¨uel & Kjær 4134 condenser
microphone [8], the gap distance could be increased or decreased by extruding
the diaphragm’s top surface or bottom surface.
In this project for simulating
the 3D model, the gap distance is measured from the initial height of 18.6 µm
decreases to 12.6 µm with 1 µm step to observe the effect of the decreasing gap
distance on the sensitivity as the same dimensions with the actual microphone,
without the difference of other dimensions.
Setting a proper mesh as guided in
the COMSOL model instruction, since the boundary layer mesh is related to the
maximum frequency, to find a finer and more accurate result, the maximum frequency
in initial parameters should be modified to 60K Hz, to ensure the mesh dimension
is smaller than the wavelength.
After that, the mechanical system, electrical system, and multiphysics system should
be disabled or deleted to ensure the simulation is only researched in a pure acoustic
system.
3.5
Adjusting the Hole Size
It is believed that the size of the hole is also an essential factor in influencing the
frequency response and the microphone’s sensitivity. This section aims to research
different hole radii from 0.2 mm to 0.9 mm and compare them to the standard
microphone’s hole with a 0.5 mm radius.
However, with the enlargement of the hole size, part of the hole will be moved to
the center, but it is unsuitable to be placed in the center due to its manufacturing
structure. So, the final decision is to make one point at the left side of the hole fixed
and broaden the radius of the hole based on that point. The entire position of the
hole will shift to the position that is close to the rim, but fixed at one point could
be regarded as no position movement within the tolerant range, only size.
However, the mechanical resistance is not included in this project due to the lumped
model match the physics of the FEM model.
The mechanical figure with different hole sizes is shown in 22. The geometry of each
model is provided by the GRAS’s staff, modified based on the Br¨uel & Kjær 4134
condenser microphone geometry model, and the following simulation is conducted
by the author using the same way as mentioned before.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 22: The comparison of mechanical drawing with different hole’s radius
fixed at the same point on the left corner.
33
==PAGE:35==
4
Results
This sector illustrates the result of two methods for estimating the acoustic values.
They are investigated because there is a deviation of the acoustic values calculated
by the ideal formula from the real microphone simulation model, which is unsuitable
for applying the lumped-element model to obtain the real performance of frequency
response and the sensitivity from the coupled circuit. However, the first method
that was introduced only works for the larger gap distances above 0.5 mm. The
functioning is not working anymore when the gap distance is the same as the
actual microphone model, typically around 20 µm, which is why the second one
is introduced to compensate for the limitation of the first method.
The second method verified its effectiveness in both the 2D and 3D models by the
lumped and numerical models. Based on that, the study of the effect of gap distance
and hole size on the microphone’s sensitivity and acoustic behavior is implemented
by this method and compared to the real microphone. The following result shows
that acoustic losses mostly happen in the hole instead of the gap, which is the
result does not meet the theory. Still, the result from the numerical model gives
the explanation that this situation only occurs in a pure acoustic system, because
lacking the mechanical properties of the diaphragm, which is also an essential factor
that needs to be considered carefully when researching the microphone model.
4.1
Estimating Acoustic Values by Existing Formula
According to the formula and the model dimensions described in the section 3, the
compliance value of the cavity is calculated by 14
Ccav = pi ∗4.5 ∗10−3 ∗2.1 ∗10−3
1.2 ∗3432
= 9.4629 ∗10−13(m4s2/kg)
Since the air inside the hole (which is on the backplate) is not exposed to two specific
types of sound fields, the correct acoustic mass value is hard to tell. However, the
three types of exposed sound fields listed below can be compared later to the results
of other estimation methods. They are expressed as a flanged tube on both sides,
an unflanged tube on both sides, a tube with a flange on one side and an unflanged
on another side by the Eq 15
• Flanged on both sides: l∗= 0.8488∗2∗0.5∗10−3+0.837∗10−3 = 1.7∗10−3(m)
The acoustic mass is M = 1.2∗1.7∗10−3
π(0.5∗10−3)2 = 2597.4(kg/m4)
• Unflanged on both sides: l∗= 0.6133∗2∗0.5∗10−3+0.837∗10−3 = 1.5∗10−3(m)
The acoustic mass is M = 1.2∗1.5∗10−3
π(0.5∗10−3)2 = 2291.8(kg/m4)
34
==PAGE:36==
• Differ conditions: l∗= 0.8488 ∗0.5 ∗10−3 + 0.6133 ∗0.5 ∗10−3 + 0.837 ∗10−3 =
1.6 ∗10−3(m)
The acoustic mass is M = 1.2∗1.6∗10−3
π(0.5∗10−3)2 = 2444.6(kg/m4)
The result above can serve as a reference to the following estimations in 4.2 and
4.3. It could be regarded as a starting point to justify whether the estimated value
is correct or not. For instance, the acoustic compliance is proportional to the air
volume. Thus, the acoustic compliance value is supposed to decrease with the gap
height dropping.
4.2
Estimating Acoustic Values by Numerical Model
Based on the estimating method from the section 3.1 to extract acoustic mass,
acoustic resistance, and acoustic compliance in COMSOL, the numerical model was
simulated in COMSOL, measuring the gap height decreased from 2.1 mm to 0.05
mm with 0.3 mm step, and continue dropped from 0.05 mm (which equals to 50
µm) to 10 µm with 2 µm step. Even though the gap height for real condenser
microphones is around 16-24 µm, the research of the wider height range can better
present the acoustic component’s behavior pattern.
The values from the numerical model are supposed to be typed into the lumped
model to see if it can give the same result to validate the effectiveness of the lumped
model further. By doing this, the estimated values were typed into the corresponding
acoustic components in the analogy circuit. The input impedance result can be
plotted by clicking label1 on the circuit 19.
Since no formula can calculate the
acoustic resistance, it is assumed the acoustic resistance is 1 ∗107(kg/(m4s)) in this
case, the input impedance can be expressed by 32 with calculated result. Thus, the
input impedance from the formula, the numerical model, and the lumped model are
presented in one graph.
Two typical comparison impedance graphs with 2.1 mm height and 0.5 mm height,
respectively, are presented here. The rest of the impedance curve regarding other
gap heights (between those two ) will be in the Appendix 6. It clearly showed the
well-matched curve in Fig 23 and the deviated curve in Fig 24 between the numerical
model and lumped model, which means when the distance from the diaphragm
to the backplate is larger, it is easy to use this extracting way to estimate the
acoustic component values and obviously verified the feasibility of the lumped model.
However, with the decreasing distance, the lumped model shows its limitations. The
reason is the values of acoustic mass and acoustic resistance are only considered
inside the hole on the backplate when building the lumped model. But the fact is
when the distance gets smaller and smaller, more and more losses happen in the
gap instead of the hole, so the acoustic mass and acoustic resistance need to be
re-considered carefully for constructing the lumped model.
35
==PAGE:37==
Figure 23: The comparison input impedance with 2.1 mm height of gap; The
blue line represents the numerical model built in COMSOL, the red line represents
the lumped model built in LTSpice, and the yellow line represents the impedance
calculated by existing formula.
Figure 24: The comparison input impedance with 0.5 mm height of gap; The
blue line represents the numerical model built in COMSOL, the red line represents
the lumped model built in LTSpice, and the yellow line represents the impedance
calculated by existing formula.
36
==PAGE:38==
Another interesting thing in both figures is that the impedance curve from the
formula calculation cannot match the numerical model’s curve, whether for the
larger distance or the smaller distance.
As a matter of fact, theoretical models
often make simplifications and assumptions to make the math tractable.
These
include assuming linear behavior, assuming idealized boundary conditions, or using
idealized material properties.
In reality, these factors do significantly affect the
acoustic properties, which is why the values calculated by the formula do not work
for estimating the acoustic component values for real condenser microphones.
4.3
Estimating Acoustic Values by Parameters Fitting
4.3.1
Fitting Data for 2D Model
Because of the limitations of the previous analogy circuit, the improved analogy
circuit 20 was introduced in the section 3. These two new components Mgap and
Rgap cannot be extracted from COMSOL directly. Thus, the Curve Fitting Tool
from Matlab could be a new way to estimate the six unknown acoustic parameters.
Based on the description in the section 3, six unknown parameters of the improved
circuit could be estimated. Meanwhile, the fitting method should also work for the
previous circuit with four parameters. From the 2.1 mm dropping to 0.0106 mm of
gap height, one large size, one medium size, and one small size are selected to present
and analyze here, respectively. The rest of the data with different gap heights will
be shown in the table in the Appendix as well as the impedance curves.
Figure 25:
The schema of the lumped model in LTSpice with four unknown
parameters on the left side, and six unknown parameters on the right side.
37
==PAGE:39==
The graph presents the lumped model structure used to fit the impedance curve
derived from the numerical model. The initial model incorporated four acoustic
components, while the enhanced one included six. These unknown component values
are needed for estimating. In subsequent sections, the term ’four parameters’ refers
to the original circuit configuration, and ’six parameters’ refers to the augmented
circuit design with additional elements. Besides, the following comparison figures
present the impedance curve and its phase from the numerical model by the marker
’+’ and ’△’; The impedance curve and its phase from the four-parameter circuit
present with light blue solid line and green dashed line; The impedance curve and
its phase from the six-parameter circuit present with red dashed line and the yellow
solid line.
Figure 26: The comparison of input impedance and its phase of the numerical
model for a simplified 2D model at 2.1 mm gap height to the fitted curve.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 27: The comparison of input impedance and its phase of the numerical
model for a simplified 2D model at 0.5 mm gap height to the fitted curve.
Figure 28: The comparison of input impedance and its phase of the numerical
model for a simplified 2D model at 18.6 µm gap height to the fitted curve. The
height is close to the real microphone model.
The Fig 26, 27, 28 above prove the feasibility of the curve fitting method to some
extent. It clearly shows that the impedance curve expressed by the lumped model
39
==PAGE:41==
can be well-fitted to the impedance of the numerical model, no matter whether four
or six lumped parameters are in the mathematical expression. In this way, each
acoustic parameter can be approximately estimated by the fitting process (See in
table [appendix]).
In addition, it also indicates the limitations of the initial circuit at very high
frequencies.
It is believed that the real microphone should experience the most
losses in the gap part. It might be the reason that the initial circuit could not be
able to reappear the complete acoustic behavior of the real microphone, as there
is no circuit component representing the impedance in the gap, which means the
losses in the gap were ignored in this condition. By contrast, the improved circuit
considered the impedance in the gap with the acoustic resistance Rgap and acoustic
mass Mgap, so the performance of the fitted curve for the improved circuit looks
better fitted.
4.3.2
Assumption and Verification for Acoustic Behavior of Each Component
After analyzing the data from various gap heights, the acoustic components display
desired or undesired trends. Acoustic compliance comes first. According to the
compliance formula, it is proportional to the volume, which means the compliance
of the gap will get smaller with decreasing the gap height. At the same time, the
compliance value of the cavity is supposed to be constant because the dimensions
of the cavity stay the same.
However, Fig 29 did not show the constant trend of the cavity compliance value
as expected, it presents the rising tendency when the gap height decreases. In this
case, it is assumed that the cavity compliance value could be the constant value since
the Curve Fitting Tool can only give an approximate estimation but not precisely
correct, the given result might have a slight deviation from the actual result within
an acceptable range. Therefore, it is believed that if the value of cavity compliance
is fixed as a specific number (as shown in the figure with the circle marker), the
result of the input impedance should not make a difference.
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 29: The comparison of the cavity compliance for 2D model, the blue solid
line is the trend of the cavity compliance from fitting six unknown parameters; The
red dashed line is the estimated cavity compliance value from the formula; The
yellow line with the circle marker is the expected trend of the cavity compliance.
With the assumption, if selecting the same height as the previous section with one
large size, one medium size, and one small size to analyze, respectively, the legend is
the same as before, see in Fig 30, 31 and 32. These graphs prove that even though
the value of cavity compliance was a constant number as 1.11 ∗10−12m4/(kg), the
results of the input impedance curve still give consistency. Therefore, it is believed
that with the decreasing of the gap height, the effective volume of the cavity is not
changed, correspondingly, the value of cavity compliance could be considered as a
constant number as shown in 29 with a yellow circle marker.
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 30:
The comparison of the input impedance with the height of 2.1
mm, between the estimated value from six unknown parameters and five unknown
parameters with a fixed cavity compliance.
Figure 31:
The comparison of the input impedance with the height of 0.5
mm, between the estimated value from six unknown parameters and five unknown
parameters with a fixed cavity compliance.
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 32:
The comparison of the input impedance with the height of 18.6
µm, between the estimated value from six unknown parameters and five unknown
parameters with a fixed cavity compliance.
Apart from the cavity compliance at various gap heights, the gap compliance and the
resistance inside the hole also present the expected trend that meets the theoretical
logic. Because the acoustic compliance is proportional to the volume, as the gap
height decreases, the volume becomes smaller and smaller, which is represented
by the gap compliance curve in Fig 33. The curve of the gap compliance shows
consistency as the formula estimated. So, from the trend of the gap compliance,
this way of estimation for acoustic parameters is reasonable.
43
==PAGE:45==
Figure 33: The comparison of the gap compliance for the 2D model at different
gap heights. The blue solid line is the trend of the gap compliance from fitting
six unknown parameters, and the red line with the + marker is the trend from the
formula.
The acoustic resistance of the hole shows an acceptable trend, which is supposed
to be a rising trend with the gap height decreasing. In Fig 34, the main graph
and the side graph show the acoustic resistance of the hole goes up continuously.
Considering the realistic microphone model, as the gap decreases, the pathway for
air to move through the holes becomes more restricted. This restriction increases
the acoustic resistance because the air has less space to push through and is forced
to move more turbulently. The designed geometry for the 2D model only has one
hole in the center, which intensifies the air friction and the corresponding thermal
and viscous losses. The change in gap height may have a more pronounced effect
on the resistance. That explains why even though the acoustic resistance should
increase with less and less gap height, the value should not have dramatic growth.
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 34: The comparison of the acoustic resistance of the hole for 2D model at
different gap heights. The blue solid line is the trend of the hole resistance at the
gap height from 0.01 mm to 2.1 mm, from fitting six unknown parameters, and the
red dashed in the side figure is the zoomed-in trend curve from 0.048 mm to 2.1
mm.
Regarding the rest of the acoustic components, the acoustic mass inside the hole in
Fig 35 presents a rising trend from 2.1 mm dropped down to 0.05 mm, but gives
a weird turning range between 0.02 and 0.05 mm, and sharply going up while the
gap height is continuously decreasing. To further observe, four key turning points
were selected to show the effect of acoustic mass inside the hole together in Fig 36.
The four different points are 2.1 mm, 0.05 mm, 0.026 mm, and 0.012 mm in height,
it compares the curve with six estimated values and the curve with five estimated
values but with Mhole = 0, represented by the yellow solid line and the red dashed
line, respectively. The figure can roughly explain why there is a weird turning at
around 0.05 mm of height, the acoustic mass of the hole cannot influence the input
impedance when the gap height becomes smaller, which specifies below 0.05 mm.
Thus, for a real condenser microphone, the acoustic resistance is only considered as
the contribution of the impedance inside the hole.
45
==PAGE:47==
Figure 35: The trend of the acoustic mass of the hole for the 2D model, fitted by
estimated six unknown parameters.
46
==PAGE:48==
Figure 36: The comparison impedance curves between the six initial estimated
values from curve fitting and the five estimated values without the acoustic mass of
the hole, and the reference curve is from the 2D model in COMSOL.
Using the same procedure, observe the turning point for the trend curve of the
resistance inside the gap in Fig 37. As expected, the resistance of the gap should
be higher and higher due to the thermal and viscous losses in the tiny gap, and the
curve would expect an exponential increase. However, after verifying whether the
resistance of the gap does matter the input impedance result, the comparable result
in Fig 38 shows that the value of resistance of the gap could be zero, which means
it can be considered that the resistance inside the gap could be neglected.
47
==PAGE:49==
Figure 37: The trend of the acoustic resistance inside the gap for the 2D model,
fitted by estimated six unknown parameters.
It does not follow the expectation, but the cause of this result will be further
discussed in the following section. Here, it is only guessed that the reason might be
because the 2D model is an ideal model without complicated geometric shapes, and
the only hole is relatively hard to pass through the air, which might cause much
air friction inside the hole instead of dissipating the resistance inside the tiny gap.
The same situation happens in comparing the value of gap mass, the Fig 39 proves
the possibility when Mgap = 0, and the figure shows the mass of hole Mhole, the
resistance of the gap Rgap and the mass of the gap Rgap have most negligible effect
on the performance of input impedance.
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 38: The comparison impedance curves between the six initial estimated
values from curve fitting and the five estimated values without the acoustic resistance
of the gap, and the reference curve is from the 2D model in COMSOL.
49
==PAGE:51==
Figure 39: The comparison input impedance curve with different fixed values. In
the legend, the line with marker + shows the reference curve from the 2D model in
COMSOL, the solid light blue line shows the impedance curve with six estimated
values, the red dashed line shows the impedance curve when Mhole = 0, the purple
dot line shows the impedance curve when Rgap = 0, the green dashed-dot line shows
the impedance curve when Mgap = 0.
The line with the triangle marker shows
the phase of the reference curve, the red solid line shows the phase curve with six
estimated values, the pink dashed line shows the phase curve when Mhole = 0, the
yellow line with circle marker shows the phase curve when Rgap = 0, and the bright
blue dot line shows the phase curve when Mgap = 0.
4.3.3
Fitting Data for 3D Model
The same method by using the Curve Fitting Tool to estimate the acoustic components
values is applied to the 3D model, whose geometry model is inserted from the
COMSOL Library. The gap height for the 3D model only measured from the initial
height of 18.6 µm to 10.6 µm.
The Fig 40 presents the input impedance and the phase of the 3D model at 18.6
µm gap height, which proves the input impedance of the 3D model can also be well
fitted by six acoustic component values. The data of acoustic component values will
shown in the table in the appendix.
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 40: The impedance of the 3D model with 18.6 µm gap height. The dark
blue ′+′ marker is from the numerical model, the light blue line is the fitted curve
from six unknown parameters.
The orange triangle marker is the phase of the
numerical model, and the red dashed line is the phase of the fitted curve.
Based on the estimation result, a similar pattern as the 2D model is found in the
3D model as well.
As mentioned in the previous section, the cavity compliance
stays constant, which means the effective volume of the back cavity is not changed
with the changing of the height of the gap. When observing the trend of 3D cavity
compliance in Fig 41, the assumption that the effective volume of the back cavity
is almost fixed has been validated. The magnitude deviation between the 2D model
and the 3D model is because the simulated numerical model for the 2D model used
the simple geometry, but the complicated non-regular geometry for the 3D model,
thus, this deviation is acceptable.
51
==PAGE:53==
Figure 41:
The comparison of the cavity compliance trend with different gap
heights among the 2D model, the 3D model and the formula, represented as the
blue solid line, the red line with the diamond marker, and the dashed yellow line
with the ′+′ marker, respectively.
In terms of the trend of the gap compliance value, the curve from the 3D model
gave the same performance as the 2D model and prediction from the ideal formula,
which is that by decreasing the gap height, the volume of the gap gets smaller. The
compliance value correspondingly becomes smaller because it is proportional to the
volume. Since there are six holes on the backplate for the 3D model instead of only
one hole for the 2D model, and the total volume of the holes is relatively larger
than the volume of the gap, some spaces inside the holes for converting the sound
wave could be used as a part of gap volume, which to some extent increases the gap
volume, that is why the gap compliance for the 3D is quite larger the 2D value in
the Fig 42.
52
==PAGE:54==
Figure 42: The comparison of the gap compliance trend with different gap heights
among the 2D model, the 3D model and the formula, represented as the blue solid
line, the red line with the diamond marker, and the dashed yellow line with the ′+′
marker, respectively.
Similar to the 2D model, the acoustic resistance seen in Fig 43 of the gap can be
extremely small or big, which means it does not affect the input impedance. As
mentioned before, more acoustic losses are expected to occur in the gap not in the
hole, but the simplified 2D model and the precise 3D geometry all gave this undesired
result. The reason will be concluded in the section 4.5.
53
==PAGE:55==
Figure 43: The comparison of the input impedance with various values of gap
resistance with the 18.6 µm height.
The blue ′′+ marker is from the numerical
model, the red dashed line is the impedance with the initial estimated value, the
yellow dotted line is the impedance when Rgap = 0 kg/m4s, the green circle marker
is the impedance when Rgap = 1.25 ∗106 kg/m4s.
However, not all features in the 3D model follow the same trend as the 2D model
or the expectation. The acoustic resistance in the hole is an example. Fig 44 shows
the resistance of the hole for the 3D model as a fluctuation curve, it is not a steadily
rising curve with the gap decreasing, which might be because the multiple holes
can provide a more gradual equalization of pressure between the backside of the
diaphragm and the external environment.
The airflow through several openings
would dissipate the pressure of each hole to balance the sound impedance inside the
hole, which means the value of hole resistance will not sharply increase with the
minor and minor gap. Instead, it will keep a roughly constant tendency. The curve
in the figure is normalized, so the acoustic resistance for the 3D model could be
considered as a slight fluctuation around the continuous value.
54
==PAGE:56==
Figure 44: The normalized trend of the acoustic resistance inside the hole with
different gap heights. The blue line with a cross marker is from the 2D model, and
the red dashed line with a triangle marker is from the 3D model.
4.4
The Sensitivity of the 2D Model and 3D Model
After observing the tendency of each acoustic component, the sensitivity of the
model with different gap heights obtained from the lumped model is going to be
discussed in this section.
The sensitivity of the 2D model simulated within a lumped model in LTSpice within
the coupled circuit, the values of acoustic components were estimated by fitting the
impedance curve of the numerical model and used into the lumped model. The
input impedance curves of different gap heights were measured in Fig 45 from 2.1
mm to 0.02 mm, arranged one by one in solid lines and dotted lines from top to
bottom.
55
==PAGE:57==
Figure 45: The comparison sensitivity curves of the 2D model at the gap height
from large to small. The legend of each height represents the solid purple line as
0.02 mm height, the black dashed line as 0.03 m height, the solid pink line as 0.04
mm height, the blue dashed-dotted line as 0.05 mm height, the green solid line as
0.1 mm height, the purple dashed line as 0.5 mm, the yellow solid line as 1.0 mm
height, the red dashed-dotted line as 1.5 mm height, and the blue solid line as 2.1
mm height.
It clearly presents the sensitivity value getting higher and higher with decreasing the
gap height and basically follows the principle of a condenser microphone. Because
the diaphragm acts as one plate of a capacitor, and the backplate acts as the other.
The capacitance between these two plates influences the microphone’s sensitivity,
which is inversely proportional to their distance. When the distance between the
diaphragm and the backplate is halved, the capacitance between the two plates
doubles.
Since the output voltage of a condenser microphone for a given sound
pressure level is proportional to the capacitance between the diaphragm and the
backplate, doubling the capacitance (by halving the distance) results in a doubling
of the output voltage for a given input sound pressure, and the doubling of voltage
corresponds to an increase of 6 dB. Therefore, the figure shows the same circumstance
as the theory.
Fig 46 is the normalized sensitivity at the frequency 250 Hz of the 2D model at
the gap height from 2.1 mm dropping to 0.02 mm. The information given from the
graph is that when the gap height shrinks, the microphone behaves more damped,
represented as attenuation at pretty early frequencies, and the smallest gap height
56
==PAGE:58==
shows the strongest damped. Additionally, the attenuation point reached a bit early
than the real microphone because there is only one hole in the center for the 2D
simplified microphone simulation model, which causes the huge resistance happening
in the hole Rhole. If there are six holes distributed evenly on the backplate, the
resistance of the hole would not be that large, then the sensitivity will go back to
the correct attenuation point around 10k Hz.
Figure 46: The normalized sensitivity at the 250 Hz of the 2D model with different
gap heights. The blue line with marker ′+′ represents 2.1 mm height, the red line
with marker ’*’ represents 1.5 mm height, the yellow line with triangle marker
represents 1.0 mm height, the purple line with triangle marker represents 0.5 mm
height, the green pure solid line represents the 0.1 mm height, the light blue dashed
line represents the 0.05 mm height, the red dashed-dotted line represents 0.04 mm
height, the blue dashed line with orange cross marker represents 0.03 mm height,
and the orange dashed line with circle marker represents 0.02 mm height.
Similarly, the sensitivity result is measured at 250 Hz for the 3D model in Fig 47
shows the same trend as the 2D model, which both meet the theory. The solid blue
line is the smallest gap height at 12.6 µm, the red dashed line is 14.6 µm, the yellow
cross line is 16.6 µm, and the purple square marker at the bottom is 18.6 µm. It
demonstrates that minimizing the gap height maximizes the sensitivity by only using
57
==PAGE:59==
the ideal formula to estimate the electrical capacitor within the lumped-element
circuit.
Its trend also proves from the side that the estimation method for the
acoustic values is validated.
Figure 47:
The comparison sensitivity curves of the 3D model obtained from
LTSpice at the gap height from large to small.
4.5
Results in COMSOL Multiphysics and Discussion
Fig 48 shows the changes with decreasing gap height from the simulation model
result. Since the single hole provides greater airflow resistance than multiple holes,
it could increase damping and shift the resonance frequency to higher. The resonance
frequency is around 2800 Hz for the larger gap height (the left top one), but the
resonance frequency will be raised to 23k Hz by decreasing the gap height to around
20 µm, at the resonance frequency, the membrane is the most effective in converting
the sound waves to the hole and the back cavity, which is why the fast speed of
airflow occurs in the hole for the largest gap height, but in the corner junction of
the gap and the entrance of the hole.
When comparing the local velocity at the entrance of the hole among 20 µm, 18.6
µm and 16 µm, it concludes the minor the gap height, the higher restriction the
58
==PAGE:60==
airflow pass of the hole, which is the prove that the resistance of the hole increases
rapidly by shrinking the gap.
Figure 48: The velocity variation from the 2D numerical model with different gap
heights built in COMSOL Multiphysics shows the gap height 2.1 mm, 20 µm, 18.6
µm and 16 µm from left top.
Since the initial research for a better understanding of the relationship between
the acoustic component and the condenser microphone, and from the changes of
microphone dimensions to observe the acoustic components’ behavior, and further
find a way to estimate the values of acoustic components applying for the lumped-element
model. That is why only the pure acoustic system is considered both for the 2D
model and the 3D model, which means the entire membrane surface of the condenser
microphone was applied on a constant external force (here is the sound pressure
with 1 Pa), the anywhere on the membrane will vibrate as an entity in the same
direction. The interaction with mechanical properties and sound wave propagation
in this condition will be neglected.
In a more realistic scenario, the diaphragm is an indispensable part of a coupled
mechanical-acoustic system. It reflects how the sound wave is captured and converted
into mechanical energy (vibration of the diaphragm) and subsequently into electrical
energy (variations in capacitance), besides, its mechanical features to a large extent
influence the frequency response of the microphone. Fig 49 presents the significant
difference between the pure acoustic and mechanical-acoustic coupled systems with
59
==PAGE:61==
the 16.6 µm gap height. The entire temperature variation, the local variation as
one-twelfth piece of geometry, and the velocity are shown from the top to the bottom.
The regret is the figure from COMSOL failed to plot again due to the license problem
of the simulation software, so the presented figure for the pure acoustic system
and the coupled system at different specific frequencies, but they can also prove
the findings about the acoustic losses happens in the hole is because lacking the
diaphragm vibrating, which gives the reason why the result obtained in this project
does not follow the theory.
Figure 49: The comparison temperature variation and velocity variation graphs
between the pure acoustic system (left) and the coupled system (right) with 16.6
µm gap height.
60
==PAGE:62==
This figure also explains why the resistance of the hole is large, but the resistance
of the gap could be zero from the estimation result, which means the acoustic losses
happen in the hole instead of in the gap as desired. As seen on the left side, when
the pure acoustic system is researched, substantial temperature variations happen
in the hole and the rim, also, the airflow has a faster speed in the hole and the
rim, which proves that the estimation result in the previous section is not wrong. It
seems the acoustic impedance in the gap could be neglected because the losses do
not happen in the gap, at least from the colorful graph, which meets the result from
the numerical model simulation.
On the contrary, the result on the right side demonstrates that acoustic losses happen
in the gap—the variation of about 25 ∗10−6 K until the edge of the rim.
The
cavity in an acoustic system could be regarded as a spring, and the initial status
of volume is considered as 0 K temperature, when the volume is compressed, it is
akin to compressing a spring, storing energy as increased pressure and density in an
acoustic cavity, the pressure of a gas increases as the volume is compressed, leading
to a rise in temperature if the process is adiabatic, which indicates at this frequency,
the center part of the membrane was moving back to the gap, and the same time,
the rim got hit by the sound wave, that is why the temperature at rim presents the
highest temperature.
In addition, the kinetic energy should be decreased due to the conservation of energy
law. In an acoustic system, kinetic energy is accounted for by the acoustic mass
or the movement of particles within the system. As sound waves move through a
medium, particles in the medium oscillate, carrying energy through the medium, the
less the kinetic energy, the less acoustic mass. That also explains why the acoustic
mass in the pure acoustic system can not contribute to the total impedance when
the gap height is close to the same dimension as the actual microphone.
If further observing the microphone’s behavior in the electrical-mechanical-acoustical
coupled system, the result follows the expectation and the principle more.
61
==PAGE:63==
Figure 50:
The comparison graphs of total thermoviscous power dissipation
density and pressure variations show 14.6 µm, 18.6 µm, and 22.6 µm gap heights
from the top to the bottom. The left side shows the combination with the whole
entity graph and the local changes of a one-twelfth slice, and the right side shows
the pressure variations at 12500 Hz.
Fig 50 shows the thermoviscous losses and pressure variations for the 3D model with
coupled systems with different gap heights in the same scale. It presents that the
thermoviscous losses mainly occur in the gap and the junction corner between the
gap and the hole. Moreover, the thermoviscous losses at 18.6 µm are higher than at
22.6µm, which meets the theory that more acoustic losses are caused by decreasing
the gap height, where the thermoviscous losses dominate the acoustic losses. When
the gap height continues dropping from 18.6 µm to 14.6 µm, there is not much
62
==PAGE:64==
difference. When further looking into the pressure variations at 12500 Hz, it shows
the smallest gap height has the lowest sound pressure level in the back cavity, but
the highest sound pressure level in the gap, which means that decreasing the gap
height, it has more damping and easier to capture the subtle sounds.
Figure 51: The comparison velocity on the left side and zoomed-in of the gap part
on the right side with 14.6 um, 18.6 um, and 22.6 um gap heights from the top to
the bottom.
Fig 51 shows the velocity variations at different gap heights in the same scale and
their detailed graph for the gap. From the velocity changes, it presents the model
with 18.6 µm gap height, which has the fastest airflow speed from the gap to the hole.
Even though the smaller height with 14.6 µm has a larger velocity than the largest
63
==PAGE:65==
one, the airflow is still not as easy as 18.6 µm to pass through. The detailed figure
on the right side shows the airflow has huge movement inside the gap, especially at
the corner between the gap and the hole.
4.6
Investigation of the Hole Size Change
When the hole radius is changed, the acoustical behavior, the frequency response,
and the sensitivity are supposed to be correspondingly changed as well, according
to the principle.
The results for the 2D and 3D models will be introduced and
discussed, further compared to the principle in the following sections.
The same fitting method is used to estimate the acoustic component values, only the
acoustic system is considered for both models within the numerical model simulation,
and the sensitivity is required from the coupled lumped model by typing the acoustic
component values.
As seen in Fig 52, the quite damped response presented for the 2D model due to its
large hole resistance. Regarding sensitivity, the radius from 0.4 mm to 0.6 mm is
shown as the same curve, so the 0.4 mm and 0.5 mm lines were hidden behind the 0.6
mm curve. Besides, with the increasing hole sizes, the sensitivity slightly increases if
measured at the standard frequency of 250 Hz, which meets the principle. Because
the bigger hole on the backplate can help reduce the resistance when the diaphragm
moves. This allows the diaphragm to move more freely in response to sound waves,
enhancing the microphone’s sensitivity to quieter sounds.
64
==PAGE:66==
Figure 52: The comparison sensitivity from the 2D model with different radii of
the hole from 0.3 mm to 0.9 mm.Small to big sizes are represented individually by
the blue solid line, the blue cross marker, the red circle marker, the purple solid line,
the green dashed line, the orange solid line, and the red dashed-dotted line.
The unexpected sensitivity comparison graph shown in Fig 53 represents the sensitivity
for the 3D model in a pure acoustic system.
There are no apparent differences
when changing the hole’s radius, only 0.02 dB difference, which could be neglected.
There is no doubt that this result is not expected, it is guessing that since the
different sizes of holes can affect the movement of the diaphragm, which will further
influence the capacitance, the mechanical features of the diaphragm will definitely
be changed. Therefore, the mechanical compliance and mass should be changed as
well. However, the value for mechanical compliance and mass were calculated by
the ideal formula, which includes the membrane tension, the membrane thickness,
the membrane density, the area of the diaphragm, and the distance of the gap.
Since tension is hard to measure but is the only variable, the value of mechanical
compliance and mass using the same value with different hole sizes could be the
reason that the sensitivity curve shows the undesired result.
65
==PAGE:67==
Figure 53: The comparison sensitivity from the 3D model with different radii of
the hole from 0.2 mm to 0.8 mm. The red solid line is 0.2mm, the yellow cross
marker is 0.4mm, the purple solid line is 0.6mm, and the green square marker is
0.8mm.
To further explore the impact of diaphragm mechanical properties on sensitivity
results, the coupled system for the 3D numerical model is simulated in Fig 54.
The significant difference is that the sensitivity data is obtained directly from the
numerical model instead of the lumped model. This more precise figure shows the
apparent difference in sensitivity and is closer to the expected. With the hole size
bigger, the sensitivity is raised and the pretty high peak occurs due to the resonance
frequency.
66
==PAGE:68==
Figure 54: The comparison sensitivity from the coupled 3D model with 0.3 mm,
0.5 mm, and 0.9 mm radius of holes. They are plotted by the blue line with the
cross marker, the red line with the diamond marker, and the yellow solid line.
It has to be believed that mechanical features will be affected by the changing of
the hole sizes and do influence the sensitivity result. So the lumped model could
only give us a rough understanding of microphone prototype optimization. Still, it
is not wise to depend on it because there are a few unknown (and hard to know)
component values except for the acoustical components, they are also vital factors
to represent the microphone performance.
From the comparison sensitivity plot from LTSpice, changing the sizes of the hole
does not effectively influence the sensitivity. On the opposite, the physical principle
should be with the hole size decreasing, the sensitivity should also be reduced.
Different from the fitting result from the COMSOL graphs, it shows a huge change
when the size of the hole becomes smaller and smaller. When the hole has a relatively
large radius, the air can easily flow through the hole and go inside the back cavity,
so the temperature varies greatly in the cavity instead of the hole. Instead, when the
hole radius decreases to 0.3 mm, the temperature variation happens mostly inside
the hole and the center of the membrane. The membrane vibrates slightly with a
small hole because it cannot simultaneously compress more air inside the gap. Thus,
the gap height is relatively increased compared to the normal microphone, so the
sensitivity with a small hole should have less sensitivity.
Also, the result of acoustic components from fitted curves both for 2d and 3d can
only give a rough estimation by fitting input impedance in pure acoustic systems.
67
==PAGE:69==
The comparison figure shows in COMSOL that the membrane vibration causes extra
losses in the gap, but for only the acoustic system, it can only prove the losses most
occur in the hole, which indicates the result of this project is not wrong.
68
==PAGE:70==
5
Conclusion
This project indicated the limitation of the ideal formula and the direct extracting
method and provided an effective method by fitting process to estimate each value
of the acoustic component, which can be used within the lumped-element model to
represent the microphone working process and obtain the microphone’s sensitivity.
However, the observation result by estimating values showed the undesired result of
acoustic losses, which should mostly happen in the gap instead of the hole, but the
result obtained in this project in the result section showed the resistance of the gap
could be neglected, which did not show there are acoustic losses existing in the gap.
To further research the reason for this undesired result, colorful graphs were adopted
to present the temperature variations and the velocity variations of the numerical
microphone models. It is believed to help the author understand the route of airflow
to the back cavity and the quantity of the energy dissipated.
It turned out that the energy dissipation gave a totally different result in the
numerical model between the pure acoustic system with a constant input pressure
applied on the whole diaphragm surface, and the coupled electro-mech-acoustic
system with diaphragm subjected to uneven stress.
The temperature variation
graphs showed the acoustic losses occur in the holes in the pure acoustic system,
and the losses occur in the gap for the coupled system because The vibrations of
the membrane alter the way in which sound waves propagate, which explains the
acoustic resistance in the holes is much larger and acoustic resistance in the gap can
be neglected. In addition, the restriction (air friction) is not only in the gap and in
the holes but also in the rim, hence, the acoustic resistance of the rim should also
be considered as an acoustical component added to the circuit to better perform the
acoustic system of the microphone.
The result of changing the hole size gave a weird sensitivity trend from the lumped
model and a reasonable trend from the numerical model. It is because this project
only explores a way to estimate the acoustic component, but the components in
the mechanical system and electrical systems within the lumped-element circuit are
still unknown. In this condition, the value of each component in the mechanical
and electrical system was estimated by the existing formula, which is not absolutely
precise to use.
Besides, they only related to the membrane thickness, membrane density and membrane
size as shown in the formula, but in realistic measurement, the changes in the
microphone’s dimension also cause the different mechanical properties of the membrane,
which could be the tension, but the formula of mechanical mass did not show the
relationship to the membrane tension. Therefore, this is a vital reason that only
research on the acoustic system can not get a precise prediction of the microphone’s
sensitivity and frequency response.
69
==PAGE:71==
The short six months of research are not enough to explore the method to estimate
the component value of the entire system to provide a more accurate prediction of
the microphone’s output performance. In the future, this project could continue
using the same curve fitting method to fit the output voltage curve extracted from
the numerical model with known acoustic parameters (from this project) to estimate
the component values in the mechanical circuit, it could help to better observe the
mechanical behavior changes by minimizing the gap height or enlarge the hole size.
70
==PAGE:72==
6
Appendix.A
6.1
The input impedance curve comparison at different gap
heights.
Figure 55: The comparison input impedance of the 2D model at 1.8 mm gap
height from the numerical model, the lumped model, and the calculated formula.
71
==PAGE:73==
Figure 56: The comparison input impedance of the 2D model at 1.5 mm gap
height from the numerical model, the lumped model, and the calculated formula.
Figure 57: The comparison input impedance of the 2D model at 1.3 mm gap
height from the numerical model, the lumped model, and the calculated formula.
72
==PAGE:74==
Figure 58: The comparison input impedance of the 2D model at 1.0 mm gap
height from the numerical model, the lumped model, and the calculated formula.
73
==PAGE:75==
6.2
The acoustic components’ data measured from the numerical
model
Gap
Height
(mm)
Resonance
Frequency
(Hz)
Acoustic
Mass
(kg/m4)
Compliance of
Cavity (m4s2/kg)
Compliance of
Gap (m4s2/kg)
Acoustic
Resistance
(kg/m4s)
2.1
2818
2475.95
1.0067 ∗10−12
1.0067 ∗10−12
5 ∗106
1.8
2818
2475.03
1.0067 ∗10−12
8.6288 ∗10−13
5.17 ∗106
1.5
2818
2479.69
1.0067 ∗10−12
7.1907 ∗10−13
5.2 ∗106
1.3
2818
2297.02
1.0753 ∗10−12
5.3254 ∗10−13
5.25 ∗106
1.0
2818
2326.31
1.0753 ∗10−12
4.0965 ∗10−13
5.4 ∗106
0.5
2692
2534.86
1.0753 ∗10−12
2.0482 ∗10−13
6.2 ∗106
74
==PAGE:76==
75
==PAGE:77==
6.3
The geometry of different hole sizes
76
==PAGE:78==
References
[1] Br¨uel
Kjær, Microphone Handbook, vol. 1: Theory, Technical Documentation
be1447. 1996.
[2] 34870 lecture 5 - microphones - 2022. Course 34870 Electroacoustic transducers
and systems, (1):1–7, 2022.
[3] L. Beranek and T. Mellow. Acoustics: Sound Fields, Transducers and Vibration.
Elsevier Science, 2019.
[4] W.M. Leach.
Introduction to Electroacoustics and Audio Amplifier Design.
Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 2001.
[5] J.W.S. Rayleigh.
Theory of sound (2nd ed.), vol. 2, Dover, Inc, New York
(1945). 1945.
[6] Mariusz Suchenek. Comparison of photoacoustic helmholtz resonator models.
In Photonics Applications in Astronomy, Communications, Industry, and
High-Energy Physics Experiments 2007, volume 6937, pages 311–318. SPIE,
2007.
[7]  Lukasz Bart lomiej Chrobak and Miros law Andrzej Mali´nski.
Comparison of
the crlc models describing the helmholtz type cells for the nondestructive
photoacoustic
spectroscopy.
Metrology
and
Measurement
Systems,
21(3):545–552, 2014.
[8] The br¨uel kjær 4134 condenser microphone comsol instruction.
[9] An introduction for differences between externally polarized and prepolarized
microphones capsules from gras sound & vibration.
77
