==PAGE:1==
Euka Update: Marine Database for
Taxa Detection from Modern and
Ancient Environmental DNA
Authors
Anna Keisha Mercy Kyei Boateng - s175562
April 8, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Data Collection
3
2.1 Code Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2 Identifying Sources of Marine Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3 Data Acqusition: Downloading and Compiling Marine Sequences
.
4
2.3.1 Taxononomic ID Retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3.2 Genomic Data Retrieval and Organization
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Database Schema and Implementation
7
3.1 Checking Contamination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1 Conterminator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2 Merging of directories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3 Cleaning and Rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4 Pairwise Alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5 Ancestral Sequence Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.6 Construction and Circularisation of Variation Graphs . . . . . . . .
10
3.6.1 Creating Unique Node IDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6.2 Variation Analysis and Family Annotation
. . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6.3 Variation Graph Complexity Across Families . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6.4 Creating a Pangenome Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Discussion and Conclusion
13
4.1 Data Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2 Quality Control and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3 Usage and Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
List of Figures
I
References
II
i
==PAGE:3==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
Euka is a tool designed for rapid and accurate characterisation of ancient en-
vironmental DNA (aeDNA). This will, based on the usage of a pangenome graph
of reference genomes and belonging variation graphs, assign taxonomy to DNA
sequences, while also estimating abundance. Euka is distinguished by its’ ability
to outperform exisiting taxonomic profiling tools in accuracy and abundance es-
timates, even when using aeDNA. Analysing aeDNA comes with difficulties, due
to DNA degradation and fragmentation. Euka employs a pangenome graph to
capture genetic variation, hence improving mapping accuracy, overcoming the
difficulties of degradation and fragmentation when working with aeDNA, offering
a significant advance in aeDNA analysis.However, Euka’s database is restricted
to mitochondrial genomes of tetrapods and arthropods. [1]
Monitoring of biodiversity in order to establish an understanding of poorly
explored marine areas as well as uncovering temporal variations and richness
across different phyla can be achieved by the use of eDNA samples. Hence, using
eDNA can be a comprehensive and non-invasive method for biodiversity monitor-
ing. [2]
A marine database can be used alongside metabarcoding when studying mi-
crobial communities. An accurate reference database is crucial when analysing
aeDNA. But when a good database is used, it can significantly contribute to mi-
crobial assesments and conservation strategies.
[3] A study integrated eDNA
metabarcoding in order to assess fish biodiversity in seagrass ecosystems. This
shows the importance of aeDNA databases for environmental conservation ef-
forts, as well as illustrating the importance of eDNA when creating a comprehen-
sive picture of biodiversity. In the mentioned study, it was used in protection and
management of seagrass beds, which is a vital habitat for some marine species.
[4]
In "Decoding Dissolved Information: Environmental DNA Sequencing at Global
Scale to Monitor a Changing Ocean" by L. R. Thomspon and P. Thielen (2023),
the role of eDNA sequencing as a tool for global ocean monitoring is discussed.
Scalable methods for global ocean monitoring is greatly needed for the vast bio-
diversity present in the oceans, due to the increasing threat from climate change,
pollution, overfishing, etc. Using eDNA sequencing is a promising approach, due
to its’ ability to survey a wide range of species from minimal samples. But imple-
menting eDNA sequencing as a tool also comes with its’ challenges. One of which
is the need for standardized protocols, since non-standardized approaches can
lead to inconsistent results. Other challenges explain the vast amount of data
and need for complex bioinformatic pipelines and tools. And most relevant for
this report, it also highlights the need for a comprehensive reference database,
since utilising eDNA sequencing data will be limited by the completeness of the
reference database in use. [5]
Page 1 of 15
==PAGE:4==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
1
Introduction
Euka uses pangenome graphs in order to analyse aeDNA. Unlike traditional
(single consensus sequence) reference genomes, pangenome graphs include mul-
tiple variations found within a species. This is ideal for species with high genetic
diversity. The traditional metabarcoding approach often lack the ability to distin-
guish between closely related species. [6] Using a pangenome graph will provide
a more nuanced reference by including the genetic diversity within closely re-
lated species. Hence, being able to support more detailed comparative genomic
studies, as evolutionary relationships, adaptation strategies, and conservation
priorities, etc. Creating a marine database could potentially aid in identification
and monitoring of biodiversity hotspots, endangered species, and the impacts of
environmental changes on genetic diversity within marine ecosystems.
The objective of this thesis is to develop a comprehensive marine life database
for sequence lookup, for the Euka tool, using a pangenome graph framework.
This database will aim to support biodiversity research, which could broaden our
understanding of marine ecosystems and aid in conservation efforts.
Page 2 of 15
==PAGE:5==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
2
Data Collection
2
Data Collection
Selecting appropriate data sources was a key element in this project. Stud-
ies have shown that a comprehensive reference database can help enhance the
accuracy of eDNA metabarcoding studies. [7]
A well-curated and comprehensive database can reduce mis-identification and
false positives, which are critical for studies aiming to catalog biodiversity, track
invasive species, or monitor endangered species. Another consideration was the
breadth of the genetic diversity captured in the database, which could affect the
capability of the Euka tool when assessing input sequencing data.
In order to assure reliability, validity and comprehensiveness, multiple strate-
gies was considered. Since arthropods and tetrapods were already in the Euka
tool, one approach was to use all data from the clade Bilateria, excluding the data
already present in the current database for Euka. It would then be assumed, that
what was not in the current database would be marine species. This would al-
low for a broad phylogenetic scope, capturing a wide array of genetic diversity
within Bilateria, as well as provide a simple selection criteria for the downloading
process. By assuming all non-tetrapods and non-arthropods would be marine
species, this approach could end up in over-inclusion of non-marine species.
Though the likely would be rather small.
Another approach was to download a list of all registered marine species from
a database already present, such as World Register of Marine Species (WoRMS).
WoRMS is dedicated to marine species, which would ensure relevance of the col-
lected data to marine ecosystems, reducing the need for extensive filtering of
non-marine species.
WoRMS also provide taxonomic information, regular up-
dates and quality control by experts, which results in high-quality and up-to-date
data. Though being a great option, it also comes with limitations. WoRMS might
not include every marine species if the species is poorly studied, or recently dis-
covered. [8]
In order to obtain taxonomic accurate and reliable data, which with certainty
would be categorised as a marine species, the second approach was chosen for
this project. Using the registered species from WoRMS would reduce the time
spent filtering and processing the data, since it would most certainly be a ma-
rine species. Also, using a curated source, checked by experts, also increase the
relevance of the database. Hence, using a taxonomic precise, marine-specific,
quality checked and curated source would increase the efficiency of the project,
as well as ensure relevance, which is why the second approach was chosen.
Page 3 of 15
==PAGE:6==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
2
Data Collection
2.1
Code Availability
The general pipeline followed in this project can be found at:
https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/601530051. This project will generally fol-
low the pipeline from the Euka publication [1], adjusting it to its’ own needs and
requirements as described in the coming chapters.
2.2
Identifying Sources of Marine Data
In order acquire a list of all marine species, it was necessary to apply for ac-
cess to the WoRMS’ database. From WoRMS, the following files were downloaded:
identifier.txt, taxon.txt, eml.xml, meta.xml, and speciesprofile.txt. [8]
The taxon text file was used to create a list of all taxonomic ID’s, as well as a
list of all genera present on the list. The ete3 toolkit was then used in order to
translate genera scientific names into taxonomic ID’s for all genera present on the
list, in order to then achieve a lineage file for all genera containing the scientific
name and the corresponding taxonomic ID. These files were then used in order to
download data from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)[9],
which will be described in the next chapter.
2.3
Data Acqusition: Downloading and Compiling Marine Se-
quences
After acquiring the list of all registered marine species from WoRMS, next
step was to retrieve complete mitochondrial genomes and the associated taxo-
nomic IDs from the NCBI database. From previous steps, a list of species was
acquired, which was used, alongside the ete3 toolkit, to acquire a list of genera
registered in WoRMS. The list of genera was then used to retrieve mitochondrial
genomes, etc. from NCBI. [9] Mitochondrial genomes were chosen due to its’ role
in understanding evolutionary relationships and the conservation of biodiversity.
2.3.1
Taxononomic ID Retrieval
In order to retrieve the data, it was necessary to use the list of species names
to obtain a list of the marine genera. This was done using a Python3 script. The
script uses Entrez API in order to search the NCBI taxonomy database for each
scientific name listed in the genera list, in order to retrieve the taxonomic ID.
These IDs were then saved in a file called tax_ids.txt, where each line contained
a single genus name, followed by the taxonomic ID.
Scripts from the current chapter provides the necessary taxonomic IDs for
the next chapter.
Page 4 of 15
==PAGE:7==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
2
Data Collection
Step
File(s)
Taxonomic ID Retrieval
tax_ids.txt
Table 1: This table showcases the steps and files produced from this chapter.
2.3.2
Genomic Data Retrieval and Organization
The second stage was used to download complete mitochondrial genomes for
the taxa identified by previous steps, as well as organising the retrieved data
in their respective folders. This Python3 scripts uses the Entrez credentials and
NCBITaxa database for taxonomic queries. The script then downloades a FASTA file
for each genus using NCBI nucleotide database searches. When downloading, it
also sorts the sequences by quality, removes duplicates as well as ensuring a high-
quality dataset. Alongside with the FASTA file, a lineage file is also downloaded,
storing the lineage of each downloaded sequence, one containing scientific names,
and another containing taxonomic IDs.
These lineage files are organised in a
phylogenetic manner.
Step
File(s)
Genomic Data Download
{genus}.fa (initial FASTA file)
Quality Sorting and Filtering
{genus}.fa (Quality sorted FASTA file)
Duplicate Removal
{genus}_reps.fa (filtered FASTA file)
Taxonomic Information Organisation
tax_id.txt, {genus}_lin_tax.txt, {genus}_lin.txt
Table 2: This table showcases the steps and files produced current chapter.
The initial FASTA file contains all the mitochondrial genomes found based on
the search criteria. Afterwards, the FASTA file is sorted based on N-count, in or-
der to indicate the quality of the sequence. Then duplicates are removed, ensuring
a unique representation. The lineage file ({genus}_lin.txt and {genus}_lin_tax.txt)
contains the taxonomic lineage both using scientific names and taxonomic IDs,
respectfully, as shown in Table 2.
In the end, mitochondrial genomes from 1593 genera (from 39 phyla), re-
sulting in 4114 sequences, were downloaded from NCBI RefSeq. The sequence
length of the downloaded data ranged from 549 basepairs (bp) to 3194736 bp,
with an average sequence length of 27606 bp, as shown in Figure 1. The short-
est sequence of 549 bp came from the Guillardia genus, which is a cryptophyte
alga.[10] The longest of 3194736 bp came from Aspergillus genus, which is a
type of fungi (mold). [11] Methods to remove unwanted data, such as Aspergillus
were considered, but deemed too time-consuming, thus continuing the building
of the database including non-eukaryotic data. Data from phyla Ascomycota, Ba-
Page 5 of 15
==PAGE:8==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
2
Data Collection
sidiomycota and Streptophyta was removed due to the length of the sequences
significantly exceeding the average.
Figure 1: Sequence length distribution of downloaded data.
Page 6 of 15
==PAGE:9==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
3
Database Schema and Implementation
3
Database Schema and Implementation
A well-designed database schema is of outmost importance. Efficiency and
accuracy of the tool is defined mostly by the database structure. In this chapter
the marine database structure and how it was build will be explained.
3.1
Checking Contamination
In order to avoid contamination the data was prepared using a Python3 script.
The output of this script was a mapping file, associating each taxonomic ID with
its’ corresponding taxonomic name. Within the file, each row has a column con-
taining the taxonomic ID and a column containing the taxonomic name asso-
ciated to that sequence ID (received and translated from the NCBI nucleotide
database [9], using the Entrez API and ete3 toolkit). Hence, making it easier
to understand taxonomic origin of each sequence. The output was then used as
input for the ctool Conterminator. [12]
3.1.1
Conterminator
Conterminator is used for detecting incorrectly labeled sequences in nucleotide
(and protein) sequence sets. Hence, it checks for cross-contamination. It is a
comprehensive tool, comparing sequences from different taxa to identify contam-
ination. [12] Unfortunately, due to the vast amount of data in the database, and
the comprehensive manner of Conterminator, it was not possible to run Conter-
minator within the scope and time frame of this project. Also, deciding what to
use as a comparison database for Conterminator proved to be a difficult task,
since deciding what "marine species" encompasses is also a complex task. Con-
sidering that all mitogenomes were downloaded from NCBI RefSeq [9], which is a
highly curated site, which also performs contamination checks, it was chosen to
move on without running Conterminator on the full database.
3.2
Merging of directories
The next step was to merge the genera directories into what we will refer to
as a family. Not in the phylogenetical sense. A family in this study, is a directory
with 10 or more sequences within, unless otherwise is stated. In order to create
these directories of families, multiple iterative steps were involved. First, the pro-
gram figures out which families are currently present. Next, it uses the lineage
file for both error handling (checking if the name of the directory is present in
the the lineage at the correct place) and to set a name for the family. Then it
iterates through each family, counting the number of sequences within the cor-
responding FASTA file containing all the sequences. If a family has less than
notified sequences (in this case 10), the family name is stored in a new list of
too small families. This is done to identify families with an insufficient number
Page 7 of 15
==PAGE:10==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
3
Database Schema and Implementation
of sequences. The families with insufficient sequences will then be sorted into a
new directory, which will be determined by the lineage file, naming the directory
after one phylogeny level up. Then FASTA files, combining all FASTA files in the
new directories, will then be generated, ensuring each family has a FASTA file
containing all FASTA files for the family. Similarly, new comprehensive lineage
files will be generated. This iterative process will then continue until all family
directories have 10 or more sequences within, as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Workflow when merging the directories.
Page 8 of 15
==PAGE:11==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
3
Database Schema and Implementation
3.3
Cleaning and Rotation
Before continuing to the pairwise alignment of our sequences for building the
pangenome graph, a few other steps were needed. These steps were performed
by two connected script, as illustrated in Figure 3. One Python script and one
Bash script. The goal of these two script were to clean, standardize, and align
the sequences.
To ensure an easier comparison of the sequences, ambiguous nucleotides within
each sequence were replaced by ’N’ in order to maintain consistency across the
dataset. Next, the longest common substring across all sequences within a family
were determined. This substring then served as a reference point for the rotation.
Each sequence within the family were then rotated to begin in the place of the
longest common substring. Sing creating pangenome graphs require performing
pairwise alignment it is a requirement that the sequences start in the same place
and are oriented similarly.
Figure 3: Data standardization workflow before pairwise alignment (created with
BioRender.com).
Page 9 of 15
==PAGE:12==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
3
Database Schema and Implementation
3.4
Pairwise Alignment
After specifying the families, next step was to perform pairwise alignment.
First step is to perform pairwise alignment in order to obtain pairwise alignment
scores based on sequence similarity.
After aligning, all text-files are compressed and archived to reduce storage
space and to organise the output. Next step was to generate all unique pairwise
combinations of sequences using the new FASTA files containing the rotated se-
quences and the itertools package. For each of these unique pairs, pairwise
alignment using EMBOSS needle [13] in order to generate the optimal global se-
quence alignment for each sequence pair within each family. Then, new FASTA
files will be generated, removing identified problematic sequences (based on pre-
defined criteria such as low pairwise aligment scores, duplicates, etc). These new
FASTA files will be used for multiple sequence alignment (MSA). This ensures that
only sequences suitable for meaningful comparison will be used in MSA.
3.5
Ancestral Sequence Reconstruction
After pairwise alignment a ancestral sequence reconstruction was done. This
was performed using PRANK, which is a probabilistic multiple alignment program
for DNA, codon and amino-acid sequences. PRANK uses a maximum-likelihood
approach, correctly taking into account the evolutionary distances between se-
quences. PRANK also allows for defining a potential structure for sequences to
be aligned, and predicts the locations of structural units in the sequences.[14]
Therefore, PRANK was used for MSA for each family to obtain an accurate ances-
tral sequence reconstruction.
3.6
Construction and Circularisation of Variation Graphs
After MSA, the MSAs for each family had a variation graph constructed in
order to circularise the graph (as illustrated in Figure 4), using the Variation
Graph toolkit.
The Variation Graph (vg) toolkit is used for working with genomic variations
represented as graphs.[15] Variation graphs is a way to capture the genetic di-
versity of populations, and the vg toolkit, is a method for creating, manipulating
and utilizing these variation graph structures. The variation graphs represent
genetic variation across a population, also including large-scale structural vari-
ation such as inversions and duplications.
Traditional reference genomes are
linear and only represent one locus, ignoring population-wide variation. Hence,
by taking variation into account it is possible to enhance read mapping accuracy
and also reduce reference bias. [15]
Page 10 of 15
==PAGE:13==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
3
Database Schema and Implementation
Figure 4: Illustration of a variation graph. The circle symbolising the consen-
sus sequence, while the nodes symbolises different sequences depending on the
species.
3.6.1
Creating Unique Node IDs
When creating multiple variations graphs, it is necessary to ensure that the
node IDs are unique across the entire set of graphs. This is also done using the
vg toolkit. A look-up dictionary was created in order to map identifiers to the cor-
responding family name using Pickle for Python3. Ensuring unique node IDs will
prepare the variation graphs for comprehensive analysis, such as constructing
pangenomes.
3.6.2
Variation Analysis and Family Annotation
Analysis on the variation graphs were made, and pairwise distances were
calculated. And using the look-up dict, the variation graphs and newly acquired
information were assigned to each of the families.
This was done in order to
obtain insight into the diversity and/or similarity within each family.
3.6.3
Variation Graph Complexity Across Families
The variation graphs were also processed into smaller sections, and the size
and complexity of each section was analysed. Each path and correlated sections
within a variation graph is mapped in order to associate sections with paths. The
complexity of each path is then calculated based on Shannon entropy, providing
a measurement of sequence diversity. [16] A summary of section coverage and
sequence complexity of each path is also generated, by calculating the maximum,
minimum, and median values across all sections for each family. In total this pro-
vides information about diversity and structural complexity within the variation
Page 11 of 15
==PAGE:14==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
3
Database Schema and Implementation
graphs for each family.
3.6.4
Creating a Pangenome Graph
Finally, all the individual variation graphs were combined into an extensive
pangenome graph using the vg toolkit. Each variation graph will represent the
genomic difference within its’ corresponding family, hence combining them into
one will result in a graph representing the genomic variation across all the in-
cluded families. This allows for analyses of genomic variations across a broad
array of taxa.
Page 12 of 15
==PAGE:15==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
4
Discussion and Conclusion
4
Discussion and Conclusion
4.1
Data Content
The marine database for Euka aims to contain all eukaryotic marine species
throughout the world with a whole mitochondrion registered in RefSeq. It aims
to then contain, for each family, a variation graph, and in the end a pangenome
graph of all sequence variation across all families. The current database also in-
cludes non-eukaryotic data, hence further investigation into removing such data
could be discussed for future advancements. An example of how to remove the
non-eukaryotic data could be to use 16S and 18S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) to dis-
tinguish between non-eukaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, respectfully.
[17]
Unfortunately due to time limitations and a large data volume, the full scale of
the database was not obtained. The different steps in the pipeline was tested on
the 1000 families containing the most sequences per family.
The 1000 families tested provided insight into the completeness of the bioin-
formatic pipeline, and where the bottleneck (in regards to time) may lie. The down-
loading, the merging of families and the pairwise alignment were the biggest bot-
tlenecks in terms of time, when working with a large amount of data. Also, making
sure not to include prokaryotic data proved to be a more complex task than an-
ticipated. Since downloading a list of registered marine species from WoRMS, one
would have to then remove all prokaryotic species from said list. In hindsight, a
better approach could be to download all from the phylogenetic branch Bilateria,
and remove everything which was already in the Euka database, as mentioned
in Chapter 2, which would exclude prokaryotes. Also, subsetting from the begin-
ning, instead of working with the full dataset, could have proved more efficient
in the long run. Hence, for future projects, it would be recommended to narrow
down the scope of the database to include an even smaller branch of all marine
species.
Another concern could be the limited availability of full mitochondrial genomes
for certain species. To obtain a more precise pangenome graph, extensive se-
quencing from a variety of individuals within species are needed to ensure ad-
equate representation of genetic diversity. A widely acknowledge hurdle to over-
come is the need for more sequencing data. Comprehensive sequencing to capture
the genetic diversity within marine species are needed. In order to obtain compre-
hensive sequencing, sampling of more marine species are also needed. Reflecting
the true variation within species with limited sampling and sequencing can be
difficult. [18, 19]
In this project, the hurdle was overcome by merging into larger families, to obtain
at least 10 sequences per family. This may or may not lead to proper display of
the variation, but most likely it will not. To completely rid the database of this ob-
stacle, multiple versions of a marine database can be completed, prioritising up-
Page 13 of 15
==PAGE:16==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
4
Discussion and Conclusion
dating with species having sufficient sequencing data or significant importance.
This would reduce bias in the database due to certain species having more data
available.
4.2
Quality Control and Validation
Leveraging WoRMS to obtain a list of all registered marine species bolsters the
accuracy of the datase. WoRMS, which is a curated site, offers an authorative
source of marine species information, this enhancing the reliability of the data
used for this project.[8] Furthermore, mitochondrial genomes used were sources
exclusively from RefSeq, which is curated and maintaned by NCBI. RefSeq’s role
in the bioinformatics and genomic research underpins the validity of the utilized
data. [9]
Incorporating Conterminator into the pipeline was done to identify and ex-
clude cross-contamination, which further reinforces the integrity of the data,
thus augmenting the overall validity of the project. [12] A future enhancement
would be to explore simulated datasets within a controlled environments to test
robustness of the database. This approach would validate the database’s func-
tionality, while also refining its’ accuracy.
Finally, comparative analysis with analogous marine biodiversity databases
would be done. Such comparisons would benchmark the Euka marine database’s
precision and coverage. Hence, providing a clear demonstration of the value and
reliability of the database.
4.3
Usage and Application
In the future, the database could be completed by using the already made
pipeline, with more time.
And if not with more time, then in smaller prede-
fined subsets, which could then be uploaded to Euka gradually. Other future
steps to be considered could be to apply machine learning techniques for pat-
tern recognition. This could potentially incorporate environmental factors into
the pangenome graph, correlating genomic variations with environmental condi-
tions, shedding light on adaptive mechanisms, as in "Research on precise pheno-
type identification and growth prediction of lettuce based on deep learning" by H
Yu et al. in Environmental Research (2024) [20].
Once finished, the marine updated version of Euka could contribute to con-
servation efforts and ecosystem management, by providing a comprehensive and
robust foundation of biodiversity data containing both terrestrial and marine
species. This could facilitate more data-driven decision-making in these fields
of expertise. The importance of such databases are also highlighted in "Tropical
Biodiversity: Science, Data, Conservation," edited by H. Segers, P. Desmet, and E.
Baus, especially in the section "Online Access to Conservation Data: Challenges
and Opportunities" authored by S. Olivieri. In mentioned section, following is
Page 14 of 15
==PAGE:17==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
4
Discussion and Conclusion
written:
"The emergence of online databases of different kinds relevant to conserva-
tion and their increased accessibility is changing the way we can improve access
to data, develop better analytical capacities and effectively support decision pro-
cesses. The new paradigms created by online access not only can bridge the gap
between scientific data and action but also accelerate the knowledge process and
the impact of new research on policy making".
This embodies the importance and pivotal role that accessible online databases
have in bridging the gap between the accumulation of data and its’ practical ap-
plication. Hence, taking a step towards updating the Euka database is helping
lay the groundwork for future advancements in conservation research, policy for-
mulation, etc.
4.4
Conclusion
This study focused on developing a marine update for the Euka tool, leverag-
ing pangenome graphs in order to capture genetic diversity within marine ecosys-
tems.
Facing challenges, such as limited availability of full mitochondrial genomes for
certain species, vast amounts of data, and limited time, the partial completion of
the database serves as a stepping stone and pipeline towards the realisation of a
full marine update for Euka, as well as a greater understanding of marine life.
This study highlights the importance of comprehensive representation of genetic
diversity, and the knowledge such representation might unlock.
The completion of the full marine update will be a focus of the future, with a clear
roadmap for future work is outlined in this study.
The continued development and refinement of the Euka database, especially in
regards to the marine version, should be pursued in the future, with focus on
completion of the full database, and hereafter vigorous effort to obtain as much
species representation as possible.
In conclusion, this thesis contributes as a stepping stone in completion of a
marine update for the Euka tool, which will then serve as a valuable tool for
conservation, policy making, monitoring and other areas of marine life.
Page 15 of 15
==PAGE:18==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Sequence length distribution of downloaded data.
. . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Workflow when merging the directories.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Data standardization workflow before pairwise alignment (created
with BioRender.com).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Illustration of a variation graph.
The circle symbolising the con-
sensus sequence, while the nodes symbolises different sequences
depending on the species. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Page I of III
==PAGE:19==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
References
References
[1] N. A. Vogel, J. D. Rubin, M. Swartz, J. Vlieghe, P. W. Sackett, A. G. Pedersen,
M. W. Pedersen, and G. Renaud, “euka: Robust tetrapodic and athropodic
taxa detection from modern and ancient environmental DNA using pange-
nomic reference graphs,” Methods in Ecology and Evolution, vol. 14, 9 2023.
[2] P. Saenz-Agudelo, P. Ramirez, R. Beldade, A. N. Campoy, V. Garmendia,
F. V. Search, M. FernĂĄndez, E. A. Wieters, S. A. Navarrete, M. F. Lan-
daeta, and A. PĂŠrez-Matus, “Environmental DNA reveals temporal varia-
tion in mesophotic reefs of the Humboldt upwelling ecosystems of central
Chile: Toward a baseline for biodiversity monitoring of unexplored marine
habitats,” Ecology and Evolution, vol. 14, 2 2024.
[3] S. Hermawati, H. Madduppa, M. M. Kamal, R. Kurnia, and R. Rachmawati,
“Diatom communities in marine protected areas in the coral reefs in Lombok,
Indonesia, using aqueous and sedimentary environmental DNA (eDNA),” E3S
Web of Conferences, vol. 442, 11 2023.
[4] S. M. Mwamburi, J. Uku, N. Wambiji, J. Kairo, F. Oketch, K. O. Oduor,
L. Amondi, and N. Ishmael, “ecosystems: A case study of Gazi bay seagrass
meadows,” Environmental DNA, 10 2023.
[5] L. R. Thompson and P. Thielen, “Decoding dissolved information: environ-
mental DNA sequencing at global scale to monitor a changing ocean,” Curr
Opin Biotechnol., 6 2023.
[6] S. T. Rishan, R. J. Kline, and M. S. Rahman, “New prospects of environ-
mental RNA metabarcoding research in biological diversity, ecotoxicological
monitoring, and detection of COVID-19: a critical review,” Environ Sci Pollut
Res Int., 2 2023.
[7] K. Deiner, H. M. Bik, E. MĂ¤chler, M. Seymour, A. LacoursiĂ¨re-Roussel,
F. Altermatt, S. Creer, I. Bista, D. M. Lodge, N. de Vere, M. E. Pfrender, and
L. Bernatchez, “Environmental DNA metabarcoding: Transforming how we
survey animal and plant communities,” Mol Ecol., 11 2017.
[8] “World
register
of
marine
species.
available
from
https://www.marinespecies.org
at
vliz.
accessed
2024-04-08.
doi:10.14284/170,”
[9] E. W. Sayers, E. E. Bolton, J. R. Brister, K. Canese, J. Chan, D. C.
Comeau, R. Connor, K. Funk, C. Kelly, S. Kim, T. Madej, A. Marchler-Bauer,
C. Lanczycki, S. Lathrop, Z. Lu, F. Thibaud-Nissen, T. Murphy, L. Phan,
Y. Skripchenko, T. Tse, J. Wang, R. Williams, B. W. Trawick, K. D. Pruitt,
and S. T. Sherry, “Database resources of the national center for biotechnol-
ogy information,” Nucleic Acids Res., 1 2022.
Page II of III
==PAGE:20==
Euka Update: Marine Database for Taxa Detection from Modern and Ancient
Environmental DNA
References
[10] C. BA, T. G, B. F, G. A, I. M, M. S, A. MC, B. SG, G. GH, H. Y, K. A, R. SA, S. J,
S. A, E. M, E. RJ, H. EK, K. MJ, N. T, O. M, R.-P. A, A. EV, A. SJ, B. RG, C. P,
D. JB, D. DG, F. NM, G. BR, G. CJ, H. F, H. B, H. MP, I. K, K. E, K. L, K. PG,
L. Y, M. SB, M. UG, M. D, M. T, N. JA, O. NT, P. AM, P. EJ, R. TA, R. G, R. SW,
S. C, S. S, S. S, S. CH, S. DF, S. S, W. AZ, Z. S, B. K, B. C, B. AK, C. JA,
G. J, K. R, L. E, L. S, S. A, M. GI, L. CE, K. PJ, G. MW, G. IV, and A. JM,
“Algal genomes reveal evolutionary mosaicism and the fate of nucleomorphs.
Nature. 2012 Dec 6;492(7427):59-65. doi: 10.1038/nature11681,” Nature,
2012.
[11] B. JW, “An Overview of the Genus Aspergillus,” Aspergillus: Molecular Biology
and Genomics, 2010.
[12] M. Steinegger and S. L. Salzberg, “Terminating contamination: large-scale
search identifies more than 2,000,000 contaminated entries in GenBank,”
Genome Biology, vol. 21, 1 2020.
[13] R. P., L. I., and B. A., “EMBOSS: The European Molecular Biology Open
Software Suite,” Trends in Genetics, 2000.
[14] A. Veidenberg, A. Medlar, and A. LĂśytynoja, “Wasabi: An Integrated Plat-
form for Evolutionary Sequence Analysis and Data Visualization,” Molecular
Biology and Evolution, vol. 33, pp. 1126–1130, 4 2016.
[15] G. E., S. J., and N. A. et al., “Variation graph toolkit improves read map-
ping by representing genetic variation in the reference,” Nature Biotechnol-
ogy, vol. 36, pp. 875–879, 10 2018.
[16] G. TD and R. NA, “Mathematical constraints on a family of biodiversity mea-
sures via connections with RĂŠnyi entropy,” Biosystems, 3 2024.
[17] A. Turnlund, Interactions between coral larval settlement, marine biofilms,
and crustose coralline algae microbiomes. Phd thesis, University of Queens-
land, 2024.
[18] L. Ramiro and P. Francesc, “Unlocking Complexities in the Ocean Micro-
biome and Fish Genomics Using Mathematical Tools,” ICM-CRM Meeting
2023: New Bridges between Marine Sciences and Mathematics, 11 2023.
[19] A.-C. L. Gisela, F. Paschoal, J. V. Couto, and F. B. Pereira, “On the Evolu-
tionary History of Philometridae (Nematoda: Dracunculoidea): Integrative
Taxonomy Reveals Evidence of Character Diversification and HostâParasite
Cophylogenetic Patterns,” Diversity, vol. 15, no. 6, 2023.
[20] Y. H, D. M, Z. R, Z. L, and S. Y, “Research on precise phenotype identification
and growth prediction of lettuce based on deep learning,” Environ Res., 4
2024.
Page III of III
