==PAGE:1==
Design, simulation, and experimental evalua­
tion of a Compton Camera instrument based
on 3D CdZnTe drift strip detectors.
Master Thesis
Author: Manuel Fernandez Jimenez
Supervisor: Irfan Kuvvetli
DTU Space
Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics Divison
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument
based on 3D CdZnTe drift strip detectors
Master Thesis
May, 2024
By
Manuel Fernandez Jimenez
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics Divison, Elektrovej, building
328, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.space.dtu.dk/english/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis is submitted as the final project for the MSc. Earth and Space Physics
and Engineering degree at the Technical University of Denmark. The work described
was carried out from the 2nd of October 2023 through the 14th of May 2024. No prior
preparation work was carried out before the start of this project.
Manuel Fernandez Jimenez ­ s212724
Signature
Date
ii
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
14/05/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project presents the design and simulation of a compact Compton Camera instru­
ment payload based on 3D CdZnTe detector modules developed at DTU Space, together
with experimental evaluation of a single detector module at the DTU Space detector lab
facilities.
A mission concept study is proposed, consisting on a preliminary performance parameter
estimation and shielding analysis of anti­coincidence detectors as the main strategy to mit­
igate the in­orbit instrumental background. Finally, an idealized CubeSat sized Compton
camera payload is presented, and its imaging capabilities are evaluated. Simulation work
includes in­orbit mission performance evaluation including a low­Earth orbit background
environment and a known source (e.g. the Crab Nebula, and a selected GRB).
Experimental work involves the characterization of the 3D drift strip detector imaging per­
formance when operating as a single­module Compton camera exposed to a weak mono­
energetic source. A double­event position characterization algorithm was developed and
implemented. Finally, the experimental results obtained were validated with a simple sim­
ulation of the experimental setup.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Thank you Irfan and Selina for being there and bringing me back to the ground when it was
most needed throughout these months. You are examples of dedication and academic
excellence, a bit scary at times, but a true inspiration to keep moving forward in the right
direction.
My parents, for supporting me when it was time to finally leave the nest and move to
Denmark. There is no better friend than a sister, Maria it’s really cool being your little
brother.
Miquel, my brother in arms, luch breaks at the wicked rabbit would have been a lot more
boring without you. The blue kitchen gang, my family here in Denmark, for so many
evenings training at DTU climbing, and all the fun together.
Last but not least, I’m grateful to schwarzschild, the local computer cluster at DTU Space,
it has been a great time together buddy :)
This is not the end, it’s just a new beginning.
Manuel Fernandez Jimenez
iv Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Radiation Detection and Measurement
3
2.1
Interaction of radiation with matter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Photoelectric absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Compton scattering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Pair production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Radiation detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Detector Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Modes of operation and pulse height spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Gamma­ray detector spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3
Semiconductor detectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3.1
Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3.2
Charge collection and signal formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
The 3D CZT Drift strip detector
19
3.1
Detector concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Signal formation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Signal processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3.1
Event types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3.2
Position algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Compton Telescopes for Gamma­Ray Astrophysics
26
4.1
Basic operating principles of Compton telescopes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Medium Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library (MEGAlib) . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2.1
Geomega . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2.2
Cosima . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2.3
Revan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2.4
Mimrec
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Compton telescope performance parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3.1
Angular resolution measure (ARM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3.2
Effective area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.3.3
Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Instrumental background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.5
Main science goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Mission Concept Study
40
5.1
Performance parameter analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.1.1
Number of detector modules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.1.2
Detector module separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.2
Shielding analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.2.1
CsI scintillator analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
v
==PAGE:8==
5.2.2
BGO scintillator analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.3
Emission­Line and Multi­messenger Observatory (ELMO) . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.3.1
Continuum source: observing the Crab Nebula . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.3.2
Transient source: observing a gamma­ray burst (GRB 990411) . . . 56
6
Experimental evaluation
59
6.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.2
Double­event characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.2.1
X­position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.2.2
Y­position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.2.3
Z­position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
6.3
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
6.4
Correlating with simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
7
Conclusion and future work
77
Bibliography
80
A 3D CZT drift strip detector geometry file
85
B Source file example
87
C ELMO cube geometry file
88
D Fitted ARM for Crab only simulations
92
E
Y­position linear fit parameters
94
F
Experimental setup in MEGAlib ­ geometry file
95
G Simulated setup in MEGAlib ­ source file
97
vi Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The electromagnetic emissions from astrophysical sources contain precise and valuable
information about their origin. Accurate detection and measurement require suitable de­
tector sensors with advanced signal processing capabilities. However, the soft to medium
energy gamma­ray regime (i.e. 0.1­100 MeV) remains one of the least explored energy
ranges in multi­wavelength astrophysics, mainly due to insufficient instrument sensitivity,
arising from challenges related to high intrinsic and instrumental background, poor stop­
ping power of sensors, and the combination of three different interaction processes for
energy deposition [1]. This gap in sensitivity, is often referred to as the MeV Gap.
Fig. 1.1 shows the continuum sensitivity of current and past telescopes in the X­ray and
high­energy gamma­ray regime, and it is clear that the sensitivity in the MeV Gap is orders
of magnitude worse than neighboring bands. The poor sensitivity of telescopes in the MeV
range is not due to a lack of scientific interest, but instead due to physical, technological,
and environmental challenges (i.e. background radiation).
Figure 1.1: Differential sensitivity for X­ and gamma­ray observatories (current and past).
The limited performance achieved in the MeV domain is evident between 100 keV to 100
MeV, often referred to as ”the MeV gap” [2]. Image credit: [3] (p. 3)
New­generation sensor technology addressing these issues is necessary to improve sen­
sor performance, providing excellent energy, position, and time resolution for photon­by­
photon detection. To build a sensitive telescope to explore the MeV Gap, it must make use
of the dominant interaction mechanism in this range, where the interaction cross section
between photons and matter is lowest, and Compton scattering represents the dominant
interaction mechanism.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Project formulation
This project incorporates space mission design, experimental work in the laboratory with
the 3D CZT detectors, and in­orbit mission performance evaluation of an instrument pay­
load in a simulation environment. The main goal of this project is to evaluate a Compton
Camera instrument through performance simulation and experimental verification of the
Compton imaging concept using a single 3D CZT drift strip detector module at DTU Space
detector laboratory. For this purpose, three milestones were set:
• Simulation of a Compton Camera payload for in­orbit performance.
• Simulation of a single 3D CZT detector module using MEGAlib platform.
• Preparation, conduct, and verification of the simulation results by experimental data
from a single 3D CZT detector in the Detector lab.
This report is intended to be structured in a way that guides the reader through the learning
process experienced during the project. Chapters 2 and 4 aim to establish the concep­
tual foundation upon which the rest of the work is based on. Chapter 2 introduces the
concepts that are considered to be fundamental when it comes to understanding the prin­
ciples of radiation detection and measurement. Chapter 4 delves in the fascinating field
of Compton telescopes for gamma­ray astrophysics and its basic principles of operation.
Chapter 3 and section 4.2 are devoted to introduce the tools that made the simulation and
experimental work during this project possible. Chapter 3 dives into the principles of the
3D CZT Drift Strip detector, developed at DTU Space. Section 4.2 introduces the Medium
Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library, the set of software tools that were used to carry
out all simulation work.
Finally, chapters 5 and 6 present the main results achieved. Chapter 5 describes a mis­
sion concept study, starting with a performance parameter estimation of a basic Comp­
ton camera payload, investigating the impact of several design choices. Moreover, a
dedicated shielding analysis is carried out, investigating the performance of employing
anti­coincidence detectors as a background rejection technique. An idealized Compton
camera instrument is proposed and its performance is evaluated through in­orbit obser­
vations of continuum and transient sources. Finally, chapter 6 covers the last milestone
of this project, the experimental evaluation of a Compton camera instrument consisting of
a single 3D CZT detector module in the detector lab.
2
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:11==
2
Radiation Detection and Measurement
In order to detect and measure any form of radiation it is necessary to interact with it,
only through this interaction we are able to relate the incoming radiation to a measurable
quantity triggered in the detector. The operation principle of any radiation detector relies
on how the radiation interacts with the detector’s material. To understand a particular
detector’s response (e.g. temperature change, visible light, current, electric charge etc.),
one must be familiar with the fundamental mechanisms by which radiation interacts and
loses their energy in matter.
Radiation sources are categorized into four general types, namely: fast electrons, heavy­
charged particles, electromagnetic radiation, and neutron sources. It is not the scope of
this report to explain all these possible sources. For this reason, the focus will be set in
the different forms of interactions from electromagnetic radiation that govern the domain
of hard X­ray and gamma­ray astronomy.
2.1
Interaction of radiation with matter
The primary gamma­ray photons are ”invisible” to the detector, an X­ray or gamma­ray
photon is uncharged and creates no direct ionization or excitation of the material through
which it passes. Thus, the detection of gamma rays is therefore critically dependent on
causing the gamma­ray photon to undergo an interaction that transfers all or part of the
photon energy to an electron, generally referred to as secondary, in the absorbing ma­
terial. Only the complete measurement of these secondary products allows for the de­
termination of the initial energy and direction of the incident photon. It also has to be
mentioned that several processes contribute to energy loss within the detector including
ionization and excitation of atoms within the absorber material and bremsstrahlung emis­
sion. Energy loss, or similarly, stopping power for charged particles in a given absorber
is defined as the differential energy loss for that particle within the material divided by the
corresponding differential path length, namely [4]:
S = −dE
dx
(2.1)
The classical expression that describes the specific energy loss is known as the Bethe
formula and is written:
−dE
dx = 4πe4z2
m0v2 NB
(2.2)
Where:
B ≡Z

ln 2m0v2
I
−ln

1 −v2
c2

−v2
c2

(2.3)
Here, v and ze represent the velocity and charge of the primary particle, N and Z are the
number density and atomic number of the absorber atoms respectively, m0 is the electron
rest mass, and e is the electronic charge. The parameter I represents the average excita­
tion and ionization potential of the absorber and is normally treated as an experimentally
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
3
==PAGE:12==
determined parameter for each element [4]. The value of −dE/dx can be seen as a rate
of energy loss, and it can generally be stated that it increases as the particle velocity
is decreased, that is for any given absorber, stopping power is higher for low velocities.
Moreover, high atomic number and high­density materials will consequently result in the
greatest linear stopping power.
When it comes to the actual interaction mechanisms of gamma rays with matter, there are
three main types, namely: photoelectric absorption, Compton scattering and pair produc­
tion. All these processes result in partial or complete transfer of the gamma­ray photon
energy to electron energy. Fig. 2.1 shows the relative importance of the three interaction
types. Here it can be noted that photoelectric absorption predominates in the low­energy
range (up to several hundred keV), pair production predominates for high­energy gamma­
rays (above 5­10 MeV), and Compton scattering is the most probable process over the
range of energies between these extremes. Considering the implication of the atomic
number of the absorber material, it can be observed that as Z increases, so does the
probability of photoelectric absorption to occur towards medium energies, similarly to that
of pair production.
Figure 2.1: Relative importance of the three major types of gamma­ray interaction with
respect to photon energy and atomic number (Z) of the material. Solid lines represent the
values of Z and hv for which the two neighboring effects are just equal. Image credit: [4]
(p. 51)
Let us now dive into the principles of each interaction mechanism.
2.1.1
Photoelectric absorption
In this process, the incident photon essentially disappears upon interaction with an ab­
sorber atom (Fig. 2.2). It is absorbed and replaced by an energetic photoelectron ejected
from one of the atom’s bound shells. The vacancy created in the electron shell as a result
of the photoelectron emission is quickly filled by a free electron or by rearrangement of
electrons from other shells of the atom. In this process the binding energy is liberated in
the form of a characteristic X­ray or Auger electron.
4
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Photoelectric absorption illustration showing the interaction sequence be­
tween the incident photon, absorber atom, and ejected photoelectron. Image credit: [4]
(p. 323)
The characteristic X­ray typically travel a millimeter or less before being fully absorbed
within the atom vicinity. Thus, in a nutshell, the effect of the photoelectric absorption is
the liberation of a photoelectron together with one or more low­energy (Auger) electrons
corresponding to absorption of the original binding energy of the photoelectron, carrying
an energy, Ee−, equal to the difference between the incident photon energy, hv, and the
binding energy of the atom, Eb, given by:
Ee−= hv −Eb
(2.4)
Where h is Planck’s constant and v is the photon frequency.
2.1.2
Compton scattering
As previously stated, the scope of this project is focused on the dominant interaction
mechanism in the MeV gamma­ray energy range: Compton scattering, a form of inelastic
scattering, which refers to a process where the energy of the incident particle or wave
is not conserved upon interaction with a target. Through this interaction gamma­rays will
partially transfer their energy to bound electrons, and by doing so, the electron recoils, and
the gamma­ray is scattered at an angle relative to its initial direction with lower energy.
Fig, 2.3 shows the diagram of a single scattering event.
Figure 2.3: Compton scattering diagram. Image credit: [4] (p. 49)
If not fully absorbed upon a first interaction, the Compton­scattered photon will then inter­
act a second time, and potentially a third and fourth, before finally absorbing all its energy
in the detector [3], this is considering the case where the initial photon energy is fully
deposited in the detector and no information is lost. However, oftentimes the scattered
photon escapes the detector.
After a first Compton scattering event has occurred, two scenarios can take place:
1. The Compton­scattered photon is either fully absorbed in a subsequent photoelec­
tric absorption event, or interacts a second time, and potentially a third and fourth,
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
5
==PAGE:14==
before finally absorbing all its energy in the detector. In this case the initial photon
energy has been fully deposited in the detector and no information has been lost.
2. The Compton­scattered photon escapes the detector, either after the first interaction
or at any step of the subsequent interactions. Thus resulting in a loss of information
since only partial energy deposition takes place. More on this when the gamma
detector spectrum, and in particular the spectral response to Compton scattering
measurements is discussed in section 2.2.3.
Let’s go back to considering a single scattering event. Assuming the electron to be at rest,
the expression for the scattered photon energy, Escat = hvscat, was derived by Arthur H.
Compton in 1923 [5], and was described as a function of incidence photon energy and
photon scattering angle, θ, namely:
Escat =
hv
1 +

hv
m0c2

(1 −cos θ)
(2.5)
Where m0c2 = 0.511 MeV is the rest mass energy of the electron, the electron mass is
denoted by m0, and the speed of light c. According to the conservation of energy principle,
the total energy before and after the scattering event must be conserved, thus, the kinetic
energy of the recoil electron, Ee−, is given by the difference between the incident photon
energy and the scattered photon energy, namely:
Ee−= hv −Escat = hv
 
hv
m0c2 (1 −cos θ)
1 +
hv
m0c2 (1 −cos θ)
!
(2.6)
The differential scattering cross section dσ/dΩas a function of incident energy (i.e. α =
hv/m0c2) and photon scattering angle for Compton scattering was derived by O. Klein
and Y. Nishina [6] for the case of unbound electrons at rest, and is given by:
( dσ
dΩ
)
unbound
= Zr2
0
(
1
1 + α(1 −cos θ)
)2 (1 + cos2 θ
2
) (
1 +
α2(1 −cos θ)2
(1 + cos2 θ) (1 + α(1 −cos θ))
)
(2.7)
Fig. 2.4 examines the previous equation, also known as Klein­Nishina formula, exploring
how different incident energies affect the angular distribution of the differential scattering
cross section.
6
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:15==
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 2.4: Klein­Nishina cross section as a function of Compton­scattering angle.
It can be observed that for lower energies (i.e. ~10 keV) the probability of the photon to
be scattered forward is almost equal to that of being scattered backwards. As the energy
increases, so does the tendency to forward scatter.
So far the only strong assumption that has been introduced is that of considering the target
electron to be unbound and at rest. However, in a real­life detector system the electrons
are neither free nor at rest, but bound to a nucleus. Understanding and accounting for this
phenomenon is crucial when it comes to employing the Compton scattering interaction as
an imaging technique in a Compton camera instrument, as Zoglauer and Kanbach [7]
stated:
”The angular resolution of a telescope which detects gamma­rays via the Compton
effect is fundamentally limited below a few hundred keV by the fact that the target
electrons have an indeterminable momentum inside their atoms which introduces an
uncertainty in the recoil energy of the Compton electron and the scattered photon.”
This additional component in the energy and momentum equation results in a Doppler
broadening of the angular resolution compared to the standard Compton equation for a
target at rest [7]. In 1975, Ribberfors [8], introduced an expression for the differential cross
section for Compton scattering from bound electron states, namely:
 dσ
dΩ

bound
=
 dσ
dΩ

unbound
SI
i (hv, θ, Z)
(2.8)
Where SI
i represents the incoherent scattering function of the i­th shell electrons in the
impulse approximation, just mentioned for convenience. In essence, it can be concluded
that the Doppler broadening effect will impose a lower limit to the angular resolution for a
Compton camera, which will become apparent in section 5.1 where a performance param­
eter analysis on the angular resolution of a simple Compton camera payload is conducted.
2.1.3
Pair production
If the gamma­ray energy exceeds twice the rest­mass energy of an electron (1.02 MeV),
the process of pair production is energetically possible, however, the probability for pair
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
7
==PAGE:16==
production is still small at gamma­ray energies that are only a few hundred keV above
this threshold. Thus, it is only at high energies that pair production becomes relevant (i.e.
above 5­10 MeV) [4]. Again, note that this energy range goes beyond the range which
is being dealt with in this project (i.e. few hundreds of keV), nevertheless, this process is
introduced for illustration.
Pair production occurs in the electric field near the protons in the nuclei of the absorbing
material (i.e. the coulomb field of a nucleus), and corresponds to the creation or pro­
duction, as the interaction name succinctly suggests, of an electron­positron pair at the
point of complete disappearance of the incident gamma­ray photon [4]. The energy of the
electron and positron generated in the interaction is described by:
Ee−+ Ee+ = hv −2m0c2
(2.9)
where Ee−represents the electron energy and Ee+ the positron energy. Fig. 2.5 intro­
duces the diagram of the interaction, as it is shown, the proton undergoes annihilation
soon after being created. Luckily, understanding the secondary products of this interac­
tion fall beyond the extent of this project.
Figure 2.5: Pair production diagram. Image credit: [9] (p. 12).
2.2
Radiation detectors
Now that we are familiar with the fundamental interaction mechanisms of gamma rays
with matter, it is possible to introduce the means through which the incoming radiation is
related to a measurable quantity. We are now entering the realm of radiation detectors.
The operation principle of any radiation detector relies on how the radiation interacts with
the detector’s material. If we consider a single particle, an individual gamma­ray photon
for example, in order for the detector to respond at all, the radiation must undergo interac­
tion through one of the mechanisms discussed in the previous section. The result of this
radiation interaction is the appearance of a measurable quantity (i.e. detector response)
[4]. The next step is to collect and interpret the response in order to extract information
about the radiation, this analysis is done with the help of an external electronic circuit. To
sum up, the detector must carry out two distinct functions. First, it must act as a conver­
sion medium in which incident gamma­rays have a reasonable probability of interacting
to yield one or more secondary electrons. Second, it must function as a conventional
detector for these secondary electrons.
Detectors vary in detection method, operation principle, material, electrode geometry,
design, and capabilities. However, a common framework for radiation detectors exist. It
is the purpose of this section to introduce some of the common detector characteriza­
8
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:17==
tion principles, discuss the different detector modes of operation, and describe the main
spectral features of the gamma­ray spectrum.
2.2.1
Detector Characteristics
Here some of the common detector specifications needed to understand a given detec­
tor’s performance are described, namely:
Full Width at Half Maximum
The resolution of a detector is usually given in terms of the Full Width at Half Maximum
(FWHM), defined as the energy width of the spectral response to a monochromatic source
(i.e. Full Width), at which the number of counts have decreased to half of the maximum
(i.e. at Half Maximum). If a standard Gaussian shape is assumed for the photo­peak,
Fig. 2.6 illustrates the resulting distribution for a spectral measurement of a source with
energy E0. The resolution is then given by R = FWHM/E0.
Figure 2.6: FWHM definition used to determine detector resolution. For peaks whose
shape is Gaussian with standard deviation σ, the FWHM is given by 2.35σ. Image credit:
[2] (p. 10).
Efficiency
The efficiency of a detector describes its ability to capture the emitted radiation quanta
from a given source. Detector efficiency strongly depends on the detector material, the
detector geometry, and the energy of the incident radiation. A thin detector with a bulk
material of high stopping power can have a higher efficiency than one with a thick material
of low stopping power [2].
The detector efficiency can be described by its absolute efficiency, εabs, and its intrinsic
efficiency, εint. The absolute efficiency is dependent not only on detector properties but
also on the distance from the source to the detector. Whereas the intrinsic efficiency is
independent on the distance to the source. The two efficiencies are defined as follows:
εabs =
number of recorded pulses
number of radiation quanta emitted by source
(2.10)
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
9
==PAGE:18==
εint =
number of recorded pulses
number of radiation quanta incident on detector
(2.11)
Both efficiencies are related by the solid angle between the source and detector:
εint = εabs
4π
Ω
(2.12)
Where Ωis the solid angle represented in Fig. 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Source­detector sketch with relevant parameters. Image credit: [4] (p. 120).
Ideally, the intrinsic efficiency of a detector is 100%. However, it is often seen that a detec­
tor is less than 100% efficient since X­ and gamma­rays can penetrate large thicknesses
of material without interacting.
Spectral resolution
The spectral resolution (or energy resolution) of a detector is a definition of how precise it
can determine the energy of an incoming photon. The energy resolution of a detector can
vary as a function of energy. There are three main contributors to the energy resolution
of a detector, defined as follows:
• Statistical fluctuation: it contributes to the uncertainty in the energy determination
and represents the absolute minimum fluctuation which will always be present de­
spite how perfect the rest of the detector is. It is the theoretical limit to the spectral
resolution of a detector. The statistical limit to the resolution is given by [4]:
R|Statistical lim. = 2.35
r
F
N
(2.13)
where F is the Fano factor, and N is the number of generated charge carriers.
The Fano factor is introduced to overcome the fact that the formation of charge
carriers (i.e. electron­hole pairs) is not independent, and thus Poisson statistics
do not accurately model the arrival of photons and subsequent electron­hole pair
formation. The statistical fluctuation contribution increases as energy of the incident
radiation increases, since the increased amount of charge carriers allow for larger
statistical fluctuation.
• Noise: The electronic readout system will unavoidably introduce noise resulting
in an uncertainty to the measured signal. When it comes to its dependency on
radiation energy, its contribution is constant at all energies, and will therefore often
be the dominating contributor for low energies.
10 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:19==
• Trapping: this effect is related to the charge transport properties of the detector
material and mainly depend on energy and geometry. Its contribution will increase
as the incident radiation energy increases, since more charges are generated, and
thus more charges can be trapped.
The total measured spectral FWHM for the detector is the squared sum of each individual
source to the FWHM [4], namely:
(FWHM)2
total = (FWHM)2
statistical + (FWHM)2
noise + (FWHM)2
trapping
(2.14)
Note that here it has first been introduced the concept of charge carriers or elctron­hole
pairs, this is a fundamental notion when it comes to understanding the charge collec­
tion and signal formation process in a semiconductor detector, which will be described in
section 2.3.2.
Spatial resolution
If a detector can quantify the interaction position of a photon in the detector volume, it has
a spatial sensitivity. Spatial sensitivity of a detector is often achieved through segmented
electrodes, where the signal induced on the electrodes can be used to determine the
interaction position. Some detectors only have a spatial sensitivity in one dimension,
while others have in two or three dimensions. If the detector consists of strip electrodes
on both sides, it is often the intersection of the two triggered electrodes that denotes the
2D position. In this case the spatial resolution will be equal to the strip pitch, and should
be noted that the detector would only be 2D sensitive. For a detector to have spatial
sensitivity in 3D, the depth of the interaction in the detector must also be determined. This
is often done either by measuring the drift time of the charge carriers, or by measuring
the relationship between the induced signal on each side of the detector [2]. That is the
case of the 3D CZT drift strip detector, which will be introduced in chapter 3
2.2.2
Modes of operation and pulse height spectra
Let’s now dive into the different modes at which radiation detectors operate. To start this
discussion let’s first consider a simplified detector model that assumes that a charge Q
appears within the detector at time t = 0 resulting from the interaction of a single particle.
Next, this charge must be collected to form the basic electrical signal. Typically, collection
of the charge is accomplished through the imposition of an electric field within the detector,
which causes the positive and negative charges created by the radiation to flow in opposite
directions. In essence, the response of this simplified model to a single particle will be
a current that flows for a time equal to the charge collection time. And, accidentally,
we’ve just gained a first insight of how the signal formation process happens in a radiation
detector.
Three main modes of operation are considered, namely: pulse mode, current mode, and
mean square voltage (MSV) mode [4]. It has to be noted that pulse mode is easily the most
commonly applied of these. In pulse mode operation, the measurement instrumentation
is designed to record each individual radiation interaction in the detector. In most common
applications, the time integral of each burst of current, or the total charge Q, is recorded
since the energy deposited in the detector is directly related to Q [4]. At very high event
rates the current pulses from successive events may overlap in time, and pulse mode
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
11
==PAGE:20==
operation becomes impractical or even impossible. In such cases, a solution is to consider
the time average taken over many individual events. This approach leads to the remaining
two modes of operation: current mode and MSV mode.
In current mode, the detector is connected across the output terminals to a current­
measuring device (see Fig. 2.8a). Assuming the measuring device has a fixed response
time T, which is typically long compared with the average time between individual current
pulses from the detector, the recorded signal is a time average of the individual current
bursts from radiation interactions. In MSV mode, however, the derived signal is propor­
tional to the square of the charge per event. This operational mode is most useful when
making measurements in mixed radiation environments when the charge produced by
one type of radiation is much different than that from the second type [4].
(a) Current mode
(b) Pulse mode
(c) Mean squared voltage mode
Figure 2.8: Schematics of the different modes of detector operation. Image credit: [4] (p.
107)
The key take away here is that for the purpose of this project, and gamma­ray spec­
troscopy in general, it is of paramount importance to preserve information on the ampli­
tude and timing of individual events, and only pulse mode can provide that.
Moreover, when operating a radiation detector in pulse mode, each individual pulse am­
plitude carries important information regarding the charge generated by that particular ra­
diation interaction in the detector. When it comes to the data processing of the detector’s
output, understanding the pulse amplitude distribution is fundamental in order to deduce
information about the incident radiation, next section further expands in this regard.
2.2.3
Gamma­ray detector spectrum
When a detector is exposed to a generic mono­energetic gamma source for a sufficient
amount of time (e.g. to ensure reliable statistics), the resulting pulse amplitude (or height)
distribution should reproduce some features (if not all, depending on the incoming energy)
of the generic X­ and gamma­ray spectrum. In this section the main spectral features of
this spectrum will be described.
Let’s first discuss in particular the spectral response to Compton scattering measure­
ments. Two scenarios where considered, one where the initial photon energy was fully
deposited either after a first interaction or a sequence of interactions, and a second case
where the scattered photon escapes the detector. Let’s consider the case where the scat­
12 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:21==
tered photon escapes the detector, Fig. 2.9 serves as illustration. The spectral shape of
the recoil electron energy for a photon with initial energy E0 = hv is shown in Fig. 2.10.
For a given photon incident energy, the fact that the photon has escaped the detector
results in a partial energy loss, thus the spectrum will display a Compton continuum of all
the possible energies.
Figure 2.9: Escaped photon.
Image credit: [10] (p. 4)
.
Figure 2.10:
Spectral shape of the recoil
electron energy for a photon with initial en­
ergy E0 = hv. Image credit: [4] (p. 324).
The maximum energy of the Compton continuum is referred to as the Compton edge. For
low scatter angles, the deposited energy is close to zero, whereas for maximum scatter
angles, the deposited energy is equal to the incident photon energy minus the maximum
electron energy [4]:
EC = hv −Ee−|θ=π
(2.15)
We can now extend to the complete X­ and gamma­ray detector spectrum. Fig. 2.10
depicts the main features of the spectral response to a mono­energetic source.
Figure 2.11: Features of the X­ and gamma­ray spectrum resulting from a mono­energetic
source. Image credit: [11] (slide 12).
A. Full energy photopeak: full­energy, photoelectric absorption interactions.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
13
==PAGE:22==
B. Compton continuum: Compton scattering interactions, resulting in a partial energy
loss.
C. Compton edge: maximum energy loss from a Compton interaction. Here it displays
a sharp edge, however, due to the bound electrons, and the fact that a detector has
a finite energy resolution, the edge will round. This will become apparent in section
6 when discussing the experimental work of this project.
D. Compton valley: either multiple Compton events or full­energy interactions under­
going small­angle Compton scattering before being absorbed in the detector. In
essence, the spectral signature of the first interaction in a sequence of Compton
scattering interactions.
E. Single escape peak: pair production, one annihilation photon escaping the mate­
rial.
F. Double escape peak: pair production, two annihilation photons escaping the ma­
terial.
Note that in order to observe single or double escape peaks in a measured spectrum,
sufficient pair production interactions must take place, which occurs only at energies > 1
MeV.
2.3
Semiconductor detectors
In this last section of the chapter in radiation detection and measurements we delve in
the main type of detector technology dealt with in this project, semiconductor detectors.
Their main advantage is the fact that much better energy resolutions can be achieved
since the number of charge carriers per interaction is increased, and therefore reduces
the statistical limit to the energy resolution. In this section the fundamental theory of
semiconductor detectors will be described.
Solid materials are divided into metals and non­metals, where non­metals include insu­
lators and semiconductors. The semiconductor material is an intermediate between the
conductors and insulators, and holds a resistivity between 10−2 Ωcm and 108 Ωcm. The
resistivity of the material determines whether it is classified as an insulator or a semicon­
ductor. However, conductivity is strongly affected by the temperature, thus the difference
really depends on the temperature at which the materials are evaluated [12].
The bandgap of a material, separates the valance band and the conduction band, and
defines whether the material is a metal, semiconductor, or insulator. The valance band
corresponds to the outer­shell electrons. The next higher­lying band is the conduction
band where the electrons can freely migrate through the crystal, thereby contributing to
the material electrical conductivity [2]. Fig. 2.12 shows an illustration of the valance
and conduction band of the different materials. For some semiconductor materials, the
thermal excitation at room temperature will result in an unsought migration of electrons
from the valance band to the conduction band, thus needing to be cooled to avoid this.
Other semiconductor materials have a larger band gap and can therefore be operated at
room temperature [2].
14 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.12: Schematic of an insulator, semiconductor, and metal. In a metal electrons
constantly occupy the conduction band. In the semiconductor, the bandgap is smaller than
that of the insulator, and electrons can transition from the valance band to the conduction
band. Image credit: [2] (p. 16)
After a brief material science detour, let’s go back and connect these concepts to the main
focus of this project. When an incoming X­ or gamma­ray photon interacts with the semi­
conductor material, it can knock an electron from the valence band into the conduction
band, leaving behind an electron hole in the valence band. An electron hole is essentially
a vacancy in the valence band where an electron used to be. Both the free electron in the
conduction band and the hole in the valence band can move in response to an applied
electric field. These are the highly anticipated, and previously mentioned charge carriers
generated along the path of the charge particle interactions in the detector. The motion
of the electron­hole pairs in the applied electric field in the detector is what generates the
detector signal [4].
Next sections will discuss the implications of different detector bulk materials, and will
further deepen in the understanding of the charge collection and signal formation process.
2.3.1
Material
The semiconductor material used for the detector bulk is one of the most, if not the most,
fundamental specifications of a semiconductor detector. It presents several implications,
such as operational temperature, charge carrier mobility and lifetime, radiation interaction
cross section, and possible active bulk size. A detector can consist of a single element
or a compound of several elements, each material is generally described by the atomic
number, density, and resistivity [2].
There exist multiple alternatives when it comes to semiconductor material selection. Widely
used examples of single element materials used in radiation detectors are silicon (Si) and
germanium (Ge). The main advantage of these materials is the fact that they can be man­
ufactured pure in large bulk, and still possess excellent charge carrier transport properties.
When it comes to disadvantages, Silicon has a low stopping power, and germanium re­
quire cooling to cryogenic temperatures [2].
Compound semiconductor materials are beneficial primarily due to their higher atomic
number, which significantly enhances the photoelectric absorption cross­section. Addi­
tionally, these materials often possess large enough band gaps to function at room tem­
perature with minimal or no cooling. Examples of compound materials are Cadmium Tel­
luride (CdTe), Cadmium Zinc Telluride (CdZnTe), and Gallium arsenide (GaAs). However,
a notable drawback of compound semiconductor materials is their poorer hole mobility
compared to electron mobility [2].
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
15
==PAGE:24==
Fig. 2.13 shows the cross sections as a function of energy for CZT, Ge, and Si. Both Ge
and Si have considerably smaller cross sections for photoelectric absorption, compared
to CZT. Already at 60 keV, Compton scattering becomes more dominant for Si. CZT has
a larger cross section for photoelectric absorption than Ge and, at the same time, does
not require cooling. However, charge transport properties of CZT are significantly worse.
Production of CZT is challenging, and can result in non­uniformity in the material, high
defect density, and deep subsurface damages (e.g. grain boundaries) [2].
Figure 2.13: Si, Ge, and CZT cross sections for photoelectric absorption, Compton scat­
tering, and pair production. Data extracted from [13].
2.3.2
Charge collection and signal formation
Let’s finally explicitly discuss the charge collection and signal formation within the extent
of semiconductor detectors. As already mentioned, when the high­energy photon inter­
acts with the semiconductor material it results in the generation of electron­hole pairs 1.
If an electric field, E, is applied to the semiconductor material, it will result in the motion
of the charge carriers along the direction of the applied field, see Fig. 2.14 for illustra­
tion. Electrons will drift towards collection at the anode, and holes will do so towards the
cathode [2].
The drift velocity of the electrons and holes, vd, can for low to moderate electric field
intensity be described by the electric field strength, E, and the charge carrier mobility, µ:
vd,h = µhE
(2.16)
vd,e = µeE
(2.17)
1Average energy required to create an electron­hole pair is a property of the solid­state material, in a CZT
detector is typically 4.4 eV
16 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.14: Illustration of a simple semiconductor detector. The interaction from a high­
energy photon will generate electron­hole pairs. The electrons will drift towards collection
at the anode, while the holes will drift towards collection at the cathode. Image credit: [2]
(p. 18)
The drift of the charges in the detector is governed by the mobility and lifetime of the
charges in the given material. This will impact the amount of trapping the electron­hole
pairs will experience towards collection [2]. Carrier lifetime and mobility characterization
falls beyond the extent of this work, the interested reader is referred to [14] for an in depth
investigation in this regard.
Back to signal formation. In essence, it is the motion of the carriers that induces the signal,
and they do so from the moment when the charges start moving, until they are collected at
the electrodes. The signal formation timeline can be conveniently summarized as follows:
Deposited energy
→
Moving charge q →
Induced charge Q
→
Output signal.
And the relationship between charge collection and signal formation is elegantly stated in
[15] as:
”The time dependent output signal of a charge sensing device can be predicted if the
induced charge Q on the readout electrode can be calculated as a function of
instantaneous position of the moving charge q within the device.”
The conventional, tedious, and computationally intensive way of calculating the induced
charge Q involves solving the Poisson equation [4], where φ denotes the electric potential,
ρ the charge density, and ϵ the dielectric constant of the detector medium:
∇2φ = ρ
ϵ
(2.18)
Solving Poisson equation for a given detector geometry, and under the relevant boundary
conditions results in the electric potential φ in the detector medium, from which the electric
field can be derived by taking its gradient:
E = −grad(φ)
(2.19)
To calculate the induced charge, one has to calculate the instantaneous electric field E
when the moving charge q is at each point of its trajectory, and then calculate the induced
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
17
==PAGE:26==
charge Q by integrating the normal component of E over the surface S surrounding the
electrode [15]:
Q =
I
S
ϵE · dS
(2.20)
It should be clear by now why this is a tedious, and computationally intensive method.
Luckily, a more general and simple method was independently developed by both Shock­
ley [16] and Ramo [17], known as the Shockley–Ramo theorem. It states that the charge
Q and current i on an electrode induced by a moving point charge q, where v represents
its instantaneous velocity, are given by:
Q = −qφ0(x)
(2.21)
i = qv · E0(x)
(2.22)
Where φ0 represents the weighting potential, and E0 the weighting field. The weighting
potential is not a real physical potential in the detector, it is introduced as a mathematical
tool to simplify the process of calculating the induced charge, and can be found as a
function of position by solving the Laplace equation (∇2φ = 0) for the given detector
geometry, under the following conditions conditions [2]:
• The selected electrode is set at unit potential.
• All other electrodes are set at zero potential and all charges removed.
• Trapped charges in the detector volume are ignored, that’s how the problem is sim­
plified from solving the Poisson equation to dealing with the more friendly Laplace
equation.
The main consequence of employing the weighting potential approach is that the charge
induced by q is independent of applied potentials on electrodes and the space charge,
being only dependant on each specific detector’s geometry, thus only one field has to be
calculated for each electrode. It is relevant to discuss the specific weighting potential dis­
tribution of the 3D CZT Drift strip detector, the detector with which the experimental work
of this project has been carried out, specifically the newly produced 40x40x5 mm3 module.
Next chapter introduces and further expands on the characteristics of this detector.
18 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:27==
3
The 3D CZT Drift strip detector
In the late 1990’s, the detector group at DTU Space started to focus their activity on
improving the spectral performance of CZT detectors [18], [19]. This effort led to the
creation of a unique electrode geometry and readout technique implemented in the 3D
CZT drift strip detector, also referred to as the Drift Strip Method [2].
In this chapter the basic principle of the 3D CZT strip detector is introduced, the detec­
tor laboratory and measurement setup is presented, and the data analysis procedure is
described.
3.1
Detector concept
What makes this detector unique is its specific electrode geometry designed to screen
the collecting anodes from the poor movement of the holes in CZT, which significantly
improves the spectral properties of the material, when the induced signal is not affected
due to inefficient hole collection. Fig. 3.1 illustrates the electrode geometry and electri­
cal diagram. Electrode strips are located on each side of the CZT crystal, cathodes are
represented in green, anodes in red, and drift strips in blue. Together with its unique ge­
ometry, the biasing configuration is what fully exploits the detector’s capabilities, designed
to direct the electrons towards the anode. The anodes are at ground potential, the cath­
odes are negatively biased, typically ­450 V in the 40x40x5 mm3 module, and drift strips
have an input voltage of ­150 V. A drift strip section is located in between each collecting
anode, consisting of three drift strip electrodes. A voltage divider applies high voltage to
each group of drift strips as shown in Fig. 3.1, so that the center drift strips are biased at
­100 V and the outer drift strips at ­50 V. Thus a drift cell consists of a single anode and
four drift strips, two on the right and two on the left of the anode, as illustrated in the right
panel of Fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Schematic of the 3D CZT drift strip detector electrode geometry, and the
electrical diagram of a single drift cell in the detector. Image credit: [2] (p. 35)
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
19
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Signal formation
We already discussed the charge collection and signal formation within the extent of semi­
conductor detectors, this section delves in the specific weighting potential of the 3D CZT
drift strip detector geometry. Recall that the weighting potential is not an actual physical
potential, but a mathematical tool introduced to simplify the method of computing the in­
duced charge Q on the detector. Each individual electrode will present its corresponding
weighting potential, but it has to be noted that electrodes located in the middle section of
the detector will present similar weighting potential distributions compared to those elec­
trodes located near the edges of the detector. The weighting potential distributions for a
given anode in the middle section of the detector, a drift strip to the right of this anode, and
cathode are illustrated in Fig. 3.2. The induced signal on each electrode can be described
as follows:
• Anode thin strips creates a compact weighting potential distribution around the elec­
trode, which contributes to the a rapid increase in the anode signal shortly before
charge collection.
• Cathodes present a linear distribution of the weighting potential, the ones close to
the interaction will sense the charge movement as soon as it begins, induced signal
increases until charge collection.
• Recall that drift strips are biased negatively, thus directing the electric field lines
towards the anodes. They present a less compact weighting potential distribution,
sensing the charge movement before the anode, as it moves closer and then away
from the drift strip towards collection at the anode.
Figure 3.2: weighting potential distribution in the detector for the (left) anode, (center)
right drift strips, and (right) cathodes. Image credit: [2] (p. 36)
With the notion of the weighting potential distribution in mind, it is easier to understand
the generated pulse shapes in the 3D CZT drift strip detector. Next section introduces the
different type of interactions that occur in the detector.
3.3
Signal processing
The charge that has been induced and collected in the electrodes is then fed to charge
sensitive pre­amplifiers with the purpose of converting the induced charge into a pro­
20 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:29==
portional voltage. This proportional voltage is then be read by the high speed digitizers,
namely Analog to Digital Converters (ADC), which sample and convert the signal at a high
speed rate. When the signal is sampled with a high rate, the entire pulse shape of each
interaction happening in the detector is measured. By inspecting each resulting pulse
shape, it is revealed which kind of interaction took place.
3.3.1
Event types
This section dives into the different kinds of interaction encountered when processing the
recorded experimental data. Note that no source with energy higher than 1.02 MeV was
used, thus, no pair production events are included.
Single site event
It is the result of a single photon interaction with the detector material. Two scenarios can
be considered in this case:
a) The incoming photon is fully absorbed in a single photoelectric absorption event,
resulting in a complete energy deposition.
b) The incoming photon is first Compton scattered and ends up escaping the detector,
resulting in a partial energy deposition.
Note that the pulse shape shown in Fig. 3.4 is a sample from a set of raw data (i.e. no
gain/energy calibration has been implemented), collected when the detector was exposed
to a Cs137 source (661.6 keV). Thus, even in a case of full energy deposition, one can’t
necessarily expect that the amplitude of the pulse shape corresponds to that of the source
energy, note that the axis are given in units of ADC channels. This is going to be an
important consideration when discussing the experimental results presented in chapter 6.
Figure 3.3: Single event illustration.
Image credit: [2] (p.37)
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
−200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Charge signal [ADC channels]
Anodes
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
Cathodes
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
Drift strips
.
Figure 3.4: Detector response (raw data).
Note that in the ideal case where charge collection was instant, the anode charge signal
would showcase a sudden step with the electron depositing all its energy instantly. How­
ever, simply by inspecting these raw data pulse heights, we can already observe that this
is not the case. This is not just a result of the weighting potential distribution, but also a
physical representation of the fact that what is being collected is not just an electron, but
an electron charge cloud. This is a fundamental notion that one has to bear in mind when
working with semiconductor detectors, if falls outside the extent of this project to model
or account for the effects of the electron charge cloud, but it has to be mentioned that it
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
21
==PAGE:30==
can severely affect the precision with which a position measurement can be made, and
theoretical models must account for this phenomena.
Single cell multiple event
It is the result of a double interaction collected by a single anode, that is constrained in
a single cell within the detector material. Two scenarios can also be considered in this
case:
a) The incoming photon is first Compton scattered and then fully absorbed in a photo­
electric absorption event, resulting in a complete energy deposition.
b) The incoming photon experiences a sequence of two Compton scattering interac­
tions and ends up escaping the detector, resulting in a partial energy deposition.
Observing the anodes charge signal shown in Fig. 3.6, it can be noted that indeed a single
anode collects both charge clouds, experiencing a steep rise when the first charge cloud
is collected, and a second rise when the second charge cloud approaches the anode
weighting potential.
Figure 3.5:
Single cell multiple
event illustration. Image credit: [2]
(p.37)
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
−200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Charge signal [ADC channels]
Anodes
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
Cathodes
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
Drift strips
.
Figure 3.6: Detector response (raw data).
It has to be noted that the convoluted nature of the anode signal makes this event difficult
to work with, thus, this type of event is not included in any of the event selections when
testing the 3D CZT detector as a Compton camera.
Multiple cell event
This is the main event type of interest when operating the 3D CZT detector as a Comp­
ton camera instrument. It is the result of a double interaction collected by independent
anodes. Two same scenarios are still considered:
a) The incoming photon is first Compton scattered and then fully absorbed in a photo­
electric absorption event, resulting in a complete energy deposition.
b) The incoming photon experiences a sequence of two Compton scattering interac­
tions and ends up escaping the detector, resulting in a partial energy deposition.
Note that this distinction is specially relevant when it comes to sorting double events in the
position algorithm to reconstruct the source. Only sequences of two events where their
summed energies results in a full or near­full energy deposition should be considered.
22 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:31==
This will be also discussed in chapter 4 when discussing the basic principles of a Compton
camera instrument.
Figure 3.7: Multiple cell event illus­
tration. Image credit: [2] (p.37)
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
−200
0
200
400
600
800
Charge signal [ADC channels]
Anodes
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
Cathodes
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
Drift strips
.
Figure 3.8: Detector response (raw data).
Cosmic ray
This interaction is clearly distinguishable from any of the other events originating from an
X­ or gamma­ray source in the laboratory. Fig. 3.9 shows the detector response to such
interaction, it can be noted that detector pulse heights are considerably high, and many
electrodes are activated simultaneously.
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
−500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Charge signal [ADC channels]
Anodes
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
Cathodes
0
500
1000
Sample no. [4 ns]
Drift strips
Figure 3.9: Detector response to a cosmic ray (raw data).
3.3.2
Position algorithms
Now that we are familiar with the 3D CZT detector concept, and have discussed the sig­
nal formation process, let us continue the discussion of the detector’s signal processing
by introducing the previously developed position algorithms for single interaction events
[20], [21], since it will establish the foundation for the discussion of the double­event char­
acterization implementation presented in chapter 6. Fig. 3.10 illustrates the coordinate
frame of reference used in the definition of the position algorithms. In general, if it is im­
portant to know the orientation of the detector, and the source position with respect to the
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
23
==PAGE:32==
detector in a given experimental setup, when testing the detector as a Compton camera it
is fundamental. Even the most precise position algorithm would yield unreliable position
characterization results if the orientation is misunderstood.
Figure 3.10: Illustration of the x­, y­, and z­dimension of the 3D CZT drift strip detector.
The x­axis is defined perpendicular to the anodes. The y­axis is defined along the depth
of the detector. The z­axis is defined perpendicular to the cathodes. Image credit: [2] (p.
47)
X­position
The x­position is determined based on the anode and drift strip signals. The activated
anode position (i.e. xtrig) provides a rough estimation of the x­position of an interaction,
and the drift strip signals provide a finer positioning, provided by the amplitude of the
inverted current signals of the left and right drift strip, ADL and ADR, namely:
xpos = 0.4 +

xtrig + F · ADR −ADL
ADR + ADL

· Pan −Pan
2
(3.1)
Where the constant 0.4mm is the offset between the edge of the detector and the first drift
strip, Pan is the anode pitch of 1.6 mm, and F is an adjustable scaling factor to calibrate
the x­position algorithm for the specific detector, a value of 0.9 has been considered in
the proposed double­event characterization algorithm.
Y­position
The detector y­position is determined using the so­called depth of interaction method,
stating that the y­position is proportional to the ratio between the total cathode charge
signal Qcathode and that of the collecting anode Qanode, the expression used to determine
the y­position is given by [20]:
ypos =
PJ
j=1 Cj
Am
· dCZT
(3.2)
Given Am(m = 1, 2, . . . , M), where M is the total number of anodes, and Cj(j = 1, 2, . . . , J),
where J is the total number of cathodes. Note that the 40x40x5 mm3 module presents 24
anode strips, 20 cathode strips, and 25 drift strips.
24 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:33==
Z­position
The z­position is based on the center of gravity method, given by [20]:
zpos =
PJ
j=1 j · Cj
PJ
j=1 Cj
· Pca −Pca
2
(3.3)
All cathode pulse heights are used for this calculation, where Pca is the cathode pitch.
Note that this is just an overview of how single­event positions are calculated in the 3D
CZT drift strip detector. When it comes to characterization and performance evaluation of
a detector module, precise position algorithms are required, a number of techniques and
algorithms have been develop to enhance the detector’s spectral and spatial resolution,
the interested reader is referred to [22] for an in depth investigation in the characterization
and performance evaluation of the same detector modules that have also been dealt with
in this project.
Moreover, operating these detector modules as a Compton camera instrument, or any
semiconductor detector in the same fashion, requires the characterization of double­
events. The double­event characterization algorithm developed in this project has been
built upon a simple approach to the characterization of single events, the implementation
is introduced and described in chapter 6.
After introducing the basic interaction mechanisms of gamma­rays with matter, and how
this radiation can be detected by harnessing the properties of semiconductor detectors,
this chapter has introduced the basic principles of the 3D CZT drift strip detector. It is
now possible to directly discuss the main topic of interest of this project, Compton camera
instruments and its application for gamma­ray astrophysics.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
25
==PAGE:34==
4
Compton Telescopes for Gamma­Ray
Astrophysics
When it comes to exploring the universe in the medium­energy gamma­ray regime, Comp­
ton scattering is the dominant interaction process between ~200 keV and ~10 MeV. This
chapter first provides an overview of the basic principles of operation of Compton tele­
scopes, and describes their standard performance parameters, delving into the details
of how each performance parameter is calculated. The discussion about Compton tele­
scopes’ performance is briefly paused to introduce the software package that has made
possible all simulation work in this project, the medium­energy gamma­ray astronomy
library (MEGAlib). Afterwards, a dedicated section is devoted to one of the dominant
factors that determine a Compton telescope’s sensitivity, the instrumental background
present in this energy range, and finally some of the main science goals that Compton
telescopes pursue are introduced.
4.1
Basic operating principles of Compton telescopes
The main objective of a Compton telescope is to determine the origin of an incoming
gamma­ray photon based on precise measurements of energy and position of one or
more Compton scattering interactions. Fig. 4.1 illustrates this basic operating principle,
left panel shows a detector volume measuring two interactions, fully containing the event.
It is important to note that it is not possible to derive the initial gamma­ray arrival direc­
tion and energy (i.e., for imaging or spectroscopy) from only the first Compton­scattering
interaction [3]. However, not all events need to be fully contained in the telescope, for
events with three interactions or more, it has been shown that the gamma­ray energy can
be estimated even if the event is not fully absorbed [23].
Back to the basics, assuming an event with two interactions where the incoming gamma­
ray is fully absorbed, the Compton scattering angle θ of the first interaction can be derived
from the measured energies E1 and E2 [3]:
cos θ = 1 −mec2
E2
+
mec2
E1 + E2
(4.1)
26 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.1: Illustration of a Compton camera measuring a two­site event: A Compton
scattering event followed by a photoelectric absorption event. The incoming photon en­
ergy, denoted as E0, is determined from the two interactions by E0 = E1+E2, the event
circle is determined from the Compton scattering angle θ, and position of the first inter­
action. When multiple events from the same source are considered, the overlap of their
event circles reveals the location of the source [2]. Image credit: modified from [3] (p. 13)
The Compton scattering angle θ is computed from energy measurements, and precise
position measurements allow to infer the direction of the scattered gamma­ray between
⃗r1 and ⃗r1, so that the quest of determining the origin of the incoming gamma­ray photon
narrows down to a cone in the sky with opening angle θ. The back projection of this cone
on the celestial sphere is referred to as the event circle [3]. This is as far as it can be
reached when considering a single photon, however, when considering multiple photons
from the same source, they will have overlapping event circles (see right panel of Fig.
4.1), finally revealing the location of the source.
So far only the scattered photon has been mentioned in this discussion, and one might
wonder what happened with the resulting recoil electron after the interaction. As detectors
are sensitive to the ionization from the recoil electron, if the direction of the recoil electron is
known, momentum conservation can further restrict the direction of each incident gamma­
ray, since the initial event circle can be reduced to a small segment, defined as the event
arc, with a length dictated by the precision of the electron trajectory measurement [3]. With
a more accurate determination of the origin of the gamma­ray, background rejection can
also be improved [24]. However, a Compton telescope that accounts for electron­tracking
needs a considerably high number of layers of active material, and may be unpractical for
smaller payloads.
At this point of the discussion it is convenient to introduce the categories in which Compton
telescopes can be divided in, generally three main categories are considered:
a) The Classic Compton Camera: consists of two detector planes, separated enough
to measure the time­of­flight (TOF) of the scattered gamma­ray. The first plane acts
as scatterer layer (low Z material), where the Compton scattering interaction occurs
before it is fully absorbed by photoelectric absorption in the absorber layer (high Z
material). COMPTEL (operational from 1991 to 2000), the first successful Compton
telescope put into space was designed based on this principle [25], see Fig. 4.2
a) for illustration. The Classical configuration was originally proposed as a means
to achieve angular resolutions «1◦, however, these earlier estimates (~1970s) did
not account for the limits set by Doppler broadening due to Compton scattering
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
27
==PAGE:36==
off of bound electrons, which dominates the angular resolution for photon energies
below ~2 MeV, thus the advantage of the long lever arm is only significant at higher
energies [26]. For this reasons efforts started to shift towards considering a closer
spacing of the the detector planes, which lead to the next generation of Compton
telescopes.
b) The Compact Compton Camera: consists of one or more 3D position­sensitive de­
tectors, allowing for the measurement of multiple Compton scattering interactions
[2]. It leads to factors of ≥5 improvements in overall effective area compared to the
Classical Compton camera geometry, ultimately enhancing the telescope’s sensi­
tivity. In addition, the Compact geometry presents a 30% larger field­of­view (FOV)
than the Classical configuration [26]. Efforts are now being focused in the direction
of a compact configuration, and the next Compton telescope flagship mission COSI
(expected to be launched in 2027) [27], is designed based on this principle, see Fig.
4.2 b) for illustration.
c) The Compton Camera with Electron Tracking: this category is independent from
the other 2 in the sense that it accounts with many thin layers of detectors, enabling
the measurement of the recoil electron track (see Fig. 4.2 c) for illustration). This
telescope type is also sensitive to pair production events by measuring the electron
and positron trajectories [2].
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the three main Compton camera configuration types. (a) Clas­
sic Compton camera (b) Compact Compton camera (c) Compton camera with electron
tracking. Image credit: [2] (p. 29)
Having discussed the basic operating principles of Compton telescopes, and before step­
ping into describing their standard performance parameters, it is the moment to introduce
the MEGAlib software package, considered to be the most versatile and state­of­the­art
tool set available in the field of gamma­ray detectors. In particular, it has been used for
different Compton telescope designs, including for instance the NASA Advanced Comp­
ton Telescope (ACT) concept study [28], and MEGAlib is currently the main data analysis
framework for the COSI mission.
28 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Medium Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library (MEGAlib)
All simulation work carried out in this project has been possible by using the Medium En­
ergy Gamma­ray Astronomy library (MEGAlib). MEGAlib, is a set of software tools which
are designed to simulate and analyze data of gamma­ray detectors, with a specializa­
tion on Compton telescopes. While MEGAlib was originally developed for astrophysics,
it has been expanded and used for ground based applications such as medical imaging
and environmental monitoring. The library comprises all necessary data analysis steps
from simulation/measurements via calibrations and event reconstruction to high­level data
analysis such as image reconstruction. Fig. 4.3 shows the basic layout of the MEGAlib
software package, as it can be observed it is highly modular, and it has to be noted that
it is a completely object­oriented library written in C++ and utilizes ROOT and Geant4 .
Figure 4.3: Basic layout of the MEGAlib software package. [29]
In essence, within the scope of this project, MEGAlib offered a user­friendly interface to
run all the necessary algorithms comprising the complete data analysis of a Compton
camera instrument. The data analysis procedure can be described as follows:
1. Data acquisition: either by measurements with the 3D CZT detector or via simula­
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
29
==PAGE:38==
tion.
• In the case where MEGAlib was used with real data. The data analysis pro­
cess begins by analyzing the raw data to characterize a set of double­event
interactions in terms of position and energy, this was done outside MEGAlib,
using the double­event characterization algorithm implemented in python. Af­
terwards, the position and energy information from each selected interaction is
uploaded to MEGAlib, a specific data structure is required, and details on how
to upload it to MEGAlib are provided in Chapter 6.
• In the case were the interactions were simulated, MEGAlib’s routine cosima
was used to simulate the passage of particles through the detector. When
introducing the mission concept study in chapter 5, all simulation conditions
are described before presenting the results obtained.
2. Event reconstruction: carried out using MEGAlib’s routine revan. Since the chrono­
logical order of the interactions is unknown, Compton sequence reconstruction is
required to determine the path in the detector. Only Compton sequences with 2–7
interactions are considered, and the minimum distance set between any interaction
depends on how the data was acquired:
• With real data, a minimum distance of 0 mm was set. Note that the event
selection already takes place in the double­event characterization algorithm.
Thus, no restriction is imposed in terms of required minimum distance.
• With simulated data, a minimum distance of 0.8 mm (in 3D) was considered
between any interaction. The minimum distance of 0.8 mm was chosen, since
it corresponds to half of the anode pitch in the 3D CZT drift strip detector.
3. High­level data analysis: carried out using MEGAlib’s routine mimrec. Within this
project, it includes performance parameter estimation (e.g. angular resolution mea­
sure estimation and effective area calculation), image reconstruction, and sensitivity
analysis.
After describing the data analysis procedure, let us now consider an overview of each
MEGAlib routine used in this project (e.g. geomega, cosima, revan, and mimrec), based
on MEGAlib’s information website [30]:
4.2.1
Geomega
Geometry for MEGAlib (Geomega) is a uniform geometry and detector description library
and it is intended to simplify the use of all other simulation programs. It allows to use
the same geometry description for the simulation as well as for the later data analysis.
In addition, it takes care of all special characteristics of the different detector types (strip
detectors, scintillators, calorimeters, drift chambers, etc.).
It all starts with a geometry file, which includes the description of all materials, volumes,
detectors, trigger criteria, etc., the geometry is built and can be viewed with Geomega.
Once a geometry file is defined, the library is in turn used by all other programs of MEGAlib
to access this geometry information. For example:
• The simulation tool Cosima is using Geomega to import the geometry into its own
Geant4 format (more on what Geant4 represents when Cosima is introduced).
• When the simulation file is read by the event reconstruction tool Revan, then the
ideal simulation data is noised according to the detector description of geomega.
30 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:39==
• Revan & Mimrec uses Geomega to calculate absorption probabilities, check where
the hits occurred, etc.
4.2.2
Cosima
The Cosmic Simulator for MEGAlib (Cosima) based on Geant4, is intended as a univer­
sal simulator for low­to­medium­energy gamma­ray telescopes, detecting gamma­rays
via photoelectric­effect, Compton scattering, and pair creation. This goal requires accu­
rate simulation from a few keV up to hundreds of GeV, including particles ranging from
gamma­ray to cascades triggered by cosmic high­energy particles. In words from Andreas
Zoglauer, main developer of the MEGAlib:
”Cosima is designed to be a simple, fool­proof interface to Geant4 and to enable the
simulation of most of the measurement scenarios encountered by X­ray and gamma­ray
detectors in space and on Earth.” [31]
Geant4 is the result of a worldwide collaboration of physicists and software engineers,
and serves as a toolkit for simulating the passage of particles through matter. It presents
a vast range of functionality. In particular, the MGGPOD package has to be highlighted, a
user­friendly suite of Monte Carlo codes that model the complex instrumental background,
and simulates ab initio the physical processes relevant for the production of instrumental
backgrounds [32]. MEGAlib’s background generator program offers a bridge to this pack­
age, and it was used to produce the instrumental background included in every in­orbit
simulation presented in this report.
4.2.3
Revan
The Real Event ANalyzer (revan) is responsible for reconstructing events in MEGAlib,
it can handle simple, single site events, Compton scatter events, pair creation events,
and high­energy charged particle events such as muons. However, Revan’s specializa­
tion is Compton event reconstruction and therefore it contains a variety of different al­
gorithms to determine the event type, starting with coincidence search, charged particle
track searches including Compton electron tracks, and several algorithms to determine
the Compton interaction sequence (classic and Bayesian algorithms). Note that in this
project the reconstruction algorithm used is the ”Classic Compton sequence reconstruc­
tion without energy recovery (chi­square approach via angles)”.
4.2.4
Mimrec
Mimrec is MEGAlib’s high­level data analyzer. It contains options to perform event selec­
tions on all important event parameters of single site, Compton and pair creation events
(e.g. energies, interaction distances, scatter or opening angles, and many more). It’s
main goal however is to perform list­mode likelihood image reconstruction in spherical,
Galactic, as well as Cartesian coordinates (2D, 3D) including different response calcu­
lation approaches (from quick and dirty to slow and sophisticated) which are mostly op­
timized for Compton image reconstruction. Finally Mimrec contains several options to
look at further parameters of your data, such as energy spectra, ARM distributions (for
gamma­ray and electrons), interaction distances, scatter angle distributions, polarization,
time distribution, and several more.
Now that we are familiar with the basic operating principles of Compton telescopes, and
the MEGAlib software package has been introduced, let us now dive into the standard
performance parameters of a Compton telescope and how they can be estimated through
simulation work.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
31
==PAGE:40==
4.3
Compton telescope performance parameters
The performance of a Compton telescope is ultimately determined by the precision of the
energy and position measurements of each interaction within the detector volume, and
the quality of the event reconstruction. What drives the design of a Compton telescope, is
the science question at hand. For example, gamma­ray burst polarization measurements
can be done with simple scintillators, where the azimuthal scatter direction is measured
without imposing strict requirements on the energy resolution or spatial resolution of the
detectors. However, achieving better line and continuum sensitivities requires a detector
with excellent spectral and spatial resolution and strong background rejection [3]. In this
section, the angular resolution measure (ARM), effective area, and sensitivity, are intro­
duced as they are considered to be the main Compton telescope performance parameters
of interest.
High­energy mission instrumentation requires a technology demonstration in space to
achieve an ESA technology readiness level (TRL) of 7+. Typically, a Compton telescope’s
performance is demonstrated in a balloon­borne instrument, where measurements from
balloon flights provide a proof of principle of the in­orbit telescope capabilities. Note that
a Compton telescope payload based on 3D position sensitive CZT detectors, has not yet
being demonstrated in space, the mission concept presented in [33] is the furthest effort
in this regard, with a 4 detector CubeSat sized payload scheduled to be launched this
current year into a sun­synchronous orbit.
When a mission is at its first stages as a proof of concept, performance parameter estima­
tion can only be tested through performance simulation. The medium energy gamma­ray
astronomy library (MEGAlib), offers a comprehensive software platform for this purpose.
As previously mentioned, simulation work in this project has intensively harnessed ME­
GAlib’s capabilities.The previous section presented a high­level description of the soft­
ware package, this section also delves into the details of how each performance parame­
ter is calculated, so that it is already apparent when discussing the performance parameter
analysis results presented in section 5.1 of the mission concept study.
4.3.1
Angular resolution measure (ARM)
The ARM for each event is defined as the minimum distance between the geometrically
calculated Compton­scattering angle and the kinematically calculated Compton scattering
angle:
∆θARM = θgeo −θkin
(4.2)
Where:
θkin = arccos

1 −mec2

1
Escat
−1
E0

(4.3)
θgeo = arccos
 −→
g0 · ⃗g1
|−→
g0| |⃗g1|

(4.4)
It has to be noted that ⃗g0 can only be defined provided that the initial source location is
known, as shown in Fig. 4.4. In essence, this definition of ∆θARM is equivalent to the
shortest angular distance between the known source location and the Compton event
circle (see Fig. 4.5). The FWHM of the ARM distribution is the standard definition for the
angular resolution.
32 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: For each event, the dif­
ference between the kinematic and
geometric Compton­scattering an­
gle gives the ARM. Image credit: [3]
(p. 32)
.
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the small­
est angular distance between the
known source location and each
Compton event circle. Image credit:
[3] (p. 33)
Note the inconsistency in the naming convention of Figs. 4.4 and 4.5, where instead of
φ, the angle should be defined as θ. In terms of uncertainties in the ARM, it was already
mentioned that Doppler broadening imposed a lower limit to the angular resolution, how­
ever, in most modern designs, the dominant factor is usually either the position resolution
or energy resolution of the detectors for gamma­rays above a few hundred keV [3].
Step by step instructions on how to calculate the ARM of a given Compton telescope ge­
ometry using MEGAlib’s mimrec routine can be found in [34]. ARM estimation only applies
when the telescope is exposed to simulated point sources with mono­energetic beams,
or modelled using a power law spectrum. The high­level instructions are introduced here,
namely:
1. Consider a window that is large enough to contain the complete photo­peak, but not
too much else (typically ± 5% around the input energy).
2. Fit a Gaussian distribution to the energy spectrum within the selected window, and
store the 1­sigma value (i.e. standard deviation of the fitted photo peak). We can
now determine the angular resolution for the events in the photo peak, given this
standard deviation.
3. Consider a new energy window for the source extraction region, typically ± 2σ or
3σ (a 3σ energy window has been considered in all ARM calculations presented in
this report) around the known input energy.
4. In the ARM dialog window (see Fig. 4.6) select the correct source position, in the
case shown the source in the zenith (i.e. theta and phi are zero) the radius around
the source position should cover the whole ARM peak, but not too much else to give
a good ARM fit.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.6: ARM dialog.
.
Figure 4.7: ARM distribution to an
input mono­energetic 2 MeV point
source with the fitted curve.
5. The resulting example ARM spectrum with a fit is shown in Fig. 4.7. The fit function
consists of two Lorentz­functions and one asymmetric Gauss (right and left wing
can have different sigmas). The FWHM of the fit is printed on the console.
4.3.2
Effective area
The effective area of a Compton telescope represents a measure of the equivalent area of
an ideal detector, an accurate measure of the effective area is only possible through de­
tailed instrument simulations, where event selections can significantly affect the outcome
[3], it is defined as:
Aeff = Astart
Nmeasured
Nstarted
(4.5)
A fundamental element for any simulation using MEGAlib is the surrounding sphere, il­
lustrated in Fig. 4.8. It is essentially what its name suggests, a sphere surrounding a
given geometry, and it is fundamental because it serves as the starting point from which
particles in far­field simulations are generated. It is of paramount importance that the
complete detector geometry is contained within the sphere volume. In order to simulate
plane waves from distant astrophysical sources, particles are started from a disk on the
surrounding sphere. The disk always points towards the centre of the sphere, (i.e. it is
tangential on the disk). Thus, Astart in eq. 4.5 denotes the area of the disk from which the
photons are started (i.e. Astart = π · r2, where r is the radius of the surrounding sphere).
Figure 4.8: The concept of the surrounding sphere illustrated. All parameters, centre and
radius of the sphere/radius of the disk are defined in geomega. Image credit: [35] (p. 34)
34 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:43==
The number of started photons, Nstarted, can be found in the simulation file and represents
the total number of simulated particles. The number of measured events, Nmeasured, rep­
resents the number of photons within the ARM window that was previously introduced.
Essentially the effective area is a ratio, given in units of area, between the number of sim­
ulated and detected particles. For further information regarding effective area calculations
using MEGAlib, the interested reader is referred to [34].
4.3.3
Sensitivity
The sensitivity of a Compton telescope is equivalent to the lowest source flux detectable,
and is defined as:
S = z2 + z
p
z2 + 4NB
2AeffTobs
(4.6)
Where z represents the detection significance, typically chosen to be 3 or 5σ (all sensi­
tivity values presented in this report were computed using a 5σ significance value), NS
the number of source photons detected, NB is the number of background photons, Aeff
is the effective area, and Tobs is the observation time. It is no surprise that greater ef­
fective areas, and longer observation times, lead to lower sensitivities. However, during
longer observation times, the telescope is also exposed to a higher number of background
photons, thus reducing the signal­to­background ratio.
Upon first examination, there seems to be no dominant parameter among the main contri­
butions to the sensitivity (i.e. detected background counts, effective area, and observation
time) to which a telescope’s design should be optimized. However, all in turn depend on
the detector energy resolution and/or position resolution. When investigating the narrow­
line sensitivity for gamma­rays with known energy, such as nuclear lines, eq. 4.6 can be
applied, and only the number of background photons within the energy resolution of the in­
strument are included [3]. The narrow­line sensitivity, therefore, can be improved by con­
sidering a detector material, and/or geometry, with excellent energy resolution as fewer
background photons will lie beneath the photo peak. When energy resolution is a limit­
ing factor, an alternative approach to improve sensitivity is to actively reduce the number
of incoming background photons. When exploring different background rejection strate­
gies, understanding the instrumental background is fundamental. Next section delves in
the characteristics of the instrumental background, including the exotic and particle­rich
cosmic background.
4.4
Instrumental background
As already stated, background radiation is one of the dominant factors that determine a
Compton telescope’s sensitivity, its main contributors are introduced here:
• Cosmic radiation: After high­energy cosmic­ray collisions occur within the instru­
ment mass, something inevitable at balloon altitudes and in satellite orbits, the ma­
terial around the detector will become activated, and the radiation from these instru­
mental nuclear decays contributes a source of significant background. The effects
of activation can be reduced by minimizing the amount of passive material around
the active detector volume, and avoiding high­Z materials in the instrument design.
[3].
• Albedo radiation: cosmic­ray interactions with particles in the atmosphere will pro­
duce a broadband spectrum of gamma­rays that is orders of magnitude more intense
than galactic sources. This atmospheric emission is strongest near the horizon [3].
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
35
==PAGE:44==
• Trapped particles: particles are trapped in the Earth’s magnetic field as a result
of the interaction of galactic cosmic radiation and solar cosmic radiation with the
Earth´s magnetic field and the atmosphere. The South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) is
a region where the Earth’s magnetic field is weaker, thus increasing the risk of ex­
posure to higher levels of radiation. A low­inclination (< 5◦) low­Earth orbit avoids
the SAA and minimizes the incident charge particle flux, if not possible, a solution
is simply turning off the instrument during SAA passages.
An overview of the background components from 10 keV to 100 GeV in low­Earth orbit
was presented in [36], and concluded that the best low Earth orbit (LEO) for a gamma­ray
mission is found to be a low inclination (i < 5◦) and low altitude (550 km) orbit. SPENVIS
and MEGAlib’s background generator were used to simulate this LEO background envi­
ronment. SPENVIS is ESA’s SPace ENVironment Information System, a web interface
to models of the space environment and its effects; including galactic cosmic rays, solar
energetic particles, natural radiation belts, plasmas, gases, meteoroids and debris [37], it
was mainly used within the extent of this project to extract three main files, namely:
• AverageTrappedProtonsElectronAP9Average.spenvis.txt
• CosmicProtons.spenvis.txt
• CosmicAlphas.spenvis.txt
Which are then fed to MEGAlib’s background generator program, and combined with
hadronic, photonic, and leptonic source files. For a step­by­step guide, the interested
reader is referred to [38]. Fig. 4.9 shows the background spectra for a NuSTAR­like orbit
(altitude: 575 km, inclination: 6◦), including cosmic and albedo radiation, and trapped
particles, produced using MEGAlib’s background generator program.
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
8
10
9
10
Energy [keV]
8
−
10
7
−
10
6
−
10
5
−
10
4
−
10
3
−
10
2
−
10
1
−
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
Flux [ph/(m^2 s MeV sr)
Background components
Cosmic photons
Cosmic protons
Cosmic alphas
Cosmic electrons
Cosmic positrons
Albedo photons
Albedo protons
Albedo neutrons
Albedo electrons
Albedo positrons
Trapped protons (orbit averaged)
Trapped electrons (orbit averaged)
Figure 4.9: NuSTAR­like orbit (altitude: 575 km, inclination: 6◦) background spectra at
launch time, no activation build up considered .
36 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:45==
All background simulations carried out in this project considered a NuSTAR­like orbit, for
illustration, Fig. 4.10 shows its orbit parameters as a function of time for a 12 h trajectory:
Figure 4.10: NuSTAR­like orbit parameters as a function of time, a 12 h trajectory duration
is considered. Data extracted from SPENVIS [37].
Recall that activation from interactions of charged particles in the detector presents a
challenging, and so far unavoidable, background component. It is possible to include
activation build up effects in MEGAlib [3], however, for the sake of simplicity, background
simulations presented here do not take into account activation build­up in the instrument,
thus, reflecting the beginning of the observation period.
Having just discussed the characteristics of the instrumental background that Compton
telescopes are subjected to, it is now possible to introduce the different background ra­
diation reduction techniques to optimize a telescope’s sensitivity. A very illustrative de­
scription of the lessons learnt from COMPTEL for future telescopes was presented in [25].
Here, the main points regarding background radiation reduction are highlighted, namely:
• Anti­coincidence detectors (ACDs) surrounding the Compton telescope can signifi­
cantly reduce the background by vetoing signals caused by cosmic­rays (i.e. active
shielding).
• Low­activation materials near the detector element will reduce instrumental back­
ground.
• Discrimination of neutrons and cosmic rays, either in electronics (pulse­shape iden­
tifiers), through vetoing, or in the software analysis chain, can lower the dead time
and false identification of gamma­ray signals [3].
It should be apparent by now that the complexity of Compton telescopes relies not only in
the intrinsic difficulties of their design, and material selection, but also in the performance
of the event reconstruction algorithms implemented, and background reduction technique
employed. Many current Compton telescope designs focus on the increase in effective
area to increase sensitivity; however, a more relevant approach is potentially through the
development of new concepts for low background observations [3]. Section 5.2 of this
report presents a dedicated investigation in the influence of different materials (i.e. BGO
and CsI) that can be used as ACDs in the active shield of a Compton telescope.
To conclude the introduction on the instrumental background, it is possible to carry out a
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
37
==PAGE:46==
preliminary investigation determining the stopping power and the energy range of trapped
protons in BGO using the The Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) tool. SRIM is
a group of programs which calculate the stopping and range of ions (up to 2 GeV/amu) into
matter using a quantum mechanical treatment of ion­atom collisions (assuming a moving
atom as an ”ion”, and all target atoms as ”atoms”). Tab. shows the calculated stopping
power and projected range of protons in BGO (eg. ρBGO = 7.13 cm3). Note that it takes
a proton energy of 70 MeV to penetrate further than 10 mm when BGO is considered as
the stopping material.
Table 4.1: Linear stopping power (i.e. dE/dx), in units of Mev/mm, and projected proton
range in BGO material, calculated using the ion stopping and range tables tool in SRIM.
Ion Energy
dE/dx
Projected range
[MeV]
Elec.
Nuclear
[mm]
20.00
9.967
4.388·10−3
1.15
22.50
9.140
3.955·10−3
1.41
25.00
8.457
3.603·10−3
1.69
27.50
7.881
3.311·10−3
1.99
30.00
7.389
3.066·10−3
2.32
32.50
6.963
2.855·10−3
2.66
35.00
6.591
2.673·10−3
3.02
37.50
6.262
2.514·10−3
3.41
40.00
5.969
2.374·10−3
3.81
45.00
5.470
2.137·10−3
4.67
50.00
5.060
1.945·10−3
5.61
55.00
4.716
1.787·10−3
6.62
60.00
4.424
1.653·10−3
7.70
65.00
4.172
1.538·10−3
8.84
70.00
3.953
1.439·10−3
10.06
80.00
3.589
1.277·10−3
12.68
Finally, this chapter concludes by introducing the main science goals of Compton tele­
scope missions.
4.5
Main science goals
The soft/medium gamma­ray regime remains the least astrophysically explored range
across the electromagnetic spectrum; the sensitivity of current missions is orders of mag­
nitudes worse than neighboring bands due to high instrumental and atmospheric back­
grounds, low interaction cross­sections, and inherent difficulty of imaging at these ener­
gies. It remains an extremely interesting range entailing the positron annihilation line,
signatures of stellar nucleosynthesis, emission from the most extreme environments, and
multimessenger astrophysics.
COMPTEL opened up the MeV gamma­ray band in the 1990’s, followed by INTEGRAL
in 2002. Together they have made huge progress toward cataloging and understanding
the gamma­ray sky, however there are still many open questions. This section introduces
the main scientific questions that the next generation of Compton telescopes will explore,
namely:
Positron annhilation: the 511 keV γ­ray line, signature of positron annihilation, was first
38 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:47==
discovered coming from the Galactic Center region in the 1970’s [39], but the source of
these positrons is still a mystery.
Stellar nucleosynthesis: Observing nuclear­lines and comparing the measured flux of
different isotopes reveals information about the evolution of massive stars and their SN
explosions: measurements accessible only in the soft γ­ray range.
Polarization of GRB’s and compact objects: polarization measurements provide a
unique diagnostic tool to probe emission mechanisms and source geometries. For ex­
treme environments, such as gamma­ray bursts (GRBs), black hole systems, and active
galactic nuclei (AGN), little is known about the specific physical processes of the emission,
however different theoretical models often predict different levels of polarization [40].
Multimessenger astrophysics: Besides photons, there are other types of cosmic sig­
nals, including cosmic rays of high energy particles, neutrinos, and gravitational waves. It
is known know of three types of sources that emit more than one of these signals: super­
novae produce neutrinos and photons (for example, SN 1987A); merging neutron stars
produce gravitational waves and photons (for example, GW 170817 was detected as a
short GRB); and blazars produce high­energy neutrinos and photons (for example, TXS
0506+056 was detected in gamma­rays) [27].
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
39
==PAGE:48==
5
Mission Concept Study
This chapter describes the mission concept developed during this project. It starts with
an initial performance parameter estimation of a highly idealized Compton camera. More­
over, a shielding analysis adds a layer of complexity to the study by performing in­orbit
simulations considering the NuSTAR­like orbit background environment introduced in sec­
tion 4.4. Finally, an idealized CubeSat­sized payload is proposed and its performance
observing continuum and transient sources is evaluated.
5.1
Performance parameter analysis
The geometry considered in the simulation campaign included in this section is the sim­
plest possible. Fig. 5.1 illustrates a Compton camera payload consisting of a stack of two
3D CZT detector modules separated a distance of 5 mm.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of a basic Compton camera geometry consisting of two 3D CZT
detector modules separated a distance of 5 mm.
The geometry file of a single 3D CZT drift strip detector is included in Appendix A, it
essentially presents the following structure:
• Starts by defining the surrounding sphere and describing the detector volume.
• The specific spectral and spatial resolution of the detector are defined.
• Finally, the trigger criteria is defined. Namely, at least 2 hits in the active material,
thus, only sequences of two or more interactions raise a trigger in the detector. Note
that this represents a fundamental trigger criteria when a payload is being tested as
Compton camera.
Moreover, in all simulations the defined payload geometry was exposed to a mono­energetic
point source modelled as a far­field point source, located at zenith, that is, directly on top
of the detector, illustrated with the black arrow in Fig. 5.1. A sample source file is included
in Appendix B, the main source specifications are defined here, namely:
40 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:49==
• Source type: mono­energetic far­field point source, 661.6 keV, with a flux equal to
10000 ph/cm s.
• Simulation stopping criteria: all simulations were terminated when a number of
500000 triggers were raised, following the already defined trigger criteria.
Fig. 5.2 shows the resulting energy spectrum after event reconstruction, considering two
different scenarios for the trigger criteria. In Fig. 5.2a only one hit was considered in the
the detector material to raise a trigger, note that one can clearly identify a broad Compton
continuum, this is due to the fact that interactions resulting only in partial energy deposi­
tion are passing the event selection, since a trigger is raised with one single hit. On the
contrary, Fig. 5.2b, presents a smaller Compton continuum, making apparent that it is
mostly interactions resulting in a full energy deposition that fall into the photo peak are
considered. Thus it should be apparent why the trigger strategy followed is considering
two hits in the detector material.
(a) Just a single hit in the detector material.
(b) At least two hits in the detector material.
Figure 5.2: Resulting energy spectrum considering two different trigger criteria.
We are now familiar with how important it is to consider a robust trigger and event se­
lection criteria, this will also become apparent in chapter 6, when the 3D CZT detector is
experimentally validated as a Compton camera instrument in the laboratory. The perfor­
mance of a Compton camera instrument can be severely affected if wrong event selection
choices are made.
Only by considering a simple simulation setup, more than valuable insights were gained
when it comes to the design of a Compton camera instrument, and not just the influence
of event selection, but also the influence of different design choices in the instrument’s
performance is investigated. Two design parameters were considered in this analysis,
namely:
• Number of detector modules: stacking multiple detector modules on top of each
other is a frequent strategy followed when designing a compact Compton camera.
Through simulation work it is possible to investigate its impact in terms of perfor­
mance estimation.
• Separation: by investigating the impact of increasing the separation between detec­
tor modules on ARM and effective area, it will certainly become apparent the reason
why the next generation of Compton telescopes are being designed based on the
compact Compton camera approach, rather than the classic Compton camera.
Let us now dive into the main results from this analysis:
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
41
==PAGE:50==
5.1.1
Number of detector modules
Recall that section 4.3.1 already introduced how the main performance parameters (i.e.
ARM and effective area) are calculated, thus, this sections directly illustrate the main re­
sults achieved during this first simulation campaign. Figs. 5.3a and 5.3b illustrate the
influence of adding detector modules while keeping a constant separation of 5 mm be­
tween each module.
(a) Impact on ARM.
(b) Impact on effective area.
Figure 5.3: First design choice investigation: number of detector modules with a constant
separation of 5 mm between each module.
It can be concluded that the overall performance of the instrument is enhanced by in­
creasing the number of detector modules. It shouldn’t come as a surprise, since adding
active material essentially increases the probability of the instrument to interact with the
incoming radiation. Even though it has to be noted that the ARM improvement seems
to converge when considering stacks of active material with more than 6 modules, this
can be related to the fact that the limit on the intrinsic material’s stopping power is being
reached. In terms of effective area, there seem to be no convergence limit for the simu­
lated number of detector modules, recall that the effective area represents a measure of
the equivalent area of an ideal detector.
5.1.2
Detector module separation
The second design choice investigated in this study is the separation between detector
modules in a Compton camera payload. In this case a constant number of 3 detector
modules stacked vertically were considered, and the vertical separation between detector
modules was increased. Figs. 5.4a and 5.4b show the impact of increasing the separation
between modules in terms of both ARM and effective area.
42 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:51==
(a) Impact on ARM.
(b) Impact on effective area.
Figure 5.4: Second design choice investigation: increasing the vertical distance between
detector modules, considering a payload consisting of a stack of 3 detector modules.
It can be observed that ARM is positively affected when increasing the separation dis­
tance up to a point where it clearly saturates and converges between 4.6◦and 4.8◦, due
to the fact that target electrons in the detector material have an indeterminable momen­
tum inside their atoms which introduces an uncertainty in the recoil energy of the Compton
electron and the scattered photon. This is a representation of the Doppler broadening as
a lower limit to the angular resolution of next generation Compton telescopes [29]. More­
over, observing the impact on effective area, it is concluded that increasing the separation
between modules is detrimental in this regard. There is a fundamental consequence of
increasing the separation between modules, namely, reducing the range in the angle at
which scattered photons interacts with deeper modules, this is conveniently illustrated in
Fig. 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Illustration of the maximum forward scattering angle between first and second
interaction, and how it is affected by increasing separation. Image credit: [41] (p. 33)
Key take­away insights after this first simulation campaign were:
• When it comes to the data processing of the simulation of a Compton camera pay­
load, it is of paramount importance to consider a right implementation of the trigger
criteria and event reconstruction. Even a telescope consisting of detectors with
excellent spectral and spatial resolution, outstanding intrinsic performance param­
eters, and well­optimised design choices, if wrong data processing techniques are
employed, its performance will be severely affected.
• In terms of number of detector modules, the final payload presented in this chapter
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
43
==PAGE:52==
will consider a vertical stack of maximum 4 detector modules. Note that the payload
is intended to fit in a CubeSat sized platform (i.e. 10x10x10 cm3), which imposes a
restriction in terms of allowed space, however a stack of 4 detector modules offers
a good compromise between ARM and effective area.
• Considering the layer separation of the final payload, a distance of 1 cm between
detector modules will be considered, since it was shown to be a suitable choice in
terms of ARM optimisation. However, considerably detrimental in terms of resulting
effective area as it was previously shown. In a real payload, active material is cou­
pled to PCB’s and other electronics, thus, it was considered nonphysical to account
for smaller module separations.
5.2
Shielding analysis
Advancing through this mission concept study, it is now time to investigate the influence
of instrumental background to the sensitivity of a Compton camera payload. For this
purpose, a new payload design is introduced based on that presented in [42]. Fig. 5.6
illustrates an example of this payload, consisting of 8 3D CZT detector modules placed in
a stack of four layers with two modules each. Moreover the detectors are surrounded by
an active shield, consisting of either BGO or CsI scintillators. The influence of active shield
thickness in sensitivity is investigated through another extensive simulation campaign.
Figure 5.6: Illustration of the geometry considered in the shielding analysis. Pink: detector
modules, 2 stacks of 4 modules with a vertical separation of 1cm. Blue: active shielding
material, in this example each panel thickness is 1 cm.
Now that the payload includes scintillators used anti­coincident detectors (ACD), it is nec­
essary to consider this by defining an additional trigger criteria, namely:
• The already introduced criteria, stating that only interactions resulting in two (or more
hits) in any CZT detector trigger the system and the event is stored. That is con­
sidering two or more interactions in a single module or two or more interactions in
different modules.
• The second trigger criteria states that if an interaction occurs in the scintillator shield
at the same time as in the CZT, the event is vetoed, thus not advancing to the event
reconstruction.
Let us recall the expression to estimate the sensitivity of a payload in a given background
44 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:53==
environment, namely:
S = z2 + z
p
z2 + 4NB
2AeffTobs
(5.1)
Note that we first need to estimate the payload’s effective area. Similarly to the proce­
dure followed in the previous performance parameter estimation, simulations for a range
of mono­energetic far­field point sources (200 keV–2000 keV) were conducted to evalu­
ate the overall payload performance, assessing both effective area and ARM. Tab. 5.1
summarises the results of this first payload characterisation:
Table 5.1: Performance parameter characterisation of the payload introduced in Fig. 5.6,
considering a wide range of energies from 200 to 2000 keV.
Energy [keV]
Aeff [cm2]
ARM [◦]
200
2.37
13.75
400
1.82
5.61
600
1.08
4.40
1000
0.36
2.74
2000
0.05
2.27
Before we explored how different design choices (i.e. number of detector modules and
module vertical separation) affected the performance of a simple Compton camera instru­
ment. Now we can further discuss how the incoming radiation energy affects a payload’s
performance. It can be concluded that as energy increases the overall performance de­
creases, both effective area and ARM significantly drop when the payload is exposed
to incoming radiation with an energy greater than 1 MeV, this results from the fact that
any given material’s stopping power significantly decreases with energy, and this impact
can only be overcome by adding more detector modules as an attempt to increase the
effective area.
Having characterised the payload for a wide range of energies, it is now possible to in­
troduce the two materials investigated in this shielding analysis, namely cesium iodide
(CsI) and bismuth germanate (BGO), two of the most common materials employed as
scintillators for active shield mechanisms to protect the payload from the instrumental
background. Fig. 5.7 shows a preliminary comparison between both materials inspecting
their cross sections and quantum efficiency for a wide range of energies.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) Total Klein­Nishina cross section.
(b) Quantum efficiency.
Figure 5.7: Comparison between BGO and CsI. Data extracted from [13], considering a
material thickness of 1cm.
The quantum efficiency is here defined as:
εquantum = 100 · (1 −exp(−ρµ · x))
(5.2)
Where ρµ is the linear attenuation coefficient in cm−1, x the material thickness considered
in the cross section calculation (e.g. 1 cm), µ is the cross section and ρ is the density of the
material (e.g. ρCsI = 4.51 g/cm3, and ρBGO = 7.13 g/cm3). In a first sight, it can already
be observed that BGO presents a higher efficiency to that compared of CsI, however,
BGO being more dense introduces an additional weight to the instrument payload. Tab.
5.2 introduces the different cases considered in this simulation campaign, and shows the
weight that each shielding case will add to the instrument payload:
Table 5.2: Shielding configurations investigated in the simulation campaign.
Material
Thickness [mm]
Mass [kg]
­
­
­
5
0.73
CsI
10
1.61
30
6.91
50
15.69
5
1.15
BGO
10
2.54
30
10.91
50
24.81
After a preliminary investigation of the scintillator materials considered in this shielding
analysis, and before presenting the main results obtained from this simulation campaign,
the simulation pipeline followed is described, namely:
1. A payload consisting of 8 CZT detectors placed in a stack of four layers with two
detectors each based on [42] was defined.
46 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:55==
2. The payload’s performance was then characterised for a wide range of mono­energetic
far­field point sources (200 keV–2000 keV).
3. A preliminary comparison between the two materials considered was carried out
(i.e. CsI and BGO) .
4. Geometry files were defined for each payload including now detector material and
scintillator. 9 different geometries were simulated, detector material with no shield,
detector material + CsI shield (5, 10, 30, 50 mm shield thickness), and detector
material + BGO shield (5, 10, 30, 50 mm shield thickness).
5. To ensure reliable statistics, in­orbit background simulations were run for a total
simulation time of 500 · 103 s for each geometry. For practical reasons in was done
running 10 independent 50000 s in parallel, cosima’s mcosima command was used
to run all these simulations in parallel. For an efficient file handling, MEGAlib au­
tomatically concatenates the 10 generated simulation files into a single combined
simulation file. Actual CPU running time ranged from around 30 minutes for the
case with no active shielding, to more than a day for the simulation of the payload
including a 50 mm thick BGO scintillator.
6. For practical reasons, all output simulation files were compressed. Each combined
simulation file was then fed to the event reconstruction tool revan.
7. And finally, using mimrec, each geometry was then characterized in terms of mini­
mum achieved narrow­line sensitivity following the previously defined procedure.
Moreover, a brief overview of the simulation conditions is presented:
• Recall that each background in­orbit simulation is based on data retrieved from
SPENVIS, for an orbit like that of the NuSTAR satellite (altitude: 575 km, inclina­
tion: 6 degrees).
• No activation build­up in the instrument is considered.
• The instrument is assumed to be off during South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) passages,
and therefore the trapped hadronic contribution is not included.
• Only narrow­line sensitivity is investigated, recall that the payload was characterized
with a range of mono­energetic far­field point sources.
• Sensitivity is evaluated at a 3σ detection significance (e.g. z = 3), which defines the
background count extraction region for each simulated energy.
• Once the background count number is extracted given the detection significance
window, it is then normalised with the total simulation time (e.g. 500·103 s), namely:
nB = NB, extraction region
Tsim
(5.3)
• An effective observation time of 106 s is considered, which multiplied by the previ­
ously computed normalised background count number, it is possible to determine
the equivalent background count number:
NB = nB · Teff
(5.4)
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
47
==PAGE:56==
• Finally, the minimum detectable flux can be expressed as:
S = z2 + z
p
z2 + 4NB
2TeffAeff
(5.5)
Let us now dive into the main results of this simulation campaign.
5.2.1
CsI scintillator analysis
The first scintillator material investigated is CsI. Fig. 5.8 shows the payload’s minimum
detectable flux sensitivity for the different energies at which the payload was characterised
and different scintillator thickness.
Figure 5.8: Minimum detectable flux sensitivity effect with energy and thickness.
Moreover Fig. 5.9 shows in blue the minimum achieved sensitivity for each active shield
thickness case including the energy at which is was reached. The red dotted line simply
introduces a measure of the rate at which sensitivity improves with increasing thickness,
where the differences between adjacent sensitivities was divided by the differences be­
tween adjacent thicknesses, this is a figure of merit introduced to gain an intuition of
the rate at which increasing the active shielding material thickness impacts the minimum
achieved sensitivity.
48 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.9: Blue line: minimum achieved sensitivity for each thickness, together with the
energy at which it was reached. Red line: a measure of the rate at which sensitivity
improves with increasing thickness.
5.2.2
BGO scintillator analysis
The second scintillator material investigated is BGO. Again, Fig. 5.10 shows the payload’s
minimum detectable flux sensitivity for the different energies at which the payload was
characterised and different scintillator thickness.
Figure 5.10: Minimum detectable flux sensitivity effect with energy and thickness.
Moreover Fig. 5.11, shows in blue the minimum achieved sensitivity for each scintillator
thickness case including the energy at which is was reached. Again, the red dotted line
introduces a measure of the rate at which sensitivity improves with increasing thickness.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.11: Blue line: minimum achieved sensitivity for each thickness, together with
the energy at which it was reached. Red line: a measure of the rate at which sensitivity
improves with increasing thickness.
For both materials, it is clearly observed that increasing the scintillator thickness improved
the minimum detectable flux. However, by observing the rate at which sensitivity improves
with increasing thickness, it is clear that the trend presents a stepper rate for lower thick­
nesses, suggesting that the benefits from increasing scintillator thickness saturates for
thicknesses higher than 30 mm. Moreover, comparing materials against each other, it
can be seen that BGO already achieves a sensitivity ~1 · 10−4 ph/cm2/s for a thickness of
5 mm, while CsI fails to do so even with a thickness of 10 mm.
Key take­away insights from this second simulation campaign are:
• Despite its higher density, BGO is the scintillator material chosen for the proposed
mission payload.
• In terms of the chosen scintillator thickness, it is concluded that a maximum scintil­
lator thickness limit is set to 10 mm, since the benefits gained in terms of sensitivity
seem to be outweighed by the penalty introduced in terms of added weight.
5.3
Emission­Line and Multi­messenger Observatory (ELMO)
In a first simulation camping, it was investigated the influence of design choices like num­
ber of detector modules and detector module separation in the performance of a Compton
camera instrument. In a second simulation campaign, in­orbit simulations of a Compton
camera payload were carried out to investigate the impact of active shielding as a back­
ground reduction technique. With the insights gained during both analyses, it is possible
to introduce in this section the final payload model with which in­orbit simulations explor­
ing known sources (e.g. Crab Nebula and a selected GRB) were conducted to investigate
the feasibility of using 3D CZT drift strip detectors as a small Compton camera on board
of a CubeSat platform.
Here it is presented the Emission­Line and Multi­messenger Observatory (ELMO) a wide
field­of­view (FOV) compact Compton camera consisting of 8 3D CZT detector modules
surrounded by BGO scintillator detectors for active shielding. Fig. 5.12 shows an illus­
tration of the designed geometry for ELMO cube using geomega’s plotting routine. Pink
color shows the 8 3D CZT detector modules, note that the design choice of adding the
50 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:59==
modules on the sides is inspired by the the Soft Gamma­ray Detector(SGD) presented in
[43]. Scintillator is shown in blue color, the shielding material is BGO with a thickness of
8 mm such that the entire payload is contained in a 1U CubeSat, that is 10x10x10 cm3.
(a) Front view.
(b) Side view.
Figure 5.12: ELMO cube illustration using geomega.
The interested reader can find the complete geometry file definition in Appendix C, for the
sake of brevity only the main mission design specifications are described here, namely:
• Payload dimensions: 9.6x9.6x6.8 cm3
• Detector module: 3D CZT drift strip detector (40x40x5 mm3)
• Number of detector modules: 8
• Background reduction technique: Anti­coincidence detectors (i.e. active shield­
ing).
• Shielding material: BGO scintillators with a 8 mm thickness.
• Scince goals: the instrument is optimised for line detection, however, the excel­
lent spectral and spatial resolution of the 3D CZT detectors also enables accurate
continuum source reconstructions, and the wide FOV expands the extent of the
telescope’s performance to the observation of transient events.
Even though the shielding analysis suggested that only modest minimum sensitivity val­
ues were reached, limited scientific objectives should still be attainable. It is now time to
investigate the payload’s performance in an astronomical context, particularly when con­
sidering bright sources, in both, continuum and transient time domains. Results observ­
ing the Crab Nebula are presented in section 5.3.1, and results observing the gamma­ray
burst GRB 990411 are presented in section 5.3.2.
5.3.1
Continuum source: observing the Crab Nebula
Before attempting the image reconstruction of an in­orbit observation of the Crab Nebula,
the source has to be modelled, and the payload characterized in terms of performance
and continuum sensitivity. Let us first dive into how to model the Crab. For this purpose
a power­law [44] is considered, namely:
F(E) = K

E
1keV
−α
(5.6)
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
51
==PAGE:60==
With a spectral index α = 2.169±0.008, and a normalization K = 14.44±0.44 ph/cm2/s/keV.
It was then defined in MEGAlib in the energy range of 50–10000 keV, with spectral def­
inition (e.g. minimum energy: 50 keV, maximum energy: 10000 keV, and photon index:
2.17) and flux resulting from integrating eq. 5.6 in the given energy range (e.g. 0.12668
ph/cm2/s).
Let us now focus on the payload characterization. Similarly to when the shielding analysis
was carried out, the payload’s performance has to be first characterized with a simulation
only including the source (e.g. the Crab Nebula). The ARM and effective area was deter­
mined in energy windows of E = ∆E (e.g. 300 keV = 150­450 keV, 600 keV = 300­900
keV, 900 keV = 450­1350 keV), and the source extraction region defined as 3σ ARM.
Note the discrepancy with the previously considered 2σ ARM source extraction region for
effective area calculation, this is done so that the methodology is in accordance to that
presented in [42]. Tab. 5.3 shows the resultant performance parameters:
Table 5.3: In­orbit payload ARM and effective area, characterized at the given energy
windows for a simulation including only the Crab Nebula.
Energy [keV]
Energy window [keV]
ARM [◦]
Aeff [cm2]
300
150­450
10.09
2.06
600
300­900
5.72
1.73
900
450­1350
4.30
1.01
Next, the payload’s continuum sensitivity was characterized, which fundamentally differs
from a narrow­line sensitivity calculation in the fact the number of background counts is
extracted from a E = ∆E window, instead of the 3σ energy window around a photo peak.
Note that we have now been able to characterize a payload’s sensitivity based on both
narrow­line and continuum sources. Tab. 5.4 shows the calculated sensitivities for the
given energy ranges:
Table 5.4: ELMO continuum sensitivity (z = 3σ).
Energy window [keV]
Sensitivity [10−4 ph/cm2/s]
150­450
6.64
300­900
4.83
450­1350
5.11
Using these continuum sensitivity values, it is possible to estimate the effective obser­
vation time for a 5σ observation, an interesting figure of merit that represents the time it
would take to distinguish the Crab at a 5σ detection significance (i.e. z = 5σ) given the
already characterized payload’s continuum sensitivity, recall the sensitivity equation:
S = z2 + z
p
z2 + 4nBTeff
2TeffAeff
(5.7)
Solving for Teff involves finding the roots of a nonlinear function, which can easily be done
with the help of a numerical software program, MATLAB’s build­in fzero function was
used. Tab. 5.5 shows the computed effective observation times:
52 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:61==
Table 5.5: In­orbit payload effective observation time of the Crab.
Energy window [keV]
Teff [s] (5σ)
150­450
2365.93
300­900
6334.68
450­1350
18015.49
With this information, it is now possible to investigate the in­orbit imaging performance
of the Compton camera payload. Considering the results from the effective observation
time for a 5σ observation investigation, a 10 ks observation time was considered for the
simulation, representing a good compromise between the range of energies considered.
Note that, given the payload’s continuum sensitivity, it requires an observation of nearly 40
minutes at a 150­450 keV energy window, and nearly 5 hours at a 450­1350 keV energy
window, it is apparent that such a long observation would require excellent instrument
stabilization. Increasing the payload’s effective area, or enhancing the background rejec­
tion technique are options that should be considered to reduce the effective observation
time.
Fig. 5.13 shows the resulting energy spectrum for a simulated 10 ks observation time of
the Crab Nebula including instrumental background. A typical power law is observed, with
the notable mention of the the 511 keV gamma­ray line, signature of positron annihilation,
as one may recall from section 4.5 where the main science goals of the next generation
of Compton telescopes were introduced.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Energy [keV]
0
10
20
30
40
50
counts / keV
Figure 5.13: Resulting energy spectrum of an in­orbit (i.e. including instrumental back­
ground) simulation of the Crab (10 ks at zenith).
It is now possible for the first time to make use of mimrec’s image reconstruction capabil­
ities. Mimrec’s user interface eases to a great extent this process, being only a matter of
selecting different options, main considerations are:
• In the general imaging options window, the classic expectation maximization list­
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
53
==PAGE:62==
mode maximum­likelihood algorithm was selected with a maximum of 10 iterations.
• In the imaging dimensions window, a new rotated coordinate system was defined
in order to show the source centered in the image. This is simply done by setting a
new x­axis and z­axis vector. See Fig. 5.14 for illustration. Note that the axis dimen­
sions depend on the desired extent of the produced image, however, for adequate
resolution, it should be noted that at least a bin per degree should be considered.
Figure 5.14: Mimrec’s image dimensions window.
Considering the already described options, it was possible to run the image reconstruction
routine considering only events contained within each of the considered energy windows.
Fig. 5.15 shows the resultant image evaluated at a 150­450 keV energy window:
54 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:63==
50
−
40
−
30
−
20
−
10
−
0
10
20
30
40
50
Phi [deg]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Theta [deg]
Figure 5.15: In­orbit observation of the Crab (10 ks at zenith) at 300 keV with an energy
window of ∆E = E (i.e. 150­450 keV).
Fig. 5.16 shows the resultant image evaluated at a 300­900 keV energy window:
50
−
40
−
30
−
20
−
10
−
0
10
20
30
40
50
Phi [deg]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Theta [deg]
Figure 5.16: In­orbit observation of the Crab (10 ks at zenith) at 600 keV with an energy
window of ∆E = E (i.e. 300­900 keV).
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
55
==PAGE:64==
Finally, Fig. 5.17 shows the resultant image evaluated at a 450­1350 keV energy window:
50
−
40
−
30
−
20
−
10
−
0
10
20
30
40
50
Phi [deg]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Theta [deg]
Figure 5.17: In­orbit observation of the Crab (10 ks at zenith) at 900 keV with an energy
window of ∆E = E (i.e. 450­1350 keV).
It can be stated that the proposed Compton telescope can clearly reconstruct the Crab
Nebula after a 10 ks observation at 300 keV and 600 keV energy windows. Recall that
the shielding analysis revealed that the minimum achievable sensitivity occurred at 600
keV when considering low thickness scintillators, this is now apparent by comparing Fig.
5.15 (e.g. at 300 keV) and Fig. 5.16 (e.g. at 600 keV), it can be observed that the back­
ground around the source region is slightly more suppressed at the 600 keV observation.
Moreover, note that the instrument presented the best ARM at 900 keV, however, the
high impact of the instrumental background in this energy range clearly hinders the in­
strument’s ability to reconstruct the source, making it not possible to distinguish it form
the background.
5.3.2
Transient source: observing a gamma­ray burst (GRB 990411)
To conclude this mission concept study, let us investigate the proposed instrument’s per­
formance when observing a transient source. Short GRBs are of particular interest be­
cause they are predicted to be the counterparts of gravitational wave sources [45], ob­
serving GRBs in coincidence with a gravitational wave signal represents a key factor in
multi­messenger astronomy [42]. Given the instrument’s effective area, it’d be difficult
to detect GRBs with a small fluence, thus a bright GRB is considered for demonstration
purposes. Tab. 5.6 presents the spectral properties from the selected GRB (e.g. GRB
990411).
56 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:65==
Table 5.6: GRB 990411 spectral properties from the CGRO/BATSE Complete Spectral
Catalog of Bright GRBs [46].
t90[s]
α
β
Epeak [keV]
Flux [ph/cm2/s]
Fluence [ph/cm2]
GRB 990411
328.448
­1.50
­2.27
283
0.82
269.3
Fig, 5.18 shows the resulting energy spectrum for a simulated 328 s observation time of
the GRB 990411 including instrumental background, note that the low number of counts
is an inherent consequence of the transitory nature of GRBs.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Energy [keV]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
counts / keV
Figure 5.18: Resulting energy spectrum of an in­orbit (i.e. including instrumental back­
ground) simulation of the GRB 990411 (328 s at zenith).
Fig. 5.19 proves that the proposed payload could possibly detect bright GRBs if they
occur within its field of view.
150
−
100
−
50
−
0
50
100
150
Phi [deg]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Theta [deg]
Figure 5.19: On­axis GRB 990411 reconstructed image, complete FOV.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
57
==PAGE:66==
Fig. 5.20 simply reduces the image FOV to investigate the resolution with which the GRB
is detected.
30
−
20
−
10
−
0
10
20
30
Phi [deg]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Theta [deg]
Figure 5.20: On­axis GRB 990411 reconstructed image, FOV restricted to source region.
In this study it has been demonstrated the potential of using 3D CZT drift strip detectors
in Compton camera configurations, the proposed payload consisting of 8 3D CZT drift
strip detectors and a BGO scintillator for active shielding as the main background rejec­
tion technique, was first characterized in terms of effective area, ARM, and continuum
sensitivity. Even though the payload only presented modest results in terms of sensitivity,
it was possible to prove the possibility of observing bright sources like the Crab Nebula
and a GRB even with relatively short observation times.
On the other hand, it should be noted that the proposed payload is a highly idealized
concept. If more accurate results are to be attained, there exist multiple routes to follow,
for example:
• The addition of passive materials in the model, like PCB’s and other electronic cir­
cuits will further hinder the minimum achievable sensitivity to some extent.
• Recall that no activation build up was considered in any of the presented simulations.
For semiconductor detectors, radiation damage in the orbit is always an issue of
concern, for CZT detectors in particular, non­ionization energy loss caused by high
energy protons is argued to be the main cause of radiation damage [33].
• Exploring different background rejection techniques that go beyond active shield­
ing, minimal passive material, and event reconstruction may be needed to make
significant gains [3].
After this mission concept study, the complexity in the design process of a Compton
telescope is apparent, with several performance parameters playing key roles, important
trade­offs should be made in terms of the science question in hand. In order to launch a
full­scale mission like COSI, currently planned for launch in 2027 [27], the concept was
matured over decades through technology development with scientific balloon flights. This
study simply suggests that a small technology demonstration mission using 3D CZT drift
strip detectors as a simple Compton camera could attain some limited science goals.
58 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:67==
6
Experimental evaluation
This chapter covers the last milestone of this project, that is, the experimental evalua­
tion of a Compton camera instrument consisting of a single 3D CZT detector module in
the detector lab. The experimental setup is described, and a high­level overview of the
double­event characterization algorithm is provided. Afterwards, the data analysis of the
set of characterized double­events (i.e. Compton interactions) in MEGAlib is introduced,
and the experimental results after performing the source image reconstruction are pre­
sented. Finally, the reconstructed image is correlated with a simple experimental setup
simulation in MEGAlib.
6.1
Experimental setup
Fig. 6.1 shows a photograph taken in the detector lab during the experiment, highlight­
ing some of the main elements of the setup. Note that when this image was taken, the
radioactive source was not yet placed.
Figure 6.1: Experimental setup.
1. Source placement (e.g. tungsten source holder).
2. Source­detector reference alignment laser system.
3. 3D CZT drift strip detector mounted on the tower.
4. SIS 3316 high­speed digitizers (i.e. analog/digital converters).
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
59
==PAGE:68==
The tower is the name given to the large structure housing the pre­amplifiers and routing
their signals to the SIS digitizers. For an in­depth description of the operating principle
and data collection with the SIS digitizers, the interested reader is referred to [22].
Fig. 6.2 illustrates the geometry of the experimental setup. The source was placed at a
distance of 195 cm to the closest side of the detector. The detector coordinate system is
introduced. Note that it is fundamental to have an intuition of how this coordinate system
is oriented so that the double­event position characterization algorithm is consistent to
this definition.
Figure 6.2: Experimental setup sketch illustrating the detector coordinate system and
according source position. As seen from the photographers side.
Furthermore, Figs. 6.3a and 6.3b illustrate the detector coordinate system, this time in­
cluding how cathodes and anodes are located respectively. Note that the black half­
square mark is a mark printed in the actual detector’s aluminum case as a reference for
the orientation of the detector.
(a) As seen from the photographers side.
Cathode strips are located parallel to the x­
axis along the z­direction.
(b) As seen from the source. Anode strips
are located parallel to the z­axis, along the
x­direction.
Figure 6.3: Detector coordinate system illustrated.
The detector was illuminated from a distance of 195 cm by a Cs137 (661.6 keV) point
source, as shown in Fig. 6.2. It was the XY plane of the detector that was directly exposed
to the incoming radiation (e.g. as if the source was our eyes and we were looking at Fig.
6.3b). This orientation was considered to exploit the larger dimension of the detector, by
60 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:69==
increasing the probability of double event interactions, recall the Klein­Nishina polar plot
(Fig. 2.4), the probability of forward scattering with a low angle is the highest for the given
source energy.
Before the source was placed, source placement and detector were aligned using a sys­
tem of two lasers, one reference laser on top of the detector (e.g. as labelled with a 4 in
Fig. 6.1) and another laser pointing to the detector from behind the source placement (it
does not appear in Fig. 6.1, but it was mounted behind the table where the source was
supported). Guiding its light through the opening of the Tungsten holder (e.g. recreating
the source radiation path) and trying to align it with the laser on top of the detector served
as a means for roughly aligning source and detector. However, given the distance at
which both were separated, it is safe to say that this alignment method will contribute to
the uncertainty in the experimental results presented.
In terms of data handling, 8 measurements of 10 minutes each were recorded, resulting
in 8 sub­datasets of approximately 4 GB each containing raw sampled pulse shapes for
each interaction detected within that time. Thus nearly 32 GB of raw data were processed.
It has to be noted that each dataset was handled independently. Each pulse shape was
sampled according to:
• Sample time: 4 ns.
• Sample length: 1000 samples.
• Trigger threshold: 12000.
• Number of elements per bank: 400.
Having defined the data collection settings in the detector’s lab PC LabView program, the
source was placed following all pertinent safety measures, and the data acquisition pro­
cess started. Once the 80 minute experiment was completed and all data was recorded,
the data is processed and analysed following these steps for each of the 8 sub­datasets,
namely:
1. A sub­dataset file is loaded in the python script and pulse heights are calculated,
simply as the difference between the mean amplitude of the last 50 samples and
the mean amplitude of the first 50 samples of each interaction pulse shape.
2. Afterwards, each interaction is sorted according to the event types already intro­
duced in section 3.3.1, namely:
• Single site event.
• Single cell multiple event.
• Multiple cell event (i.e. Compton interaction).
• Cosmic ray.
3. A further masking is carried out to the sorted Compton interactions (the masking
criteria is defined later in this section).
4. The masked set of Compton interactions enter the position algorithm, and for each
interaction:
• x­position of both events is calculated.
• y­position of both events is calculated.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
61
==PAGE:70==
• z­position of both events is calculated.
• Energy is assigned to both events.
5. A further masking is applied according to the calculated positions (the masking cri­
teria is defined when explaining the algorithm).
6. The EVTA file is created including the final set of Compton interactions.
We are now in step 3. The data from a file of the complete data set has already been
loaded, and sorted according to event type. Fig. 6.4 shows the anode pulse height dis­
tribution (e.g. considering all event types). Here the photo peak can be observed around
700 ADC channels, also the Compton valley, and Compton continuum are clearly distin­
guishable. Note that the peak around 200 ADC channels arises from interactions resulting
in partial energy deposition, were the scattered photon escaped the detector, this is an
expected and unavoidable phenomena given the small size of the detector. The blue
shaded region shows the energy range of interest, only double events whose summed
anode pulse heights fall within the shaded blue area are sorted and fed to the positioning
algorithm. Note that no energy calibration was carried out in the data, only a simple cor­
rection was implemented in the final event selection that made it through the double­event
positioning algorithm, thus when mentioning energy note that so far this is given in terms
of ADC channels and not keV.
Figure 6.4: Raw energy spectra, pulse height distribution in units of ADC channels.
Further sorting was carried out in order to mask Compton interactions were the maximum
cathode signal is lower than 60 ADC channels which improved the electron charge cloud
drift time estimation. Moreover, it was also observed that in some events the drift strips
showed a positive signal meaning that they were not properly screening the anodes and
collecting charge, further investigation is needed in this regard, for simplicity any event
that presented a drift strip collecting a signal higher than 15 ADC channels was discarded.
In summary, this is the initial sorting criteria of Compton interactions:
• Criteria on anode signal: summed activated anode pulse heights higher than 550
ADC channels and lower than 800 ADC channels, namely:
62 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:71==
ADC PHe1, activated anode + ADC PHe2, activated anode > 550 ADC channels
ADC PHe1, activated anode + ADC PHe2, activated anode < 800 ADC channels
Where ADC PH represents the calculated pulse heights on the raw data.
• Criteria on cathode signal: maximum cathode signal should at least be higher
than 60 ADC channels, namely:
max(ADC PHall cathodes) > 60 ADC channels
• Criteria on drift strip signal: in the case of a collecting drift strip, the drift strip
collecting signal must not be higher than 15 ADC channels, namely:
max(ADC PHactiated driftstrip) < 15 ADC channels
Starting from a 4 GB file of sampled pulse shapes for roughly 20000 interactions, this was
first sorted into the different event types, Compton interactions typically accounted for
nearly 30% of the total number of interactions, and the sorted Compton interactions were
further masked according to the criteria previously introduced. This reduced set accounts
for around 5% of the total number of interactions (e.g. roughly 1000 masked Compton
interactions out of the initial 20000 total number of interactions), and it was then fed to
the developed double­event characterization algorithm in order to determine position and
deposited energy for each interaction. We are now entering step 4 of the data analysis
previously introduced:
6.2
Double­event characterization
For the sake of clarity, from now on we will refer to a Compton interaction as a double­
event interaction. For a more detailed description of the methodology followed to develop
the double­event characterization algorithm, the interested reader is referred to [9], since
the implementation presented here follows those footsteps, with the only difference that
the latter was implemented in IDL, and this current implementation has been developed
in python.
As already discussed, the input for this algorithm is a set of masked double­events from
the initial 4 GB file of sampled pulse shapes. The output is the final selection of double­
events characterized in terms of position (e.g. x, y, and z in cm) and energy in keV.
A high­level overview of the double­event characterization algorithm is now presented,
discussing how each coordinate was calculated, namely:
6.2.1
X­position
Calculating the x­position for each event within a double­event interaction does not differ
much from the method introduced in section 3.3.1, when the x­position calculation of a
single event was introduced. Recall that a rough estimate was based on the activated
anode position, and a finer position resolution was achieved by inspecting the amplitude
of the negative gradient of the drift strip signal at the time of collection, namely:
xpos = 0.4 +

xtrig + F · ADR −ADL
ADR + ADL

· Pan −Pan
2
(6.1)
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
63
==PAGE:72==
Fig. 6.5 shows for illustration a selected double­event interaction anode and negative drift
strip gradient signal. The left plot shows the anode signal with each respective collection
time marked, and the right plot shows the negative drift strip gradient signal, the amplitude
at each collection time is used to improve the x­position estimate.
200
400
600
800
1000
Sample nr
. [4 ns]
−200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Anode signal [ADC channels]
t1
t2
200
400
600
800
1000
Sample nr
. [4 ns]
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
- Drift strip gradient [ADC Channels]
t1
t2
Figure 6.5: Resulting sampled pulse shape for a particular double­event interaction. Left
panel: anode signals. Right panel: inverted drift strip current signals. Electron charge
cloud collection times are also represented, t1 (red) and t2 (blue).
Thus the single­event method is simply applied to each activated anode within the double­
event interaction. The only difference is that one has to be able to distinguish for each
double­event interaction which electron charge cloud was collected first and which sec­
ond. This is done by inspecting for each event the electron charge cloud drift time (i.e.
difference between collection time and drift start time), namely:
te1 = t1 −t0
te2 = t2 −t0
(6.2)
In order to compute the electron charge cloud drift start time (e.g. t0), the cathode signal
is scanned at each sample number from 700 and backwards, at the moment the recorded
cathode signal reaches a value lower than 10 ADC channels, that sample number is stored
and multiplied by the sampling rate (e.g. 4 ns) to consider the drift time in units of time
(e.g. ns), this value is defined as t0. This is illustrated in the bottom plot of Fig. 6.6, where
all cathode signals are shown.
Moreover, each electron charge cloud collection time is estimated by inspecting the anode
gradient signal. For each activated anode, the sample number at which this curve reaches
its maximum amplitude (i.e. argmax in python) is multiplied by the sampling rate and
stored, this is illustrated in the middle plot of Fig. 6.6. After subtracting both values with
the electron charge cloud drift start time, one already has computed both electron charge
cloud drift times. Finally, one has to assign each electron charge cloud drift times to each
of the two events, the shortest time is assigned to the first event, and the longest time is
assigned to the second event.
64 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:73==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
−200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Anode signal
t1
t2
0
200
400
600
800
1000
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Anode gradient
0
200
400
600
800
1000
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Cathode signal
[ADC Channels]
Sample nr
. [4 ns]
Figure 6.6: Double­event interaction anode charge and current (i.e. gradient) signal, and
cathode signal with time stamps for electron charge cloud collection times, t1 (red) and t2
(blue). Black dotted line denotes the electron charge cloud drift start time, t0.
Fig. 6.7 shows the resulting x­position distribution (in cm) of the final set of double­event
interactions considered for the source image reconstruction.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
x [cm]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Counts per bin
Spatial hit distribution x
Figure 6.7: Distribution of the calculated x­position for the final set of double­events con­
sidered in the source image reconstruction.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
65
==PAGE:74==
This histogram includes a total of 679 double­event interactions, note that despite some
outliers, the distribution appears to be uniformly distributed along the detector length. This
is the final set of double events resulting after running the algorithm for each sub­dataset.
Recall that, for each sub­dataset, roughly 5% of the sorted double­event interactions (e.g.
1000 out of 20000 total interactions) entered the characterization algorithm. After a final
sorting, based on the calculated positions, roughly 80 events (e.g. from each sub­dataset)
were finally considered as a final selection of double­event interactions for the source
image reconstruction. That is, starting from a set of 1000 sorted double­event interactions,
a selection of roughly 80 (selected double­event interactions) × 8 (sub­datasets) was
considered.
It should be noted that this is quite a harsh event selection, with the most restrictive criteria
posed in the z­position calculation, this will be further commented when discussing the
z­position characterization. Let us now dive into how the y­position was calculated.
6.2.2
Y­position
Recall that the method of determining y­position for a single­event was based in the so­
called depth of interaction method, stating that the y­position is proportional to the ratio
between the total cathode charge signal Qcathode and that of the collecting anode Qanode
(e.g. ypos ∝Qcathode /Qanode ), and is given by [20]:
ypos =
PJ
j=1 Cj
Am
· dCZT
(6.3)
However, in a double­event interaction, when two electron charge clouds are drifting within
the detector material at the same time, both charges will induce signals on all cathodes.
The fact that the cathode signals become convoluted, adds a layer of complexity to the
estimation of the y­position for a a double­event interaction. To overcome this, it was
observed that the relationship between y­position of a single event and the electron drift
time presents a linear trend [9]. This linear relationship will be used as the method to
determine the position of double­event interactions.
For this purpose, a separate set of single­events resulting in a full or near­full energy
deposition (i.e. single­events contained within the photo peak) was considered. The cut­
offs were determined visually by inspecting the anode pulse height distribution previously
shown in Fig. 6.4, namely:
ADC PHsingle event, activated anode > 670 ADC channels
ADC PHsingle event, activated anode < 770 ADC channels
Afterwards, the electron charge cloud drift time was estimated for each single­event within
the selection, namely:
tdrift, single event = t1 −t0
(6.4)
This was done following the same procedure described for the electron charge cloud drift
time estimation for a double­event interaction. Recall, drift start time (e.g. t0) is estimated
by scanning the maximum cathode signal until the amplitude reaches a value lower than
10 ADC channels (see bottom panel in Fig. 6.8 for illustration). The electron charge cloud
collection time (e.g. t1) is estimated by considering the sample number at which the anode
gradient signal reaches its maximum value (see middle panel in Fig. 6.8 for illustration).
66 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:75==
Note that the estimated sample number is converted to a time by multiplying each value
with the pulse shape sampling rate (e.g. 4 ns).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
−250
0
250
500
750
1000
Anode signal
t0
t1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Anode gradient
0
200
400
600
800
1000
−200
0
200
400
600
800
Cathode signal
[ADC Channels]
Sample nr
. [4 ns]
Figure 6.8: Single­event interaction anode charge and current (gradient) signal, and cath­
ode signal with time stamps. Black dotted line represents the electron charge cloud drift
start time, t0. Red dotted line represents the electron charge cloud collection time, t1.
Having estimated the electron charge cloud drift time for each single­event interaction
within the set of selected photo peak single events. The next step is to compute the y­
position for each single­event interaction, this is done using a modified version of eq. 6.3.
Instead of considering the total cathode charge signal (e.g. Qcathode), only the contribution
of 5 cathode charge signal is considered. That is, the cathode presenting the maximum
amplitude and the two neighbouring cathodes to its left and right. In the case where the
cathode presenting the maximum amplitude is located at the edge, if at the start, the
contribution from the first 5 cathodes is considered, if at the end, the contribution from the
last 5 cathodes is considered. This implementation is a simple approach to the cathode
windowing method proposed in [22], introduced as a means of improving the y­position
resolution.
Once it was estimated both electron charge cloud drift time, and y­position for each single­
event interaction within the set of selected photo peak single events. Each event was
sorted based on the corresponding activated anode, resulting in 24 sets, containing data
points of drift and position for each event based at which the specific anode was activated.
Fig. 6.9 illustrates the 24 plots, one for each anode, of the y­positions as a function of
electron charge cloud drift time. A linear trend in each anode can be observed.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
67
==PAGE:76==
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 1
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 2
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 3
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 4
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 5
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 6
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 7
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 8
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 9
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 10
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 11
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 12
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 13
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 14
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 15
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 16
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 17
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 18
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 19
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 20
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 21
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 22
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 23
0
200
400
600
800
0.0
2.5
5.0
Anode 24
Drift Time [ns]
Y Position [mm]
Figure 6.9: Linear fit of the y­positions as a function of electron charge cloud drift times of
all 24 individual anodes, considering only single site photo peak events (904 photo peak
single events are included).
Resulting fit parameters are included in Appendix E. The linear relationship between the
y­position of a double­event interaction and the electron drift time is given by:
ypos = αte + β
(6.5)
Where, as usual, α represents the slope of fitted line and β the intercept, recall that one
of each was computed for all individual anodes. Determining the y­position is then simply
a matter of considering each of the electron charge cloud drift time for both events, and
which anode collected it (e.g. activated anode number). The y­position is then determined
for each event from the linear regression of the anode in question.
Finally, Fig. 6.10 shows the resulting y­position distribution (in cm) of the final set of
double­event interactions considered for the source image reconstruction. Again, the
histogram includes a total of 679 double­event interactions. Note that almost no event
positions were calculated for the first section of the detector in the y­direction. This repre­
sents the section were the electron charge cloud drift time is the shortest, recall that anode
strip side is located at y = 0 mm, and cathode strip side at y = 5 mm. Thus suggesting
that improving the estimation of electron charge clouds with a short drift time (i.e. starting
close to the anode side) is one of the possible routes that could be followed to improve
the performance of the algorithm. Moreover, improving the method in which the start of
the charge cloud drift time could further contribute in this regard.
68 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:77==
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
y [cm]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Counts per bin
Spatial hit distribution y
Figure 6.10: Distribution of the calculated y­positions for the final set of double­events
considered in the source image reconstruction.
6.2.3
Z­position
Out of the 3 coordinates, estimating the z­position of both double events in an interaction is
arguably the one that presents the greater challenge. Recall that the x­position presented
no major issue in terms of position calculation, being simply a matter of implementing the
single­event position method twice, and the electron charge cloud drift time was investi­
gated to determine which event occurred first (e.g. labelled as event 1), and which second
(e.g. labelled as event 2). In terms of the y­position for a double­event interaction, the
position couldn’t just be determined applying the single­event method, and it required a
more involved consideration, however, the assignment was still straightforward by simply
investigating again each electron charge cloud drift time. For the case of the z­position
characterization, neither the position estimation, nor the assignment is straightforward.
Recall that the z­position of a single­event interaction is based on the center of gravity
method, given by [20]:
zpos =
PJ
j=1 j · Cj
PJ
j=1 Cj
· Pca −Pca
2
(6.6)
As it was the case in the y­position estimation, cathode signals are convoluted, thus eq.
6.6 is no longer applicable when estimating double­event interaction position along the
z­direction. Several methods where presented in [9] to overcome this issue. The imple­
mentation presented here is based in the long distance method proposed in the latter.
This method only considers double­events where at least one cathode is between the
interaction. Requiring a minimum distance of 2 mm between the z­positions along the
cathode direction.
This method investigates the cathode amplitude distribution along the z­ direction. Recall
that the 40x40x5 mm3 module presents 20 cathodes with a 2 mm pitch, the first cathode
is located at z = 1 mm, and the last one (e.g. 20th) is located at z = 39 mm. The
cathode amplitude distribution simply represents the distribution of each cathode’s pulse
height in ADC channels. Fitting a double Gaussian function (e.g. as defined in eq. 6.7) to
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
69
==PAGE:78==
the cathode amplitude distribution it is possible to reach a more accurate estimate of the
position of both events along the z­direction. Where the position of both events is given
by µ1 and µ2, and the cathode signal at each position is given by c1 and c2.
f(z) = c1 · exp

−z −µ1
2σ2
1

+ c2 · exp

−z −µ2
2σ2
2

(6.7)
Initial guesses have to be provided for all six parameters in order to fit the cathode signal
distribution to the double Gaussian function. Initial guesses for values c1 and c2 are de­
termined by finding the peaks of the cathode signal distribution, using scipy’s find_peaks
routine with the following conditions:
• Required height of peaks: 30 ADC channels.
• Required minimal horizontal distance: 1 (samples between neighbouring peaks)
which relates to an actual minimum distance of 2 mm.
Moreover, initial guesses for values µ1 and µ2 were simply determined from the position
at which each peak was found. And finally, σ1 and σ2 were both set to 0.5 mm.
Once both positions have been determined, the next step is to assign each position to
each event. Here, the strategy followed is based on considering the cathode amplitude
at each computed z­position, the position presenting the highest amplitude is assigned
to the event with the longest drift time (e.g. event 2), this is illustrated in the left panel of
Fig. 6.11. This is based on the assumption that events occurring closer to the cathode
side will present a higher cathode amplitude value. This is true in most of the cases,
however, there is an scenario in which, regardless of the relative position with respect to
the cathode side, the first event deposits most of the energy from the interaction (i.e. near
full absorption) and the second event deposits the remaining energy, note that this is not
considered in the presented implementation.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
z-pos [mm]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Cathode Amplitude [ADC Channels]
event 1
event 2
fit
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Sample nr
. [4 ns]
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Cathode signal [ADC Channels]
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C17
C18
C19
C20
Figure 6.11: Left panel: cathode amplitude distribution, green dotted line represents the
fitted curve to the distribution, electron charge cloud collection times are also marked
After a first examination of the z­position algorithm implementation, nonphysical results
were observed in the region close to the first cathodes (e.g. cathode number 4 and 6).
70 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:79==
Upon further inspection it was observed that this cathodes presented no collected signal
as it is shown in Fig. 6.12, this phenomena is also observed in the work presented in [22],
and it was finally confirmed that it was due to a poor connection in the adapter PCB. Thus,
it was decided to simply disregard any calculated interaction position below 1.5 cm. That
is, any event including a calculated z­position lower than 1.5 cm was discarded, which
considerably reduced the selected number of double­events since, essentially, nearly half
of the detector length was disregarded.
0
100
200
Counts
Cathode 1
Cathode 2
Cathode 3
Cathode 4
0
100
200
Counts
Cathode 5
Cathode 6
Cathode 7
Cathode 8
0
100
200
Counts
Cathode 9
Cathode 10
Cathode 11
Cathode 12
0
100
200
Counts
Cathode 13
Cathode 14
Cathode 15
Cathode 16
250
500
750
Energy [ADC ch.]
0
100
200
Counts
Cathode 17
250
500
750
Energy [ADC ch.]
Cathode 18
250
500
750
Energy [ADC ch.]
Cathode 19
250
500
750
Energy [ADC ch.]
Cathode 20
Figure 6.12: Cathode pulse height distributions.
Finally, Fig. 6.13 shows the resulting z­position distribution (in cm) of the final set of
double­event interactions considered for the source image reconstruction. Again, the
histogram includes a total of 679 double­event interactions. Note the cutoff at 1.5 cm,
and it also has to be mentioned that the distribution of the z­positions clearly presents
more variability than the distribution of the x­positions shown in Fig. 6.7.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
71
==PAGE:80==
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
z [cm]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Counts per bin
Spatial hit distribution z
Figure 6.13: Distribution of the calculated z­positions for the final set of double­events
considered in the source image reconstruction.
Finally, after computing each of the 3 position coordinates for both double­event interac­
tions, the energy is assigned simply by storing the resulting pulse height of the activated
anode from each of the 2 events.
6.3
Experimental results
Recall the data analysis steps introduced at the beginning of this chapter. We are now
in step 6. Let us do a brief recap, after loading the data, all interactions were sorted
according to event type. A further masking was carried out to the sorted double­event
interactions, this masked set of double events entered the position algorithm, the position
for each double­event interaction was characterized and the energy was assigned. We
are now at the step of creating the EVTA file including the final set of double events, that
will serve as input in MEGAlib to continue with the data analysis of the experimental data.
Before doing so, note that so far all calculations has been carried out in raw data (e.g.
no gain/energy calibration applied). Typically, it is necessary to do a gain/energy calibra­
tion before calculating the position of interactions in the detector, since the ratio between
pulse heights are used to asses interaction positions in the detector [2]. In general, three
sources are used when gain/energy calibrating the detector (e.g. 241Am, 57Co, and 137Cs).
A linear regression of the known source energy and the measured pulse height in ADC
channel allows to determine a linear relation between the measured signal in ADC chan­
nels, EADC and the true source energy in keV, EkeV, namely:
EkeV = a · EADC + b
(6.8)
Where a is the slope of the relation, and b the intersection with the y­axis. There has
already been extensive work carried out within the group in this regard, the work pre­
sented in [22] produced gain/energy calibration files for each detector, containing all fitted
parameters for each anode, cathode, and drift strips. However, when the gain/energy
calibration files were applied to the data recorded in the proposed experimental setup,
the resulting calibrated pulse height distribution did not relate to the expected 137Cs photo
72 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:81==
peak at 661.6 keV. The reason of this discrepancy could only be explained by assuming
that the experiment wasn’t carried out at the nominal cathode voltage bias (e.g. ­450 V).
Assuming the fundamental mistake of not double­checking the cathode voltage bias at
which the experiment was conducted, and accepting that it wasn’t possible to prepare a
new experimental setup due to time constraints, it was decided to carry on with a set of
collected data most likely at a cathode voltage bias of ­200 V (e.g. the bias set when
the previous set of measurements were taken). Ultimately, this part of the project wasn’t
aimed to present a perfect demonstration of the 3D CZT drift strip detector’s capabilities
as a Compton camera, but rather reaching a proof of concept showing that a single 3D
CZT drift strip detector module could act as a Compton camera.
Nevertheless, a correction factor was applied to convert each of the assigned energies
from units of ADC channels to keV. This factor was determined by visually inspecting the
value in ADC channels where the photo peak was located. A value of E [ADCchannels]
= 730 ADC channels was considered, thus the applied gain/energy calibration was given
by:
EkeV =
661.6 [KeV]
E [ADC channels] · EADC = 0.9068 · EADC
(6.9)
This factor was then applied to all the assigned energies of the final set of double­events
considered in the source image reconstruction. A way to check the quality of the final set of
double­events is by summing each pair of energies for all events and inspect the resulting
distribution, if properly selected, the sum of energies should reconstruct the source photo
peak. Fig. 6.14 shows the resulting energy spectrum after summing the energies in keV
(e.g. after correction) of each double event pair that passed final event selection. Note
that the photo peak shape is adequately reconstructed, however, not centered around the
expected 661.6 keV given the 137Cs source.
500
550
600
650
700
750
Energy [keV]
0
5
10
15
20
25
counts
Summed energies (679 double events)
Figure 6.14: Resulting energy spectrum after summing the energies in keV (e.g. after
correction) of each double event pair that passed final event selection.
Once the energies are corrected and given in units of keV, it is now possible to continue
with the data analysis of the experiment in MEGAlib. Note that MEGAlib was originally
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
73
==PAGE:82==
designed for the MEGA Compton and pair telescope prototype, so using it with real mea­
surements is as straight forward as using it with simulations. Only two things are required
to use MEGAlib with real measurements:
• An EVTA­file (which is very similar to the sim file).
• A geometry file with the detector at the correct position and orientation.
Both files can then be used with Revan for the subsequent event reconstruction. The
interested reader can find a step by step guide on the structure and how to define the
EVTA­file in [47]. Here it has to be mentioned that the file format generated follows Version
200, and the detector ID: 8 was considered (e.g. 3D voxel detector).
In terms of geometry considerations, it is fundamental that the defined geometry is con­
sistent with the detector coordinate system that was introduced at the beginning of this
chapter. For illustration the geometry file defined according to the experimental setup is
included in Appendix F. According to this coordinate system, the source position is given
by:
(xsource, ysource, zsource) = (2 cm, 0.25 cm, 199 cm)
(6.10)
And, given in spherical coordinates as:
(θsource, ϕsource) = (89.42◦, 7.13◦)
(6.11)
Note that a way to determine the performance of the double­event characterization algo­
rithm is by inspecting whether the reconstructed source is located at the expected position.
Having emphasized how important it is to define a consistent geometry according to the
detector coordinate system, it is now time to run the event reconstruction routine revan on
the EVTA file containing the final set of characterized double­event positions. Fig. 6.15
shows the resulting energy spectrum after event reconstruction in MEGAlib, note that 664
out of the initial 679 passed the event selection in revan.
500
550
600
650
700
750
Energy [keV]
0
2
4
6
8
10
counts / keV
Figure 6.15: Resulting energy spectrum after event reconstruction in MEGAlib (664 out
of the initial 679 passed the event selection in revan)
74 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:83==
Comparing this energy spectrum to the one shown in Fig. 6.14, both are consistent which
confirms that the data was successfully passed on to MEGAlib. It is now time to finally
attempt the source image reconstruction in mimrec. Similarly to when ELMO’s imaging
capabilities were investigated, these are the main imaging options considered:
• In the general imaging options window, the classic expectation maximization list­
mode maximum­likelihood algorithm was selected with a maximum of 10 iterations.
• In the imaging dimensions window, a new rotated coordinate system was defined
in order to show the source centered in the image. This is simply done by setting
a new x­axis (X = (1, 0, 0)) vector, and z­axis (e.g. Z = (0, 0, 1)) vector . See Fig.
5.14 for illustration. Recall that the axis dimensions depend on the desired extent
of the produced image, however, for adequate resolution, it should be noted that at
least a bin per degree should be considered.
Fig. 6.16 shows the resulting source image reconstruction from the final set of character­
ized double­events.
150
−
100
−
50
−
0
50
100
150
Phi [deg]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Theta [deg]
Figure 6.16: Source image reconstruction from the final set of characterized double­
events.
Recall that the source is expected to be located at (θ, ϕ) = (89.42◦, 7.13◦). A region of
maximum intensity can be observed at θ ~90◦and ϕ ~30◦. In terms of latitude (e.g. θ)
the region of maximum intensity is consistent with the expected source position. In terms
of longitude (e.g. ϕ) there seem to be a considerable disagreement with the expected
source location. Recall that in the presented experimental setup, source and detector
were aligned using a system of 2 lasers, and the alignment accuracy is limited by consid­
ering a simple visual inspection. This may justify the discrepancy in latitude. However,
there is still not enough evidence to confirm that the region of maximum intensity actually
corresponds to the 137Cs source radiation. A simple experimental setup was simulated in
MEGAlib, based on the already described geometry, next section describes the simulation
setup and presents the simulated source image reconstruction.
6.4
Correlating with simulations
In order to correlate the experimental results with simulated results, a simple simulation
setup is introduced in this section. This setup geometry is consistent with the presented
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
75
==PAGE:84==
experimental setup, that is, the same geometry file used to produce the experimental
results (e.g. presented in Appendix F), is considered in the simulated setup. The only
difference is that now instead of performing the event reconstruction with collected real
data, the reconstruction is performed with simulated data using cosima. For this purpose
the source has to be first defined. The specific source file can be found in Appendix G.
Main specifications are introduced here, namely:
• Simulation stop criteria: 10000 generated triggers.
• Source type: restricted point source. That is, only particles reaching the surround­
ing sphere are generated, thus only simulating particles that can hit the detector. It
is an improved implementation of the standard point source beam definition, which
significantly reduces the simulation time (i.e. less than 5 minutes). Note that this
requires the source position to be outside the surrounding sphere. When the setup
was simulated with a simple point source, the simulation was terminated after 20 h,
because it did not even reach 1000 triggers.
• Source position: (x, y, z) = (2 cm, 0.25 cm, 199 cm)
• Source spectrum: mono­energetic (661.6 keV).
• Source flux: 100 particles/s.
Note that this is a simple simulated setup, not aiming to recreate the exact conditions
of the presented experimental setup, but to confirm if the observed region of maximum
intensity in the experimental source image reconstruction corresponds to the actual 137Cs
source. After performing the event reconstruction on the simulated data, the resultant
simulated source image reconstruction is shown in Fig. 6.17.
150
−
100
−
50
−
0
50
100
150
Phi [deg]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Theta [deg]
Figure 6.17: Reconstructed photo­peak from sorted double events
Here one can clearly distinguish the source at the expected (θ, ϕ) = (89.42◦, 7.13◦).
76 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:85==
7
Conclusion and future work
This project incorporated space mission design, experimental work in the laboratory with
the 3D CZT detectors, and in­orbit mission performance evaluation of an instrument pay­
load in a simulation environment. Recall that the main goal of this project was to evaluate
a Compton Camera instrument through performance simulation and experimental verifi­
cation of the Compton imaging concept using a single 3D CZT drift strip detector module
at DTU Space detector laboratory. For this purpose, three milestones were set:
• Simulation of a Compton Camera payload for in­orbit performance.
• Simulation of a single 3D CZT detector module using MEGAlib platform.
• Preparation, conduct, and verification of the simulation results by experimental data
from a single 3D CZT detector in the Detector lab.
Regarding the simulation of a Compton Camera payload for in­orbit performance, it should
be noted that the proposed payload is a highly idealized concept, and if more accurate
results are to be attained, there exist multiple routes that can be followed, for example:
• Improving the payload model by adding passive materials, like PCB’s and other
electronic circuits will further hinder the minimum achievable sensitivity to some ex­
tent. With additional surrounding materials, the particle induced background in the
payload will increase, thus, the presented results can be regarded as a lower limit.
• Recall that no activation build up was considered in any of the presented simulations.
For semiconductor detectors, radiation damage in the orbit is always an issue of
concern. For CZT detectors in particular, non­ionization energy loss caused by high
energy protons is argued to be the main cause of radiation damage [33]. Including
radio­activation of materials caused by high energy protons should be fundamen­
tal when investigating the long­term in­orbit performance of the proposed payload.
However, it should also be mentioned that radio­activation due to SAA transit is
highly dependent on the orbit inclination, and is important only at high inclinations.
Thus, favoring the choice of a low­inclination orbit like the NuSTAR orbit (altitude:
575 km, inclination: 6◦) considered in this mission concept study.
• Exploring different background rejection techniques that go beyond active shield­
ing employing scintillators as anti­coincidence detectors, may be needed to make
significant gains in terms of improving the minimum achievable sensitivity [3].
After this mission concept study, the complexity in the design process of a Compton
telescope is apparent, with several performance parameters playing key roles, important
trade­offs should be made in terms of the science question in hand. In order to launch
a full­scale mission, a mission concept is matured over decades through technology de­
velopment. The imaging performance of the proposed payload model (e.g. ELMO) was
evaluated by observing continuum and transient sources. In­orbit simulations of bright
sources like the Crab Nebula and a GRB were conducted, and it can be concluded that
observing these sources is feasible even with relatively short observation times. How­
ever, it has to be noted that the proposed mission concept study simply suggests that a
small technology demonstration mission using 3D CZT drift strip detectors as a simple
Compton camera could attain some limited science goals, due to its reduced effective
area, and moderate sensitivity.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
77
==PAGE:86==
In terms of the simulation of a single 3D CZT detector module using MEGAlib platform. A
simple simulated setup based on the experimental setup geometry was proposed, aiming
to confirm if the observed region of maximum intensity in the experimental source im­
age reconstruction corresponded to the actual 137Cs source. In order to recreate a more
realistic simulated setup, the aluminum casing protecting the detector should also be mod­
elled. It acts as a light shield protecting the detector from any incoming light. However,
the incoming radiation looses energy to some extent when passing through the aluminum
casing, and this energy loss should be accounted for. Moreover, a more accurate model
of the 137Cs source should be considered. However, this simple simulated setup allowed
to locate the simulated source in the reconstructed image when evaluating a Compton
camera based on a single 3D CZT detector in MEGAlib.
Considering the preparation, conduction, and verification of the simulation results by ex­
perimental data from a single 3D CZT detector in the Detector lab. Recall that when
applying the gain/energy calibration to the collected experimental data, the resulting cal­
ibrated pulse height distribution did not relate to the expected 137Cs photo peak at 661.6
keV. The reason of this discrepancy could only be explained by concluding that the ex­
periment wasn’t carried out at the nominal cathode voltage bias (e.g. ­450 V). Assuming
the fundamental mistake of not double­checking the cathode voltage bias at which the
experiment was conducted, it was decided to carry carry on with a set of collected data
most likely at a cathode voltage bias of 200 V (e.g. the bias set when the previous set
of measurements were taken). Ultimately, this part of the project wasn’t aimed to attain
a perfect experimental demonstration of the 3D CZT drift strip detector’s capabilities as a
Compton camera, but rather reaching a proof of concept showing that a single 3D CZT
drift strip detector module could act as a Compton camera.
A simple energy correction factor was introduced to overcome this issue, and with a final
set of characterized Compton interactions in terms of position and energy, it was possible
to reconstruct an image in which a region of maximum intensity could be observed at θ
~90◦and ϕ ~30◦.
Considering an uncertainty of 1 cm in the source­detector alignment method:
ysource = 0.25 ± 1 cm
When transforming to spherical coordinates, it would introduce the following uncertainty
in latitude:
ϕsource = 7.125 ± 24.88◦
Which contains the observed ϕ ~30◦, thus suggesting that the observed region of maxi­
mum intensity could be attributed to the 137Cs source. The uncertainty in source latitude
could be mitigated by refining the source­detector alignment method, and not just rely­
ing in visual inspection of the laser alignment. Moreover, reducing the distance between
source and detector in the experimental setup would also contribute to reducing this un­
certainty.
Several paths can be suggested in order to improve the double­event characterization al­
gorithm. First of all, it should be noted that the initial event sorting cut­offs were defined by
visual inspection of the anode pulse height distribution. Implementing a systematic way
of determining the cut­offs would increase the robustness of the algorithm. Moreover, in
78 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:87==
terms of position characterization, the x­position implementation presents little room for
improvement, however the two remaining coordinates present a great room for improve­
ment. Considering the y­position characterization, two main suggestions are proposed:
• Improving the method to estimate the electron charge cloud drift start time. Here a
simple approach was presented based on scanning the cathode signal until a min­
imum threshold was reached. However, due to the noisy signal when the cathode
signal is weak, that is, interactions occurring near the anode side (e.g. y = 0), it was
observed that this method did not adequately estimate short drift start times. A pos­
sible means of overcoming this issue is by considering the drift start time algorithm
presented in [22].
• Moreover, the method proposed here to estimate the y­position considered a fixed
window of 5 cathodes in the total contribution of the cathode signal. Recall, the cath­
ode presenting the maximum amplitude and its two neighbouring cathodes to the left
and right. An insightful investigation in the implication of the window size was also
proposed in [22], and following the guidelines presented there could significantly
improve the implementation of the y­position characterization.
Considering the z­position characterization, two main suggestions are also proposed:
• Improving the estimation of the initial guess for the double Gaussian fit of the cathode
amplitude distribution. A fixed standard deviation of 0.5 was considered for both
estimates. Improving the estimation of this initial guess, could potentially improve
the performance of the algorithm.
• In terms of event assignment, recall that the presented implementation assigned
the second event of the Compton interaction to the fitted position with the highest
amplitude. This is likely for most of the cases, however, for better performance the
algorithm should also account for the case where the first collected electron charge
has a much larger energy compared to the second collected electron charge cloud.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
79
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
[1]
J.M. Ryan. “Astrophysics challenges of MeV­astronomy instrumentation”. In: New
Astronomy Reviews 48.1­4 (2004), pp. 199–204. DOI: 10.1016/j.newar.2003.11.052.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.newar.2003.11.052.
[2]
Selina R. H. Owe. “Development of 3D Imaging Detectors for High Energy Astron­
omy Instrumentation”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[3]
Carolyn Kierans, Tadayuki Takahashi, and Gottfried Kanbach. “Compton Telescopes
for Gamma­Ray Astrophysics”. In: Handbook of X­ray and Gamma­ray Astrophysics
Not available (2022), pp. 1–72. ISSN: Not available. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-16-4544-
0_46-1. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-4544-0_46-1.
[4]
Glenn F. Knoll. Radiation Detection and Measurement. 4th. New York: Wiley, 2010.
[5]
Arthur H. Compton. “A Quantum Theory of the Scattering of X­rays by Light Ele­
ments”. In: Physical Review 21 (1923), pp. 483–502. ISSN: 0031­899X. DOI: 10.
1103/physrev.21.483. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1103/physrev.21.483.
[6]
O. Klein and Y. Nishina. “Über die Streuung von Strahlung durch freie Elektro­
nen nach der neuen relativistischen Quantendynamik von Dirac”. In: Zeitschrift für
Physik 52.11­12 (1929), pp. 853–868. DOI: 10.1007/BF01366453.
[7]
Andreas Zoglauer and Gottfried Kanbach. “Doppler broadening as a lower limit to
the angular resolution of next­generation Compton telescopes”. In: SPIE Proceedings,X­
Ray and Gamma­Ray Telescopes and Instruments for Astronomy Not available
(2003), Not available. ISSN: 0277­786X. DOI: 10 . 1117 / 12 . 461177. URL: https :
//dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.461177.
[8]
Roland Ribberfors. “Relationship of the relativistic Compton cross section to the
momentum distribution of bound electron states. II. Effects of anisotropy and polar­
ization”. In: Physical Review B 12 (1975), pp. 3136–3141. ISSN: 0556­2805. DOI:
10.1103/physrevb.12.3136. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1103/physrevb.12.3136.
[9]
Selina R. H. Owe. “Characterization of New Generation 3D CZT High Resolution
X­ and Gamma­ray Detector for High Energy Space Mission Concept”. MA thesis.
Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[10]
Irfan Kuvvetli. Basic for Radiation Detector Physics and Measurement Systems.
[11]
Course 30787 ­ Scientific Instrumentation for X­ and Gamma­Ray Astronomy. Lec­
ture 1: Detectors for high energy space instrumentation.
[12]
Alan Owens. “Compound Semiconductor Radiation Detectors”. In: (2016). DOI: 10.
1201/b11943. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1201/b11943.
[13]
NIST ­ National Institute of Standards and Technology. https://physics.nist.gov/
PhysRefData/Xcom/html/xcom1.html. Accessed: Mar. 2024.
[14]
S. Howalt Owe, I. Kuvvetli, and C. Budtz­Jorgensen. “Carrier Lifetime and Mobility
Characterization Using the DTU 3­D CZT Drift Strip Detector”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Nuclear Science 68 (2021), pp. 2440–2446. ISSN: 0018­9499, 1558­1578. DOI:
10.1109/tns.2021.3068001. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tns.2021.3068001.
[15]
Zhong He. “Review of the Shockley–Ramo theorem and its application in semicon­
ductor gamma­ray detectors”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Re­
search Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip­
ment 463 (2001), pp. 250–267. ISSN: 0168­9002. DOI: 10.1016/s0168-9002(01)
00223-6. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0168-9002(01)00223-6.
80 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:89==
[16]
W. Shockley. “Currents to Conductors Induced by a Moving Point Charge”. In: Jour­
nal of Applied Physics 9 (1938), pp. 635–636. ISSN: 0021­8979, 1089­7550. DOI:
10.1063/1.1710367. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1710367.
[17]
S. Ramo. “Currents Induced by Electron Motion”. In: Proceedings of the IRE 27
(1939), pp. 584–585. ISSN: 0096­8390. DOI: 10.1109/jrproc.1939.228757. URL:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/jrproc.1939.228757.
[18]
M.A.J. van Pamelen and C. Budtz­Jørgensen. “Novel electrode geometry to im­
prove performance of CdZnTe detectors”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ­
ated Equipment 403.2­3 (1998), pp. 390–398. DOI: 10.1016/s0168-9002(97)01120-0.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fs0168-9002%2897%2901120-0.
[19]
M.A.J. van Pamelen and C. Budtz­Jørgensen. “CdZnTe drift detector with correction
for hole trapping”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Sec­
tion A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 411.1
(1998), pp. 197–200. DOI: 10.1016/s0168-9002(98)00283-6. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1016%2Fs0168-9002%2898%2900283-6.
[20]
Carl Budtz­Jorgensen and Irfan Kuvvetli. “New Position Algorithms for the 3D CZT
Drift Detector”. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science (2017), pp. 1–1. DOI:
10.1109/tns.2017.2696574. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109%2Ftns.2017.2696574.
[21]
S. Howalt Owe et al. “Evaluation of a Compton camera concept using the 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors”. In: Journal of Instrumentation 14 (2019), pp. C01020–C01020.
ISSN: 1748­0221. DOI: 10.1088/1748-0221/14/01/c01020. URL: https://dx.doi.org/
10.1088/1748-0221/14/01/c01020.
[22]
Benjamin N. Hauptmann. “Characterization and Performance Evaluation of the 3D
MBI Detector Modules”. MA thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[23]
S. Tashenov and J. Gerl. “TANGO—New tracking AlGOrithm for gamma­rays”. In:
Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 622 (2010), pp. 592–601.
ISSN: 0168­9002. DOI: 10.1016/j.nima.2010.07.040. URL: https://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.nima.2010.07.040.
[24]
A Akyüz et al. “Enhanced performance of an electron tracking Compton gamma­
ray telescope”. In: New Astronomy 9 (2004), pp. 127–135. ISSN: 1384­1076. DOI:
10.1016/j.newast.2003.07.004. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.newast.2003.07.004.
[25]
Volker Schönfelder. “Lessons learnt from COMPTEL for future telescopes”. In: New
Astronomy Reviews 48 (2004), pp. 193–198. ISSN: 1387­6473. DOI: 10.1016/j.
newar.2003.11.027. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.newar.2003.11.027.
[26]
S. E. Boggs and P. Jean. “Performance characteristics of high resolution Compton
telescopes”. In: Astronomy and Astrophysics 376 (2001), pp. 1126–1134. ISSN:
0004­6361, 1432­0746. DOI: 10.1051/0004-6361:20011058. URL: https://dx.doi.
org/10.1051/0004-6361:20011058.
[27]
John Tomsick et al. “The Compton Spectrometer and Imager”. In: PoS ICRC2023
(2023), p. 745. DOI: 10.22323/1.444.0745.
[28]
Not available. “The Advanced Compton Telescope Mission”. In: NASA Space Sci­
ence Vision Missions Not available (2008), pp. 369–404. ISSN: Not available. DOI:
10 . 2514 / 5 . 9781600866920 . 0369 . 0404. URL: https : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2514 / 5 .
9781600866920.0369.0404.
[29]
A. Zoglauer, R. Andritschke, and F. Schopper. “MEGAlib – The Medium Energy
Gamma­ray Astronomy Library”. In: New Astronomy Reviews 50 (2006), pp. 629–
632. ISSN: 1387­6473. DOI: 10.1016/j.newar.2006.06.049. URL: https://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.newar.2006.06.049.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
81
==PAGE:90==
[30]
MEGAlib: The Medium­Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library. https://megalibtoolkit.
com/home.html. Accessed: Oct. 2023.
[31]
A. Zoglauer et al. “Cosima ­ The cosmic simulator of MEGAlib”. In: 2009 IEEE Nu­
clear Science Symposium Conference Record (NSS/MIC) Not available (2009), Not
available. ISSN: Not available. DOI: 10.1109/nssmic.2009.5402128. URL: https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/nssmic.2009.5402128.
[32]
G. Weidenspointner et al. “MGGPOD: a Monte Carlo Suite for Modeling Instrumen­
tal Line and Continuum Backgrounds in Gamma­Ray Astronomy”. In: The Astro­
physical Journal Supplement Series 156.1 (2005), pp. 69–91. DOI: 10.1086/425577.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1086%2F425577.
[33]
Jiahuan Zhu et al. “MeV astrophysical spectroscopic surveyor (MASS): a compton
telescope mission concept”. In: Experimental Astronomy 57 (2024), Not available.
ISSN: 0922­6435, 1572­9508. DOI: 10 . 1007 / s10686 - 024 - 09920 - 4. URL: https :
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10686-024-09920-4.
[34]
Mimrec manual. https://github.com/zoglauer/megalib/blob/main/doc/Mimrec.pdf.
Accessed: Nov. 2023.
[35]
Cosima manual. https://github.com/zoglauer/megalib/blob/main/doc/Cosima.pdf.
Accessed: Nov. 2023.
[36]
P. Cumani et al. “Background for a gamma­ray satellite on a low­Earth orbit”. In:
Experimental Astronomy 47 (2019), pp. 273–302. ISSN: 0922­6435, 1572­9508.
DOI: 10.1007/s10686-019-09624-0. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10686-019-
09624-0.
[37]
SPENVIS ­ Space Environment, Effects, and Education System. https : / / www .
spenvis.oma.be/intro.php. Accessed: Nov. 2023.
[38]
MEGAlib ­ Background generator program. https://github.com/zoglauer/megalib/
blob/main/resource/examples/advanced/Background/Background.txt. Accessed:
Nov. 2023.
[39]
III Johnson W. N. and R. C. Haymes. “Detection of a Gamma­Ray Spectral Line
from the Galactic­Center Region”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 184 (1973), p. 103.
ISSN: 0004­637X, 1538­4357. DOI: 10.1086/152309. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1086/152309.
[40]
H Tajima. “Gamma­Ray Polarimetry with Compton Telescope”. In: Not available Not
available (2004), Not available. ISSN: Not available. DOI: 10.2172/827326. URL:
https://dx.doi.org/10.2172/827326.
[41]
Simon V. Ørum. “Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on
3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a CubeSat Space Mission”. MA thesis. Technical
University of Denmark, 2022.
[42]
S.R.H. Owe et al. “Feasibility of using 3D CZT drift strip detectors for small Compton
camera space missions”. In: Journal of Instrumentation 19 (2024), p. C01005. ISSN:
1748­0221. DOI: 10.1088/1748-0221/19/01/c01005. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/1748-0221/19/01/c01005.
[43]
Yuto Ichinohe et al. “The first demonstration of the concept of “narrow­FOV Si/CdTe
semiconductor Compton camera””. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip­
ment 806 (2016), pp. 5–13. ISSN: 0168­9002. DOI: 10.1016/j.nima.2015.09.081.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2015.09.081.
[44]
P. Sizun et al. “The INTEGRAL/SPI response and the Crab observations”. In: (2004).
arXiv: astro-ph/0406058 [astro-ph].
[45]
Jeremy S. Perkins et al. “BurstCube: A CubeSat for Gravitational Wave Counter­
parts”. In: Proceedings of 35th International Cosmic Ray Conference — PoS(ICRC2017)
82 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:91==
Not available (2017), Not available. ISSN: Not available. DOI: 10.22323/1.301.0760.
URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.22323/1.301.0760.
[46]
Yuki Kaneko et al. “The Complete Spectral Catalog of Bright BATSE Gamma￿Ray
Bursts”. In: The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 166 (2006), pp. 298–340.
ISSN: 0067­0049, 1538­4365. DOI: 10.1086/505911. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1086/505911.
[47]
Using MEGAlib with real measurements. https://github.com/zoglauer/megalib/
blob/main/doc/MEGAlibWithMeasurements.pdf. Accessed: Apr. 2024.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
83
==PAGE:92==
84 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:93==
A
3D CZT drift strip detector geometry file
#-----------------------------------------------------------------
# 3D CZT drift strip detector geometry file
Name CZT-ENERGY_SPECTRUM
Version 1.0
SurroundingSphere 10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
# ShowSurroundingSphere true
Include /opt/megalib_4a/resource/examples/geomega/materials/Materials.geo
#------------------------------------------------------------
# Volume section:
Volume WorldVolume
WorldVolume.Material Vacuum
WorldVolume.Visibility 0
WorldVolume.Shape BRIK 500. 500. 500.
WorldVolume.Mother 0
//------------------------------------------------------------
// Define 3D
CZT
strip detector:
// One layer of the tracker
// 3DCZTStripDetector is the 40 mm x 40 mm x 5 mm CZT material
Constant DetectorHalfWidth
2.0
Constant DetectorHalfHeight 0.25
Volume CZTWafer
CZTWafer.Material CZT
CZTWafer.Visibility 1
CZTWafer.Color 6
CZTWafer.Shape BRIK
DetectorHalfWidth
DetectorHalfHeight
DetectorHalfWidth
CZTWafer.Position
2.0 0.25 2.0
CZTWafer.Mother WorldVolume
#Volume CZTWafer2
#CZTWafer2.Material CZT
#CZTWafer2.Visibility 1
#CZTWafer2.Color 4
#CZTWafer2.Shape BRIK
0.1 0.1 0.1
#CZTWafer2.Position
0. 0. 0.
#CZTWafer2.Mother WorldVolume
#------------------------------------------------------------
# Detector and trigger section:
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
85
==PAGE:94==
Voxel3D
CZTStripDetector
CZTStripDetector.DetectorVolume
CZTWafer
CZTStripDetector.SensitiveVolume
CZTWafer
CZTStripDetector.Offset 0. 0. 0.
#CZTStripDetector.Strips 20 20
CZTStripDetector.NoiseThreshold
10
CZTStripDetector.TriggerThreshold
15
#CZTStripDetector.DepthResolution
500
0.04
CZTStripDetector.VoxelNumber 100 12 100
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
10
10
1.7
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
100
100
1.5
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
700
700
2.3
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
1000
1000
3.25
#CZTStripDetector.FailureRate 0.0
Trigger Trigger_Gauss
Trigger_Gauss.Veto false
Trigger_Gauss.TriggerByChannel true
Trigger_Gauss.Detector CZTStripDetector 2
86 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:95==
B
Source file example
Version
1
Geometry
/data/home/st01/Desktop/MEGAlib_project_data/geometry/...
2L_5mm_3DCZT_40x40x5mm3.geo.setup
# Physics list
PhysicsListEM
Livermore-Pol
Run MySim
MySim.FileName
2L_5mm_3DCZT_40x40x5mm3_T5e5_1e4_Cs137_FFPS_0_0
MySim.Trigger 500000
MySim.Source Source_Cs137_FFPS
Source_Cs137_FFPS.ParticleType
1
Source_Cs137_FFPS.Beam
FarFieldPointSource 0.
0.
Source_Cs137_FFPS.Spectrum
Mono 661.6
Source_Cs137_FFPS.Flux
10000
// ph/cm s
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
87
==PAGE:96==
C
ELMO cube geometry file
#-----------------------------------------------------------------
# ELMO cube geometry
Name CZT-ENERGY_SPECTRUM
Version 1.0
SurroundingSphere 10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
# ShowSurroundingSphere true
Include /opt/megalib_4a/resource/examples/geomega/materials/Materials.geo
#------------------------------------------------------------
# Volume section:
Volume WorldVolume
WorldVolume.Material Vacuum
WorldVolume.Visibility 0
WorldVolume.Shape BRIK 100. 100. 100.
WorldVolume.Mother 0
//------------------------------------------------------------
// Define 3D
CZT
strip detector:
// One layer of the tracker
// 3DCZTStripDetector is the 40 mm x 40 mm x 5 mm CZT material
Constant DetectorHalfWidth
2.0
Constant DetectorHalfHeight 0.25
Volume CZTWafer
CZTWafer.Material CZT
CZTWafer.Visibility 1
CZTWafer.Color 6
CZTWafer.Shape BRIK
DetectorHalfWidth
DetectorHalfWidth
DetectorHalfHeight
CZTWafer.Copy CZTWafer0
CZTWafer0.Position
0.0 0.0 2.25
CZTWafer0.Mother WorldVolume
CZTWafer.Copy CZTWafer1
CZTWafer1.Position 0.0 0.0 0.75
CZTWafer1.Mother WorldVolume
CZTWafer.Copy CZTWafer2
CZTWafer2.Position 0.0 0.0 -0.75
CZTWafer2.Mother WorldVolume
CZTWafer.Copy CZTWafer3
CZTWafer3.Position 0.0 0.0 -2.25
CZTWafer3.Mother WorldVolume
CZTWafer.Copy CZTWafer4
CZTWafer4.Position 0.0 3.25 -0.5
88 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:97==
CZTWafer4.Rotation 90.0 0 0
CZTWafer4.Mother WorldVolume
CZTWafer.Copy CZTWafer6
CZTWafer6.Position 0.0 -3.25 -0.5
CZTWafer6.Rotation 90.0 0 0
CZTWafer6.Mother WorldVolume
CZTWafer.Copy CZTWafer5
CZTWafer5.Position 3.25 0.0 -0.5
CZTWafer5.Rotation 0.0 90.0 0.0
CZTWafer5.Mother WorldVolume
CZTWafer.Copy CZTWafer7
CZTWafer7.Position -3.25 0.0 -0.5
CZTWafer7.Rotation 0.0 90.0 0.0
CZTWafer7.Mother WorldVolume
//------------------------------------------------------------
// Define BGO Scintillator:
Constant ActiveShieldHalfWidth
0.4
Constant ActiveShieldHalfHeight_sides 3
Constant ActiveShieldHalfLenght_ShortSide 4
Constant ActiveShieldHalfLenght_LongSide 4.8
// Defining side layers
Volume ASWafer_LongSides
ASWafer_LongSides.Material BGO
ASWafer_LongSides.Visibility 1
ASWafer_LongSides.Color 7
ASWafer_LongSides.Shape BRIK ActiveShieldHalfLenght_LongSide ...
ActiveShieldHalfWidth ActiveShieldHalfHeight_sides
ASWafer_LongSides.Copy ASWafer_LongSides1
ASWafer_LongSides1.Position 0 4.4 0
ASWafer_LongSides1.Mother WorldVolume
ASWafer_LongSides.Copy ASWafer_LongSides2
ASWafer_LongSides2.Position 0 -4.4 0
ASWafer_LongSides2.Mother WorldVolume
Volume ASWafer_ShortSides
ASWafer_ShortSides.Material BGO
ASWafer_ShortSides.Visibility 1
ASWafer_ShortSides.Color 7
ASWafer_ShortSides.Shape BRIK ActiveShieldHalfWidth ...
ActiveShieldHalfLenght_ShortSide ActiveShieldHalfHeight_sides
ASWafer_ShortSides.Copy ASWafer_ShortSides1
ASWafer_ShortSides1.Position 4.4 0 0
ASWafer_ShortSides1.Mother WorldVolume
ASWafer_ShortSides.Copy ASWafer_ShortSides2
ASWafer_ShortSides2.Position -4.4 0 0
ASWafer_ShortSides2.Mother WorldVolume
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
89
==PAGE:98==
// Defining bottom layer
Volume ASWafer_bottom
ASWafer_bottom.Material BGO
ASWafer_bottom.Visibility 1
ASWafer_bottom.Color 7
ASWafer_bottom.Shape BRIK ActiveShieldHalfLenght_LongSide ...
ActiveShieldHalfLenght_LongSide ActiveShieldHalfWidth
ASWafer_bottom.Copy ASWafer_bottom1
ASWafer_bottom1.Position 0 0 -3.4
ASWafer_bottom1.Mother WorldVolume
#------------------------------------------------------------
# Detector and trigger section:
Voxel3D
CZTStripDetector
CZTStripDetector.DetectorVolume
CZTWafer
CZTStripDetector.SensitiveVolume
CZTWafer
CZTStripDetector.Offset 0.02 0.02 0.02
#CZTStripDetector.Strips 20 20
CZTStripDetector.NoiseThreshold
10
CZTStripDetector.TriggerThreshold
15
// 0.4 mm FWHM position resolution in all 3 dimensions
#CZTStripDetector.DepthResolution
500
0.04
CZTStripDetector.VoxelNumber 100 100 12
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
10
10
1.7
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
100
100
1.5
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
700
700
2.3
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
1000
1000
3.25
// Scintillator Resolution
Scintillator
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides.DetectorVolume
ASWafer_LongSides
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides.SensitiveVolume
ASWafer_LongSides
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides.TriggerThreshold
80
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold
true
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides.EnergyResolution Gauss 200 200 12.77
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides.EnergyResolution Gauss 662 662 18.31
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000 1000 42.55
Scintillator
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides.DetectorVolume
ASWafer_ShortSides
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides.SensitiveVolume
ASWafer_ShortSides
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides.TriggerThreshold
80
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold
true
90 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:99==
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides.EnergyResolution Gauss 200 200 12.77
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides.EnergyResolution Gauss 662 662 18.31
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000 1000 42.55
Scintillator
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom.DetectorVolume
ASWafer_bottom
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom.SensitiveVolume
ASWafer_bottom
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom.TriggerThreshold
15
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold
true
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom.EnergyResolution Gauss 200 200 12.77
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom.EnergyResolution Gauss 662 662 18.31
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000 1000 42.55
#CZTStripDetector.FailureRate 0.0
#------------------------------------------------------------
# Trigger Definitions:
Trigger triggerCZT
// Define trigger with name
triggerCZT.Veto false
// true: veto/rejection trigger
// false: real/acceptance trigger
triggerCZT.TriggerByChannel true
// true: trigger channel wise
triggerCZT.DetectorType Voxel3D 2
// Hits required to raise trigger
// Active Shielding veto detections:
Trigger Veto0
Veto0.Veto
true
Veto0.TriggerByDetector
true
Veto0.Detector
BGO_ActiveShield_ShortSides 1
Trigger Veto1
Veto1.Veto
true
Veto1.TriggerByDetector
true
Veto1.Detector
BGO_ActiveShield_LongSides 1
Trigger Veto2
Veto2.Veto
true
Veto2.TriggerByDetector
true
Veto2.Detector
BGO_ActiveShield_Bottom 1
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
91
==PAGE:100==
D
Fitted ARM for Crab only simulations
20
−
15
−
10
−
5
−
0
5
10
15
20
]°
ARM - Compton cone [
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
counts
ARM (Compton cone)
Figure D.1: On­axis GRB 990411 simulation, complete FOV.
20
−
15
−
10
−
5
−
0
5
10
15
20
]°
ARM - Compton cone [
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
counts
ARM (Compton cone)
Figure D.2: On­axis GRB 990411 simulation, complete FOV.
92 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:101==
20
−
15
−
10
−
5
−
0
5
10
15
20
]°
ARM - Compton cone [
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
counts
ARM (Compton cone)
Figure D.3: On­axis GRB 990411 simulation, complete FOV.
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
93
==PAGE:102==
E
Y­position linear fit parameters
Table E.1: y­position as a function of electron charge cloud drift time linear fit parameter
values for each anode.
Anode nr.
α
β
1
0.005552
1.003993
2
0.005475
1.196129
3
0.006175
0.807486
4
0.006059
0.877056
5
0.006087
0.879900
6
0.005478
1.055213
7
0.005725
0.904801
8
0.005689
0.872713
9
0.005736
0.865332
10
0.005585
0.889240
11
0.005592
0.854937
12
0.005631
0.808978
13
0.005706
0.869076
14
0.005615
0.765700
15
0.005871
0.746861
16
0.005600
0.912113
17
0.005708
0.801021
18
0.005829
0.815181
19
0.005477
0.928238
20
0.005794
0.920466
21
0.005639
0.863985
22
0.005492
0.979274
23
0.005529
0.873750
24
0.005377
0.807622
94 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:103==
F
Experimental setup in MEGAlib ­
geometry file
#-----------------------------------------------------------------
# 3D CZT drift strip detector geometry file
Name CZT-ENERGY_SPECTRUM
Version 1.0
SurroundingSphere 10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
# ShowSurroundingSphere true
Include /opt/megalib_4a/resource/examples/geomega/materials/Materials.geo
#------------------------------------------------------------
# Volume section:
Volume WorldVolume
WorldVolume.Material Vacuum
WorldVolume.Visibility 0
WorldVolume.Shape BRIK 500. 500. 500.
WorldVolume.Mother 0
//------------------------------------------------------------
// Define 3D
CZT
strip detector:
// One layer of the tracker
// 3DCZTStripDetector is the 40 mm x 40 mm x 5 mm CZT material
Constant DetectorHalfWidth
2.0
Constant DetectorHalfHeight 0.25
Volume CZTWafer
CZTWafer.Material CZT
CZTWafer.Visibility 1
CZTWafer.Color 6
CZTWafer.Shape BRIK
DetectorHalfWidth
DetectorHalfHeight
DetectorHalfWidth
CZTWafer.Position
2.0 0.25 2.0
CZTWafer.Mother WorldVolume
#Volume CZTWafer2
#CZTWafer2.Material CZT
#CZTWafer2.Visibility 1
#CZTWafer2.Color 4
#CZTWafer2.Shape BRIK
0.1 0.1 0.1
#CZTWafer2.Position
0. 0. 0.
#CZTWafer2.Mother WorldVolume
#------------------------------------------------------------
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
95
==PAGE:104==
# Detector and trigger section:
Voxel3D
CZTStripDetector
CZTStripDetector.DetectorVolume
CZTWafer
CZTStripDetector.SensitiveVolume
CZTWafer
CZTStripDetector.Offset 0. 0. 0.
#CZTStripDetector.Strips 20 20
CZTStripDetector.NoiseThreshold
10
CZTStripDetector.TriggerThreshold
15
#CZTStripDetector.DepthResolution
500
0.04
CZTStripDetector.VoxelNumber 100 12 100
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
10
10
1.7
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
100
100
1.5
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
700
700
2.3
CZTStripDetector.EnergyResolution
Gauss
1000
1000
3.25
#CZTStripDetector.FailureRate 0.0
Trigger Trigger_Gauss
Trigger_Gauss.Veto false
Trigger_Gauss.TriggerByChannel true
Trigger_Gauss.Detector CZTStripDetector 2
96 Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
==PAGE:105==
G
Simulated setup in MEGAlib ­ source
file
Version
1
Geometry
/data/home/st01/Desktop/MEGAlib_project_data/geometry/...
3DCZT_40x40x5mm3.geo.setup
# Physics list
PhysicsListEM
LivermorePol
Run MySim
MySim.FileName
3DCZT_40x40x5mm3_experimentalSetUp_Trig_10000
MySim.Trigger 10000
MySim.Source Cs137_PS
Cs137_PS.ParticleType
1
Cs137_PS.Beam
RestrictedPointSource 2. 0.25
199.
Cs137_PS.Spectrum
Mono 661.6
Cs137_PS.Flux
100
// particles/s
Design, simulation, and experimental evaluation of a Compton Camera instrument based on 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors
97
==PAGE:106==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, building 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.space.dtu.dk/english/
