==PAGE:1==
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy sys-
tems: a prospective material flow analysis on a
Danish case study
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a
Danish case study
Master Thesis
April, 2023
By
Bruna Catarina Alexandre Mateus
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary biblio-
graphic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygningstorvet, Build-
ing 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The increasing demand for renewable energy has accelerated the photovoltaic (PV) energy deployment,
leading to an exponential growth over the past decade. Alongside this expansion, increasing concerns
arise regarding the unprecedented waste streams, which are due to arise, with the future decommission-
ing of PV systems. As a resource-intensive technology, the disposal of PV waste presents significant
environmental challenges, yet also offers opportunities for value creation.
This study utilizes a case study PV system currently under construction in Denmark, to estimate future
post-decommissioning waste flows, encompassing both PV modules and the Balance of System (BoS).
Using the Bill of Quantities (BoQ) of the ongoing construction project and supplier data, complemented
by available literature, a waste inventory is estimated. Waste handling practices are explored through
conversations with industry experts, and data is gathered on recycling efficiencies informed by available
literature. Employing the Material Flow Analysis (MFA) methodology, a comparison is drawn between
prospective scenarios, which represent baseline, optimistic and pessimistic waste handling approaches.
Mass-based recovery rates and the quality of recovered material are assessed as performance indicators.
Findings reveal a high potential for material recyclability and recovery in end-of-life (EoL) PV systems
within the assessed market. Although the baseline scenario already displays effective recycling practices
for PV waste originating from Denmark, the optimistic scenario shows greater promise for closed-loop
recycling and value-recovery. PV modules and steel structures emerge as the primary mass contributors
of the assessed inventory, with PV modules treatment leading to the most significant variation across
scenarios, associated with the dynamic developments of this technology.
Finally, this study serves as a preliminary investigation in mapping the recycling value chain and lays the
groundwork for further environmental assessments, namely, a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA).
ii
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my supervisors, for all the guidance and support through-
out the execution of this project. To Anders and Gloria, thank you for all the insightful discussions and
advice towards my research. To Rita, thank you for sharing my excitement in this project and, to Inês,
thank you for the invaluable feedback throughout – to both, I am specially thankful for the patience and
the constant availability. I would also like to thank my thesis support group, for the shared doubts and
findings, and for being a relatable bunch!
I would like to extend my thanks to my friends, both in Denmark and back home, for the study sessions,
the long breaks/chats and, above all, for the encouragement. To my family, whom I am always blessed
to have by my side, obrigada por tudo! A special mention goes to my brother, for believing in me when
I couldn’t, and for always putting things into perspective.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Photovoltaics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Components and resource use in PV systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
End-of-Life PV systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Waste management in EU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Recycling technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Materials and Methodology
13
3.1
Scope and case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Relevant terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Material Flow Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.1
System definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.2
Scenario definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4.3
Modelling choices and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.4
Data quality and uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results
19
5
Discussion
29
5.1
Analysis of waste flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Data quality and uncertainty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Considerations for the development of an LCA as a next step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Opportunities and challenges for circularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Conclusions
35
6.1
Future work and recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Bibliography
37
A Waste composition (confidential)
41
B
Expert conversations (confidential)
42
C Flow inventories
43
D Data quality indicators
64
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
EU cumulative solar PV installed capacity from 2000 to 2023 [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Solar PV technology status [23]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
First generation c-si PV module composition. Extracted from [24].
. . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Illustration of a typical ground-mount utility-scale solar PV installation [25]. . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Waste hierarchy adopted by the Waste Framework Directive. Retrieved from [34] . . . .
9
2.5
Mechanical processing of PV panels [39]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
Stouby solar park location as seen in Google Maps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Simplified system boundaries from gate to grave applied for the waste fractions. . . . . .
16
4.1
MFA results from baseline scenario. Unit: kg/MW. The flows are color coded based
on the source of data used: primary data (in black), estimations based on documented
secondary data (in gray), assumptions (in orange) and mass balances (in green). . . . . .
20
4.2
MFA results from optimistic scenario. Unit: kg/MW. The flows are color coded based
on the source of data used: primary data (in black), estimations based on documented
secondary data (in gray), assumptions (in orange) and mass balances (in green). . . . . .
21
4.3
MFA results from pessimistic scenario. Unit: kg/MW. The flows are color coded based
on the source of data used: primary data (in black), estimations based on documented
secondary data (in gray), assumptions (in orange) and mass balances (in green). . . . . .
22
4.4
Sankey diagram representing input waste flow and output flow types of the baseline sce-
nario.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Sankey diagram representing input waste flow and output flow types of the optimistic
scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6
Sankey diagram representing input waste flow and output flow types of the pessimistic
scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
vi
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
3.1
Data sources used to build the waste inventory. (Decommissioning study refers to a cost
analysis report commissioned by EE, which provided estimations on the installed quan-
tities in the company’s PV parks in Denmark.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Estimated waste inventory based on installed components in the case study PV park.
. .
14
3.3
Definition and glass example for the different cascading levels adapted from Thomassen
et al. [24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Key data sources used in the MFA scenarios.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1
Recovery and recycling amounts per fraction and per scenario. Recovery rates include
recycled materials and recovered materials for energy recovery. Reused components are
not included.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Cascading level of outputs per scenario, categorized according to Figure 3.3 (N/A: not
assessed)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1
Life expentancy of PV system components based on [57]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Non-assessed (N/A) fractions, corresponding to flows labeled as ”residues and possible
secondary products”. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Data quality scores for waste composition according to Weidema & Wesnæs [55] (See
Appendix D). (Note: R: reliability, C: completeness, TC: temporal correlation, GC: ge-
ographical correlation, FTC: further technological correlation.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
C.1
Flow inventory for baseline scenario. P, F refer to processes and flows, respectively; TC
refers to transfer coefficients; CL refers to cascading level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
C.2
Flow inventory for optimistic scenario. P, F refer to processes and flows, respectively;
TC refers to transfer coefficients; CL refers to cascading level. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
C.3
Flow inventory for pessimistic scenario. P, F refer to processes and flows, respectively;
TC refers to transfer coefficients; CL refers to cascading level. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
D.1
Pedigree matrix with 5 data quality indicators retrieved from Weidema & Wesnæs [55]. .
65
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
vii
==PAGE:10==
Abbreviations
BF-BOF Blast Furnace - Basic Oxygen Furnace
BFR Brominated Flame Retardants
BoQ Bill of Quantities
BoS Balance of System
CL Cascading Level
CRM Critical Raw Materials
CSP Concentrated Solar PV
c-si Crystalline silicon
EAF Electric Arc Furnace
EE European Energy A/S
EoL End of Life
EPD Environmental Product Declaration
EPR Extended Producer Responsability
ERP European Recycling Platform
EU European Union
EVA Ethylene Vinyl Acetate
FRELP Full Recovery End-of-Life Photovoltaic
GHG Green House Gas
HV High voltage
IEA International Energy Agency
LCA Life Cycle Assessment
LCI Life Cycle Inventory
N/A Non-Assessed
MAV Mature Achievable Value
MFA Material Flow Analysis
MV Medium voltage
PCB Polychlorinated Biphenyls
PCBA Printed Circut Board Assembly
POP Persistent Organic Pollutants
PV Photovoltaics
R&D Research and Development
SRM Secondary Raw Material
TC Transfer Coefficient
WEEE Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment
WtE Waste-to-Energy
viii
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Basis for energy sector decarbonization
The increasing global demand for energy, driven by expanding populations and industrialization, has led
to an increased reliance on fossil fuels, which for the past decades have accounted for around 80% of the
global energy consumption share [1]. In fact, the increasing combustion of fossil fuels is today the main
cause of climate change [2, 3], and the primary driver of air pollution, to which over 90% of the global
population is exposed to [1]. The urgent need to address these environmental challenges has sparked a
global push for decarbonization in the energy sector.
The renewable energy industry has been fast-growing since the start of the century [4, 5] , and, incen-
tivized by climate and energy targets set by policies like the Paris Agreement – an international treaty on
climate change – it is now gaining momentum and its global share is set to significantly increase by 2030
[1] . Indeed, the world’s capacity to generate renewable electricity is expanding faster than at any time
in the last three decades [6] , with renewables being set to provide more than one-third of total electricity
generation globally by early 2025, overtaking coal [7].
In the European Union (EU), where the energy sector is responsible for over 70% of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions [8, 9] , a commitment to combat climate change is evident in policies like the EU
Greendeal, which aims to reach climate neutrality by 2050. More recently, the EU has had another
motivation in the transition to renewable energy, attributed to the geopolitical tensions with Russia [10,
5] . This way, the REPowerEU plan was established with the intention to rapidly decrease the EU’s
dependency on Russian fossil fuels, by raising its clean energy ambition and placing energy security at
the forefront of its transition plans [11].
Photovoltaic technology
Solar photovoltaic (PV) technology is the largest contributor to the recent increase in renewable elec-
tricity generation [7]. Followed by wind power, these technologies are being installed at a rate that is
three times faster than all other new electricity sources combined [12]. With their deployment increasing
exponentially, they are proving to be the most competitive and practical methods for deploying new gen-
erating capacity [12]. Still, solar PV shows unequalled deployment capabilities and is leading the way in
reducing the EU’s dependency on Russian fossil fuels and changing the overall global electricity system
[10].
The PV industry expansion over the last decade (Figure 1.1) has been driven by technological advance-
ments and economies of scale, resulting in drastic cost reductions [5]. A big advantage of this technology
is its modular nature, which offers scalability and flexibility for a wide range of applications, meeting
small and large electrical power needs, thereby contributing to its widespread adoption across diverse sec-
tors and allowing for decentralized energy production. Other factors contributing to the fast deployment
of PV energy are the relatively quick installation and its adaptability to most geographic locations.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: EU cumulative solar PV installed capacity from 2000 to 2023 [5]
The European market has been having annual growth rates of at least 40% in the past 3 years, having
installed nearly 60 GW of PV capacity in 2023 alone. Countries like Germany, Spain and Italy are leading
the way with the highest amounts of installed capacity, and so is the Netherlands with the highest installed
PV capacity per capita [5]. Besides the RePower EU and the EU GreenDeal schemes, which encourage
the deployment of this technology, the European Commission endorsed the creation of a new European
Solar PV Industry Alliance in 2022 to ensure investment opportunities for European solar PVs and to
help diversify the supply chains to retain more value in Europe and deliver efficient and sustainable PV
products. One ambitious objective of this alliance is to reach 30 GW of European manufacturing capacity
by 2025, across the entire PV value chain.
Challenges with photovoltaics
While PV systems are regarded as a clean and sustainable energy source [13], they are not free of adverse
environmental consequences such as biodiversity and habitat loss associated with the land requirements
for large scale installations, and even climatic effects and pollution associated with the manufacturing of
solar panels [14].
More recently, the fast expanding photovoltaic sector has been facing new challenges. For one, renew-
able energy technologies typically have high and diverse metal requirements [15] and solar PV is no
exception. Despite not relying on primary raw materials for its operation, this technology is significantly
more metal intensive than conventional technologies that primarily rely on fossil fuels [16]. Thus, the
increase in demand for specific metals associated with the expansion of the PV industry can lead to sup-
ply chain bottlenecks and limit further growth and integration. Some of these metals and minerals are
listed as critical raw materials (CRM) according to the EU critical raw materials act, which classifies such
materials as being of ”high economic importance for the EU, with a high risk of supply disruption due to
their concentration of sources and lack of good, affordable substitutes” [17].
2
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:13==
Not only that, the industry heavily relies on imports from Asia, with the competitive prices making it
hard to establish new markets. In fact, China’s share in all the manufacturing stages of solar panels, such
as polysilicon, ingots, wafers, cells and modules, currently exceeds 80% [18].
Another upcoming problem in the PV industry is related to the coming surge in PV module waste. With
the expansion of the global PV industry, the quantity of decommissioned PV panels will also rise, and
while today the volume of panels awaiting recycling remains low, since this waste comes from early
failure during installation and operation [19], it is predicted that global PV panel waste will reach 60 to
78 million tonnes by 2050, with the decommissioning of end-of-life (EoL) PV systems [20]. The negli-
gence to treat this resource-heavy waste product can pose potential harm from the release of hazardous
substances and the loss of scarce mineral resources [14]. Besides the rising waste from PV modules,
the remaining components of the system, i.e. the balance of system (BoS), pose another wave of waste
streams that will need to be accounted for. The BoS is often overlooked in environmental studies of PV
technologies and systems [21]. However, the BoS can have a significant share in the installed system and
considerable environmental impacts and, thus, it should be included in such environmental studies [21].
1.2
Aim and Objectives
The purpose of this project is to quantitatively estimate the waste flows succeeding the decommissioning
of a utility PV system. The study employs a well established environmental engineering tool, the Mate-
rial Flow Analysis (MFA), to visualize the waste streams, using a Danish solar PV park currently under
construction by European Energy A/S (EE) as a case study. A prospective baseline scenario is developed,
drawing on the company’s current operations in Denmark and available literature, and a comparison is
drawn with optimistic and pessimistic scenarios. This study is done in collaboration with the Sustain-
ability Department at EE and has the intention to serve as a basis for a future environmental study, a
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), to assess the environmental impacts of the waste generated by the com-
pany’s solar PV parks, with a geographical scope in Denmark and a temporal scope in around 30 years,
an expected time frame for the operation of solar PV parks [20], after which they would enter EoL.
The aim of this project can therefore be expressed through the following research question:
What are the estimated post-decommissioning waste flows of a solar PV system built today in Denmark
under different prospective scenarios?
This can be broken down into the following sub-questions:
• Which data and data quality gaps can be identified?
• What are the reuse, recovery and recycling rates for different waste fractions?
• What is the expected quality of the recycled materials?
• What are some considerations to have for the development of an LCA based on the present study?
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Photovoltaics
2.1.1
Components and resource use in PV systems
As aforementioned, PV installations vary in scale and application. Residential systems, typically roof-
mounted or building-integrated, usually have a capacity of several kilowatts (kW) and can also be installed
off-grid in remote locations. Commercial PV systems are similar, but larger, installed to meet the energy
requirements of a company reaching several megawatts (MW) of capacity. Utility-scale systems are
larger ground-mounted installations in open fields with a capacity of tens to hundreds of MW, or even
several gigawatts (GW), with the purpose of supplying power to the utility grid. Besides traditional PV
systems, other types of systems exist, such as concentrated solar PV (CSP) and floating PV.
Photovoltaic systems are composed by two types of components, the solar PV module, which generates
energy through the photoelectric phenomenon, and the BoS, which is here defined as all components of
a photovoltaic system other than the photovoltaic panels. While the BoS varies greatly depending on
the system, it can be described as a group of mechanical, structural, electrical and electronic components
responsible for the energy output adjustment, connection to the grid and the overall proper functioning
of the system.
PV modules
Different PV technologies exist today (Figure 2.1), with two main technologies being used at commer-
cial scale: (mono- and poly-) crystalline silicon technology (c-si), and thin film technologies, such as
cadmium telluride (CdTe), and copper indium diselenide (CIS). Today, the c-si technology dominates
the PV market, with a 95% production market share [22]. This can be attributed to the maturity of this
first-generation technology, its steadily-increasing efficiency and the price drop of polysilicon since 2012
[23]. Specifically, the mono-crystalline technology comprises the majority of the total c-Si production
[22]. Despite the lower production costs of the second generation thin film technology, its overall market
share has decreased over the years due to its lower efficiency and the eventual economies of scale of the
c-si technology [23]. Figure 2.1 shows the status of the different technologies present in the industry
today.
Figure 2.1: Solar PV technology status [23].
A PV module consists of solar cells made of semiconductor material, covered on the front surface by
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
5
==PAGE:16==
a transparent and anti-reflective material, to maximize sunlight absorption, and a reflective layer on the
back surface to redirect any escaped sunlight back into the cells. To protect the delicate solar cells from
environmental factors, the entire assembly can be encapsulated in a weather-resistant and durable mate-
rial, usually tempered glass, with a protective backsheet [18]. Additionally, a frame made of aluminum
or other sturdy materials surrounding the edges can provide structural support. Figure 2.2 depicts the
composition of a crystalline silicon (c-si) PV module, the most common type of PV modules produced
today.
Figure 2.2: First generation c-si PV module composition. Extracted from [24].
The semiconductor material used in PV cells is metallurgical grade silicon or polysilicon. Besides the
bulk materials that make a c-si module, other materials are in used in small concentrations: copper is used
in interconnectors, silver is used in contact lines and, in even smaller proportions, tin and lead are used
for solder and ribbon coating purposes. Traces of antimony are also used in solar-grade glass to enhance
its optical performance and in the encapsulant as a polymerization catalyst [18].
Interestingly, S-ci modules, despite being the most developed and commercialized PV technology, require
more material overall when compared to the other technologies [15], but significant improvements in
material intensity have been achieved in the past two decades for key materials, such as polysilicon and
silver [18].
Progress in R&D (research and development) is being made in both existing and emerging technologies,
with the current focus being the increase in their efficiency. From a technical perspective, this will allow
for reduced amounts in transport, land area and wire and cabling lengths per unit of produced energy.
Balance of System
The BoS of a utility-scale PV system includes components such as inverters, transformers, wiring and
support structures, which are addressed below. Figure 2.3 shows a diagram of a typical ground-mount
array, for reference.
PV inverters. A solar panel produces direct current, which the inverter converts into alternating current,
the frequency used by the electric grid. String inverters are usually used in utility-scale PV plants, con-
trolling the power from a number of modules [26]. Otherwise, these systems can make use of central
inverters, which are larger and connect to one combiner box, with directs the total DC power from vari-
ous individual strings of PV modules to the central inverter. This electronic device is composed of metals
like copper, aluminum and steel, the printed circuit board assembly (PCBA) – consisting of the printed
wiring board itself and the electrical components mounted to it –, along with other individual compo-
nents, such as plugs, cables, polypropylene and inductor [27]. The trend is to produce lighter inverters
with less copper [28].
6
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of a typical ground-mount utility-scale solar PV installation [25].
Transformers. Energy grids operate at medium or high voltage levels. Power transformers step up the
output voltage from inverters before supplying the generated power to the grid. The active components
of a transformer consist of elements that directly interact with voltage and current. These components
primarily include the windings, which are typically made from copper or aluminum coils, and the core,
which is the heaviest part of the transformer and is made of magnetic steel [29, 30]. There are liquid-
filled and dry-type transformers, the first uses a liquid like mineral oil as the insulating medium, while
the second uses air. In fact, to increase fire resistance, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were com-
monly added to the oil in older transformers [30]. However, the Stockholm Convention an international
environmental treaty signed in 2001 to help the decrease of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in the
environment, prohibits any new PCB production and the phasing out of electrical equipment that contains
high concentrations of PCBs by 2025.Large-scale oil-type transformers are usually supported by concrete
foundations, which impede any oil leakage to permeate the soil.
Cabling Aluminum and copper cables are used in PV plants to connect the PV panels with the inverters
and the transformers, and to connect the system to the electrical grid. The main materials used are copper,
aluminum, insulation materials, and plastics [26].
Mounting structure. Supporting structures are typically made of galvanized steel, i.e. steel that is coated
in zinc to provide enhanced corrosion resistance, although aluminum can sometimes be used, and concrete
footings are sometimes necessary to support these structures. Due to the extraction, processing, and
transportation, they can be the largest source of carbon emissions in the BoS [31]. The mounting structure
largely varies from project to project, taking into account the geographical location, site conditions and
project budget [32]. Bifacial modules, which can generate power from both sides of panels, may require
higher mounting structures, since they require a certain amount of light to be collected by the backside of
the PV module [32]. Instead of fixed-mounted structures, tracking systems can be used to adjust the angle
or orientation of solar panels throughout the day to track the sun’s movement. According to Domínguez &
Geyer [26], while tracking systems can significantly increase energy generation by maximizing sunlight
exposure, they are more complex and resource-intensive, using 10% more aluminum or 50% more steel
and zinc and 30% more copper than ﬁxed mounting structures [26].
Other components and structures. Additional equipment and facilities are also used in large-scale ground-
mounted installations. Monitoring and control systems are used to track performance and ensure safety,
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
7
==PAGE:18==
as well as facilitate grid integration. These systems include sensors, communication devices, and soft-
ware that require materials such as electronic components and plastics. Switchgear, composed of metal-
enclosed circuit breakers, fuses, and power conductors, is used to control, protect and isolate electrical
equipment. Office facilities are also necessary for the operation and maintenance of the park.
The deployment of PV energy requires a significant resource investment, before a PV system can op-
erate for around 30 years [20]. Due to the resource intensiveness of PV systems, their EoL can lead
to significant environmental burdens, dooming what could otherwise be a green technology. Instead, if
handled carefully, EoL can avoid negative environmental impacts and even generate opportunities for
value creation and socio-economic benefits [20].
2.1.2
End-of-Life PV systems
At EoL, a utility scale PV system might be repowered - partly or fully - or it might be decommissioned,
with the removal of all equipment and redevelopment of the land for other purposes. The International
Energy Agency (IEA) [4] suggests that decommission will be rare in the future for PV systems in gen-
eral, due to land use constraints and other factors which encourage repowering. However, this decision
depends on factors such as project profitability, energy sales, re-negotiation of the land lease, land use
permitting, and system condition [33]. In the case of the latter, an option could be a full repowering. This
would require the removal of the entire installation, allowing for a system upgrade supported by newer
technologies and a higher overall performance.
Despite the decision to extend the life of a PV installation or to decommission it all together, large amounts
of waste will likely be generated at this stage. The waste handling involves the disconnection and dis-
mantling of the equipment, collection and transportation to different treatment or disposal facilities across
different industries and according to local legislation
2.2
Waste management in EU
In the EU, waste management is guided by the Waste Framework Directive (Directive 2008/98/EC) [34],
a directive that applies to all waste and serves as the foundation for waste management policies and
practices within the EU member states.
According to this directive, waste management in the EU follows a five-step waste hierarchy, often rep-
resented as an inverted pyramid (as illustrated in Figure 2.4), which establishes an order of preference
for managing and disposing of waste, with prevention being the preferred option, and sending waste to
landfill being the last resort. While ”prevention” refers to measures taken before a product becomes
waste, ”preparing to re-use” refers to waste that has been checked, cleaned or repaired so that it can be
reused without further processing. ”Recycling” refers to recovery operations that result in a material or
substance, not including energy recovery, while (other) ”recovery” refers to the use of operations which
result in waste serving a useful purpose by replacing other materials which would otherwise be used to
fulfill such function - this includes energy recovery. Finally, ”disposal” means any operation that is not
recovery (even if any recovery exists as a secondary consequence) [34].
8
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.4: Waste hierarchy adopted by the Waste Framework Directive. Retrieved from [34]
More specific waste directives and policies exist in the EU, setting requirements and guidance for specific
types of waste, some of which are relevant for the PV industry and are hereby mentioned, although not-
exhaustively. An example is the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) directive, which
applies to waste such as PV modules, inverters, and any existing connection cables. In fact, while some
parts of the world lack in specific legislation for handling EoL PV panels, typically handling them as
general waste [35], the EU has been a world pioneer in creating legislation for PV waste management,
by including it in this directive. Since 2012, the WEEE directive requires 85% recovery and 80% recy-
cling/preparation for reuse of the collected PV modules. In the case of inverters, these rates are 75% and
55% respectively [36].
The Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) framework is an environmental policy which serves to
ensure that producers (or importers) of products bear financial and/or organizational responsibility for
the management of the waste stage of a product’s life cycle. This framework applies for waste such as
electronic waste, and therefore applies for waste under the WEEE directive. Member States are required
to ensure that producers (or importers) meet the minimum targets and report on it - in Denmark, DPA
(Dansk Producent Ansvar) is responsible for this.
The WEEE directive excludes equipment from large-scale fixed installations, which includes a large share
of transformers, switchgear, and other industrial size equipment used in electrical substations. However,
the directive might still apply at product level, at a later stage in the waste handling, such as electric metal
scrap [37].
The Waste Framework Directive also includes end-of-waste criteria which establishes a set of rules for
some waste-derived materials to be treated as primary raw materials after treatment, losing their waste
status. Regulations currently exist for scrap iron, steel and aluminum, for glass cullet and for copper
scrap [34]. To avoid the loss of secondary raw materials and the uncontrolled movement of toxic waste,
the EU has recently adopted a proposal for a new regulation on waste shipments [34].
Another directive worth mentioning is the Ecodesign directive, which sets a range of requirements for
manufacturers that require considerations on environmental aspects at all stages of the product develop-
ment process, striving for products to have the lowest possible environmental impact throughout their
life cycle. Examples of such requirements are related to durability, reparability and reciclability, as well
as the presence of substances that inhibit circularity [38].
2.2.1
Recycling technologies
A non-comprehensive overview of the recycling technologies involved with some waste types generated
at the EoL of PV systems is addressed in this section.
PV module waste recycling
Landfilling of PV modules, which could lead to land use impacts and possibly soil and groundwater
contamination from leaks of materials like cadmium, lead and selenium [39], is not an acceptable practice
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
9
==PAGE:20==
in the EU. Incinerating PV panels should also be avoided, as it not only releases harmful gases and
dust, but also does not allow for the recovery of materials [39]. In contrast, new technologies focus on
recovering materials for future manufacturing and to replace energy-intensive processes involved in the
production of certain materials, in line with a circular economy model. The preferred option would be
to extend the life of EoL solar panels through resale, after quality tests have been performed to ensure
electrical safety and power output [20].
Like other electronic waste, PV modules can be recycled through bulk or mass recycling or through high-
value recycling. The first focuses on recovering high-mass fractions, like glass and aluminum, leaving
other masses of materials mixed or uncovered. This type of recycling allows for significant volumes
of materials to be reclaimed in order to reduce the overall environmental impact of waste. The second
prioritizes the recovery of valuable trace materials, with the goal to extract materials that have a high
economic or environmental value [40].
In the EU, the trend is towards high-value recycling. Specific materials in solar panels were previously
recovered depending on the market value, material shortages or legislation for minimum recovery re-
quirements, while now the interest is shifting to recovering as many materials as possible, towards a
more circular economy [35].
The process of recycling PV modules starts with a preparation or disassembly step, where the junction
box and the aluminum frame are mechanically or manually removed. After this, the module is processed
through a mechanical, thermal or chemical process, or a combination of these. Available literature on
these processes is abundant and numerous patents are being created to further develop these technologies,
with the biggest challenge being polymers used in the modules, which are the hardest part to tackle in
the recycling process - they are difficult to recycle and are economically unviable [35]. Each of these
pathways is explained below.
Mechanical processing. The mechanical processing can be done in two ways. The module can be shred-
ded through a mechanical process, or, the EVA delamination can be done first through a thermal or
chemical process, separating the glass without breaking it, after which the remaining can be crushed or
shredded. The parts that were shredded or crushed together can be sorted into plastic and metal fractions,
and in the former case, glass fractions. A diagram for this can be seen below.
Figure 2.5: Mechanical processing of PV panels [39]
Thermal processing. This approach consists of thermally decomposing/burning the EVA layer and the
backsheet, therefore separating the glass from the PV cells. This process is efficient, and it has the
advantage of recovering up to 85% of reusable cells, due to avoided damage and allowing for energy
recovery. One disadvantage is the production of hazardous gases, such as hydrogen fluoride present in
10
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:21==
the backsheet [41].
Chemical processing. This pathway involves treating the module with an etching solution which dissolves
the EVA encapsulant and allows for the extraction and recovery of metals. This is an expensive method
due to the use of expensive solvents and their disposal, the time needed for the chemicals to act. The
process requires, mechanical, electrical and thermal energy, and it has gas emissions to take into account
[40].
Following the processing at the first facility, the recovered materials are transported to other designated
locations such as smelters, processing factories, and secondary markets for further recycling or process-
ing [39, 35]. However, according to IEA [42], it appears that crystalline silicon PV cell materials and
plastics/polymers are not currently recycled.
In Europe, the mechanical approach is the one currently commercialized. However, the treatment capac-
ity for PV modules is not very large, and the glass recovered is recycled as a low-grade product [35].
However, material recovery rates are currently not influenced by the material value or their secondary
functions [24]. Preparing for future mass treatments, the focus in new technology is to develop economi-
cal processes, achieve higher recovery/recycling rates, and improve the quality of the recovered materials
[35].
E-waste recycling
Electronic waste, the case of inverters and other electronic equipment used in monitoring and in grid
integration, is treated in specialized e-waste facilities. Similarly to PV module waste, E-waste contains a
range of materials, such as plastics, ceramics, metals and glass [43], some of which can be systematically
recovered, thus making this waste stream a resource of raw materials. Metals of value are found concen-
trated in waste PCBA with a metal composition of approximately 30%, whereas the remaining fraction
are non-metals, such as plastics, ceramics and resins. While metals like structural steel are important in
terms of mass recycling, high purity metals, such as electric copper, found in PCBAs are important in
value recycling [44]. Devices are first dismantled to remove any specific components such as batteries,
which could cause damage and contamination if mixed with other components. Next, all other compo-
nents are shredded and then sorted using different mechanisms. These include manual sorting, magnetic
separators for the recovery of ferrous metals, eddy-current separators to extract non-ferrous metals and
optical sorters [43]. Metal fractions are then sent to specialized recycling facilities for smelting [45].
The plastic fractions undergo melting processing methods like extrusion, primarily to produce pellets or
for injection molding, depending on the intended product. At present, the quality of secondary WEEE
plastic is low, and consequently downcycled – i.e., reduced in quality and/or functionality – for applica-
tions in external furniture and planters [46]. Depending on the type of plastic, repeated cycles of melt
processing, lead to the degradation and shortening of the polymer chains, rendering them unsuitable for
further processing with the same technique. Consequently, this situation often culminates in the disposal
of plastics in landfills [43]. Another hindrance for recycling of e-waste plastics is the presence of bromi-
nated flame retardants (BFRs). This is also the case in waste to energy recovery technologies [43], which
should be highly regulated to avoid these hazardous substances to be released into the atmosphere.
High voltage waste recycling
The materials in switchgear and transformers have a high potential for recyclability. A study done on
the environmental impacts of EoL high voltage products [37], reported high recycling rates for metals
and uncontaminated transformer oil, while the current approach for small amounts of conventional waste
(paper, wood and ceramics) present in transformers is to send them directly to landfill or to incineration
for energy recovery.
Upon collection, larger transformers might be disassembled on site to facilitate transportation or directly
taken to a specialized treatment facility. They are then dismantled, and the waste is separated through
mechanical and chemical processes. The waste is finally sorted into different waste types and each waste
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
11
==PAGE:22==
type is sent to different recycling facilities [37].
The degree of circularity of a liquid-filled transformer is higher when using copper instead of aluminum
for high voltage windings. This is because recovered aluminum does not reach purity levels higher than
98% [30]. It is downgraded for use in second life products for which this purity level is sufficient. More
than 90% of the recovered copper will be recycled at purity level 1A (more than 99.9% purity) [30].
While electrical grade copper used in copper windings has the potential to be recycled into the same
function (closed-loop recycling), this is only possible if it doesn’t mix with copper of lower purity grade,
which could lead to contamination (for example, by phosphorus) which significantly reduces electrical
conductivity [37].
Magnetic steel, in the form of laminates, from the transformer core can be cleaned and prepared for reuse
or recycled into new steel [30]. In order for these laminates to be reused in the EU, they have to comply
with the prevailing Ecodesign regulation. Since transformers currently being taken out of service have
thicker laminates which do not comply with that regulation, they are more often recycled into new steel
[30].
As beforementioned, PCB content in transformer oil is still a reality for some transformers currently in
use. For this reason, oils contaminated with PCBs need to go through cleaning and decontamination
processes before being reused. Because of this, oil-filled transformer recycling starts with an oil analysis
conducted in specialized facilities [30]. When the PCB content in the oil is found to be above 50 ppm, it
is considered hazardous waste and is needs to be handled in compliance with strict safety rules.
Metal scrap recycling
Both ferrous metals (iron and steel) and non-ferrous metals (e.g. aluminum, zinc and copper) can be
remelted and used in the production of new metal. This is today a common practice across Europe, as
metals are easy to sort and can be recycled in an economically sustainable way [47]. In fact, according
to the German Copper Institute, about half of the annual copper demand in Germany is already covered
by recycled material [48].
As for steel, an average of 85 % of end-of-life steel in the EU is collected for use in the production of new
steel [49]. Steel is manufactured in the EU primarily using the Blast Furnace - Basic Oxygen Furnace
(BF-BOF) in primary steelmaking, and via the secondary route of Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) ([50]. This
way, steel can be recycled through the EAF steel production process in the EU. Through this technology,
galvanized steel can be recycled with other steel scrap. Zinc, which volatilises early in the process, can be
collected in the EAF dust and recycled in specialist facilities, often returning to refined zinc production
[51].
”The key outstanding challenge is maintaining the quality of the steel scrap through the separation of
copper wiring, other metals, and other materials before the remaining steel scrap is melted.”
Construction and demolition waste recycling
Currently, concrete waste, upon sorting and crushing processes, is mostly used in the production of ag-
gregates to be used in road construction [47]. It is used as a substitute for sand, gravel or other low quality
applications, and it allows for the entire amount of crushed concrete to be used. New technologies cur-
rently focus on higher quality applications, such as the use of the corse fraction from crushed concrete in
the production of new concrete. Other novel developments focus on applications in cement production
for the recovered fine fractions [47].
12
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:23==
3
Materials and Methodology
In this study, the Material Flow Analysis (MFA) is adopted the primary methodological framework to
comprehensively analyze the EoL waste flows of a solar PV system. The geographical and temporal
scopes are selected, and a case study selected from European Energy’s portfolio is chosen accordingly.
Data collection focuses on waste composition, which was extracted from primary information available
from the project, supplier data and complemented by available literature, and waste handling, which
originated from expert conversations and available literature. Based on the collected data, three scenar-
ios were developed with each set of flows having been mapped, according to the system boundaries,
from cradle-to-grave, using Sankey diagrams using the Stan2web freeware. To address uncertainty, a
combination of a qualitative and semi-quantitative methods is used.
3.1
Scope and case study
With a focus on current PV technology and on the Danish market, an 88MW solar park located in Stouby,
Denmark, currently under construction was selected as a case study. The reason for choosing a park
currently under construction, was the intent to focus on current technology, while assessing how the
company can plan for the future EoL of a park at this early stage. The park is currently under construction
and is expected to enter operation in May 2024. For the purpose of this study, it is assumed that the park
will operate for about 30 years, the average operation time for a PV system [20], after which a full
decommissioning takes place.
Figure 3.1: Stouby solar park location as seen in Google Maps.
3.2
Data collection
Data was collected in two separate steps: waste composition, in order to build a waste composition
inventory, and waste handling, to compose waste flow inventories for each of the assessed scenarios
detailed in Section 3.4.
Waste composition
Data on the installed quantities was collected from the Bill of Quantities (BoQ) of the ongoing park
construction project and from estimations made in a cost analysis report commissioned by EE, which
provided estimations on the installed quantities in the company’s PV parks in Denmark. A combination
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
13
==PAGE:24==
of primary and secondary data types was used to define the composition of the different components. The
overview of the data sources is presented in Table 3.1. The inventory includes all waste fractions in the
scope of this study - namely, PV modules, inverters, power transformers and their foundations, copper
and aluminum cables, and mounting structures and fencing -, but it does not represent the full installed
system. This is because a cut-off was done to exclude switchgear and monitoring equipment (including
smart loggers), as well as office facilities. This cut-off was done due to the lack and/or complexity of
data involving such components and structures.
Table 3.1: Data sources used to build the waste inventory. (Decommissioning study refers to a cost anal-
ysis report commissioned by EE, which provided estimations on the installed quantities in the company’s
PV parks in Denmark.)
Component
Installed quantity
mass/composition
PV modules
BoQ
Supplier data
Inverters
BoQ
Supplier data
Power Transformers
BoQ
Supplier/ Literature data
Cable scrap (Al and Cu cables)
Decommissioning study
Decommissioning study/Literature data
Steel Scrap (galvanized)
Decommissioning study
Literature data
Steel Scrap (fencing)
BoQ
Decommissioning report
Transformer foundations (concrete)
BoQ
Project’s technical drawings
Based on the collected data, the estimated mass-based waste inventory, s shown in Table 3.2, was created.
The detailed waste composition inventories for each waste fraction and their specific data sources can be
found in Appendix A.
Table 3.2: Estimated waste inventory based on installed components in the case study PV park.
Component
Installed quantity
unit
weight/unit (kg)
weight/MW (kg)
Pv Modules
160,160.00
pcs
32.13
58,476.24
Inverters
385.00
pcs
86.00
376.25
Power Transformers
20.00
pcs
8,034.53
1,826.03
Cable Scrap (Al and Cu cables)
188,916.13
kg/MW
-
2,146.77
Steel Scrap (galvanized)
3,151,818.56
kg/MW
-
35,816.12
Steel Scrap (fencing)
6,136.00
m
1
69.73
Transformer foundations (concrete)
20.00
kg/pcs
5,468.52
1,242.84
Waste handling
To map how PV module and inverter waste collected in Denmark is currently handled, informal conver-
sations were held with industry experts downstream the value chain, which can be consulted in Appendix
B. The information collected at this stage was mainly used to understand the waste pathways and the
maturity of the current technology relevant to the geographical scope of the project. Available literature
was then explored for recycling and recovery efficiencies for the various waste streams. The combined
findings were then used to build the flow inventories presented in Appendix C.
3.3
Relevant terminology
Open and closed-loop recycling & cascading
To address the differences in quality of secondary applications, this study uses different cascading levels,
adapted from Thomassen et al. [24], as shown in Table 3.3.
14
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.3: Definition and glass example for the different cascading levels adapted from Thomassen et al.
[24]
Cascading level
Secondary application of glass
CL0
Closed-loop recycling
Glass for PV modules
CL1
Open-loop recycling to high/medium-end applications
Glass for bottle glass or insulation material
CL2
Open-loop recycling to low-end applications
Glass used as road construction
CL3
Energy Recovery
Not applicable
CL4
Lost in landfill
Glass in landfill
In this classification, a distinction is made between closed-loop and open-loop recycling. In the former
case, waste materials are recycled into the same product, while the second generates a different type
of product, which can range from high to low-quality applications [24]. According to the adopted CL
definition, open-loop recycling is considered downcycling, since even high-quality applications (CL1)
involve cascading to functional applications that require lower purity when compared to closed-loop
recycling (CL0). CL2 refers to low-end applications, where the functionality of the material is lost, for
example in the use of metal containing ash in road infrastructure.
Recycling and Recovery
This study differentiates between recovering rate and recycling rate, as follows:
• Recovery rate: ratio of the weight of materials recovered after processing, to the weight of the input
waste before processing.
• Recycling rate: ratio of the weight of materials recycled for secondary use, to the weight of the
input waste. Materials recovered but not used are not counted in the recycling rate (e.g. energy
recovery).
3.4
Material Flow Analysis
3.4.1
System definition
Using the free software STAN 2.7.101, a static MFA is developed, in the form of Sankey diagrams. Flows
are tracked in tonnes of material per MW, since the latter is a common unit to measure the size of an energy
plant.
Figure 3.2 shows a simplified conceptual diagram of the system boundaries, which are limited to the post-
decommissioning waste treatment at the EoL of the PV system, focusing on the recycling and recovery
of the waste according to a circular economy model.
The first step is the collection of waste, which is assumed to have been separated into the fractions shown
in Table 3.2. After this, waste is taken to sorting/aggregation facilities or directly to treatment facilities.
In the case of some EoL devices, testing and preparing for use takes place, and the remaining waste is
pre-treated, through processes such as dismantling, decontamination and sorting, before being recycled.
The export flows of the MFA are the materials going into reuse, production of SRM, WtE processes or
landfill disposal. Since the goal of the study is to track the recovery of waste products generated at the
EoL of the PV system, inputs used in treatment processes and emissions are not tracked in the model.
Looking into the future decommissioning and consequent treatment of the waste, this comparative MFA
is of prospective nature. Thus, in the case of emerging technologies, recovery rates correspond to the
theoretical mature achievable value (MAV) reported in literature.
Besides the quantification and mapping of flows, the MFA takes a qualitative approach in qualifying the
quality of the secondary applications of the outputs.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.2: Simplified system boundaries from gate to grave applied for the waste fractions.
3.4.2
Scenario definition
As before mentioned, three scenarios were assessed:
• ”Baseline scenario”, which aimed to map the current waste handling pathways specific to waste
collected in Denmark, assuming a business-as-usual approach. This scenario serves as the founda-
tion upon which the following ones are built.
• ”Optimistic scenario”, which aimed to take a more circular approach where possible, prioritizing
higher material recovery and closed-loop recycling, using available data on relevant waste handling
approaches and recycling efficiencies.
• ”Pessimistic scenario”, representing a less circular approach, where recycling efforts stagnate or
decline, within realistic market standards. This scenario explores a worst-case-scenario for the
assessed market if no proactive measures are taken to improve recycling practices.
Baseline scenario
The waste handling processes for PV module and inverter waste are defined based on the expert conver-
sations reported in Appendix B. Due to the lack of primary data on recovery rates of the recycling of these
waste fractions, TCs on treatment processes are defined based on available literature and assumptions,
as presented in the flow inventory (Appendix D). Processes involved in the handling and treatment of
EoL transformers, as well as TCs are defined based on Jezdinsky & Wachter [37]. Recycling of concrete
waste, which assumes no losses in collection, is based on Damgaard et al. [47]. TCs used in steel and
cable scrap are based on industry averages, as presented in the flow inventory C.
Optimistic scenario
In the optimistic scenario, the waste handling of PV modules and inverters before reaching the recycling
facilities is optimized. The recycling process and the TCs used in the treatment of PV panels in this
scenario is based on the FRELP project [52, 53]. Inverter waste is modelled like in the baseline sce-
nario, with the difference that it includes plastic recycling. In transformer waste, which is based on the
same study, porcelain and steel laminate fractions are recovered according to [30]. Steel scrap is equally
processed, although zinc is additionally recovered. Finally, concrete waste recovery uses better quality
outputs based on emerging technologies reported by Damgaard et al. [47].
Pessimistic scenario
In the pessimistic scenario, PV modules are recycled through bulk recycling, where only high mass frac-
tions are recovered. The same approach is taken for inverters. Transformers TCs are defined based on a
HV power transformer EPD [54], which was published in 2022 with a scope on the EU market, since it
reported the same type of (bulk) recycling at the EoL of the product. Steel, cable scrap and concrete are
modelled as in the baseline scenario, with the difference that any secondary products are sent to landfill.
16
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:27==
The abovementioned key data sources for each scenario can be seen in the below table:
Table 3.4: Key data sources used in the MFA scenarios.
Data source
Application
Expert interviews
Findings from expert interviews, which are reported in Section B,
were the base for establishing the PV module and inverter waste han-
dling pathways.
”Life Cycle Assessment of an in-
novative recycling process for crys-
talline silicon photovoltaic panels”
[52] and ”Resource efficient recov-
ery of critical and precious metals
from waste silicon PV panel recy-
cling” [53]
These studies focus on the PV recycling FRELP process, an EU fi-
nanced project focused on the development of an innovative pro-
cess based on mechanical and chemical treatments to recycle/recover
EoL c-si PV panels and its comparison with the traditional treatment
of PV panel in WEEE recycling plants. These studies was used for
its insights in recycling rates and secondary material quality. The
PV recycling pathway in the optimistic scenario was based on this
project.
”Assessing the Environmental Im-
pact of End of Life High Volt-
age Products: A case study of Hi-
tachi Energy’s EoL transformers in
Sweden” [37] and ”Fact sheet –
Medium power transformer recycla-
bility” [30]
The first report focuses on HV transformers by the same manufac-
turer and within the same geographical scope of the present case
study. The second report, assesses the recyclability of MV trans-
formers. Both reports were used for their insights in waste handling
and recycling technologies, as well as recovery rates and secondary
applications of recovered materials in the transformer waste stream.
”Background data collection and life
cycle assessment for construction
and demolition waste (CDW) man-
agement” [47]
This study focuses on construction and demolition waste manage-
ment in the EU. Current uses and emerging technologies for the use
of concrete scrap were used to define recovery rates and secondary
applications in the MFA scenarios.
3.4.3
Modelling choices and assumptions
Some relevant assumptions and modeling choices are listed below. A more comprehensive list is present
in AppendixC.
• Collection It is assumed, in all scenarios, that all waste is collected and that no waste is lost in
between collection and treatment facilities.
• Treatment capacity It is assumed that capacity at treatment facilities is able to handle all waste
streams and therefore, no waste is hoarded in storage.
• Reuse In the baseline scenario, it is assumed that PV modules and inverters are reused at a rate of
2%, and in the optimistic scenario this rate increases to 20%. These rates were assumed based on
current average amounts of EoL PV modules that are suitable for reuse, for the baseline scenario,
and based on the minimum reuse rate necessary for the business case to be proven, for the optimistic
scenario, as found in an expert conversation, as reported in Appendix B. These assumptions were
used to model the current and optimistic scenario, and the same rates were assumed for inverters.
• Technology maturity Due to the prospective nature of the study, and since the treatment technologies
included in the scenarios are either mature technologies from industries such as copper smelting,
or novel technologies under a development stage, MAV reported in literature are used for the latter
ones.
• Antimony in solar glass Antimony in glass is assumed to be lost.
• PCBs in transformer oil It is assumed that the transformers installed in the system have no PCB
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
17
==PAGE:28==
content present in the cooling oil.
• FRELP technology As abovementioned, the FRELP process was chosen to represent the PV recy-
cling pathway in the Optimistic scenario. This choice was motivated by the fact that this is a well
documented project which was financed by the EU, with the aim to test and develop an innovative
technology for 100% recycling of end-of-life PV panels [52, 53].
3.4.4
Data quality and uncertainties
To assess the validity of the results, it is necessary to first assess the quality of the collected data and
how the associated uncertainty propagates through the model. In the context of the present study, time
constraints impacted the ability to conduct a comprehensive assessment of data quality on all the mapped
flows. Given the limited timeframe, a choice was made to semi-quantitatively assess the input flows,
related to the waste compositions, while qualitative uncertainty estimations were carried out for all other
modeled flows, an approach which was deemed more feasible and practical. The parameters used in each
type of assessment are detailed below.
For the quantitative methodology, a pedigree matrix developed by Weidema & Wesnæs [55] (made avail-
able in Appendix D) was used to measure the data quality according to the following indicators: reliabil-
ity, completeness, technological correlation, geographic correlation and further technological correlation.
The Reliability indicator relates to the data collection; Completeness focuses on the representativeness of
the data; Temporal correlation represents the time correlation between the year of the obtained data and
the year of the present study; Geographical correlation relates to the geographical correlation between
the obtained data and defined area of the study. Finally, the Technological indicator refers to any other
aspects related to the representativeness of the specific enterprises. Each indicator was systematically
evaluated and assigned a score ranging from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating a high level of data quality and 5
indicating a deficiency in meeting the data quality goal.
The qualitative data quality estimations were based on the type of data sources used as such: primary
data was estimated to have a ”small” uncertainty, estimations based on documented secondary reported
data were classified as ”medium”, and assumptions were estimated to have a ”large” uncertainty. The
uncertainty of flows calculated through mass balance is not classified, as it depends on the uncertainties
associated with the remaining flows based on which they are calculated.
18
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:29==
4
Results
Figures 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 show the flow diagrams of the three scenarios. The flows are presented as Sankey
diagrams, where the width of the arrows is proportional to the magnitude of the flows. The static MFA
diagrams are presented in kg per MW, and the flows have been color coded based on the source of data
used: primary data (in black), estimations based on documented secondary data (in gray), assumptions
(in orange) and mass balances (in green). Generic processes are shown in gray boxes. The waste flows
are mapped from waste collection to secondary applications of each output fraction, according to the
inventory presented in Appendix C.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.1: MFA results from baseline scenario. Unit: kg/MW. The flows are color coded based on the source of data used: primary data (in black), estimations
based on documented secondary data (in gray), assumptions (in orange) and mass balances (in green).
20
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.2: MFA results from optimistic scenario. Unit: kg/MW. The flows are color coded based on the source of data used: primary data (in black),
estimations based on documented secondary data (in gray), assumptions (in orange) and mass balances (in green).
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.3: MFA results from pessimistic scenario. Unit: kg/MW. The flows are color coded based on the source of data used: primary data (in black),
estimations based on documented secondary data (in gray), assumptions (in orange) and mass balances (in green).
22
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:33==
The developed waste inventory amounts to a total of 10 tonnes of waste per MW of installed capacity.
PV module waste and steel scrap make up the most important waste streams in terms of mass - 59% and
36% of the total, respectively. Deriving from these waste streams, glass and steel make up the highest
mass of recycled materials in all three scenarios. While steel is similarly recycled in all scenarios, through
the EAF production line, resulting in high recovery rates, the glass is recovered using different treatment
processes, and therefore resulting in different recovery rates and output qualities. Besides the recycled
glass, some of the input glass ends up in the reused PV panels in both the baseline and the optimistic
scenarios. It can be noted that the pessimistic scenario shows the smallest number of recovered materials
out of the three scenarios. While the baseline and optimistic scenarios result in similar recycled material
fractions, the latter results in extra ones, such as silver from PV modules, zinc from steel scrap and
porcelain from transformers, all of which make up small percentages of the total waste recovered.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
23
==PAGE:34==
Simplified Sankey diagrams were created to better visualize the type of output fractions in each scenario.
These can be seen in Figures 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6. The baseline scenario shows a significantly higher mass of
non-assessed (N/A) output destinations, which applied to all ”residues and possible secondary products”
outputs of treatment processes. The pessimistic scenario has the largest amount of waste, in mass, get-
ting disposed into landfill. While the baseline scenario has the largest share, out of the three scenarios,
going into the production of SRM, and therefore the largest overall recycling rate, the optimistic scenario
presents a larger mass of combined reused and recycled outputs. In fact, when adding up all recovered
waste (SRM, reuse and WtE), the optimistic scenario shows the highest yield, closely followed by the
baseline scenario. Both baseline and optimistic scenarios show the potential to recover over 80% of the
total waste, through reuse and recycled materials alone, which increases to over 85% when accounting
for WtE recovery. All scenarios show recovery rates above 70%.
Figure 4.4: Sankey diagram representing input waste flow and output flow types of the baseline scenario.
24
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.5: Sankey diagram representing input waste flow and output flow types of the optimistic sce-
nario.
Figure 4.6: Sankey diagram representing input waste flow and output flow types of the pessimistic sce-
nario.
Table 4.1 shows the recovery and recycling numbers per waste fraction for each scenario. Recovery
of each waste fraction, which includes recycled materials and materials recovered for energy recovery
(WtE), is presented in mass (kg), mass per total waste and mass per fraction. Recycling of each waste
fraction, which includes only recycled materials, is also shown in the same units.
The baseline scenario shows the highest mass of material recovery, while the pessimistic scenario shows
the lowest. This is also the case for mass of material recycling. The higher rates achieved by the baseline
scenario compared to the optimistic scenario for PV modules and inverters are justified by the reuse
rates of the latter, which result in a significant lower mass of these components going into recycling.
It is interesting to note that some of the fractions with the largest gaps in recovery/recycling rates in
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
25
==PAGE:36==
between scenarios, lead to a small, almost negligible gap when taking into account the total waste. An
example is the transformer fraction, where a 48% increase in recovery can be seen from the pessimistic
to the optimistic scenario, reflecting in an increase of 1% recovery of the total waste. In contrast, a 20%
recovery rate increase from the pessimistic to the baseline scenario in the PV module fraction leads to a
12% recovery increase in relation to the total waste.
It can be seen that the recovery and recycling rates (62% for both) of EoL PV modules in the pessimistic
scenario is not sufficient to meet EU requirements (85% and 80% respectively), when only aluminum and
glass are recovered. While these two components of PV modules make up around 87% of the weight, the
recovery rates do not reach 100% – and are, in fact, 95% for the aluminum and 69% for the glass.
Table 4.1: Recovery and recycling amounts per fraction and per scenario. Recovery rates include recycled
materials and recovered materials for energy recovery. Reused components are not included.
Component
Scenario
Mass
Recovery
(kg)
Recovery
rate per total
waste
(%w/w)
Recovery
rate per
fraction
(%w/w)
Mass
recycled
(kg)
Recling rate
per total
waste
(%w/w)
Recycling
rate per
fraction
(%w/w)
PV Modules
Baseline
47,964.6
48.0%
82.0%
46,404.6
46.4%
79.4%
Optimistic
40,302.3
40.3%
68.9%
37,708.7
37.7%
64.5%
Pessimistic
36,270.8
36.3%
62.0%
36,270.8
36.3%
62.0%
Inverters
Baseline
295.9
0.3%
78.6%
272.6
0.3%
72.4%
Optimistic
255.8
0.3%
68.0%
224.2
0.2%
59.6%
Pessimistic
126.3
0.1%
33.6%
126.3
0.1%
33.6%
Transformers
Baseline
1,609.0
1.6%
88.1%
1,566.6
1.6%
85.8%
Optimistic
1,697.4
1.7%
93.0%
1,654.9
1.7%
90.6%
Pessimistic
734.1
0.7%
40.2%
734.1
0.7%
40.2%
Cable Scrap
Baseline
2,102.5
2.1%
97.9%
1,286.7
1.3%
59.9%
Optimistic
2,102.5
2.1%
97.9%
1,286.7
1.3%
59.9%
Pessimistic
1,286.7
1.3%
59.9%
1,286.7
1.3%
59.9%
Steel Scrap
Baseline
31,330.2
31.3%
87.3%
31,330.2
31.3%
87.3%
Optimistic
31,620.3
31.6%
88.1%
31,620.3
31.6%
88.1%
Pessimistic
31,330.2
31.3%
87.3%
31,330.2
31.3%
87.3%
Concrete
Baseline
1,242.8
1.2%
100.0%
1,242.8
1.2%
100.0%
Scrap
Optimistic
1,143.4
1.1%
92.0%
1,143.4
1.1%
92.0%
Pessimistic
1,242.8
1.2%
100.0%
1,242.8
1.2%
100.0%
Total
Baseline
84,891.9
84.9%
-
82,450.3
82.5%
-
Optimistic
77,121.6
77.2%
-
73,638.2
73.7%
-
Pessimistic
70,991.0
71.0%
-
70,991.0
71.0%
The recovery and recycling outputs in table 4.1 are only concerned with the output mass. For a better
overview of the output quality in each scenario, each recovered material fraction in every waste fraction
is classified according to their CL, as defined in table 3.3. The results are displayed in Table 4.2.
The optimistic scenario results in the highest incidence of closed-loop recycling (CL0) across different
waste streams, while the pessimistic scenario shows the highest material quality cascading. Yet, the
results indicate that some materials are recovered with equal levels of quality across the scenarios. This
is the case for structural steel, aluminum and transformer oil, which are recovered without cascading to
lower quality applications. Other metals and glass are recycled into functional applications (i.e., medium-
to high-quality applications) in all scenarios.
Non-assessed (N/A) CL can be identified in all scenarios, with the most incidence in the baseline scenario.
Materials used in low concentrations in PV cells, such as lead and zinc, are lost to landfill in the unsorted
fraction in the pessimistic scenario. This is also the case in the optimistic scenario, according to the
FRELP technology [53]. In the baseline scenario, the destination of this fraction is not assessed, as it is
26
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:37==
considered to be present in ”residues and possible secondary materials” stemming from silicon recycling.
Finally, the metals in the PCBA go into further recycling processes, while the ceramics, plastics and resins
are incinerated for energy recovery. Since the metals present in the PCBA have high purity [56], there is
an opportunity for high value recovery depending on the treatment technology, although non-assessed.
Due to a lack of meaningful data, copper used in inverters was also not assessed in terms of CL.
Table 4.2: Cascading level of outputs per scenario, categorized according to Figure 3.3 (N/A: not as-
sessed)
Input
Output
Pessimistic
Baseline
Optimistic
PV modules
Glass
CL1
CL0
CL0
Aluminum
CL0
CL0
CL0
Cables (plastics)
CL3
CL3
CL3
Cables (metals)
CL1
CL1
CL0
Backsheet
CL4
CL3
CL3
Cell (silicon)
CL4
CL0
CL0
Cell (silver)
CL4
N/A
CL0
Cell( other metals)
CL4
N/A
CL4
Inverter
Aluminum
CL0
CL0
CL0
Steel
CL0
CL0
CL0
Copper
CL4
N/A
N/A
PCBA (other metals)
CL4
N/A
N/A
Plastics
CL4
CL3
CL2
Transformer
Transformer cooling oil
CL0
CL0
CL0
core(electrical steel)
CL1
CL1
CL0
Windings (aluminum)
CL1
CL1
CL1
carbon steel
CL1
CL0
CL0
porcelain
CL4
CL3
CL2
organic materials
CL3
CL3
CL3
Cable scrap
Polymers
CL3
CL3
CL3
Copper
CL1
CL1
CL0
Alluminum
CL1
CL1
CL1
Steel scrap
steel
CL0
CL0
CL0
zinc
CL4
N/A
CL0
Concrete
CL2
CL2
CL0
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
27
==PAGE:38==
28
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:39==
5
Discussion
In this chapter, waste flows are analyzed (Section 5.1), as well as data quality (Section 5.2). Considera-
tions for the development of an LCA based on the present study are presented in Section 5.3 and finally,
Section 5.4 discusses opportunities and challenges for circularity from a developer’s point of view.
5.1
Analysis of waste flows
This study has shown that there is a high recycling potential for some commodities, while some valuable
metals are likely to be lost under a business-as-usual approach, represented by the baseline scenario.
Although the optimistic scenario performs better in this aspect, the baseline scenario is closer to the
optimistic scenario than to the pessimistic scenario in terms of overall combined recycling and reuse
rates. The optimistic scenario still points to a 6.6% overall mass disposal in landfill, with a 4.7% non-
assessed percentage, out of which some are likely to end up with the same fate.
Collection and sorting
Flows related to collection and sorting processes were assumed to include no losses, and while this is a
relevant assumption for e-waste components which are required to be reported under the WEEE directive,
it might not be representative of reality for other waste streams, where a percentage of materials might
be lost in between collection and treatment processes. The model, however, does not include sorting
and aggregation processes for those other waste flows, which is a limitation of the model. Since these
extra processes would require extra transport and loading/unloading operations in between, these become
specially relevant when assessing environmental impacts.
In terms of transportation, it is expected that the PV module fraction and the steel fraction affect it most,
due to their biggest masses overall. While it was not identified where steel is treated, it is likely that
it could be recycled through EAF in Sweden or Germany [50]. Another discussion point in terms of
transportation to treatment facilities is that the specialized transport of PV panels assumed in the optimistic
scenario, while allowing for a higher preservation of the PV modules, it could signify a need for more
transportation trucks and therefore higher amount of km traveled overall. This could turn out to not
be economically feasible and even increase the overall environmental impacts. As such, this should be
further investigated.
Reuse
The assumed reuse rates for PV modules and inverters (see Section 3.4.3) might not be representative at
the time of the decommissioning of the system, as these would depend on how well established a sec-
ondary PV market will be by then. This consideration comes from that fact that, after a 30-year operation
time, PV modules will have reached EoL – as most of the equipment that was installed during construc-
tion (as can be seen in Table 5.1) –, and will therefore perform at lower efficiencies. Such efficiencies
will rate much lower than those offered by new available technologies, and operate for a short life-time,
possibly requiring equally old BoS for connection and replacement for parts that might not be available.
Since steel structures have longer expected life-times, relative to the system, is relevant when considering
re-powering of the system, as such structures could be kept, allowing for a partial repowering. However,
since mounting structures are project specific, as discussed in Section 2, it is unlikely that these structures
would be used for secondary applications in different systems.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
29
==PAGE:40==
Table 5.1: Life expentancy of PV system components based on [57].
Component
Service life
PV panels
25- 30 years, based on typical PV module warranties (i.e., 20% or less efficiency
degradation after 25 years) and the expectation that modules last beyond their war-
rantees
Inverters
30 years, with replacement of certain parts every 10 years
Transformers
30 years
Steel structures
60 years for ground-mount installations, although it could vary with trackers
Cabling
30 years, with maintenance
Batteries
5 years, with maintenance
Open and closed-loop recycling
Outputs classified as closed-loop recycling, meaning that the function is kept in their secondary appli-
cation, depend on the local industry, which is something difficult to predict. This is easier for well
established, mature industries, such as the metal industry, and it mostly depends on whether high purity
metals are refrained from mixing with lower quality alloys. This can be seen in the optimistic scenario,
where copper from cables is recycled to its original quality (CL0), and so is the electrical steel used in
transformers, in comparison with the other scenarios, where both these metals are recycled with cascading
quality (CL1).
In the case of novel technologies, this is harder to estimate. One reason is that high quality recovery
might not be a priority of R&D in the recycling industry, specially for materials of lower value, such as
solar glass – although, in this study, it is considered to keep its original function through the flat glass
production line. Another reason might be the lack of a local manufacturing market for that industry
altogether, which is further explored in section 5.4.
Waste-to-energy and landfill disposal
While WtE processes were not included in the system boundaries, it is worth to mention that the efficiency
of these processes depends on the waste fractions and their calorific value. These processes might also
allow for the recovery of metals, which might be left in these fractions as impurities, through further
fly-ash treatments. One example is the plastic fraction in cables, which is polluted with metal particles
due to the impossibility of achieving a full metal recovery [58].
Waste fractions going into landfill disposal are mostly composed of unsorted material fractions. This can
result in valuable or harmful substances ending up in landfills, which is specially seen in the pessimistic
scenario. Therefore, efforts should focus on the recovery of materials in an economically feasible way
thus, using this type of disposal only as last resort.
Non-assessed outputs
Non-assessed (N/A) flows, marked as ”residues and possible secondary products”, are present in all
studied scenarios. The processes which generated these flows are shown in Table 5.2, together with
the assumed composition of each fraction. While data was not found regarding the destination of these
waste flows, their applications are likely to depend on whether they are considered residues or secondary
products.
Residues are possibly used in low-quality applications, like low quality aggregate substitution in road
construction or backfilling, or disposed in landfills. Secondary products, however, could be extracted
from these fractions, including high-value low-concentration products, such as silver from silicon recy-
cling processes. While this metal constitutes only 0.09% of the total mass of the system and 0.16% of the
mass of a PV module, it can contain 9 to 23% of the module’s value [18]. While its contribution to mass
recovery would be negligible, its contribution to high value recovery becomes relevant. This is the case
30
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:41==
with other low-concentration scarce materials present in PV systems, which can also be hard to track in
the downstream value chain.
In some cases, the optimistic scenario compromises on output quantity in order to achieve output quality,
examples being the flat-glass recycling (which is also the case in the baseline scenario) and the concrete
recycling. To prevent secondary products from these processes from being disposed, the focus should be
on using them for lower quality applications, as seen in the other scenarios.
Table 5.2: Non-assessed (N/A) fractions, corresponding to flows labeled as ”residues and possible sec-
ondary products”.
Process
Optimistic
Baseline
Pessimistic Assumed composition
Glass recycling
x
x
Glass fine fraction, resins, plastic and metal particles
which were not recovered. Traces of antimony could
also be present in these fractions.
Silicon refining and
recycling
x
Silver, unrecovered silicon, aluminum, lead and
zinc, used in the PV cells.
Steel
recycling
(EAF)
x
x
Steel alloys and zinc from galvanized steel.
Copper recycling
x
x
x
Unrecovered copper alloys, tin from tinned copper
used in PV panels and polymer particles from copper
cables.
Aluminum recycling
x
x
x
Aluminum alloys and polymer fractions from alu-
minum cables.
Concrete recycling
x
Fine crushed concrete, possibly polluted with other
CDW.
5.2
Data quality and uncertainty
When interpreting the MFA results, data quality and uncertainty should be taken into account.Due to
the lack of primary data, recycling rates are based on available literature, where sometimes recycling
rates refer to intermediate recycling rates, other times to final recycling yields, often including collection
rates. Moreover, some of the literature data used to define the recycling rates in this study, also relies on
secondary data and thus reports a significant level of uncertainty. These factors increase the uncertainty
of the recycling rates defined in this study.
The quantitative data quality assessment done on the input flows – which represent the waste composition
– is shown in Table 5.3. According to this assessment, cable scrap and steel scrap exhibit the lowest data
quality of the waste fractions, with completeness being the overall lowest scored indicator. Although
the uncertainty is not tracked through the remaining flows of the MFA model, the qualitative uncertainty
estimations attributed to those flows (available in Appendix C) suggest an increasing uncertainty prop-
agation downstream. Because of this, if any decision is to be made along the value chain, the upstream
uncertainty should be taken into account.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
31
==PAGE:42==
Table 5.3: Data quality scores for waste composition according to Weidema & Wesnæs [55] (See Ap-
pendix D). (Note: R: reliability, C: completeness, TC: temporal correlation, GC: geographical correlation,
FTC: further technological correlation.)
Waste composition
R
C
TC
GC
FTC
Average
EoL PV modules
1
1
1
2
1
1.2
EoL inverters
1
1
2
2
3
1.8
EoL transformers
3
5
1
2
3
2.8
Cable Scrap
4
5
1
3
5
3.6
Steel crap
4
5
2
3
3
3.4
Waste concrete
2
1
1
2
2
1.6
5.3
Considerations for the development of an LCA as a next step
To conduct an environmental assessment, namely an LCA, based on the developed waste flow inventory,
where an impact assessment can be obtained, other input data and considerations not included in the
developed MFA are necessary, as explored below.
Transportation. Transport data between the PV installation and waste treatment facilities should be con-
sidered in the life cycle inventory (LCI). Some distances can be calculated based on the primary data
gathered in expert interviews (Section B), while other data can be estimated based on the type of facility
and their incidence relevant to the geographical scope of the assessment. An example is the transport of
steel scrap, which can calculated considering the location of an EAF facility in either Sweden or Germany
[50]; in the case of transformers, their recycling can be assumed to take place in Sweden, as described by
Tamura & Johansson [37].
Energy use. Energy is used in various treatment processes in the system, and it is an input that should be
included. While for some technologies that are well documented, this information can be readily avail-
able, for others, where the specific technology used is unknown, an estimation can be done based on
industry averages or database processes can be used. The inputs for grid mixes should take the consider-
ations mentioned above.
Other inputs and outputs in treatment processes. Substances used in treatment processes are not included
in the MFA model. Such inputs should be added when building the LCI, as should the waste treatment
of the related outputs.
Other considerations that must be taken into account when building the LCA inventory are regarding the
background data, which should be adapted to better represent the geographical and temporal scopes. Due
to the prospective nature of this MFA, a prospective LCA methodology is recommended for background
and foreground calculations, in order to scale technologies to the future temporal scope.
Another consideration is that by extending the system boundaries to include the substitution of virgin
materials, benefits from recycling can be better understood. According to SolarCycle, a PV module
recycling startup in Texas, recycling aluminum uses 95 percent less energy than making virgin aluminum.
The same company estimates that recycling a single PV panel avoids the emissions of 44 kg of CO2, a
figure which rises to more than 1.5 tons of CO2 if the PV panel is reused [59].
5.4
Opportunities and challenges for circularity
The case-study solar park on which this study focuses will add, once it enters operation, an 88 MW
capacity to the total 4.9 GW PV installed capacity of which Denmark has reached by the end of 2023 [5].
Mapping for future post-decommissioning becomes especially relevant when looking at the wider range
of PV installations in the considered geographical scope. Considering the unprecedented future amounts
32
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:43==
of waste streams that will result from the decommissioning of these installations, and their treatment
complexity, highlights the need for dedicated recycling options for PV systems and the need for planning
for decommissioning.
The efforts for circularity, at product level, should start with designing for repair, reuse and recycling,
in line with the eco-design framework. This is because studies show that the majority of the environ-
mental impacts in PV systems originate from the production processes [60]. It is therefore important that
EoL treatment offsets those environmental impacts caused in production, instead of causing additional
impacts. Some eco-design efforts include eliminating substances of concern, as it has been done with the
restriction of PCB use in transformer oil, incorporating recycled content in order to retain value as long as
possible, and using materials in a more efficient way, as it is seen in the declining copper content in invert-
ers and silver in PV modules. According to Ardente at al. [53], the latter can, however, pose challenges
in recycling, since those materials are the main economic driver for the development of high-efﬁciency
recycling processes. Their decline could hence discourage industrial developments in recycling. In some
cases, replacing materials with higher value ones, such as aluminum for copper in transformer windings,
can not only increase the circularity of the product (as discussed in Section 2), but also cause economic
incentives for recycling. Another aspect taken into account in eco-design, is the extension of the life-time
of a product. While some defend this is an important development to be made in PV components such as
PV modules [61], other research shows that, at current technology status, upgrading old solar panels with
newer, more efficient ones can actually be beneficial in terms of land use efficiency and in improving
overall carbon footprint of PV energy production [60].
Design-for-recycling is, however, challenging when applied to products with a long service-life, as is the
case of most components used in PV installations. This is because it is hard to estimate the future state
of the recycling market or of the technology of the products, and the waste regulations that might be in
place. In this way, estimating reuse of certain components or closed-loop recycling is inherently subject to
significant uncertainties. This isn’t as much of a concern for mature technologies, such as metal recycling
industries, as it is for novel, less mature technologies. In the case of some electrical and electronic devices,
where the recovery of materials can be challenging, specially those used in small concentrations, is where
efforts need to be made in R&D for the recycling technologies to become fully viable before they can
be scaled up to commercial scale. Some factors that are important for the profitability of the recycling
processes include the transport distances of the waste, the locations of the treatment facilities and the
amount of waste collected [53].
While the findings of this study showed a high possibility for closed-loop recycling for a significant
quantity of the materials used in PV system, the lack of a solar manufacturing industry in the EU hinders
the possibility of these materials to be reused in the PV industry, forcing the recovered materials to be
used in different industries, often losing quality in their second life (open-loop recycling). The Green
Deal Industrial Plan – established in 2023 –, which aims to reach at least 30 GW of solar production in
Europe by 2030, may tackle this problem and create opportunity in retaining value in the PV industry.
While the focus for a manufacturing industry is mostly concerned with PV module components, other
BoS components such as trackers are also included in the EU solar innovation efforts [9].
Planning for decommissioning is important, as optimization to waste handling can be done once a better
understanding of the overall value chain is achieved. This entails understanding the waste streams asso-
ciated with the project, the local legislation (environmental requirements) and the local recycling market.
Not only that, it can be beneficial in optimizing the involved costs. Considerations to have regarding de-
commission start as the system is dismantled, ensuring that equipment is handled correctly on site before
being collected, preventing contamination and damage to devices that have the potential to be reused or
recovered for individual components. Moreover, unplanned decommissioning, could lead to equipment
being stored (hoarded) in warehouses, or even outside, while a waste handling solution is organized. This
might decrease the chances for component reuse and for recovery of high-quality materials.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
33
==PAGE:44==
From an industry standpoint, primary data and transparency should be increased to improve data quality
and consequent improvements towards circularity. It is advantageous to the industry that best possible
practices which build towards an optimistic scenario are adopted, allowing for value creation, environ-
mental impact mitigation and the use of its know-how to influence less regulated markets. While some
industry studies already gather information on new technologies and developments on PV module recy-
cling, this should be extended to include BoS components.
Although the uncertainty associated with these results limits the extent to which decisions can be based
on them, some qualitative findings can be used to aid company-level policy and to improve logistics with
direct stakeholders in the downstream value chain. An example is the consideration towards adopting
specialized transport for waste PV panels. Moreover, this study has provided a first step in tracking and
closing data gaps in the downstream value chain for the danish market, and to some extent the overall
EU market. In fact, knowing the specifics of each market can additionally increase the data quality in
corporate reporting. Finally, highlighted by the findings of this study, it is important to know the local
recycling market when planning for decommissioning; this way, it can be valuable to extend this study
to other markets, including highly-regulated and less regulated ones.
34
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusions
In this study, the post-decommissioning waste flows of a utility-scale PV solar system located in Denmark
were mapped according to prospective scenarios, distinguished by baseline, optimistic and pessimistic
waste handling approaches. The assessment encompassed PV modules and the BoS, which included
inverters, transformers and their concrete foundations, cabling, steel scrap from mounting structures and
fencing.
Aligned with the study objectives, recovery and recycling rates were successfully defined and the material
quality of output fractions was assessed. The lack of primary data in the downstream value chain, coupled
with its intricate complexity characterized by a multitude of stakeholders and a lack of data sharing, has
made it challenging to trace the recycling pathway of each material with certainty. Consequently, the
findings are associated with a substantial degree of uncertainty, limiting their capacity to inform decision-
making processes effectively.
Nevertheless, the findings suggest a high potential for material recyclability and recovery in EoL PV
systems within the assessed market, with PV modules and steel scrap emerging as the primary contributors
to generated waste mass. In fact, the results indicate that greater improvements towards circularity can be
made through PV module recycling, due to novel and evolving technologies; while the more established
metal recycling industry exhibited a more consistent performance across scenarios.
Furthermore, the study has revealed that recycling yields in the pessimistic scenario fell short of current
EU legislation. Interestingly, the baseline scenario performed closer to the optimistic scenario in terms of
mass recovery, suggesting effective recycling practices currently in place. Still, the optimistic scenario
resulted in a higher rate of closed-loop recycling and a higher value recovery, indicating that there are
opportunities for further improvement.
Finally, the present research underlines the importance of waste flow mapping as an initial step in assess-
ing environmental impacts associated with EoL PV waste and improving circularity. In fact, the study
provides foundational framework for a further LCI development and LCA modelling.
6.1
Future work and recommendations
The present study established a base for further environmental assessment studies, namely an LCA, and
to do this, further work is recommended to increase data quality and validate the findings. Moreover,
additional recommendations are made in the direction of gaining new insights.
• It is recommended that the recycling market is more thoroughly tracked, with further collection of
primary data, and an extension of system boundaries to the secondary raw material market. This
could show what substitution rate is possible for recycled materials in the manufacturing of new
products, and what current theoretical limits exist in terms of input rates. Other markets could be
explored for a better perspective of the results.
• To have a complete analysis of the system, waste from other BoS components should be investi-
gated, such as monitoring and control devices, switching gear and office facilities. To extrapolate
the findings of in this study to account for a larger installed capacity within the defined geographical
scope, the assessment could be adapted to consider the use of other components, such as tracking
systems and batteries, and even other PV module technologies, allowing for a better representation
of the study area.
• In future studies, it would be valuable to include a quantitative value recovery assessment, to build
on the existing metrics of mass recovery and output quality. Incorporating an analysis of the eco-
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
35
==PAGE:46==
nomical value of recovered material can help create a more holistic perspective, to further increase
the decision-making potential of the study.
36
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook 2023. Tech. rep. Licence: CC BY 4.0 (report);
CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A). Paris: IEA, 2023. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/world-
energy-outlook-2023.
[2]
Environmental Protection Agency. Causes of Climate Change. https://www.epa.gov/climatechange-
science/causes-climate-change. Accessed: 08/02/2024. 2023.
[3]
E. Papadis and G. Tsatsaronis. “Challenges in the decarbonization of the energy sector”. In: Energy
205 (2020), p. 118025. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.118025.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544220311324.
[4]
IEA-PVPS. 2023 Snapshot of Global PV Markets. Technical Report. International Energy Agency
Photovoltaic Power Systems, 2023.
[5]
Solar Power Europe. EU Market Overlook for Solar Power 2023-2027. Technical Report. Solar
Power Europe, 2023.
[6]
International Energy Agency. Renewables 2023. Tech. rep. Licence: CC BY 4.0. Paris: IEA, 2024.
URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/renewables-2023.
[7]
International Energy Agency. Electricity 2024: Analysis and forecast to 2026. Tech. rep. Revised
version: January 2024. 2024. URL: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/6b2fd954-2017-
408e-bf08-952fdd62118a/Electricity2024-Analysisandforecastto2026.pdf.
[8]
G. Zachmann et al. Decarbonisation of Energy. Tech. rep. Publication for the Committee on In-
dustry, Research and Energy (ITRE). Luxembourg: Policy Department for Economic, Scientific
and Quality of Life Policies, European Parliament, 2021.
[9]
European Commission. Energy and Green Deal. Accessed: 08/02/2023. European Commission.
URL: https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/european-
green-deal/energy-and-green-deal_en.
[10]
EUROBSERV’ER. Photovoltaic Barometer 2023. https://www.eurobserv-er.org/photovoltaic-barometer-
2023/. Study funded by the European Comission. 2023.
[11]
International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook 2023. https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-
outlook-2023. Licence: CC BY 4.0 (report); CC BY NC SA 4.0 (Annex A). Paris: IEA, 2023.
[12]
International Solar Energy Society (ISES). “The fastest energy change in history”. In: PV Magazine
(2023). URL: https://www.pv-magazine.com/2023/01/25/the-fastest-energy-change-in-
history/.
[13]
M. Tawalbeh et al. “Environmental impacts of solar photovoltaic systems: A critical review of
recent progress and future outlook”. In: Science of The Total Environment 759 (2021), p. 143528.
ISSN: 0048-9697. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143528. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969720370595.
[14]
H. Zhang et al. “Green or not? Environmental challenges from photovoltaic technology”. In: En-
vironmental Pollution 320 (2023), p. 121066. ISSN: 0269-7491. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1016/j.envpol.2023.121066. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0269749123000684.
[15]
Sven Teske, ed. Achieving the Paris Climate Agreement Goals. Global and Regional 100% Renew-
able Energy Scenarios with Non-energy GHG Pathways for +1.5°C and +2°C. 1st ed. Hardcover
ISBN: 978-3-030-05842-5, Published: 28 February 2019. Springer Cham, 2019, pp. LIX, 491.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-05843-2.
[16]
K. Klein Goldewijk et al. “RCP2.6: exploring the possibility to keep global mean temperature
increase below 2°C”. In: Climatic Change 109 (2011), p. 95. DOI: 10.1007/s10584-011-0152-3.
[17]
European Council. Critical Raw Materials. Accessed on 30/03/2024. European Council. 2024.
URL: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/infographics/critical-raw-materials/.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
37
==PAGE:48==
[18]
International Energy Agency. Special Report on Solar PV Global Supply Chains. Tech. rep. Re-
vised version: August 2022. International Energy Agency, 2022. URL: https://iea.blob.core.
windows.net/assets/d2ee601d-6b1a-4cd2-a0e8-db02dc64332c/SpecialReportonSolarPVGlobalSupplyChains.
pdf.
[19]
C. Rollet. “Recycling PV panels: Why can’t we hit 100%”. In: PV Magazine (2020). URL: https:
//www.pv-magazine.com/2020/08/26/recycling-pv-panels-why-cant-we-hit-100/.
[20]
IRENA and IEA-PVPS. End-of-Life Management: Solar Photovoltaic Panels. Technical Report.
International Renewable Energy Agency and International Energy Agency Photovoltaic Power
Systems, 2016.
[21]
Z. Wang et al. “Life Cycle Assessment for Balance-of-System of Photovoltaic Energy Systems”.
In: 2022 International Conference on Power Energy Systems and Applications (ICoPESA). 2022,
pp. 553–564. DOI: 10.1109/ICoPESA54515.2022.9754477.
[22]
Fraunhofer ISE. Photovoltaics Report. Technical Report. Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy
Systems, ISE, 2023.
[23]
IRENA. Future of Solar Photovoltaic: Deployment, investment, technology, grid integration and
socio-economic aspects (A Global Energy Transformation: paper). Technical Report. International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi, 2019.
[24]
G. Thomassen, J. Dewulf, and J. Van Passel. “Prospective material and substance flow analysis of
the end-of-life phase of crystalline silicon-based PV modules”. In: Resources, Conservation and
Recycling 176 (2022), p. 105917. ISSN: 0921-3449. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.
2021.105917. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921344921005267.
[25]
K. Kiatreungwattana, O. VanGeet, and B. Stoltenberg. Facility-Scale Solar Photovoltaic Guide-
book. Tech. rep. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2016.
[26]
Adriana Domínguez and Roland Geyer. “Photovoltaic waste assessment in Mexico”. In: Resources,
Conservation and Recycling 127 (2017), pp. 29–41. ISSN: 0921-3449. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.resconrec.2017.08.013. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921344917302525.
[27]
L. Tschümperlin, P. Stolz, and R. Frischknecht. Life Cycle Assessment of Low Power Solar Invert-
ers (2.5 to 20 kW). Tech. rep. Commissioned by Swiss Federal Office of Energy (SFOE). Uster,
Switzerland: Treeze Ltd., Oct. 2016.
[28]
M. Caduff et al. “Power-law relationships for estimating mass, fuel consumption and costs of
energy conversion equipments”. In: Environmental Science & Technology 45.2 (2011), pp. 751–
754. DOI: 10.1021/es103095k.
[29]
B. Mansilha et al. “Life Cycle Assessment of Electrical Distribution Transformers: Comparative
Study Between Aluminum and Copper Coils”. In: Environmental Engineering Science (2018).
DOI: 10.1089/ees.2018.0256.
[30]
B. Wachter and T. Jezdinsky. Fact sheet – Medium power transformer recyclability. Tech. rep.
Cu0278. Release: Public. European Copper Institute, 2021. URL: https://help.leonardo-energy.
org/hc/en-us/article_attachments/4409272456722/Cu0278_FS_Transformer_recycling_v1.
pdf.
[31]
M. Bošnjaković et al. “Environmental Impact of PV Power Systems”. In: Sustainability 15.15
(2023). ISSN: 2071-1050. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/15/15/11888.
[32]
F. Baumgartner. “5 - Photovoltaic (PV) balance of system components: Basics, performance”.
In: The Performance of Photovoltaic (PV) Systems. Ed. by Nicola Pearsall. Woodhead Publish-
ing, 2017, pp. 135–181. ISBN: 978-1-78242-336-2. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
1 - 78242 - 336 - 2 . 00005 - 7. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
B9781782423362000057.
[33]
Great Plains Institute. Repowering and Decommissioning of Wind and Solar Projects. Accessed:
February 8, 2024. 2020.
38
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:49==
[34]
European Parliment and the Council. “Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council”. In: Official Journal of the European Union (2008). URL: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32008L0098.
[35]
IEA-PVPS. End-of-Life Management of Photovoltaic Panels: Trends in PV Module Recycling
Technologies. Technical Report. International Energy Agency Photovoltaic Power Systems, 2018.
[36]
European Parliment and the Council. “Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of
the Council”. In: Official Journal of the European Union (2012). URL: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32012L0019.
[37]
A. Tamura and T. Johansson. Assessing the Environmental Impact of End of Life High Voltage
Products: A case study of Hitachi Energy’s EoL transformers in Sweden. Tech. rep. Chalmers
University of Technology, 2022. URL: https://odr.chalmers.se/server/api/core/bitstreams/
342ed35f-38a2-43d5-9241-b0fd5cdd8d1d/content.
[38]
European Parliment and the Council. “Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council”. In: Official Journal of the European Union (2009). URL: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:02009L0125-20121204&from=EN.
[39]
M. Bošnjaković et al. “The End of Life of PV Systems: Is Europe Ready for It?” In: Sustainability
15.23 (2023). ISSN: 2071-1050. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/15/23/16466.
[40]
A. Mulazzani, P. Eleftheriadis, and S. Leva. “Recycling c-Si PV Modules: A Review, a Proposed
Energy Model and a Manufacturing Comparison”. In: Energies 15 (2022), p. 8419. DOI: 10.3390/
en15228419. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/en15228419.
[41]
P. J. M. Isherwood. “Reshaping the Module: The Path to Comprehensive Photovoltaic Panel Re-
cycling”. In: Sustainability 14.3 (2022). ISSN: 2071-1050. DOI: 10.3390/su14031676. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/14/3/1676.
[42]
IEA. Status of PV Module Recycling in Selected IEA PVPS Task12 Countries 2022. Technical
Report. International Energy Agency, 2022.
[43]
V. Sahajwalla and V. Gaikwad. “The present and future of e-waste plastics recycling”. In: Current
Opinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry 13 (2018). Reuse and Recycling / UN SGDs: How
can Sustainable Chemistry Contribute? / Green Chemistry in Education, pp. 102–107. ISSN: 2452-
2236. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsc.2018.06.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2452223618300452.
[44]
I. M. S. K. Ilankoon et al. “E-waste in the international context – A review of trade flows, regula-
tions, hazards, waste management strategies and technologies for value recovery”. In: Waste Man-
agement 82 (2018), pp. 258–275. ISSN: 0956-053X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.
2018.10.018. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0956053X18306366.
[45]
Sensoneo. How to Recycle E-Waste. Accessed in 07/04/2024. URL: https://sensoneo.com/how-
to-recycle-e-waste/.
[46]
Circular Plastics Alliance - European Commission. State-of-play on collected and sorted plastic
waste. Tech. rep. Version from 2020-09-28. Sept. 2020.
[47]
A. Damgaard et al. Background data collection and life cycle assessment for construction and
demolition waste (CDW) management. Tech. rep. JRC 130992. Luxembourg: Publications Office
of the European Union, 2022. DOI: 10.2760/772724.
[48]
THM Recycling Solutions GmbH. Cable Recycling. Accessed in 07/04/2024. URL: https://www.
thm-recyclingmaschinen.de/en/recycling/cable/.
[49]
European Environmental Bureau. Action 15: Strategies for increasing material efficiency and the
use of secondary steel. Retrieved from https://eeb.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/recommendation-
paper-strategies-material-efficiency-secondary-steel.pdf. 2023.
[50]
The European Steel Association (EUROFER). Where is steel made in Europe? Accessed in 07/04/2024.
URL: https://www.eurofer.eu/about-steel/learn-about-steel/where-is-steel-made-in-europe.
[51]
Galvanizers Association. Galganizing Recycling. Accessed in 07/04/2024. URL: https://galvanizing.
org.uk/sustainable-construction/galvanizing-is-sustainable/recycling/.
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
39
==PAGE:50==
[52]
C. Latunussa et al. “Life Cycle Assessment of an innovative recycling process for crystalline sil-
icon photovoltaic panels”. In: Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 156 (2016). Life cycle,
environmental, ecology and impact analysis of solar technology, pp. 101–111. ISSN: 0927-0248.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.03.020. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0927024816001227.
[53]
F. Ardente, C. Latunussa, and G. Blengini. “Resource efficient recovery of critical and precious
metals from waste silicon PV panel recycling”. In: Waste Management 91 (2019), pp. 156–167.
ISSN: 0956-053X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.04.059. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0956053X19302909.
[54]
IMEFY. “Environmental Product Declaration: POWER TRANSFORMER immersed in mineral oil
with a power from 12.8/16 MVA 45 KV, 12.8/16 MVA 66 KV, 12.8/16 MVA 110 KV, 12.8/1616
MVA 132 KV, 20/25 MVA 66 KV, 20/25 MVA 110 KV, 20/25 MVA 132 KV, 32/40 MVA 110 KV,
32/40 MVA 132 KV”. In: EPDItaly (2022).
[55]
B. P. Weidema and M. S. Wesnæs. “Data quality management for life cycle inventories—an ex-
ample of using data quality indicators”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 4.3 (1996), pp. 167–
174. ISSN: 0959-6526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-6526(96)00043-1. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652696000431.
[56]
I. M. S. K Ilankoon et al. “E-waste in the international context – A review of trade flows, regula-
tions, hazards, waste management strategies and technologies for value recovery”. In: Waste Man-
agement 82 (2018), pp. 258–275. ISSN: 0956-053X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.
2018.10.018. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0956053X18306366.
[57]
R. Frischknecht et al. Methodology Guidelines on Life Cycle Assessment of Photovoltaic Elec-
tricity. IEA PVPS IEA-PVPS T12-06:2016. IEA PVPS Task 12, International Energy Agency
Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme, 2016.
[58]
Sara Díaz et al. “Recycling of polymeric fraction of cable waste by rotational moulding”. In:
Waste Management 76 (2018), pp. 199–206. ISSN: 0956-053X. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1016/j.wasman.2018.03.020. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0956053X18301624.
[59]
J. Hurdle. “As Millions of Solar Panels Age Out, Recyclers Hope to Cash In”. In: Yale Environment
360 (2023). Accessed: 14/04/2023. URL: https://e360.yale.edu/features/solar-energy-panels-
recycling.
[60]
“Life cycle assessment of PV module repowering”. In: Energy Strategy Reviews 43 (2022), p. 100928.
ISSN: 2211-467X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2022.100928. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2211467X22001225.
[61]
P. Harazin. Material flow in photovoltaics from the perspective of circular economy. Tech. rep.
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 2020.
[62]
F. Pagnanelli et al. “Solvent versus thermal treatment for glass recovery from end of life photo-
voltaic panels: Environmental and economic assessment”. In: Journal of Environmental Manage-
ment 248 (2019), p. 109313. DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.109313.
[63]
Huawei Digital Power Technologies Co., Ltd. “Environmental Product Declaration: SUN2000-
330KTL-H2”. In: EPDItaly (2023).
[64]
M. Wędrychowicz et al. “Recycling of Electrical Cables-Current Challenges and Future Prospects”.
In: Materials 16.20 (Oct. 2023), p. 6632. DOI: 10.3390/ma16206632.
40
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:51==
A
Waste composition (confidential)
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
41
==PAGE:52==
B
Expert conversations (confidential)
42
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:53==
C
Flow inventories
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
43
==PAGE:54==
Table C.1: Flow inventory for baseline scenario. P, F refer to processes and flows, respectively; TC refers to transfer coefficients; CL refers to cascading level
Process/FlowName
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
P23
E-waste collection
Assumed that PV modules and
inverters are collected together
as e-waste
Inputs
F1
EoL PV modules
58,476.2
According to Table 3.2
Import
F2
EoL inverters
376.3
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F59
E-waste
58,852.5
100.00%
Intermediate
Low
P1
Unloading and sorting in e-
waste sorting facility (DK)
According to Section B
Inputs
F59
E-waste
58,852.5
Intermediate
Outputs
F84
E-waste
58,852.5
100.00%
Intermediate
Low
P4
Unloading in e-waste recycling
facility (DK)
According to Section B
Inputs
F84
E-waste
58,852.5
Intermediate
Outputs
F83
EoL PV modules
58,476.2
99.36%
Intermediate
Low
F85
EoL inverters for recycling
338.6
0.58%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
F60
EoL inverters for testing
37.6
0.06%
Assumed that 10% of inverters
are optically undamaged and
thus tested for reuse, based on
unspecialized transport
Intermediate
Large
P18
Unloading in PV recycling fa-
cility (DE)
According to Appendix B
Inputs
F83
EoL PV modules
58,476.2
Intermediate
44
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:55==
Table C.1 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
Outputs
F26
Optically intact EoL PV mod-
ules
5,847.6
10.00%
Assumed that 10% of modules
are optically undamaged and
thus tested for reuse, based on
unspecialized transport
Intermediate
Large
F8
Other EoL PV modules
52,628.6
90.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P15
Module testing and preparing
for reuse
Inputs
F26
Optically intact EoL PV mod-
ules
5,847.6
Intermediate
Outputs
F82
PV modules for reuse
1,169.5
20.00%
2% reuse (See Section 3.4.3)
Export (reuse)
Large
F74
PV modules for recycling
4,678.1
80.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P18
Dismantling in PV recycling
facility (DE)
According to Appendix B
Inputs
F8
Other EoL PV modules
52,628.6
Intermediate
F74
Modules for recycling
4,678.1
Intermediate
Outputs
F23
Dismantled modules for treat-
ment
51,235.2
89.40529% Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
F21
Aluminum frame
5,402.3
9.42703%
95% recovery according to [40]
Intermediate
Medium
F81
Junction box and cable
669.2
1.16769%
Assumed to be handled to-
gether as cable waste
Intermediate
Medium
P14
Mechanical processing in PV
recycling facility (DE)
According to Appendix B
Inputs
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
45
==PAGE:56==
Table C.1 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F23
Dismantled modules for treat-
ment
51,235.2
While all fractions are cal-
culated as 100% of the that
present in the modules, they
are assumed to have impurities
from other fractions, which are
accounted for in recovery rates
Intermediate
Outputs
F12
Glass
41,925.7
81.83%
Estimated 95% glass recovery
based on [40]
Intermediate
Medium
F24
impure silicon fraction
1,676.5
3.27%
Includes all materials present in
the cell, with 95% recovery as-
sumed
Intermediate
Large
F37
tinned copper
113.2
0.22%
Assumed 95% tinned copper
recovery according to [40]
Intermediate
Medium
F20
Backsheet into energy recovery
1,248.4
2.44%
Includes only backsheet, ac-
cording to Appendix B. As-
sumed 95% recovery.
Other
polymer fractions are assumed
to be binded to other recovered
fractions or lost in the shredder
dust.
CL3
Export (WtE)
Large
F39
shredder dust to use as sand in
construction
6,271.4
12.24%
Some material is ”lost” as
shredder dust according to [19].
Amount calculated based on
mass balance.
CL2
Export (SRM)
(-)
P8
Flat glass recycling
Inputs
F12
Glass
41,925.7
Intermediate
Outputs
46
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:57==
Table C.1 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F30
glass cullets into flat glass pro-
duction
33,540.6
80.00%
80% of the glass cullets are as-
sumed to be used in flat glass
recycling, while the remaining
are assumed to be finer cullets
which are not suitable for flat
glass production
CL0
Export (SRM)
Large
F55
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
8,385.1
20.00%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
P15
Silicon refining and recycling
According to Appendix B
Inputs
F24
impure silicon fraction
1,676.5
Intermediate
Outputs
F69
secondary silicon into metallur-
gical grade silicon
1,269.5
75.73%
95% silicon recovery based on
FRELP project [53].
Ouput
quality assumed according to
expert conversation (see 3.4.3).
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F73
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
406.9
24.27%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
P31
Inverter testing and preparing
for reuse
Inputs
F60
EoL inverters for testing
37.6
Intermediate
Outputs
F14
Inverters for recycling
30.1
80.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
F90
Inverters for reuse
7.5
20.00%
2% reuse (see Section 3.4.3)
Export (reuse)
Large
P9
Dismantling and recycling in e-
waste facility
Based on [39]
Inputs
F85
EoL inverters for recycling
338.6
Intermediate
F89
Inverters for recycling
30.1
Intermediate
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
47
==PAGE:58==
Table C.1 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
Outputs
F49
steel recovery
30.1
8.17%
90% metal recovery [39]
Intermediate
Medium
F65
aluminum recovery
132.8
36.00%
90% metal recovery [39]
Intermediate
Medium
F52
copper recovery
6.1
1.66%
90% metal recovery [39]
Intermediate
Medium
F66
PCBA metals into further re-
covery
111.4
30.21%
65% PCBA recovery [39]
N/A
Export (SRM)
Medium
F51
Energy recovery
23.3
6.33%
All polymers are incinerated.
[39]
CL3
Export (WtE)
Medium
F36
Unsorted materials to landfill
65.0
17.63%
Mass balance
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
P28
HV equipment collection
It is assumed that the trans-
formers are disassembled on
site,
including oil removal,
based on [37]
Inputs
F3
EoL transformers
1,826.0
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F75
EoL transformers
1,826.0
100.00%
Intermediate
Medium
P13
Transformer dismantling and
sorting in transformer facility
(SE)
Inputs
F75
EoL transformers
1,826.0
Intermediate
Outputs
F70
Cleaned mineral oil for reuse in
transformers
404.2
22.13%
95% of the oil is collected since
5% ia assumed to be impreg-
nated in the insulating paper
[30]. All the oil is suitable for
reuse after cleaning [37]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
48
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:59==
Table C.1 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F72
Aluminum windings for recy-
cling
240.7
13.18%
100% recovery [30]
Intermediate
Medium
F80
Steel for recycling
1,033.5
56.60%
100% recovery [30]
Intermediate
Medium
F79
Organic materials for incinera-
tion
42.5
2.33%
Includes 5% of oil which is
impregnated into materials ac-
cording to [30]
CL3
Export (WtE)
Medium
F78
Unsorted materials into landfill
105.2
5.76%
Mass balance
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
P3
steel scrap collection
Inputs
F6
waste steel
35,885.8
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F67
steel scrap
35,885.8
100.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P30
cable scrap collection
Inputs
F86
Cable Scrap
2,146.8
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F54
cable scrap
2,146.8
100.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P25
cable scrap treatment
Inputs
F54
cable scrap
2,146.8
Intermediate
F81
Junction box and cable
669.2
Intermediate
Outputs
F44
polymers from cable recycling
1,127.4
40.04%
Assumed 100% recovery
CL3
Export (WtE)
(-)
F57
copper scrap from cable treat-
ment
814.6
28.93%
Assumed 100% recovery
Intermediate
Large
F58
aluminum from cable recycling
874.0
31.04%
Assumed 100% recovery
Intermediate
Large
P16
CDW collection
Inputs
F22
Waste concrete
1242.84
According to Table 3.2
Import
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
49
==PAGE:60==
Table C.1 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
Outputs
F87
Waste concrete
1,242.8
100.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P24
Concrete recycling
Inputs
F87
Waste concrete
1,242.8
Intermediate
Outputs
F56
concrete to road construction
1,242.8
100.00%
Based on [47]
CL3
Export (SRM)
Medium
P27
Aluminum recycling
Inputs
F58
Aluminum from cable recy-
cling
874.0
Intermediate
F21
Aluminum frame
5,402.3
Intermediate
F72
Aluminum windings for recy-
cling
240.7
Intermediate
F65
aluminum recovery
132.8
Intermediate
Outputs
F63
secondary aluminum for alu-
minum alloy(from cables)
843.4
[53]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F64
secondary aluminum for alu-
minum alloy (from frame)
5,213.2
95 to 97%
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F64
secondary
aluminum
for
aluminum alloy (from trans-
former)
232.3
95 to 97%
[53]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F64
secondary aluminum for alu-
minum alloy (from inverter)
128.1
95 to 97%
[53]
N/A
Export (SRM)
Medium
F64
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
232.7
3 to 5%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
P20
Steel recycling (EAF)
Inputs
F67
steel scrap
35,885.8
Intermediate
50
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:61==
Table C.1 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F80
Steel for recycling
1,033.5
Intermediate
F49
steel recovery
30.1
Intermediate
Outputs
F66
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (from mounting struct)
31,330.2
90% recovery of steel [26]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F66
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (from transformer)
930.1
90% recovery of steel
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F66
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (from inverter)
27.1
87.38%
N/A
Export (SRM)
Medium
F53
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
4,662.0
12.62%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
P26
Copper recycling
Inputs
F57
copper scrap from cable treat-
ment
814.6
Intermediate
F52
copper recovery
6.1
Intermediate
F37
tinned copper
113.2
Intermediate
Outputs
F61
secondary copper for copper al-
loys (from cables)
790.1
97%
[53, 39]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F61
secondary copper for copper al-
loys (from inverters)
6.0
97%
[53, 39]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F61
secondary copper for copper al-
loys (from modules)
109.8
97.00%
[53, 39]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F62
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
28.0
3.00%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
51
==PAGE:62==
Table C.2: Flow inventory for optimistic scenario. P, F refer to processes and flows, respectively; TC refers to transfer coefficients; CL refers to cascading
level.
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
% P24
PV module collection
Inputs
F1
EoL PV modules
58,476.2
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F8
EoL PV modules
58,476.2
100.00%
Intermediate
(-)
P18
Unloading in PV recycling fa-
cility
Inputs
F8
EoL PV modules
58,476.2
Intermediate
Outputs
F26
Optically intact PV modules for
testing
29,238.1
50.00%
Assumed that 50% of modules
are optically undamaged and
thus tested for reuse, based on
specialized transport
Intermediate
Large
F8
Modules for recycling
29,238.1
50.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P15
Module testing and preparing
for reuse
Inputs
F26
Optically intact PV modules for
testing
29,238.1
Intermediate
Outputs
F82
Modules for reuse
11,695.2
40.00%
20% reuse according to Section
3.4.3
Export (reuse)
Large
F27
Modules for recycling
17,542.9
60.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P18
Recyling in PV recycling facil-
ity: FRELP
Inputs
F8
Modules for recycling
29,238.1
Intermediate
52
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:63==
Table C.2 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F27
Modules for recycling
17,542.9
Intermediate
Outputs
F12
Glass for medium-high appli-
cations (eg. flat glass)
31,703.2
67.77%
[53]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Low
F24
Metalurgical grade silicon
1,090.9
2.33%
[53]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Low
F37
Secondary copper equivalent to
primary material
308.6
0.66%
[53]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Low
F70
Aluminum equivalent to pri-
mary material
4,534.9
9.69%
[53]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Low
F60
Secondary silver equivalent to
primary material
71.10
0.15%
[53]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Low
F20
Energy recovery
2,593.54
5.54%
[53]
CL3
Export (WtE)
Low
F82
Material loss/landfill
6,478.7
13.85%
[53]
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
P23
Inverter collection
Inputs
F2
EoL inverters
376.3
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F88
EoL inverters
376.3
100.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P2
Unloading in e-waste sorting
facility
Inputs
F88
EoL inverters
376.3
Intermediate
Outputs
F14
EoL Inverters
376.3
100.0%
Intermediate
(-)
P60
Unloading in e-waste recycling
facility
Inputs
F14
EoL Inverters
376.3
Intermediate
Outputs
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
53
==PAGE:64==
Table C.2 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F92
Inverters for recycling
188.1
50.00%
Intermediate
(-)
F73
Inverters for testing
188.1
50%
Assumed that 50% of inverters
are optically undamaged and
thus testes for reuse, based on
specialized transport
Intermediate
Large
P60
Inverter testing and preparing
for reuse
Inputs
F73
Inverters for testing
188.1
Intermediate
Outputs
F84
Inverters for reuse
75.3
40.00%
20% reuse (see Section 3.4.3)
Export (reuse)
Large
F74
Inverters to recycling
112.9
60.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P9
Dismantling and recycling in e-
waste facility
Inputs
F92
Inverters for recycling
188.1
Intermediate
F74
Inverters to recycling
112.88
Intermediate
Outputs
F50
plastic into furniture applica-
tions
1.7
0.55%
60% of plastics can be recycled
[39]. Assumed application into
furniture based on [46]
Export
(SRM)
Medium
F52
Copper
5.0
1.66%
Intermediate
Medium
F65
Aluminum
108.4
36.00%
Intermediate
Medium
F49
Steel
24.6
8.17%
Intermediate
Medium
F66
PCBA
90.9
30.21%
N/A
Export (SRM)
Medium
F51
energy recovery
31.6
10.50%
CL3
Export (WtE)
Medium
F36
Unsorted materials to landfill
38.8
12.90%
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
P28
HV equipment collection
Inputs
54
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:65==
Table C.2 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F3
EoL transformers
1,826.0
Import
Outputs
F90
EoL transformers
1,826.0
100%
Intermediate
(-)
P13
Transformer dismantling and
sorting in transformer facility
(SE)
Inputs
F90
EoL transformers
1,826.0
Intermediate
Outputs
F70
Cleaned mineral oil for reuse in
transformers
404.2
22.13%
95% of the oil is collected since
5% ia assumed to be impreg-
nated in the insulating paper
[30]. All the oil is suitable for
reuse after cleaning [37]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F76
Recovered aluminum windings
240.7
13.18%
100% recovery [30]
CL1
Intermediate
Medium
F28
Magnetic steel laminates for
reuse
609.3
33.37%
Assuming that they comply
with new Ecodesign regula-
tions in the EU. Older trans-
former have thicker ones which
can no longer be used in the EU.
[30]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F80
Recovered structural steel
424.2
23.23%
100% recovery [30]
CL0
Intermediate
Medium
F81
Porcelain into road contruction
applications
27.4
1.50%
1.5% of transformer waste ac-
cording to [37]
CL2
Export (SRM)
Medium
F79
organic material into energy re-
covery
42.5
2.33%
includes 4 to 5% of the oil,
which is impregnated in the in-
sulating materials
CL3
Export (WtE)
Medium
F29
material into landfill
77.8
4.26%
Mass balance
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
P3
steel scrap collection
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
55
==PAGE:66==
Table C.2 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
Inputs
F4
waste steel
35,885.8
Import
Outputs
F67
steel scrap
35,885.8
100.00%
Intermediate
(-)
P20
Steel recycling (EAF)
Inputs
F67
steel scrap
35,885.8
Intermediate
F80
Recovered structural steel
424.2
Intermediate
F49
Steel
24.6
Intermediate
Outputs
F68
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (mounting struct)
31,330.2
90% recovery of steel [26]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F68
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (transformers)
381.7
”
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F68
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (inverters)
22.1
87.34%
”
N/A
Export (SRM)
Medium
F91
Recovered zinc into further
processing
290.1
0.80%
27% recovery [26]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F53
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
4,555.6
11.86%
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
P30
cable scrap collection
Inputs
F86
Cable Scrap
2,146.8
Import
Outputs
F54
cable scrap
2,146.8
100.00%
Intermediate
(-)
P25
cable scrap treatment
Inputs
F54
cable scrap
2,146.8
Intermediate
Outputs
F44
polymers from cable recycling
815.8
38.00%
Mass balance
CL3
Export (WtE)
(-)
56
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:67==
Table C.2 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F57
copper scrap from cable treat-
ment
457.0
21.29%
Assumed 100% recovery
Intermediate
Large
F58
aluminum from cable recycling
874.0
40.71%
Assumed 100% recovery
Intermediate
Large
P26
Copper recycling
Inputs
F57
copper scrap from cable treat-
ment
457.0
Intermediate
F52
Copper
5.0
Intermediate
Outputs
F61
secondary copper equivalent to
primary material (cables)
443.3
97% recovery rate based on
[53, 39]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F61
secondary copper equivalent to
primary material (inverters)
4.9
97.00%
97% recovery rate based on
[53, 39]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F62
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
13.7
3.00%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
P27
Aluminum recycling
Inputs
F58
aluminum from cable recycling
874.0
Intermediate
F76
Recovered aluminum windings
240.7
Intermediate
F65
Aluminum
108.4
Intermediate
Outputs
F63
secondary aluminum into allu-
minum alloys (cables)
843.4
96.5% recovery rate [53]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F63
secondary aluminum into allu-
minum alloys (windings)
232.3
96.5% recovery rate [53]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F63
secondary aluminum into allu-
minum alloys (inverters)
104.6
95 to 97%
96.5% recovery rate [53]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F64
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
42.8
3 to 5%
1.00%
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
P16
CDW collection
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
57
==PAGE:68==
Table C.2 continued from previous page
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
Inputs
F22
Waste concrete
1,242.8
Import
Outputs
F87
Waste concrete
1,242.8
100.00%
It is assumed that no material is
lost
Intermediate
(-)
P24
Concrete sorting and crushing
Inputs
F87
Waste concrete
1,242.8
Intermediate
Outputs
F56
coarse fraction into aggregates
for production of new concrete
(C0/C1)
745.7
60.00%
Only the coarse fraction (>4
mm) can be used as aggregate
in the production of new con-
crete [47].
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F86
Fine fraction into cement con-
stituent
397.7
32.00%
80% recovery is the MAV for
recycling the fine fraction into
cement constituents in technol-
ogy under development by Hei-
delbergCement as reported by
Damgaard at al. [47]
CL2
Export (SRM)
Medium
F87
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
99.4
8.00%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
58
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:69==
Table C.3: Flow inventory for pessimistic scenario. P, F refer to processes and flows, respectively; TC refers to transfer coefficients; CL refers to cascading
level.
P or F
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
P2
E-waste collection
Inputs
F1
Pv modules
58,476.2
According to Table 3.2
Import
F2
Invertes
376.3
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F59
E-waste
58,852.5
100.00%
Assumed that PV modules and
inverters are collected together
as e-waste
Intermediate
(-)
P15
Unloading in e-waste sorting
facility (DK)
Inputs
F59
E-waste
58,852.5
According to Table 3.2
Intermediate
Outputs
F84
E-waste
58,852.5
100.00%
Intermediate
(-)
P14
Unloading in e-waste recycling
facility (DK)
Inputs
-
F84
E-waste
58,852.5
According to Table 3.2
Intermediate
Outputs
-
F8
PV modules to WEEE recy-
cling facility
58,476.2
99.36%
Intermediate
(-)
F14
Inverters to WEEE recycling
facility
376.3
0.64%
Intermediate
(-)
P18
PV module dismantling and
mass recycling (shredding)
Inputs
-
F8
PV modules to recycling
58,476.2
Intermediate
Outputs
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
59
==PAGE:70==
Table C.3 continued from previous page
Process /
Flow
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F48
Unsorted materials to lanfill
17,387.6
29.73%
Mass balance
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
F21
Aluminum frame
5,512.6
9.43%
Assumed that 95% is recovered
as in baseline scenario
Intermediate
Medium
F37
Glass cullets
35,576.1
60.84%
Estimated 79% glass recovery
based on [62], where 17% is a
readily recoverable glass frac-
tion, and 62% is a coarse frac-
tion needing further thermal
treatment to remove resins
Intermediate
Large
P8
Glass recycling
Inputs
F37
Glass cullets
35,576.06
Intermediate
Outputs
F30
Glass cullets into insulation and
glass foam products
30,951.2
87.00%
Estimated that 76 % of the pre-
viously recovered glass frac-
tion is recovered after thermal
treatment of the coarse fraction.
Based on [62]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F55
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
4,624.9
13.00%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
P9
Inverter dismantling and mass
recycling
Inputs
Intermediate
F85
EoL inverters for recycling
376.3
Intermediate
Outputs
F49
recovered steel
27.3
7.26%
[63]
Intermediate
Medium
F65
recovered aluminum
105.4
28.00%
[63]
Intermediate
Medium
F29
Materials to landfill
243.6
64.74%
Mass balance
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
60
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:71==
Table C.3 continued from previous page
Process /
Flow
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
P28
HV equipment collection
Inputs
F3
EoL transformers
1826.029545
Import
Outputs
F38
Transformer solid waste
1,826.0
100.00%
Mass balance
Intermediate
(-)
P13
Transformer dismantling and
shredding
Inputs
-
F38
Transformer solid waste
1,826.03
Import
Outputs
-
F15
Mineral oil into reuse
297.82
16.31%
[54]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F28
Steel recovery
482.07
26.40%
[54]
Intermediate
Medium
F72
Aluminum recovery
2.56
0.14%
[54]
Intermediate
Medium
F29
Unsorted materials to lanfill
1,043.58
57.15%
[54]
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
P3
steel scrap collection
Inputs
F6
waste steel
35,885.8
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F67
steel scrap
35,885.8
100.00%
Intermediate
(-)
P30
cable scrap collection
Inputs
F86
Cable Scrap
2,146.8
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F54
cable scrap
2,146.8
100.00%
Intermediate
(-)
P25
cable scrap treatment
Inputs
F54
cable scrap
2,146.8
Intermediate
Outputs
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
61
==PAGE:72==
Table C.3 continued from previous page
Process /
Flow
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F44
cable polymers to landfill
815.8
38.00%
[64]
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
F57
recovered copper for recycling
457.0
21.29%
Assumed 100% recovery
Intermediate
Large
F58
recovered aluminum for recy-
cling
874.0
40.71%
Assumed 100% recovery
Intermediate
Large
P16
CDW collection
Inputs
F22
Waste concrete
1,242.8
According to Table 3.2
Import
Outputs
F87
Waste concrete
1,242.8
100.00%
Intermediate
Medium
P24
Concrete sorting and crushing
Inputs
F87
Waste concrete
1,242.8
Intermediate
Outputs
F56
concrete to road construction
(C3)
1,242.8
100.00%
[47]
CL2
Export (SRM)
Medium
P27
Aluminum recycling
Inputs
F58
recovered aluminum for recy-
cling
874.0
Intermediate
F21
Aluminum frame
5,512.6
Intermediate
F65
recovered aluminum
105.4
Intermediate
F72
Aluminum recovery
2.6
Intermediate
Outputs
F63
secondary aluminum into alu-
minum alloys (cables)
843.4
95 to 97%
Recovery rate based on [53]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F63
secondary aluminum into alu-
minum alloys (frame)
5,319.6
95 to 97%
Recovery rate based on [53]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F63
secondary aluminum into alu-
minum alloys (inverter)
101.7
95 to 97%
Recovery rate based on [53]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
62
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:73==
Table C.3 continued from previous page
Process /
Flow
Name
Quantity
(kg)
TC (%)
Sources and Assumptions
CL
Flow type
Uncertainty
F63
secondary aluminum into alu-
minum alloys (transformer)
2.5
95 to 97%
Recovery rate based on [53]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F64
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
227.3
3 to 5%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
P20
Steel recycling (EAF)
Inputs
F67
steel scrap
35,885.8
Intermediate
F28
Steel recovery
482.1
Intermediate
F49
recovered steel
27.3
Intermediate
Outputs
F66
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (mounting struct)
31,330.2
90% recovery of steel [26]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F66
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (transformer)
433.86
90% recovery of steel [26]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F66
liquid steel into steel produc-
tion (inverter)
24.59
87.34%
90% recovery of steel [26]
CL0
Export (SRM)
Medium
F53
Dust to landfill
4,606.56
12.66%
Assumption that the EAF dust
is landfilled instead of further
processing
CL4
Export
(land-
fill)
(-)
P26
Copper recycling
Inputs
F57
recovered copper for recycling
457.0
Intermediate
Outputs
F61
secondary copper into copper
alloys or additives in steel mak-
ing
443.3
97.00%
[53, 39]
CL1
Export (SRM)
Medium
F62
Residues
and
possible
sec-
ondary products
13.7
3.00%
Mass balance
N/A
Export (N/A)
(-)
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
63
==PAGE:74==
D
Data quality indicators
64
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
==PAGE:75==
Table D.1: Pedigree matrix with 5 data quality indicators retrieved from Weidema & Wesnæs [55].
Waste management of end-of-life PV energy systems: a prospective material flow analysis on a Danish case study
65
==PAGE:76==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like at this
place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is there a difference
between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives
you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text
should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There is no need
for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
