==PAGE:1==
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic
micro systems
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Section for Engineering Acoustics, Department of
Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering
(MSc Eng).
This thesis represents a workload of 30 ECTS credits, corresponding to one semester’s
work.
The reader is assumed to have basic knowledge of mechanics, vibrations, finite element
methods (FEM), statistical energy analysis (SEA), and acoustics.
Marcus Holm - s153617
Signature
Date
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
iii
20/06/2024
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis provides an overall introduction to the finite element method and statistical en-
ergy analysis. These methods are then combined to investigate a coupled finite element
statistical energy analysis method. This has been done through numerical calculations
of point and line connections, which has been simulated using semi infinite structures.
Three di Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems Master Thesis DTU
Electro Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering fferent approaches for calcu-
lating semi infinite structures has been discussed and the PML has been chosen as the
best method for this case. The usage of semi infinite structures to calculate point and
line connections through matrix reduction are then discussed. Finally the response for a
fully coupled statistical and deterministic system is calculated utilizing the FE-SEA model.
Finally a fully FE model has been compared with a the FE-SEA approach, however no
final conclusion can be drawn, due to many uncertainties occurring in the deterministic
modelling.
iv
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Marcus Holm, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
Author of the thesis, would like to thank:
[Jonas Brunskog], [Associate Professor], [DTU]
I would first and foremost like to thank Jonas for his feedback and for his always welcoming
office, where questions could be asked. Furthermore, I would like to thank Jonas for being
the creator of the thesis; without his guidance, this thesis would not have been possible.
[Frieder Lucklum], [Professor MSO], [DTU]
I would like to acknowledge Frieder for his ideas and thoughts during our weekly meetings,
and also thank him for his valuable feedback.
[Daniele Giannini], [postdoctoral researcher], [KU Leuven (Belgium)]
Special thanks to Daniele for guiding me with his expertise and for always being helpful
and ready to assist despite the distance. His insightful feedback helped shape this thesis.
[María Mónica Ballesteros Villarreal], [Industrial PhD], [DTU]
Lastly, I would like to thank María for always having her door open and for helping out
with my COMSOL and other related questions, no matter how trivial they seemed.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
A Brief Introduction to Finite Element Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
A Brief Introduction to Statistical Energy Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Hybrid Finite Element and Statistical Energy Method . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Matrix Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methods
13
3.1
Linking COMSOL and Matlab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Structures Used for Verification of Link Between COMSOL and Matlab . . . 13
3.3
Hybrid Finite Element Statistical Energy Analysis Implementation . . . . . . 15
4
Results
19
4.1
Deterministic System Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Verification of semi infinite domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Hybrid Finite Element Statistical Energy Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Discussion
25
5.1
Deterministic System Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Plate physics modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Point and Line Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
Complete Hybrid Finite Element Statistical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.5
Hybrid Finite Element Statistical Analysis as a Method for Modelling Hear-
ing Aids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.6
General Thoughts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Conclusion
29
7
Further Work
31
7.1
FE Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2
Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.3
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The study of vibroacoustics is applicable in many different field of studies ranging from
consumer electronics to building acoustics. Despite its broad applicability, the structure
borne sound often receives less attention than airborne sound due to its more complex
nature. Structure borne sound can be particularly challenging because sources may gen-
erate multiple transmission paths, and structures are highly sensitive to variations. Even
minor changes in the geometry can lead to significant differences in the acoustic response.
The methods for predicting the structure borne sound propagation varies depending on
the frequency, for low frequencies the modal approach is commonly employed, while sta-
tistical methods are more prevalent for high frequencies. However, the mid-frequency
range present unique challenges due to a lack of suitable predictive methods. This gap in
methodology complicates the accurate analysis and prediction of structure borne sound
in this frequency range.
The most common industrial applications of the FE-SEA method lies within predicting
structure-borne noise in different moving objects such as trains [1], automotives [2] and
spacecrafts [3]. With the FE-SEA approach the behaviour of the above examples can
be predicted accurately for a wide range of frequencies and adds a more realistic ap-
proach, due to the energies and damping being calculated through SEA and the local
details through FEM. This detailed approach however comes with a costs in complex im-
plementation, since the method is not as commercial used as just FE or SEA by itself,
however, some companies have started implementing it into their software such as VA
ONE.
This thesis will focus on developing a hybrid finite element statistical energy analysis (FE-
SEA) method, in COMSOL Multiphysics® and MATLAB®. The hypothesis of this thesis
is that the hybrid FE-SEA method can provide more accurate and efficient predictions of
sound propagation in the mid-frequency range compared to existing methods. To explore
this hypothesis the following research questions will be addressed:
• Can a FE-SEA method be implemented using both COMSOL and Matlab?
• How does the FE-SEA method compare with the full FEM implementation in COM-
SOL?
• How can the direct field dynamic stiffness matrix be calculated in the link between
COMSOL and Matlab.
• How can semi-infinite plates be modelled in COMSOL?
• Can the COMSOL Matlab approach to FE-SEA modelling be useful for modelling
the electrical components in a hearing aid as statistical systems and the shell as
deterministic?
The primary objective of the thesis is to develop and validate a hybrid FE-SEA method
created through COMSOL and Matlab interactions. This will include covering the neces-
sary theoretical background, the implementation steps, in both COMSOL and Matlab, and
a detailed discussion of the results.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
The main objective of the theory chapter is to provide the reader with the necessary the-
oretical background to understand the subsequent discussion and analysis. The main
topics discussed in the theory chapter are, the finite element method, which will serve as
an introduction to the method as well as an introduction to statistical energy analysis. The
hybrid FE-SEA modelling will then be described, and aim at explaining the combination
between the finite element method and statistical energy analysis which makes up the
FE-SEA model. Finally the main matrix operations used within the thesis will be derived.
2.1
A Brief Introduction to Finite Element Method
The equations that governs the law of physics in a space and time dependent manner are
usually expressed as partial differential equations (PDEs). PDEs are not always solvable,
hence numerical methods needs to be implemented, in this section the numerical method
of finite elements will briefly be explained. The FEM equations will be carried out for
Mindlin plate theory, that is a plate which is assumed to have the same thickness across
the whole plate and the thickness does not change during deformation. The equation of
motion for a Mindlin plate can be written as [4]
∂
∂x
(
kGh
(∂w
∂x
)
−ψx
)
+ ∂
∂y
(
kGh
(∂w
∂y −ψy
))
−p(x, y, t) = ρh ¨w
(2.1)
with h, w, G and ρ being the thickness, displacement, shear modulus and density re-
spectively, p(x, y, t) being the external pressure load, ψ being the rotation and k being
a compensation of the assumption that the shear stresses dependent on the thickness,
must be constant, however, the stresses must vanish at the stress free surfaces. This
equation is a PDE since it is dependent on the location (x and y) and the time (t). To
solve this one would need to use a numerical approach such as the FEM. First the equa-
tion would need to be rewritten into its weak form, for it to be solved numerically. The
writing of the equation into its weak form has many advantages, one of them being the
reduced differentiability. Looking at the equation for transverse displacements 2.1, it is
easy to see that the equation has a differentiability requirement of at least four, however
with the weak form this will be reduced. Another important benefit of the weak formu-
lation is that the boundary conditions often will occur naturally in the equation and that
the integrals in the weak form can handle complex geometries, since it is computed over
elements.
One can now find the weak formulation of equation 2.1, however for simplicity, the equa-
tion will be written in matrix-vector format as
∂T
p D∂pu + p(t) = ρ¨u.
(2.2)
Here ∂p is the differential operator matrix for plates, D is the constitutive matrix, ρ is the
density matrix and u is the displacement vector, the definitions of these can be found in
[4]. Now the weak equation can be formulated by multiplying with a test function v and
integrating over the area of the plate
∫
A
v(∂T
p D∂pu + p)dA =
∫
A
vρ¨udA.
(2.3)
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
3
==PAGE:12==
This is the weak motion equation for a Mindlin plate, however this equation can still be
manipulated to further simplify the problem one needs to solve, see [4] for Mindlin plate
with zero displacement at boundaries.
Another important aspect of FEM modelling is the discretization of the object under in-
vestigation. The object is discretized into multiply smaller objects called elements, and
the displacement field is approximated within the element nodes based on the shape
functions. Shape functions are mathematical functions that interpolate the displacement
field inside the element, based on the nodal values. The shape function usually takes the
value one at its own node and zero at the other nodes within the element. The shape
function can be of many different types and are determined from the element shape and
the approximate element displacement field is determined as
u(x, y, t)e
p ≈N(x, y)d(t)e,
(2.4)
with N being the shape function and d being the nodal displacements for an element. The
elemental discretization can now be inserted into the weak formulation and from there the
final FEM equation of motion can be written as
M ¨
D + KD = f(t).
(2.5)
This is the FEM equation of motion, where M is the summation of all the elemental masses,
K is the sum of the elemental stiffnesses and D is the global nodal displacement variables.
It is worth noting that this equation does not account for damping, however, the equation
used in COMSOL does account for damping and uses the same methods as discussed
above. For a full mathematical derivation, the reader is referred to [4].
2.2
A Brief Introduction to Statistical Energy Analysis
Statistical energy analysis is a method for predicting sound propagating and mean-value
responses in complex vibro-acoustic problems.
The method is efficient in structures
where multiple modes of the structure will be excited at once, hence it also has its ad-
vantages when calculating for the audible frequency range. The method has its origins
in statistical room acoustics, where it is used to describe diffuse sound fields, predicting
sound pressure and more [5]. The four main assumptions within statistical room acous-
tics are (i) broadband excitation, meaning multiple frequency occurring in the excitation
signal, an example could be white noise, (ii) the sound field is diffuse, meaning that all
propagation and reflection are equally probable, (iii) all natural frequencies are equally
excited, and (iv) the dimensions of the room are of no significance. With these four as-
sumption the acoustical power which an airborne sound source radiates into a room can
be calculated as [6]
Pa = ⟨p2⟩
ρc
A
4 = ρ⟨v2
a⟩V 13.8
T60
= m⟨v2
a⟩ωη = Eωη,
(2.6)
where ⟨.⟩indicates the spatial average mean square, p is the pressure, ρ is the density of
air, c is the speed of sound in air, A is the total area of absorption within the room, V is
the volume of the room, T60 is the reverberation time, that is how many seconds it takes
for the sound level to decrease 60dB, m is the total mass of air in the room, E is the total
acoustic energy within the room, and η is the loss factor of the room. Equation 2.6 relates
the acoustical power to the acoustical energy and loss factor. Remembering the four basic
assumptions, one would realise that equation 2.6 is reliable when dealing with frequency
average values, such as 1/3 octaves, when the volume of the room is much larger than
4
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:13==
the wavelength, rule of thumb is V > λ3, and the loss factor is of moderate values. Since
this thesis is more interested in the structure borne sound equation 2.6 would need to be
written with the quantities within the equation belonging to the structure, with the same
assumptions as before, the structural equation becomes
P = M⟨v2⟩ωη.
(2.7)
Here M is the total mass of the structure, and v is the velocity. As in the room acoustic
case the wavelength has to be much smaller than the dimensions of the structure. Now
for simplicity a coupling of two systems will be considered, that is a system which consist
of two subsystems which are connected, hence power can move from one system to the
other see figure 2.1. The power supplied by a force can be expressed as
P = ¯F 2Re(Y ) = M⟨v2⟩ωη,
(2.8)
where F is the force, ¯. represents the root mean square and Y is the point mobility at the
force location. Inspecting figure 2.1 and realising the two systems into power balances
one gets
System1 :
P1 + P21 = Pd1 + P12,
(2.9)
System2 :
P12 = Pd2 + P21,
(2.10)
where subscript d is dissipated power, the direction of the power transfer from one sub-
system to another is indicated with numbers, hence P12 is the power transfered from
subsystem 1 to subsystem 2. The power balance is the main tool in SEA methods along
with the relation of reciprocity. Since the systems are assumed to be linear the energy
must be proportional with the mean square velocities hence
P12 = c12⟨v2
1⟩≡M1ωη12⟨v2
1⟩,
(2.11)
P21 = c21⟨v2
2⟩≡M2ωη21⟨v2
2⟩,
(2.12)
with c being the coupling loss functions and η is coupling loss factor. The relation be-
tween the mean square velocities can now be found inserting equations 2.11 and 2.12
into equation 2.10 which yields
⟨v2
1⟩
⟨v2
2⟩= M2ωη2
c12
.
(2.13)
The relation of reciprocity can be found in [6] and is
c12
c21
= Re(Y2)
Re(Y1) = ∆N2
M2
M1
∆N1
,
(2.14)
where N is the modal density, which is how many natural modes there is within a certain
frequency band. In this thesis the SEA method will be used on plates hence the modal
density can be found as [6]
∆N =
S
3.6cl1h,
(2.15)
with S being the surface area, h the thickness and cl1 the longitudinal wave speed prop-
agation and is defined in plates as
cl1 =
√
E
ρ(1 −ν),
(2.16)
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
5
==PAGE:14==
with E being Young’s modulus and ν being Poisson’s ratio. With equations 2.13 and 2.14
one can now calculate the response of the coupled system, when subsystem 1 is excited
[6]
⟨v2
1⟩
⟨v2
2⟩= ∆N2
M2
M1
∆N1
1
1 + M2ωη2/c21
.
(2.17)
Due to the relation of reciprocity which occurs within the SEA method, if one wanted to
calculate the response when subsystem 2 was excited, the indexes 1 and 2 should be
interchanged. It is now possible to calculate the responses for both systems when one of
them is excited by a force, this method can also calculate for more than two subsystems,
the importance lies within the power balance and how the subsystems are connected.
Figure 2.1: A two coupled system with illustrating how power can move between both
subsystems.
2.3
Hybrid Finite Element and Statistical Energy Method
The main goal of a hybrid FE-SEA model is to accurately describe a system of coupled
subsystems. Some of the subsystems are known precisely, these are called the deter-
ministic systems, and can be modelled using the finite element method, whereas the other
subsystems are not as well known, this can be due to complex boundaries, multiple prop-
agating wave types, etc., and these subsystems are known as statistical and are usually
described with statistical methods such as the statistical energy analysis.
While characterizing the behavior of individual subsystem it is necessary that the power
of FE-SEA modelling lies in the coupling between deterministic and statistical subsys-
tems. To visualize the coupling, one would think of an acoustic cavity surrounded by a
deterministic box. When the box is excited from the outside it will radiate into the cavity
hence creating reactive and resistive impedance. The reactive impedance describes the
phase shift between the vibration of the box and the sound waves, whereas the resistive
impedance describes how efficient the modes of the box propagates sound into the cav-
ity. The reverberant field of the cavity will also apply a load onto the box. The radiation
into the cavity and the loading onto the box can now be utilized to realize the coupling
in FE-SEA, which can be expressed as a deterministic system with boundary conditions
matching that of the radiation into the statistical subsystem, and loading onto the deter-
ministic subsystem, see Figure 2.2 for illustration.
Now looking only at the uncoupled deterministic subsystem one would be able to deter-
6
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of coupling between deterministic and statistical subsystems using
FE-SEA.
mine the behaviour by utilizing finite element method, hence the equation of motion can
be written as
Ddq = fd,
(2.18)
where q is a vector containing all the deterministic degrees of freedom with f being the
force applied upon q and Dd is the dynamic stiffness matrix defined as
Dd(ω) = −ω2M + (1 + iη)K,
(2.19)
with M and K being the mass and stiffness matrices respectively, η the damping coeffi-
cient and ω the angular frequency. With the uncoupled statistical subsystem one could
use a similar approach, however, the properties of statistical subsystems are rarely known
exactly, which is why a statistical approach is applied. The motion of the mth statistical
subsystem can be written as [7]
D(m)
dir q = f + f(m)
rev ,
(2.20)
where Ddir is the direct field dynamic stiffness matrix, f is a force vector and frev is the
reverberant loading which the statistical system applies onto the deterministic system and
the direct field dynamic stiffness accounts for the radiating boundary, as seen in Figure 2.2.
The direct field dynamic stiffness matrix, can be found analytically for simple connections
such as points and lines, however, these calculations can be tedious, so one might want
to calculate it through finite element methods, this will be discussed later on. With the
uncoupled equations for both subsystems now determined, the assembled equation of
motion can now be written as
Dtotq = fext +
∑
m
f(m)
rev ,
(2.21)
where fext is external excitation of the coupled system and Dtot is the total dynamic stiff-
ness matrix
Dtot = Dd +
∑
m
D(m)
dir .
(2.22)
The interests of FE-SEA modelling lies in computing the ensemble average response of
the coupled system, hence the cross-spectrum of the response yields useful informations.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
7
==PAGE:16==
Equation 2.21 in cross-spectral form and averaging over an ensemble can be written as
[8]
⟨Sqq⟩= D−1
tot⟨Sff⟩D−H
tot ,
(2.23)
where ⟨.⟩indicates the ensemble average and H indicates the Hermitian transpose, which
is the complex transpose of a complex matrix. The cross spectrum of the force is given
as [8]
⟨Sff⟩= Sext
ff +
∑
m
(fext⟨f(m),H
rev
⟩+ ⟨f(m)
rev ⟩fH) +
∑
m,n
⟨f(m)
rev f(n),H
rev
⟩.
(2.24)
Breaking down 2.24 it is worth noticing that the response of the system depends on the
statistics of the reverberant loading, from the second term. However, from the third term,
the statistics of the reveberant load is seen to be dependent on the ensemble assumed
in the given analysis. It might seem as if no meaningful statements about the statistics of
the force can be made without more information about the analysis. However, in [7] it is
shown as the uncertainty of the statistical subsystems increases, the force tends towards
the following limit
⟨Sff⟩= Sext
ff +
∑
m
S(m),rev
ff
,
(2.25)
where the cross-spectrum of the reverberant force associated with the reverberant field
is given as
S(m),rev
ff
= αmIm
(
D(m)
dir
)
,
(2.26)
with α being a constant of proportionality and will be derived later on. Combining equations
2.25 and 2.26, then inserting into equation 2.23 yields
⟨Sqq⟩= D−1
tot
(
Sext
ff +
∑
m
αmIm
(
D(m)
dir
))
D−H
tot ,
(2.27)
this is an exact expression for the ensemble average response of coupled subsystems,
however it can not yet be solved, since the ensemble average amplitudes of the reve-
berant fields (α) has not yet been determined, also the amplitudes are functions of the
response, hence equation 2.27 does not contain enough information to solve for the re-
sponse. However, if the incident power is related to the expected energy density, group
velocity and dimensions of the subsystem, then it is shown in [7] that
αm = 4Em
πωnm
,
(2.28)
with Em being the energy contained in the reverberant field, and nm is the modal den-
sity. With an expression for α one is closer to solve for the ensemble average response.
The next section will be dedicated to setup and describe a power balance, such that the
amplitudes of the reverberant fields can be calculated and equation 2.27 can be solved.
2.3.1
Power Balance
Power balances are the fundamental assumptions of a statistical energy analysis. The
assumption states that the power which is put into a system, has to be the same as the
dissipated power and the power leaving the system, this can be written as
Pin = Pdis + Pout.
(2.29)
Using the subsystems described in previous chapter, the input power is due to the energy
flowing across the boundary caused by the direct field. The dissipation is losses within
8
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:17==
the reverberant field, and finally the output power is caused by the reveberant field force
upon the connection boundary. Describing the powers this way gives a power balance
equation as
P (m)
in,dir = P (m)
out,rev + Pdiss,m.
(2.30)
From [8] it is known that the time and ensemble average input power is
P (m)
in,dir = ω
2
∑
jk
Im
(
D(m)
dir,jk
)
⟨Sqq,jk⟩,
(2.31)
where the index jk is what direction the power is transmitted. Inserting equations 2.27
and 2.28 into 2.31 yields
P (m)
in,dir = P (m)
in,0 +
∑
n
hmn
En
nn
,
(2.32)
where
P (m)
in,0 = ω
2
∑
jk
Im
(
D(m)
dir,jk
) (
D−1
totSext
ff D−H
tot
)
,
(2.33)
and
hnm = 2
π
∑
jk
Im
(
D(m)
dir,jk
) (
D−1
totIm
(
D(n)
dir
)
D−H
tot
)
jk .
(2.34)
The coefficient hnm is known as the power transfer coefficient and describes the ensemble
average input power to the direct field of the mth system per unit modal energy density in
the reverberant field of the nth system. The power transfer coefficient is closely related to
the coupling loss factor which is commonly used in traditional SEA modelling, the relation
is
hnm = ωnnηnm,
(2.35)
one benefit of implementing it as done in this thesis, is that the coupling loss factor now
accounts for damping, which is not the case in traditional SEA.
Now that the input power to the reverberant field has been calculated, the next natural
step would be to calculate the power leaving the reveberant field. From [8] the power
leaving the reverberant system can be written as
P (m)
out,rev = ω
2
∑
jk
S(m),rev
qq,jk
Im (Dtot,jk) = Em
nm
htot,m,
(2.36)
where S(m),rev
qq
is the response happening due to the load by the mth reverberant field and
htot,m describes the total energy leaving the mth reverberant field per unit modal energy
density, and is defined as
htot,m = 2
π
∑
jk
Im (Dtot,jk)
(
D−1
totIm
(
D(m)
dir
)
D−H
tot
)
jk .
(2.37)
Finally the dissipated power can be described using the damping loss factor such that
Pdiss,m = ωηmEm.
(2.38)
With the three power entries in the power balance now fully described as FE-SEA model,
one will be able to calculate the fully coupled system with both statistical and deterministic
subsystems.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
9
==PAGE:18==
2.4
Matrix Methods
The goal of this section is to give the reader insights into the matrix methods which has
been used in this thesis. The main purpose of the reduction method in this thesis, is to
reduce a model, describing a statistical subsystem, down to just the boundary nodes, such
that the direct dynamic stiffness matrix can be described only as a boundary condition in
the deterministic system. Another important aspect of this section, is how to implement
boundary conditions into the extracted matrices from COMSOL, this is important since the
extracted matrices from COMSOL are extracted before COMSOL does any calculations,
hence boundary conditions has not been applied to them.
2.4.1
Dynamic Condensation
The utilized reduction method in this thesis is the dynamic condensation. To perform the
dynamic condensation one needs to have a system described by the equation of motion
Du = f,
(2.39)
with D being the dynamic stiffness matrix, u being the displacements, and f being the load
vector. This equation can be rewritten into the boundary and interior nodes by partition
hence,
Du =
[Dii
Dib
Dbi
Dbb
] [ui
ub
]
=
[ fi
fb,
]
(2.40)
with b and i being boundary and interior indexing respectively. Since the reduction needs
to take place on the boundary the interior force will be zero which yields
{
Diiui + Dibub = 0
Dbiui + Dbbub = fb.
(2.41)
Solving for ui gives
ui = −D−1
ii Dibub,
(2.42)
which means the displacements can be rewritten as
[ui
ub
]
=
[−D−1
ii Dib
I
]
ub = Φub,
(2.43)
where Φ is the transformation matrix, and the reduced dynamic stiffness matrix, with only
boundary nodes can be found as
Dred = ΦT DΦ.
(2.44)
This equation allows for calculation of the total response of a system and then reduce
to just the boundary nodes, so that one can use for direct field dynamic stiffness matrix
calculations.
2.4.2
Dirichlet Boundary Condition
Another important matrix calculation done throughout this thesis is adding Dirichlet bound-
ary conditions to the system matrix, in other words adding a fixed boundary condition on
the degree of freedom (DOF) with zero displacement. This can be achieved by setting all
entries that couples to the DOF in the system matrix to zero, hence setting both the row
and column to zero. However, a one needs to be added to the diagonal of the system
matrix, else the DOF would completely vanish from the system. Now imagine a system
with three nodes and three DOFs, such a system will result in a 9x9 system matrix. If
one wants to make the 7th DOF fixed, one would need to create an identity matrix same
10
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:19==
size as the system matrix and the 7th entry should be set to zero. Multiplying this newly
generated identity matrix with the system matrix will result in the 7th row being zero, hence
multiplying the system matrix with the new created identity matrix transposed will result
in the 7th column being zero. Now the one at the diagonal just needs to be added, which
can be done through subtracting the newly created identity matrix from the original identity
matrix and add it to the system matrix. The process described above can be formulated
mathematically as
ADirichlet = NANT + (I −N),
(2.45)
where N is the identity matrix with zeroes at the entries corresponding the fixed DOF, A
is the system matrix and I is the identity matrix. Now that the Dirichlet boundary condition
has been applied to the system matrix, it is important to also apply it to the displacement
vector such that it does not contain any entries at the zero displacements. This operation
is simpler and can be done by a single matrix-vector product
bDirichlet = Nb,
(2.46)
with b being the right hand side of the equation, typically loads. With both implementations
the system can now be solved with zero displacement boundary conditions.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:21==
3
Methods
The main goal of this chapter is to give the reader insight into what methods has been
used throughout the thesis. This includes dimensions and meshing of structures used for
deterministic and statistical calculations and how these are implemented into COMSOL.
The link between COMSOL and Matlab will also be discussed and how the equation are
used within this link.
3.1
Linking COMSOL and Matlab
The link between COMSOL and Matlab is of great importance, since it is in the Matlab en-
vironment that all the matrix manipulation and FE-SEA calculation can happen. However,
the power of solving finite element methods lies within COMSOL. The link between the two
software is made through COMSOLs LiveLink module, which opens a COMSOL server
where COMSOL models can be uploaded to, and then Matlab can read the model from
the server. This connection also allows for specific Matlab functions which works on the
COMSOL model loaded onto the server, an example is mphmatrix(model,’soltag’,out),
which extracts different matrices for the given solution within the model. This function
is crucial when it comes to creating a hybrid FE-SEA model, since the different system
matrices are needed. Another crucial function utilized within the thesis, is the mphxmesh-
info(model,’soltag’), this function gives back all necessary informations of the mesh in the
model. From the function the mesh types, DOFs and nodes can be extracted to Matlab
and is used to find the coordinates of DOFs at which different modifications would be
needed, that could be boundary conditions or direct field dynamic stiffness assemblies.
3.2
Structures Used for Verification of Link Between
COMSOL and Matlab
This section serves as a description of all the structures used for the verification of the
link between COMSOL and Matlab. The different verifications within this thesis are:
• Deterministic system verification,
• semi infinite structure calculations,
• Verification of the direct field dynamic stiffness structure.
The three structures and there modelling will be described in separate subsections.
3.2.1
Deterministic System Verification
The structure used to veryfi the deterministic system results between COMSOL and Mat-
lab was a structural square frame, made out of aluminium, E = 71 GPa, ν = 0.33 and
ρ = 2700 kg/m3. The length of the frame is 0.2 m and the thickness is 0.01 m. It was
created in COMSOL by defining two blocks, one with dimensions 0.2m x 0.2m x 0.2m and
another with 0.2m-0.01m x 0.2m-0.01m x 0.2m-0.01m. The small block was then extruded
outwards in all six faces and finally the small block was subtracted from the big block, the
frame can be seen on figure 3.1. The mesh used was physics controlled normal mesh,
which creates a tetrahedral mesh on the entire frame, with 4382 nodes and 13146 DOFs.
Finally the frame is excited by a harmonic point force at point (0.005, 0.01, 0), with frequen-
cies from 50Hz to 300Hz with an interval of 10Hz. The frequency response of the frame at
the point force location is then calculated in both COMSOL and Matlab to compare and
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Frame created in COMSOL for deterministic verification in link between COM-
SOL and Matlab.
verify that the link between the two software are working. Two different frequency domain
studies has been created in COMSOL, one which takes the frequency vector from Matlab
as input, this is used to get the needed matrices for every frequency. The other study
has the frequency vector already defined within COMSOL and this is used to export the
values of the final results to Matlab.
3.2.2
Semi Infinite Structure Calculation
Semi infinite structures are structures who has one or more dimension of size infinite,
however, this might be reasonable when doing analytical solutions, however, it has its
challenges when doing numerical solutions. The first problem one might encounter when
modelling semi infinite structures is the dimensions, one could just make the model very
large in the infinite dimension, however this approach will lead to long calculation times
and might not give the results which were sought after. Now one has to think of what
does it mean to be of infinite size, and how can this be modeled. For structure borne
sound problems semi infinite has the meaning of no reflections, that is if a dimension is
assumed infinite, then there would be zero interference of waves due to reflection in that
direction. In this thesis three different methods for modelling a semi infinite plate has been
investigated.
3.2.3
Plate Physics Perfectly Matched Layer
The first investigation of semi infinite plate, was carried out using the build in plate physics
in COMSOL. Plate physics is a 2D physics within COMSOL under the structural mechan-
ics module, it extrudes the plate into the z-direction. In the plate physics each node has
6DOFs one for each displacement in x, y and z and one for each displacement of the nor-
mal in x, y and z. The dimensions of the plate is 0.25m x 0.2m with an extruded thickness
of 0.01m. The plate is fixed at the top boundary and free on the other boundaries, which
are assumed infinite. The plate is excited with a harmonic point force at the center of the
plate with a force of 100N in the out of plane direction and a frequency of 300Hz. The in-
finite has been modelled as a narrow air domain around the plate with perfectly matched
layer (PML) condition on all the exterior boundaries. This has been done since PMLs are
14
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:23==
not defined in the plate physics within COMSOL, this is due to the complex behaviour
and the velocity dispersion within transverse waves in a plate. The last part to implement
before the calculations can be run, is the coupling between the narrow air domain and the
plate itself. This coupling can be achieved by letting the load at plate boundary be equal
to the sound pressure at the boundary and letting the particle acceleration of the air being
equal to the acceleration of the plate at the boundary. This can be achieved by manually
changing the equations inside COMSOLs equation view. The free boundary condition will
be modified such that the load upon the boundary is equal to the sound pressure, also the
particle acceleration at the boundary between the two domains has been modified, such
that the particle acceleration equals the plate acceleration at the boundaries between the
two domains. Again the mesh has been set to Normal physical controlled which results
in 6269 DOFs.
3.2.4
Semi Infinite Plate Solid Mechanics
Modelling a plate can also be done using the solid mechanics physics which is found
under 3D modelling and is part of the structural mechanics module in COMSOL. The
solid mechanics has 3DOFs, that is the three displacements in x, y and z directions. For
the solid mechanics modelling of the plate, the same dimensions was used as previous
section and two different approaches for semi infinite modelling was investigated. Firstly
the low reflecting boundary condition was modelled. The low reflecting boundary condition
tries to calculate a perfect impedance match between the plate and the domain adjacent
to the plate for both pressure and shear waves. The second method was to use the build
in PML for solid mechanics. When applying low reflecting boundary condition one can
simply add the condition to the boundary on the object, however when applying PML one
has to make new domains which are then defined as the PMLs. For this specific case a
Cartesian PML was chosen, since the object is a rectangular shape, which means that
five different PML domains were needed. The plate was fixed at the top left and right
corner and 3.5cm towards the top center. The test was with a harmonic point force in the
center of the plate of 100N in the y direction at 200Hz. The plate can be seen on figure
3.2. The mesh used in the 3D case was a free quad, which creates quadrilateral mesh
elements, this was then swept in the thickness direction to ensure at least four elements
in the thickness, this is important to capture the plate behaviour. This creates a structure
with 35943DOFs.
3.3
Hybrid Finite Element Statistical Energy Analysis
Implementation
Figure 3.3: Hollow frame
for full FE-SEA modelling
For the implementation of FE-SEA model the same struc-
ture as [9] was used, to be able to compare the results with
already known data.
The structure consists of 12 beams
connected with right angles and a length of 0.7m, a hollow
section with a side width of 25.4mm and a wall thickness of
3.2mm, the frame has a damping loss factor of 0.05%. The
domain of the frames was modelled as solid mechanics.
Attached to the frame is four panels, each attached with four
bolts, in [9] these has a radius of 5mm and are off centered
from the neutral axis, however for simplicity in this work, they
are considered as point connections and are centered. The
panel dimensions are 0.6m x 1.1m and are 1mm thick, with
a damping loss factor of 0.2%. The whole structure is made of aluminium and has the
same elastic properties as the frame in section 3.2.1. The hollow beams are created in
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.2: The plate used for verification of semi infinite domain in solid mechanics, blue
area is the perfect matched layer.
COMSOL using plane geometry and creating two squares , one with side length 25.4mm
and one smaller with side length 25.4mm-3.2mm, the smaller one is then subtracted from
the big and finally the object is extruded 0.7m, rotated and moved so that it makes up the
frame, see figure 3.3 for sketch of the hollow frame. The four plates was also modelled
in COMSOLs solid mechanics, with PMLs on all four side of the plate. Then the dynamic
stiffness matrix was extracted to Matlab and reduced down to only four points, using matrix
reduction from the theory chapter. This approach allowed for calculating of the direct field
dynamic stiffness matrix, which then could be used to calculate the energies and finally
the response. The full structure can be seen on figure 3.4.
16
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.4: The fully coupled system with one frame and four plates, used for full FE-SEA
calculations.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
This chapter is providing the results from all the methods stated in the methods chap-
ter. Firstly the different result variables will be explained and discussed and then after
the results will be shown, the analyzes of the results will be discussed in the discussion
chapter.
4.1
Deterministic System Verification
The verification of the deterministic system has three steps. First the model is created
as in the method section and computed in COMSOL, secondly the displacements are
exported into Matlab and lastly the matrices are solved in Matlab. If the displacement in all
three calculations agree, then the verification is said to be completed. For this verification
the frame has been excited by a harmonic point force and the displacements in all three
directions are calculated at the excitation point. The magnitude of the volume velocity
will then be calculated and the results compared. The volume velocity has been chosen,
since it provides insight in all three displacement fields hence one validation would be
enough. From figure 4.1 the results of the verification of the deterministic system can
be seen. It is shown that the results exported from COMSOL and the results calculated
extracting the matrices from COMSOL aligns, and that the difference is magnitudes below
the calculated results.
Figure 4.1: The verification of the deterministic system link between COMSOL and Mat-
lab by extracting matrices from COMSOL and calculating the volume displacement, and
exporting the volume displacement directly from COMSOL.
4.2
Verification of semi infinite domain
This section will provide the results for the different approaches of modelling semi infinite
domain in COMSOL. The results will be presented as contour plots, where each contour is
the volume displacement, this gives a good insight in how the wave travels in the material,
hence a good insight in reflections within the plates. Figure 4.2 shows the contour plot
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.2: Contour plot of volume displacement magnitude and surface plot for sound
pressure level, both for verification of 2D plate with PML.
for the 2D plot as well as the sound pressure level, which is created when the plate is
excited. This approach seems to have multiple issues, first the PML boundaries of the air
domain seems to not be zero, which is expected when implementing a PML. Furthermore
the pressure is not evenly distributed in the air domain which will create different loading
on the plate boundary, hence creating different wave patterns in the plate. Lastly no clear
propagation pattern can be seen in the plate, which would have been expected for a
centered point load.
The next step was to investigate both 3D plate methods for semi infinite approach, the
results can be seen on figure 4.3. From the figure the difference in the two methods can
be seen, however it can be difficult to spot which method is better at modelling no reflec-
tions, since they both manage to dissipate the waves at the boundary. Since PML is only
defined for frequency analysis and low reflecting boundaries are mostly recommended
for transient studies, the PML has been implemented as the infinite domain calculation
method moving forward. Now verifying that the 3D plate with PML can be implemented in
Matlab through COMSOL. The differences from the first deterministic verification and that
of the 3D plate is that damping has been added to the model, as well as boundary condi-
tions, hence it is important to ensure this can be implemented correctly. To ensure correct
implementation the surface plot of the volume displacement magnitude has been plotted
for two different instances, one with exported data from COMSOL and one with extracted
matrices to Matlab and then calculated. Finally the difference between the two has been
calculated and plotted, see 4.4. The surface plots are alike, however the difference plot
shows that there is a bit of variance albeit most of it lies within the PML.
20
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:29==
(a) Contour plot of the volume displacement
magnitude for PML approach.
(b) Contour plot of the volume displacement
magnitude for the low reflecting boundary
approach.
Figure 4.3: Comparison of the two methods for modelling semi infinite domain in solid
structure module COMSOL with a harmonic point force at 200Hz.
4.3
Hybrid Finite Element Statistical Energy Analysis
In this section the results of the fully implemented FE-SEA method will be shown, the
results will be compared with those of [9], hence the results will be shown as modulus
squared velocity, for easy comparison. However, first the structures will be computed
and verified in the link between COMSOL and Matlab. A fully FE implementation of the
structure used for FE-SEA modelling has also been created for comparison. The hollow
frame is firstly verified, hereafter the plate with PML and finally the FE-SEA calculations
will be compared with both the results from [9] and the fully implemented FE model. From
4.5 it is possible to see that the matrices for the deterministic system in the full FE-SEA
calculations has been extracted correct. The same can be seen for the plate in figure 4.6.
The final part of the results for the full model was to compare the magnitude velocity of
the FE-SEA approach with that of a full FE approach.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) Surface volume displacement magnitude
plot for COMSOL exported data
(b) Surface volume displacement magnitude
plot for data calculated in Matlab extracting the
COMSOL matrices
(c) Difference in the two above surface plots for the cut line z=0, vertical lines indicate start of
PML
Figure 4.4: Surface plots and the difference between them for a point load of 200Hz
22
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.5: Difference in Matlab and COMSOL calculations for the hollow frame used in
full FE-SEA model.
Figure 4.6: Difference in Matlab and COMSOL calculations for the plate used in full FE-
SEA model.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.7: The magnitude velocity plot of a full FE COMSOL model versus a FE-SEA
model
24
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:33==
5
Discussion
This section will provide a thorough discussion of the presented results in the result sec-
tion. The discussion will mainly consists of discussing the results, explaining deviations in
expected and calculated results and improvements of the methods and results for future
work.
5.1
Deterministic System Verification
The results for verification of the deterministic system (figure 4.1) shows a strong con-
sistency reflected by the small difference between the two calculations. This leads one
to conclude that the matrices extracted using Matlab work as intended. The method of
defining the frequency vector in Matlab and then running the simulation also shows effi-
ciency, since this only requires two different studies within COMSOL. Another approach
to the problem could have been to define a study for each frequency in COMSOL and
then extract the system matrices for every study, however this method is more intuitive,
it makes extracting the matrices more complicated and prone to errors, since every small
change in the structure would need to be computed for every frequency inside COMSOL,
however, in Matlab this would be done automatically.
5.2
Plate physics modelling
At figure 4.2 the contour of the displacement for a point load is plotted, and it shows that for
a frequency of 300Hz the displacement gets larger as the distance from the fixed bound-
ary gets larger. This shows that the total displacement is moving in the same direction,
hence no interference or reflections, however the excitement of the structure occurs in
the center of the plate and since there is propagation from the center, the waves in the
plate must have influenced each other. This can also be seen by the pressure along the
plate boundary. The pressure is varying along the whole boundary, hence the load onto
the plate varies, which means the plate would have different loads along the boundary.
Another important take from the plot is that the boundary of the outer air domain is not
zero, which is however the expected result when doing a PML, since it is supposed to
fulfill the Sommerfeld radiation condition. Lastly it is worth noting that this plot is 2D how-
ever the plate is moving in all three directions hence the acoustic pressure would have
been more accurately plotted in the 3D domain. Another aspect to this approach is that
the air domain would add unwanted damping to the dynamic stiffness matrix hence this
approach, is not suited for calculating a semi infinite domain for a 2D plate in COMSOL.
This also gives an insight to why a PML is not already build in COMSOL, firstly it is hard
to imagine how the 2D PML would work on 3D movement, secondly transverse waves in
a plate has dispersive wave speeds, which makes it complicated to absorb all frequen-
cies. An approach to do a PML in 2D plates in COMSOL has been suggested in [10].
Comparing the 2D method with the two investigated 3D models from 4.3 shows a clear
difference in how the volume displacements propagates throughout the plate. The two
3D cases yields both good absorbing at the boundaries, however, they also seem differ-
ent. The PML case is not as uniform as the low reflecting boundary. The main difference
between the two methods is that the low reflecting boundary condition is based on exact
analytical solution for no reflection, where as the PML is based on a coordinate change,
which ensures evanescent waves stays evanescent and that propagating waves becomes
evanescent. This approach is usually the better choice for frequency dependent studies
however such a coordinate change can not always occur. For the low reflecting boundary
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
25
==PAGE:34==
case a solution can always be found, however these calculations are time consuming,
hence numerical softwares uses approximations for the boundary condition. The chosen
model for simulating semi infinite domains was chosen to be the PML, due to its fact of
being better at frequency studies, which was needed when sweeping through frequencies
during a frequency study.
With the semi infinite modelling decided, the next step was to verify the model within the
COMSOL Matlab link. The different volume displacement plots for the verification can
be seen in figure 4.4. The contour plots 4.4a and 4.4b looks similar, however investi-
gating 4.4c shows that the results are similar to a certain point. When the cutline plot
reaches the boundary of the PML, the difference increases, however both displacements
are decreasing. The difference increasing in the PML domain is of no concern since both
displacements are decreasing rapidly, which is what is wanted from a PML. The decrease
in the Matlab calculations occurs faster, than that of the COMSOL, which might suggest
that Matlab is doing better in the PML domain than COMSOL, however the difference most
likely occur due to numerical errors, since the values in the PML are significant smaller
than the values in the plate.
5.3
Point and Line Connections
An important feature of a FE-SEA modelling is the connection between the deterministic
and statistical subsystems. These subsystems can be connected in many different ways,
however the most simple connection would be the point and the line connection. At the
connections is where the direct dynamic stiffness matrix is calculated, hence it is of great
importance to calculate the connection. If desired these simple connections can be cal-
culated analytically, however this task can be very tedious, an approach for the analytical
solution for the direct direct dynamic stiffness matrix can be seen in [11]. Another ap-
proach would be to calculate the connections numerically, which has been done through
this thesis. The results from the infinite domain analysis in 3D, works as studies for line
connections as well. If a deterministic system is attached to a statistical system along a
line, then the plates stiffness could be reduced to only the nodes within the line see figure
5.1 for visualization. The benefits of this approach is that a lot of tedious calculations are
skipped, the downside however is that one has to add another deterministic part to the
method. This is not a big problem for the cases in this thesis, since all the connection
have been assumed to be equal, however when the structure becomes complicated and
many different connections are within the system, this method can be time time consum-
ing. For the full FE-SEA system the connection between the statistical and deterministic
subsystem was modelled as point connections, hence the direct dynamic stiffness matrix
was reduced to one single node within the plate.
5.4
Complete Hybrid Finite Element Statistical Analysis
The results obtained in 4.7 shows that the difference in the full FE model and FE-SEA
model does not match, however they seem to get closer at the frequency becomes higher,
this is not certain and can not be concluded just from that one figure. There could be
multiple reasons for the graphs not matching, however I believe the most likely is due
to the deterministic calculations in both cases. The mesh is coarse, which results in the
plate not being captured correctly for the full FE, however the deterministic calculation is
for the FE-SEA approach is made in solid physics, where a beam physics would have
been more suited, however, this was not possible since COMSOL does not allow for point
excitation in beam physics.
26
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.1: visualization of the line connection for a statistical subsystem
5.5
Hybrid Finite Element Statistical Analysis as a Method for
Modelling Hearing Aids
One of the research questions of this thesis was to investigate the usage of the FE-SEA
method for hearings aids, with the electronic components modelled as statistical subsys-
tem, and the deterministic being the shell. Describing the deterministic part of the hearing
aid is a task which could be done, and has been done, however the issue lies within cal-
culating the statistical subsystems. Firstly one would have to measure and calculate the
modal densities, mass and damping of each individual component, which is doable but
cumbersome, secondly the connections would need to be defined. The connections is
where this method becomes not suitable, it is possible to calculate the connections nu-
merically, however connections and how to model them in numerical methods is still a
widely researched topic, so for basic connections like lines and points it could work.
5.6
General Thoughts
As i reflect upon the journey of this thesis multiple insights come to mind. The unexpected
challenge of calculating the direct dynamic stiffness matrix as the most vivid. A small cal-
culation ended being what took up most of the thesis time, and now sit with a realisation
of why books, paper and articles either takes up many pages describing the process or
neglect it. This challenge, however, created a valuable learning experience in both over-
coming hurtles and also accepting redirection within a project.
With the hindsight I do have now, I would have changed one thing from the thesis be-
ginning, that being the way LiveLink for COMSOL and Matlab has been utilized. As of
in the thesis Matlab has been used as a tool to calculate the FE-SEA model, and extract
matrices, which I would have changed to be only Matlab based, meaning that I would
have not used the COMSOL GUI, but based everything on Matlab coding, and then used
COMSOL for solving the FEM equations. This approach would have made things more
complicated in the start of the project, since I would have had to get used to the LiveLink
for Matlab syntax, however the project in all would have been more efficient.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:37==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis the the basic concepts of finite element methods and statistical energy anal-
ysis has been provided and then the theoretical background for a hybrid finite element
statistical energy analysis has been derived. The FE-SEA approach to dynamic predic-
tion is throughout the thesis carried out in a link between COMSOL and Matlab. One of
the main concepts in FE-SEA modelling is the direct dynamic stiffness matrix, which is
the force occurring at the connection between statistical and deterministic system due to
a direct field. This thesis investigate a way to numerical calculate the direct dynamic stiff-
ness matrix through semi infinite structures. Three different methods was tested, first the
2D plate physics, then two methods in 3D solid physics, PML and low reflecting boundary.
Out of the three the PML was chosen as the best, however the low reflecting boundary
had good results as well. The 2D implementation was not desired.
This thesis also provides verification for the link between COMSOL and Matlab, this is
of great importance to do for every model, to make sure the matrix extraction and ma-
nipulation work as intended. Lastly the full FE-SEA approach is used for predicting the
behaviour of a deterministic and statistical structure. The FE-SEA approach can not be
concluded as verified, since too many uncertainties within the modelling in the determin-
istic system has occurred, and a more detailed approach for this has been suggested as
further work.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:39==
7
Further Work
The completion of this thesis yield a significant insight into modelling FE-SEA model in
both Matlab and COMSOL, and the point and line connection that may occur in the system.
However, as with any other subject there are numerous opportunities for expanding upon
what is found in this thesis, some will be outlined below.
7.1
FE Model
In this thesis a full finite element model has been used as comparison to the FE-SEA
model, however the model is not exact, since the connections are not very well defined
within the full model. A more precise FE model for comparison would be a good next
approach for future work.
7.2
Coding
The future work of this thesis could have multiple coding projects as next step. One could
make an algorithm for calculating the direct dynamic stiffness matrix or even utilize AI
to predict the direct dynamic stiffness matrix for different object connections. Another
coding project could be optimizing of the FE-SEA code written in this thesis, for now one
calculation takes multiple hours, this could be optimized.
7.3
Verification
Another future work could be to verify the FE-SEA model with more than just one struc-
ture, this could be multiple FE structures, SEA structures or even experimental structures.
Another way to verify the model could be to make a Monte Carlo simulation with masses
randomly distributed along the structure.
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
31
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
Léo Baurès; Ulf Orrenius. “Coupled FE-SEA vibroacoustic analysis of floating floors
for trains”. In: Proceedings of German Acoustical Society (DAGA) (2007).
[2]
Kazuki Fukui Arnaud Charpentier Prasanth S. “Effecient Model of Structure-Borne
Noise in a Fully Trimmed Vehicle from 200Hz to 1kHz”. In: Inter Noise (2008).
[3]
I. Dandaroy. “Mid-high frequency vibroacoustic modeling and correlation of Orion
Ground Test Article”. In: 41st International Congress and Exposition on Noise Con-
trol Engineering 2012, INTER-NOISE 2012 8 (Jan. 2012), pp. 6388–6399.
[4]
Niels Aage Fengwen Wang; Jakob S. Jensen. Lecture notes: 41813 FEM for sound
and vibrations. 2023.
[5]
Finn Jacobsen; Peter Møhler Juhl. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics. Wi-
ley, 2013.
[6]
M. Ohlrich. “Vibration and waves in solid structures at audible frequencies”. In:
acoustical technology, DTU electro (2011).
[7]
P.J. SHorter; R.S. Langley. “On the reciprocity relationship between direct field ra-
diation and diffuse reverberant loading”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America (2005).
[8]
P.J-Shorter; R.S.Langley. “Vibro-acoustic analysis of complex systems”. In: Journal
of Sound and Vibration (2005).
[9]
Vincent Cotoni; Phil Shorter; Robin Langley. “Numerical and experimental validation
of a hybrid finite element-statistical energy analysis method”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America (2007).
[10]
Maryam Morvaridi and Michele Brun. “Perfectly matched layers for flexural waves in
Kirchhof–Love plates”. In: International Journal of Solids and Structures 134 (2018),
pp. 293–303. ISSN: 0020-7683. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2017.11.009.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020768317305140.
[11]
R.S.Langley;K.H.Heron. “Elastic wave transmission through plate/beam junctions”.
In: Journal of Sound and Vibration (1990).
32
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
==PAGE:41==
Exploring hybrid FE-SEA for vibroacoustic micro systems
33
