==PAGE:1==
From Security Policies to Practices
Researching Programmers’ Compliance with Cy­
ber Security Standards
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
From Security Policies to Practices
Researching Programmers’ Compliance with Cyber Security Standards
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Halla Margrét Jónsdóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cybersecurity Engi­
neering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in En­
gineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Cyber Security.
Halla Margrét Jónsdóttir ­ s222991
Signature
Date
ii
From Security Policies to Practices
Halla MargretFonsdottir
22. June 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In an era where technology plays an increasingly significant role in our lives, the impor­
tance of cyber security has never been greater. To combat the increasing threat of cyber
attacks and to lower the likelihood of being affected by an attack, cyber security standards
have been created to guide companies with implementing security best practices. Many
programmers are responsible for developing and maintaining critical infrastructure. A lack
of cyber security measures and non­compliance by programmers can pose a significant
risk to the security of products, systems and infrastructure being developed. The person
responsible for ensuring the cyber security standard is being followed is typically the Chief
Information Security Officer (CISO) or a similar role. The aim of this research is to obtain
reflections and opinions from CISOs and programmers on their experience with comply­
ing with cyber security standards in Danish and Icelandic companies. The research was
of a qualitative design, involving one­on­one semi­structured interviews with both pro­
grammers and CISOs from each participating company. Interviews with 19 CISOs and
18 programmers working at different Icelandic and Danish companies were conducted.
The interviews were then analysed to identify key findings and themes. The interviews
revealed diverse insights about cyber security practices and compliance within organi­
sations. Sometimes, the programmers were not on the same page as the CISOs, while
other times they were well­informed and up­to­date about the security standard and mea­
sures at their companies. Programmers often faced challenges such as the additional
time and effort required to comply with security protocols. Benefits they had gained from
following security policies were improved security practices and a structured approach to
coding and system management. Nearly 90% of the programmers interviewed had not
taken any formal courses in cyber security during their university education. This sug­
gests to a significant gap in the academic training of programmers, which may impact
their ability to effectively comply with security standards. A large majority of the CISOs
had experienced some challenges in promoting adherence to security standards, some
with programmers, others with upper management. CISOs found it easier to promote ad­
herence to standards after the company’s leadership had emphasised the importance of
a certification, making it clear that it was a priority. In conclusion, this study offers valu­
able insights into the challenges and benefits of adhering to cyber security standards from
the perspectives of programmers and CISOs in Denmark and Iceland. It emphasises the
importance of continuous improvement in communication, training, and implementation
of security practices to achieve robust cyber security compliance in organisations.
From Security Policies to Practices
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Halla Margrét Jónsdóttir, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
To all who have supported and assisted me, thank you. I greatly appreciate it.
I would like to extend special thanks to all the participants who took the time to meet with
me and discuss cyber security; this research would not have been nearly as interesting
or even possible without you.
Guðrún Valdís Jónsdóttir and Eik Mánadóttir, CISO, sister and goddaugther, Syndis
Þú ert best, takk fyrir alla hjálpina, endalausu símhringingarnar og yfirlesninguna.
Ég kann óendanlega mikið að meta það! <3
Elsku Eik, takk fyrir að vera til og gera líf okkar fallegra og litríkara.
Sigríður Valdimarsdóttir and Jón Helgason, Bookkeeper and CEO, Mamma og Pabbi
Hjartans þakkir elsku foreldrarnir mínir fyrir allan stuðninginn í gegnum tíðina, hún er
ómetanleg. Þið hafið kennt mér svo margt og ég hlakka svo til að vera saman aftur.
Eiður Andri Guðlaugsson, Sport scientist (og kærasti), SDU
Takk fyrir allan endalausa stuðninginn og að hafa haldið mér andlega og líkamlega heil­
brigðri yfir þennan krefjandi tíma <3
Ég elska ykkur mest í heiminum og hlakka til að fagna öll saman.
Weizhi Meng, Supervisor, DTU Compute
Thank you very much for the valuable guidelines and quick responses. I really appreciate
it!
iv
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
What are Cyber Security Standards? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Programmers’ Role in Cyber Security
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Challenges with Compliance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Contribution and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.7
Outline of the Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background and Related Work
7
2.1
Cyber Security Standards and Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
ISO/IEC 27001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
SOC 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
NIST CSF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3.1
Key Components of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework . .
9
2.1.4
CIS Controls
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.5
OWASP Top Ten . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.6
OCTAVE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.1.7
Information Security Forum (ISF) Standard of Good Practice
. . . . 12
2.1.8
DORA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.1.9
NIS2 Directive
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.1.9.1
NIS2 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.1.10 Comparing these Cyber Security Standards and Frameworks . . . . 15
2.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Methodology
23
3.1
Research Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Selection of Interview Participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
Data Collection Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.1
Interview Guides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.1.1
Interview Question Guide for the CISOs . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3.1.2
Interview Question Guide for the Programmers . . . . . . . 26
3.4
Interview Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.5
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6
Ethics Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.7
Data Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Results
31
4.1
Interview Participants and their Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Results from the Interviews with the CISOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Results from the Interviews with the Programmers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
From Security Policies to Practices
v
==PAGE:8==
5
Discussion and Conclusion
63
5.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.1.1
Summary of Main Research Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.1.1.1
Key Findings from the CISOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.1.1.2
Key Findings from the Programmers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.1.2
Research Questions Answered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.1.3
“Cry Wolf” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.1.4
Cyber Security in Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5.1.5
Communications between CISOs and Programmers . . . . . . . . . 67
5.1.6
Programmers’ buy­in to Security Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5.1.7
Management Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5.1.8
Confidence in Iceland’s Security Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.2.1
NIS2 Compliance Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.2.2
Company Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Bibliography
72
A Appendix
77
A.1 Interview Questions in Icelandic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.1.1
Questions for CISO’s in Icelandic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.1.2
Questions for Programmers in Icelandic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
vi
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
CISO
Chief Information Security Officer
CSO
Chief Security Offier
EEA
European Economic Area
EU
European Union
IDS
Intrusion Detection System
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission
IPS
Intrusion Prevention System
ISF
Information Security Forum
ISMS
Information Security Management System
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
IT
Information Technology
MFA
Multi­Factor Authentication
MSc
Masters of Sciences
NIS2
Network and Information Security Directive 2
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCTAVE
Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation
OWASP
The Open Web Application Security Project
SOC2
Service Organization Control 2
From Security Policies to Practices
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Overview
In an era where technology plays an increasingly significant role in our lives, the impor­
tance of cyber security has never been greater. Cyber security is the practice of protecting
networks, systems, hardware, data, and programs from cyber attacks [1]. Usually, the
goal of these cyber attacks is to access, change or destroy sensitive information or data,
disrupt normal business processes, or demand money from users via ransomware [2].
As technology advances, cyber attacks are simultaneously on the rise, with a significant
increase in incidents reported in recent years. With 2.365 cyber attacks and over 343
million victims in 2023, data breaches increased by 72% between 2021 and 2023, break­
ing the previous record from 2021 [3]. In 2024, cyber crimes are expected to cost the
world $9.5 trillion USD and $10.5 trillion USD in 2025 [4]. The number of unfilled cyber
security jobs increased by 350 percent globally between 2013 and 2021, from 1 million to
3.5 million. There is a need for more than 750.000 additional cyber security professionals
in the United States alone, resulting in a substantial supply­demand imbalance [5].
As companies and organisations continue to rely heavily on digital infrastructures, the
need to protect sensitive information and systems remains crucial. To combat the in­
creasing threat of cyber attacks and to lower the likelihood of being affected by an attack,
cyber security standards have been created to guide companies with implementing secu­
rity best practices. Cyber security standards specify the requirements for an Information
Security Management System (ISMS), which helps organisations become more aware of
their risks and to be proactive in identifying and addressing their weaknesses and areas for
improvement. “An ISMS such as that specified in ISO 27001 takes a holistic, coordinated
view of the organization’s information security risks in order to determine and implement
a comprehensive suite of information security controls within the overall framework of a
coherent management system” [6].
Cyber security standards (in this paper referred to as the standards or security standards)
include policies and procedures that aim to ensure that general security best practices
are followed by the companies’ employees, including secure software implementations
for programmers. The purpose of security standards is to make it easier for companies
to set an ISMS in place to help them become more secure and know how to react if
something comes up, e.g. a vulnerability is found or a cyber attack is issued. Many se­
curity standards are available that companies can choose from, some better known than
others. Examples of such security standards include ISO 27001, NIST, OCTAVE, and
SOC2. Companies can be audited and certified by official standards, which can be ben­
eficial when working with other companies and even outside your country. However, it is
not enough to have a standard in place if it is not being followed. The person responsible
for ensuring the cyber security standard is being followed is typically the Chief Information
Security Officer (CISO) or a similar role. Some CISOs are responsible for all information
security tasks at their organisations, while others work with separate operations centers or
take on tasks outside of information security to help with organisational priorities. CISOs
primary responsibility is to lead information security across the company, implement cy­
ber security solutions where necessary, and ensure their organisation directs its mission
and resources toward enhancing the organisation’s cyber security [7]. ”The head of each
agency has a legislative mandate to maintain and improve the security of their agency’s
From Security Policies to Practices
1
==PAGE:12==
information and information systems. In most cases, the agency’s internal policies del­
egate management of the agency’s information to the Chief Information Officer (CIO).
Under The Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA), the CIO may then
delegate tasks related to information security to the senior agency information security
officer (often referred to as CISO)” [7].
Despite the increasing importance of cyber security, there is a notable gap in most com­
puter science and software engineering bachelor’s programs, where mandatory cyber
security courses are often lacking. Cyber security is sometimes just briefly mentioned at
the end of certain courses, or the program might have an elective course about cyber
security for those interested in the topic [8]. This missing part of computer science ed­
ucation raises concerns about the extent to which programmers (as a significant part of
graduated computer scientists become programmers) follow security measures in their
work after graduation, and whether they will gain any security education and knowledge
at all. [9] found in a survey they conducted that a lack of a formal security education, and
a lack of investment in security training for employers, is contributing to the growing cyber
security skills gap. According to the survey, the problem begins at the university level,
where only 24% of the respondents had to complete mandatory cyber security courses
as part of their education [9].
1.2
Motivation
The motivation for this thesis topic is multi­factored. First, the rise in cyber attacks un­
derscores the critical need for robust cyber security practices that help protect sensitive
information and maintain the integrity of digital infrastructures [1]. Second, the significant
financial impact of cyber crimes highlights the economic importance of having effective
cyber security practises. Additionally, the shortage of skilled cyber security professionals
shows the need to integrate a comprehensive security education into computer science’s
programs. Moreover, relying on programmers to perform secure coding methods de­
mands a deeper understanding of their awareness and compliance with cyber security
policies. Another key motivator for this thesis is the researcher’s interest in comparing
cyber security practices in Denmark and Iceland. Having moved from Iceland to Den­
mark two years ago to pursue a Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering,
specialising in Computer Security, a program that did not exist in Iceland at the time, the
researcher saw an opportunity to explore and compare the cyber security cultures of these
two countries. The researcher’s network and experience in software engineering within
the Icelandic technology industry provided a good foundation, but the researcher had lim­
ited connections within the technology industry here in Denmark. This presented a great
opportunity to delve into Denmark’s cyber security culture and compare to the Icelandic
cyber security practises. To see whether the cyber security standards implemented in
Iceland would be similar to those in Denmark and if similar practices were advocated in
both countries. Additionally, aiming to understand if there are distinct difference in cyber
security cultures between these two Nordic countries, considering their differences in size
and the fact that Denmark is in the European Union, while Iceland is not in the Union but
in the European Economic Area.
To explore these questions, CISOs and programmers working at companies in both Den­
mark and Iceland were interviewed. Their responses were compared to understand the
extent to which companies and their programmers adhere to established cyber security
standards and policies. While many companies follow security standards or have some
security policies in place, the extent to which programmers adhere to these standards
remains uncertain. This introduces the overarching question explored in this thesis how
2
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:13==
closely and in what ways do companies and their programmers follow established cyber
security standards and policies. This is further discussed in section 1.6.
Interviews with CISOs and programmers from various Danish and Icelandic companies
were conducted to shed light on which security standards and policies these companies
adhere to, the programmers’ familiarity with their company’s standards and policies, their
adherence to these standards, and the perceived challenges faced and benefits gained
when complying with them. The data from both countries were explored to determine if
there are differences in security practices or different security standards in place.
1.3
What are Cyber Security Standards?
Cyber security standards are formalised sets of rules and guidelines that organisations
follow to protect their information systems from cyber threats. These standards are im­
portant because they provide a structured approach to securing data and systems, en­
suring that organisations can defend against a wide range of cyber threats [10]. Security
standards act to ensure that concepts, terms, and definitions are understood by all par­
ties, which reduces the possibility of errors and facilitates the sharing of best practices
and knowledge [11]. However, it is important to remember that the standards are only
frameworks that provide a good starting point for establishing policies, processes, and
administrative activities for information security management for companies, that need to
make sure to follow the guidelines and implement the security measurements they state
in their policies [10].
As mentioned above, common standards include ISO 27001, which focuses on informa­
tion security management systems [12]; OCTAVE, which defines a risk­based strategic
assessment and planning technique for security [13]; NIST, which provides a framework
that aims to better equip organisations to purposefully and effectively manage their cyber
security risks [14]; and SOC2, which specifies how organisations should protect customer
data from security incidents, unauthorized access, and other vulnerabilities [15].
Each of these standards or framework has its own requirements and objectives, influenc­
ing organisations’ choice of which to implement based on their specific needs, regulatory
requirements, and industry practices or requirements. Although implementing ISO stan­
dards might be time­consuming, they can be useful for organisations that need to show
their information security capabilities through ISO 27000 certification. NIST is the stan­
dard mandated by federal agencies in the United States; however, any organisation can
use it to create an information security plan tailored to their specific technology. The only
poor decision among these different frameworks is selecting none of them as they assist
security professionals in planning and directing an information security programme [10].
Measuring compliance with these standards can be challenging. Tools and methods for
assessing cyber security include security audits, vulnerability assessments, Intrusion Pre­
vention Systems (IPS), Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and compliance checklists.
These different tools can help organisations identify gaps in their security practices and
ensure that their policies are effectively implemented [16].
1.4
Programmers’ Role in Cyber Security
Programmers play a crucial role in ensuring cyber security, to make both their organisa­
tions and the digital world as a whole more secure. They are responsible for writing secure
code, adhering to security standards and guidelines during the software development pro­
cess, and often maintaining the security of the systems they develop. Compliance with
the security policies in place is very important for protecting the organisations’ data and
From Security Policies to Practices
3
==PAGE:14==
systems from cyber threats, given that the policies are well written for the organisation’s
work.
That is why security awareness and understanding of cyber security policies among pro­
grammers are of utter importance. This thesis will explore the responsibilities of program­
mers in adhering to these standards in the Danish and Icelandic companies interviewed.
It will also shed light on the programmers’ point of view involved, including their differ­
ent and specific challenges and stressors, such as tight deadlines, the need to fix bugs
quickly, and the pressure to implement new features, or their comfort with policies as it
may offer a nice frame to work within.
1.5
Challenges with Compliance
Despite the existence of comprehensive cyber security standards, programmers often
face significant challenges in complying with these requirements. Factors influencing
compliance include the complexity of the standards, lack of awareness or training, or­
ganisational culture, and support. This thesis will investigate these challenges and the
role of organisational support in promoting compliance.
Non­compliance with security standards by programmers can have severe consequences,
including increased vulnerability to cyber attacks. Emphasising the urgency to find effec­
tive methods to ensure secure coding practices is crucial for mitigating these risks. This
study aims to identify the obstacles programmers face and propose solutions to enhance
compliance with cyber security standards.
1.6
Contribution and Research Questions
This thesis is to contribute to the existing body of cyber security research by deepening
our understanding of programmers’ security awareness and their compliance with cyber
security standards.
The aim of this research is to obtain reflections and opinions from CISOs and program­
mers on their experience with complying with cyber security standards in Danish and Ice­
landic companies, and to address this identified gap will investigate the following research
questions:
The goal of this thesis about cyber security standards and programmers’ compliance with
them is to provide answers to the following research questions:
RQ1: What are the most used cyber security standards in Denmark and Iceland, and
why?
RQ2: What are the main challenges programmers encounter when it comes to complying
with cyber security standards, and what benefits have they gained from following
these standards?
RQ3: To what extent do programmers in Danish and Icelandic companies demonstrate
awareness of their companies’ established cyber security standards or policies?
RQ4: Is there a difference between Icelandic (EEA country) and Danish (EU country)
companies regarding compliance to cyber security standards?
By addressing these questions, this research will provide valuable insight into the practi­
cal application of cyber security standards in Denmark and Iceland, highlighting the chal­
lenges and benefits experienced by programmers in these countries.
4
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:15==
1.7
Outline of the Paper
The remainder of this thesis is outlined as follows:
Chapter 2 provides background on the most common cyber security standards used in
the industry today and excising literature about compliance with these cyber security stan­
dards.
Chapter 3 outlines the methodology used when designing and conducting the interviews,
along with the data collection and analysis.
Chapter 4 presents the results of the interviews with the CISOs and the programmers.
Chapter 5 discusses the findings of this research, answers the research questions, ex­
plores limitations, provides suggestions for future work and ends with a conclusion of the
key findings of the research.
From Security Policies to Practices
5
==PAGE:16==
6
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:17==
2
Background and Related Work
This section introduces the most commonly used cyber security standards and frame­
works in the industry, as well as widely discussed cyber security regulations in Europe.
The standards and frameworks covered include ISO/IEC 27001, SOC 2, NIST CSF, CIS
Controls, OWASP Top Ten, OCTAVE, and the Information Security Forum (ISF) Standard
of Good Practice. Additionally, the section explores the NIS2 Directive and the DORA
regulations, which will both be enforced into European law. The section includes a com­
parison of these standards and frameworks to highlight their key features and applicability.
Existing literature on these security standards is also reviewed to provide context and in­
sights into their implementation and effectiveness.
2.1
Cyber Security Standards and Frameworks
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines a standard as a
“document [...], established by consensus and approved by a recognized body,
that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or character­
istics for activities or their results, aimed at the achievement of the optimum
degree of order in a given context” [17].
The purpose and goal of cyber security standards is to increase the security of information
technology (IT) systems, critical infrastructures and networks of organisations[10] [11].
Nevertheless, there are often significant differences in how individual standards are de­
veloped and applied. Cyber security standards specify the functional and assurance re­
quirements for a system, process, product, or other technological environment. Good and
robust cyber security standards facilitate consistency and uniformity in the processes and
work of product developers and act as a reliable benchmark or metric when e.g. buying
security products. These standards are usually implementation­independent and span a
wide range of granularity, from the specification of security features in a Web browser to
the mathematical formulation of a cryptographic algorithm [11]. In addition to meeting user
needs, a standard needs to be practical and realistic because developing products that
adhere to it requires taking financial and technological constraints into account. A stan­
dard’s requirements also need to be verifiable; if not, users will not be able to evaluate
security, not even when products are put through standard testing or audits. Increasingly
many cyber security standards have been created to assist organisations in implement­
ing security controls that satisfy legal and regulatory requirements, managing security risk
more effectively, and achieving cost and performance benefits. Governments and corpo­
rations are increasingly requiring organisations e.g. critical infrastructure of the adoption
of cyber security standards. Products and services that comply with standards are being
produced and sold by an increasing number of manufacturers and vendors. Addition­
ally, more and more organisations are participating in the creation and development of
standards [11].
2.1.1
ISO/IEC 27001
ISO is an independent, non­governmental international organisation that brings global
experts together to agree on the best ways and practises of doing things. From artificial
intelligence to climate change, ISO states that their mission is to “make lives easier, safer
and better – for everyone, everywhere” [18].
From Security Policies to Practices
7
==PAGE:18==
ISO/IEC 27001 is one of the world’s best­known cyber security standard for ISMS, but
the standard defines requirements an ISMS must meet [19]. The “ISO” part of the name
of the standard stands for that the standard is certified by the International Organization
for Standardization and IEC stands for International Electrotechnical Commission [19].
In the cyber security industry, the standard is usually called ISO 27001 or simply ISO,
or all the ISO cyber security standards are referred to as the ISO 27000 series. When
organisations become ISO 27001 certified, the certification is valid for three years. How­
ever, the organisations’ ISMS must be maintained and managed throughout these three
years. Auditors from the certification body will conduct annual surveillance visits while the
certification is valid [18]. The ISO/IEC 27001 standard offers guidance for creating, imple­
menting, maintaining, and continuously improving an ISMS to companies of all sizes and
across all industries. When an organisation or business complies with ISO/IEC 27001, it
indicates that it has implemented a risk management system for the protection of its data
and that system adheres to all of the best practices and principles outlined in this interna­
tional standard [12]. ISO 27001 does not require a particular method when implementing
the standard, instead it recommending a process approach. This is essentially a Plan­Do­
Check­Act (PDCA) cycle strategy with iterations. Any model provided the requirements
and processes are clearly defined, implemented correctly, and reviewed and improved
regularly. The PDCA cycle ensures that the procedure and policy documents are easily
available and adequately protected, distributed and stored in the managed ISMS sys­
tem [20].
2.1.2
SOC 2
A security framework called SOC 2, developed by American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants (AICPA), outlines how businesses should protect customer data from secu­
rity incidents, breaches, unauthorised access, and other vulnerabilities. SOC 2 stands for
Systems and Organisation Controls 2 and was created to provide auditors with direction
for evaluating the operating effectiveness of an organisation’s security protocols. AICPA
made SOC 2 in 2010 based on the five Trust Services Criteria (TSC): security, availability,
confidentiality, processing integrity, and privacy [15]. A SOC 2 examination is a report on
controls at a service organisation relevant to the five TSC. The purpose of SOC 2 reports
is to meet the requirements of a diverse group of users who require comprehensive de­
tails and guarantees regarding the controls in place at a service organisation concerning
the security, availability, and processing integrity of the systems the organisation uses to
handle user data, as well as the confidentiality and privacy of the information these sys­
tems process [21]. An independent auditor will assess a company’s security posture in
relation to one or more of these Trust Services Criteria during a SOC 2 audit. Companies
implement internal controls to comply with the specific criteria of each TSC [21].
There are 2 types of SOC 2 attestation report to choose from: A SOC 2 Type 1 and SOC
2 Type 2. In SOC 2 reporting, a Type 1 report assesses the design of a service organisa­
tion’s systems at a specific point in time, while a Type 2 report evaluates the operational
effectiveness of these systems over a defined period. Organisations that store, process,
or transmit sensitive customer data and need to quickly assure prospects of secure data
handling may require a SOC 2 Type 1 report. This report is suitable for new companies,
those making significant changes to their data security systems, or when a quick deal
closure is needed. In contrast, a SOC 2 Type 2 report is necessary for organisations to
demonstrate the design and operational effectiveness of their controls over time, provid­
ing greater assurance to customers and showcasing a mature data security posture for
securing enterprise deals [22].
Unlike some popular security frameworks like ISO 27001, SOC 2 does not have rigid re­
8
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:19==
quirements Every organisation has different controls and attestation reports and every
company designs their own controls to meet their requirements for the Trust Services Cri­
teria. The organisation then hires an independent auditor to confirm whether its controls
meet the SOC 2 requirements and the auditor evaluates how effectively the business’s
systems and procedures adhere to SOC 2 in a report that is written following the audit [15].
The vast majority of companies that have a SOC 2 are not under a legal or regulatory
requirement to comply with SOC 2. Therefore SOC 2 is not a mandatory security frame­
work, but a attestation which can be proven by an external auditor. That proof is the
SOC 2 report which is a living document providing interested parties information about
the organisation’s commitment and practises to security [23].
2.1.3
NIST CSF
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) under the U.S. Department
of Commerce develops cyber security standards, best practices, guidelines, and other
material with the main purpose to serve the needs of the industry in the United States of
America, federal agencies and the general public. NIST’s work includes both practical
information that organisations may use right away, as well as longer­term research that
foresees technology advances and upcoming challenges. Federal laws, executive orders,
and regulations specify some of the NIST cyber security assignments. For instance, all
federal agencies in the U.S. are required by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
to use the cyber security guidelines and standards developed by NIST for non­national
security systems. The demands of the American public and business community also
influence NIST’s cyber security activities. NIST also contributes to the understanding
and management of privacy threats and risks, some of which are closely related to cyber
security [24].
The NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0 offers guidelines for managing cyber secu­
rity risks to businesses, governmental bodies, and other organisations. Any organisation,
regardless of size, maturity level, or sector, can utilise this taxonomy of high­level cyber
security outcomes to better understand, evaluate, prioritise, and convey its cyber security
initiatives. The NIST CSF refers to online resources that offer more guidance on controls
and procedures that might be applied to get desired results rather than specify how the
outcomes should be attained [25].
The NIST CSF is intended to be used to handle cyber security threats in addition to other
business risks, such as supply chain, financial, privacy, reputational, technological, and
physical threats. Regardless of the audience’s level of cyber security experience, the
NIST CSF outlines targeted outcomes that should be understood by executives, man­
agers, and practitioners. These outcomes allow an organisation the freedom it needs to
handle its particular risks, technologies, and mission concerns because they are sector­,
country­, and technology­neutral. In order to reduce cyber security risks, outcomes are
immediately mapped to a list of possible security controls [25].
2.1.3.1
Key Components of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
The NIST CSF consists of three main components: This is a set of cybersecurity activ­
ities, desired outcomes, and applicable references that are common across critical in­
frastructure sectors. The Framework Core consists of five concurrent and continuous
functions [25].
1. CSF Core, the central component of the CSF, a taxonomy of high­level cyber se­
curity outcomes that can assist any kind of organisation in risk management. Each
outcome is detailed in a hierarchy of Functions, Categories, and Subcategories that
make up the CSF Core components. Regardless of their level of cyber security
From Security Policies to Practices
9
==PAGE:20==
experience, a wide range of people, including managers, practitioners, and execu­
tives, may understand these results. The results allow an organisation the freedom it
needs to handle its own risks, technologies, and mission concerns because they are
sector­, country­, and technology­neutral. The core consist of these sex concurrent
and continuous functions:
(a) Govern (GV): The organisation’s cyber security risk management policy, strat­
egy and expectations are established, agreed on and monitored. With regard
to an organisation’s mission and stakeholder expectations, the GOVERN Func­
tion produces results that help guide actions taken to prioritise and attain the
goals of the other five Functions. An organisation’s larger enterprise risk man­
agement (ERM) plan must include cyber security, where governance actions
are crucial. Understanding the organisational environment, developing a cyber
security strategy, managing the risk associated with the cyber security supply
chain, defining roles and duties, establishing policies, and supervising the plan
are all covered by GOVERN.
(b) Identify (ID): The organisation’s current cyber security risks are identified and
understood. Comprehending the entity’s resources (such as data, software,
hardware, systems, people, facilities, services), vendors, and associated cy­
ber security threats allows a company to arrange its priorities in accordance
with its risk mitigation plan and the missions that needs to be done that were
identified under GOVERN. To assist efforts under all six Functions, the Iden­
tify Function also identifies areas for improvement for the organisation’s plans,
policies, processes, procedures, and practices that support cyber security risk
management.
(c) Protect (PR): The organisation uses safeguards to control its cyber security
risks. PROTECT facilitates the ability to protect assets to prevent or reduce
the possibility and impact of unwanted cyber security events as well as to raise
the likelihood and impact of seizing opportunities after assets and risks have
been identified and prioritised. This function covers the following outcomes:
platform security (i.e., protecting the hardware, software, and services of phys­
ical and virtual platforms); awareness and training; data security; identity man­
agement, authentication, and access control; and the resilience of technology
infrastructure.
(d) Detect (DE): Potential cyber security breaches and attacks are identified and
analysed. DETECT makes it possible to quickly find and analyse abnormalities,
signs of compromise, and other potentially harmful occurrences that could point
to the occurrence of cyber security incidents and attacks. Activities for effective
incident response (RS) and recovery (RC) are supported by this function.
(e) Respond (RS): Actions are taken to respond to cyber security incidents. Con­
taining the impact of cyber security events is something that RESPOND pro­
motes. In this function, reporting, communication, analysis, mitigation, and
incident management are all covered as results.
(f) Recover (RC) : Affected assets and operations by a cyber security incident are
recovered and restored [25].
2. CSF Organisational Profiles, using the outputs of the CSF Core, the profiles serve
as a means of characterising the present and/or desired cyber security posture of
an organisation [25].
10
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:21==
3. CSF Tiers are used for assessing the level of rigour in an organisation’s cyber secu­
rity risk governance and management policies. They can be applied to CSF Organi­
sational Profiles. Tiers can also give an organisation’s perspective on cyber security
threats and the procedures in place to address those risks context [25].
The steps demonstrated in fig. 2.1 provide an example of how a company could use an
Organisational Profile to guide continuous cyber security improvements.
Figure 2.1: Potential steps for creating and using a NIST CSF Organisational Profile [25].
2.1.4
CIS Controls
The Center for Internet Security (CIS) has developed a prioritised set of actions to protect
organisations and their data from cyber attack vectors. The CIS Critical Security Controls
(CIS Controls) are a simplified, prioritised, and prescriptive set of best practices designed
to improve an organisation’s cyber security posture. Theses controls include foundational
security measures that help to achieve essential cyber hygiene to protect organisations
against cyber attacks [26]. Unlike some cyber security frameworks, such as NIST CSF,
which addresses risk analysis and risk management, the CIS Controls focus entirely on
lowering risk and boosting resilience for technical infrastructures. CIS Controls assist in
mitigating identified risks by integrating with current risk management frameworks. For
IT departments that lack in­depth technical knowledge of information security, the CIS
Controls can serve as valuable resources [10].
2.1.5
OWASP Top Ten
The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) is an international nonprofit or­
ganisation focused on web application security [27]. Web application security involves
protecting websites, applications, and APIs from various attacks [28]. One of OWASP’s
fundamental principles is to ensure that all their materials are freely available and easily
accessible on their website, enabling anyone to enhance their web application security.
The resources they offer include documentation, tools, videos, and forums about web
application security. The OWASP Top 10 is perhaps their most known project [27].
The OWASP Top 10 is a standard awareness document for web application security in­
tended for web developers. It represents a broad consensus about web applications’
most critical security risks. OWASP encourages all companies to adopt the OWASP Top
10 into their processes to effectively reduce and mitigate security risks in their web appli­
cations. Implementing the OWASP Top 10 is likely one of the most effective initial step
From Security Policies to Practices
11
==PAGE:22==
toward transforming the software development culture within organisations to prioritise
the production of more secure code [29]. The OWASP Top 10 is a periodically updated
report, put together by a team of security experts from all around the world [27].
2.1.6
OCTAVE
The Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation (OCTAVE) approach
defines a risk­based strategic evaluation and planning technique for security. OCTAVE
is a self­directed approach, meaning that individuals within an organisation take owner­
ship in determining the security strategy for the organisation [13]. It was developed to
assist organisations in conducting information security risk assessments in relation to the
strategic and operational drivers that are essential to their mission fulfilment.
The goals of OCTAVE are to help organisation:
• Create qualitative risk evaluation criteria that outline the operational risk tolerances
of the organisation.
• Identify important assets critical to the organisation’s mission.
• Identify threats and vulnerabilities to those important assets.
• Investigate and assess the potential consequences for the organisation should threats
arise [30].
A version of the strategy, called OCTAVE­S, is designed to work with the specific limi­
tations and limited resources that are often present in small businesses (less than 100
employees). A small, interdisciplinary team of three to five employees from an organisa­
tion oversees OCTAVE­S. They collect and evaluate data, creating a protection strategy
and mitigation measures based on the particular operational security threats that the or­
ganisation faces. For the team to manage OCTAVE­S efficiently and be able to handle
all tasks independently, it needs to have a thorough understanding of the business and
security procedures of the organisation [13]. OCTAVE Allegro is the next generation of
the OCTAVE method and a member of the OCTAVE assessment family, along with its
predecessors OCTAVE and OCTAVE­S. OCTAVE Allegro was designed to optimise and
streamline the information security risk assessment process, allowing an organisation to
achieve adequate outcomes with minimal expenditure of time, personnel, and other lim­
ited resources. It prompts the organisation to consider facilities, people, and technology
in relation to information and the services and business processes they support. While
OCTAVE Allegro offers an alternate approach that is especially focused on information
assets and their resilience, it remains focused on placing risk assessment in the appropri­
ate organisational context, just like OCTAVE and OCTAVE­S. Using this different strategy
can help an organisation position and carry out the risk assessment in a way that yields
valuable results more quickly and effectively [30].
2.1.7
Information Security Forum (ISF) Standard of Good Practice
The Information Security Forum (ISF) is a leading authority on cyber security and infor­
mation risk management. The ISF’s Standard of Good Practice for Information Security
(SOGP) provides a comprehensive framework for managing information security risks.
Updated regularly to address evolving threats, the SOGP covers a wide range of topics
including risk assessment, security architecture, incident management, and compliance.
It serves as a valuable resource for organisations aiming to enhance their information se­
curity posture and ensure robust protection against cyber threats. However, ISF does not
offer certification. Instead, organisations use the SOGP as a guideline to enhance their
security posture and practices [31].
12
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:23==
2.1.8
DORA
Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) is an EU regulation aimed at strengthening the
IT security of financial entities, including banks, insurance companies, and investment
firms. It was enforced on January 16, 2023, and will apply in EU law as of January 17,
2025. DORA aims to ensure the European financial sector’s resilience in the event of se­
vere operational disruptions by harmonising rules related to operational resilience across
20 types of financial entities and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) third­
party service providers. The financial sector is increasingly dependent on technology and
on tech companies to deliver financial services needed. This makes financial entities vul­
nerable to cyber­attacks or incidents. When ICT risks are not properly managed, they
can disrupt cross­border financial services, affecting other companies, sectors, and the
broader economy. This highlights the critical importance of digital operational resilience
within the financial sector. This is why DORA was made. Key areas covered by DORA
include ICT risk management, third­party risk monitoring, resilience testing, incident re­
porting, and information sharing on cyber threats. As DORA is a regulation, it will be
set into law in Europe, but companies will not get certified for the regulation but have to
comply with it [32].
2.1.9
NIS2 Directive
The first European Union (EU) cyber security law, known as the Network and Information
Security (NIS) Directive, is also the first horizontal internal market tool designed to in­
crease the EU’s network and information systems’ resistance to cyber security threats [33].
The NIS2 Directive, which was introduced in 2020 and went into effect on January 16,
2023, is an extension and continuation of its predecessor, the NIS cyber security Directive
from the EU. The European Commission made a proposal to improve upon and address
the weak points of the initial NIS Directive. The original NIS Directive also sought to raise
the cyber security standards of the EU member states, but its implementation was fraught
with difficulties and led to inconsistent efforts throughout the EU. NIS2 was suggested as
a replacement by the EU commission due to the increase in cyber threats [34] [35].
NIS2 requires operators of critical infrastructure and essential services to put in place
suitable and adequate security measures and notify the appropriate authorities of any in­
cidents in order to improve the security of networks and information systems within the
EU. In contrast to the original NIS, NIS2 broadens its EU­wide security requirements and
scope of covered organisations and sectors to improve the security of supply chains, sim­
plify reporting obligations, and enforce more stringent measures and sanctions throughout
Europe. In 2024, NIS2 passes into law and the deadline for EU member states to adopt
the Directive into national law is on 17th of October 2024. This means that by Q4 2024,
every organisation covered by the Directive will be required by law to comply with its
standards [34].
NIS2 affects all entities, including companies and suppliers, that provide essential or im­
portant services to the European economy and society [36]. Entities classified into two
categories are covered by NIS2 and it aims to establish a higher level of cyber security
for those organisations; entities from highly critical sectors or Essential Entities (EE) and
other critical sectors or Important Entities (IE). High criticality sectors include: energy (dis­
trict heating and cooling, electricity, gas, oil and hydrogen); transportation (air, rail, water
and road); banking; financial market infrastructures; health, including the production of
pharmaceuticals and vaccines; drinking water; waste water; digital infrastructure (e.g. in­
ternet exchange points; DNS service providers; cloud computing service providers; data
centre service providers; TLD name registries; content delivery networks; trust service
providers; providers of public electronic communications networks and publicly available
From Security Policies to Practices
13
==PAGE:24==
electronic communication services); ICT service management (managed security service
providers and managed service providers), public administration and space. Other impor­
tant sectors include: postal and courier services; waste management; chemicals; food;
manufacturing of medical devices, machinery and equipment, computers and electronics,
motor vehicles, trailers and semi­trailers and other transport equipment; digital providers
(online search engines, online market places, and social networking service platforms)
and research organisations [33] [37] [35].
Table 2.1: NIS2 Entity categories: Sectors that are Critical infrastructures (Essential En­
tities) and important infrastructures [37] [36].
Essential Entities (EE)
Important Entities (IE)
Energy (electricity, district heating and
cooling, oil and gas)
Postal and courier services
Transport
Waste management
Banking
Chemicals
Financial market infrastructures
Food
Health
Digital Providers
Drinking water
Research
Waste water
Manufacturing of e.g. medical devices,
electronics and machinery equipment
Digital Infrastructure
Public administration
Space
2.1.9.1
NIS2 Requirements
The NIS2 Directive adds additional rules and obligations to the first NIS Directive for Eu­
ropean organisations in four main areas: risk management, corporate accountability, re­
porting obligations, and business continuity. These measures are intended to strengthen
Europe’s resilience against present and future cyber threats [38]. Organisations must im­
plement risk management practices in order to comply with the new NIS2 Directive, which
mandates minimising cyber risks; Iincident management, improved network security, en­
hanced supply chain security, greater access control, and encryption are some of these
approaches. Corporate management is also required by NIS2 to supervise, approve,
and receive training on the entity’s cyber security procedures and cyber risk mitigation.
Management may face fines for violations, including liability and maybe a temporary sus­
pension from management positions. Reporting Obligations are mandated by NIS2 where
essential and important entities need to have procedures in place for promptly reporting
security incidents that have a major influence on their ability to provide services or recip­
ients. NIS2 establishes precise notice deadlines, like a 24­hour “early warning.” Entities
also need to prepare for how they will maintain business continuity in the event of signifi­
cant cyber attacks. This strategy ought to take emergency protocols, set up a Computer
Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT), and system recovery into account [35].
NIS2 requires critical and important entities to adopt 10 baseline security measures in
addition to the four main areas of requirement already described. These measures are
intended to combat specific forms of anticipated cyber threats.
1. Risk assessments and security policies for IT systems
2. Policies and procedures for the use of cryptography (and encryption if applicable)
14
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:25==
3. Policies for handling and reporting vulnerabilities. Security regarding the procure­
ment of systems.
4. Security protocols, including data access policies, for employees who have access
to confidential or important data.
5. Use of multi­factor­authentication (MFA)
6. Policies and procedures for assessing security measures’ effectiveness
7. A security incident response plan
8. Cyber security training and security awareness training for employees
9. A play book, a plan for managing the organisations during and following a security
incident. This includes e.g. that backups need to be up to date and ensuring access
to IT systems and their functionality during and following the incident.
10. Security of their supply chains and the business’s connection with its direct suppliers.
Companies need to evaluate each vendor’s or supplier’s overall security level [35].
2.1.10
Comparing these Cyber Security Standards and Frameworks
This subsection provides a comprehensive comparison of the cyber security standards
and frameworks discussed above: ISO/IEC 27001, NIST CSF, CIS Controls, OCTAVE
Allegro, SOC 2, NIS2 Directive, OWASP Top Ten, DORA regulation and ISF best prac­
tises. Understanding the distinctions and unique attributes of these standards is important
for organisations to select and implement the most suitable framework for their specific
needs [10]. The comparison can be seen in Tables 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4.
To facilitate a thorough and systematic comparison, the following criteria was used in the
comparison:
• Purpose: The primary aim and focus of each standard or framework, outlining what
the standard seeks to achieve in terms of cyber security management.
• Implementation: The methodology and approach required to implement the stan­
dard within an organisation.
• Certification: Whether the standard offers a certification process, and for how long
a certification is valid.
• Geographical Focus: The primary geographical regions where the standard is
mostly adopted or mandated.
• Key Features: The main components and controls emphasised by the standard.
• Applicability: The types of organisations and sectors that can benefit most from
implementing the standard.
• Strengths: The notable advantages and strengths of the standard.
• Weaknesses: The potential drawbacks or limitations associated with the standard.
From Security Policies to Practices
15
==PAGE:26==
Table 2.2: Comparison of the discussed security standards ­ Part 1
Criteria
ISO 27001
NIST CSF
CIS Controls
Purpose
Information
security
management
Cyber security
best practices
Foundational
security
measures
Implementation
PDCA cycle
Flexible,
customisable
Simple and
prescriptive
Certification
Yes (3 years)
No (alignment
guidelines)
No (guidelines)
Geographical
Focus
Global (popular
in Europe)
Primarily USA
Global
(developed
in USA)
Key Features
ISMS, risk
management
Cyber security
outcomes
Essential hygiene,
risk mitigation
Applicability
All organisations
in all sectors
Government and
private sectors
Technical
infrastructures
in all sectors
Strengths
Comprehensive
ISMS and
certification
Flexible, widely
adopted
Practical and
actionable
controls
Weaknesses
Can be resource­
intensive
No direct
certification
Limited to
technical
controls
16
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:27==
Table 2.3: Comparison of the discussed security standards ­ Part 2
Criteria
OCTAVE Allegro
SOC 2
NIS2 Directive
Purpose
Risk management.
Provide information
about controls related
to security, availability,
processing integrity,
confidentiality or
privacy.
Trust services criteria,
protect customer data
Cyber security for
essential/critical
infrastructure
and services
in Europe.
Will be enforced
in European laws.
Implementation
Risk assessment
methodology
Third­party audit
Monitored by national
authorities
Certification
No (self­assessment)
No, attestation
(Type 1 and
Type 2 reports)
No (compliance required,
in EU laws in 2024)
Geographical­
Focus
Global
Global
Europe
Key Features
Risk identification
and management
Security, availability,
processing integrity,
confidentiality, privacy
Cyber security directives
for critical infrastructure
Applicability
All organisations
in various sectors
Service organisations
Essential critical
infrastructures and
digital services in the EU
Strengths
Focused on
risk management
Specific to service
organisations and
straight forward
certification
Comprehensive,
EU­wide requirements
Weaknesses
No certification,
self­assessment
Custom controls
can vary widely
Implementation can be
complex and costly
(will see in following years)
From Security Policies to Practices
17
==PAGE:28==
Table 2.4: Comparison of the discussed security standards ­ Part 3
Criteria
OWASP Top Ten
DORA
ISF
Purpose
Web application
security risks
Ensure digital
operational resilience
for financial entities
in Europe.
Guidance for
information security
best practices.
Implementation
Recommendations
and best practices
Mandatory
incident reporting,
risk management,
testing, and oversight.
Regularly updated
guidance and
tools.
Certification
No (guidelines)
No certification
required, compliance
enforced by
EU regulations.
No
Geographical­
Focus
Global
Europe
Global
Key Features
Top 10 most
critical web app
security risks.
Comprehensive
risk management,
incident reporting,
resilience measures.
Broad security
practises covering
various aspects.
Applicability
Web­developers
and security teams.
Financial entities
in Europe.
All sectors
Strengths
Focused on most
critical web app
security issues
Comprehensive,
ensuring operational
resilience for critical
financial services.
Goes into law.
Comprehensive,
regularly updated,
globally relevant
Weaknesses
Limited to web
application security
Implementation complexity,
regulatory compliance
enforcement costs.
No certification
This comparison highlights the diverse approaches and focuses of different cyber security
standards and frameworks. ISO/IEC 27001 offer formal certification processes, provid­
ing assurance to stakeholders about an organisation’s cyber security measures. SOC 2,
NIST and CIS Controls, while not offering a direct certification, provide flexible and prac­
tical frameworks widely adopted in various sectors. Companies can get an attestation for
these frameworks, through being audited by 3rd party auditors. OCTAVE Allegro focuses
on risk management through a self­assessment methodology, while NIS2 introduces com­
prehensive, mandatory requirements for critical infrastructure and services within the EU.
The OWASP Top 10 focuses specifically on the most critical web application security risks,
providing practical guidance for developers and security teams.
By analysing cyber security standards against key criteria, organisations can make in­
formed decisions about which frameworks best align with their operational needs, risk
profiles, and regulatory environments.
2.2
Related Work
Previous research and literature has investigated cyber security standards, their imple­
mentation and compliance. Sommestad, Ericsson, and Nordlander examined and com­
18
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:29==
pared several SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) cyber security stan­
dards and guidelines in relation to the risks and countermeasures they outline in [39]. Ad­
ditionally, they compared their findings to the ISO/IEC 17799 international standard (now
ISO/IEC 27002). They applied a method that involved classifying the data into distinct
categories and then comparing how those main issues were handled in the standards.
The major issues’ occurrence were recorded, and comparisons made. They came to the
conclusion that whereas ISO/IEC 17799 is more concerned with organisational counter­
measures, SCADA­specific standards are more focused on technical ones, like intrusion
detection and firewalls. Their results indicate that electric power utilities that only use
ISO/IEC 17799­style standards for security management should supplement their efforts
by adapting them to SCADA specific security requirements, giving special attention to
intrusion detection, firewalls, and system administration tools [39]. While this research
highlights the need for tailored standards in different sectors, the thesis will explore how
these tailored standards impact programmer compliance in day­to­day operations, partic­
ularly comparing practices in Icelandic and Danish companies.
The main contribution of the article “On Challenges of Cyber and Information Security
Management in Federal Structures ­ The Example of German Public Administration” is
the results of an interview study among the CISOs of the federal states of Germany,
which shed light on challenges in cyber security management. The survey on information
security carried out identified challenges and perspectives of CISOs. The main finding
of the study was that more specialised tools are required for federation and federal state
level coordination. These tools should provide normative or best practice suggestions
instead of the amount of assistance provided by policies or guidelines. [40]. The study
focuses on the challenges at the administrative level, whereas this research will delve into
how these high­level challenges translate into practical issues faced by programmers in
implementing security standards.
In the article “Cyber security of a critical infrastructure” Slavimir and Martin examine and
analyse critical infrastructure’s cyber security, cyber attacks on critical infrastructure and
the measures needed to be taken to mitigate the consequences of such cyber attacks.
Critical infrastructure is a crucial part of the entire infrastructure of the society. Its de­
activation, whether temporary or permanent, will have far­reaching effects due to the in­
terconnectedness of numerous subsystems within the infrastructure. It is, in a sense,
essential to the way society and the economy run. Countries and organisations in charge
of managing critical infrastructure are concerned about the effects on people and infras­
tructure, the length of time needed for system recovery, and the potential for significant
damage if the critical infrastructure gets hit by cyber attacks. Since critical infrastructure
contains sensitive information that is susceptible to cyber attacks, cyber security plays
a significant role in protecting critical infrastructure [41]. While the paper focuses on the
importance and broad measures of protecting critical infrastructure, this thesis will explore
which specific cyber security standards are implemented by programmers and CISOs in
critical infrastructures in Iceland and Denmark and their compliance.
K. Jawaharrani et al. discussed and studied the key resource areas of CISOs and how
they can manage risk through cyber security laws. They suggest that CISOs should create
a thorough cyber security plan in accordance with the business goals of their organisa­
tions that identifies possible risks and threats, along with specifying the steps required to
reduce such risks. CISOs should also put in place robust security measures, e.g. fire­
walls, encryption, intrusion disclosure and blockage systems, multi­factor attestation, and
security intelligence and event management (SIEM) systems. Another task of the CISO
is to organise frequent training and alertness programs for employees to warn and create
From Security Policies to Practices
19
==PAGE:30==
awareness about security dangers and how to inhibit them. Security awareness training
could, for example, contain a phishing campaign and education on security best practises.
The CISO is also responsible for creating a solid incident response plan that details the
behavioural actions to be taken in the case of a security breach. The CISO should also
frequently interact with senior management and the board to ensure their awareness of
the organisation’s security posture and relevant security threats [42]. This comprehen­
sive view of a CISO’s responsibilities complements this research by providing a backdrop
against which can evaluate the specific challenges and compliance behaviors of program­
mers in different organisational contexts.
Shackelford et al. analyses and explore in their article ”Toward a Global Standard of Cy­
bersecurity Care?: Exploring the Implications of the 2014 Cybersecurity Framework on
Shaping Reasonable National and International Cybersecurity Norms”, the evolving cyber
security duty of care and the potential influence of the 2014 National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) cyber security framework on negligence law. As best practices
in this field are still being established, the NIST framework may help define standards
not only for critical infrastructure firms but also for the broader private sector. Moreover,
the NIST framework has the potential to shift the cyber security landscape not only in the
United States but also in other jurisdictions that favor a largely voluntary approach to en­
hancing cybers ecurity, such as the United Kingdom, the European Union, and India. For
businesses operating across jurisdictions, the uptake of the NIST framework by stake­
holders could lead to the emergence of a global duty of cyber security care, promoting
consistency and contributing to cyber peace even in the absence of regulatory action.
Shackelford et al. also discuss how cyber security frameworks, while essential for main­
taining security, can sometimes be seen as burdensome. The paper highlights that these
frameworks can create additional layers of compliance that may be viewed as hindrances
by those directly involved in technical and developmental roles [43].
“Life Inside the Perimeter: Understanding the Modern CISO” is a report commissioned in
2019 by Nominet, which is based on interviews conducted with 408 CISOs from all over
the world. Almost 90% of the CISOs surveyed reported having moderate to high levels of
stress, and 25% reported that stress had negatively impacted their physical and/or mental
health. Of those surveyed, nearly 20% admitted to using alcohol or medication as a coping
mechanism, and more than 50% said they were unable to switch off from work [44]. This
is very alarming and needs to be addressed in near future, as cyber security is a very
important aspect in people’s daily safety.
In their article “Defining Cybersecurity Due Diligence Under International Law: Lessons
from the Private Sector”, Shackelford et al. examines the arguments for and against the
establishment of a cyber security due diligence norm, arguing in favour of a proactive
framework that recognises the distinct and shared obligations of public and private sector
participants in cyberspace. The comparison they make is between cyber security due
diligence in the private sector and the experience of the 2014 NIST Framework. They
propose that concepts of cyber security due diligence should be drawn from existing cus­
tomary international law but expanded upon through an examination of industry norms
that are in turn informing national policies, given the rich cross­pollination of cyber secu­
rity best practices and the cyber threat posed by a huge range of attackers to the public
and private sectors [45]. While the article focuses on a broad, international perspective,
this research will narrow down to the practical implications and compliance issues faced
in regards to cyber security standards in Iceland and Denmark.
In the domain of cyber security metrics, Gupta et al. propose a comprehensive taxonomy
20
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:31==
that classifies metrics into five major categories: vulnerabilities, protection mechanisms,
threats, users, and encounter outcomes. This classification aids in systematically eval­
uating the strength of cyber security measures. Additionally, the paper discusses the
application of Multi Criteria Decision making approach to assess these metrics, providing
a robust framework for comparative analysis [16].
From Security Policies to Practices
21
==PAGE:32==
22
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:33==
3
Methodology
In this chapter, the methodology of the research performed for this thesis will be detailed.
It will delve into the design of the research, the characteristics of the interview participants
and how they were selected. The section on data collection methods will detail the tech­
niques that were implemented during the research process to collect the data and what
interview questions the participants were asked to answer. Section 3.4 will explain the
interview process, from how the participants were selected, to how the interviews were
conducted. The data analysis process will be explained along with ethical concerns and
how the data was managed throughout the research.
3.1
Research Design
In this research, interviews with 19 CISOs and 18 programmers working at different Ice­
landic and Danish companies were conducted. The goal was to gather their perspectives
and insight to answer the research questions. The interviews provided valuable points
and data, which were then analysed to identify key findings and themes. The detailed
methods of analysis are discussed further in Section 3.5.
The research was of a qualitative design, involving one­on­one interviews with both pro­
grammers and CISOs from each participating company. When the researcher’s objective
is to gain a deeper grasp of the participants’ distinct perspectives rather than a generalised
comprehension of a phenomenon, semi­structured interviews are the preferred approach
of gathering data [46]. This approach was chosen in order to obtain authentic and accu­
rate data, ensuring that programmers felt comfortable expressing their genuine opinions
without the influence of their CISOs, and vice versa. A qualitative research design was
deemed appropriate for this study as it allowed for a deeper exploration of programmers’
compliance behaviors, which might not have been captured as accurately through quan­
titative methods.
Interviews that are semi­structured and in­depth explore the participants’ experiences and
the meanings that they make of them. One of the main advantages of a semi­structured
interview approach is that it allows the interviews to be focused while providing the re­
searcher the freedom to explore relevant ideas that may come up during the interview.
For this research as it can further allowed for a better understanding of the cyber security
compliance being assessed. During the interviews, the researcher encouraged partici­
pants to talk about issues relevant to the research questions by asking some open­ended
questions that provided the opportunity to explore additional topics that arose during the
conversation. In semi­structured interviews, the interviewer is allowed to re­word, re­order
or clarify the questions for the participants to further investigate topics introduced by the
respondent [46] [47].
The Theory of Planned Behavior, as outlined by Ajzen in [48], was partly used as a the­
oretical guideline for this research’s interviews. The Theory of Planned Behavior asserts
that behavioural intentions, attitudes, perceived behavioural control, and subjective norms
all have an impact on behaviour. This framework provided a good perspective for examin­
ing the factors that might influence cyber security compliance among programmers. The
COREQ checklist [47] and the Seven Steps to Conducting, Analyzing, and Reporting
Semi­Structured Interview Data (7S CARS­SID) suggested in [46] were used as inspira­
tion and guidelines for the process and methodology of the thesis. They provided helpful
From Security Policies to Practices
23
==PAGE:34==
insight when in came to planning, conducting, analysing, concluding and reporting the
interviews conducted in this research.
These chosen qualitative approaches aligned with the research questions as listed in
Section 1.6, which sought to explore the perspectives and experiences of programmers
and CISOs regarding cyber security compliance. Given the exploratory nature of the
study and practical constraints, like the time each interview took, a qualitative approach
with a limited number of in­depth interviews was therefore deemed more feasible and
appropriate than a large scale quantitative survey.
3.2
Selection of Interview Participants
The participants required for this research had to be working at companies or organisa­
tions that develop and/or manage their own software and have established cyber security
protocols. Given the crucial nature of their work, many companies that fall under the cat­
egory of critical infrastructures, as mentioned in Section 2.1.9, need to follow strict cyber
security policies, making them suitable for this study. Therefore, many participants were
selected from companies classified as critical infrastructure in Iceland and Denmark.
Participants were chosen based on their roles within these companies, divided into two
groups: programmers and CISOs. The programmers, or software engineers, were re­
sponsible for the development and/or maintenance of various software systems within
their organisations. These individuals would provide insight into the practical and techni­
cal aspects of cyber security practices and the challenges they have faced or benefits they
have gained in their day­to­day tasks following security measures. On the other hand, the
CISOs (or equivalent security personnel) were responsible for overseeing the organisa­
tion’s cyber security strategies and policies. Their perspectives were crucial in under­
standing the broader organisational and policy­related aspects of cyber security compli­
ance, as well as the measures being taken to improve security awareness and compliance
within their companies. It was essential for the research that each pair of participants (a
programmer and a CISO) came from the same organisation to ensure a comprehensive
understanding of the company’s cyber security practices from different perspectives.
The inclusion criteria for participants included being actively employed in relevant roles
within the company. The exclusion criteria for the programmers included individuals not
directly involved in software development, management or programming. Similarly, the
exclusion for the CISOs included individuals not directly involved with cyber security man­
agement within the company. These criteria ensured that the participants had substantial
knowledge and experience relevant to the research questions.
A few different strategies were used to recruit participants. Initial contact was made via
email or LinkedIn messages, explaining the purpose of the study and inviting them to
participate. Some participants were recruited via e­mail, when their contact information
was received from another participant in the research or from the researcher’s profes­
sional network. Most participants were recruited through LinkedIn, where “CISO” and
“Copenhagen Metropolitan Area” were used as key search words to find people working
in CISO roles in Danish companies. When searching for CISOs in Icelandic companies,
“CISO”, “öryggisstjóri” and “upplýsingaöryggisstjóri” (Icelandic terms for CISO) were used
as key search words on LinkedIn and “Reykjavík, Capital Region, Iceland” was selected
as the location. When CISOs were identified that fit the inclusion criteria, they received
a LinkedIn request. Upon accepting the LinkedIn request, they received a message with
an invitation to participate in the research. When a CISO had shown interest or accepted
to participate, a search began for a programmer or a software engineer working at the
24
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:35==
same company as the CISO. Sometimes the CISO suggested a programmer that was
then contacted with an invitation to participate in the research. Other times, programmers
were recruited directly by the researcher and found via LinkedIn where the company’s
name was one of the key search words along with “software engineer”, “programmer” or
“developer”, as well as the location of the company. Therefore, in some cases the CISOs
knew which programmer from their company was being interviewed, while other CISOs
did not know. When a CISO and a programmer had accepted to participate in the re­
search, the interviews were scheduled. Several potential participants did not respond to
the research invitation, declined due to lack of time in their schedule, or were not allowed
by their employers to participate.
The chosen sample size of 18 pairs of participates was deemed appropriate for this qual­
itative study as it allowed for exploring the research questions more in­depth. According
to [49], data saturation in qualitative research can often be achieved with a sample size of
12 to 20 interviews when the goal is to understand common perceptions and experiences.
This sample size also provided a manageable amount of interviews within the practical
constraints of the study, such as time management and the scheduling of interviews, as
well as providing a sufficient amount of data to sufficiently answer the research questions.
3.3
Data Collection Methods
This section details the methods used to collect the data for this research, focusing on the
interviews conducted with the participants.
As mentioned in Section 3.1, the data collection involved semi­structured interviews. This
approach was chosen to gather rich, detailed data while allowing for the flexibility to delve
deeper into specific topics that emerged during the interviews. Semi­structured interviews
facilitated the collection of candid responses by building trust between the researcher and
participants, ensuring the authenticity of the data collected.
The interviews were scheduled for 30 minutes each and the participants were notified of
the time allotted for the interview in advance. Additionally, data was collected through
note­taking during the interviews and audio recordings. The recordings and notes were
consistently conducted using the same device and note­taking methods. They were thor­
oughly cleaned and transcribed later the same day.
3.3.1
Interview Guides
Interview guides were created and used by the researcher to ensure that all relevant topics
and questions were covered consistently across all interviews while permitting exploration
of other topics. Two guides were made, one for the CISOs and another one for the pro­
grammers. Participants did not see the questions beforehand unless requested. The
interview questions were pilot­tested with one CISO and one programmer before execu­
tion to ensure understandability and that all questions were clear and no important ones
were missing. The interview guides were developed based on the research questions
and focused on:
1. The cyber security standards and policies in place at the organisations.
2. Programmers’ awareness and understanding of these standards.
3. Experiences and perceptions regarding cyber security practices.
4. Challenges or benefits in adhering to cyber security policies.
5. Perceived effectiveness of the implemented security measures.
From Security Policies to Practices
25
==PAGE:36==
The interview guides provided a framework for the interviews that allowed the conversa­
tions to explore areas of interest that emerged during each interview as well as ensuring
that answers to all the research questions would be obtained.
3.3.1.1
Interview Question Guide for the CISOs
1. First, could you briefly tell me about your role within your company, and what your
main goals are at the moment?
2. Does your company follow a cyber security standard or policies?
3. What cyber security standard or policies does your company follow? (If there is no
standard, do your policies seek inspiration from any particular standard?)
4. What factors influenced the selection of these particular security standards or poli­
cies?
5. Is there any sort of training or presentations for the company’s programmers about
the cyber security standard or policy?
6. Are the programmers and other employees aware of what security standard the
company follows?
7. Is the standard or guidelines available to the programmers somewhere? Can they
access it?
8. Have you faced any challenges in promoting adherence to security standards and
policies within the organisation?
9. What is your opinion of the standard?
10. Do you find the cyber security standard easy or hard to follow?
11. Is there anything you would like to do differently regarding the standard or the se­
curity measures taken?
12. Is there anything you would like to add to this interview?
3.3.1.2
Interview Question Guide for the Programmers
1. First, could you briefly tell me about your role within your company, and what your
main tasks are at the moment?
2. As a programmer or a software engineer, is there a cyber security standard or policy
you follow within your company?
3. Can you describe your familiarity with the standards or policies implemented?
4. Do you know if, and where, you can access the cyber security standard or policy?
5. Do you or did you receive any training about the security standard, for example,
when you started working for your current company?
6. Have you faced any challenges in adhering to the standards during your work or
gained any benefits in your tasks from following the security standard? If so, can
you give me an example?
7. How do you find following the cyber security standard? Is it easy, hard, or irrelevant?
Do you find it necessary or helpful to have these guidelines?
8. What is your opinion on the cyber security standard or policy?
9. Did you take a security course or obtain any security knowledge in your education?
26
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:37==
10. Is there anything you would like to add to this interview?
3.4
Interview Process
All interviews were conducted by the same person, the researcher, who was a full­time
masters student during the time of the research, to ensure consistency. The researcher
had no prior relationship to most participants, though a few were a part of the researcher’s
professional network. All participants were informed that the interviewer was a DTU mas­
ters student specialising in Computer Security and that the research focused on cyber
security compliance in Icelandic and Danish companies.
Interviews were mainly conducted in person, but a few via Microsoft Teams with the cam­
era on. The interviews that took place in person were conducted at the participants’ work­
place. One assistant CISO attended an interview in addition to the CISO of that company.
Before all interviews, the participants were informed that their answers could not be traced
back to them or their organisations. They were also told that this was in no way an audit
and they were encouraged to answer as honestly as possible and that there are no right
or wrong answers to the questions asked.
All interviews except two were audio recorded (with the participants’ consent) to ensure
accuracy in data collection. Notes were also taken during the interviews in order to docu­
ment the most noteworthy information and answers directly touching the research ques­
tions. The recordings were then transcribed verbatim for analysis later in the day of the
interview. The transcription was carried out carefully to accurately capture the content of
the discussions. The researcher’s notes from the interviews were also considered during
the transcription process to convey the expressions and tones of the participants when an­
swering the questions, which are important for qualitative analysis. No repeat interviews
were conducted.
3.5
Data Analysis
Content analysis was the primary method used to analyse the interview data. Content
analysis is a qualitative research method used to evaluate and interpret the content of
data of written materials, interview transcripts, and other types of communication [50].
Content analysis provides a systematic way to discover specific themes, concepts, words
and patterns within qualitative data to gain insight into the meaning and context of the
content [51].
Using content analysis, themes and patterns were derived from the interview data, as de­
tailed in Section 4. Transcripts were read and examined multiple times to gain a compre­
hensive understanding of the data. This method involved presenting the data in a struc­
tured and straightforward manner, focusing on summarising and highlighting the main
points directly from the responses. It was deemed well suited for this research and its
data as the method enabled the examination of key themes across all interviews, while
maintaining interviewees’ individual perspectives on each question.
A codebook was developed and managed using Microsoft Excel, where reliability and
validity was ensured in the coding process. The codebook helped with identifying the key
findings and results of the research. The researcher alone conducted the coding, which
involved several steps:
1. Initial Theme Identification: The first step was to thoroughly read all interview
transcripts, taking notes on key points related to each question to identify major
patterns and themes.
From Security Policies to Practices
27
==PAGE:38==
2. Code Development: Based on the initial themes, a list of relevant codes was
created for each theme. Each code had a clear definition, representing common
themes or patterns in the data.
3. Code Assignment: The codes were applied to relevant segments of the responses
for each question. The researcher created the codebook from scratch, where the
structure of the codebook included the following components:
• Code Names: Short labels for each theme.
• Definitions: Detailed descriptions of what each code represents.
• Examples: Sample quotes from the transcripts exemplifying each code.
The codebook was treated as a living document throughout the data analysis process.
As the analysis progressed, the codes were refined to better capture the nuances of the
responses. New codes were added, and some existing codes were merged or split to
ensure a comprehensive and accurate representation of the data.
Lastly, the main themes and highlights were identified based on the coded data and sum­
marised for each question. This systematic approach enabled a thorough examination of
the interview data, ensuring that key findings and results were robust and reflective of the
participants’ experiences and perspectives.
3.6
Ethics Approval
Ethical considerations were paramount in this study. All participants provided informed
consent to participate in the research and to have their interviews transcribed. Two partic­
ipants did not consent to having their interview recorded, while all others gave verbal in­
formed consent for their interviews to be recorded. The interviews that were not recorded
were documented via detailed note­taking by the interviewer.
The primary purpose of the recordings was to facilitate accurate data analysis, ensuring
that important information was captured, even if it was missed in the note­taking during the
interview. Confidentiality was maintained by securely storing all records, like described
in Section 3.7, and anonymizing all interview transcripts and quotes during analysis and
reporting. This helped preserve the anonymity of the interviewees and their companies.
All recordings were deleted after the completion of data analysis. In cases where confiden­
tial information was disclosed, the interviewer signed a mutual non­disclosure agreement
(NDA) confidentiality contract to ensure the protection of sensitive data.
3.7
Data Management
The research data was securely stored throughout the entire research process. The writ­
ten notes taken during the interviews, as well as the transcripts, were saved as Word doc­
uments on a password­protected computer and backed up on the researcher’s iCloud ac­
count, secured with Multi­Factor­Authentication (MFA). All audio recordings were recorded
on the same device and subsequently uploaded and backed up to the researcher’s iCloud
account after each interview. The Excel file containing the codebook was managed solely
on the researcher’s computer and backed up on the researcher’s OneDrive account with
MFA. All devices and accounts used in the research were exclusively owned and ac­
cessed by the researcher.
28
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:39==
All recordings and data were exclusively accessed and managed by the researcher, en­
suring strict confidentiality. All recordings were deleted before the final submission of the
thesis, ensuring that no sensitive data was retained unnecessarily.
From Security Policies to Practices
29
==PAGE:40==
30
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:41==
4
Results
In this section, the results derived from the data collected from the interviews with the
interviewees (CISOs and the programmers) will be presented. Section 4.1 provides an
overview of the CISOs and programmers and the different companies that participated
in this research. The results from the interviews are presented in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
The results are organised to first discuss the responses from the CISOs, followed by
those from the programmers. For each interview question, the interviewees’ answers are
presented along with the main themes and insights, starting with the main theme, followed
by a summary of the results and quotations from the participants.
As mentioned in Section 3.4, the interviews were transcribed and thoroughly reviewed
multiple times for coding and analysing to derive the results. As discussed in Section 3.5,
the analysis involved grouping responses and identifying consistent or very similar trends
to create codes and themes. Both similarities and contradictions in the answers were
identified and analysed. The circumstances and context of each interview were also con­
sidered to ensure a comprehensive understanding of the responses.
4.1
Interview Participants and their Characteristics
A total of 37 interviews were conducted, the first interview taking place on March 18, 2024,
and the last one on May 27, 2024. The interview process spanned 10 weeks, taking into
account the Easter holidays which impacted scheduling.
The lengths of the interviews ranged from 15 minutes to a little over 1 hour. The average
time of all interviews was roughly 37 minutes. The average time of the interviews con­
ducted with the programmers were 28,5 minutes, while the average time of the interviews
conducted with the CISOs were 46 minutes. The reason for the CISOs’ interviews taking
longer than the programmers’ interviews is that many of the CISOs partaking in the study
really enjoyed talking about cyber security.
The security personnel that partook in this research were mainly CISOs, some of whom
also had responsibility over physical security and the overall security within the company,
such as a Chief Security Officer (CSO). The final sample size consisted of 37 participants
from 19 different companies. This included 9 programmers and 9 CISOs from 9 different
Danish companies, 9 programmers and 9 CISOs from 9 different Icelandic companies,
and 1 Icelandic CISO who works as an independent contractor and advisor for multiple
companies. That is a total of 18 different participant pairs. This sample size was man­
ageable within the practical constraints of the study, such as time management and the
scheduling of interviews. Of these 37 research participants, a total of 19 people were from
Iceland (10 CISOs and 9 programmers), 18 people were living in Denmark (9 CISOs and
9 programmers), 26 were male and 11 female. Of the 18 programmers, 11 identified as
male and 7 as female. Of the 19 CISOs, 15 were male and 4 female. The distribution
between countries and the gender ratio can be seen in Figure 4.1 and Table 4.1 below.
The participants’ backgrounds varied widely. Participants included individuals with ex­
tensive experience at both smaller and larger organisations, and the programmers typ­
ically had a background in computer science or software engineering, with varying lev­
els of seniority from junior developers to lead engineers. The roles of the programmers
included backend developers, frontend developers, architecture developers, web devel­
opers, data management and development, backend foundation developers, integration
From Security Policies to Practices
31
==PAGE:42==
Danish Programmers
Danish CISOs
Icelandic Programmers
Icelandic CISOs
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of Research Participants
Female
Male
Figure 4.1: Number of research participants in terms of role and gender
architects, security software developers, app developers, DevOps engineers, technical
product owners, and full stack developers.
The CISOs had very diverse backgrounds, sometimes combining technical expertise with
managerial experience, and in some cases had no prior education or experience in IT
before their journey in cyber security governance. Some were very experienced in the
cyber security compliance sector, such as one CISO who had been working in cyber se­
curity since 1988. Some CISOs had backgrounds in computer science, engineering or
system administration, while others had backgrounds in law, literature, anthropology or
pharmaceuticals. Despite their very different backgrounds, all CISOs were at the time of
the research responsible for implementing and overseeing cyber security measures within
their organisations. This variety in backgrounds and experiences enriched the data, pro­
viding a well­rounded view of cyber security practices from different perspectives across
different organisational contexts.
Table 4.1: Participants in the research
Male
Female
Total
Danish Programmers
6
3
9
Danish CISOs
8
1
9
Icelandic Programmers
5
4
9
Icelandic CISOs
7
3
10
Total
26
11
37
The companies that the CISOs and programmers worked for varied as well, both in size
and purpose, ranging from smaller companies with about 30 employees to large corpora­
tions with several tens of thousands of employees. The companies spanned various in­
dustries, including train transportation, flight transportation, energy, telecommunications,
banking, cyber security, biotech, software services, and pharmaceuticals. Table 4.2 de­
tails the companies participating in the research, listing their industry, country, and total
employee number.
32
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.2: Participation pairs from these companies partook in the research, detailing their
industry, country, and total employee number
Company
Industry
Country
Total Employee Number
1
Cyber security Software
Denmark
80+
2
Energy
Denmark
9.000+
3
Pharmachudical
Denmark
64.000+
4
Banking
Denmark
4.000+
5
Consulting
Denmark
350+
6
Software services
Denmark
221.000
7
BioTech
Denmark
10.000+
8
Software services
Denmark
350+
9
Train transportation
Denmark
6.000+
10
Electronic authentication
Iceland
33
11
National Broadcasting
Iceland
270+
12
Telecommunications
Iceland
450
13
Banking
Iceland
880+
14
Bio­pharmaceutical
Iceland
330+
15
Flight transportation
Iceland
1.400+
16
Cyber security company
Iceland
50+
17
Banking
Iceland
750+
18
FinTech
Iceland
60+
19
Cyber security Consulting
Iceland
1
Mean ca 16.790 employees
4.2
Results from the Interviews with the CISOs
This section presents a detailed analysis of the interviews conducted with the CISOs.
The interviews aimed to gain insights into their roles, the cyber security standards their
companies follow, the challenges they face, and their perceptions of these standards.
By analysing their responses, key themes and insights were identified, shedding light on
the practices and perspectives towards cyber security in different organisations. The key
themes and insights derived from their responses are outlined below for each interview
question:
1. First, could you briefly tell me about your role within your company, and what
your main goals are at the moment?
Theme 1: Cyber Security Oversight and Strategy
All the security personnel interviewed were CISOs or equivalent security personnel
within the company, such as the Quality and Security Manager, the Director of IT Op­
erations and the chairman of the internal security task force, individuals responsible
for the organisation’s cyber security measures and shared the same responsibilities
as a CISO. Hereafter, all the security personnel will be referred to as CISOs. All
CISOs described their roles as overseeing the overall security strategy and risk as­
sessment, monitoring security (both in­house and externally bought cyber security
services), and implementing compliance with cyber security standards to various
extents. Many were also responsible for incident response and managing security
audits, ensuring their organisations were complying with the current standard and
achieving certification.
From Security Policies to Practices
33
==PAGE:44==
Some of the CISOs also had additional roles. For instance, some also carried the
responsibilities and the role of a CSO, where they were responsible both for the
physical and digital security of the organisation. Others also worked as cyber se­
curity consultants, serving as CISO for multiple companies (CISO­as­a­service) or
providing consultancy to other organisations about their cyber security.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“My main responsibilities include cyber defenses, oversight of security ar­
chitecture and pen­testing, compliance, and reporting to executives and
the board.”
“I am the CISO of [company 4], where there are 4.000 employees, 500 in
IT, and 20 people in my department.”
“I am the Quality and Security Manager at [company 12], a telecommuni­
cations company. My role is within the law department of the company,
but I work with the security people, I work with HR, I work with the lawyers,
I work with the executive board, and I work with the developers. So as you
can see my role is very extensive. I have the oversight of all the kinds of
security for [company 12].”
“I am both the CSO and the CISO of [company 11]. I am responsible for all
security, including physical, digital and information security. I am also in
control of the building’s security and both the physical and digital access
control. My job is to implement and present security protocols and make
sure people follow them. My main goal recently has been the ISO 27001
audit, and we just got certified last week. It was our first attempt, and we
got it on the first try, which we are very happy about.”
Theme 2: Cyber Security Certification Audit Processes and Security Compli­
ance
The recent goals of the CISOs varied. Some organisations were involved in risk as­
sessing, monitoring, revising and adjusting their ISMS and cyber security measures.
Many companies were preparing for, or had just undergone, a security standard au­
dit from an external auditor, such as for ISO 27001 and SOC 2. Other main priorities
included preparations for implementing and complying with the NIS 2 Directive and
DORA regulation.
The companies preparing for an ISO 27001 certification audit focused significantly
on the certification process and defining their ISMS accordingly. Many CISOs found
the audit process to be stressful, especially after working on implementing the stan­
dard and ISMS for an extended period of time. Some companies had to try few
times before they get certified.
The following examples demonstrate some of the main themes and insights that
were identified during the analysis:
“We recently defined our ISMS and our security policy, but now the main
focus is on how we are going to follow it through and implement it through­
out our whole organisation and get people to follow the policy.”
“Our task and goal right now is to monitor our standard and security im­
plementations. We are now ensuring that everything is going as planned,
34
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:45==
revising and adjusting as we see fit. We have been working on the secu­
rity of the company for the last five years and have come a long way, if I
may say so myself.”
“My focus at the moment is on the NIS 2 and DORA regulations, as we
need to comply with both of these regulations as a bank, and they are
soon to be enacted into Danish laws.”
“I am preparing for our ISO 27001 audit that will be next week. There is
also an ISO 27001 audit in 10 days for another company I work for as
a CISO­as­a­service, so a lot of ISO 27001 stuff has been on my mind
recently and will continue to be.”
2. Does your company follow a cyber security standard or policy?
Theme 3: General Compliance, Adoption and Implementation of Cyber secu­
rity Standards
All the CISOs answered this question positively. Responses ranged from compa­
nies being certified according to a cyber security standard, to that they follow a cyber
security standard to some extent, to those that at least had a cyber security docu­
ment in place, such as a security handbook, a few page document or a one­pager.
Some organisations were following a standard but not certified according to the stan­
dard. In those cases, they took some parts from the standard and personalised them
for their company’s needs. Some of them were not rushing to get a certificate and
did not see any advantage to doing so. However, in those cases the organisations’
security policies might be more relaxed and not following the standards as strictly as
the companies being audited according to the standards. Some of the non­certified
companies were considering going thought the certification process but just were
not quite ready yet.
On the other hand, some companies were considering obtaining additional certifi­
cations to their excising ones, such as SOC 2, ISO 27002 or ISO 27005, to address
data handling and personal information requirements.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“Yes, we are following a standard but we are not certified. It is required
for us to follow a cyber security standard and have an ISMS in place but
it is not required for us to be certified which would take time, energy and
money from us so we do not do it at the moment.”
“Yes, we at [company 9] are ISO 27001 certified which is a convenient
and suitable standard for critical organisations as us. The ability to trans­
port people is critical for society. We have implemented the standard’s
requirement for the whole business, both transport wise and for our front
line stores.”
“Yes, [company 13] follows ISO 27001, but does not have an ISO certifi­
cate. There is no incentive for us to do so, it would not benefit us any
more than it does already. We are not required to have the certificate and
that would only mean a lot of my time going into getting some certificate
for what we are already doing. It is not our focus at the moment to collect
certificates.”
From Security Policies to Practices
35
==PAGE:46==
3. What cyber security standard or policies does your company follow? (If there
is no standard, do your policies seek inspiration from any particular stan­
dard?)
Theme 4: Cyber Security Standard Compliance and Primary ISO 27001, Sec­
ondly SOC 2 and NIST CSF
All the organisations mentioned that they follow ISO 27001 to some extent. A total
of 14 companies partaking in the research were ISO 27001 certified. Of those 14,
two companies were also audited, from an external auditor, for SOC 2. Many of the
companies following ISO 27001 were still in the process of updating from the 2013
version of the standard to the newest release from 2022. The second and third most
popular standards mentioned were SOC 2 and NIST.
Figure 4.2 illustrates the number of Danish and Icelandic companies in the study that
are ISO 27001 certified versus those that are not. Among the Danish companies, 5
out of 9 are certified, while 4 are not. In contrast, the Icelandic companies show a
higher certification rate, with 8 out of 9 companies holding ISO 27001 certification,
leaving only 1 company not certified. This suggests a stronger culture of certification
in Iceland compared to Denmark.
See Table 4.3 that provides an overview of which standards the companies partici­
pating in the research follow, and whether they are certified or not, categorised by
industry.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“Yes, we follow and are certified for ISO 27001/2013. Our security pol­
icy is high level and based on ISO 27001 but we will update the policy
next year to comply with the 2022 version of ISO. Our policy has several
objectives, e.g. security train all the employees, security procedures for
pushing code, no guests allowed in our working space, etc. We made
an easy to read and understand one pager to increase the likelihood of
people actually reading it. We also have an employee handbook for all
employees, that contains for example how to handle the WiFi, rules for
your work computer, and how to work safely remotely.”
“Our security seeks inspiration from few standards.
We don’t adhere
100% to one specific standard but have looked at some to get inspira­
tion from and take what is most important for us in each of these stan­
dards. Some of these inspirations are, ISF standard of good practises,
ISO 27001, NIST CSF and NIST/853. For example, ISA/IEC 62443 se­
curity standard is more applicable to when patching is more difficult than
usual. But we are in the process of merging with another company now
so some new parts of these standards and policies might be implemented
additionally.”
“We follow and are certified for ISO 27001/2013. We are going to finish
the three year cycle first, before we go into the 2022 release. But what
matters and is important for us as a bank to follow, and what goes in our
security policy, comes from 11 laws and regulations. We are classified as
a critical infrastructure so we have to fulfill the NIS Directive. We have to
follow EBA [European Bank Authority], PCD, PSS [Payment and Settle­
36
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:47==
ment Systems Act], PSR [Payment Services Regulation], GDPR, THRIFT,
CSP [costumer security program] and more. These 11 laws and regula­
tions will go up to around 21 when DORA goes through. So there are a
lot of things to look at and comply with.”
“Yes, [Company 13] follows ISO 27001/2013 and we have been follow­
ing ISO since 2007. Before next year’s audits we will move to the 2022
version of the standard. But we also have plenty of external criteria we
need to meet such as the ICT [Information and Communication Technolo­
gies] guidelines and the EBA [European Banking Authority] rules that all
banks in the EU and EEA need to follow. There are many processes
and policies that have been created based on ISO, for example the ICT
guidelines are based on ISO. The majority of our security regulations are
made from requirements that ISO made. We are also focusing a lot on
the DORA regulations now, where we will just add the DORA’s require­
ments to our current security policies and I believe we are already almost
fulfilling DORA as we are ISO certified.”
Danish Companies
Icelandic Companies
0
2
4
6
8
10
5
8
4
1
Number of Companies
ISO 27001 Certified
Not Certified
Figure 4.2: Number of Danish and Icelandic companies participating in the research that
are ISO 27001 certified and not certified.
4. What factors influenced the selection of these particular security standards
or policies?
Theme 5: ISO 27001, Industry’s Standard, Most Common and Popular Stan­
dard
The main factors influencing the selection of cyber security standards were their pop­
ularity and industry’s acceptance, ISO 27001 was the most popular standard among
interviewees. Many companies chose standards widely recognized and used in their
industry. They knew this works for other similar companies that have to fulfil similar
security requirements. Additionally, prior experience of the CISOs with certain stan­
dards played a significant role, as they would have experience with the implemen­
tation of the standard. Another factor is that their customer, partner, dealer, or other
companies they worked with would require them to follow a particular standard, or at
least any standard. The continent and the environment also played a part, as com­
panies that worked mainly within Europe talked mainly about ISO 27001, whereas
From Security Policies to Practices
37
==PAGE:48==
companies that also had costumers from the USA additionally mentioned NIST and
SOC 2.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“Having the ISO 27001 badge helps in competitive markets and tenders.
Many of our customers are in the German market and many require us to
follow ISO, as the industry’s standard is for companies to have the ISO
certification. Our parent company also mandates us to have or obtain an
ISO certification. So the choice was not really ours, it was more mandated
for us.”
“ISO 27001 is the industry’s standard. It is what everyone is using.”
“ISO 27001 is by far the biggest and most popular standard. Today there
are many requirements for companies regarding their cyber security and
then this is always the standard talked about.”
“I do not know why they chose this particular standard. The company had
already decided to follow ISO 27001 before I started working here.”
“There were multiple factors that influenced the selection. The work had
already been started to follow ISO and even ideas to go through the audit
process. I have also worked with the standard, I am a ISO 27001 lead au­
ditor. This ISO standard is well known here in Iceland, it is the standard
most companies look to, likely because of the connection to Europe. An­
other factor is because we are considered as critical infrastructure, we will
have to comply with the NIS 2 Directive which will likely go into Icelandic
law in 2025 or 2026 and ISO, when implemented, fulfills NIS 2 quite well.
It also fulfills the airport regulations that we need to meet. Our ISMS and
security policy’s backbone is very much built on ISO.”
“We practise what we preach. As a cyber security software developers
and consultancy we mostly help our costumers with implementing ISO
27001 so it is very applicable to follow it as well.”
“ISO 27001 is more of a Europe requirement, if you were ISO certified
then it was enough. SOC 2 and NIST is more popular and required in
the USA. SOC 2 gives you the opportunity to look more under the hood
and gives a very good, and even more than ISO, insight to your security.
Through our global customers, e.g. banks in USA, we have been required
to also have SOC 2. So the influence of the choice was mainly customers’
requirements and preferences.”
“It is the standard I had worked with at my previous jobs, so I knew quite
well how it worked and how to implement it.”
“ISO 27001 is the most common cyber security standard in Europe and
it covers the most major requirements. It is also the easiest to follow and
to get certification for. The state requires us [company 10] to comply with
ISO 27000 or 29000. I have been in the cyber security industry since 1988
and ISO has been the most popular standard. I believe Iceland has more
certifications than Denmark. Denmark used to have their own standard
but did not follow for example ISO.”
38
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:49==
“The reason for why we use the ISF guidelines is because they work well
and, since we are a member of ISF, we got access to it already and it
aligned with the tools we already had from them. We use the ISO 27001
as a reference with external companies and suppliers because it is the
default standard that everyone knows of and everyone refers to. ISO is
easier to implement within big organisations than other standards in my
opinion. When we ask for 3rd party security assessments for vendors, we
ask for ISO 27001. We are requesting SOC 2 now. The NIST CSF is also
very good for reporting because it makes sense when you are doing it, it
is quite straightforward compared to other standards. ISO 27001 covers
so many topics, and if you are complying and getting audited and certified
for it then you have to report where you stand in all of these topics. Which
is mainly the reason we are not certified.”
5. Is there any sort of training or presentations for the company’s programmers
about the cyber security standard or policy?
Theme 6: General Security Awareness Training Videos and No Programmers
Specific Training
All the CISOs interviewed responded that they were responsible for the security
awareness training within the company. The CISOs said that the security aware­
ness training they conduct is quite general and for all employees, regardless if they
are developers or programmers, or have other roles within the company. The ma­
jority of the CISOs said that the particular cyber security standard was not presented
for the programmers specifically, or other general employees. However, many or­
ganisations have an annual security training, where employees need to watch short
security videos and read certain documents including notes connected to the secu­
rity policy, subsequently, employees are asked to click a box stating that they have
read and understood the security policy. Many companies talked about a service
they utilise that offers such security awareness videos. Many CISOs also men­
tioned that the programmers should follow the security requirements that the Chief
Technical Officer (CTO) or the person over the development department set in place
for them. Some CISOs said that since they recently went through the certification
process they had a short talk about the standard with all employees, including the
programmers. Many CISOs talked about general security awareness, such as spot­
ting phising emails, locking the computer before leaving the workstation, using work
computers appropriately, confidential documents, good password hygiene, etc.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“Yes, we, as a certified organisation, need to have security training of
course. We have lectures and are mainly focusing on e­mails and phising
now.”
“We have some general security training in on­boarding and such but no,
nothing special for the programmers. If their manager tells the program­
mers about the security standard and policy then yes, in that way they
would get a presentation about it and in that case they are following the
security framework, but that is completely up to their manager.”
“We use the Eloomi educational system for our security education. They
have good and up­to­date videos about IT security. It is mandatory for
From Security Policies to Practices
39
==PAGE:50==
all employees to watch them. We also have an extensive presentation
for new employees about security and the policies we follow within the
company. After the presentation they get tested on it.”
“Yes, during on­boarding employees get direct access to our security soft­
ware Vanta where they have to read all the security policies and everyone
has to do it once a year. We also have security awareness videos from
AwareGO that they have to watch. I can see who has and has not watched
the videos they should have and can remind them.”
“Yes, we just started it. Just yesterday we were pushing out a training
requirement for everyone to read the information security policy, set up
malware protection and so on. The IT department and programmers need
to know all of this, and they make their own processes they then follow.
We also have AwareGO security videos for all employees. Two policies
are sent to every employee, but the programmers and the people in the
IT department get more policies and more tech­related.”
“Yes, for all employees we have general security awareness training annu­
ally but not particular training for programmers. The programmers them­
selves do some training that is more coding related, like Java program­
mers practise Java and there should be some security aspect to that. Or
wait, I think we did some training 3 years ago for the programmers.”
“Not specifically on the developer level, more like on the management
level and they then train their employees. We train security architects and
they train the developers, software engineers and business owners on
how they should implement the security procedures. Then they make a
document that is specific only to their operation.”
“Yes, we have security awareness training. When I started 3 years ago, no
such thing existed here, so I just made it myself. I made 3 basic courses
that are quite detailed that all employees must go through. We are also
starting a phishing campaign that will run for the next 3 years. A big part
of our employees only have basic computer skills or knowledge and are
not particularly security oriented. It is a battle in and of itself, to get people
to learn and practise security. I believe online teaching is not enough, it is
much more effective to be in person and look the people in the eyes and
then you, as a CISO and in that case a lecturer, see if they understand
what you are preaching or not. My strategy is to have live short courses
or lectures regularly. I have held 3 such already and so far it is going
quite well. It is very important to make it fun and lively and get them to
understand and feel the responsibility of security as well. But regarding
the programmers, I have a conversation with a part of the programmers
about the requirements in our security policy and what is being asking
for. Then we make and document the process we found best suited. All
the programmers then follow the process we made together. This new
approach has worked well for us. I do not have a specific presentation
about ISO 27001 for all the programmers but their direct boss should talk
about it briefly in the on­boarding.”
“No, not a lot about the security standard. We have some security training
in the on­boarding which is just a general training. The only mandatory
40
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:51==
security training for all employees is how to use the policy, which is four
pages of “dos and don’ts”. They need to check a box that indicates that
they have read the policy. But we do not do training in underlying policies.
There is nothing extra for the developers. The development department
has their one policies which they choose and have control over how they
follow it.”
“Yes, we have on­boarding training and regular training. We do not require
the employees to read the cyber security policies. We have made short
guidelines from the standard about how to behave regarding security. If
we were not a transportation company and more of a tech company we
would put more requirements on our employees. We are doing a phising
campaign now, but we focus more on the positive behaviour, that is if you
report a phising mail we encourage it. Our goal is to integrate the security
policy more in to the development process. We have vulnerability man­
agement, how can we scan the code, etc. We have also thought about
implementing a security ambassador, making one of the programmers a
spokesman for security where he would promote best practises and se­
cure coding among the programmers and get them on the wagon. There
is a vision we have to have security guidelines for the programmers, sort
of a checklist or a more straightforward guide. However, it is not our main
focus right now.”
“Yes, but the engineers do not have to read the policies word for word
but it is integrated into their workflow. They have security training during
on­boarding, which is different between roles within the company. There
is also an annual security awareness training for everyone. Then it is also
up to the employee, how they want it. In the on­boarding for the software
engineers we have something about secure coding and OWASP. Then
after that it is mostly up to the engineer themselves. There are a lot of
tools that we have available for them to do secure coding training, and if
they need more we are always open for questions.”
6. Are the programmers and other employees aware of what security standard
the company follows?
Theme 7: Security Standard Awareness vs. Security Procedures Awareness
The most common answer from the CISOs was that the programmers should be
aware of it, with emphasis on the should. Some CISOs said that they believed the
programmers are unaware of exactly what standard the company follows, e.g. ISO
27001 or SOC 2. Many CISOs also felt that it is unnecessary for the programmers to
know what cyber security standard is being followed, as long as the programmers’
work and procedures fulfill the standard.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“They should know that they have to follow OWASP, but not necessar­
ily that they know about ISO 27001. There is a certain process that the
programmers have to go through to be able to push their code, a staging
system that reviews the code. But that should be implemented by their
managers, so if you, as a CISO, do not have the manager on you side
then it gets hard. Also when there is a high employee turnover it is quite
From Security Policies to Practices
41
==PAGE:52==
hard to follow and enforce this. The procedures are in place, but we need
to ensure that they are being followed.”
“Employees here are generally very conscious about security. I think that
most people know about the ISO certification and processes.”
“I hope they are familiar with the overall policies.
And we have work
processes, policies and procedures in place for people who are pushing
code.”
“Yes they should be now after our recently sent security training require­
ments. We are only adding processes, not removing or changing already
made processes that are being followed. We are emphasising that the
rules and processes are known and being followed, so it should not matter
if it is me or you doing some task, the same process should be followed.”
“The software development team knows most of OWASP, but not ISO
27001. They would probably not know that one of our models comes
from OWASP, but they know the model.”
“Yes, they should know it by name, since it is very important for our cus­
tomers and we talk about ISO often in meetings and such.”
“It depends on the manager that trains the programmer and the employ­
ees.”
“The general employee would not know we follow the ISO 27001 standard,
they should know to be aware and not click all links they receive in e­mails
and such. But most of the programmers should know we follow ISO as
they have to read the security requirements.”
“They should be aware of it. But the implementation is such that we do
not specifically talk a lot about ISO. It is a security lifestyle we are trying
to implement. It should be a part of how you work, not that you are only
doing this to check a box to fulfill some security standard. It should be like
when you get in your car, you put on your seat belt. It should just be the
good practises that you follow.”
“You would probably get different answers if you would ask different de­
velopers. Some of them might know and others not. But I hope some of
them do.”
“Yes, I would think so. Everyone involved in technical operations has
had to answer questions from our security standard. Maybe 30% of our
employees have very technical jobs, so they so they should know, but
the company’s activities are very broad as we are almost a production
company. The people working with the computers and coding needs to
know the security issues. Everyone should have at least heard of it, we
have been putting a lot of work and emphasis on this lately.”
7. Is the standard or guidelines available to the programmers somewhere? Can
they access it?
Theme 8: Accessibility of Security Standards and Guidelines on Shared Spaces
The largest majority of CISOs answered that their standard or guidelines were ac­
cessible to all employees on their internal shared space. Many also said that a more
42
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:53==
comprehensive security handbook, or a shorter document which stated more per­
sonalised security guidelines for the organisation were available to people. Some
of the CISOs, however, admitted that they highly doubted that all programmers had
read the standard word for word. Another CISOs’ view on it was that the standard
per se does not have to be available to normal employees, as long as they follow
the security procedures implemented.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“Yes, it is accessible for everyone on SharePoint where they can read all
the information about the standard and policy. We have 18 different busi­
ness areas so different policies are applicable in different areas. But all
the policies are available for the whole company. People are also encour­
aged to ask if they are ever in doubt of anything related to security.”
“Yes, everything processed from the standard goes in documentations
that are then put in a central internal collection. We have a quality hand­
book as well and all employees can open and read those documents. Now
after the implementation of the ISO 27001 standard we have all these pro­
tocols put in place, but the implementation of procedures requires people
to read them specifically. Next iteration and phase goes into how to teach
people how to follow these protocols and procedures.”
“No, there is no need for it to be available for the programmers and other
regular employees, because the programmers would not go and read it
as there aren’t many instructions or any manuals in it. It contains more
of procedures that are created to adhere to specifics in the standard. It is
written after each organisation’s need. But we have a security handbook
that everyone has access to, and reading it is one of the requirements in
our on­boarding. All employees need to familiarise themselves with the
handbook and have to sign that they have gone through it.”
“Yes, it is both on our internal network and on our Workplace. There is a
link there that takes you straight to the security handbook.”
“Yes, we send it out to all employees. It is available in 8 languages on
our intranet site. Employees have to sign that they have read it in the
on­boarding process.”
8. Have you faced any challenges in promoting adherence to security standards
and policies within the organisation?
Theme 9: Resistance to Security Compliance from Programmers and Funding
from Management
A large majority of the CISOs had experienced some challenges in promoting ad­
herence to security standards, some with programmers, others with upper manage­
ment. Only one CISO stated that they had not experienced any challenges. Some
found it better and easier to promote adherence after the company decided they
wanted to become certified according to a cyber security standard, as the company’s
management had then made it clear that it was something that needed attention.
Some talked about how security is sometimes an afterthought, only considered and
implemented when all the company’s foundation work is done or after the company
gets hacked. That security is either one of the last things people think about so it
From Security Policies to Practices
43
==PAGE:54==
(hopefully) comes very slowly and steadily as the company grows, or that security
measures are highly thought of and deep dived into after an security incident has
happened.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“Yes, definitely! Security is extra work for most companies. It is a non­
functional requirement, making the process complex and dreading for
many companies. People are usually willing to have good security mea­
sures but there is always a question about resources, people not being
available at the right times in the development process of the ISMS, in­
volving stakeholders too late in the ISMS process so they end up not being
invested enough in security, etc. Stakeholders need to be involved early
in the process to make them invested and feel responsible for the organ­
isation’s security. On a more positive note, stakeholders and everyone
usually want to have good security measures. The approach to them is
very important, but when approached right they are very willing to give
feedback for risk assessment, for example.”
“I have had challenges with getting all the funding I need when implement­
ing proper security measures. The board does not see the value and the
same importance as I do. Hopefully will that change when they are re­
quired to get certified by a standard by law.”
“Security can be seen as something that slows down programmers so
you need to have that in mind when trying to implement cyber security
measures into their work.”
“Programmers want to work on their own terms so it is a challenge, they
sometimes feel that they are being commanded how to do their job, in
particular older programmers who have always done it this way.”
“Especially when it comes to legacy code then it is very hard to implement
security protocols, but it is easier to put security requirements on new
features and codebases.”
“Yes. People do not have a proper understanding of the need to go so
deep into security. My approach is try to get them to understand why we
are changing it and show them the real dangers. I feel like us Icelanders
are quite rural people, we like to leave the door open and the computer
unlocked. We are quite naive to many things concerning security. People
trust too much. But we just need to get people thinking more about it.”
“Oh yes, both with the executive level and all the way down to system ad­
mins to programmers. It pays off to have audits, both internal and external.
Sometimes people do not see the purpose of security, and say that they
do something and follow the procedures but then they cut corners and do
not follow them.”
“Yes I have faced challenges, different challenges in different companies
from both programmers and managers. Some people do not have or do
not give themselves time to read the security standard or feel like it does
not concern them, that it is unnecessary. As [company 16] is a cyber
security company, all the employees have high security awareness and
44
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:55==
are quite security­oriented, which is a part of the reason why they work
here. When our customers have decided to go through for example the
ISO 27001 certification process, there is usually not a lot of resistance
as they are buying this service and consultation from us. They are al­
ready invested. But as a CISO, it is so important to get the employees
on the same team as you, work as one team towards this security goal.
I have tried many fun things such as giving them candy for good security
behaviour, I also had the security hero of the week that got a superhero
cape. It works well to have security fun and have some sort of positive
reinforcement. People need to feel that they matter, are providing value
and a joint responsibility for security.”
9. What is your opinion of the standard?
Theme 10: ISO 27001 Compliance, Generally Good Standard and Starting
Point
The general consensus among CISOs is that ISO 27001 is a valuable framework
that supports the implementation of their ISMS. Many highlighted that while imple­
menting ISO 27001 sets a solid foundation, it is essential to implement more exten­
sive security measures beyond the standard. CISOs encourage organisations to go
the extra mile for better security. Most found their implementation of the standard
good as well, while some were still in the process of implementing the standard fully.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“The ISO 27001 is good to get you in the right direction. It is a checklist of
topics and issues that need to come up with a solution. But it is not enough
just to have and follow a standard, you have to implement sufficient se­
curity measures and go the extra mile. You can not just get a certification
and stop there, you need to use it and always improve a little. You have
to iterate for your organisations. But it can be easy and tempting to stop
there.”
“I find it [ISO 27001] great! Especially the 2013 version, maybe because I
have worked with it for a long time. I find the 2022 version harder to read
and understand, but I believe that will come as well. We will move to the
2022 version next year.”
“I love it! I am called the ISO queen as a joke. I really like having frame­
works and these check boxes.”
“I think our security policy is good and quite up to date, but we need to
update some more technical stuff. I find ISO 27001 to be very high­level,
so it takes a lot of energy to understand how to apply it to our company.
We are looking into going through the certification process but that would
mean a lot of work on our part, a big part of it is documentation. I believe
a lot of it would be documentation of processes we are already running,
we have many good processes but they are not being documented as
necessary.”
“ISO 27001 is fine. It is a nice tool. Best practises how to work. I also like
the 27002 one. It is more flexible and does not present requirements but
suggestions.”
From Security Policies to Practices
45
==PAGE:56==
“ISO 27001 is overall good. But I find the environmental clause in 4.1. and
4.2 organisations irrelevant. The standard should only be about security
but not about environment, like are they green or are they secure?”
“I like the newest release of ISO 27001. It is not that cyber security related,
it is more of a framework then a security standard. You could be certified
with the standard but have relatively low security in practise, it is not that
practical or technical. I feel that NIST is more strict.”
10. Do you find the cyber security standard easy or hard to follow?
Theme 11: Varied Experiences with ISO 27001, Overall Good and Easy
Many CISOs had extensive experience with ISO 27001, as they had been working
with the standard for many years. They found it quite straightforward and knew it
really well, consequently finding it relatively easy to follow. Other CISOs had just
gone through their first certification audit process with the standard and found it a
big and challenging project.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“I find it easy, I know what to do.”
“It is a great lesson to learn the standard [ISO 27001]. It was quite chal­
lenging and a rollercoaster in the beginning. We are still learning how to
follow it. First when I read through the standard it felt self­explanatory,
but then after a while I realised that it is not that easy to implement and
requires you to put a lot of thought into it”
“I find it okay. I do not feel that it is too restrictive, I do not see it as a
burden. Maybe my colleagues would disagree though.”
“I find ISO very nice to follow. It is a good framework to follow. However,
ISO 27001 contains a lot of complicated and weird words that can be
misinterpreted in various ways. ISO is quite open and flexible which gives
a wide range of companies some common spectrum they can follow. If
ISO would be less open it would be harder for smaller companies to follow.
We will also have to comply with NIS 2 which I welcome, but that will
probably not be until 2025.”
“Very easy, also because I have worked with it for such a long time. Many
who I consult have a very hard time understanding it. I am helping many
companies update to the the 2022 release.”
“Very simple. If you understand the standard and see solutions to it with­
out getting lost in detail it is very easy to follow. Some companies have
been trying to implement a standard for many years, but then do not get
the certificate because they overcomplicated it. The implementation does
not have to be perfect on first try. Eventhough it is a standard it is not a
square, not in just one specific form. I used to perform ISO 27001 au­
dits before and I learned a lot from performing audits, seeing what works
and what doesn’t. It is important to implement it as simply as possible
to get everyone on board, like the programmers to follow it. The key to
success in this is to start and then iterate and improve and just keep the
ball rolling.”
46
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:57==
“We have been using it for a long time so it is quite easy for us. We also
add our own controls on top of it. The standard helps us to see where we
have some gaps in our security guidelines and then we can fix them.”
“It’s easy to follow ISO 27001 if you have done it before. It is easy to
understand ISO but you need to translate it to your company and to your
technical team. You need to adapt it so that it makes sense and works for
your organisation. For a company never having followed ISO or any other
standard and wanting to go that path, it is a long road as it requires a new
way of thinking, where we need to talk about risk in a new and respectable
way.”
11. Is there anything you would like to do differently regarding the standard or
the security measures taken?
Theme 12: Adaptation and Improvement of Standards, Better Translation
A lot of CISOs had to think for a while before answering this question. They had not
thought about it before as they have always considered the standard as guidelines
set in stone.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“No, the standard stands for itself. The latest version has fixed a lot. But
it is important to remember that the standard is the minimum security re­
quirements. There is nothing that stops you from doing more and better
in security.”
“I would like the standard to be better translated to Icelandic.”
“No, since we are not complying and following the standard 100% I do not
feel like I can criticise it too much.”
“There are some words badly translated in the Icelandic version, but oth­
erwise no I would not change much. I found the update from the 2013 to
2022 very good, I am very happy with the update. First I thought it did
not make sense but I can now see that it is better and the chapters are
good. ISO is not technical so new technology like artificial intelligence is
not necessary to cover in the standard. Instead, CISOs should list new
technologies, like AI, as potential threats in their risk assessment.”
“I would like to know more about the future vision of the standard. When
is the standard planned to be updated and how often. Now the standard
is just updated when they feel like it.”
“ISO 27001 is a compliance manager standard, not a technical standard.
I found the new update fine, especially about the cloud management. But
as with everything, it can always be better and improve, but I can imagine
it to be hard as it is an international standard and needs to be quite broad.
NIS 2 will hopefully soon go into Icelandic law. It will be similar to when
GDPR went into law. When it has been implemented into law people
start to think about it. When these kind of directives or regulations go
into the laws, security awareness grows as well, as it then has become a
requirement.”
From Security Policies to Practices
47
==PAGE:58==
“Nothing specific no. Sometimes I feel that it clashes to be secure and to
be compliant. In principle, I see the importance of doing questionnaires
with vendors and such, but I do not see the security being as big of a
factor as all the work it takes to do all this. We send the questionnaire
or requirements to the vendors, and they maybe send us one as well,
and it takes time from both parties to send, answer and send again the
security documents. Will it make the vendors super secure anyway or
more secure? I doubt it. We could have the same security level as one of
the largest companies in the wold but they still get hacked.”
“Yes, ISO is too academic, which is very challenging. It could be more in
human language. Also, it could focus more on explaining what you as a
CISO might expect from different people, like stakeholders and vendors.
Framing it more to the general roles in companies. External consultants
also do not have the understanding or feeling of the difficulties about these
different parts of big companies that all need to work together.”
12. Is there anything you would like to add to this interview?
Theme 13: Importance of Cyber Security Standards, Certification Audit Chal­
lenges, and Feelings of Security
Some of the CISOs shared additional thoughts on the importance of cyber security
standards, challenges in compliance, the varying levels of adherence among pro­
grammers, and their perspectives on the current state of cyber security. They em­
phasised the evolving significance of standards, the challenges posed by different
and inconsistent audit approaches, and the need for enhanced security awareness
among employees.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“I am all for standards. They make it easier to communicate and interact
because everyone knows for example ISO 27001.”
“Programmers’ compliance varies very much, some are very security ori­
ented while others do not think about it at all.”
“The standards can sometimes feel like a checklist that needs to be ful­
filled. Also, the audits can be different depending on who the auditor is,
even though it is for the same standard. Some auditors just have some
checklist where they feel like we should do things in some particular way,
but not with another approach which we have implemented and would
work better for us.”
“Standards are getting more and more important. We have to use a lot of
different standards. I think they will just continue to become more impor­
tant as cyber threats continue to grow.”
“My feeling of cyber security in Iceland is that it is very often something
people think about afterwards. Overall, web programmers are completely
clueless about security, but the websites are often the only or the main
service that the customers touch, and hackers’ first touch as well. The
public is slowly realising that security is very important and a big part of
their lives, and that their digital footprint matters. It is very important that
48
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:59==
companies make their employees cyber resilient because it is so important
for the world, to make people more security­oriented, both in their personal
and work lives.”
“Programmers can be very naughty when it comes to security. And the
naughtiest ones are web developers, which many programmers are. They
tend to bypass things that are complicated or take more time. They just
always want to find the easiest way, which is usually not the most secure
one.”
“Now they are starting with fines in Iceland. They will fine you if you are
not complying with security if you are required to, similar to the equal pay
certifications we have. With NIS 2 and GDPR, companies can be forced
to implement improvements, which is only positive in my eyes.”
4.3
Results from the Interviews with the Programmers
This section presents a detailed analysis of the interviews conducted with the Program­
mers. The interviews aimed to gain insights into their roles, whether and how they follow
cyber security standard or policies within their organisations, the challenges they face
and benefits gained in adhering to the standards, previous security training and educa­
tion, and their perceptions of these standards. By analysing their responses, key themes
and insights were identified, shedding light on the practices and perspectives towards
cyber security in different organisations. The key themes and insights derived from their
responses are outlined below for each interview question:
1. Could you briefly tell me about your role within your company, and what your
main tasks are at the moment?
Theme 14: Diverse Roles in Software Development
The roles of the programmers interviewed varied widely. They had the following
roles: backend developers, front­end developers, architecture developers, web de­
velopers, data management and development specialists, backend foundation de­
velopers, integration architects, security software developers, app developers, De­
vOps engineers, technical product owners, and full stack developers. Hereafter all
interviewees in this section will be referred to as programmers.
Theme 15: Implementing Diverse Software Systems and Ensuring Data In­
tegrity and Security
Their main tasks generally involved developing, maintaining, and improving various
software systems and applications, including websites, apps, and internal and ex­
ternal systems. Some also mentioned that their work entails automating processes
to enhance efficiency and ensure data integrity and security. These tasks require
troubleshooting and debugging, collaborating with team members to design new
features, and staying updated with the latest industry trends and technologies.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“I am a front­end developer, and my main tasks involve maintaining and
developing [company 11]’s website, ensuring it functions smoothly for both
internal systems and external users.”
From Security Policies to Practices
49
==PAGE:60==
“I am a backend programmer in what we call the core team, where we
have the oversight of the core systems and ensure they operate correctly
and efficiently.”
“I work as a front­end developer and I have been focusing on the bank’s
app for the last year. My main task at the moment is implementing com­
panies’ overdraft in the app.”
“I am a programmer developing apps for [company 15]’s employees across
various departments. I am also automating some tasks to enhance effi­
ciency within different teams.”
“In my role as a security software developer, I am creating [company 16]’s
new security product, which strengthens companies in their security jour­
ney and their goals by identifying and showing them their weaknesses
before they get compromised.”
“I am in the back­end, programming in­house solutions where I am trans­
ferring data between systems.”
“I am an integration architect, where I manage the global environment,
determining how and when environments are used. I am also heavily
involved in developing, setting up services, and APIs.”
“I am a senior software engineer in the backend foundation team at [com­
pany 8], were we handle safety for our costumers’ data.”
2. As a programmer or a software engineer, is there a cyber security standard or
policy you follow within your company?
Theme 16: Variability in Awareness and Application of Cyber Security Stan­
dards among Programmers
The majority of programmers indicated that their company follows a cyber security
standard. However, most were unaware of the specific standard their organisation
adheres to, and some felt that the standards did not directly apply to their roles as
programmers. There was a noticeable variation in security awareness among the
programmers. Some were highly security­oriented, frequently referencing OWASP
and other security best practices, while others did not prioritise security at all in their
day­to­day tasks despite their tasks being of similar nature.
Only a few programmers could identify their company’s security standard by name,
typically those from companies that had recently undergone an audit and a certi­
fication process. While some programmers were uninformed about whether their
company had a security related policies in place, others were aware that a standard
or policies existed, and a few knew the specific standard their company followed.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“I do not know the name of the standard, but there is a focus on secu­
rity, like we are not supposed to take something directly from the internet
without giving it any thought. We have a vulnerability scan on all running
servers which scans all dependencies as well. All data is encrypted as
we work with very sensitive data. We never see the original data and we
have testing data on the same format as the encrypted data. We try as
50
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:61==
much as we can to minimise that we are somehow dependent on some
random guy on the internet for a code snippet or dependency. We also
buy a service to get pen­tested. I am also in good contact with the CISO,
who keeps us in the development team updated on security news.”
“Yes, we recently implemented the ISO standard. Now, all code changes
need to be approved by at least two people, both another front­end devel­
oper and our manager needs to review it before it gets pushed. Nothing
goes out before we have tested it. We have mandatory peer reviews and
user tests.”
“Honestly, I don’t know.”
“No, no standard or policy has been given to me as a programmer to follow
or read. I have briefly heard about it in passing, but nothing more.”
“Yes, we follow ISO 27001. Maybe not directly when I am developing the
product, but I check if there are any vulnerabilities and conduct pen­tests
on the product when we have gotten to the appropriate stage. We just fol­
low this popular standard software development way when implementing
the product. We have quite free hands as most developers.”
“Yes, OWASP, NIST and some ISO standard. But us programmers write
our own guidelines that need to follow these standards.”
“I don’t know. I don’t think so as I am not in direct contact to anyone outside
of the bank, since my code is only within the bank itself.”
3. Can you describe your familiarity with the standards or policies implemented?
Theme 17: Varying Levels of Familiarity with Security Standards, Security
Handbooks, Familiarity with Policies
The programmers’ familiarity with the security standards varied significantly. Most
were not familiar with the specific security standard their company complied to,
but were aware of some processes implemented to follow the standard.
Many
mentioned security measures and procedures such as OWASP guidelines, peer­
reviews, password management, and their code pipeline. A few programmers knew
the standards and some felt they were not as technically detailed as they should be.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“No, I have no idea.”
“I am not that familiar with them as they are just being enforced now. We
need to do peer­reviews on all code we push and change our passwords
every month.”
“No, just none existent familiarity.”
“I know that we follow ISO 27001, but I have never read it and I do not know
if it would apply to our job in the development team. But we have some
questions and exposures we need to be able to answer from customers.”
“We have an engineering fundamental handbook that describes our se­
curity processes, how we follow best practises, how we should do code
reviews, and how our pipeline is set up.”
From Security Policies to Practices
51
==PAGE:62==
“They’re documents that say what we can and cannot do. They are a bit
fluffy in my opinion. I think some policies are weaker than other, and some
are more secure.”
“I guess they’re processes that we need to follow, but I am not sure what
I need to follow.”
4. Do you know if, and where, you can access the cyber security standard or
policy?
Theme 18: Varied Awareness of Standards and Accessibility of Security Stan­
dards
The programmers’ responses were split regarding their knowledge of where to ac­
cess the cyber security standard or policies. Just over half of the programmers knew
where to find the security standard or security handbook on their company’s inter­
nal network, while just under half of the programmers did not know where to find it.
Those who were unsure often mentioned that they could ask for it and gain access
that way.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“Yes, I can see the security handbook and procedures on our shared
SharePoint. I think everyone can access it, both programmers and other
employees.”
“No, I don’t know if or where I could find it.”
“On the internal network, but I do not know exactly where it is.”
“No I do not know. I would talk to the people in charge of the security and
the security training and ask them. I would also probably search on our
shared Confluence site.”
“Yes, it is on our Confluence site and on our Workplace.”
“Yes, on the intranet. When contractors come and work for us, they get it
sent to them and have to read it as well.”
“No, I don’t know. If I asked for the standard from the people in info sec, I
think I would be able to get my hands on it.”
5. Do you or did you receive any training about the security standard, for exam­
ple, when you started working for your current company?
Theme 19: General Security Awareness Training and Vidoes, Limited Standard­
Specific Instruction
All programmers stated that they had received a security awareness training from
their companies. The vast majority of programmers had gotten security training dur­
ing their on­boarding, which again focused primarily on general security awareness.
Most of the programmers did not get any specific lecture or training about the secu­
rity standard itself. Many programmers referred to security awareness videos, such
as those from AwareGO [52], which covered topics like password management,
phishing emails, handling sensitive data, and locking computers when leaving their
desks. This general security training was typically provided during their on­boarding
52
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:63==
and then annually. Only a few programmers had attended a short lecture or talk
specifically about the company’s security standard.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“I had to watch security videos form AwareGO as a part of my on­boarding.
But I have not gotten any training or such specifically about the security
standard I am supposed to follow.”
“I got some training during on­boarding about security awareness and I
also have to watch bi­weekly videos on AwareGO about security aware­
ness. However, this training is for all employees, regardless if you are a
programmer or in some other role. I have not received any specific train­
ing regarding the security standard. Recently, we had an external lecturer
who conducted a workshop on how to hack yourself, which was interest­
ing. I think that was a part of our security training as well.”
“[company 15] has an online training platform called ‘The [company15]’s
School’. I took a course there that included a lecture about the ISO stan­
dard and GDPR. Department meetings have also mentioned ISO topics.
During on­boarding, they talked a lot about GDPR but nothing about ISO.
The [Company 15]’s School also teaches a lot about general security on
the web, such as how to spot phising emails.”
“I received some training about GDPR and privacy. There has been no
formal training about ISO provided by the company. I have read a lot about
secure coding in my own time just from my own initiative. There are no
formal steps that we, at the company, have to follow. I think we should,
but we don’t.”
“Yes, I have been to several training courses held by our CISO, maybe five
or six in total, covering topics like email phising and how to have secure
passwords and a password manager. It is very good and helpful to get
the reminder about all these security issues.”
“Yes, in my on­boarding. There has been a lot of discussion about the
ISO 27001 implementation, but there has not been one big presentation
about it. Instead, it has been talked about and implemented in many small
steps. A lot of things have changed. Logins are now geo­blocked, our
work phones are more managed by the company, and there is a single­
sign­on for everything. It has been challenging for some of us Linux guys.”
“Yes, there is an annual general security training for everyone, but that
is just for formalities. Otherwise you manage your own security training
as a programmer. I do it in my own time. I like to do Capture The Flag
challenges (CTFs) and go to conferences.”
“There was a security presentation in the on­boarding, but that was not
very technical. It is more what you already know as a programmer and
what you learn from other programmers. We take some courses and learn
some more there. For example, we had a hackathon by one of the secu­
rity companies in Iceland, which had a good presentation on all of this
technical security stuff and we were tested on all the material there.”
From Security Policies to Practices
53
==PAGE:64==
6. Have you faced any challenges in adhering to the standards during your work
or gained any benefits in your tasks from following the security standard? If
so, can you give me an example?
Theme 20: Varied Experiences and Challenges in Adhering to Security Stan­
dards. More Effort, Time Constraints, Improved Coding Practises and Security
Awareness
The programmers’ experiences with adhering to security standards varied. They
were primarily divided into those who faced challenges, such as dealing with permis­
sions and experiencing slower workflows, and those who did not feel any significant
impact because they were not or did not feel like they were closely following specific
security measures. While the majority mentioned challenges, primarily mentioning
that the security standards tend to slow down their tasks, others did not notice much
or any security measures in their daily work. Specific difficulties included evaluat­
ing the severity of vulnerability scans, obtaining permissions, knowing whether they
are coding sufficiently securely, and handling outdated security systems. However,
some programmers highlighted benefits such as increased security awareness and
improved coding practices. A few mentioned that in the implementation of their
security standard, they were assigned to create coding guidelines that fulfilled the
security requirements. That process fostered collaboration and a shared under­
standing of security practices within their teams.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“No, not really. Sometimes I have to get permission for downloading.”
“Yes, some challenges. These tasks become harder or more daunting
with security constraints. We have been using Keycloak as part of our
security. The person who set it up left the company a long time ago. The
authenticity was that you had to have an API from Keycloak, we went
through so much trouble because the handover was insufficient. There
was some documentation but it wasn’t very understandable. Better han­
dover practices are needed when someone leaves, not enough to just
have some Confluence overview site, but other people must be able to
run, build and dev it. Not just have something lying on some random
GitHub server and no one dares to touch it. More people need to know
how the security measures work.”
“One colleague could not make a pull request the other day because they
had not answered some secure code question. Requiring answers to se­
curity policy questions is a smart way to ensure programmers read it. Do­
ing this every time would be too restrictive, but once a month is a good
reminder.”
“No challenges or benefits as I don’t follow any security standard or policy.
We have some vulnerability scan and need to do integration and unit tests
which can take time, but otherwise nothing. I can use all dependencies
and packages I want.”
“I don’t think the standards are in the way or challenging. But if we would
always stop when the vulnerability scan states there is a vulnerability, then
we would be stopping and resetting every two weeks. It’s more about
54
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:65==
knowing what constitutes a risk and what not. When is the risk too big
and when is it not relevant.”
“Yes and no to the challenges. We cannot have guests in the office be­
cause of ISO 27001, which can be boring and inconvenient to not be able
to invite people and costumers up to our office, e.g. when we are having
meetings with costumers because of a project. We are also restricted to
using trusted software, but this term can be stretched.”
“Yes, challenges come up regularly. The security standard is important
and a good framework but it can slow down projects and increase stress.
Sometimes, solving tasks technically is easy, but doing so legally and se­
curely is more difficult. It’s hard to find the right balance between legality
and technicality. Hard to find the legal and technical frame we are allowed
to work within. We provide a service that a lot of things depend on here
in Iceland so it is very important to be secure.”
“No, I have not really faced any challenges as we the programmers made
the guidelines with the security standard in mind. We asked ourselves
how can we fulfil the standard and have best practises without overturning
everything. The changes were positive. The benefit was that we made
the guidelines and it made the programmers team more united. We make
sure we do not do anything in haste, like bug fixes. One challenge is
that it takes longer to get code to production, but it’s only a slight delay
compared to the benefits.”
7. How do you find following the cyber security standard? Is it easy, hard, or
irrelevant? Do you find it necessary or helpful to have these guidelines?
Theme 21: Mixed Feelings on the Necessity and Practicality of Security Stan­
dards
The programmers’ feelings about following their company’s standards were varied.
Some found it very beneficial to have a framework as it made them feel safer and
minimised the risk of making harmful mistakes. They appreciated the clear guide­
lines that helped ensure their work was secure and compliant with industry stan­
dards. These programmers felt that having a structured approach to security al­
lowed them to focus more on their tasks without worrying too much about potential
vulnerabilities.
On the other hand, some programmers found the security standards annoying or re­
strictive due to the additional steps they added. They mentioned that the standards
often slowed down their workflow, making simple tasks more cumbersome. This
sentiment was particularly strong among those who felt that the security measures
were too rigid or were not well integrated into their existing processes. These pro­
grammers expressed frustration at the time it added to their tasks and extra effort
needed to comply with the security protocols, which they felt could sometimes hin­
der their efficiency and creativity. Despite these differing views, most programmers
acknowledged the importance of having some security measures in place. They
recognized that these standards were essential for protecting sensitive data and
ensuring the overall security of their projects. However, some programmers were
unaware of any security measures and standard or did not think much or at all about
them.
From Security Policies to Practices
55
==PAGE:66==
Overall, while there were mixed feelings about the ease of following the security
standards, there was a general consensus on their significance. This balance be­
tween convenience and security was a recurring theme in the programmers’ re­
sponses, highlighting the ongoing challenge of integrating robust security practices
into day­to­day tasks and workflows.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“I have quite open hands. It does not really affect me in my job. I really
don’t think about it that much.”
“Just very nice to follow it. Especially when looking at it in the long run.”
“I am pretty happy with it. Nice to follow the procedures. They sometimes
make things harder and take longer, but knowing the risks, I don’t see it
as an obstacle, more like auxiliary tires.”
“Sometimes it can be so annoying. Maybe I just want to add something
tiny in the code but need to wait because it takes so long to get it approved
and go through all the pipeline and fulfill all security requirements. Things
could take much shorter time if there were not such strict rules.”
“I just think it can be fun to think about the security side of tasks. All the
security policies and standards are such that you just have to follow them.
You need to have your eyes open because you are working with sensitive
data. But I do not think it is fun to go through security audits and have
to document everything and add even more documentations. That just
takes time from other tasks like programming. Security takes time from
programmers. For example, I reported a security vulnerability with one
of our APIs and so much of my time went into reporting and fixing every­
thing. A long and big process went into motion. I was head down in other
tasks and it was a bit of a focus shift always having to document more
about this weak API. It required a lot of work to comply with security and
report issues. I found it a bit of an overreaction, but not everyone has
the same understanding of the software as me. Also, the auditors often
don’t know the difference between security best practises and practical
best practises. We just had an ISO audit earlier today. The programmers
got a comment that we are not allowed to use old production data when
we are testing, but we get way more realistic results with them rather than
with dummy data. So dummy data is security best practises, but the other
is actually better to get more realistic results. It is just for test on develop­
ment so it would be safe regardless. It is sometimes like that with these
security standard. They state all these security best practises but don’t
actually contain what is practically best practises as well, they make it
sometimes harder to work. Yes, so the short answer is that they can be
quite burdensome.”
“I find it necessary. I know about it and that is good.”
“I think it is nice. It is just fine as it is. I like to have some frame. I don’t
like that everyone has different programming styles or procedures when
doing similar tasks.”
“I think it is good and just very comfortable to have it. I find it good to have
56
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:67==
a frame and have some procedures layed out. Everything is getting so
strict with all the laws like GDPR so it is good that we have a framework.
As we are a flight transport company, we need to follow many security
measures and be sure about the security.”
“Easy as it does not affect me. I don’t like strict standards and frameworks
that tell me what I can do and what not. I want to know why I cannot do
certain things and how I should do it instead. I think it is important to teach
good standards and best practises and make programmers understand
the security and reason behind it.”
“I think it does not apply to me. I think it is very hard to monitor security.
But I do not really notice for the security standard or policy in my work.”
“I think it is fine. Nothing that irritates me specifically.”
8. What is your opinion on the cyber security standard or policy?
Theme 22: Mixed Opinions on Cyber Security Standards and Practises, Gen­
eral Consensus About Security Importance
The programmers’ answers to this question were quite related to the one before.
The programmers’ opinions on their company’s cyber security standards varied.
Some found the standards beneficial as they provided a structured framework that
enhanced security and prevented mistakes. Others found them irritating and re­
strictive, though they acknowledged their importance. Overall, most programmers
recognised the necessity of having security measures in place, even if they some­
times felt cumbersome. Some highlighted that these standards, while sometimes
seen as a hindrance, ultimately contribute to a safer and more reliable working en­
vironment. A few mentioned that adhering to these standards has fostered better
teamwork and communication within their development teams in the cases they got
tasked to create security related guidelines for their team.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“The standard does not go that deep, just covers this checklist. I feel
like that we would always comply with ISO unless we were completely off
track. We have gotten some comments from audits like ‘put more info on
the tickets’ but no comments that are too crazy, so I have not been sweat­
ing it. We had another, more technical audit from a security company in
Iceland, that was much harder than the ISO audit.”
“I think it is very important to have a security standard. It is just very good
that this framework exists. Even though it can be irritating sometimes,
it is much better to have it and follow rather that just doing something.
There needs to be processes and documentation. Knowledge, both se­
curity related and not, inside the company needs to be distributed and
documented, not just one person being a specialist in this one thing. The
procedures always need to be implemented but also open for changes
and improvements.”
“The main things covered are very good. When you get the hang of it, you
realise that it is better and safer to go the secure way. Change the mindset
to be ready to go the more secure way from the beginning. I think just the
From Security Policies to Practices
57
==PAGE:68==
whole ISO certification process has been a good decision and improved
the company’s security.”
“There is always a small reminder about the security, but it is not at all
restraining, but it slows things down sometimes. I am not at all thinking
about security when I am programming. The process and pipeline is just
as they are and I am not thinking whether they have all the security mea­
sures needed integrated or not.”
“I am overall positive about it. I find it important. I know programmers,
mostly older programmers, that find these security policies and measures
cumbersome and just want to power through and do everything like they
have been doing it for the past 20 years and find new security practises
hindering. I don’t feel that way. I really like when we get pen­tested, then
we see where we can improve. Sometimes our CISO lets us know that
we are being tested, other times we don’t know that someone is trying to
break in.”
“My opinion is neutral. I understand why a relatively new company like
this one does not have a security standard. Security is probably the first
thing many companies cut or drop when saving money. I understand that
it is not here, but I would like to have a guideline. It should not rely solely
on my security knowledge as a programmer, as it is not that great haha.”
“I like when cyber security is thought of at the company. It makes me
feel better and more confident that I cannot break the code or break any
laws, as it would be prevented before it could happen. It is good that the
employees are being taught about security. I am working with a lot of
confidential data and I don’t want to screw it up.”
“As a developer, I like to have free hands. Having many regulations and
frameworks sounds restrictive and boring to me. I think it would make me
not as good of an employee and programmer. I like to have free hands to
a certain extent, but it is good to have some framework though, of course.”
9. Did you take a security course or obtain any security knowledge in your edu­
cation?
Theme 23: Lack of Formal Cyber Security Education and No Mandatory Secu­
rity Courses
All the programmers interviewed had attended university to pursue their education.
Sixteen programmers had degrees in computer science or software engineering,
while two had studied other types of engineering. Out of the 18 programmers, only
two had taken a dedicated cyber security course during their education. One of
these two had taken the only security course available in their computer science
program, which was an elective three­week course. The other had not taken a
security course during their bachelor’s degree in software engineering but had taken
network security and data security courses during their master’s degree.
The majority of the programmers had not taken any specific courses focused on se­
curity. However, some mentioned that security topics were briefly covered in a few
lectures within courses they took such as Computer Communications, Databases,
and Web Programming. Overall, formal education in cyber security was very lim­
ited among the programmers’ computer science degrees, highlighting a gap in their
58
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:69==
academic training.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“No, I graduated with a computer science degree in 2003. It was a dif­
ferent world back then, I hope. I mean, at my previous workplace, card
information was saved without encryption ­ that’s crazy! I think security
was briefly mentioned in the Computer Communications course. I believe
computer security should be mandatory in computer science programs to­
day. It is so important to have some knowledge about it and be aware of
these security standards. Cyber security is a big field today and will just
continue to grow.”
“No, but it has been a while since I was in school. I believe security was
mentioned somewhere, but it was not the main thing. There was more
emphasis on performance. Security is also more on the guys in operations
than the programmers. They put up the servers and systems and make
sure it is safe.”
“Yes, I took a network security course and a data security course during
my master’s degree I graduated with in 2022. However, I did not have to
take any security courses in my undergraduate program.”
“No, I did not take any security course in my computer science degree.
Security was not a major focus in my courses, but it was mentioned to­
wards the end of some courses like Database Management Systems and
Web Programming. I graduated in 2023.”
“No, I graduated with a bachelors in software engineering in 2022. There
was one elective cyber security course, but I did not take it. Security was
mentioned in the last lectures of some courses, but nothing super detailed
that I can recall.”
“No, but I love Hack The Box and CTF challenges, and I learned cyber
security that way on my own.”
“Yes, I took the elective three­weeks course in Reykjavík University about
cyber security.”
10. Is there anything you would like to add to this interview?
Theme 24: Additional Insights and Suggestions for Improving Security Prac­
tices from Programmers’ Point of View
The programmers offered a range of additional insights and suggestions. Some em­
phasised the need for better collaboration between programmers or system admin­
istrators and the CISO, while others highlighted the importance of security training
tailored specifically for developers. Several mentioned the benefits and challenges
of their company’s current security practices and suggested improvements for en­
hancing security awareness and compliance.
The following quotations demonstrate the main themes and insights that were iden­
tified during the analysis:
“I think we need some strong system administrators and to make them
and the CISO work better together. We have some security guidelines in
From Security Policies to Practices
59
==PAGE:70==
Confluence, but it is just hard to always follow them. Our CISO is not in the
same department as the developers, maybe not as close to us as needed.
Maybe there could be a security representative within the development
team and department. It would be nice to have a session with the CISO
and the programmers together, to connect the CISO better to the software
development. The security representative could be a programmer but
would also be a representative maybe as a 30% role that would keep
their eyes open regarding how to improve technical security and the CISO
could use the representative to advocate and report back to the CISO
with both good and bad things related to the security. I think security is
something that we need to think about from the beginning of projects, we
need to be ready and on our toes. But as with most Icelandic technical
companies we are very few employees with so many tasks. It is funny
to work with big fancy companies from other countries and seeing all the
resources they have. When we are this few it is hard to be strict and go
as in depth as we would like with certain things like security. The morale
is more like “It this task done? Yes, but X and Y are missing. Ok, but we
have already started selling it so onto the next one”. We are just always
running. There are so many projects going on here. Much more than
enough work to do.”
“I feel like the security awareness has increased quite a bit since we went
through the ISO implementation and audit.”
“I think that the size of the company plays a big part in whether everyone is
aware of the standards and the security guidelines. In bigger companies
like ours, I think it is harder. We just focus on us and the security within
our department but we don’t know if all the other teams are doing it as
well.”
“I think that it is very important that programmers get security training re­
garding coding securely, that programmers know the main code vulner­
abilities and how to minimise the likelihood of them. Technical security
awareness is missing in programmers. I learned it myself through CTFs.
There, I learned how to see the hacker’s side and break and hack code,
so now I know how I can build it without it being easy to hack. If you
know how to break code then you are more likely to know how to develop
it without it being easily broken. I think programmers would learn a lot
about secure coding if they would go through a course that would be built
on those kind of ideas.”
“Cyber security is a really important topic. Hackers are always getting
better and better. We always need to think about security.”
“I know that we are implementing and following ISO 27001, but I don’t
know what the company needs to maintain the ISO certificate, I don’t know
what the ISO standard is about other than it is about cyber security some­
how. I don’t know what it means to follow ISO, but I know that it is going
well, or that is at least what the CISO says.”
“In larger projects, we also have to fill out a risk form. We also have the
quality handbook and more documents. I want to end by saying that the
security awareness has grown the last 3 years I have been here.”
60
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:71==
“Security audits are a good thing, but I think they check more if you have
things documented or not rather than checking if the company follows the
security procedures they say they do in real life. Here, we follow the pro­
cedures pretty well. We take security seriously. After companies get at­
tacked they focus a lot on security, but they feel like security slows down
production, which is why companies don’t focus on security in the first
place. I don’t feel like security slows down my production, maybe in the
beginning, but in the long term you are saving time and money when fo­
cusing on security. I say let’s do it the right way from the start as we
need to have a good and secure product. Then there is another point that
some companies have policies in place but do not follow them or any se­
curity measures. I want companies to actually commit to security and say
something concretely like we follow this standard and OWASP, etc.”
“I know that the security issues could be better. When they are training
security awareness, then they are always talking about the most basic
things like don’t click the link in the emails you get. It gets so boring when
you are always listening to the same stuff. Hackers are always finding
new and more complex ways to hack, and it would be fun and interesting
to hear about that. Because the security training is always on such ba­
sic level, it becomes noise in the background. Just another similar video
about phising, nothing interesting to hear. It needs to be relevant and on
the right level for everyone.”
From Security Policies to Practices
61
==PAGE:72==
Table 4.3: Overview of which standards the companies participating in the research follow
and their certification status by industry.
Company
Industry
Country
Certified
Standard
1
Cyber security
Software
Denmark
No, not
yet, we’re
working
on it
ISO 27001/2022.
2
Energy
Denmark
Yes
NIST, ISO 27001
ISO 27002,
and IEC 62443.
3
Pharmachudical
Denmark
Yes
ISO 27001
4
Banking
Denmark
No
ISO 27001
and ISO 27002.
5
Consulting
Denmark
No
ISO 27001.
6
Software
services
Denmark
Yes
ISO 27001,
and ISO 27018.
7
BioTech
Denmark
No
ISO 27001
IEC 62443
for OT/ICS
security, and
NIST CSF and
800­53.
8
Software
services
Denmark
Yes
ISO 27001/2022,
ISO 27005,
ISO 27017,
SOC 2 and NIST.
9
Train
transportation
Denmark
Yes
ISO 27001.
10
Electronic
Authentication
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001
(since 2017).
11
National
Broadcasting
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001/2022
(since April 2024).
12
Telecommunications
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001
(since 2014)
13
Banking
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001/2013.
14
Bio­pharmaceutical
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001.
15
Flight
transportation
Iceland
No
ISO 27001/2022.
16
Cyber security
company
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001/2013.
17
Banking
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001/2013.
18
FinTech
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001/2013
(updating to
’22 in Nov),
SOC 2, ISO 42001.
19
Cyber security
Consulting
Iceland
Yes
ISO 27001.
62
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:73==
5
Discussion and Conclusion
This section discusses the results derived from the interviews conducted as part of this
research. It summarises the main findings from the results and answers the research
questions that were listed in Section 1.6. Strengths and limitations of the research are
addressed along with interesting topics for possible future work. Lastly, the research is
tied together with a conclusion.
5.1
Discussion
The interviews with the CISOs and programmers that were conducted in this research
revealed diverse insights about cyber security practices and compliance within organisa­
tions. Sometimes, the programmers were not on the same page as the CISOs, while other
times they were well­informed and up­to­date about the security standard and measures
at their companies. This study provides a comprehensive overview of the cyber secu­
rity standards adopted and their implementation by companies in Denmark and Iceland,
offering diverse perspectives from both CISOs and programmers. This balanced view
highlights the challenges and benefits of cyber security compliance. To improve cyber
security practices, organisations should enhance communication and training on security
standards, ensuring all employees, especially programmers, understand their importance
and implementation.
5.1.1
Summary of Main Research Results
The research revealed that all CISOs interviewed stated their company follows a cyber
security standard or has security policies in place. ISO 27001 emerged as the most widely
used standard among companies in both Denmark and Iceland. The primary reasons
for its prevalence included its comprehensive framework, international recognition, and
adaptability to the needs of different organisations. Companies with customers based in
the USA were more likely to additionally mention and follow SOC 2 and NIST CSF.
Some CISOs and programmers working within the same company had different opinions,
perspectives, and experiences regarding their company’s security standards and mea­
sures. This indicates that not all security measures and necessary information about se­
curity are effectively communicated to the programmers. Only a few programmers knew
the cyber security standard their company was following. Some said they knew that the
company follow some standard, but that they were not affected by it and it did not concern
them in their roles as programmers. CISOs felt that as long as the programmers know
and follow the security policies and procedures, they do not have to specifically know the
security standard their company adheres to. However, there was a general consensus
among both programmers and CISOs about the importance of cyber security and policies.
Programmers were more likely to be aware of their company’s standards and feel more
responsibility to the company’s security, when involved in the implementation process of
the security policies and measures.
Programmers often found compliance with security standards to be cumbersome. Chal­
lenges they faced included the additional time and effort required to comply with secu­
rity protocols, assessing code security, and handling security systems. Despite these
challenges, benefits such as improved coding practices, enhanced security awareness,
reduced human error, and more structured approach to code management and imple­
mentation were noted, especially among programmers involved in implementing security
guidelines.
From Security Policies to Practices
63
==PAGE:74==
No significant differences were found between Danish and Icelandic companies in terms
of compliance emphasis and implementation. However, Icelandic companies showed
a higher tendency towards obtaining ISO 27001 certification compared to their Danish
counterparts, suggesting a stronger culture of certification in Iceland.
The study highlights the importance of involving programmers in the development of se­
curity guidelines and ensuring effective communication and training to enhance security
compliance across organisations.
5.1.1.1
Key Findings from the CISOs
Most companies in both Denmark and Iceland adhere to widely recognised standards,
most popularly ISO 27001, with some CISOs mentioning SOC 2 and NIST CSF as well.
Many companies that partook in the research are certified, with 13 out of the 18 companies
having ISO 27001 certification. All but one Icelandic company were ISO 27001 certified,
compared to five out of nine Danish companies.
Compliance processes are seen as beneficial but challenging, particularly in terms of
resource allocation and organisational buy­in. Some CISOs experienced difficulties ob­
taining sufficient funding from higher management for their implementation plans. Con­
versely, they observed more commitment from management, and consequently program­
mers, to standard compliance when leadership decided to pursue a certification with a cy­
ber security standard. CISOs found it easier to promote adherence to standards after the
company’s leadership had emphasised the importance of a certification, making it clear
that it was a priority.
5.1.1.2
Key Findings from the Programmers
Awareness of specific standards varied significantly among programmers, with some well­
versed in the standards and others largely unaware. Common challenges the program­
mers faced when complying with the security standards included the perceived slowdown
of workflow and integration difficulties with existing processes. Some found the security
measures not practically good practises, resulting in them not being fond of them and
being unlikely to follow them. Benefits they had gained from following security policies
were improved security practices and a structured approach to coding and system man­
agement. Nearly 90% of the programmers interviewed had not taken any formal courses
in cyber security during their university education. This suggests to a significant gap in
the academic training of programmers, which may impact their ability to effectively com­
ply with security standards. Some programmers found the general security awareness
training uninteresting and too repetitive, resulting in them not listening or paying much
attention to it.
5.1.2
Research Questions Answered
RQ1: What are the most used cyber security standards in Denmark and Iceland, and
why?
ISO 27001 was the most popular cyber security standard among the 18 companies
interviewed in Denmark and Iceland. All CISOs interviewed said their companies
follow ISO 27001 to some extent, whether certified or using it as a reference when
creating and implementing policies. The primary reason for its popularity is its status
as a widely recognised standard in Europe. The reasons the CISOs provided as to
why they chose to follow ISO 27001 were mainly that it is the industry standard:
everyone accepts it, knows it and uses it in the industry. Many also mentioned its
ability to be tailored to the needs of each organisation as a reason for their choice of
ISO 27001. This standard was also favored due to its comprehensive frameworks,
international recognition, and the structured approach it provides for managing and
64
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:75==
mitigating cyber risks.
Companies that worked with companies tied to the USA, or had US­based cus­
tomers, were more likely to also follow SOC 2 and mention NIST CSF than com­
panies exclusively working within Iceland or Denmark, or within Europe. After ISO
27001, SOC 2 and NIST CSF were the most often mentioned frameworks. Quan­
titative research could further support the claim that ISO 27001 is the most used
cyber security standard in Denmark and Iceland.
RQ2: What are the main challenges programmers encounter when it comes to complying
with cyber security standards, and what benefits have they gained from following
these standards?
The main challenges programmers face include the additional time and effort re­
quired from them to comply with security protocols, which can slow them down in
their development processes. The programmers also mentioned difficulties assess­
ing the security of their code, handling security systems, and evaluating the severity
of vulnerabilities from vulnerability scans all of which are tasks often imposed on
programmers for compliance reasons. Sometimes programmers feel like the se­
curity measures set by the CISOs are not what is practically best practices, but
rather what the standard requires. The programmers need to be able to implement
security measures without it feeling unnecessary or complicated, making security
implementation easy and intuitive.
The benefits programmers have gained from following security standards and poli­
cies include a greater awareness of security issues and improved coding practices
that enhance the company’s overall security posture. These benefits were espe­
cially noted by programmers that were involved in the implementation of the secu­
rity standard within their company, such as creating development guidelines that
fulfil security requirements imposed by a standard. Programmers also mentioned
the relief that can come with security practises as they minimise the likelihood of
human errors, as the security measures should prevent them from happening. This
seemed to minimise the stress of the programmers.
RQ3: To what extent do programmers in Danish and Icelandic companies demonstrate
awareness of their companies’ established cyber security standards or policies?
All the CISOs interviewed stated that their companies provided security awareness
training for all employees, including the programmers. However, awareness levels
among programmers varied significantly in terms of the company’s cyber security
standard and policies. While some had a good understanding of their company’s
standards and security policies, others lack detailed knowledge. This variation often
depends on the level of communication and training provided by the organisation.
Most programmers believed that their company followed some security standard
but did not know much more about it. However, some programmers did not know
or were not aware of the security policies and measures the company had in place.
Addressing this is crucial for increasing security awareness and strengthening the
security mindset of programmers to ensure safer software. A minority of the pro­
grammers knew the specific security standard and policies their company followed
and what it entailed. Most of the programmers were unaware of the standard and
felt it irrelevant to their roles, despite being responsible for implementing software.
Some CISOs pointed out in the interviews that it does not matter if the programmers
know the name of the cyber security standard, as long as they understand and follow
From Security Policies to Practices
65
==PAGE:76==
the security policies and procedures set in place according to the company’s security
standard. The standard and its name might be irrelevant to the programmers, but
knowing and adhering to the policies implemented according to the standards is of
utmost importance for ensuring digital security. The lack of specific security­focused
courses in the programmers’ education, particularly in computer science or software
engineering, and appropriate security training at workplaces might contribute to this
feeling of irrelevance and security unawareness.
Programmers were more likely to know their company’s cyber security standard
and be aware of its procedures if their CISO had recently undergone an ISO 27001
audit and included the programmers in the implementation process. This indicates
that involving programmers in creating security guidelines to meet the standard’s
requirements fosters a sense of responsibility and awareness of the established
policies.
RQ4: Is there a difference between Icelandic (EEA country) and Danish (EU country)
companies regarding compliance to cyber security standards?
No significant differences were found between Danish and Icelandic companies in
terms of compliance emphasis and implementation. Both countries practised gen­
eral security awareness training, had security policies accessible to all employees
on their shared space, and maintained cyber security policies as the standard pre­
scribes. However, the study found that Icelandic companies were more likely to be
ISO 27001 certified than Danish ones. The NIS2 Directive applies to both Denmark
and Iceland as it will be enforced for all countries in Europe, regardless whether they
are in the EU or EEA. Consequently, NIS2 should not be a factor in the difference in
security compliance between countries. All except one of the Icelandic companies
interviewed were ISO 27001 certified, whereas four out of the nine Danish compa­
nies interviewed were not certified by a cyber security standard. This suggests a
stronger culture of certification in Iceland compared to Denmark at the time of this
research.
5.1.3
“Cry Wolf”
The idea of a security cry wolf could sometimes be interpreted from some the program­
mers’ conversations. Some programmers found vulnerability scans cry wolf where they
felt the scans report vulnerabilities too often, resulting in the programmers ignoring the
warnings until they could not continue unless they fixed the vulnerabilities. Just as re­
peated false alarms can lead people to ignore fire alarms, and people stop relying on the
boy on the wolf watch when repeatedly crying wolf when there is no wolf, programmers
may start ignoring vulnerability scan results until it is too late.
The interviews with the programmers showed that general security awareness training
can become monotonous and too basic for programmers. This reduces its effectiveness
when programmers gradually stop listening to it as it can start sounding like the boy who
cried wolf. Security training needs to be more relevant, interesting, and appropriately
challenging to keep programmers engaged. Many CISOs also mentioned that it can be
challenging getting programmers to adhere to policies and procedures derived from a
cyber security standard. Considering these factors, offering programmers security training
that is more tailored to their jobs, needs and interests should be beneficial to all. It could
make programmers more engaged and interested in security, potentially increasing the
likelihood of them adhering to relevant policies and procedures.
66
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:77==
5.1.4
Cyber Security in Education
A significant finding was the lack of formal cyber security education among the program­
mers. A large part of them, or nearly 90% of the 18 programmers, did not receive any
cyber security education during their university studies, which were mainly in computer
science or software engineering. Only two programmers had taken security courses dur­
ing their university education, one of whom only took security courses in their masters
program.
This is especially concerning as the programmers mentioned data integrity and security
as being a part of their day­to­day tasks. Many of them are responsible for developing
and maintaining critical infrastructure. Therefore, a lack of formal cyber security educa­
tion poses a significant risk to the security of products, systems and infrastructure being
developed. Relying on programmers’ own ambition for learning about cyber security not
only leads to inconsistencies in their security knowledge, but also increases likelihood of
vulnerabilities being present in their code.
Making cyber security a mandatory part of the curriculum of all computer science and
software engineering studies is vital in increasing the overall security awareness of pro­
grammers and of the technology industry as a whole.
5.1.5
Communications between CISOs and Programmers
The CISOs had diverse educational backgrounds, ranging from pharmacy to anthropology
to engineering. A technical background might help CISOs connect better with program­
mers and devise more practical security measures that the programmers would be more
likely to use and follow. However, a technical background might not be strictly necessary
if the CISOs can find a solution to bridge the gap between them and the programmers
to foster better collaboration and understanding of security measures. One potential so­
lution is designating a programmer as a security ambassador. This role could enhance
collaboration and understanding, leading to more effective security measures.
One programmer suggested designating a programmer as a security ambassador in a
30% role to promote security best practices, implement security measures, and align
with the CISO on appropriate security measures that are both practical and compliant
with security standards. This could be especially beneficial for CISOs lacking a techni­
cal background, as the programmer security ambassador can bridge the gap between
technical details and security requirements. The security ambassador would also inspire
other programmers regarding security practices and could help them improve their secu­
rity posture. Hearing from another programmer that security is important might be more
effective in ensuring adherence to security procedures than hearing it from the CISO.
Programmers often found security training to be boring and irrelevant to their technical
work, as the general security awareness training was often repetitive, often emphasising
phising emails. They expressed a desire for more engaging and relevant training, fo­
cusing on practical security measures and interesting hacks. This feedback highlights the
challenge CISOs face in promoting security compliance among programmers, particularly
when the training provided does not meet their needs and level of knowledge.
This demonstrates a gap in communications between CISOs and programmers, where
the challenges on both sides could be solved by having more interesting training for the
programmers, so not just a general security training but specific to the programmers role.
To foster a shared responsibility for the organisation’s security practices, it is necessary
to reduce the gap between CISOs and programmers and improve their communications.
Encouraging closer collaboration and ensuring that programmers feel part of the same
From Security Policies to Practices
67
==PAGE:78==
team working towards a common security goal can enhance compliance and create a
unified approach to security within the organisation.
5.1.6
Programmers’ buy­in to Security Compliance
Programmers who were actively involved in creating security guidelines that fulfill the
standard’s requirements showed more interest in security, more awareness and a greater
sense of security responsibility. They felt more accountable for the security measures and
perceived themselves and the CISOs as part of the same team, working collaboratively
to enhance the company’s security posture.
This insight highlights the importance for CISOs to engage programmers in the policy­
making and process development stages. Considering that some CISOs had faced chal­
lenges in promoting security compliance among programmers, this approach is particu­
larly valuable to them. They may not have heard programmers’ honest opinions about
the security measures they are implementing and these points could help them improve
their strategy to get programmers to comply with security standards and policies.
By involving programmers in these processes, CISOs can foster a stronger sense of pro­
grammers’ ownership and compliance with security standards, leading to more robust
security practices among programmers within the organisation. This collaborative ap­
proach not only improves adherence to security protocols but also cultivates a culture of
continuous improvement and vigilance in cyber security practices.
5.1.7
Management Support
Some CISOs experienced challenges in securing sufficient funding for their security mea­
sures. On the other hand, CISOs found greater support and success when their man­
agement team was actively involved and prioritised security. When higher management
decided to pursue a cyber security certification, such as ISO 27001, CISOs found it easier
to obtain the necessary funding and resources. This highlights the importance of involving
higher management in cyber security initiatives.
Having the backing of higher management made it easier for CISOs to promote and im­
plement security measures, as it signaled to the entire organisation that security was a
priority. This top­down approach helped ensure that employees understood the impor­
tance of security measures and were more likely to comply with them. Involvement from
management also provided CISOs with the authority and legitimacy needed to enforce
security protocols effectively. Additionally, the support from management fostered more
emphasis on security within the organisation, making it a collective responsibility rather
than just the duty of the CISO.
5.1.8
Confidence in Iceland’s Security Culture
During the interviews with the Icelandic CISOs and programmers it became apparent that
they believed that the grass was greener in Denmark with regards to cyber security when
they learned that the research covered both Icelandic and Danish companies. Both Ice­
landic CISOs and programmers seemed to believe that Danish, and other international
companies, might have more mature security measures and implementations. The Ice­
landic companies had a hint of inferiority complex regarding their security and felt like
they had less resources to work with than larger companies from other countries. One
CISO said that Icelanders are too naïve and do not believe serious security incidents can
happen to them, suggesting that their pragmatic approach might sometimes lead to less
secure practices.
This view was interesting considering the fact that proportionally more Icelandic compa­
nies were certified according to a cyber security standard than Danish companies. Con­
68
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:79==
trary to the Icelandic CISOs’ beliefs, that suggests that the Icelandic companies have
relatively mature security measures in place. One reason for Icelandic companies being
more likely to be ISO 27001 certified than Danish ones might be that Iceland, being a
small country with fewer and smaller companies, has to prove its security practices more
rigorously to potential international customers than larger, well­known Danish companies.
This necessity likely fosters a greater emphasis on certification in Iceland.
5.2
Limitations
Several limitations of the research should be acknowledged.
Some participant pairs
(CISOs and programmers from the same company) might have discussed the research
prior to their interviews, which may have influenced their responses. This especially ap­
plies to cases where CISOs recommended programmers for the interviews, leading to a
possible selection bias. CISOs might have recommended programmers with interest in
security, or those with greater security awareness than most and who are more familiar
with the security standards. Some of the recommended programmers had participated
in security audits before for the company. This could have resulted in a sample that is
not entirely representative of the broader population of programmers within the compa­
nies. Additionally, some CISOs might have informed programmers about the security
standards or provided guidance on how to answer certain questions in order to influence
the programmers’ answers.
It is possible that some participants might have withheld information or provided less de­
tailed responses due to concerns about confidentiality, despite assurances that their re­
sponses would be anonymized. This might affect the depth and authenticity of the data
collected.
The sample, while diverse, may not be fully representative of all companies in Denmark
and Iceland. A quantitative study could provide a clearer answer and support this research
with regards to the prevalence of cyber security standards in these countries.
5.2.1
NIS2 Compliance Bias
Most companies interviewed for this research will need to comply with the NIS2 Directive,
as they are classified as critical infrastructure, potentially creating a bias in the findings.
A few companies, out of the 18, do not have to comply with NIS2, while the rest will need
to adhere to it once it becomes part of Danish and Icelandic laws. Consequently, the
research might reflect the most popular standards among companies that need to comply
with NIS2, rather than providing a comprehensive view of all companies. Additionally,
companies classified as critical infrastructure (like the majority of those that participated
in this research) may be more security oriented than many other companies due to the
importance of their service. This may also have resulted in a biased sample.
5.2.2
Company Bias
Despite the researcher’s assurances of confidentiality, some participants might have pro­
vided biased responses to protect their company’s image. For instance, some program­
mers might have claimed their company follows all necessary security standards without
being fully aware of the details.
One of the reasons for that might be employees’ loyalty to their company and not wanting
the company to look bad in this research. The researcher ensured the participants, how­
ever, that this was in no way an audit from their security standard auditor with the goal of
getting certified according to an official standard.
From Security Policies to Practices
69
==PAGE:80==
5.3
Future Work
Future research could explore the effectiveness of different training programs tailored
specifically to programmers to enhance their understanding and implementation of secure
practices, thereby improving programmers’ compliance with cyber security standards. In­
vestigating how organisational culture affects security practices and exploring various ap­
proaches to addressing cyber security challenges within different cultural contexts would
also be valuable and interesting.
Future work should aim to bridge the gap between technical and security best practices
for CISOs and programmers, encouraging more active participation by programmers in
technical security measures. Engaging programmers with security measures that are
interesting and relevant to their development can increase their sense of responsibility
towards security.
Examining differences in security compliance across industries, particularly in critical in­
frastructures, would provide valuable insights into industry­specific security practices and
challenges. Additionally, understanding why there is a stronger culture of certification in
Iceland compared to Denmark could reveal important factors influencing security prac­
tices and help develop strategies to enhance certification adoption in other regions.
By addressing these areas, future work can contribute to a better and more secure cyber
environment within organisations, ensuring effective collaboration between CISOs and
programmers towards common security goals.
5.4
Conclusion
The research involved interviews with Icelandic and Danish CISOs and programmers to
explore the implementation of cyber security standards and the programmers’ compli­
ance with them. This study sheds light on the practical application of these standards
in Denmark and Iceland and highlights the critical role of both organisational leadership
and technical employees in achieving compliance. By emphasising better communica­
tion, training, and integration of security practices, the research offers valuable insights
for CISOs, companies and policymakers aiming to enhance cyber security measures. It
gives the CISOs an opportunity to see programmers’ honest opinions about the security
measures and what they can improve on to get the programmers more involved in the
organisations’ security procedures.
A concerning finding was the lack of formal cyber security education among the program­
mers, with nearly 90% of them not receiving any cyber security education during their
computer science or software engineering studies, or practical security education at their
workplaces. Despite this, programmers identified data integrity and security as part of their
tasks. Given their role in developing critical infrastructure, this lack of education poses a
significant risk. Relying on programmers’ own passion and ambitions for practical cyber
security learning leads to inconsistencies in security knowledge and practises, and might
increase the likelihood of vulnerabilities in the products and systems they develop.
The findings underscore the need for improved communication between CISOs and pro­
grammers, ensuring that all employees, especially programmers, understand and adhere
to security policies. To increase programmers’ compliance, it is very helpful when the
programmers feel responsible for the organisation’s security practices and perceive them­
selves as part of a unified team working towards a common security goal. This approach
will help organisations mitigate cyber risks more effectively and foster a culture of security
awareness.
70
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:81==
Moreover, the research highlights the significance of industry­recognised standards like
ISO 27001, which provide a structured framework for managing cyber security risks. While
ISO 27001 was the most widely used standard, companies with USA based customers
were more likely to also follow SOC 2 and mention NIST CSF. The study found no sig­
nificant differences in compliance emphasis between Danish and Icelandic companies,
although Icelandic companies showed a higher tendency towards ISO 27001 certifica­
tion.
Programmers often faced challenges such as the additional time and effort required to
comply with security protocols, assessing code security, and handling security systems.
However, those involved in the implementation process noted benefits such as improved
coding practices, enhanced security awareness, and reduced human error. This indicates
the importance of involving programmers in creating security guidelines to foster a sense
of responsibility and awareness. By addressing the challenges and benefits associated
with cyber security compliance, this study contributes to a deeper understanding of how
organisations can enhance their cyber security posture. It also provides a foundation for
future research, particularly in exploring the effectiveness of various training programs.
In conclusion, this study offers valuable insights into the challenges and benefits of ad­
hering to cyber security standards from the perspectives of programmers and CISOs in
Denmark and Iceland. It emphasises the importance of continuous improvement in com­
munication, training, and implementation of security practices to achieve robust cyber
security compliance in organisations.
From Security Policies to Practices
71
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[1]
Sharon Shea. What is cybersecurity? | Definition from TechTarget. Security. URL:
https : / / www . techtarget . com / searchsecurity / definition / cybersecurity (visited on
06/03/2024).
[2]
Cisco. What Is Cybersecurity? URL: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/
security/what-is-cybersecurity.html (visited on 05/20/2024).
[3]
Mariah St. John. Cybersecurity Stats: Facts And Figures You Should Know – Forbes
Advisor. URL: https://www.forbes.com/advisor/education/it-and-tech/cybersecurity-
statistics/ (visited on 06/03/2024).
[4]
Cybercrime To Cost The World $9.5 Trillion USD Annually In 2024. eSentire. URL:
https://www.esentire.com/web-native-pages/cybercrime-to-cost-the-world-9-5-
trillion-usd-annually-in-2024 (visited on 05/23/2024).
[5]
Cybersecurity Ventures Report on Cybercrime. eSentire. URL: https://www.esentire.
com/cybersecurity-fundamentals-defined/glossary/cybersecurity-ventures-report-on-
cybercrime (visited on 05/23/2024).
[6]
ISO Central Secretary. Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection ­
Information security controls (ISO/IEC 27002:2022). Geneva, CH, Nov. 2022. URL:
https://www.iso.org/standard/75652.html.
[7]
Chief Information Officer/Chief Information Security Officer Council. CISO Hand­
book | CIO.GOV. URL: https://www.cio.gov/resources/ciso-handbook/ (visited on
06/09/2024).
[8]
CloudPassage. CloudPassage Study Finds U.S. Universities Failing in Cyberse­
curity Education. GlobeNewswire News Room. Apr. 7, 2016. URL: https://www.
globenewswire . com / news - release / 2016 / 04 / 07 / 1312702 / 0 / en / CloudPassage -
Study- Finds- U- S- Universities- Failing- in- Cybersecurity- Education.html (visited on
05/24/2024).
[9]
Dave Gruber. “Modern Application Development Security”. In: (2020).
[10]
Paul Kirvan. Top 12 IT security frameworks and standards explained | TechTarget.
Oct. 27, 2023. URL: https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/tip/IT-security-
frameworks-and-standards-Choosing-the-right-one (visited on 06/09/2024).
[11]
Karen Scarfone, Daniel Benigni, and Timothy Grance. “Cyber Security Standards”.
In: Wiley Handbook of Science and Technology for Homeland Security, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, June 15, 2009. URL: https://tsapps.nist.gov/publication/
get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=152153 (visited on 06/09/2024).
[12]
ISO Central Secretary. Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection ­
Information security management systems ­ Requirements (ISO/IEC 27001:2022).
Geneva, CH, Oct. 2022. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/27001.
[13]
Octave. ENISA. URL: https : / / www . enisa . europa . eu / topics / risk - management /
current-risk/risk-management-inventory/rm-ra-methods/m_octave.html (visited on
05/24/2024).
[14]
“Cybersecurity measurement”. In: NIST (Apr. 29, 2021). Last Modified: 2022­11­
16T15:13­05:00. URL: https://www.nist.gov/cybersecurity-measurement (visited on
05/24/2024).
[15]
Secureframe. What is SOC 2? A Beginners Guide to Compliance. URL: https://
secureframe.com/hub/soc-2/what-is-soc-2 (visited on 05/24/2024).
72
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:83==
[16]
Seema Gupta Bhol, JR Mohanty, and Prasant Kumar Pattnaik. “Taxonomy of cyber
security metrics to measure strength of cyber security”. In: Materials Today: Pro­
ceedings. SI:5 NANO 2021 80 (Jan. 1, 2023), pp. 2274–2279. ISSN: 2214­7853.
DOI: 10.1016/j.matpr.2021.06.228. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2214785321046009 (visited on 05/24/2024).
[17]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2 ­ Prin­
ciples and rules for the strucutre and drafting of ISO and IEC documents. Ver­
sion Ninth edition. Vernier, Geneva, Oct. 1, 2021. URL: https://www.iso.org/sites/
directives/current/part2/index.xhtml (visited on 06/09/2024).
[18]
ISO ­ International Organization for Standardization. ISO. URL: https://www.iso.
org/home.html (visited on 05/29/2024).
[19]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO/IEC 27001:2022. ISO. URL: https:
//www.iso.org/standard/27001 (visited on 05/20/2024).
[20]
Luke Irwin. ISO 27001 Checklist: Simple 9­Step Implementation Guide. IT Gover­
nance UK Blog. Jan. 18, 2021. URL: https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/blog/iso-
27001-checklist-a-step-by-step-guide-to-implementation (visited on 06/22/2024).
[21]
AICPA \& CIMA. SOC 2® ­ SOC for Service Organizations: Trust Services Criteria
| AICPA & CIMA. URL: https://www.aicpa-cima.com/topic/audit-assurance/audit-
and-assurance-greater-than-soc-2 (visited on 06/08/2024).
[22]
Secureframe. SOC 2 Type 1 vs Type 2: What’s the Difference? Secureframe. URL:
https://secureframe.com/hub/soc-2/type-1-vs-type-2 (visited on 06/22/2024).
[23]
Is SOC 2 a certification or attestation? Vanta. URL: https : / / www . vanta . com /
collection/soc-2/is-soc-2-a-certification-or-attestation (visited on 06/21/2024).
[24]
“Cybersecurity”. In: NIST (June 30, 2016). Last Modified: 2024­03­19T09:03­04:00.
URL: https://www.nist.gov/cybersecurity (visited on 05/29/2024).
[25]
National Institute of Standards and Technology. The NIST Cybersecurity Frame­
work (CSF) 2.0. NIST CSWP 29. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Feb. 26, 2024, NIST CSWP 29. DOI: 10.6028/NIST.CSWP.29.
URL: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/CSWP/NIST.CSWP.29.pdf (visited on
05/31/2024).
[26]
CIS Critical Security Controls. URL: https://www.cisecurity.org/controls (visited on
06/09/2024).
[27]
Cloudflare. What is OWASP? What is the OWASP Top 10? URL: https://www.
cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/security/threats/owasp-top-10/ (visited on 06/12/2024).
[28]
Cloudflare. What is web application security? | Web security. URL: https://www.
cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/security/what-is-web-application-security/ (visited on
06/12/2024).
[29]
OWASP Foundation. OWASP Top Ten. OWASP. URL: https://owasp.org/www-
project-top-ten/ (visited on 06/12/2024).
[30]
Richard A. Caralli et al. Introducing OCTAVE Allegro: Improving the Information
Security Risk Assessment Process. CMU/SEI­2007­TR­012. Carnegie Mellon Uni­
versity, Software Engineering Institute’s Digital Library, May 2007. URL: https://
doi.org/10.1184/R1/6574790.v1.
[31]
Standard of Good Practice for Information Security. Information Security Forum.
URL: https://www.securityforum.org/solutions- and- insights/standard- of- good-
practice-for-information-security/ (visited on 06/22/2024).
[32]
Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) ­ European Union. URL: https://www.
eiopa.europa.eu/digital-operational-resilience-act-dora_en (visited on 06/22/2024).
[33]
Directive on measures for a high common level of cybersecurity across the Union
(NIS2 Directive) ­ FAQs | Shaping Europe’s digital future. URL: https://digital-
From Security Policies to Practices
73
==PAGE:84==
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/faqs/directive-measures-high-common-level-cybersecurity-
across-union-nis2-directive-faqs (visited on 05/30/2024).
[34]
The NIS2 Directive. What is NIS2? URL: https://nis2directive.eu/what- is- nis2/
(visited on 05/30/2024).
[35]
Directive on measures for a high common level of cybersecurity across the Union
(NIS2 Directive) | Shaping Europe’s digital future. May 22, 2024. URL: https://
digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/nis2-directive (visited on 05/31/2024).
[36]
Who does NIS2 apply to? The NIS2 Directive. URL: https://nis2directive.eu/who-
are-affected-by-nis2/ (visited on 05/30/2024).
[37]
The European Parliament. “The NIS2 Directive: A high common level of cyberse­
curity in the EU”. In: (2023). EU Legislation in Progress, p. 13. URL: https://www.
europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2021/689333/EPRS_BRI(2021)689333_
EN.pdf.
[38]
NIS2 requirements. The NIS2 Directive. URL: https://nis2directive.eu/nis2-requirements/
(visited on 05/30/2024).
[39]
Teodor Sommestad, Göran N. Ericsson, and Jakob Nordlander. “SCADA system
cyber security — A comparison of standards”. In: IEEE PES General Meeting. IEEE
PES General Meeting. ISSN: 1944­9925. July 2010, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/PES.
2010.5590215. URL: https://ieeexplore-ieee-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/document/5590215
(visited on 06/10/2024).
[40]
Thomas Rehbohm, Kurt Sandkuhl, and Thomas Kemmerich. “On Challenges of
Cyber and Information Security Management in Federal Structures ­ The Example
of German Public Administration”. In: CEUR­WS. 2019 Joint International Confer­
ence on Perspectives in Business Informatics Research Workshops and Doctoral
Consortium, BIR­WS 2019 (2019), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 16130073.
[41]
Vesić Slavimir and Bjelajac Martin. “Cyber security of a critical infrastructure”. In:
University Business Academy in Novi Sad Faculty of Law for Commerce and Judi­
ciary (2023), pp. 77–88. ISSN: 26835711 and 03523713. DOI: 10.5937/ptp2302077V.
[42]
K. Jawaharrani et al. “Role of CISO ­ Cyber Security & Risk Management”. In: 2023
International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communication and Applied
Informatics (ACCAI). 2023 International Conference on Advances in Computing,
Communication and Applied Informatics (ACCAI). Chennai, India: IEEE, May 25,
2023, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 9798350315905. DOI: 10.1109/ACCAI58221.2023.10200017.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10200017/ (visited on 06/10/2024).
[43]
Scott Shackelford et al. “Toward a Global Cybersecurity Standard of Care? Ex­
ploring the Implications of the 2014 NIST Cybersecurity Framework on Shaping
Reasonable National and International Cybersecurity Practices”. In: Texas Interna­
tional Law Journal Indiana Legal Studies Research Paper No. 291 (2015), p. 59.
URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2446631 (visited on
06/19/2024).
[44]
Nominet Cyber Security. Nominet’s The CISO Stress Report 2020. 2020. URL:
https://media.nominetcyber.com/wp- content/uploads/2020/02/Nominet_The-
CISO-Stress-Report_2020_V10.pdf (visited on 05/26/2024).
[45]
Scott J. Shackelford, Scott Russell, and Andreas Kuehn. “Defining Cybersecurity
Due Diligence Under International Law: Lessons from the Private Sector”. In: Ethics
and Policies for Cyber Operations: A Nato Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Ex­
cellence Initiative. Philosophical Studies Series. Cham: Springer International Pub­
lishing, 2017, pp. 115–137. ISBN: 3­319­45299­1. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-45300-
2_8. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978- 3- 319- 45300- 2_8 (visited on
06/10/2024).
74
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:85==
[46]
Omolola A. Adeoye­Olatunde and Nicole L. Olenik. “Research and scholarly meth­
ods: Semi­structured interviews”. In: JACCP: JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COL­
LEGE OF CLINICAL PHARMACY 4.10 (2021), pp. 1358–1367. ISSN: 2574­9870.
DOI: 10 . 1002 / jac5 . 1441. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jac5 . 1441 (visited on
05/29/2024).
[47]
A. Tong, P. Sainsbury, and J. Craig. “Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative
research (COREQ): a 32­item checklist for interviews and focus groups”. In: Interna­
tional Journal for Quality in Health Care 19.6 (Sept. 16, 2007), pp. 349–357. ISSN:
1353­4505, 1464­3677. DOI: 10.1093/intqhc/mzm042. URL: https://academic.oup.
com/intqhc/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/intqhc/mzm042 (visited on 05/26/2024).
[48]
Icek Ajzen. “The theory of planned behavior”. In: Organizational Behavior and Hu­
man Decision Processes 50.2 (1991), pp. 179–211. ISSN: 0749­5978. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/074959789190020T.
[49]
Greg Guest, Arwen Bunce, and Laura Johnson. “How Many Interviews Are Enough?:
An Experiment with Data Saturation and Variability”. In: Field Methods 18.1 (Feb. 1,
2006). Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc, pp. 59–82. ISSN: 1525­822X. DOI: 10.
1177/1525822X05279903. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X05279903 (visited
on 05/27/2024).
[50]
Content Analysis Method and Examples | Columbia Public Health | Columbia Uni­
versity Mailman School of Public Health. URL: https://www.publichealth.columbia.
edu/research/population-health-methods/content-analysis (visited on 06/06/2024).
[51]
Delve, L. Ho, and A. Limpaecher. “The Practical Guide to Qualitative Content Analy­
sis”. In: (Mar. 24, 2023). URL: https://delvetool.com/blog/qualitative-content-analysis
(visited on 06/06/2024).
[52]
Human Risk Management ­ The Key to Cybersecurity ­ AwareGO. June 29, 2023.
URL: https://awarego.com/ (visited on 06/17/2024).
From Security Policies to Practices
75
==PAGE:86==
76
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:87==
A
Appendix
A.1
Interview Questions in Icelandic
To have the interviews as comfortable and to get the most authentic answers from both the
CISO’s and programmers working in Icelandic companies, it was decided to conduct their
interviews in Icelandic. Therefor, the questions in the interview guides were translated to
Icelandic and they are as follows:
A.1.1
Questions for CISO’s in Icelandic
Fyrst langar mig að nefna að trúnaði er gætt í rannsókninni og það verður ekki hægt að
rekja svörin til þín eða fyrirtækisins. Það eru engin rétt eða röng svör, þannig reyndu að
svara af bestu getu.
1. Getur þú stuttlega sagt mér hvað þú gerir innan fyrirtækisins og hver eru þín helstu
verkefni og markmið um þessar mundir?
2. Fylgir fyrirtækið öryggisstaðli eða stefnu?
3. Hvað heitir staðallinn eða á hvaða öryggisstaðli byggist stefnan?
4. Af hverju var þessi staðall fyrir valinu? Hvaða áhrifavaldar eða faktorar höfðu áhrif
á val staðalsins?
5. Er einhverskonar þjálfun eða kynning fyrir forritara fyrirtækisins í tengslum við öryg­
gisstaðalinn og öryggisstefnuna?
6. Eru forritarnir og aðrir starfsmenn meðvitaðir um hvaða öryggisstaðli fyrirtækið fyl­
gir?
7. Er öryggisstefnan eða ­staðalinn aðgengilegur forriturum?
8. Hefur þú staðið frammi fyrir einhverjum áskorunum við að stuðla að því að öryggis­
staðlinum og stefnunni sé fylgt?
9. Hver er þín skoðun á staðlinum?
10. Hvernig finnst þér að fylgja öryggisstaðlinum? Létt eða erfitt?
11. Myndir þú vilja að eitthvað myndi fara betur með staðilinn? Myndir þú vilja breyta
honum að einhverju leyti?
12. Viltu koma einhverju öðru á framfæri?
A.1.2
Questions for Programmers in Icelandic
Fyrst langar mig að nefna að trúnaði er gætt í rannsókninni og það verður ekki hægt að
rekja svörin til þín eða fyrirtækisins. Það eru engin rétt eða röng svör, þannig reyndu að
svara af bestu getu.
1. Getur þú stuttlega sagt mér hvað þú gerir innan fyrirtækisins og hver eru þín helstu
verkefni og markmið um þessar mundir?
2. Sem forritari í þínu fyrirtæki, fylgir þú einhverjum öryggisstaðli eða ­stefnu?
3. Kannast þú við öryggisstefnuna? Getur þú sagt frá stefnunni eða staðlinum í stuttu
máli?
From Security Policies to Practices
77
==PAGE:88==
4. Veist þú hvort og hvar þú getur nálgast staðalinn eða stefnunni?
5. Færðu eða hefur þú fengið einhverja þjálfun eða kynningu um öryggisstaðalinn, t.d.
þegar þú byrjaðir að vinna hjá fyrirtækinu?
6. Hefur þú staðið frammi fyrir einhverjum áskorunum við að fylgja stöðlunum í þínum
daglegu verkefnum? Og þá hvaða áskoranir?
7. Hvernig finnst þér að fylgja öryggisstaðlinum? Létt, erfitt, þægilegt, pirrandi? Finnst
þér erfitt að fylgja eða óþarfi eða finnst þér gott að hafa ákveðnar leiðbeiningar?
8. Hver er þín skoðun á öryggisstaðlinum eða ­stefnunni?
9. Tókst þú einhverja öryggisáfanga eða fékkstu einhverja öryggiskennslu í tölvunarfræði­
eða hugbúnaðarverkfræðináminu þínu?
10. Viltu koma einhverju öðru á framfæri?
78
From Security Policies to Practices
==PAGE:89==
From Security Policies to Practices
79
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
