==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data 
for detection of consciousness after 
pharmacological stimulation in patients with 
acute brain injury 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attila Géry Toury-Puel, s222730 
Supervisor: Tobias Andersen, Associate professor 
DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science 
Master’s degree program: Human-centered Artificial Intelligence 
February 2024 - June 2024 
30 ECTS 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
3 
Abstract 
An original dataset consisting of recordings obtained with electroencephalography, near-infrared 
spectroscopy and pupillometry is analyzed. The data have been gathered as part of a medical trial that aims 
at evaluating the effect of two pharmacological stimulants on the level of consciousness of patients with 
disorders of consciousness. We propose a custom Python pipeline, leveraging existing research, to 
preprocess the signals and extract features understood to be markers of consciousness. Those values are 
examined with unsupervised machine learning algorithms and conventional statistical tests to evaluate the 
effect of the stimulants on the patients’ levels of consciousness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
4 
Preface 
This project was led in collaboration between the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and 
Rigshospitatet, Copenhagen University Hospital. Code is available at https://github.com/npfvr1/thesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
5 
Table of content 
1. Project description 
7 
1.1. Motivation 
7 
1.2. Research question 
9 
2. Dataset 
10 
2.1. Signals 
10 
Electroencephalography (EEG) 
10 
Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) 
12 
Pupillometry 
13 
2.2. Acquisition 
13 
2.3. Overview 
17 
3. Existing works 
19 
4. Approaches 
21 
5. Tools used 
22 
6. Data cleaning 
24 
6.1. EEG 
24 
6.2. fNIRS 
26 
6.3. Pupillometry 
27 
7. Feature extraction 
29 
7.1. EEG 
29 
7.2. fNIRS 
30 
7.3. Pupillometry 
32 
7.4. Notes 
32 
7.5. Visualizing the new dataset 
32 
8. Machine learning approach 
36 
==PAGE:6==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
6 
8.1. Clustering 
36 
8.2. Objective 
36 
8.3. Methods 
36 
8.4. Results 
39 
k-means 
39 
Gaussian mixture 
42 
8.5. Discussion 
44 
9. Statistical approach 
46 
9.1. Introduction 
46 
9.2. ANOVA 
46 
9.3. Linear mixed-effect models 
46 
9.4. Methods 
47 
9.5. Results 
48 
9.6. Discussion 
49 
10. Conclusion 
50 
11. Bibliography 
51 
11.1. Articles 
51 
11.2. Webpages 
51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
7 
1.Project description 
1.1.Motivation 
Consciousness concerns the state of awareness and responsiveness that most humans are in, but the term 
can have different meanings. However, defining it in medical terms is crucial to the treatment of 
unconscious patients. Several levels of consciousness (LoC) are characterized and used in medicine (see 
Tab. 1). The LoC of a patient can be a relevant signal in prognostics (see section “Existing works”). But as 
of today, it is usually determined using one of several tests consisting of simple questions and commands 
which result in a score corresponding to a LoC (for instance the Glasgow Coma Scale [Teasdale et Jennett 
1974], see Tab. 2).  This method is quick and versatile, but its outcomes can be biased by the person 
following it, leading to misdiagnoses. Furthermore, it is not sensitive enough to detect various cases like 
locked-in syndrome, where the patient retains their full mental capabilities and is conscious but remains 
paralyzed and unable to communicate with someone else in any other way than eye blinks or limited eye 
movements. The importance of a reliable evaluation of a patient’s LoC - especially in the case of a patient 
with a disorder of consciousness (DoC, see Tab. 3) - calls for better ways and tools to be available to medical 
professionals.  
Electroencephalography (EEG), functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), and pupillometry are three 
measures of different biomedical signals, respectively the electrical activity of the brain, the oxygen 
concentration in the blood at the surface of the brain, and the diameter of pupils. They have all been used 
in studies to try and link their resulting signals to LoC of patients (see section “Existing works”), although 
EEG appears to have been the most studied so far. These technologies provide the advantage of requiring 
little equipment, meaning they can be used in the intensive care units (ICU) of hospitals, where many 
patients with brain injuries end up [Huijben et al. 2020]. However, the measurements done with those tools 
are hard to interpret on their own, and it is complex to link their variations to the LoC of patients. EEG can 
be read and analyzed manually, but studies have proposed markers that can be extracted from the EEGs for 
later automated analysis (see section “Existing works”). The same is true for fNIRS and pupillometry. 
This thesis project concerns the exploratory analysis of an original dataset acquired as part of a medical 
experiment. The experiment in question aims to evaluate the effect of two pharmacological stimulants on 
the detection of signs of consciousness in patients with DoC, with EEG, fNIRS, and pupillometry. More 
details are available under the section “Dataset - Acquisition”. The scale of this exploratory study is limited 
==PAGE:8==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
8 
in terms of the number of patients (50), so depending on its results, it may justify a larger trial to better 
examine the effect of the stimulants used. 
 
Level of consciousness (LoC) 
Symptoms 
Conscious 
Normal awareness and wakefulness (or in a normal sleep 
stage) 
Confused 
Disorientation, impaired thinking and responses 
Delirious 
Restlessness, hallucinations, sometimes delusions 
Somnolent 
Excessive drowsiness, incoherent and disorganized 
responses to stimuli 
Obtunded 
Decreased alertness, slowed psychomotor responses, 
sleepiness 
Stuporous 
Sleep-like state, little to no spontaneous activity 
Comatose 
Cannot be aroused, no response to stimuli 
 
Tab. 1: Levels of consciousness (adapted from [Wikipedia - Altered level of consciousness] and [Tindall 1990]) 
 
Eye opening (E) 
Best motor response (M) 
Best verbal response (V) 
Not Testable (NT) 
NT 
NT 
1. No eye opening 
1. No movement 
1. No sounds 
2. Opens eyes to pain 
2. Abnormal extensor response 
2. Incomprehensible sounds 
3. Opens eyes to voice 
3. Abnormal flexor response 
3. Inappropriate words 
4. Opens eyes spontaneously 
4. Withdraws to pain 
4. Confused conversation 
- 
5. Localizes to pain 
5. Appropriate and oriented 
- 
6. Obeys commands 
- 
 
Tab. 2: Score categories for the Glasgow Coma Scale (adapted from [Tindall 1990]). The GCS is used to evaluate 
the level of consciousness of a patient after a brain injury. A score is obtained for each category. Their sum ranges 
from 3 to 15 and helps to assess the severity of a brain injury, and to orient the treatment of the patient. 
 
==PAGE:9==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
9 
Disorder of consciousness (DoC) 
Symptoms 
Minimally conscious state (MCS) 
Clear but minimal or inconsistent awareness 
Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome (UWS) 
Wakefulness (sleep-awake cycles, eye opening, basic 
reflexes), but no signs of awareness 
Coma 
No signs of wakefulness nor awareness 
 
Tab. 3: Disorders of consciousness (adapted from [NHS website - Disorders of consciousness]). More detailed levels 
also exist, e.g., MCS+ and MCS-. 
1.2. Research question 
The main objective of this project is to evaluate the effect of two pharmacological stimulants, apomorphine 
and methylphenidate, on the detection of signs of consciousness in patients with DoC. It can be rephrased 
into the following research question: 
 
“What is the effect of methylphenidate and apomorphine on the detection of consciousness through EEG, 
fNIRS, and pupillometry signals, in patients with DoC?” 
 
To choose one or more relevant approaches to answer it, two elements are required. First, a solid 
understanding of the dataset which was collected in the first phase of the medical experiment (the collection 
phase was done by the medical researcher beforehand and is outside the scope of the present work). Second, 
an overview of the scientific literature on assessing the LoC of subjects through the biomedical signals at 
our disposition. 
 
The dataset is presented in the next section, existing works are studied in the following one, and the methods 
chosen to solve to the problem at hand are explained and justified in the section “Approaches”. 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
10 
2.Dataset  
The dataset consists of EEG, fNIRS, and pupillometry recordings, stored digitally. Its acquisition 
and details are in the following subsections. As the files contain medical information about the patients, the 
data was only accessed locally through the hospital’s computers. 
2.1.Signals 
Electroencephalography (EEG) 
EEG is a method to measure the electrical activity of the brain. More precisely, with “scalp EEG”, 
electrodes - usually between 10 and 256 - are placed on the surface of the head and detect the electrical 
potential created by active neurons [Teplan 2002]. That signal can be linked to mental activity [Jaušovec et 
Jaušovec 2000]. After it has been acquired and amplified, usually through an amplifier external to the 
electrodes, it can be analyzed. The signal is called an electroencephalogram (also EEG). 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: actiCAP Xpress Twist from Brain Products. A similar cap was used to do the measurements in the study. 
 
EEG is non-invasive, has a high temporal resolution (the sampling rate is usually between 250 Hz and 2 
kHz), and is cheaper and more mobile than other brain imaging technologies such as functional magnetic 
==PAGE:11==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
11 
resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, or magnetoencephalography. On the other hand, EEG 
has a lower spatial resolution, and requires more interpretation to even hypothesize the origin of the 
electrical activity within the brain because it cannot directly measure the impact of most neurons that are 
deeper within the brain. 
 
 
Fig. 2: Extract of an EEG from the dataset, after it has been preprocessed (see section “Data cleaning”) (own work). 
On the Y axis are the voltages of three channels corresponding to three electrodes, out of the thirty-two in total. The 
scale of that axis is 500 μV (largest amplitude), but it is not relevant here. On the X axis is the time in seconds. 
 
EEG is used mainly for the diagnosis of epilepsy [Acharya et al. 2013], as this condition is characterized 
by electrical discharges in the neurons, but also for that of other brain injuries and diseases, as well as the 
study of sleep (see section “Existing works”). 
Abnormal electrical brain activity can be detected on an EEG by looking for specific patterns in the signal. 
For instance, the frequencies present in the EEG are expected to be distributed in a certain way for healthy 
people, while patients with brain injuries or diseases can have different distributions [Wallace et al. 2001]. 
In any case, since the EEG reflects the electrical activity of the brain, it is directly affected by the state and 
actions of the patient, for example sleep, eye blinks, heart rate [Jurysta et al. 2003], and more importantly 
for this project, possibly by the level of consciousness (see section “Existing works”). 
The EEG measures the electric potential at a certain number of locations on the scalp, but it is usually the 
difference of potentials - the voltage - between locations that is used and interpreted [Teplan 2002]. The 
placement of the electrodes and the way to compute the differences of potentials is called a montage. A 
common montage is the international, standardized 10-20 System (see figure below). Then, for obtaining 
the differences of potentials, three usual methods are the sequential montage (electrodes are paired and the 
signal from one is subtracted from the other), the referential montage (one electrode is chosen as the 
==PAGE:12==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
12 
reference and its signal is subtracted from all the other electrodes’ signals), and the average montage (the 
reference electrode is a virtual one corresponding to the average of all electrodes) [Acharya et Acharya 
2019]. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: Diagram of the 10-20 system (public domain image, taken from [10–20 system (EEG) 2024]). 
 
Once the signals have been acquired, they can be visualized as a time series. If they have been measured in 
real-life conditions, then they can contain noise and artifacts, which are visible when plotting the signals. 
Such noise can originate from the environment or from the patient themselves [Pijn et al. 1991] and can 
usually be reduced or removed by preprocessing the signals. 
Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) 
fNIRS is a neuroimaging method that relies on emitting and absorbing light through the surface of the head 
to measure the concentration of oxygen in the blood circulating there [Irani et al. 2007]. The oxygen 
transported in the blood is vital to the various processes carried out by the human body [Rhodes et al. 2019], 
and the functioning of the brain is one of them. Hence, observing the levels of blood oxygen can tell us 
about mental activity [Naseer et Hong 2015]. fNIRS uses near-infrared light, which is emitted by optodes 
placed on a headcap, in a similar way to EEG. Then the light travels through the scalp until it reaches the 
blood vessels, where it gets absorbed by the hemoglobin proteins depending on their concentration [Irani 
==PAGE:13==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
13 
et al. 2007]. Some of the light is also deviated or reflected and gets measured by other types of optodes 
placed near the emitting ones. So, the signal generated by fNIRS is actually the variation of the light 
absorption in time, but after using a few equations from physics, this can be converted to the concentration 
of oxy- and deoxy-hemoglobin in the blood [Irani et al. 2007], therefore indicating the variation of 
oxygenated blood flow at the surface of the patient’s brain. 
Just like EEG, different montages can be used for fNIRS, depending on what areas of the brain need to be 
monitored. The signals will also most likely contain noise and artifacts, and fNIRS is for instance impacted 
by the patient’s heart rate [Naseer et Hong 2015]. 
Pupillometry 
Pupillometry corresponds to the measure of the diameter of a person’s pupil or pupils. The pupil is the hole 
within the iris in the eye that lets light go through until it reaches the cornea. Its size can vary due to various 
factors, including light, but also mental arousal [Mathôt 2018]. Hence, this is the expected observation in 
our study. 
2.2.Acquisition 
The acquisition of the dataset is described in great details in [Othman et al. 2024]. Fifty patients were 
included in the study based on several criteria, such as the diagnosis of a DoC. Measures were done on each 
patient during three distinct sessions (separated by enough time for the drug’s effects to disappear), when 
possible (some patients were excluded from the trial before being able to undergo the three visits). One 
session corresponds to three recording times (see diagram below): at T0 (before any drug is administered), 
at T15 (fifteen minutes after one of the drugs has been administered), and at T60 (sixty minutes after the 
administration).  
 
==PAGE:14==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
Fig. 4: a schematized view of the experiment for one patient (own work). 
 
The drug in question is one of three: methylphenidate, apomorphine (see table below), or placebo (saline 
solution used to obtain measurements without any effect from a drug, so they can be used as control when 
comparing to the effects of the two stimulants). The medical researcher in charge of administering the drug 
and making the measurements does not know which one of the three drugs they are giving to the patients, 
so they are blinded and cannot influence the results. Since the patients in question are in an altered state of 
consciousness, their consent was obtained through a family member. 
 
Name 
Methylphenidate 
Apomorphine 
2D skeleton 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
15 
Drug class 
● 
Central nervous system stimulant 
● 
Norepinephrine–dopamine 
reuptake inhibitor 
● 
Non-selective dopamine agonist 
Brand names (ex.) 
Ritalin, Concerta 
Apokyn 
Use cases 
Treatment of ADHD, and narcolepsy 
Treatment of intermittent hypomobility in 
advanced Parkinson's disease 
 
Tab. 4: Overview of the stimulants used in the study (adapted from [Othman et al. 2024], [MayoClinic – 
Methylphenidate], [Wikipedia - Methylphenidate], [Wikipedia - Apomorphine], [Drugbank - Apomorphine). 
 
During each one of a session’s recording times, the patient listens to an audio recording through 
headphones, while measures are done. The EEG and fNIRS signals are acquired through thirty-two 
electrodes and optodes placed on a head cap - following the montage in Fig. 5 – that is plugged to a 
computer, while the pupil diameter is measured with a handheld pupillometer (see figure below). The audio 
recording is the same for all patients and for all the sessions. It contains two parts. First, “audio stimuli” 
such as alarm sounds and music are played (ten seconds of stimulus, followed by twenty seconds of resting, 
repeated three times). This is called the passive paradigm, as a person in a normal state of consciousness is 
expected to have a passive response to such sounds [Gomez et Danuser 2004]. Then, instructions given by 
the lead researcher are given, where the patient is asked to perform a series of mental arithmetic tasks. More 
precisely, five multiplications of moderate difficulty, followed by five ones of harder difficulty (twenty-
five seconds of task, followed by twenty seconds of rest, for each multiplication). This is called the active 
paradigm, as the patient is asked to use their mental capabilities to focus on a task. The idea is that it would 
be possible to detect a response from the patient to those paradigms through signals like EEG, fNIRS, and 
pupillometry, showing that the patient has some level of consciousness, even if they are not able to 
communicate otherwise with another person. In total, the number of “events” is thirteen, and those make 
up the parts of the signals that we will be particularly interested in. The length of each recording is around 
ten minutes. 
 
==PAGE:16==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
16 
 
Fig. 5: location of the EEG electrodes (in green) and of the fNIRS optodes (also in green, they are in reality slightly 
displaced) in our experiment (diagram made by one of the medical researchers). 
 
 
Fig. 6: Experiment setup on a mannequin (taken from [Othman et al. 2024]). The headcap has electrodes and 
optodes. The researcher is holding the pupillometer. The audio recording is played through the headset. 
==PAGE:17==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
17 
2.3.Overview 
In theory, the dataset would consist of a total of 450 EEG recordings, 450 fNIRS recordings, and 450 
pupillometry recordings (50 patients, 3 visits, 3 recording times). However, some patients were not able to 
attend the three visits because they did not meet the inclusion criteria any longer, and some recordings are 
incomplete. So, the initial dataset used for this work contains fewer files: 330 EEG, 341 fNIRS, and 296 
pupillometry recordings. 
 
The dataset has the following file structure (simplified): 
 
>  DRUG 1 
>  DRUG 2 
v  DRUG 3 
 
v  ID 1 
 
 
v  Baseline 
 
 
 
- EEG.xdf 
 
 
 
- fNIRS.snirf 
 
 
 
- Pupillometry recording 
 
 
>  Post administration 1 
 
 
>  Post administration 2 
 
>  ID 2 
 
… 
 
>  ID 50 
 
Fig. 7: overview of the dataset’s file structure (own work). 
 
 
The recordings have been sorted based on the drug that was administered, since the objective of the analysis 
is to evaluate the differences of the effects of the stimulants on patients. This split was done by the main 
researcher, which means that the person doing the data analysis, the author, does not know which drug is 
which. Therefore, he is blinded, and the comparison results cannot be influenced. Each patient is identified 
by a number (the same across all folders). The “Baseline” folder corresponds to the recording done at T0 
==PAGE:18==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
18 
and the folders named “Post administration 1” and “Post administration 2” to the ones done at T15 and T60 
respectively. 
 
The EEG recordings are stored as XDF files, which is not the most common format. They are around ten 
minutes long. They contain some meta information such as the time of recording and the sampling 
frequency. The signals are the electric potentials of the thirty-two electrodes located on the headcap, varying 
throughout the length of the recording. 120 files are missing (around 27%). 
 
The fNIRS recordings are stored as SNIRF files, and they are similar to the EEG files in terms of meta data, 
but the signals they contain are the light intensity captured by the optodes on the head cap throughout the 
recording. 109 files are missing (around 24%). 
 
The pupillometry recordings contain the diameter of one of the patient’s pupils measured during the same 
period. However, all the pupillometry data have already been preprocessed by the main researcher, 
following an approach like the one described in [Vassilieva et al. 2019]. This means that the pupillometry 
data used here were contained in a single spreadsheet document (see section “Data cleaning - Pupillometry” 
for more details). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
19 
3.Existing works 
Since the first recording of a human electroencephalogram by Hans Berger in 1924 ([Haas 2003]), 
EEG has been used and studied to better comprehend the activity of the brain. In this subsection, we review 
works that focus on establishing a relationship between EEG and LoC. Specifically, we are interested in 
understanding the state-of-the-art approaches to process EEGs and automatically analyze them. 
EEG are noisy and complex signals [Takor et Tong 2004] and vary extensively between subjects [Lotte et 
al. 2018]. As a result, preprocessing the signals is necessary and this has led to many approaches of doing 
so, as shown in [Chaddad et al. 2023]. This review article highlights several denoising techniques 
commonly used, e.g., signal filtering (low-pass, high-pass, or band-pass) and signal decomposition 
(independent component analysis, Wavelet transform). The preprocessed EEGs can be and are often 
visually interpreted by trained medical staff, but our interest lies in their automatic analysis. The method 
used by many researchers in this field consists of finding and extracting features from the signals, before 
leveraging machine learning algorithms to detect patterns and classify the EEGs, e.g., between different 
conditions. For instance, [Choubey et Padey 2021] use artificial neural networks to predict seizures from 
EEGs. [Ping et al. 2009] instead used a support vector machine (SVM) classifier to attack the same problem. 
[Li et al. 2014] study the permutation entropy of EEGs to differentiate between seizure and non-seizure 
recordings. In addition to seizure detection, EEG is also used for studying sleep. [Huang et al. 2020] train 
a SVM classifier to differentiate sleep stages based on a total of sixty-two features, including time and 
frequency-domain ones and non-linear ones. Finally, [Ghaderi et al. 2018] study the relationship between 
brain activity and time estimation abilities in healthy subjects.  
To determine the focus and state of consciousness of meditating subjects by analyzing their EEG, [Walter 
et Hinterberger 2022] extracted a variety of features, notably the power spectral density of several frequency 
bands (e.g., delta between 0 and 4Hz, theta between 4 and 8Hz, and alpha between 8 and 12Hz) and entropy 
measures, which they used in statistical tests. [Egbebike et al. 2022] also take the powers of similar brain 
wave frequency bands as input to a SVM classifier. The authors are then able to identify patients with 
cognitive-motor dissociation, which is a condition were patients are conscious but behaviorally 
unresponsive. [Chaddad et al. 2023] reviews the results of several studies, where it has been found that the 
power of the delta frequency band is expected to decrease when the LoC increases, while the power of the 
alpha frequency band is expected to increase. Some works mentioned in the review of [Chaddad et al. 2023] 
==PAGE:20==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
20 
find the same relationship between higher values of entropies and increased LoC, but other find no 
significant link. The same is true for the power of the theta frequency band.  
fNIRS is a more recent technology but as review articles like [Rupawala et al. 2018] and [Abdalmalak et 
al. 2021] demonstrate, several studies have shown its potential as a bedside tool for neuroimaging, notably 
in the case of brain injury patients. Motor imagery (imagining an action, e.g., squeezing a ball with one’s 
hands) is a common task that researchers ask patients to perform during the measurements, for example in 
[Kempny et al. 2016] and [Abdalmalak et al. 2020]. Some studies have also focused on mental arithmetic. 
[Kurz et al. 2018] thus obtain reproducible fNIRS responses during mental arithmetic tasks for healthy 
controls, but not for DoC patients. In their review article, [Rupawala et al. 2018] point out that the features 
extracted from haemodynamic signals (HbO and HbR) are commonly ones such as peak amplitude, mean 
value, variance, and slope. Indeed, the fNIRS response during motor imagery or mental arithmetic tasks is 
expected to be a clear increase in the HbO signal. However, as shown by [West et al. 2019], there exists a 
delay in the haemodynamic response, which can be around 5 or 6 seconds long. 
Finally, pupillometry is also an appropriate tool to measure mental activity. In their review article, [Laeng 
et al. 2012] point out that studies have shown that the size of a person’s pupils can be linked to their mental 
activity even in the case where they are not aware, i.e., patients with a DoC. Furthermore, there have also 
been studies specifically using pupillometry on DoC patients, for instance in [Othman et al. 2024] the 
authors aimed at identifying covert consciousness. They monitored the pupil dilations during passive and 
active paradigms (visual and auditory stimuli, and mental arithmetic, respectively) and were able to 
discriminate between different states of consciousness. One advantage of pupillometry is that the signal is 
not complex and can be analyzed more easily than EEG or fNIRS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
21 
4.Approaches 
The problem at hand is one of exploratory data analysis. Indeed, it is unknown which recordings 
correspond to increased LoCs. The raw signals that form the dataset can be individually visualized and 
analyzed but this requires medical expertise and a vast amount of time. Instead, we will extract features that 
have been found in other studies to be markers of consciousness, from the signals in our dataset. However, 
this step requires that the recordings can be loaded properly, which will be done by writing custom Python 
scripts. Then, to answer the research question, we need to evaluate the impact of the stimulants on the 
features’ values. This can be done by calculating statistics at the group level, i.e., use tests and models that 
indicate whether the features vary in a statistically significant way based on the drug that is administered. 
Unsupervised learning algorithms from the field of machine learning can also find relationships between 
the data points, i.e., each recording’s features. Those relationships can be compared to the drug groups and 
recording times to see whether they indicate a pattern that could answer the research question. Supervised 
learning algorithm like classifiers are not applicable in our case because of the absence of classes. The 
relatively small size of the dataset should also be considered. Either way, as in any data analysis, relevant 
visualizations will provide insights. Finally, the medical significance of all results obtained will be left to 
the lead researcher to decide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
22 
5.Tools used 
This part contains a list of the tools used throughout the project. The following method was chosen 
to address the problem at hand: leverage the Python programming language and its libraries (“packages”) 
written by other researchers and developers to visualize, transform, and analyze the data, apply statistical 
and machine learning algorithms to it, and use the results to answer the research question. The R 
programming language was also used for one statistical model, for which a base script to work from was 
provided by the thesis supervisor. 
 
● VS Code as a code editor and development environment 
https://code.visualstudio.com/ 
 
● Git and GitHub for code version control 
 
https://git-scm.com/ 
 
https://github.com/ 
 
● Python (version 3.11) and R (version 4.4.1) as programming languages 
 
https://www.python.org/ 
https://cran.r-project.org/ 
 
● Anaconda to create virtual Python environments 
 
https://www.anaconda.com/ 
 
● Python packages (for a more complete list, see the requirements.txt file on the project’s 
GitHub repository): 
 
○ MNE [Gramfort et al. 2013] for EEG and fNIRS analysis tools  
https://mne.tools/stable/index.html# 
 
○ Pandas, NumPy for data manipulation and mathematical tools 
https://pandas.pydata.org/ 
==PAGE:23==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
https://numpy.org/ 
 
○ Statsmodel for statistical tools [Skipper et Perktold 2010] 
 
 
https://www.statsmodels.org/stable/index.html# 
 
○ Autoreject [Jas et al. 2016] [Jas et al. 2017], pyprep [Bigdely-Shamlo et al. 2015] for 
EEG data cleaning 
https://autoreject.github.io/stable/index.html 
https://pyprep.readthedocs.io/en/stable/ 
 
○ Antropy, Yasa for EEG feature extraction [Vallat et Walker 2021] 
 
 
https://raphaelvallat.com/antropy/build/html/index.html 
 
 
https://raphaelvallat.com/yasa/build/html/index.html 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
24 
6. Data cleaning 
The dataset contains the raw signals acquired during the first part of the study, so they need to be 
preprocessed, or “cleaned” before they can be analyzed. 
6.1. EEG 
The first step to preprocess the EEG recordings is to load the files. Their format, XDF, is not directly 
supported by the MNE Python package, so a custom method was written to do it (see Python script 
eeg_preprocess.py). This ensures that both the recording’s data and metadata are loaded properly. Once 
the data has been converted to a mne.io.Raw object, we can follow the next common steps of EEG 
preprocessing [Bigdely-Shamlo et al. 2015]. As described in the section “Dataset - Signals - 
Electroencephalography (EEG)”, the signal contained in each channel of the recording can be unusually 
noisy. So, we use the functions NoisyChannels.find_bad_by_deviation and NoisyChannels. 
find_bad_by_hfnoise from the pyprep package. Those detect channels that are too noisy according to 
the following criteria: unusually high or low signal amplitude, and unusually high amount of high frequency 
noise [Bigdely-Shamlo et al. 2015]. In our dataset, 2.5 EEG channels out of the 32 were marked as bad, on 
average. Such channels are then deleted and replaced by interpolations of all other channels, based on the 
montage used (see section “Dataset - Acquisition”). The interpolation is done to conserve the same number 
of channels, which facilitates the next steps. Then the channels are referenced by average, so the signals 
now correspond to voltages (see section “Dataset - Signals - Electroencephalography (EEG)”). Following 
this, a common additional step is to bandpass filter the signals between around 1 Hz and 70 Hz [Bigdely-
Shamlo et al. 2015], as well as notch filter them at 50 Hz [Bigdely-Shamlo et al. 2015]. The former is done 
to focus on the frequencies that we are interested in (see section “Existing works”), while the latter is done 
to account for the electrical noise created by the electrical grid. The signals are then cropped to the periods 
of interest, i.e. the thirteen events. The mne.Epochs objects are used in the Python scripts to store such 
shortened signals. An extra step done at the same time is to “baseline” the signals. This is done by 
subtracting the mean of the signal’s previous ten seconds to the signal of interest. This is common practice 
in EEG automated analysis and allows to account for each patient’s baseline signal which varies across 
patients [gilbert et al. 2003]. At this point, some of the shortened signals or “epochs” can still contain too 
much noise to be interpretable. So, the function get_rejection_threshold from the package 
==PAGE:25==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
25 
autoreject is used to detect noisy channels within each epochs, following the approach described in [Jas 
et al. 2017]. Any epoch containing at least one channel marked as noisy is deleted. The remaining signals 
are saved as a FIF file which can be loaded later with mne quicker than the original longer file. 
 
 
Fig. 8: Diagram summarizing the preprocessing steps applied to each EEG recording (own work). Note that only one 
channel is plotted on each image for clarity, but the file contains a total of thirty-two channels. The channel in 
question is plotted throughout the entire recording (around ten minutes). The colored bands on the first two graphs 
correspond to the thirteen events. The last two images represent the signal during all the events (first plot) and 
during the eleven events that were kept eventually (second plot). 
 
==PAGE:26==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
26 
After running this pipeline on all the EEG recordings of the dataset, 330 (around 73%) were not missing 
data and of good enough quality to be kept for the analysis. 
6.2. fNIRS 
The format of the fNIRS recording (SNIRF) is supported by the mne python package so its functions were 
used to load the files (see script fnirs_preprocessing.py). The next common preprocessing steps are 
applied in order [Naseer et Hong 2015]. First the raw signals are converted to optical density using the 
function mne.preprocessing.nirs.optical_density. The quality of the data can now be evaluated 
by computing the scalp coupling index, which focuses on the frequencies within the recording that are in 
the range of cardiac signal, and saims at detecting a prominent synchronous component [Pollonini et al. 
2014]. Channels with an index lower than 0.5 are removed, following the recommendations of [Gramfort 
et al. 2013]. Then the signals are converted to oxy- and deoxy- haemoblogin concentrations by 
mne.preprocessing.nirs.beer_lambert_law. At this point it is also recommended to bandpass 
filter the signals to focus on relevant frequencies and remove physiological noise, due for instance to 
heartbeat and respiration [Gramfort et al. 2013]. In our script the filtering is done between 0.03 and 1 Hz. 
The lower frequency cut off value was set to 0.03 Hz because it corresponds to a change over around 30 
seconds, which is slightly longer than the duration of our events (25 seconds). The higher frequency cut off 
value was set to 1 Hz to remove unwanted higher frequency components [Gramfort et al. 2013]. Finally, 
the signals are cropped to the periods of interest. 
==PAGE:27==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
27 
 
Fig. 9: Diagram summarizing the preprocessing steps applied to each fNIRS recording (own work). Note that only 
one channel is plotted on each image for clarity, but the file contains a total of thirty channels. The channel in 
question is plotted throughout the entire recording (around ten minutes), and for the thirteen events in the last image. 
The colored bands on the first four graphs correspond to the thirteen events.  
6.3. Pupillometry 
As explained in section “Dataset - Signals - Pupillometry”, the pupillometry data have already been 
preprocessed. The transformation is the same as described in [Othman et al. 2024B]. The idea is to detect 
and count the number of significant pupil dilations that happen during a stimulus, throughout the recording. 
==PAGE:28==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
28 
The significance is based on statistical analysis of the signal [Othman et al. 2024B]. So, the preprocessed 
data simply contain the number of such dilations for each recording (a recording is characterized by the 
patient ID (1 - 50), the drug ID (1 - 3), and the recording time (T0, T15, T60)). As there are three sequences 
of different events (audio stimuli, mental arithmetic tasks of moderate difficulty, and of hard difficulty), 
three numbers are obtained, either between one and three or one and five. 154 numbers are missing in the 
table (around 34% of the total), either due to improper recordings or to the inability of the patients to attend 
the session. This will limit the extent of our analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
29 
7. Feature extraction 
The numerous biomedical signals acquired during the earlier phase of the project are high-
dimensional and too complex to be all easily interpreted as such. So, once the so-called cleaning step has 
been performed, it is time to select and extract relevant lower-dimensional signals from the raw data. The 
resulting information are called features. See section “Existing works” for an overview of the research that 
supports the choice of features below. 
7.1. EEG 
Two types of features are extracted from the EEG signals: brain wave band powers and complexity 
measures. Specifically, the powers of the delta, theta, and alpha bands, which correspond to 0 - 4 Hz, 4 - 8 
Hz, and 8 - 13 Hz respectively. Theoretically, those values are obtained by first decomposing the EEG in 
frequency components with the Fourier transform, whose magnitude is then squared to obtain the power 
spectral density (see Fig. 10), or power spectrum, and finally integrating that density in the frequencies of 
interest. In our case, the relative band powers are computed with the bandpower function from the yasa 
package. Here, relative means that the powers are expressed as a percentage of the signal’s total power. For 
each power band, one value is obtained per channel (our EEG recordings have 32 channels in total) and per 
event (there should be 13 events in each recording, but after the data cleaning step there can be fewer). All 
those numbers are averaged so that each EEG recording now has one relative power value for each of the 
three power bands. Based on their domain knowledge, the medical researchers asked to also include the 
ratio of the alpha power over the delta power as a feature. 
 
==PAGE:30==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
Fig. 10: Power spectral density of the 32 channels of one EEG recording, after it has been preprocessed. The y axis 
shows the power in decibels. The two dashed vertical grey lines indicate the bandpass filter’s cut-off frequencies. 
The blue lines show the frequency bands of interest (0.5 Hz - 4 Hz, 4 Hz - 8 Hz, and 8 Hz - 13 Hz). The drop in 
power at 50 Hz is due to the notch filter used during the preprocessing. Note that the steps of the preprocessing 
could be changed to fit the chosen features, i.e. the signal could simply be bandpass filtered between 0.5 Hz and a 
higher bound around 20 Hz. 
 
The complexity measures are the spectral and permutation entropies. The spectral entropy measures the 
entropy of the signal’s frequency distribution, while the permutation entropy measures the signal’s temporal 
dependence structure. They are calculated using the antropy package and are averaged in the same way 
as the band powers. As shown in the works presented in section “Existing works”, those numbers can be 
linked with the brain activity in such a way that we can expect them to increase (for the alpha band power, 
the alpha over delta ratio, and the complexity measures) or decrease in value (for the delta band power) 
when the LoC of a patient increases. 
7.2. fNIRS 
[Naseer et Hong 2015] show that researchers use various features from the fNIRS signal, such as the mean, 
variance, or slope. Here we estimate the trend of the signal by computing the slope of a linear model fitted 
==PAGE:31==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
31 
on each channel’s signal, which summarizes its trend in one number. Indeed, given the time duration of 
each event (10 or 25 seconds) and the time it usually takes the blood oxygen levels to visually change on 
the fNIRS recording [Irani et al. 2007], this feature will correspond to an activation if the slope is positive. 
The interpretation of this number is nonetheless not obvious as any positive number cannot necessarily be 
linked to mental activity. For each event and each channel of a recording, a linear regression model is fitted 
to the time series by using the sklearn.Linear_model. LinearRegression.fit function. The slope 
of the model is saved and averaged across all channels and all events, so that each fNIRS recording has one 
value corresponding to the average slope of the signal. 
 
 
 
Fig. 11: A least-squares linear regression model (in green) is fitted to the signal of each channel during each event. 
Its slope is saved, and the average of all slopes is used as the feature for that fNIRS recording. Note that the signals 
on the background image are slightly longer than the actual duration of the events, only for visualization purposes. 
(own work) 
==PAGE:32==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
32 
7.3. Pupillometry 
For this signal only one feature is used. The total pupillometry score is computed for each recording by 
summing up the three numbers of significant pupil dilations during that recording’s events. Hence the score 
is out of thirteen. 
7.4. Notes 
A few things should be noted on the feature extraction process. First, averaging values for each feature 
across events and channels when applicable can result in a weakened response. Nonetheless, it was done to 
keep the dimensionality of the feature dataset down, i.e., we aim at keeping the number of features per 
recording to a minimum. Second, the features are calculated only from the signals recorded during the 
events. As a reminder, there should be 13 of those in each recording, but there can be less due to technical 
errors or noisy signals. Furthermore, there are three types of events corresponding to the three types of 
stimuli, namely audio stimuli, mental arithmetic tasks of moderate difficulty and of hard difficulty. This 
means that we can decide to include all events in the data analysis, or only events of a particular type. The 
medical researchers asked to focus on the mental arithmetic tasks only because of the higher likelihood of 
observing a response during them compared to the audio stimuli. 
 
Once the features have been extracted, they constitute a compressed version of the dataset. In the next 
subsection, this new dataset is visualized with violin plots, before any analysis is performed. 
7.5.Visualizing the new dataset 
Here are shown violin and box plots of the distributions of the features’ values based on drug type (also 
referred to as “drug group”) and recording time. Fig. 12 contains the values for T0, T15, and T60, while Fig. 
13 shows the values for T15 - T0 and T60 - T0. This subtraction is done to pair the data points. Indeed, our 
interest lies in how the features change when the stimulants have been administered, so transforming the 
values in this way allows to keep all the information while reducing the number of groups and focusing on 
the variations of the features. After the subtraction is performed, the dataset contains 151 data points. These 
are the ones used in the analyses in the next sections. 
 
==PAGE:33==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
33 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
34 
 
Fig. 12: Distributions of the feature values. The values are grouped by drug type (y axis) and recording time (blue 
for T0, orange for T15, and green for T60). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
Fig. 13: Distributions of the feature values. The values are grouped by drug type (y axis) and recording time (blue 
for T15 - T0, orange for T60 - T0). 
 
Visually, there are no clear differences between drug groups for any feature. However, for some markers 
like Delta, Theta, Alpha, and Ratio, there seems to be more variance for the drug groups 2 and 3 than for 
the drug group 1. 
 
In the following sections, two different approaches are used to analyze and compare the values and see if 
this visual inspection is right. For the reasoning behind the choice of analyses, see section “Approaches”. 
 
==PAGE:36==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
36 
8. Machine learning approach 
8.1. Clustering 
Clustering algorithms are a set of tools in machine learning that perform unsupervised learning. They create 
groups, or clusters, within the dataset in several manners. Different algorithms will lead to different groups, 
and even the same algorithm can produce varying results when it has parameters which can be modified. 
Once the clusters have been found, relationships between the data points can be interpreted and used to 
predict which group a new point belongs to. 
8.2. Objective 
Such methods are commonly used in exploratory data analyses [Dubes et Jain 1980] as they can highlight 
similarities in the dataset that are not obvious at first, especially when dealing with high-dimensional data. 
In our case, a clustering algorithm could for instance group recordings by drug type, by the amount of brain 
wave power in the alpha band, or by any and more complex combination of characteristics, depending on 
which features are included. So, the idea is to select only features, among those that can be extracted from 
our dataset, that have been found in the scientific literature to change in relation with the level of 
consciousness. Then, if a clustering algorithm can group the resulting data points, we can interpret how the 
clusters are composed and separated. And see how much the drug type is influencing the group formation. 
Indeed, since the objective is to assess the effect of the two stimulants given to the patients on their LoC, 
the approach presented in this section will provide information on whether there is a group-level variation 
in the selected features. 
8.3. Methods 
As detailed in the section on feature extraction, each data point has eight features that are markers of 
consciousness. However, clustering algorithms work better on low-dimensional data [Steinback et al. 
2004]. Hence, we reduce the dimensionality of our dataset using principal component analysis (PCA) [Wold 
et al. 1987]. PCA works by finding the directions of largest variances within the dataset. The points can 
then be projected onto those directions. The choice of the number of principal components (PC) allows to 
select the reduced number of dimensions. We choose to use two principal components (see subsection 
==PAGE:37==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
37 
“Discussion”) because the dataset can then be plotted easily. If we want each feature to have the same 
impact on the variance calculation in the PCA algorithm, then the features should be on a similar scale. 
Hence, we normalize the features beforehand. The results of those transformations are plotted below. 
 
 
Fig. 14: Dataset distribution after normalization and dimensionality reduction with PCA (2 components). The 
coordinates of the principal components (PC1 and PC2) tell us what the directions (in feature space) of largest 
variance are. 
 
Fig. 14 confirms that there is no obvious difference at the group-level. However, by interpreting the 
coordinates of the data points in the reduced feature space, we can see that multiple points have at least 
several feature values corresponding to an increased LoC. For instance, points that have negative 
coordinates on the first principal component have a decreased delta band power and an increased alpha 
band power. Overall, one visual interpretation of this plot is that the stimulants do not modify all the selected 
==PAGE:38==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
38 
markers of consciousness, nor for all patients, but some patients have likely a positive response to some 
extent. 
 
Concerning the clustering algorithms, we use k-means and Gaussian mixture models. k-means finds a 
predefined number of clusters (the k in the name) within the dataset by assigning each point to the cluster 
that is closest to it in terms of mean. The mean of the new group is calculated again, and a new assignment 
step takes place. This process is repeated until the groups do not change any longer. k-means will always 
create k clusters so the selection of the value for k is crucial. Nonetheless, different runs of the algorithm 
on a given dataset may return different clusters. On the other hand, the Gaussian mixture model approaches 
the clustering problem from a probabilistic point of view. Indeed, it assumes that the data points come from 
a given number of Gaussian distributions, and it estimates the parameters of those. Once more, the number 
of clusters is selected as a hyperparameter, i.e. by us. 
Since we are looking for a possible effect of the stimulants on the features which were extracted, we can 
evaluate different hypotheses with the following numbers of clusters: 
- 
Two groups in total: one for non-responders (no effect on the values) and one for responders (some 
effect) 
- 
Three groups in total: one for each of the three drugs (including placebo) and their effect, i.e. no 
response (assumption for placebo, and possibility for the other stimulants), one type of response 
(for one of the stimulants), and a second type of response (for the other one) 
- 
Five groups in total: one for non-responders, and four to allow for two types of response for the 
two drugs (given that the concentration of one stimulant is expected to peak at T15 while that of the 
other one is expected to peak at T60) 
 
Once the clusters have been created, we can assess how well they match our assumption. One way of doing 
this is to compute a clustering metric like purity. Purity sums up in a number between 0 and 1 how well the 
clusters match the classes of the datapoints. In our case, we could compute the purity based on which drug 
was administered to patients, but we are interested in seeing whether the formed clusters can partition 
between responders and non-responders. Since we do not know which data points are actual responders 
(which is not only indicated by the features’ values), we are not able to assess such a clustering metric. 
==PAGE:39==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
39 
8.4. Results 
Here are reported the composition of the clusters based on the algorithm used and the number of clusters. 
The composition is evaluated based on the drug groups which the data points originally belong to. 
k-means 
With k = 2 we get the following results: 
 
 
Fig. 15: Clusters as found by the k-means algorithm. Cluster 1 is in purple, and cluster 2 is in yellow. 
 
Cluster 
Drug 
 
1 
2 
3 
1 
55 (98.2%) (38.2%) 
45 (91.8%) (31.2%) 
44 (95.7%) (30.6%) 
2 
1 (1.8%) (14.3%) 
4 (8.2%) (57.1%) 
2 (4.3%) (28.6%) 
 
Tab. 5: Composition of the clusters obtained with k-means (k = 2). In each cell, the first percentage indicates the 
distribution of the drug (according to the column) across all clusters, while the second percentage corresponds to the 
proportion of that drug in the cluster (according to the row). 
 
Those clusters somewhat match our previous interpretation of the principal components’ coordinates. 
Indeed, we can hypothesize that the yellow cluster corresponds to the responders, while the other one 
==PAGE:40==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
40 
corresponds to the non-responders. Unfortunately, we are unable to verify this. Furthermore, even the 
yellow cluster contains data points from the three drug groups, which means that at least one patient who 
was administered placebo would be marked as a responder. 
 
With k = 3 we get the following results: 
 
 
Fig. 16: Clusters as found by the k-means algorithm. Cluster 1 is in purple, cluster 2 is in blue, and cluster 3 is in 
yellow. 
 
Cluster 
Drug 
 
1 
2 
3 
1 
22 (39.3%) (29.7%) 
26 (53.1%) (35.1%) 
26 (56.5%) (35.1%) 
2 
27 (48.2%) (44.3%) 
17 (34.7%) (27.9%) 
17 (37.0%) (27.9%) 
3 
7 (12.5%) (43.8%) 
6 (12.2%) (37.5%) 
3 (6.5%) (18.8%) 
 
Tab. 6: Composition of the clusters obtained with k-means (k = 3). In each cell, the first percentage indicates the 
distribution of the drug (according to the column) across all clusters, while the second percentage corresponds to the 
proportion of that drug in the cluster (according to the row). 
 
Again, none of the clusters contains data points belonging to at most two drug groups. 
 
==PAGE:41==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
41 
Finally, with k = 5 we get: 
 
Fig. 17: Clusters as found by the k-means algorithm. Cluster 1 is in purple, cluster 2 is in dark blue, cluster 3 is in 
light blue, cluster 4 is in green, and cluster 5 is in yellow. 
 
Cluster 
Drug 
 
1 
2 
3 
1 
19 (33.9%) (32.8%) 
23 (46.9%) (39.7%)  
16 (34.8%) (27.6%) 
2 
29 (51.8%) (47.5%) 
14 (28.6%) (23.0%) 
18 (39.1%) (29.5%) 
3 
7 (12.5%) (46.7%) 
6 (12.2%) (40.0%) 
2 (4.3%) (13.3%) 
4 
0 (0.0%) (0.0%) 
2 (4.1%) (20.0%) 
8 (17.4%) (80.0%) 
5 
1 (1.8%) (14.3%) 
4 (8.2%) (57.1%) 
2 (4.3%) (28.6%) 
 
Tab. 7: Composition of the clusters obtained with k-means (k = 5). In each cell, the first percentage indicates the 
distribution of the drug (according to the column) across all clusters, while the second percentage corresponds to the 
proportion of that drug in the cluster (according to the row). 
 
Here, cluster 4 completely excludes points belonging to drug 1, which could indicate it corresponds to a 
group of responders. However, the increased number of clusters should be considered when analyzing the 
data. Indeed, if there were as many clusters as there are data points, each cluster would also contain only 
one drug type. Moreover, the coordinates of the points belonging to cluster 4 do not align with the expected 
variations of the features used as markers of consciousness. 
==PAGE:42==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
42 
Gaussian mixture 
With two components, we get the following results: 
 
 
Fig. 18: Clusters as found by the Gaussian mixture model. Cluster 1 is in purple, and cluster 2 is in yellow. 
 
Cluster 
Drug 
 
1 
2 
3 
1 
9 (16.1%) (27.3%) 
11 (22.4%) (33.3%) 
13 (28.3%) (39.4%) 
2 
47 (83.9%) (39.8%) 
38 (77.6%) (32.2%) 
33 (71.7%) (28.0%) 
 
Tab. 8: Composition of the clusters obtained with the Gaussian mixture model (two components). In each cell, the 
first percentage indicates the distribution of the drug (according to the column) across all clusters, while the second 
percentage corresponds to the proportion of that drug in the cluster (according to the row). 
 
The clusters are quite different from the one obtained with the k-means algorithm. This is expected as the 
Gaussian mixture model does not work in the same way. Its ability to find clusters nested within each other 
as is the case here could produce better partitions of the dataset. Tab. 8 shows that the clusters do not match 
our hypothesis that at most two drug types will give responders. 
 
With three components, we get the following: 
==PAGE:43==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
43 
 
Fig. 19: Clusters as found by the Gaussian mixture model. Cluster 1 is in purple, cluster 2 is in blue, and cluster 3 is 
in yellow. 
 
Cluster 
Drug 
 
1 
2 
3 
1 
42 (75.0%) (39.6%) 
34 (69.4%) (32.1%) 
30 (65.2%) (28.3%) 
2 
9 (16.1%) (28.1%) 
10 (20.4%) (31.2%) 
13 (28.3%) (40.6%) 
3 
5 (8.9%) (38.5%) 
5 (10.2%) (38.5%) 
3 (6.5%) (23.1%) 
 
Tab. 9: Composition of the clusters obtained with the Gaussian mixture model (three components). In each cell, the 
first percentage indicates the distribution of the drug (according to the column) across all clusters, while the second 
percentage corresponds to the proportion of that drug in the cluster (according to the row). 
 
Finally, with five components, we get: 
==PAGE:44==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
44 
 
Fig. 20: Clusters as found by the Gaussian mixture model. Cluster 1 is in purple, cluster 2 is in dark blue, cluster 3 is 
in light blue, cluster 4 is in green, and cluster 5 is in yellow. 
 
Cluster 
Drug 
 
1 
2 
3 
1 
17 (30.4%) (33.3%) 
15 (30.6%) (29.4%) 
19 (41.3%) (37.3%) 
2 
28 (50.0%) (50.9%) 
12 (24.5%) (21.8%) 
15 (32.6%) (27.3%) 
3 
3 (5.4%) (30.0%) 
6 (12.2%) (60.0%) 
1 (2.2%) (10.0%) 
4 
7 (12.5%) (23.3%) 
14 (28.6%) (46.7%) 
9 (19.6%) (30.0%) 
5 
1 (1.8%) (20.0%) 
2 (4.1%) (40.0%) 
2 (4.3%) (40.0%) 
 
Tab. 10: Composition of the clusters obtained with the Gaussian mixture model (five components). In each cell, the 
first percentage indicates the distribution of the drug (according to the column) across all clusters, while the second 
percentage corresponds to the proportion of that drug in the cluster (according to the row). 
8.5.Discussion 
Using clustering algorithms on our dataset can provide insights and useful visualizations for the medical 
researchers to leverage during their own interpretation. Nonetheless, the results presented previously cannot 
be used on their own to answer our research question. There is also the issue of the parameters’ choice. We 
selected the clustering algorithms, the number of principal components to project the data on, and the 
==PAGE:45==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
45 
number of clusters to look for based on our hypotheses, i.e. arbitrarily. However, they all greatly impact the 
results. This is also a reason why the interpretation of those is limited. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
46 
9. Statistical approach 
9.1. Introduction 
Statistical methods can tell us about the group level variations in the selected features, and whether those 
variations are statistically significant. Tests like Student’s t-test or ANOVA are part of the standard method 
to analyze, and report results of medical trials [Bland 2015]. In our case, there are three populations 
corresponding to the three drug groups, and several features. Moreover, the overall population contains 
repeated measures since signals were obtained from the same patients more than once. 
9.2. ANOVA 
The analysis of variance test (ANOVA) is a statistical test used to determine if several populations have 
statistically different mean values for one variable. When the groups contain measures done on the same 
patients, ANOVA with repeated measures (RM) should be used instead. However, ANOVA RM requires 
balanced groups. In our case, this means the same number of recordings per patient across drug groups and 
recording times. However, as mentioned in sections “Dataset - Acquisition” and “Data cleaning”, many 
data points are either missing or get discarded during the data cleaning step. Indeed, after reducing the 
dataset to balanced group, only 14 out of the 50 patients are present. The statistical tests can still be run but 
the results will obviously be less statistically significant and interpretable. 
9.3.Linear mixed-effect models 
Linear mixed-effects models, or mixed models, are statistical models that account for fixed effects and 
random effects. This flexibility is advantageous for our dataset. Indeed, the biological variation between 
subjects can be modeled as a random effect, while the effect of the drugs we are evaluating can be modeled 
as a fixed effect.  
9.4. Methods 
The population used for the statistical tests consists of the feature values computed as detailed in the section 
“Feature extraction”. One sample is characterized by a patient ID, a drug ID, a time ID, and has eight feature 
==PAGE:47==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
47 
values. Each feature is normalized (the mean is subtracted, and the values are then divided by the standard 
deviation) before the running the tests since some of the value ranges are close to zero, notably for the 
fNIRS feature. The ANOVA RM tests are done using the stats.anova.AnovaRM function of the 
statsmodels Python package, after the groups have been balanced. One test is done for each feature (the 
dependent variable). The within factors are the drug type and the recording time, since in the balanced 
groups every patient has a recording for all possible combination of drug type and recording time. 
The mixed models are fitted using the lmer function from the lme4 R package. For each feature, one 
model with the form: 
                                           𝑀1 ∶ 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 ~ 𝑑𝑟𝑢𝑔 + 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 + 𝑑𝑟𝑢𝑔: 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 + (1 | 𝑖𝑑) 
(1) 
 
is fitted, and is then successively compared to the following three models, which are also fitted on the data: 
 𝑀2 ∶ 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 ~ 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 + (1 | 𝑖𝑑) 
(2) 
 
𝑀3 ∶ 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 ~ 𝑑𝑟𝑢𝑔+ (1 | 𝑖𝑑)  
(3) 
 
𝑀4 ∶ 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 ~ 𝑑𝑟𝑢𝑔 + 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 + (1 | 𝑖𝑑)  
(4) 
 
Those models all have one or more fixed effects (drug, time, and drug:time) and one random effect (moted 
as (1 | id)) which accounts for the variation between patients. The comparisons are done using the anova 
function from the R language. They are done to assess the effect, on each feature, of the drug, of time, and 
of the interaction between drug and time, respectively. The results are indicated in the next subsection. 
9.5. Results 
The results from the ANOVA RM tests are reported in the table below. When doing several statistical tests 
on the same population, it can be necessary to correct the p values [Armstrong 2014]. However, as can be 
seen in the table, even before correction, no p value indicates a statistically significant difference between 
drug groups. 
 
==PAGE:48==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
48 
Feature 
Delta 
Theta 
Alpha 
Ratio 
P.E. 
S.E. 
fNIRS 
Pup. 
Effect of drug 
0.3098 
0.4306 
0.6144 
0.5405 
0.1892 
0.2003 
0.2527 
0.4064 
Effect of time 
0.7542 
0.7016 
0.8552 
0.9403 
0.8515 
0.1103 
0.7056 
0.4108 
Interaction 
0.1553 
0.1313 
0.2806 
0.3398 
0.2602 
0.7778 
0.1539 
0.9098 
 
Tab. 11: p values of the ANOVA RM tests. 
 
The results obtained by evaluating the fixed effects in the mixed models are reported in the table below. 
Since the comparisons are done on the models and not directly on the samples, the p values need not be 
corrected. Values below the significance level of 5% are underlined and colored in blue. 
 
Feature 
Delta 
Theta 
Alpha 
Ratio 
P.E. 
S.E. 
fNIRS 
Pup. 
Effect of drug 
0.005963 
0.001515 
0.4904 
0.2406 
0.2361 
0.2017 
0.1256 
0.1378 
Effect of time 
0.655 
0.7693 
0.7606 
0.8461 
0.9895 
0.9518 
0.07241 
0.6741 
Interaction 
0.4545 
0.582 
0.5588 
0.6657 
0.9502 
0.9311 
0.03045 
0.8905 
 
Tab. 12: p values for the evaluation of the fixed effects in the linear mixed-effects models. 
 
For more information, we can look at the parameters of the models (with the form M1, see equation 1) for 
which at least one fixed effect was found to have a significant impact on one feature. Hence, we look at the 
models for Delta, Theta, and fNIRS. 
- 
The model for Delta shows a statistically significant effect of “drug 3” on the values of Delta (p = 
0.00105 before correction) but no significant effect of the other drugs, nor of the time. 
- 
The model for Theta also shows an effect of “drug 3” on the values of Theta (p = 0.000635 before 
correction). 
==PAGE:49==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
49 
- 
The model for fNIRS finds a statistically significant effect of the interaction between “drug 2” and 
“time 2” on the values for the fNIRS feature (p = 0.0394 before correction). 
 
9.6. Discussion 
The results of the ANOVA RM indicate that no statistically significant difference can be observed between 
the drug groups and the recording times in terms of individual features. This could be expected given the 
largely reduced population imposed by the balance between the groups required by ANOVA RM. The 
linear mixed-effects models also show no effect of drug nor time on most features. However, there is a 
significant effect of the drug type on the delta and theta band powers. And there is a significant effect of 
the interaction drug:time on the hemoglobin activation in the fNIRS signal. 
Discuss the drawbacks of using relative powers instead of absolute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
50 
10. Conclusion 
In this project, an original dataset was analyzed, as part of a broader medical experiment in collaboration 
with Rigshospitalet. The dataset contained EEG, fNIRS, and pupillometry signals measured on fifty patients 
with DoC, before and after either methylphenidate, apomorphine, or placebo was administered to them. 
The goal of the analysis was to answer the following research question: 
 
“What is the effect of methylphenidate and apomorphine on the detection of consciousness through EEG, 
fNIRS, and pupillometry signals, in patients with DoC?” 
 
A substantial part of the project was spent on understanding the complex dataset, researching the scientific 
literature, and writing custom scripts to load, clean, and visualize the signals. Then, several features were 
chosen according to existing research and to the expertise of the researchers leading the project. Those 
features, which are assumed to be markers of consciousness, were compared across recordings. Two 
unsupervised machine learning algorithms were used to cluster the data. The results provided some insights 
but could not be used to reach a conclusion. Statistical testing such as ANOVA RM and linear mixed-effects 
models indicated statistically significant differences between groups made up of patients having received 
the same stimulant only regarding the delta and theta band powers, and the hemoglobin activation extracted 
from the fNIRS signal.  
 
After all analyses were done, the real drug types were revealed: drug 1 was methylphenidate, drug 2 was 
placebo, and drug 3 was apomorphine. Using this knowledge to interpret the results presented in earlier 
sections, methylphenidate cannot be said to influence the LoC of patients with DoC visible at the study’s 
group level. Apormorphine can be said, however, to have a statistically significant effect on two of the eight 
consciousness markers used in this study, namely delta and theta band powers. In any case, some patients 
exhibited many of the expected variations in terms of the extracted features which can be linked to an 
increased LoC, therefore supporting the need for a larger medical trial. Furthermore, the preprocessing 
pipeline and the visualizations generated in this work may be reused by the medical researchers to facilitate 
their analyses. 
==PAGE:51==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
51 
11. Bibliography 
[1] 
A. Abdalmalak, D. Milej, L. Norton, D. B. Debicki, A. M. Owen, et K. S. Lawrence, « The 
Potential Role of fNIRS in Evaluating Levels of Consciousness », Front. Hum. Neurosci., vol. 15, juill. 
2021, doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.703405. 
[2] 
J. N. Acharya et V. J. Acharya, « Overview of EEG Montages and Principles of Localization », 
Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 36, no 5, p. 325, sept. 2019, doi: 
10.1097/WNP.0000000000000538. 
[3] 
U. R. Acharya, S. Vinitha Sree, G. Swapna, R. J. Martis, et J. S. Suri, « Automated EEG analysis of 
epilepsy: A review », Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 45, p. 147‑165, juin 2013, doi: 
10.1016/j.knosys.2013.02.014. 
[4] 
Bigdely-Shamlo, Mullen, et Kothe, « The PREP pipeline: standardized preprocessing for large-scale 
EEG analysis. », Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 9, 16, 2015. 
[5] 
A. Chaddad, Y. Wu, R. Kateb, et A. Bouridane, « Electroencephalography Signal Processing: A 
Comprehensive Review and Analysis of Methods and Techniques », Sensors (Basel), vol. 23, no 14, p. 
6434, juill. 2023, doi: 10.3390/s23146434. 
[6] 
S. Coyle, T. Ward, C. Markham, et G. McDarby, « On the suitability of near-infrared (NIR) systems 
for next-generation brain–computer interfaces », Physiol. Meas., vol. 25, no 4, p. 815, juill. 2004, doi: 
10.1088/0967-3334/25/4/003. 
[7] 
R. Dubes et A. K. Jain, « Clustering Methodologies in Exploratory Data Analysis », in Advances in 
Computers, vol. 19, M. C. Yovits, Éd., Elsevier, 1980, p. 113‑228. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2458(08)60034-0. 
[8] 
J. Egbebike et al., « Cognitive motor dissociation to predict time to functional recovery in patients 
with acute brain injury », Lancet Neurol, vol. 21, no 8, p. 704‑713, août 2022, doi: 10.1016/S1474-
4422(22)00212-5. 
[9] 
A. H. Ghaderi, S. Moradkhani, A. Haghighatfard, F. Akrami, Z. Khayyer, et F. Balcı, « Time 
estimation and beta segregation: An EEG study and graph theoretical approach », PLoS One, vol. 13, no 4, 
p. e0195380, avr. 2018, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195380. 
[10] Gilbert, Sethuraman, et Kotagal, « Meta-analysis of EEG test performance shows wide variation 
among studies | Neurology ». Consulté le: 29 juin 2024. [En ligne]. Disponible sur: 
https://www.neurology.org/doi/full/10.1212/01.WNL.0000044152.79316.27?casa_token=dxHNI3w7om0
AAAAA%3AXCioOVP0eQx90BUhGDZE1ZaPd4yVJTajeP3R9tynraXtsBuUA9EjdTXkXtpssSK3HPA
==PAGE:52==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
52 
ZtCCuHKDcx9G5 
[11] P. Gomez et B. Danuser, « Affective and physiological responses to environmental noises and 
music », International Journal of Psychophysiology, vol. 53, no 2, p. 91‑103, juill. 2004, doi: 
10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2004.02.002. 
[12] A. Gramfort, Luessi, et Larson, « MEG and EEG data analysis with MNE-Python. », Frontiers in 
Neuroscience, 2013. 
[13] E. H. Hess et J. M. Polt, « Pupil Size as Related to Interest Value of Visual Stimuli », Science, vol. 
132, no 3423, p. 349‑350, août 1960, doi: 10.1126/science.132.3423.349. 
[14] W. Huang et al., « Sleep staging algorithm based on multichannel data adding and multifeature 
screening », Comput Methods Programs Biomed, vol. 187, p. 105253, avr. 2020, doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105253. 
[15] J. A. Huijben et al., « Quality indicators for patients with traumatic brain injury in European 
intensive care units: a CENTER-TBI study », Critical Care, vol. 24, no 1, p. 78, mars 2020, doi: 
10.1186/s13054-020-2791-0. 
[16] F. Irani, S. M. Platek, S. Bunce, A. C. Ruocco, et D. Chute, « Functional Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy (fNIRS): An Emerging Neuroimaging Technology with Important Applications for the 
Study of Brain Disorders », The Clinical Neuropsychologist, vol. 21, no 1, p. 9‑37, janv. 2007, doi: 
10.1080/13854040600910018. 
[17] Jas, Engemann, Bekhti, Raimondo, et Gramfort, « Autoreject: Automated artifact rejection for MEG 
and EEG data », NeuroImage, 159, 2017. 
[18] Jas, Engemann, et Raimondo, « Automated rejection and repair of bad trials in MEG/EEG. », 6th 
International Workshop on Pattern Recognition in Neuroimaging (PRNI), 2016. 
[19] N. Jaušovec et K. Jaušovec, « EEG activity during the performance of complex mental problems », 
International Journal of Psychophysiology, vol. 36, no 1, p. 73‑88, avr. 2000, doi: 10.1016/S0167-
8760(99)00113-0. 
[20] F. Jurysta et al., « A study of the dynamic interactions between sleep EEG and heart rate variability 
in healthy young men », Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 114, no 11, p. 2146‑2155, nov. 2003, doi: 
10.1016/S1388-2457(03)00215-3. 
[21] E.-M. Kurz et al., « Towards using fNIRS recordings of mental arithmetic for the detection of 
residual cognitive activity in patients with disorders of consciousness (DOC) », Brain and Cognition, vol. 
125, p. 78‑87, août 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2018.06.002. 
[22] B. Laeng, S. Sirois, et G. Gredebäck, « Pupillometry: A Window to the Preconscious? », Perspect 
==PAGE:53==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
53 
Psychol Sci, vol. 7, no 1, p. 18‑27, janv. 2012, doi: 10.1177/1745691611427305. 
[23] F. Lotte et al., « A review of classification algorithms for EEG-based brain-computer interfaces: a 
10 year update », J Neural Eng, vol. 15, no 3, p. 031005, juin 2018, doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aab2f2. 
[24] S. Mathôt, « Pupillometry: Psychology, Physiology, and Function », J Cogn, vol. 1, no 1, p. 16, 
2018, doi: 10.5334/joc.18. 
[25] N. Naseer et K.-S. Hong, « fNIRS-based brain-computer interfaces: a review », Front. Hum. 
Neurosci., vol. 9, janv. 2015, doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00003. 
[26] M. H. Othman, K. Møller, J. Kjaergaard, et D. Kondziella, « Detecting signatures of consciousness 
in acute brain injury after stimulation with apomorphine and methylphenidate: protocol for a placebo-
controlled, randomized, cross-over study », BMJ Neurol Open, vol. 6, no 1, p. e000584, janv. 2024, doi: 
10.1136/bmjno-2023-000584. 
[27] M. H. Othman et al., « Covert Consciousness in Acute Brain Injury Revealed by Automated 
Pupillometry and Cognitive Paradigms », Neurocrit Care, avr. 2024, doi: 10.1007/s12028-024-01983-7. 
[28] J. P. Pijn, J. Van Neerven, A. Noest, et F. H. Lopes da Silva, « Chaos or noise in EEG signals; 
dependence on state and brain site », Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 79, no 
5, p. 371‑381, nov. 1991, doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(91)90202-F. 
[29] L. Pollonini, C. Olds, H. Abaya, H. Bortfeld, M. S. Beauchamp, et J. S. Oghalai, « Auditory cortex 
activation to natural speech and simulated cochlear implant speech measured with functional near-
infrared spectroscopy », Hearing Research, vol. 309, p. 84‑93, mars 2014, doi: 
10.1016/j.heares.2013.11.007. 
[30] C. Rhodes, D. Denault, et M. Varacallo, « Physiology, Oxygen Transport », Study Guide from 
StatPearls Publishing, 12 mars 2019. [En ligne]. Disponible sur: 
https://europepmc.org/article/nbk/nbk538336 
[31] M. Rupawala, H. Dehghani, S. J. E. Lucas, P. Tino, et D. Cruse, « Shining a Light on Awareness: A 
Review of Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy for Prolonged Disorders of Consciousness », Front. 
Neurol., vol. 9, mai 2018, doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00350. 
[32] Skipper et Perktold, « statsmodels: Econometric and statistical modeling with python. », 
Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, 2010. 
[33] Steinback, Ertoz, et Kumar, The Challenges of Clustering High Dimensional Data. 2004. Consulté 
le: 29 juin 2024. [En ligne]. Disponible sur: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-662-08968-
2_16 
[34] G. Teasdale et B. Jennett, « ASSESSMENT OF COMA AND IMPAIRED CONSCIOUSNESS: A 
==PAGE:54==
  Analysis of pupillometry and NIRS-EEG data for detection of consciousness after pharmacological stimulation in patients with acute brain injury 
 
 
 
54 
Practical Scale », The Lancet, vol. 304, no 7872, p. 81‑84, juill. 1974, doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(74)91639-0. 
[35] M. Teplan, « FUNDAMENTALS OF EEG MEASUREMENT », MEASUREMENT SCIENCE 
REVIEW, vol. 2, 2002. 
[36] N. V. Thakor et S. Tong, « Advances in quantitative electroencephalogram analysis methods », 
Annu Rev Biomed Eng, vol. 6, p. 453‑495, 2004, doi: 10.1146/annurev.bioeng.5.040202.121601. 
[37] S. C. Tindall, « Level of Consciousness », in Clinical Methods: The History, Physical, and 
Laboratory Examinations, 3rd éd., H. K. Walker, W. D. Hall, et J. W. Hurst, Éd., Boston: Butterworths, 
1990. Consulté le: 22 juin 2024. [En ligne]. Disponible sur: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK380/ 
[38] Vallat et Walker, « An open-source, high-performance tool for automated sleep staging. », Elife 10, 
2021. 
[39] A. Vassilieva, M. H. Olsen, C. Peinkhofer, G. M. Knudsen, et D. Kondziella, « Automated 
pupillometry to detect command following in neurological patients: a proof-of-concept study », PeerJ, 
vol. 7, p. e6929, 2019, doi: 10.7717/peerj.6929. 
[40] B. E. Wallace, A. K. Wagner, E. P. Wagner, et J. T. McDeavitt, « A History and Review of 
Quantitative Electroencephalography in Traumatic Brain Injury », The Journal of Head Trauma 
Rehabilitation, vol. 16, no 2, p. 165, avr. 2001. 
[41] N. Walter et T. Hinterberger, « Determining states of consciousness in the electroencephalogram 
based on spectral, complexity, and criticality features », Neuroscience of Consciousness, vol. 2022, no 1, 
p. niac008, janv. 2022, doi: 10.1093/nc/niac008. 
[42] S. Wold, K. Esbensen, et P. Geladi, « Principal component analysis », Chemometrics and Intelligent 
Laboratory Systems, vol. 2, no 1, p. 37‑52, août 1987, doi: 10.1016/0169-7439(87)80084-9. 
[43] « Apomorphine ». Consulté le: 29 juin 2024. [En ligne]. Disponible sur: 
https://go.drugbank.com/drugs/DB00714 
[44] « Methylphenidate (Oral Route) Side Effects - Mayo Clinic ». Consulté le: 29 juin 2024. [En ligne]. 
Disponible sur: https://www.mayoclinic.org/drugs-supplements/methylphenidate-oral-route/side-
effects/drg-
20068297?p=1#:~:text=Methylphenidate%20is%20used%20to%20treat,sudden%20attack%20of%20deep
%20sleep 
[45] « 10–20 system (EEG) », Wikipedia. 29 janvier 2024. Consulté le: 29 juin 2024. [En ligne]. 
Disponible sur: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=10%E2%80%9320_system_(EEG)&oldid=1200194996 
==PAGE:55==
                       Attila Géry Toury-Puel, 2024 
 
 
 
55 
[46] « Altered level of consciousness », Wikipedia. 11 mai 2024. Consulté le: 22 juin 2024. [En ligne]. 
Disponible sur: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Altered_level_of_consciousness&oldid=1223369814 
 
