==PAGE:1==
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and 
Mechanical Engineering
22.06.2024
Facilitating the design and
implementation of circular transitions 
through theories of change
Supervisors
Daniel Guzzo
Daniela C. A. Pigosso
Master’s Thesis - Design & Innovation
Julie Elise Knakkergaard Monby s183654
Sofie Nihøj-Damgaard s183646
==PAGE:2==
Thesis title
Facilitating the design and implementation of circular
transition through theories of change
Supervisors
Mainsupervisor Daniel Guzzo
Co­supervisor Daniela Cristina Antelmi Pigosso
ECTS
30
University
The Technical University of Denmark DTU
Institute
DTU Construct ­ Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering
Project date
22/1­2024 to 22/6­2024
Total number of pages
118
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This research project has been conducted from January 22nd, 2024, to June 22nd, 2024, at
the Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
It fulfills the requirements for the Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng.) in Design and
Innovation.
The project embodies a collaborative journey, characterised by a dynamic and equally dis­
tributed effort between both authors. Each chapter and aspect of this research project has
undergone multiple drafts and iterations, reflecting a joint commitment. Table 1 illustrates an
approximate distribution of the contributions throughout the project, highlighting the synergy and
balance in the collaborative work.
Table 1: Overview of work distribution. J = Julie (s183654), S = Sofie (s183646)
Chapter
Process
contri­
bution
First
draft
Second
draft
Proof
reading
Introduction
J/S
S
J
J/S
Methdology
J/S
J
S
J/S
Theoretical findings: circular tran­
sition in cities
J/S
J
S
J/S
Theoretical findings:
Theory of
Change
J/S
S
J
J/S
Empirical findings: Project facilita­
tion
J/S
J
S
J/S
Desired improved siutation
J/S
S
J
J/S
Development of support concepts
J
S
J/S
Cycle 4 ­ Tool proposal
J/S
S
J
J/S
Discussion
J/S
J/S
J/S
J/S
Sofie Nihøj­Damgaard
Julie Elise Knakkergaard Monby
s183646
s183654
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Keywords:
Circular Economy, Theory of Change, City, Circular Transition, Waste and Resource Manage­
ment, Project Evaluation, Circular City Projects
Cities are responsible for 70% of global greenhouse gas emissions, exacerbating the climate
crisis. The traditional linear economy contributes significantly to this issue through excessive
consumption and resource extraction. Transitioning to a circular economy is considered crucial
for achieving sustainable city development by closing resource loops and reducing environmen­
tal impacts. However, the circular transition in cities is complex and it requires strategic design,
planning and evaluation.
This research project addresses the challenge by focusing on the application of Theory of
Change (ToC) to facilitate the circular transition in cities. Through theoretical and empirical
research, a strategic evaluation management tool called the ”Circular City Evaluation Manager”
was developed. It is designed to assists project managers, designers, and other professionals
designing, planning and managing effective evaluations of circular city projects. The tool in­
cludes a 5­step approach which entails clarifying the project foundation, mapping the project’s
causal pathway to circular impact through a ToC map, identifying barriers and activities, identi­
fying underlying assumptions and identifying indicators to measure for success.
The tool was evaluated through iterative development cycles and applied with two circular city
project cases from the Waste and Resource Management area in Copenhagen Municipality.
This tailored recommendations and demonstrated its application and potential to improve the
quality of evaluation plans and overall city project success. Evaluations with change experts
confirmed the tool’s potential for broader applicability and effectiveness in enhancing circular
transitions in general.
In conclusion, this research project provides valuable insights into how ToC can facilitate circular
transitions in city contexts and offers a tool to support in designing, planning, and managing
effective evaluations. Lastly, recommendations for further research to improve and optimise
the tool was suggested.
1
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The researchers would first of all like to thank their supervisors, Postdoc Daniel Guzzo, and,
Professor Daniela C. A. Pigosso.
To Daniel, a great thanks for all the reflective discussions throughout the research project and
for helping with both direction and guidance. Thank you for many good, reflective, and educa­
tional discussions and for being an indispensable support throughout the entire project. Your
contribution has meant enormously to the project, not to forget the many good laughs and for
inspiring us everytime. Thank you for encouraging us to reflect, broaden our perspectives, and
for supporting us in our work.
To Daniela, a special thanks for continuously showing a strong curiosity by including both critical
and essential insights to the research project. Additionally, thank you for inspiring us throughout
our studies and for repeatedly impressing us with your extensive knowledge and approach to
your work. You have inspired us to do our very best.
Thanks to all the interviewees (I1, I2, I3, I4, I5, I6, I7, I8, I9, I10, I11, I12, I13, I14, I15) for all
their valuable inputs, which were indispensable for completing this project. A thanks to all the
people who gave their time and interest in providing valuable insights to developing the tool.
2
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
Throughout the report, multiple abbreviations will be used. The table below provides an overview
of some of the crucial ones.
Abbreviations
Word
ToC
Theory of Change
CE
Circular Economy
SLR
Systematic Literature Review
RC
Research Clarification
DS­I
Descriptive Study I
PS
Prescriptive Study
DS­II
Descriptive Study II
RAP
Resource and Waste Management Plan
CPHM
Copenhagen Municipality
CHA
Circular House Associations
SZ
Sharing Zone
ARC
Amager Resource Center
3
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1
Introduction
6
2
Methodology
9
2.1
Design Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Research clarification and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Theoretical findings: Circular transition in cities (DS­I)
20
3.1
Circular Economy as a solution to climate change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Circular transition in cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Challenges of the circular transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Key takeaways from the overview review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Theoretical literature findings: Theory of Change (DS­I)
24
4.1
Theory of Change and its background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Theory of Change elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Application of Theory of Change in project facilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Development of a Theory of Change map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Challenges of applying Theory of Change in project facilitation
. . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
Key take aways from theoretical research on ToC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Empirical findings: Project facilitation (DS­I)
37
5.1
Introduction and scoping within the case company: Copenhagen Municipality . .
37
5.2
Resource and Waste Management Plan 2019­2024
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Introduction to the two project cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Project facilitation in Resource and Waste Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.5
Identification of key problems and factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.6
Key takeaways from empirical findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Desired improved situation
54
6.1
Defining key factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Desired situation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Design Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Development of support concepts
65
7.1
Cycle 1 ­ Nine support concept ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2
Cycle 2: Three support concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.3
Cycle 3 ­ One support concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.4
Key takeaways from development of support
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8
Cycle 4 ­ Tool proposal (PS and DS­II)
77
8.1
Introduction to the tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.2
Elaboration on each element of the tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
8.3
Application evaluation of tool with researchers, stakeholders and experts
. . . .
87
4
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
==PAGE:8==
8.4
Evaluation of tool with design specification and success criteria . . . . . . . . . .
94
9
Discussion
99
9.1
Discussion of the tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
9.2
Discussion on findings and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
9.3
Implementation plan ­ recommendation for further research . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
9.4
Discussion on achievement of learning objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
9.5
Research project’s contribution to our future careers as design engineers . . . . 110
10 Conclusion
111
Bibliography
114
5
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Change is happening dynamically all the time, with or without interventions (Carey, 2022; Eck­
stein and Holyer, 2023), and it can be both negative and positive (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018).
An example of negative change, and also one of today’s major challenges and leading global
concerns, is climate change. This negative change results from continuous increases in con­
sumption, production, and heavy resource extraction, leading to rising emissions and temper­
atures (Khanna et al., 2022). Cities are responsible for 70% of the global greenhouse emis­
sions and with the urbanisation only expected to rise they are predicted to house 66% of the
population by 2050 (Lakatos et al., 2021; Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018). This will only add to
the increasing environmental challenges, and emissions numbers are estimated to be tripled
by 2030 (Lakatos et al., 2021). To stop global emissions and temperatures from rising, society
must change its current agenda and work to have a sustainable development of society (Lakatos
et al., 2021), which means having a continuous quality of life improvement in society and meet
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs (Hauschild et al., n.d.). However, urban development has followed the earlier ways
of designing with the ”take­make­waste” linear economy which has resulted in numerous nega­
tive consequences, such as solid waste management, underutilised buildings and health costs
due to different kinds of pollution in the air, water and noise (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019;
Lakatos et al., 2021). Thus, the linear economy is not sufficient for sustainable development
(Khanna et al., 2022), meaning there is a strong urgency to take action and sustain the planet
(Lakatos et al., 2021).
Fostering positive change for sustainability is challenging but necessary (Oberlack et al., 2019).
One promising solution to these challenges is the transition to a circular economy (CE) (Khanna
et al., 2022). The primary rationale behind the CE is to go from the traditional linear economy,
into a closed­loop CE where waste is designed out of the economy and the value of resources
are maintained (Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018). In the context of cities, this transition involves
rethinking urban systems and infrastructures to close resource loops and reduce environmental
impacts (Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018). The circular transition in cities can thus foster positive
change by enhancing sustainable growth and reducing the negative impacts of climate change
while maintaining a minimum use of raw materials (Lakatos et al., 2021).
Despite the benefits of a CE in cities, the transition is a complex and a challenging task. There
is uncertainty about what a circular city looks like and its purpose. The complexity of systems
and interventions in uncertain environments adds to the challenge (Simeone et al., n.d.). Yet,
complex interventions, which can be strategies, policies, or projects with multiple components,
are more likely to be sustainable, effective, and scalable (Kahan et al., 2014). They consist
of activities aiming for positive change (Mayne, 2015; Sides and Carey, 2023). Furthermore,
Academia, corporations, government, and civil society interactions are seen as crucial for fos­
tering systematic changes (Khanna et al., 2022).
A significant challenge is the limited research on strategic planning for the transition to a CE,
particularly in urban contexts (Bolger and Doyon, 2019). Cities like Copenhagen, which are in
the early stages of this transition, need more guidance and practical frameworks to implement
CE principles effectively. This is necessary because successful interventions must identify the
parts contributing to positive change and actual societal impact (Kahan et al., 2014). If the
purpose of an intervention is unclear, it challenges the evaluation of it. There is a need to
evaluate whether or not an intervention has had an actual impact, but also exactly which parts
had an impact and understanding of how and why (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Kahan et al., 2014).
6
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
==PAGE:10==
To address these challenges, this research project focused on applying Theory of Change (ToC)
in facilitating the circular transition in cities. ToC provides a structured approach to design, plan
and evaluate complex interventions like the circular transition in cities. By investigating two
project cases by the Copenhagen municipality, this research project aimed to demonstrate how
ToC can be used in circular city projects. In this research, projects are understood as complex
interventions. The overarching goal of the research project was to develop a support that can
help cities achieve their desired circular goals. The main research question was defined to
guide the research process: How can Theory of Change help facilitate the circular transition in
cities?
1.0.1
Learning objectives
Below, the learning objectives that was formulated prior to the research execution are presented:
• LO1 ­ Understand key drivers and dynamics within the circular transition of cities.
• LO2 ­ Explore, gather, and systematise key approaches to elicit and manage theories of
change under the light of the program evaluation literature.
• LO3 ­ Interpret and illustrate the primary pitfalls when engaging in circular transitions in
cities (e.g., rebound effects and unintended consequences).
• LO4 ­ Analyse how theory of change can help decision­making in the context of circular
transitions in organisations.
• LO5­ Examine challenges faced by stakeholders engaging in circular transition in cities.
• LO6 ­ Synthesise strategies to map the potential consequences of design interventions
while connecting them to the desired circular transition in the city level.
• LO7 ­ Synthesise strategies to assess the potential consequences of design interventions
in the context of the desired circular transition in the city level.
• LO8 ­ Develop an approach to help design and implement circular transitions in cities
through theories of change.
• LO9 ­ Assess the application of the approach for circular transition through relevant case
material and stakeholder engagement.
• LO10 ­ Discuss the applicability of the approach for circular transitions in other contexts.
7
==PAGE:11==
8
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodology
This chapter explains the methodology used throughout the research project. First, the main
methodology and the research type will be elaborated. This will be followed by scoping and
research questions that guided the direction and execution of the research. Furthermore, the
methods used to answer each research question and the respective sections that provide the
findings will also be explained.
2.1
Design Research Methodology
The overall methodology used in this research project was the Design Research Methodology
(DRM). DRM is a methodology with the aim of enabling more efficient, effective, and successful
design research. The objectives of DRM are to create and validate models and theories about
the design process and to develop and validate supports based on these models and theo­
ries, to improve design practice, management, education, and their outcomes (Blessing and
Chakrabarti, 2009).
The DRM guided the research project through a systematic and iterative approach by develop­
ing an understanding of the existing situation and the development of support for the desired
improved situation.
Figure 2.1 shows a generic overview of the DRM framework with its four main stages: Research
Clarification (RC), Descriptive Study I (DS­I), Prescriptive Study (PS), and Descriptive Study II
(DS­II). The key objectives of the stages will briefly be elaborated below.
Figure 2.1: Overview of the DRM framework from Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009
Research Clarification (RC): The key objectives of RC are to scope the focus of the research
project, formulate research goal(,s), construct a realistic research plan and develop preliminary
requirements and criteria for the research project.
Descriptive Study I (DS­I): The key objectives of DS­I are to increase the understanding of the
existing situation by identifying potential key factors, as well as suggest which are relevant to
address in PS for support development.
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
9
==PAGE:13==
Prescriptive Study (PS): The key objectives of PS are to use the understanding gained in RC,
DS­I, or DS­II to identify the key factors to be addressed, as well as how addressing these will
contribute to a desired improved situation. Therefrom, develop a support that can improve the
existing situation by addressing the selected key factors.
Descriptive Study (DS­II): The key objective of DS­II is to understand the impact of the devel­
oped support to determine whether it can be applied and is successful in addressing the key
factors and improving the desired situation as intended. Furthermore, the evaluation should be
used to identify improvement opportunities.
2.1.1
Type 5 design research project
This research project is categorised as a type 5 design research project, see figure 2.2. RC
was review­based and purely based on an overview review of literature. DS­I and PS were
both comprehensive studies: DS­I included theoretical literature in a systematic literature review
(SLR) and empirical studies. PS included iterative development of support concepts. DS­II was
initial and included continuous evaluation of the support concepts. This included final results
and preparations for others.
Figure 2.2: Type 5 ­ design research project and the main focus in design stages, adapted from
Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009
2.2
Research clarification and research questions
The following section will elaborate on the methodology behind answering five formulated re­
search questions (RQs).
2.2.1
Research Clarification
The research project was executed by developing learning objectives and defining the main
research question: How can Theory of Change (ToC) help facilitate the circular transition in
cities?.
From this question, the main objectives of RC were:
1. Initial understanding of key drivers, dynamics, and challenges within the circular transition
in cities.
2. Initial understanding of ToC and its potential to facilitate circular transitions in cities.
3. Define research focus, goals, and approach.
4. Formulate research questions (RQs).
5. Construct research plan
6. Outline search strings for SLR.
Overview review on circular transition cities and ToC
The researchers conducted an overview review (Grant and Booth, 2009) on the circular transi­
tion in cities, including five documents, and an overview review on ToC, including three docu­
ments. This resulted in an initial understanding of the existing situation and what is needed to
10
==PAGE:14==
facilitate the circular transition. An affinity map was used to systematise and cluster key find­
ings (Hanington and Martin, 2012). The key findings on the circular transition in cities will be
presented in section 3.
The key findings from both overview reviews provided enough evidence to continue the re­
search. It was used to define research focus, formulate overall research goal, research ques­
tions, construct a project plan, as well as the formulation of key words and synonyms used in
the search string for the SLR in DS­I.
2.2.2
Project plan and management
Figure 2.3 shows a detailed overview of the final research process, milestones, basic means,
research questions and main deliverables. The research project evolved with an iterative, di­
vergent and convergent approach beyond what is possible to show in a figure. The figure is
simplified with the intention to clarify main flow of the research process. However, reality in­
cluded multiple iterations when understanding increased, as well as stages that were executed
in parallel to increase efficiency.
Figure 2.3: Outline of a research project with its four stages: RC, DS­I, PS, and DS­II, basic
means, research questions, and deliverables.
11
==PAGE:15==
In addition with the process overview in figure 2.3 a GANTT chart served as a key project
management tool for project planning. It provided a clear visualisation of the project timeline,
milestones and ensured the achievement of learning objectives. Furthermore, it served as a
boundary object for the researchers to have a common understanding about project direction.
The milestones were at each gateway to the individual project stages, see figure 2.3, where
findings were presented to supervisors. The milestones ensured reaching project deadlines,
kept momentum, and initiated critical reflection on the achievement of RQs, and whether to
proceed to next stages.
2.2.3
RQ1: What aspects of Theory of Change can be relevant to facilitate the
circular transition in cities?
The objectives were to:
1. Understand the existing situation regarding ToC relevant to facilitate the circular transition
in cities.
2. Illustrate a generic ToC model that can be used as an anchor for PS.
A SLR on ToC and an analysis of collected theoretical data were performed (Grant and Booth,
2009). Key findings will be presented in chapter 4.
Systematic literature review (SLR)
Figure 2.4 shows the step­by­step approach with inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Step 1: The main database used was Scopus. FindIt helped to get access to literature not
possible through Scopus. Two different search strings were used. Both were limited to doc­
uments published in the years 2010­2024, this resulted in over 2000 documents. Therefore,
an additional inclusion criteria was that the documents should be review type. However, from
this inclusion, search string 1 resulted in 88 documents, but search string 2 resulted in only one
document. Therefore, search string 2 included all types of documents resulting in 41. Addition­
ally, the database SciSpace confirmed if the search strings included relevant documents and
helped searching for additionally documents. The questions used to search on SciSpace are
also shown on figure 2.4. This search resulted in 14 documents. In total, step 1 resulted in a
total of 143 documents.
Step 2: All titles and abstracts were read from the 143 documents to include or exclude docu­
ments based on these criteria, resulting in 51 documents:
• Inclusion criteria 1: Explain how to use (different approaches for) ToC for addressing sys­
tem problems.
• Inclusion criteria 2: Describe ToC for addressing (a specific) system problem.
• Exclusion criteria 1: Uses ToC as a research method to convey a review.
Step 3: All introductions and conclusions of the 51 documents were read, using the same
inclusion and exclusion criteria from step 2. Three additional inclusion criteria were included,
resulting in a total of 31 documents:
• Inclusion criteria 3: Documents explain different approaches for ToC for addressing sys­
tem problems.
• Inclusion criteria 4: Documents explain only one approach of ToC for different system
problems.
• Inclusion criteria 5: Documents are an adaptation of a ToC for a specific system problem.
12
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Overview of Systematic Literature Review approach
Step 4: After reading through the 31 documents and analysing all the data, a gap in the search
strings became clear. All documents were either reviewing or explaining customised ToC ap­
proaches. The SLR did not provide findings on how to develop a ToC. Therefore, backwards
13
==PAGE:17==
literature research was conducted and four relevant guides were found. The total number of
documents of the SLR was thus 35.
SLR through deductive and inductive data analysis
All data from SLR was systematised and analysed using using both deductive and inductive
approaches. The deductive approach helped categorise insights, while the inductive analysis
helped restructuring insights into new or adjusted categories as more insights were gained.
Definition of ToC and generic ToC model
Definitions and key elements of ToC was analysed to formulate a unified definition. This led to
the creation of a generic ToC model used as a foundation throughout the research.
Analysis of ToC’s application in project facilitation
The application of ToC were counted based on documents mentioning specific design phases
to create an overview of ToC’s application, highlighting key benefits and challenges in each
project facilitation phase.
Analysis of existing ToC models
All ToC models from the SLR were analysed in­depth to understand their visual characteristics.
An exploratory approach and mind­mapping helped to identify likes and dislikes based on the
ToC models.
Testing ToC development guides
The identified ToC guides were tested with the project cases to gain insights into the mapping
and development process and evaluate strengths and weaknesses of them.
2.2.4
RQ2: How are project groups in the Waste and Resource Management
area facilitating their circular projects, and what are the problems?
The objectives were to:
1. Develop research protocol for conducting empirical research.
2. Understand and examine the existing situation of how circular city projects are facilitated
in the context of the Waste and Resource Management (RAP).
3. Understand and examine the two project cases (problem, purpose, goal(s), target group,
user journey, stakeholder involved, activities, success criteria, risks).
4. Systematise and identify key problems faced by stakeholders engaging in the facilitation
of circular transition in cities.
To answer RQ2, an empirical study was conducted by the researchers, and grey literature de­
livered by the case company was read. Key findings are presented in chapter .
Iterative development of research protocol
Before starting collection of empirical data, an initial research protocol was developed, based
on knowledge obtained in RC. It served as the foundation and was iterated and improved as
knowledge and understanding increased during DS­I.
Empirical research collection (diverging)
Empirical data was collected from a total of 10 stakeholders, referred to as interviewees (Ix), see
table 2.1. This helped identify potential key problems to address. All interviews were conducted
mainly online and with one interviewer and one note­taker. They were performed in parallel with
the theoretical data analysis throughout DS­I, illustrated on figure 2.3.
14
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.1: Interviewee reference, job title and which project they are part of.
Reference
Job title
Project case
1: SZ
Project case
2: CHA
Other
I1
Program leader
x
I2
Recycling advisor from ARC
x
I3
Recycling advisor from ARC
x
I4
Project group member
x
I5
Project group member
x
I6
Project manager
x
I7
Project manager
x
I8
Consultant from climate plan
x
I9
Project manager in the be­
havioural design team
x
I10
Project manager from ARC
x
Project case 1 ­ Sharing Zone (SZ): A project focusing on increasing reuse on recycling stations.
A small interview protocol was developed to use for two on­the­spot interviews conducted on
recycling stations with recycling advisors (I2, I3), see table 2.1. While visiting recycling stations,
the researchers used the method photo safari “Design Method Toolkit Photo safari”, n.d. Fur­
thermore, fly­on­the­wall observations were used (Hanington and Martin, 2012), while taking
notes about the environment and surroundings. Additionally, body­storming (Hanington and
Martin, 2012) helped to understand the role and user journey of a visitor on SZ.
Project case 1 ­ Circular House Associations (CHA): A project focusing on increasing sorting in
house associations. Data collected through the interviews, and photo safari to better understand
the circumstances around waste collection areas.
Grey literature
Grey literature was handed out after the interviews about the project cases and their project
descriptions were investigated and analysed. Multiple internal guides and templates from exist­
ing project management toolbox was analysed. Valuable insights about the project cases and
facilitation were found, that would not be possible to search for online.
Empirical research analysis (converging)
All empirical insights were systematised and clustered using an affinity diagramming approach
in Miro (Hanington and Martin, 2012). This helped organise and identify key findings.
Workshop with project manager (I6). After analysing all empirical data, there was a need to
fill out some knowledge gaps about the project facilitation. Therefore, the researchers hosted
an online workshop with (I6) having 8 years of experience as project manager in CPHM. The
purpose was to clarify any uncertainties as well as confirm or correct the initial understanding
about the project facilitation in CPHM. A boundary object was used in the form of an overview
of the different project facilitation phases, stakeholders, inputs, outputs and questions to be
answered.
Stakeholder analysis. An overview of relevant human­, and non­human actors was captured
through a stakeholder map. This helped to identify the surrounding system, to understand
relationships between actors and to scope the research project with the intervening area.
Testing tool from CPHM toolbox. One specific tool was considered somehow similar to ToC.
Therefore, it was tested with one of the project cases to get inspiration and insights to the current
15
==PAGE:19==
way of approaching project facilitation. Additionally, the tool was considered as a baseline to
compare with support concepts.
Root­cause analysis, expert questionnaire, and identification of key factors. Empirical findings
about identified key problems were analysed in a root­cause analysis including a logic tree
to further understand the root­problems. This analysis was supported by reflective practice
of asking why this problem happened and what the cause was. This uncovered hypothesis
of the project facilitation that needed validation. A expert questionnaire was developed with
the purpose of identifying key factors to address. This was answered and validated by five
stakeholders from CPHM.
2.2.5
RQ3: What are the requirements and criteria of the support to help
circular city projects reach their circular goals?
The objectives were:
• Use understanding obtained in RC and DS­I to determine the key factor(s) relevant to
address in PS to improve the existing situation.
• Describe the desired impact that is expected by addressing the chosen key factor(s) in
PS.
• Use understanding obtained in RC and DS­I to determine success criteria for intended
support to include in PS.
• Use understanding obtained in RC, DS­I, or DS­II to determine requirements and criteria
for intended support to include in PS.
• Develop evaluation plan for actual support.
RQ3 was answered iterative throughout the research project with a formulation of a design
specification to assist the support concept development in PS and evaluation in DS­II. The
results will be presented in chapter 6.2.
Determining key factor
The obtained understanding of the existing situation gained in RC and DS­I within project facili­
tation, ToC and circular transition cities was used to determine the key factor. The identified key
factors from empirical research was compared with the identified key factors from theoretical
research to minimise any biases or assumptions, and to avoid the risk of focusing on a specific
factor that is not really a problem which would not contribute to the desired situation. This could
occur if only looking on the theoretical or empirical findings.
Determining the desired situation for intended support
An initial impact model was mapped to describe the desired improved situation for the intended
support. Additionally, reflections and discussions on how addressing the key factor will influence
the existing situation. From this success criteria were defined for the intended support and they
helped to determine the ultimate goal and long­term impact of the research project which is out
of reach within this research project time frame.
Development of design specification with requirements and criteria
Findings gained throughout all project stages (RC, DS­I, PS, and DS­II) were continuously used
to determine and update requirements and criteria for the support. They were iterated upon after
each project stage and therefore further defined. The requirements are must­haves, and the
criteria are nice­to have. They were stated in a design specification which served as anchor
for the support development in PS and evaluation in DS­II. This means that the requirements
were considered crucial for the support development whereas the criteria were considered as
16
==PAGE:20==
something extra that would be nice to include for the support. The design specification also
served as the evaluation plan of the support concepts in DS­II.
2.2.6
RQ4: How does the support facilitate the circular transition for the
project cases?
The objectives were:
• Develop support concepts to enhance facilitation of the circular city projects.
• Evaluate whether the developed support concepts can be used to address the identified
key factor(s).
• Apply project cases to support concepts and provide recommendation for them.
• Evaluate actual support for circular transition through relevant case material and stake­
holder engagement.
The support development followed an iterative approach of building, applying and evaluating
through four development cycles. The findings from one cycle was used in the following. This
ensured that the support concepts addressed the key factor leading to better contribution to the
desired situation. Some of the evaluations included application with the project cases (table
2.2).
Table 2.2: Overview of the two case studies employed in development cycles
Case study
Project name
Main CE strategy
Cycle
1
Sharing zone
Reuse
3
2
Circular house associations
Recycle
4
Cycle 1 ­ Initial development of support concept ideas
Cycle 1 will be presented in section 7.1. Morphology was used to guide and structure the gen­
eration of concept ideas. A morphology is typically used in product development for conceptual
development by connecting means to fulfill the function (“Idea Generation”, n.d.). The functions
reflected themes, requirements and criteria from the design specification. Brainstorming was
used to define means to deliver these functions building on all insights obtained from RC and
DS­I allowing a divergent development for concept ideas. Conceptual drawings were used to
communicate the developed concepts.
The evaluation of the concepts was performed with a meta­application carried out by the re­
searchers. This included discussions and reflections about how each concept could be used in
practice in a planning phase of a project. Strengths, weaknesses and similarities were identified
to guide the development of new concepts.
Cycle 2 ­ Creation of applicable prototypes
Cycle 2 will be presented in section 7.2. Prototypes were created to detail concepts and to
enable a meta­application with the project cases carried out by the researchers (Hanington
and Martin, 2012). This was time­limited to gain an understanding of what a full application
would entail. An existing tool from CPHM’s toolbox was also tested due to its similarities with
ToC. This tool served as a benchmark to both compare and evaluate the developed concepts.
Strengths, weaknesses and improvement opportunities were identified for the concepts from
the meta­application. These insights enabled a Weighted Objective Method (WOM) (Hanington
and Martin, 2012) including both requirements and criteria from the design specification. The
evaluation of requirements involved reflective thinking, answering ”yes” or ”no” to determine if
the concepts met the essential requirements. The evaluation of the criteria involved weighting
17
==PAGE:21==
the criteria and scoring the concepts and the existing tool. This allowed for a comparison to
ensure the concepts performed better than the existing tool. This evaluation guided a discussion
of new improvements and development of a concept.
Cycle 3 ­ Creation of a detailed prototype
Cycle 3 will be presented in section 7.3. The final support concept was developed as a more
detailed prototype of a tool to enable a full application of a project case. The development of
the tool included detailing of both bigger and smaller elements. An application evaluation with
project case SZ was carried out by the researchers, to evaluate the easiness and value of all
crucial tool features, and to identify recommendations for SZ. The application of each step was
timed to estimate the needed time for first­time users to complete a full application when they
are in the design and planning phase of a project. The tool was developed with an user­oriented
focus therefore it was also evaluated with two relevant stakeholders in a workshop using stake­
holder walk­through (Hanington and Martin, 2012). The purpose was to discuss the value of
the tool. The workshop included a presentation of the research project, the tool and its output
gained from the application of the tool with SZ as an example. Lastly, a discussion of the tool
was facilitated in the end of the workshop. Several improvement opportunities were identified to
guide the development in the next cycle from both evaluations. Additionally, recommendations
for SZ were also identified.
Cycle 4 ­ Development of actual support and final evaluation
The actual support and the final tool proposal will be presented in section 8. It was developed as
a proof of concept, to enable a full application with a project case and a workshop with profes­
sional stakeholders. The detailed development included searching for consolidated documents
about CE to further detail the tool.
There were three different evaluations of the actual support with inclusion of external stakehold­
ers, see table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Overview of stakeholders included in evaluations of tool
Reference
Stakeholder and experience
I11
ToC expert
I12
Change management expert
I13
CE professional
I14
Design professional
I15
City development professional
First, an evaluation with a ToC expert and a change management expert provided insights in
how the tool could be used in other contexts. Second, an application evaluation with project
case CHA, which was carried out by the researchers, to evaluate the easiness and value of
the tool and to identify recommendations for CHA. Third, an evaluation of the tool with a partic­
ipatory approach through a workshop with three professional stakeholders with experience in
design, CE and city development applied the tool with the project case SZ. The purpose was
to gain more insights, identify improvements, its value, and its potential. The researchers used
all learnings from evaluation to visualise what an intended support could look like to provide
guidance for what the future development could focus on.
2.2.7
RQ5: To what extent can the support be applied in other contexts?
The objectives were:
• Collect insights from stakeholders across sectors.
• Evaluate how well actual support can be modified to suit other projects.
18
==PAGE:22==
• Evaluate the scalability of the actual support.
These findings will be presented in 9.1.4. RQ5 was answered by applying the tool with the
project cases to understand how it could be used with real­world examples. As mentioned in
RQ4 the tool was evaluated with external stakeholders from CPHM, a ToC expert, a change
management expert and three professionals each with an experience in CE, design or city
development. These evaluations enabled reflections among the researchers of how the tool
could be integrated in other contexts.
19
==PAGE:23==
3
Theoretical findings: Circular transition in
cities (DS­I)
The following chapter will elaborate on the theoretical findings answering RQ1: What aspects
of ToC can help facilitate the circular transition in cities? First an explanation of the concept of
CE. This will be followed by an explanation of what the circular transition in cities is, and how it
can help facilitate sustainable development and climate change. Lastly, key challenges of the
transition will be described.
3.1
Circular Economy as a solution to climate change
CE is defined as a ”systems­level approach to economic development designed to benefit busi­
nesses, society, and the environment.” (Khanna et al., 2022). It seeks to decouple economic
activities and value creation from the consumption of natural finite resources (Khanna et al.,
2022; Kravchenko et al., 2020; Lakatos et al., 2021). It is a complex system where materials
never become waste and nature is regenerated (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, n.d.). Today, CE
is recognised worldwide by decision­ and policy­makers as one of the key frameworks to facili­
tate sustainable development, delivering climate objectives, and resource scarcity (Bolger and
Doyon, 2019; Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019; Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018).
CE emerged over the past 30 years and appeared for the first time in 1989 in international
publication (Mattos et al., 2022). It stems from industrial ecology and management, corporate
sustainability and ecological and environmental economics (Lakatos et al., 2021). In 1996,
a law called the Closed Substance Cycle and Waste Management Act was implemented by
Germany to close the waste loop, while Japan started working with similar policies. Around
2008, China also started working with the concept. However, it was not before 2015 that the
European Commission implemented and approved the CE pathway Lakatos et al., 2021).
CE offers an alternative to, and goes beyond, the linear ”take­make­waste” economy, by re­
placing the end­of­life stage for resources with restoration and regeneration to sustain all value
in the economy and keep resources in use for as long as possible (Bolger and Doyon, 2019;
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, n.d.; Khanna et al., 2022; Kravchenko et al., 2020; Lakatos et al.,
2021; Mattos et al., 2022; Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018).
A well­known illustration of CE is the butterfly diagram, see figure 3.1. It illustrates the circular
transition meaning how to transition from the current linear economy to a circular economy. The
straight lines illustrates the linear economy, whereas the circles illustrate the circular strategies
of keeping the materials and products in loop and circulation for as long as possible. Materials
and products will no longer end up as waste, but be fed back and regenerated into the system.
The green cycles (left) illustrate biological resources and how they are returned to earth through
regeneration. The blue cycle (right) illustrates the technical cycle, where products and materials
are kept in use through different strategies such as reuse, repair or recycling (Ellen MacArthur,
n.d.).
As of today, it is not possible to have a fully circular economy, as there is still is a need for raw
materials as input and there will always be a little bit of waste (Adabre et al., 2023). However,
the goal of a CE is to minimise the leakage and negative externalises.
20
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.1: The butterfly diagram developed by Ellen MacArthur, n.d., illustrating the biological
(green) and technical (blue) cycles of resources. The smaller the loop, the better the circularity.
This research project main focus was on governments in cities from which the following will
define what a circular transition in cities means.
3.2
Circular transition in cities
Cities have a high capacity and concentration of capital, resources and innovation talent, and
thus play a crucial role in facilitating the circular transition (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Ellen
Macarthur Foundation, 2019). In this research project, a city is defined as the territorial organi­
sation in municipalities (Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018). It is a dynamic, adaptive and a complex
ecosystem build on interconnected, often interdependent parts with natural resources, energy,
raw materials, food and goods interacting and impacting the daily lives and economic activity
of the people within them (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019). They can sometimes be seen
as unsustainable ”growth engines”, but are also acknowledged as places for innovation and
experimentation (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Lakatos et al., 2021).
There is no consensus on a standard definition of circular transition in cities (Petit­Boix and
Leipold, 2018). Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019 argues that is is about building thriving,
liveable, resilient cities that are regenerative by design. The organisation has defined the three
main CE principles that cities must work to enable (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019):
1. Waste and pollution to be designed out of products and urban systems.
2. Materials to be kept in use and maintain their value.
3. Natural systems in and around cities to regenerate.
Circular transition in cities thus seeks to contribute to the sustainable development within the
21
==PAGE:25==
planetary boundaries through closing of the resource loops, seeking to eliminate waste as much
as possible. Many authors emphasise the environmental benefits that can be gained by the
circular transition in cities. It can help reduce the negative impact on the environment and
tackle the climate change crisis by reducing pollution and emissions (Bolger and Doyon, 2019;
Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019; Khanna et al., 2022; Lakatos et al., 2021). Furthermore, it
can allow for both an increased consumer awareness and well­being of society (Mattos et al.,
2022), as well as facilitate innovation in businesses and generation of new job opportunities
(Fratini et al., 2019; Khanna et al., 2022). The London Circular Economy Route Map highlights
the benefits of economic recovery, where they have estimated that they would have a benefit of
around 7 billion dollar a year by 2036 if they accelerated their circular transition (Ellen Macarthur
Foundation, 2019; Lakatos et al., 2021; Mattos et al., 2022). According to, CE provides a
framework for cities to rethink the unsustainable urban growth systematically on the social,
environmental and economic complexities.
A city practising circular economy principles in all aspects of the economy to build a ”future­
proof” city, can be seen as a circular city (Fratini et al., 2019; Lakatos et al., 2021). It promotes
the transition from a linear to a circular economy in collaboration with crucial actors like citizens,
businesses and communities (Fratini et al., 2019). Politicians and governments are also cru­
cial actors in facilitating the transition throughout their municipalities, because they control the
legislation regarding CE development (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Ellen Macarthur Foundation,
2019; Fratini et al., 2019; Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018).
The circular transition in cities requires complex systems thinking to not looking at them as iso­
lated from their surroundings, and considering all factors that might influence the system such
as unintended consequences (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019;
Lakatos et al., 2021). The strategies to transition to CE in cities are diverse (Bolger and Doyon,
2019; Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018). Lakatos et al., 2021 argues that the primary strategies in­
clude prioritizing renewable sources, extending the life of products, using waste as raw material
and taking into account new business models. The secondary strategies include the collabora­
tion of urban agents for value creation, design for the future and integration of digital technolo­
gies. The primary focus today is on crucial city infrastructure like energy, water, agriculture,
building, mobility, and especially waste management practices and strategies like recycling has
a strong focus (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Fratini et al., 2019; Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018).
Furthermore, a focus on social consumer responsibility in terms of decreasing consumption
patterns and resource use, shifting industries’ and businesses’ production and consumption
patterns, and the concept of a sharing economy where resources are reused and shared, is
also gaining momentum as a means for the circular transition (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Fratini
et al., 2019; Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018).
Although CE in cities is not a new concept, and it holds many potential benefits, meanwhile it
also has multiple challenges, and there is still a long way to go (Bolger and Doyon, 2019). The
transition is a complex, multi­dimensional process which can not happen overnight (Ibrahim et
al., 2017). At the moment, many cities are finding themselves in the transition phase (Lakatos
et al., 2021), but they still require a lot of innovation, work, and effort to transition (Lakatos
et al., 2021). Today, cities’ realisation of CE is mostly seen in developed countries and larger
cities such as Almere, Amsterdam, Birmingham, Dusseldorf, Genoa, Ghent, Ljubljana, London,
Utrecht as well as Copenhagen (Lakatos et al., 2021; Petit­Boix and Leipold, 2018). According
to (Circular Economy Foundation, 2024 the global situation is still getting worse due to the rising
material extraction and use, and today, the world is only 7,2% circular. The following section
will elaborate in some of the key challenges in the transition.
22
==PAGE:26==
3.3
Challenges of the circular transition
One key challenge is the lack of a clear definition of CE and what a circular city is and how
it can be implemented (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Ibrahim et al., 2017; Khanna et al., 2022;
Lakatos et al., 2021). The current linear economy is still difficult to restructure (Lakatos et al.,
2021), mostly small­scale circular initiatives have been implemented within a wider pattern of
increasing consumption of materials, which is not contributing to the overall goal of CE (Bolger
and Doyon, 2019). Meanwhile, policies fail to address the demand for resources by consumers
and therefore also fail to reduce resource consumption (Lakatos et al., 2021). There is a lack of
dynamic and inclusive planning. The future is fluid and continuously changing, therefore also
very hard to predict (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Fratini et al., 2019). This also means that relevant
stakeholders and citizens are not included enough and participatory processes are lacking to
better understand existing patterns and needs (Fratini et al., 2019). Additionally, there is a lack
of consideration of unintended consequences or rebound effects as a result of CE innovations
and implementations developed within the CE framework (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019;
Fratini et al., 2019), leading to unsustainable behaviour. Metic and Pigosso, 2022 defines re­
bound effects as “the unintended consequences driven by behavioural and systemic changes
that undermine potential sustainability gains”. There is an urgent need to address these as
40% of sustainability gains are missed as a consequence to that (Metic and Pigosso, 2022).
Another key challenge of the circular transition in cities is the difficulty measuring, evaluating
and quantifying circularity progress as, among others, a result of a lack of definitions, measure­
ment methods, indicators, targets etc. (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Lakatos et al., 2021): ”Without
an evaluation framework or support from the industry, CE initiatives cannot succeed in urban
areas.” (Lakatos et al., 2021).
3.4
Key takeaways from the overview review
CE is worldly recognised as a key framework to facilitate sustainable development. It is defined
as a systems­level approach to economic development designed to benefit businesses, soci­
ety, and the environment. It offers an alternative to the traditional ’take­make­waste’ economy,
by seeking to seeking to sustain all value in the economy and keep resources in loop for as
long as possible. The circular transition is thus about transition from the current linear econ­
omy to a circular economy. Cities are crucial in facilitating the circular transition due to their high
concentration of capital, resources, and innovation talent. A city is defined to be the territorial or­
ganisation, and described as a dynamic, adaptive, and complex ecosystem with interconnected
parts, including natural resources, energy, raw materials, food, and goods, which impact daily
lives and economic activities. A circular city is a city that is adopting the three main CE princi­
ples of waste and pollution designed out of products and urban system, materials are kept in
use and maintain their value, and, lastly that natural systems are regenerated. It offers environ­
mental, social and economic benefits such as enhanced sustainable development, increased
consumer awareness and economic recovery. Focus of the transition today is mostly on differ­
ent city infrastructures, especially waste management practices like recycling has a key focus.
However, the circular transition in cities is not an easy journey, many cities are in the transition
phase today and the world remains only 7,2% circular. It requires complex systems thinking
considering all influential factors in the system such as unintended consequences. Several
challenges complicates the transition e.g. lack of clear definitions, stakeholder engagement,
dynamic planning, addressing unintended consequences. Lastly, difficulties in measuring and
evaluating the circularity progress remains a key challenge..
23
==PAGE:27==
4
Theoretical literature findings: Theory of
Change (DS­I)
This chapter will present the findings for RQ1: What aspects from Theory of Change can be
relevant to facilitate the circular transition in cities?. First, a general definition and explanation
of what ToC is, its background and potential users. Then a generic ToC model with definitions of
its main elements and a comparison with logic models will be elaborated. This will be followed
by various applications of ToC in project facilitation, its key benefits and typical characteristics,
and how to develop a ToC. After that, the application of ToC in circular transition projects will
explained, and finally, the challenges of applying ToC in projects in general.
4.1
Theory of Change and its background
ToC is a theory­driven strategic approach to address and improve the overall success of complex
interventions (Murphy and Jones, 2020), such as strategies, policies or projects with multiple
components. Complex interventions are according to Kahan et al., 2014 more likely to be sus­
tainable, effective and scalable. In this research project, a complex intervention is understood
and considered as a project. A crucial part of a ToC is change, and as previously mentioned the
world is in crucial need for positive change. Change is a multifaceted process that is often not
recognised or understood, which can be both negative and positive (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018).
It occurs dynamically within complex systems, both with or without interventions (Carey, 2022;
Eckstein and Holyer, 2023). ToC originated in the US in the 1990s to improve community devel­
opment and social program evaluations (De Silva et al., 2014; Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Jones
et al., 2023; Khanna et al., 2022; Mattos et al., 2022). It evolved from logic planning models
like logical frameworks, which were used since the 1970s (Chapman et al., 2023; Valters and
Stein, 2016). Although initially developed for community program evaluation, it proved useful
in other contexts and project phases. It can be used in both designing and planning (ex­ante),
as well as managing, evaluating and scaling interventions (ex­post) (Kahan et al., 2014; Mills
et al., 2019).
Weiss et al., 1995 was the first one to define ToC as a theory of why and how an initiative
works, including outlining assumptions on how activities lead to desired change and positive
impact (Ibrahim et al., 2017; Mattos et al., 2022; Valters and Stein, 2016). ToCs can be im­
plicit (unconscious beliefs about how change happens) or explicit (reflected, researched and
documented) (Carey, 2022). Despite its long existence, ToC still lacks a standardised definition
(Kahan et al., 2014). This research defines ToC as:
ToC is commonly realised as a concept of why and how a given series of activities
would lead to a specific change in a particular context (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018). ToC
can be viewed as a product its inquiry results in specific outcomes in a narrative and
visual form and offers a framework that needs to be revisited and adapted as the
project progresses. (M Kabongo et al., 2020).
Who can use ToC?
ToC is used by various stakeholders in the private and government sectors and organisations
(Claus et al., 2023). Especially non­profit organisations use it for defining, planning and evalu­
ating change initiatives (Carey, 2022; Eckstein and Holyer, 2023), where research shows that
approximately half of non­profits have developed a ToC (Forti, 2012). Organisational leaders
and board members use ToC to design and adjust activities for impact and to communicate
24
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
==PAGE:28==
expected changes (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a). The use of ToC
is increasing (Jones et al., 2023), and is increasingly recognised as a core competency for de­
signers and facilitators working with complex transitions (Raymond et al., 2019; TOC, 2023). A
ToC guide recommends all social organisations to design their projects on ToC (Harries et al.,
2014). Development organisations and international donors like the Gates Foundation use ToC
to monitor and evaluate programs (Kahan et al., 2014).
4.2
Theory of Change elements
The investigated ToC models and approaches vary widely in terms of elements, illustration meth­
ods and purposes. Therefore, a generic ToC model was created based on the most common
elements in the literature, see figure 4.1. See appendix C4A1 for an overview of the analysed
results.
Figure 4.1: A generic ToC model
This generic ToC model consists of 13 elements: Input, activities, outputs, outcomes, impact,
assumptions, barriers, indicators, ceiling of accountability, causal links, causal pathway and
context. Each element will be defined and elaborated on below.
Inputs are resources necessary to implement an intervention’s activities and catalyse change
(Harries et al., 2014; Hayes et al., 2011; Kaveh et al., 2021; Valters and Stein, 2016). Inputs
can include training, knowledge, skills of practitioners, protocols or toolkits for implementation
(Mills et al., 2019; P. Rogers, 2014).
25
==PAGE:29==
Activities are the components of projects (Ratcliffe, 2012), thus the actions and processes
utilised by stakeholders to create change (Mayne, 2015; Mills et al., 2019). Well­designed
activities are essential, if they can not be directly linked to the outcomes or impacts, they should
not be included (Hayes et al., 2011).
Outputs are the immediate results produced by a project’s activities (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018;
Harries et al., 2014; Ratcliffe, 2012; Rodrigues et al., 2018; P. Rogers, 2014). Outputs are
the links between activities and outcomes and can be described quantitatively with numerical
values (Hayes et al., 2011; Rodrigues et al., 2018). Outputs can for example be number of
users, services provided etc. (Hayes et al., 2011).
Outcomes are the results and pathways of changes initiated by activities (Jones et al., 2023).
Outcomes can be short­term (1­3 years), intermediate­term (3­5 years) or long­term (5­10 years)
(Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Hayes et al., 2011; P. Rogers, 2014; Simeone et al., n.d.). An outcome
is thus a state that does not currently exists, but they must exist in order for the causal links to
happen (Kahan et al., 2014; Simeone et al., n.d.). They can be harder to measure than outputs,
as they are not the immediate results of an activity (Rodrigues et al., 2018). Examples include
changes in behaviour, attitude, skills, knowledge or level of functioning (Harries et al., 2014;
Kaveh et al., 2021).
Impact is the final real­world positive change that an intervention aims to achieve through ac­
tivities, outputs and outcomes (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Kahan et al., 2014; Raymond et al.,
2019). A project might try to reach this impact, but not be able to within its the time frame (De
Silva et al., 2014; Kahan et al., 2014). Some refer to impacts as closely aligned with long­term
outcomes (De Silva et al., n.d.; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Rodrigues et al., 2018). Impact usually
refers to societal impacts such as effects on systems or quality of life (Simeone et al., n.d.).
Assumptions are the elements that one assumes are there and must exist for the planned
change to occur and outputs, outcomes and impact to be achieved (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018;
Harries et al., 2014; Hayes et al., 2011; Kahan et al., 2014; Valters and Stein, 2016). Identifying
and making the underlying assumptions explicit is crucial for mapping out a project’s ToC (Eck­
stein and Holyer, 2023; Wilkinson et al., 2021). It can help identifying where a project has crucial
assumptions, making them testable and providing theoretical evidence for why it is reasonable
to expect change to happen (Claus et al., 2023; Eckstein and Holyer, 2023; Jones et al., 2023).
Assumptions can be causal link assumptions, paradigm assumptions, or external assumptions
(social, economic and political conditions) (Simeone et al., n.d.).
Indicators are milestones that can be observed and measured, determining whether and how
much change has been achieved towards the project’s intended results (De Silva et al., 2014;
Jones et al., 2023). There are both output­, outcome­ and impact indicators (Hayes et al., 2011;
Jones et al., 2023; Kahan et al., 2014). They must be measurable and can both be qualitative
or quantitative (Adabre et al., 2023). As soon as a project’s ToC is mapped out, one can identify
and define indicators, therefrom indicate how successful a project is (De Silva et al., n.d.; Hayes
et al., 2011; Jones et al., 2023; Kahan et al., 2014). Examples include number of staff trained,
percentages of cured illnesses, reduction in specific numbers, etc. (De Silva et al., 2014).
Ceiling of accountability line is the level where a project stops measuring for whether the
outcomes or impact has been achieved. It indicates that the project does not have responsibility
beyond this line (De Silva et al., n.d.; Kahan et al., 2014). It is usually drawn between impact
and long­term outcomes (Kahan et al., 2014).
Causal links illustrate the cause­effect relationships among inputs, outputs, outcomes and im­
pact (Claus et al., 2023; De Silva et al., n.d.; Dhillon and Vaca, 2018). The causal links are
usually illustrated with arrows between ToC elements (Claus et al., 2023; De Silva et al., n.d.).
26
==PAGE:30==
They thus help identify underlying assumptions and articulate why one element connects with
another in the causal pathway.
Causal pathway describes the underlying elements of a project’s pathway within a specific
context (Claus et al., 2023; Mattos et al., 2022). It involves a sequences of a project’s activities,
outputs, and outcomes that collectively contribute to specific changes and impact (Eckstein and
Holyer, 2023; Hayes et al., 2011; Oberlack et al., 2019).
Context refers to the physical conditions that configure the settings in which projects take place
and activities trigger change (M Kabongo et al., 2020). The context consists of everything that
exists in the external environment prior to initiation of an intervention (Connell and Kubisch,
1998). A ToC should be adaptive to the changing contexts, as they are continuously changing
and things might work differently in different settings (Oberlack et al., 2019; Simeone et al.,
n.d.). Understanding the context is therefore key to achieving intended change and success­
ful project implementation (Mills et al., 2019; Valters and Stein, 2016). Information about the
project’s context can be gained through qualitative and quantitative research, existing data, in­
terviewing relevant stakeholders etc, identifying the relevant target group etc (Raymond et al.,
2019; Simeone et al., n.d.).
4.2.1
The difference between a logic model and a ToC
ToC is often confused with other evaluation tools such as Logic Models or Log Frames. The
differentiation can be unclear, as there is no consensus on what makes a tool qualify as either
Log Frame, Logic Model or ToC (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018). All three tools use similar terms
(e.g., activities, outputs, outcomes). A ToC often builds upon a Logic Model by adding explicit
causal links, as illustrated on figure ??). In Logic Models, causal links are often implicit, making
it difficult to identify underlying assumptions (Harries et al., 2014). The terminology in ToC and
Logic Models is thus very similar and both describe the pathway to intended outcomes or impact
(Kahan et al., 2014)
Figure 4.2: Comparing Logic Model and ToC, illustration from Dhillon and Vaca, 2018
4.3
Application of Theory of Change in project facilitation
This section will elaborate on the application of ToC, its benefits and characteristics, particularly
in the design, planning, management, evaluation and scaling of complex interventions.
4.3.1
ToC to design, plan, manage, evaluate and scale complex interventions
Modelling a ToC map can be used to depict how a project and its planned activities are expected
to work (ex­ante) and how it has worked (ex­post). This makes it useful throughout all project
27
==PAGE:31==
phases to both design, plan, manage, evaluate and scale projects (Jones et al., 2023; Mayne,
2015). The 35 documents analysed in the SLR were systematised into whether they mention
ToC being applied in the different phases, the results are shown on figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Documents mentioning use of ToC in project phases
4.3.2
Design
All analysed documents mention that ToC can be used to design complex interventions. ToC is
effective in the design and development of complex interventions due to its visual explicit causal
pathway with activities and intended outputs, outcomes and impact, that reveal the ’messy
middle’ and the expected changes on the way to realise change (Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a).
This makes the design testable, more effective, and solid (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Tribaldos
and Schneider, 2021). It is particularly effective when developed early in a project (De Silva
et al., 2014; Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a; Simeone et al., n.d.), to e.g. evaluate the likely
value of a project and its investment worthiness (Simeone et al., n.d.).
The visual map serves as a boundary object for quickly communicating and constructing a
narrative about the intended change a project aims to achieve and the steps needed to get
there (Armitage et al., 2019; Claus et al., 2023; Mattos et al., 2022; Rodrigues et al., 2018; P.
Rogers, 2014), as well as what is realistic within the time frame (P. Rogers, 2014). Additionally,
Chapman et al., 2023 highlights the benefit of ToC’s standardised ’language,’ which facilitates
communication across diverse backgrounds.
Many authors highlight that designing a project’s ToC through a participatory process with di­
verse stakeholders enhances collaboration, shared vision and understanding of how and why
the designed activities contribute to intended change (Hayes et al., 2011; Khanna et al., 2022;
Mills et al., 2019; Murphy and Jones, 2020; Oberlack et al., 2019; Sides and Carey, 2023;
“TOC Benefits ­ Theory of Change Community”, n.d.). Sharing implicit mental models dur­
ing design can surface underlying assumptions, barriers, risks, unintended consequences or
gaps that need addressing, facilitating argumentation and decision­making about important de­
sign changes or refinement of activities (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Epstein and Klerman, 2012;
28
==PAGE:32==
Ibrahim et al., 2017; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Mclaughlin and Jordan, 2015; Raymond et al.,
2019)
Additionally, ToC provides a structure for stakeholders to adopt continuous critical reflection
and learning about their underlying assumptions and theories on how change will occur (Carey,
2022; Chapman et al., 2023; Claus et al., 2023; Mattos et al., 2022; Tribaldos and Schneider,
2021; Wilkinson et al., 2021). This critical reflection is essential throughout all project facilitation
phases, as assumptions must be tested, validated, and adapting with new learnings (Eckstein
and Holyer, 2023).
4.3.3
Plan
18 documents mentioned ToC’s use in planning. ToCs are effective strategic planning tools
(Kaveh et al., 2021; P. Rogers, 2014; Tribaldos and Schneider, 2021; Valters and Stein, 2016),
providing a visual roadmap of a project’s goals and the causal pathway to intended impact (Gien­
app and Hostetter, 2022a; Jones et al., 2023; Simeone et al., n.d.). It can illustrate a project’s
complexity and serve as a communicative boundary object among stakeholders, helping them
explain how and why activities lead to desired change (Carey, 2022; Ibrahim et al., 2017; TOC,
2023; Wilkinson et al., 2021).
The explicit ToC map helps identify and plan necessary actions, tests, validation, evaluation
(what, when and how to evaluate), resource needs (inputs), indicators etc. (Claus et al., 2023;
Eckstein and Holyer, 2023; Harries et al., 2014; Hayes et al., 2011; Kahan et al., 2014; Oberlack
et al., 2019). Furthermore, it facilitates critical reflection about planning for addressing possible
barriers, risks, crucial activities and how to address them during implementation (Carey, 2022;
Ibrahim et al., 2017; Kahan et al., 2014; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Wilkinson et al., 2021).
ToC’s ability to make a project’s intended impact explicit also benefits securing of funding, as it
allows for clear arguments about what a project is trying to achieve and how it will do it ex­ante
(Carey, 2022; Chapman et al., 2023; Claus et al., 2023; Connell and Kubisch, 1998; Ratcliffe,
2012). Furthermore, it can also secure further funding through credible evaluation results ex­
post (Epstein and Klerman, 2012).
4.3.4
Manage
14 documents mentioned ToC’s benefits in managing and monitoring projects. ToC is useful be­
cause it helps monitor progress through indicators, documenting whether change happens as
planned and understand why (Claus et al., 2023; Jones et al., 2023; Kahan et al., 2014; Mattos
et al., 2022; Simeone et al., n.d.). Due to unpredictable changing environments, the intended
change pathway may not unfold as expected. As a project progresses and new learnings sur­
face, the ToC map can be iteratively documented, adapted and updated (Chapman et al., 2023;
Connell and Kubisch, 1998; Eckstein and Holyer, 2023; Valters and Stein, 2016). This helps
communicate changes and learnings to stakeholders effectively, supporting design changes
intentionally and cost­effectively (Raymond et al., 2019).
4.3.5
Evaluate
31 documents mentioned ToC’s role in strategic evaluation. As earlier mentioned, ToC was ini­
tially invented to facilitate the evaluation of complex projects in uncertain environments (Jones
et al., 2023; Simeone et al., n.d.). Carey, 2022 argues that evaluation is crucial, it is not cate­
gorised as a product of completion, but must be integrated throughout all project phases to in­
crease chances of success. Once mapped, ToC provides a clear foundation for both planning­
(mentioned earlier) and managing evaluations (Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a; Ibrahim et al.,
2017; Jones et al., 2023; Kaveh et al., 2021; Wilkinson et al., 2021).
Understanding how
projects achieve intended change helps identify crucial indicators for outputs, outcomes and
impact across all pillars of sustainability (Kahan et al., 2014; Mattos et al., 2022; Mills et al.,
2019; Oberlack et al., 2019).
29
==PAGE:33==
ToC helps define what, when and how to collect data for measuring project performance (De
Silva et al., n.d.; Mclaughlin and Jordan, 2015; Raymond et al., 2019; P. Rogers, 2014; TOC,
2023). Continuous evaluation with ToC can help track progress through indicators, support­
ing informed decisions and project improvements (Connell and Kubisch, 1998; Epstein and
Klerman, 2012; Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a). One of the key benefits of ToC is that it also
helps explains exactly why outputs, outcomes or impacts were achieved, enabling stakehold­
ers to communicate the project’s impact effectively and whether it has actually been successful
(Dhillon and Vaca, 2018).
4.3.6
Scale
Only three documents mentioned ToC’s use in scaling. It can be used for scaling, because ToC
helps argue whether a project has had an impact, facilitating analysis and supporting arguments
for either scaling or adaptation in new contexts (Carey, 2022; Kahan et al., 2014; Simeone et
al., n.d.). ToC provides a clear understanding of the project’s evolution, what worked, or did not
work, which can serve as a template and guideline for new or larger projects (Simeone et al.,
n.d.).
4.4
Development of a Theory of Change map
This section outlines key approaches, considerations and visual elements for mapping a ToC.
Many of the findings was gained from testing ToC guides with the projects cases (see process
and all results on appendix C4A2) (De Silva et al., n.d.; Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022b; Harries
et al., 2014; TOC, 2023), as well as findings from analysing ToC approaches from articles (see
process and findings on appendix C4A3).
4.4.1
Participatory approach through workshops, co­design
Developing a ToC often involves a participatory approach, including stakeholders with diverse
knowledge and backgrounds (Ibrahim et al., 2017; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Mattos et al., 2022;
Wilkinson et al., 2021). Stakeholders are usually involved through workshops, interviews or
focus groups to facilitate co­development (Kahan et al., 2014; Rodrigues et al., 2018; Simeone
et al., n.d.). Involving diverse stakeholders provides a more relevant, nuanced, credible and
legitimate understanding of the current system and content in which a project intervenes (Claus
et al., 2023; Mayne, 2015; Oberlack et al., 2019). Co­designing a project facilitates increased
stakeholder engagement, buy­in, common agreement about roles and shared ownership, pro­
moting a dialogue about achieving intended change (Claus et al., 2023; Hayes et al., 2011;
Kahan et al., 2014; Mills et al., 2019; Wilkinson et al., 2021).
4.4.2
Visuals representation
There are many different ways of representing ToC in the analysed approaches and article
(Harries et al., 2014; Jones et al., 2023). However, there are some common elements. ToC is
often presented visually in a model or diagram (Claus et al., 2023; Ibrahim et al., 2017). They
are typically organised in a linear fashion, illustrated in a vertical or horizontal structure (Dhillon
and Vaca, 2018), but can also be illustrated circularly (Simeone et al., n.d.). Mills et al., 2019
explains that modelling a ToC is a qualitative process, and it may take different forms each time
it is mapped. Each ToC element is often illustrated in a separate box, connected with arrows
(Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Mattos et al., 2022; Murphy and Jones, 2020), as illustrated in the
generic ToC model in figure 4.2. The common structure of an if­then causal pathway explains
the use of boxes and arrows (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Hayes et al., 2011). The ”if” in an if­then
statement declares an assumption, and the ”then” describes the assumed outcome (Eckstein
and Holyer, 2023). The summary of all if­then statements provides the narrative description
(Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Mattos et al., 2022). Assumptions are often illustrated with dotted
arrows (TOC, 2023)
30
==PAGE:34==
4.4.3
Systems thinking
Mapping ToC requires complex systems thinking, considering societal challenges or system
characteristics (Claus et al., 2023; Eckstein and Holyer, 2023). A systems perspective helps
understand that interventions are connected elements in a complex system (Carey, 2022).
Changes can occur at different system levels: Individual, organisational and community (Khanna
et al., 2022).
4.4.4
How to map the ToC
The four tested guides varied a lot in the way they mapped the ToC. However, there were some
similarities of things that worked well which will be highlighted here. The mapping process
often begins by defining the desired impact and using backwards mapping to identify outcomes,
outputs, activities, assumptions and indicators (Kahan et al., 2014; Khanna et al., 2022; Mattos
et al., 2022; “TOC Benefits ­ Theory of Change Community”, n.d.).
Preparing the development of ToC before starting through e.g. clarification of the contexts with
problems, project maturity, target groups is also important. Furthermore, providing a systematic
structure and guidance for development, including examples, questions, tips, brainstorming and
visual illustrations enhance the mapping process. An iterative approach helps to encourage
reflections on results, to update the ToC map before identifying indicators and to uncover new
assumptions and tendencies during the mapping.
Development of a ToC map is important both before initiating a project, but it is also crucial to
update it after a project has started and while it is ongoing. This way, the ToC can be seen
as a guiding compass instead of a roadmap, as complex environments will likely change and
therefore it is important to always work iteratively (Eckstein and Holyer, 2023).
4.4.5
Theory of Change applied in circular transitions in cities contexts
The following will explore how aspects of ToC can facilitate the circular transition in cities. De­
spite the limited literature directly addressing ToC, CE and cities, some relevant insights can be
drawn from existing studies.
ToC in circular economy and climate change
Khanna et al., 2022 utilised ToC as a theoretical framework to investigate the relevance of CE for
climate change, analysing 96 articles. The author illustrated a ToC to communicate the transition
from a linear to a circular economy, addressing key issues like inefficient resource use, pollution
and increasing emissions. It outlines some of the key activities such as policy promotion on
circular strategies, research on CE and climate mitigation, funding and partnerships. Khanna
et al., 2022 suggests indicators for the short­term including eco­design, renewable energy use,
waste reduction, job creation and innovation in sustainability. Whereas indicators suggested
for the long­term effects are reduced green house gas emissions, improved health conditions,
efficient resource use, or sustainable growth.
It also highlights, that inclusion of all relevant stakeholders working towards a common vision
is crucial for transitioning from a linear to a circular economy. Additionally, CE strategies such
as reuse, reduce and recycle are essential activities in this transition (Khanna et al., 2022).
Furthermore, ToC is highlighted to be particularly beneficial during the design phase of new
circular projects (Mattos et al., 2022), encouraging rigorous questioning about project variables
and identifying additional activities to fill gaps and ensure significant contributions to impact.
While ToC is a powerful tool, it may oversimplify real­world challenges, especially in contexts
involving wicked problems like climate change and poverty (Armitage et al., 2019). Some ap­
proaches integrate circularity and sustainability, focusing on the triple bottom line or climate
change (Khanna et al., 2022; Mattos et al., 2022; Raymond et al., 2019; Rodrigues et al.,
2018).
31
==PAGE:35==
In summary, although the literature on ToC applied in circular transitions in cities is sparse, the
literature highlights participatory inclusion of ToC and its ability to visualise complex processes
making it a valuable framework for facilitating the circular transition in cities. Additionally, it
can provide indicator for the short­ and long­term. Though ToC was also seen to oversimplify
complex issues like climate change. Therefore, it is important to keep the desired long­term
impact in mind.
4.5
Challenges of applying Theory of Change in project
facilitation
As with any approach, there are numerous challenges and limitations to applying ToC in project
facilitation which will be described in this section. Key challenges identified from the literature
are summarised in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Challenges of ToC
Key challenges of Theory of Change
Number of
documents out of 35
Terminology confusion
9
Resource intensive and requires ToC experts
12
Linearity, fixed ToC, lack of iteration, insufficent attention to
system, oversimplification, countaer factuality, Too optimistic,
Disregarding unintended effects
17
Lack of engagement from stakeholders
9
Unpredictable reality, paradox between static model and re­
ality
7
Requires ToC expert/champion/specialist, responsible
5
Weak theoretical basis, lack of evidence and explicit assump­
tions
7
Disagreement on outputs, outcomes, impact
5
Too complex, never ending, hard visualising
11
Missing guidelines for ToC development
4
Terminology confusion
Terminology in ToC elements is often used ambiguously and inconsistently, leading to confusion
and disagreement (Claus et al., 2023; Oberlack et al., 2019; Simeone et al., n.d.; Valters and
Stein, 2016). The lack of standardised definitions and classification of elements complicates
the approach and undermines its benefits (Jones et al., 2023; Kahan et al., 2014; Mills et al.,
2019). The term ”Theory of Change” itself can cause confusion due to its vague meaning (Claus
et al., 2023; Valters and Stein, 2016). Valters and Stein, 2016 highlights that a more common
terminology and clarity about the elements, definitions etc. is needed (Valters and Stein, 2016).
Resource intensive and requires ToC experts
Developing and using ToC is resource­intensive, requiring significant time, people, and effort
to develop, organise workshops, and keep the ToC updated (Chapman et al., 2023; Epstein
and Klerman, 2012; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Oberlack et al., 2019; Wilkinson et al., 2021).
This can lead to frustration or fatigue among stakeholders (Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a), and
might not be sustainable over time (Valters and Stein, 2016). There is a critical need for a ToC
expert or ToC champion to handle the operations and drive the process forward to be successful
(Chapman et al., 2023; Kahan et al., 2014; Raymond et al., 2019), as it is not an easy process
requiring many iterations (Oberlack et al., 2019). Stakeholders must be willing to set aside
32
==PAGE:36==
sufficient resources and engage in the process( M Kabongo et al., 2020; Oberlack et al., 2019;
Raymond et al., 2019; P. Rogers, 2014). However, not all projects may have the capacity to
allocate such resources (Connell and Kubisch, 1998). Meanwhile, utilising ToC alone in project
facilitation is not enough to guarantee success of a project (Simeone et al., n.d.), therefore there
must also be set aside resources for other matters.
Too linear models with insufficient attention to system and lack of iterations
ToC’s graphical depictions are often criticised for being too linear, simplistic, inflexible, not cap­
turing the complex, dynamic nature of change in systems (Carey, 2022; Eckstein and Holyer,
2023; Oberlack et al., 2019; Simeone et al., n.d.; Wilkinson et al., 2021). They may lack im­
portant details and oversimplify causality, or even make change pathways seem predictable
(Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Murphy and Jones, 2020), while the
underlying mechanisms are usually not presented but black­boxed (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018;
Jones et al., 2023).
Meanwhile, the visual linearity has been criticised for being too optimistic with a lack of sufficient
attention to the surrounding system (Claus et al., 2023; Murphy and Jones, 2020; Oberlack et al.,
2019; Wilkinson et al., 2021). This can result in overlooked counterfactualities and unintended
effects/outcomes that might influence intended results and not being accounted for (Armitage
et al., 2019; Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Oberlack et al., 2019; Wilkinson et al., 2021). This is also
an argument for why critical reflections and systems approaches are needed, especially on the
potential unintended effects /Murphy and Jones, 2020; Oberlack et al., 2019). This also means
that the ToC is not always possible to demonstrate that change has happened as a result of a
specific project (Simeone et al., n.d.).
Lastly, the linearity of ToC was criticised for leading to a lack of iterations as the development
of a ToC often ends after the first draft without further adjustments (Claus et al., 2023; Epstein
and Klerman, 2012). This is because it is often easier to develop the ToC than embed and use
it continuously during implementation (Harries et al., 2014). The linear nature in a ToC can lead
people to treat it as a static map and not as a guiding compass (Eckstein and Holyer, 2023). But
to remain useful and meaningful over time, ToC must facilitate continuous adaptation with new
information, learnings etc. (Oberlack et al., 2019). Society is ever evolving and circumstances
are continually changing; a ToC map that might work today, may not work within 10 years from
now (Epstein and Klerman, 2012; Hargreaves and Podems, 2012)
Lack of engagement from stakeholders
Effective ToC development requires sufficient stakeholder involvement, but it can be challenging
to get stakeholders to invest their time and energy (Connell and Kubisch, 1998; Valters and
Stein, 2016). Insufficient involvement can lead to decreased engagement and under utilisation
of the ToC (Kahan et al., 2014; Simeone et al., n.d.). This might also be why ToC lacks iterations.
Weak theoretical basis and lack of evidence/explicit assumptions
The quality and validity of a ToC heavily relies on the plausibility of causal links (Claus et al.,
2023; Forti, 2012; Simeone et al., n.d.). Although having a strong focus on making assumptions
explicit and finding evidence, they are often compromised by weak theoretical basis Claus et
al., 2023. Many ToCs lack explicit explanations of why change is expected, reducing their
credibility (Rodrigues et al., 2018). The complexity of systems cannot be adequately captured
by qualitative ToC models alone (Mills et al., 2019).
Disagreement on outputs, outcomes and impact
Participatory ToC development can lead to conflicts over differing ideas and views on what it
takes to produce intended change and what the project is accountable for (Claus et al., 2023;
Connell and Kubisch, 1998; Forti, 2012; Hayes et al., 2011). It can be challenging to formulate
33
==PAGE:37==
meaningful outcomes that are useful to all parties (Hayes et al., 2011).
Too complex visualisation
Mapping a ToC can be overly complex and open­ended, potentially becoming too complicated
and overwhelming for stakeholders (Harries et al., 2014; Rodrigues et al., 2018; Tribaldos and
Schneider, 2021; Valters and Stein, 2016; Wilkinson et al., 2021). There is a paradox between
simplicity and sufficient detail in the ToC; simplicity is crucial to ensure that the ToC can be un­
derstood by stakeholders, but detail is needed to capture all the complexities within the system
(Armitage et al., 2019; Chapman et al., 2023; P. Rogers, 2014). Mills et al., 2019 addresses
the need to have different kinds of complexities and representations for different complexities
of a project.
Missing guidelines for ToC development
Lastly, one of the challenges identified is a lack of detailed, proper guidelines for developing a
ToC map, leaving it up to the practitioners how to develop it (Buelow et al., 2024; Jones et al.,
2023; Mills et al., 2019). The visual development of ToC maps remains underdeveloped (Sime­
one et al., n.d.). This issue was also identified in the SLR, revealing multiple weaknesses and
challenges in existing guidelines. The existing guides often suffer from confusing navigation
and structure, with a clear lack of step­by­step instructions. The information is frequently pre­
sented in a dense, text­heavy format. Some guides lack clear definitions of terminology and
proper clarification of their use, which complicates the ToC mapping process. Formulating and
identifying indicators, as well as prioritising outcomes to measure, are also challenging due to
insufficient guidance. Additionally, identifying and formulating assumptions or evidence proves
difficult, as it is hard to discern when an assumption or evidence is valid.
Lack of criticising ToC approaches
One challenge identified by the researchers, have been that the authors from the articles anal­
ysed in the SLR are not criticising their presented ToC approaches. This decreases the cred­
ibility of the approaches and lowers an indication of how useful the approach would be in this
research project. Additionally, all the approaches only indicate usage from the authors self with
an additional explanation of how it can be used by others.
4.6
Key take aways from theoretical research on ToC
The SLR on ToC provided an in­depth understanding of its relevance in facilitating circular tran­
sitions in cities. Here are the key takeaways:
Development of generic Toc model and definition to use for PS
ToC was first defined by Weiss et al., 1995, explains why and how an initiative works by outlining
and making explicit the assumptions behind the desired changes. In this research project, ToC
is defined as follows: ToC is commonly realised as a concept of why and how a given series of
activities would lead to a specific change in a particular context (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018). ToC
addresses causal pathways of change and how those changes are expected to occur (ex­ante)
or how change has occurred (ex­post) (Mattos et al., 2022). ToC can be viewed as a product its
inquiry results in specific outcomes in a narrative and visual form and offers a framework that
needs revisited and adapted as the project progresses (M Kabongo et al., 2020). A generic
ToC model for this research project was developed, including 13 elements: input, activities,
outputs, outcomes, impact, assumptions, barriers, indicators, ceiling of accountability, causal
links, causal pathway, and context.
ToC to design, plan, manage, evaluate and scale circular city projects
ToC provides a strategic, structured approach for complex interventions, beneficial for map­
ping necessary steps and intended outcomes for transitioning to a circular economy in cities.
34
==PAGE:38==
It can be used throughout all project phases, from design and planning (ex­ante) to manage­
ment, evaluation, and scaling (ex­post). Early use of ToC in project facilitation enhances its
effectiveness.
Design: ToC can serve as a boundary object, clearly communicating the intended causal path­
way, increasing collaboration, shared vision, and understanding among stakeholders about how
activities can contribute to circular impact. It helps reveal and address underlying assumptions,
barriers, risks, and unintended consequences, facilitating critical reflection and learning, which
is vital for successful circular transitions. ToC also helps evaluate the likelihood of a successful
project design and its investment worthiness.
Plan: ToC is also valuable for planning circular city transitions, as it can provide a visual
roadmap of intended changes and identifying necessary indicators for outputs, outcomes and
impact. It helps define what needs testing, validation, evaluation, and resource requirements,
facilitating the planning of tasks and measurement methods.
Manage: ToC can also help in managing circular city projects by monitoring activity effective­
ness through indicators, tracking and documenting changes. Continuous updates and iterations
based on new information or learnings will ensure the ToC map remains relevant and effective,
which can keep the project on track towards circular impact.
Evaluate: Originally developed for evaluating complex projects, ToC provides a solid founda­
tion for planning, structuring and managing evaluations of circular city projects. It helps identify
crucial outputs, outcomes, and impact indicators to track project progress, while making it pos­
sible to communicate why and how project activities have worked or not.
Developing a ToC map for circular city projects
Developing an effective ToC requires a participatory approach, involving all relevant stakehold­
ers to foster collaboration and a shared vision. Although only few development guides have
been identified, all having high diversity and different approaches, some similarities exists,
which are recommendations for future development. The visual representation, often through
models or diagrams, enhances understanding of the complex systems in which projects oper­
ate. Most ToC maps are created using backwards mapping, starting with the desired impact,
representing elements with boxes, causal links with arrows etc. Providing clear, step­by­step
instructions throughout the entire mapping process is essential to guide participants effectively.
Including examples, as little text as possible, and tips on how to map and formulate ToC el­
ements can enhance understanding and accuracy. Supplementing this with visuals such as
colors, icons, shapes, and arrows to differentiate between elements and improve clarity. It is
important to consider how to limit the ToC mapping so that it does not become overly complex
and difficult to manage. Brainstorming approaches, including various design methods, can be
introduced to identify outputs, outcomes, assumptions, barriers, and activities.
Prioritising elements, especially indicators, ensures that the most critical factors are addressed
first. Including a ceiling of accountability line can help identify the difference between what is
directly achievable and what is beyond the project’s influence. Finally, ensuring that the ToC
map is iterative allows for flexibility, enabling elements to be moved, deleted, or changed as the
project evolves and environment changes.
Challenges of applying ToC
Several challenges must be addressed for effective ToC use in circular city projects. Terminol­
ogy confusion, resource intensiveness, and the need for ToC experts are significant challenges.
The visual characteristics of ToC can be problematic if they become too simple, too complex,
or overly optimistic, potentially overlooking system complexities and unintended effects. ToCs
can also become static models rather than adaptive tools, failing to represent changing envi­
35
==PAGE:39==
ronments. The validity of a ToC relies heavily on the plausibility of causal links and explicit
assumptions; without evidence­based support, its credibility and effectiveness decrease. Ad­
ditionally, the lack of clear, detailed guidelines for constructing ToC maps poses a challenge.
Existing guides often have vague descriptions and confusing instructions, making the mapping
process difficult to follow. Addressing these challenges is essential for maximising ToC’s po­
tential in facilitating circular transitions in cities.
36
==PAGE:40==
5
Empirical findings: Project facilitation
(DS­I)
This chapter will elaborate on key findings to RQ2: How are project groups in the Waste and
Resource Management area facilitating their projects, and what are their challenges? First,
an introduction to the case company and the scoping within, followed by an elaboration of the
Resource and Waste Management plan and what it entails. Then the two project cases will
be presented. General project facilitation phases and practices for RAP project teams will be
elaborated, and lastly, identification of key problems within project facilitation.
5.1
Introduction and scoping within the case company:
Copenhagen Municipality
The capital of Denmark is Copenhagen with a population of approximately 659.000 people
(“Københavns Kommunes Statistikbank ­ data og tal”, n.d.), thus the city is around 11,1% of
the population share i Denmark (“Befolkningstal ­ Danmarks Statistik”, n.d.). This means that
CPHM holds significant responsibility and influence on the citizens and their future as well as
being the leading example for other municipalities in Denmark.
Figure 5.1 illustrates the research project’s scoping within CPHM, which focused on the Waste
and Resource area, more specifically the Resource and Waste Management Plan (RAP), by
using two project cases from RAP 2024. CPHM has seven different administrations (“Forvalt­
ninger | Københavns Kommunes hjemmeside”, n.d.). Within the Technical and Environmental
Administration (TEA), four different departments exist, each having different responsibilities.
Climate and Urban Development (CUD) department is responsible for multiple development
areas in Copenhagen. They are preparing and coordinating the areas of climate, resources,
waste water, local plans and public housing. They also handle regulatory work, operations
and the development of waste and resource management (“Teknik­ og Miljøforvaltninvns Kom­
munes hjemmesidegen | Københa”, n.d.). CUD is seeking to transform the city of Copenhagen
in the coming years within four main areas Climate, Waste and Resources, Urban Planning,
and Mobility. RAP is a part of the work in Waste and Resource area which seeks to create a
circular lifestyle, where resources are no longer seen as waste, but as resources that can be
used again and again (“Sådan udvikler vi København | Bæredygtig byudvikling”, n.d.).
Figure 5.1: Scoping within CPHM. The coloured objects mark the focus of the research project.
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
37
==PAGE:41==
Currently, around 2500 people are employed in TEA and they are administrating a net budget
of around 2,6 billion DKK tax­financed by the citizens. The department is responsible for the
operation and development of the city for the benefit of citizens, businesses and other users of
the city. They handles the city’s current and future challenges as, among others, a result of pop­
ulation growth and climate change (“Teknik­ og Miljøforvaltninvns Kommunes hjemmesidegen
| Københa”, n.d.).
Figure 5.2 illustrates a stakeholder map including human and non­human actor. It provides an
overview of all involved actors in the system surrounding ecosystem related to CPHM. This
helped in understanding the roles, relationships, and influences of each stakeholder, ensuring
comprehensive analysis and a common understanding of the scope of the research.
Figure 5.2: Human and non­human actors in wihtin Copenhagen Municipality’s surrounding
system and the scope of htis research project
5.2
Resource and Waste Management Plan 2019­2024
RAP24 is an continuation of the previous RAP from 2018 (RAP18), aimed at developing circular
economy solutions for Copenhagen. This plan focuses on reducing residual waste sent to in­
cineration and increasing the reuse of resources by establishing key partnerships with national,
international, industrial, and academic stakeholders, which are crucial for transitioning to a circu­
lar economy (“Circular Copenhagen is Copenhagen’s innovation platform for partnership­driven
circular economy solutions. | Circular Copenhagen”, n.d.).
5.2.1
Key drivers behind RAP
Going from linear to circular: Eurostat data shows that Copenhagen citizens generate nearly
twice as much waste as the average EU citizen in terms of resource consumption per per­
son (“Circular Copenhagen is Copenhagen’s innovation platform for partnership­driven circular
38
==PAGE:42==
economy solutions. | Circular Copenhagen”, n.d.). Every day, valuable resources are wasted
and sent to incineration. The RAP strives to transition Copenhagen into an economy where
materials recirculate, based on Ellen McArthur’s circular economy principles as mentioned in
previous chapter 3. This involves moving away from the traditional take­make­waste economy
to an economy where resources are reused and recycled continuously. Efforts under RAP18
have already increased the recycling rate from 27% in 2010 to 45% in 2018.
Legislation: According to the Waste Regulation (Affaldsbekendtgørelsen), municipalities are re­
quired to develop a waste management plan every six years (Københavns Kommune, 2019).
The Danish Government’s Ministry of Environment (Miljøstyrelsen) has created a National Plan
for Prevention and Management of Waste for 2020­2032, which aligns with the European Circu­
lar Economy Agreement. This agreement sets objectives for recycling, waste prevention, and
sorting, and outlines how to calculate recycling rates. It specifies that by 2025, the reuse and
recycling of municipal waste must increase to at least 55%, to 60% by 2030, and to 65% by
2035 (“Waste Framework Directive ­ European Commission”, n.d.). The Danish Government’s
action plan for circular economy sets targets, indicators, policies, and initiatives within waste
management, aiming to become climate neutral, produce less waste, improve resource use,
increase reuse and recycling, and reduce the amount of incinerated plastic waste by 80%, all
by 2030.
5.2.2
Circularity goals
RAP24 has set three overarching circularity goals which contribute to the vision of Copenhagen
becoming a front­runner within CE and the first CO2­neutral capital in 2025 (Københavns Kom­
mune, 2019, 2015), see figure 5.3.
Goal 1: ”59.000 tons of CO2 reduction”, is aiming at reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The
focus is on using bio­waste to produce bio­gas as well as eliminating plastic in the residual
waste fraction. It supports Copenhagen’s Climate Action Plan aiming at making Copenhagen
the world’s first carbon­neutral city in 2025 (Københavns Kommune, 2019). The Climate Action
Plan comes from another focus area in CUD, see figure 5.1.
Goal 2: ”70% of household waste and light commercial waste collected for recycle”, is aiming
at increasing the recycling of resources from both household waste, light commercial waste
and the waste from institutions. They want the quality of the collected resources to be high to
increase the potential of them being used in new products (Københavns Kommune, 2019)
Goal 3: ”Three times more reuse”, is aiming to increase reuse rates by three times in the mu­
nicipality’s sharing and reuse facilities, going from 2000 tons in 2016 to 6000 tons in 2024. The
majority of the citizens are to be using the sharing or reuse facilities, going from around 22%
users in 2015 (Københavns Kommune, 2019). As illustrated, both goal 2 and 3 contributes
to achieving goal 1, as minimising residual waste and enhancing both recycling and reuse will
reduce CO2 emissions that would otherwise be generated from incineration.
To measure progress towards these goals, CPHM employs specific measures for CO2 reduc­
tion, recycling, and reuse (Københavns Kommune, 2019):
• Measuring CO2 refers to the direct effect measured by the reduced amount of CO2 emitted
from the incineration facilities.
• Measuring recycling refers to the quantities of waste and resources collected from citizens
that are transferred to recycling facilities.
• Measuring reuse refers to quantities passing through municipal schemes from both direct
reuse and preparation for reuse.
39
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.3: Hierarchy structure of the three overall RAP goals
5.2.3
Principles and strategy to reach circularity goals
All initiatives within RAP24 are built upon CPHM’s four principles for waste handling, which
should be recognisable, easy and logical, accessible and facilitate growth, see figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Four principles for waste handling, adapted from (Københavns Kommune, 2019)
Additionally, RAP24 follows the five­step waste hierarchy from the EU Commission’s Waste
Framework Directive as the foundation and reference to waste management to establish an
order of preference for managing and disposing of waste (Københavns Kommune, 2019). The
higher up the initiatives are in the waste hierarchy, the better the use of resources, whereas
preventing waste is the preferred option. The lowest stage in the hierarchy represents the
worst use of resources which is sending waste to landfill or incineration, see figure 5.5.
5.2.4
Themes, projects and activities
RAP24 consists of six themes, with an additional package introduced in 2022. Each theme has
individual goals and projects that contribute to the overall circularity goals, including a detailed
overview of expected resources and investments. An overview of all themes is available in the
appendix C5A1.
This research project examines two key project cases from the different themes, see figure 5.6:
The projects within each theme are described with their related challenges, solutions, and in­
tended impacts in RAP24 and the additional package (KbenhavnsKommune2022Cirkulr2022­24;
Københavns Kommune, 2019). The maturity levels of these projects varies; some are contin­
uations from RAP18, while others are new and require development and testing. Many are
interdependent, relying on the success of others.
The following will elaborate on the two project cases, that have been used as key examples
40
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.5: Waste hierarchy principles used by Circular Copenhagen in RAP24 (Københavns
Kommune, 2019), illustration adapted from (“Waste Framework Directive ­ European Commis­
sion”, n.d.)
Figure 5.6: Themes and project cases
throughout this research project both to among others understand the project facilitation in the
existing situation in CPHM.
5.3
Introduction to the two project cases
Figure 5.7 illustrates how these projects contribute to the RAP24 goals.
Section 2.2.4 clarified the relevant stakeholders in this research. Both project cases share
several stakeholders across multiple system levels, as depicted in figure 5.8.
On the engineering level, both projects share all stakeholders, for example knowledge institu­
41
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.7: Project cases contribution to different RAP goals
Figure 5.8: Stakeholders in three system levels for CHA and SZ
42
==PAGE:46==
tions and legislative actors like politicians. On the complex level, both projects influence the
citizens and ARC employees. SZ influences companies working with reuse, such as second­
hand shops like Røde Kors. CHA influences citizens living in house associations and the board
members of them. Both projects share a network of internal stakeholders, including program
leaders, steering groups, coordination groups, follow­up groups, and other project groups within
CPHM.
On the artefact level, the project cases differ from each other by focusing on resources/waste
from households in CHA and in SZ the artefact is reusable items. What they have in common
is that all the assigned stakeholders above are surrounding the two artefacts.
43
==PAGE:47==
Sharing Zone (SZ)
Problem  
Citizens in CPHM have many usable products and 
items they do not want to use anymore. Instead of 
letting these products and items turn into waste 
they can be shared with other citizens. CPHM 
wants to support the sharing possibilities at 
recycling stations to make it easier for the citizens 
to share items and to avoid letting usable items 
become waste. 
Target group  
Citizens and the professional users of recycling 
stations using the reuse items for corporate 
purposes. 
Purpose  
To increase reuse from things delivered at recycling 
stations, and therefrom contributing to goal 3, 
tripling the amount of reuse in swapping and reuse 
facilities. 
The vision is to have a logical system in and around 
recycling stations, where waste should end up 
where it makes most logical sense to the citizens 
and the climate. 
Main goal 
To increase reuse from things delivered at 
recycling stations with 2200 tons in total. It can 
also be argued that if the recycling stations 
increases the reuse of items that would be 
incinerated then the project will also contribute to 
goal 1. 
Success criteria
C. 3 reuse spotters hired to help in guiding visitors 
of recycling stations in delivering items for reuse. 
D. 50% increased turnover of reused items in the 
current sharing facilities (from 400 ton today, to 
600 ton).
Project activities
Each project has different activities to reach the 
project goal. SZ has initiated three "sub-activities"1
 Establish facilities for reuse of building 
materials and larger effects on the recycling 
stations. This contributes to 2000 tons reuse. 
+
/ Optimise existing sharing facilities on the 
reuse stations. This contributes to 200 tons 
reuse
 Investigate opportunities for establishing 
reparations and/or workshop facilities around 
reuse stations.
Risks and prevention/opportunity approach
SZ have also identified what they have called risk 
element and a prevention/opportunity approach 
one example is1
F Risk element: Not enough space on recycling 
stations for all the new activities.+
F Prevention/opportunity: Focus on smart design 
and logical flow. 
Project case 1 is the initiative 3.1.2 "Øget genbrug 
på genbrugsstationerne", also referred to as 
Delezonen.
Going to 
recycling 
station
Throws recyclable 
items into recycling 
containers (recycling 
advisors guides)
Reuse spotter 
tells citizen to 
reuse items
Drops reusable 
items in Sharing 
Zone 
Maybe grabs 
something from 
Sharing Zone and 
brings home
==PAGE:48==
Circular House 
Associations (CHA)
Problem  
House associations have not been organised in a 
way that support enhanced waste sorting 
practices for recycling and circular economy. 
Therefore, house associations have been offered to 
participate in a program to optimise their waste 
sorting possibilities both inside their homes and 
outside in the common waste areas. 
Target group   
the residents and board members of the house 
associations.
Purpose  
to enter into a mutual collaboration agreement 
between the board members in the house 
associations and CPHM with activities trying to 
improve the waste sorting of residents and 
reducing the volume of residual waste containers, 
by focusing on the barriers the house associations 
are experiencing. 
Main goal 
to reduce residual waste volume and increase 
sorting other sub-goals.
Project case 2 is the 7.5 initiative "Boligforeninger 
bliver cirkulære", also referred to as Cirkulære 
Boligforeninger.
The project is an extension of a former initiative 
and experiences from RAP18 (København sorterer 
mere) where all citizens in Copenhagen could get a 
subsidy on waste sorting system for inside use.
Success criteria
 I. 80% of citizens must sort the primary fractions: 
food, plastic, cartons, metal, glass, paper, cardboard 
(42%). 
 J. 90% answer i citizen measurements that they 
sort plastic (Baseline 2019: 66%)
Project activities
The activities implemented in the house 
associations can be separated into two overall 
categories: 
Physica
 Decrease residual waste containers and adjust 
the recyclable waste containers in common 
yard
 Provide a subsidy for the residents to purchase 
a waste sorting system inside their home.
 
Virtual and verba
 Communication packages including PowerPoint 
slides, pre-written newsletters, email 
templates and similar for the board of the 
house associations to share with the residents. 
Risks and prevention/opportunity approach
The project group of CHA has identified conditions 
for the project and described what the system 
barrier is and identified a solution to prevent the 
system barrier. 
s Condition: Residual waste volume: uniform 
definition of the sufficient residual waste 
volume to fit the goal of 70% recyclable waste 
being collected
s System barrier: Tendency to increase volume 
to provide sufficient space for desired amounts 
of recycling fractions. Resistant to minimise 
space for residual due to fear of overflowing 
waste containers or pollution of recycling 
fractions, if unsorted residual is dumped into 
the recycling containers. 

s Solution: Test with yard optimisation how to 
work more proactive with taking back/
minimising residual waste container. 
Waste 
generated in 
household
Waste thrown out 
inside household 
waste bin
Waste transported 
Waste thrown into 
different fractions in 
common waste 
containers
Waste containers 
are emptied by 
ARC
==PAGE:49==
5.4
Project facilitation in Resource and Waste Management
This section elaborates on the gained understanding about project facilitation in RAP gained
from all the consolidated interviews, see appendix C5A3 for an overview of the workshop with
project manager that helped confirmed the understanding.
Project facilitation in RAP occurs in two main tracks: 1) Design and planning of RAP, includ­
ing defining the themes and projects, which takes approximately two years, and 2) Facilitation
of projects from initiatives to evaluations, which lasts six years. Figure 5.9 illustrates the par­
allel nature of these tracks. When approximately two years remain in a RAP period, working
groups start developing the new RAP plan. RAP periods do not overlap, but some projects may
continue into the next period. Currently, the period for RAP24 is ending, and CPHM is in the
process of developing RAP30.
Figure 5.9: Overview of the two RAP tracks and how they overlap
5.4.1
Track 1: Design and plan of RAP
Figure 5.10 shows an overview of track 1, designing and planning of RAP. The development of
RAP is an iterative process, and not linear as it might seem on the figure.
Figure 5.10: Overview of track 1: Design & plan of Resource­ and Waste Management Plan,
with its four project phases.
All of the stakeholders involved in the designing and planning of RAP as well as their roles are
illustrated on figure 5.11.
Phase 1: Development of goals and visions
Early in the RAP planning process, expectations are aligned to ensure CPHM and politicians
agree on the same ambition level of the plan. The main stakeholders are the steering group, pro­
gram leaders, politicians (citizen representation), project owners, and different directors. Em­
ployees in CPHM are mostly civil servants, meaning they must do what the politicians demand.
EU legislation, directives from the Danish Ministry of Environment, external world analysis, and
insights from employees guide the development of RAP goals and visions. Learnings from the
previous RAP period also play a key role. This phase ends with the overall goals of RAP, as
well as the main CE principles they are working with (the waste hierarchy and Ellen McArthur’s
definition of CE (Københavns Kommune, 2019)).
46
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.11: Overview of stakeholders involved with designing and planning RAP roles and
characteristics
Phase 2: Design themes
New themes as well as continuation of former themes are developed iterative through work­
shops with brainstorming and idea­generation processes, including relevant stakeholder from
former projects to share learnings. Budgets are always used as a reference during these work­
shops to ensure realistic themes. The size of the workshops varies, some can be short while
some will last multiple days. There will always be a educated facilitator to host the workshops.
The main stakeholders are the steering group, program leaders, project owners, and project
groups. The output is a clear description of RAP themes and their goals.
Phase 3: Design projects
Projects are derived from themes in a process similar to theme development, involving work­
shops and stakeholder input. The main stakeholders include the steering group, program lead­
ers, project owners, project groups, and working groups. The output is a detailed description of
the different projects, including their challenges, solutions, and intended effects. The maturity
of project varies a lot at this phase.
Phase 4: Project initiation
The final phase of RAP development concludes with an initiation description written by pro­
gram leaders, summarizing all gathered knowledge. This document is handed over to project
managers and groups at the beginning of the new RAP period.
47
==PAGE:51==
5.4.2
Track 2: Facilitation of projects in RAP through four phases
Figure 5.12 illustrates the four overall phases of the project facilitation during a RAP period.
Project facilitation of RAP starts once projects are formalised and an initiation description is
handed over. Overall, it is a very open approach, meaning there is a lot of freedom to decide
how to facilitate projects. Project managers and groups have access to a toolbox with project
facilitation tools, however only a few of the tools are mandatory,
Figure 5.12: The four project phases
All phases involve project managers, project groups, coordination groups, following groups,
program leaders, and other project groups. Sometimes, external consultancies are hired to
assist in planning and evaluating projects. Figure 5.13 shows the roles and characteristics of
stakeholders involved.
Figure 5.13: Overview of stakeholders involved with facilitation of projects during the RAP period
and their roles and characteristics
Phase 1 & 2: Needs clarification & Analyse and plan
The needs clarification phase starts with the project manager describing and estimating the
core elements of the project: reasoning, background, purpose, benefits, scope, stakeholders,
and budget. The project manager and group then develop a project description detailing the
project’s purpose, goals, success criteria, activities, risks, opportunities, budget, resource allo­
cation, and milestone plan. The project description requires approval from the steering group
48
==PAGE:52==
before implementation. The phases involves multiple workshops and idea generation. It is
a time­consuming process that can take several months due to numerous adaptations. Suc­
cess criteria are crucial and must be measurable, using SMART targets. These criteria are
identified during workshops, with discussions on desired outputs and feasibility. Although the
process lacks systematic criteria selection, brainstorming helps address questions like ”What do
we want out of it?” and ”When is the solution successfully implemented?” Sometimes, project
groups must consider legislation that could hinder activities. Once the steering group approves
the description, the project can proceed to implementation. These phases focus on planning
the project work, while the next two phases deal with implementation and evaluation based on
the project description.
Phase 3: Implementation and management
Implementation typically begins with pilot projects to test different project activities, ensuring
an iterative learning process. Not all projects and project activities require pilot tests if previ­
ously has already been tested in former periods. Evaluation of pilot projects may influence the
project description, and if there are any significant changes in scope, time, resources, or budget
the steering group must approve it. The number and duration of pilot projects depend on the
individual project. Successful activities continue, while unsuccessful ones are discarded.
Phase 4: Evaluation
Project groups use pilot projects to test what works and what does not work in project activities
before scaling them: ”We typically have a type of test before the project will be scaled and
spread out”. This proves as a valuable and iterative process, that ensures improved activities.
It is up to the project groups how they are going to evaluate a projects results. However, they
must conduct mid­term and final evaluations, focusing on core project elements such as time
schedule, purpose, goals, resources, budget, risks, and solutions. Budget and resource usage
are crucial parts of this evaluation. CHA hired an external consultancy for evaluation, while SZ
performed their own. The final evaluation determines if success criteria, goals, and impacts
have been achieved. These results and learnings decide if the project should continue and
scale in the next RAP period.
Phase 5: Scale and Realisation
Project can be scaled both during and after project periods if successful. An example of scaling
projects during the RAP period is SZ where the sharing zone allowing for more sharing and
reuse facilities has been scaled to more recycling stations. This is due to the successful results
of a pilot test at one recycling station. Projects can also be scaled after RAP periods with a
continuation of projects or be scaled to other municipalities. In these circumstances, contracts
has to be made. In phase 5, it is very important that all learnings and knowledge are shared, to
ensure consistency in activities where they are scaled.
5.5
Identification of key problems and factors
This section elaborates on the key problems and their potential root causes identified in project
facilitation identified through empirical research with interviewees (I1, I2, I3, I4, I5, I6, I7, I8, I9,
I10), root cause analysis and expert survey with interviewees from RAP.
Overall, the problems identified from empirical research indicates that the project quality and
success differs, leading to a decreased positive impact on circular transition in cities. Several
problems was identified to contribute to this. Figure 5.14 captures the five key problems that was
identified, their root causes, and therefrom key factors that have been identified. The highlighted
key factors illustrates the ones that was considered crucial to address. See appendix C5A4 for
a root cause analysis overview that contributed to identifying these potential root causes to the
problems.
49
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.14: Overview of problems, root­problems and potential key factors. Coloured key
factors have been chosen to continue with.
5.5.1
Varied facilitation of CE in projects
Not streamlined facilitation of CE
Although all RAP projects are based on the principles of CE by Ellen McArthur, there is minimal
communication about CE in the daily project facilitation: ”CE is our overall framework, so I am
surprised that it does not fill more. I am in doubt if anyone knows what CE actually means.
It has become similar to the word sustainability” (I9). There is voluntary trainings available
for employees to learn about climate change, CE, and sustainability, however, this does not
appears to lack some consensus: ”CE has probably not been defined as a term” ­ I5. The
expert survey shows that respondents feel comfortable communicating CE but would benefit
from increased focus on CE in daily work, see appendix C5A5.
Additionally, the use of tools in project facilitation is not consistent across projects. Employees
have access to a project management toolbox, but its usage varies: ”I think I have all the tools
to do project facilitation. So the toolbox from CPHM is not that useful to me, but for someone
who is not used to project facilitation, it might be helpful” (I9). Respondents from the expert
survey state that they use their own tools and methods, with half using the toolbox and feel­
ing confident in its use, and they believe that have sufficient tool to shape their projects, see
appendix C5A6. Changing project facilitation approaches in CPHM could might be challenging
due to busy schedules: ”It is difficult to implement something in CPHM” (I9). A streamlined
support tool, such as a concise handbook, could improve project facilitation with CE principles:
”It would be cool with a tangible tool, something similar to a handbook. The individual must see
the value in it. Should not be 100 pages, but a maximum of 5­10 pages” (I9). This indicates that
there is potential to develop a support that strives to streamline the project facilitation approach
with usage of CE principles.
5.5.2
Projects drastically changed out of a sudden
Politicians require changes to projects
Projects can be drastically changed by politicians, who have the final decision­making authority:
”CPHM is a politically managed organisation, it depends on who is currently in charge. It is not
everyone who is interested in resources or circular economy. This creates big swings in our
projects. And that is very difficult to plan around” (I9). Politicians demand multiple options and
50
==PAGE:54==
valid arguments from project groups: ”Politicians have the final word. We come with justified
suggestions” (I7). The politicians define direction and legal foundation for projects which can
quickly influence a project: ”The politicians in the town hall define the boundaries and goals that
we are working towards. Inside those boundaries and goals it is up to the individual administra­
tion to define what we can do to reach that” (I5). The expert survey indicated that respondents
are informed about legal changes that can affect their project mostly through workshops/semi­
nars, internal meetings, newsletters etc. One states to researching themselves, see appendix
C5A7. From this a potential to focus on the argumentation for a project’s positive contribution
to circular goals could provide strong and valid argumentation for the politicians.
Lack identification of risks, barriers and unintended consequences
Unforeseen consequences can slow down and alter projects: ”The hardest thing is foresee­
ing these consequences. E.g., during the construction phase of a sharing zone, cables in the
ground appeared that no one was aware of. We usually set off 10% of the budget for unfore­
seen consequences. But even so, it is hard to get resources for it” (I6). Planning, designing
and managing a project for unintended consequences prove to be one of the major challenges
in both project cases. There is even doubt if they consider unintended consequences: ”Do we
even prepare for unintended consequences? In CHA we adapt more than we prepare” (I5).
Project groups put in a lot of work in planning for possible barriers and risks through systematic
use of tools and methods, workshops, brainstorming, open dialog etc. One respondent from
expert survey mentions, that it depends on the situation. They are often aware of risks from un­
foreseen consequences, and evaluates every time how they should handle the identified risks.
Even though there is a general awareness of possible barriers that can occur during project im­
plementation, these findings emphasise potential in addressing identification of consequences
in terms of barriers, risks and unintended consequences to help manage the consequences that
drastically change the projects.
5.5.3
Activities do not have intended output
Lack of complex systems thinking in planning
Implementation and management of projects often differ from the intended plan, making them
difficult to manage: ”There are so many things, it is our reality. Planning projects and working
with projects’ reality, but making those things connected with management” (I7). Project activ­
ities results can be unpredictable, and not all activities have the intended output. The expert
survey indicates that respondents plan for how project activities contribute to circular targets,
though planning remains to be considered one of the most challenges part of project facilita­
tion, see C5A8. These findings are very controverting though there is some potential in helping
project groups plan for multiple scenarios in their project.
Lack of stakeholder involvement
Interviews indicate that stakeholders and citizens could be more involved in project facilitation.
The expert survey shows that end­users and other stakeholders are included mostly in the
design phase, but not frequently throughout the project. For example, waste management
advisors, though important, are not involved in designing and planning new activities: ”We are
not much of a part of what is being done here. We do have a small say, but most of the learnings
come from Vermlandsgade and have been transferred to Borgervænget” (I3). This means, that
important learnings from the might not be shared with the project group. The waste management
advisors have also claimed to know more about reuse than the newly educated reuse spotters:
”Actually we (waste management advisors) know more about what can be reused than them
(reuse spotters), even though they are educated, but we have just worked here for much longer”
(I3). Taking advantage of the already existing knowledge and skills might have saved some
resources for something else. From this there is a potential to improve the communication
about projects to stakeholders.
51
==PAGE:55==
5.5.4
Evaluation is difficult and not always possible
Evaluation is not planned systematically
There is a lack of understanding how well the project has reached its intended goals and whether
it has had an actual impact. Projects differ in many ways which means that they cannot be eval­
uated the same way. The expert survey showed that there are some evaluation tools available
but they do not fulfil all needs and the tools available can be challenging to use, see appendix
C5A9.
Evaluation is crucial to ensuring impact, though measuring outcomes can be difficult: ”In the
behaviour team, we cannot measure tons, and we cannot measure if waste sorting has im­
proved. We can investigate people’s experience and what they think” (I9). There is a tendency
to look at how the budgeting of the project has been going, and how the resources have been
distributed. E.g., in CHA they look at quantitative data on how many house associations partici­
pated, how many households, number of residual waste containers reduced, amount of subsidy
given. While this does give some indications, it does not explain whether the activities have ac­
tually changed citizens’ sorting behaviour. For SZ, evaluating amount of reused resources has
also been tricky, as the measurements currently require people to go out and count how much
is reused or reuse spotters have been estimating how many reused items have been delivered.
SZ are investigating if AI can help in identifying exactly what comes in and out. Meanwhile,
project group employees agree that documentation of effect is crucial to keep direction and
have an actual impact: ”In CHA, we have only scratched the surface, so if we can document
that there is an effect of our activities, then it is a big potential, and it will be natural to continue
the activity” (I5). Meanwhile, documenting effects and defining evaluation criteria during project
planning is essential: ”If there is no quantitative goal to begin with, then it is difficult to evaluate
on” (I5).
There is more focus on implementation rather than evaluation of projects, which can lead to a
return to the status quo after project completion. This might be why keeping momentum and
truly anchor a project can be challenging: ”We create all these types of projects and activities,
but it is difficult to anchor the projects and facilitate continuous learning” (I6, I7). There is a desire
for an evaluation that can help to improve and adjust activities during project management and
not just be satisfied after something has been implemented: ”We have a tendency in a project
to place a check­mark and then just move on. But it is also important to evaluate meanwhile
and follow up” (I6). These two root­problems indicate high potential in addressing the planning
of evaluation.
5.5.5
Time­consuming to share and communicate learnings
Some learnings are not communicated
All RAP periods are built upon learnings from former RAP periods. These learnings must be
shared and used to develop themes and projects for the upcoming RAP period. It requires
many resources to ensure that that all learnings are captured. One interviewee dreamed about
an improved learning process: ”Dreaming about a site where they can go and collect learnings,
knowledge sharing etc. because so much new knowledge is coming in all the time and it is hard
to grasp everything.” (I1).
To ensure that everyone is updated on learnings from projects, many workshops and meetings
are held every week. These meetings have common agendas and purposes. Knowledge­
sharing and decision­making can be a time­consuming process and it is not always that all
important knowledge is captured. The reasons for why learnings are not communicated are
too many learnings, too time­consuming, silent learnings are not documented and important
stakeholders have not been present, see appendix C5A10. One project group member states
”Would be nice if communication could be better. It doesn’t take much before communication
52
==PAGE:56==
goes wrong and something gets lost” (I4). Meanwhile, making the right decision is crucial and
therefore all decisions are ”evaluated and explicitly discussed before any decision will be made.”
(I5). From these findings there is potential in addressing the communication of learnings.
Lastly, the expert survey included a ranking of 9 potential factors, see appendix C5A11. This
resulted in narrowing down to three influential factors, which have also been highlighted with
dark grey on figure 5.14. These were: Identification of consequences, quality of evaluation plan,
and communication of learnings during and in between projects.
5.6
Key takeaways from empirical findings
This research project has investigated the project facilitation of RAP24 and two project cases
SZ and CHA. RAP24 is made by the politically managed organisation CPHM in their Technical
Environmental Administration. The project facilitation of RAP24 includes many different stake­
holders and areas such as the waste management in CPHM including relevant stakeholders
such as citizens and ARC employees. CPHM uses the waste hierarchy as the foundation and
reference to their waste management. There are three overall goals in RAP24 which has guided
the direction of all the projects: 70% of collected waste is recycled, around 60.000 tons of CO2
reduction and three times more reuse. The project cases mainly contribute two different goals.
Project case 1: Sharing zone (SZ) contributes to three times more reuse by addressing the
problem that many citizens in CPHM have many usable products and items they do not want
to use anymore. Instead of letting these products and items turn into waste they can be shared
with other citizens. CPHM wants to support the sharing possibilities at recycling stations to
make it easier for the citizens to share items and to avoid letting usable items become waste.
Project case 2: Circular House Associations (CHA) contributes to the 70% recycle by addressing
the problem that house associations have not been organised in a way that support enhanced
waste sorting practices for recycling and circular economy. Therefore, house associations have
been offered to participate in a program to optimise the waste sorting possibilities both inside in
their homes and outside in the common waste areas.
The facilitation of RAP24 is divided into two tracks. Track one is about developing the goals,
themes and initiatives for the six year RAP period. This development takes two years. Track
two is about developing, implementing and evaluating the projects. One project is assigned
a project manager and a project group. There is high flexibility and freedom to choose which
project management tools to use during the project facilitation. There are five phases of a project
in CPHM: Needs clarification, Analyse and plan, Implementation and management, Evaluation
and lastly Scale and realisation. Initially, project managers define the project with a project
description which requires approval from the steering group. The implementation of project
activities are started with pilot tests with an iterative learning process which causes changes
to the project. The evaluation is a part of those pilot test however a mid­term and finalisation
evaluation are usually performed. The successful project are then scaled.
From this research the circular quality and success in a project differ. This is caused by several
root­problems. Even though CPHM has many initiatives revolving around CE the communi­
cation and usage of its principles lack in the daily project facilitation. Streamlining the use
of project management tools can improve facilitation processes. Additionally, project group
employees must make well­justified recommendations for the politicians. Addressing the chal­
lenges of unforeseen consequences, lack of stakeholder involvement, unsystematic evaluation
plan and lack of thorough documentation of learnings are also root­problems that are essential
to address to improve the project quality and success.
53
==PAGE:57==
6
Desired improved situation
The following chapter will present the findings from answering RQ3: What are the requirements
and criteria of the support to help circular city projects reach their circular goals?. First, the key
factor to be addressed in PS will be determined. Second, a description of the desired impact by
addressing this key factor with the description of success criteria for intended support. Third,
a presentation of the design specification with requirements and criteria for development of
support concepts.
6.1
Defining key factor
The main takeaway from the ranking of the identified factors in the expert survey was the identi­
fication of the three most influential factors which were presented in section 5.5 figure 5.14. The
following will present the key reflection points when further investigating the three key factors
and the decision of the most influential one.
6.1.1
Communication of learnings during and in between projects
The expert survey showed that the project group employees have different opinions and experi­
ences on whether or not learnings are communicated well. They do not think that any learnings
are lost during the project work, but they lean towards that learnings are lost between RAP pe­
riods. Therefore, the communication of learnings is an influential factor which is also supported
in the literature cause it is seen critical to have an adjustable project facilitation plan (Claus et
al., 2023; Eckstein and Holyer, 2023; Kahan et al., 2014; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Mills et al.,
2019; Raymond et al., 2019). Learnings are also seen as a characteristic in the ToC literature
to engage in critical reflection throughout a project’s life cycle and especially on the context,
the readiness to change and the user’s perceptions and views of the change (Carey, 2022;
Hayes et al., 2011; Ibrahim et al., 2017; Mattos et al., 2022; Oberlack et al., 2019; Tribaldos and
Schneider, 2021; Wilkinson et al., 2021). This is why the communication and documentation
of learnings including insights and barriers that can be identified during the project life cycle is
crucial to ensure the right path towards impact (Hayes et al., 2011; Kahan et al., 2014; Raymond
et al., 2019; Tribaldos and Schneider, 2021).
6.1.2
Identification of consequences during planning of projects
Project groups are experienced in planning for potential barriers and spend a lot of time and
resources on this. However, unintended consequences still have a negative effect on projects
and influence their success. Therefore, planning for unintended consequences is also an in­
fluential factor to address cause more focus on unintended consequences could increase the
success of projects.
There are also strong argumentation in the literature that underline the importance of planning
for potential barriers/risks or unintended consequences. ToC can help identify opportunities for
the desired change (Kahan et al., 2014; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Wilkinson et al., 2021). It is also
essential to identify potential gaps and barriers cause this can help revise and refine a project
design and becoming prepared for unintended consequences (Kahan et al., 2014; M Kabongo
et al., 2020; Wilkinson et al., 2021) that also can affect the transition towards circular economy
(Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019). The level of stakeholder inclusion
is also a crucial factor in the identification of both opportunities and barriers as it brings multiple
perspectives to the design of activities (Fratini et al., 2019; Ibrahim et al., 2017; Lakatos et
al., 2021; Oberlack et al., 2019; Raymond et al., 2019; Torrens et al., 2021; Tribaldos and
Schneider, 2021). A key stakeholder to include is the target group. This will provide a more
54
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
==PAGE:58==
in­depth understanding of social norms and the context (Eckstein and Holyer, 2024; Rodrigues
et al., 2018). Overall it is essential to use complex systems thinking when developing a ToC
(Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Carey, 2022; Claus et al., 2023; Eckstein and Holyer, 2024; Ellen
Macarthur Foundation, 2019; Fratini et al., 2019).
6.1.3
Quality of evaluation plan
In CPHM there is a higher focus on implementing projects rather than evaluating them. The
project groups think that the evaluation tools available do not fulfil all their needs. It is a re­
quirement to define success criteria for their project. This is something that the project group
employees do not find difficult but it does take a lot of time and resources. Therefore, the factor
of addressing the quality of an evaluation plan is crucial cause it can ensure higher focus on
the evaluation of projects on the same level as implementation and further help project groups
to define the right success criteria to plan achieving the circular goals.
In relation to factors identified in theoretical literature, this is also the problem area where most
factors have been identified. Evaluating and quantifying circularity progress was recognised as
a key challenge in the circular transition in cities (Lakatos et al., 2021). However, the continuous
evaluation of a project is seen as beneficial to have throughout its life cycle (Dhillon and Vaca,
2018; Hayes et al., 2011; Ibrahim et al., 2017; Kahan et al., 2014; Tribaldos and Schneider,
2021). It is also important to evaluate across all three pillars of sustainability: Environmental,
social and economic (Mattos et al., 2022). Planning of evaluation is crucial to increase the
success of a project. Therefore, the definition of meaningful outcomes is essential to have
the right impact (Gebler et al., 2022; Hayes et al., 2011). This also means that the planning
of evaluation with the definitions of indicators that align with the project’s goals is very critical
to have planned before an activity is implemented (Carey, 2022; Fratini et al., 2019; Lakatos
et al., 2021; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Mclaughlin and Jordan, 2015; Raymond et al., 2019).
Assumptions have to be made explicit during planning (Claus et al., 2023; Eckstein and Holyer,
2024; Hayes et al., 2011; Mills et al., 2019). Effective indicators that are prioritised will also help
with the measurements and evaluation to keep costs low (Kahan et al., 2014; Wilkinson et al.,
2021).
From these identified three key factors, the most influential one was evaluated to be the ”quality
of the evaluation plan”. Addressing this key factor can be argued to somehow have an influence
on the other key factors identified. This will be argued in the ??.
6.2
Desired situation
The following section will elaborate on the desired situation, entailing first the success criteria
and desired impact by addressing the key factor: quality of evaluation plan, when it is going to
be used during project facilitation, and lastly, the system boundaries.
6.2.1
Success criteria and desired impact
The support should address the key factor quality of evaluation plan. From this, the purpose of
the support was to strategically design, plan and manage an effective evaluation of circular city
projects.
The overall success criteria of the support are shown on figure 6.1. These represent the ulti­
mate goals with the research project in practice (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009). The desired
impact aimed to be reached by focusing on quality of evaluation plan which will first improve the
quality of evaluation plan ex­ante, through strategically and systematically planning the project
evaluation before implementation, considering what, when and how to measure for impact.
By improving quality of evaluation plan, it is desired to improve quality of evaluation, because
having a clear evaluation plan will make it easier to evaluate the project continuously during
55
==PAGE:59==
implementation and management, as well as ex­post. The evaluation plan will ensure docu­
mentation of results, showing progress, and thus enable the right direction toward the intended
impact.
Ultimately, this will enable enhanced achievement of cities desired circular goals, and thus the
likelihood of more successful projects.
The long­term desired impact is thus to increase the circular city projects positive impact and
contribution to the circular transition in cities.
Figure 6.1: Success criteria for the Intended Support
6.2.2
User of support
The desired and intended users of the support are professionals or stakeholders working with
circular city projects. These could include project managers, consultants or similar. It is ex­
pected that the user of the support will require training prior to use.
6.2.3
Input and output of support
For all the developed concepts, the desired input and output have been defined, see figure 6.2.
Input: The support should be designed to be applicable to any circular city projects, across all
maturity levels. Both for the early maturity phases, when little is known about the project and
its activities or goals, as well as for later project maturities, where e.g. goals or activities are
already defined and possible also tested/implemented.
Support: The design specification included must­have requirements and nice­to­have criteria,
that ensured, that the support contributes to addressing the key factor and desired impact, as
well as deliver the output. Content of design specification will be further elaborated in the next
section: 6.3.
56
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.2: Input and output of support
Output: The support has two key desired outputs. First, a project evaluation plan, containing
information for project stakeholder about what, when and how to evaluate, with planned tasks
for evaluation activities. Enabling documentation and continuous evaluation of a project during
implementation and management. Second, a ToC map of the project’s causal pathway to circu­
lar impact, building upon the basic elements of the generic ToC model as illustrated in chapter
4 on figure 4.1.
6.2.4
Use in project facilitation
The support being developed is desired to be useful throughout all project facilitation phases,
during design, plan, manage, evaluate and scale, see figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Overview of desired use in project facilitation phases.
Before implementation ­ design and plan: The support is desired to be fully executed ex­ante,
during design and plan, before a project is implemented. As explained, this should result in the
output of an initial project evaluation plan as well as initial ToC map that can be brought into
implementation. This will ensure an effective and relevant evaluation plan.
After implementation ­ manage, evaluate, and scale: After a project has started the implementa­
tion (this could both for pilot project or bigger scale project), the support is desired to be iterative
meaning to be used continuously to evaluate, track progress, document measurement results
and update evaluation plan as well as the ToC map according to complex changing circum­
stances and environments.
57
==PAGE:61==
6.3
Design Specification
This section contains the final design specification. The purpose of it was to guide the con­
ceptualisation in PS, to ensure addressing the key factor and keeping direction to reach desired
situation in the development of the support. It contain must­have requirements and nice­to­have
criteria.
The design specification was created in cycles allowing for several iterations in the formulation
of the requirements and criteria. Each requirement (R) or criterion (C) will entail a description,
comment and connected references.
58
==PAGE:62==
Theme  
Requirement 
(must have)  
Criteria 
(nice to have)  
Comment   
Reference   
Usage of support   
User of support  
Must be able to be 
used by all project 
group members of 
circular city projects.  
 
With the expectation 
that the users have 
read the guide 
thoroughly before 
use.   
  
(I8, I9) 
(Oberlack et al., 
2019a; Raymond et 
al., 2019a; Eckstein 
and Holyer, 2023) 
Participatory  
Must allow for a 
participatory 
approach with 
relevant and diverse 
stakeholder group  
 
To allow for multiple 
perspectives, valuable 
inputs, user-oriented 
approach  
(I3, I4) 
(Kahan et al., 2014; 
Ibrahim, El-Zaart 
and Adams, 2017; 
Rodrigues et al., 
2018; Oberlack et 
al., 2019b; 
Tribaldos and 
Schneider, 2021; 
Wilkinson et al., 
2021; Carey, 2022; 
Claus et al., 2023) 
Test with 
professionals  
Interventions / 
project  
Must be applicable to 
the two project cases 
CHA and SZ   
 
Striving to be 
applicable to other 
project cases and 
contexts.   
(I1, I6, I7, I9)  
(Ratcliffe, 2012; M 
Kabongo et al., 
2020; Mattos, Scur 
and Albuquerque, 
2022)  
Compatibility  
 
Should be 
compatible with 
existing project 
facilitation 
approaches.  
 
Workshops, sprints, 
presentations etc.   
(I4, I5, I6, I8, I9) 
(Claus et al., 2023) 
Complexity of 
projects  
Must offer multiple 
complexity levels of 
developing the ToC 
for different projects 
and project 
maturities  
 
 
(Kahan et al., 2014; 
Rodrigues et al., 
2018; Tribaldos and 
Schneider, 2021; 
Wilkinson et al., 
2021) 
Evaluation with 
CPHM  
Communication 
and 
argumentation  
Must enable clear 
communication to be 
used as 
argumentation to 
explain whether, how 
 
Both ex-ante, during 
and ex-post of a 
project by using ToC 
map to explicitly 
communicate about 
(I1, I2, I4, I5, I7, I8, 
I9) 
(Rodrigues et al., 
2018; Raymond et 
al., 2019b; 
==PAGE:63==
and why projects can 
be successful and 
contribute to desired 
impact.  
how project activities 
contribute to 
intended outputs, 
outcomes, and impact 
through the causal 
pathway    
Wilkinson et al., 
2021) 
Decision making  
Must be able to be 
used in strategic 
decision making   
 
To decide make 
decision throughout 
project facilitation on 
what should be 
included  
(Simeone et al., 
2017; Rodrigues et 
al., 2018; Armitage 
et al., 2019; Mills, 
Lawton and Sheard, 
2019; M Kabongo 
et al., 2020; 
Mattos, Scur and 
Albuquerque, 
2022) 
Context   
Target group  
Must strategically 
consider the target 
group in the project   
 
E.g. CHA: residents 
and board members 
or SZ: Copenhagen 
citizens, visitors   
(I1, I5)(Ibrahim, El-
Zaart and Adams, 
2017; Rodrigues et 
al., 2018; Carey, 
2022; Eckstein and 
Holyer, 2023) 
Roles of 
stakeholders  
Must be clear on 
relevant project 
stakeholders and 
their roles.  
 
To be clear on how 
stakeholders 
influence the project 
and the target group.  
(I4, I5, I7) 
(Kahan et al., 2014; 
Claus et al., 2023)  
Evaluation with SZ  
Definition  
Must provide a clear 
definition of CE in a 
city.  
  
To ensure that there 
is consensus on its 
standard definition  
(I5, I9) 
(Ibrahim, El-Zaart 
and Adams, 2017; 
Khanna, 
Gusmerotti and 
Frey, 2022; Mattos, 
Scur and 
Albuquerque, 
2022) 
Circular strategy  
Must strategically 
develop the 
evaluation plan on CE 
strategies in a city  
e.g. going from a 
linear city to a circular 
city, decrease 
resource 
consumption etc.   
(Petit-Boix and 
Leipold, 2018; 
Bolger and Doyon, 
2019; Ellen 
Macarthur 
Foundation, 2019; 
Lakatos et al., 2021; 
Mattos, Scur and 
Albuquerque, 2022; 
Circular Economy 
Foundation, 2024) 
Map of ToC   
==PAGE:64==
Understanding  
Must elaborate on 
and create a 
common 
understanding about 
terminology, 
elements, and the 
evaluation process to 
avoid 
misunderstandings  
 
To provide guidance 
on how to formulate 
and differentiate 
between ToC 
elements (impact, 
outcomes, outputs, 
activities)   
 
(Kahan et al., 2014; 
Mclaughlin and 
Jordan, 2015; 
Oberlack et al., 
2019b; Mattos, 
Scur and 
Albuquerque, 2022; 
Claus et al., 2023) 
Test with guides, 
test with concept 
solutions 
(I8)  
Mapping of ToC 
elements  
Must guide on how 
to formulate and 
differentiate 
between ToC 
elements     
 
All articles. 
Meaningful 
outcome and 
impact 
 
Should help 
define what is a 
meaningful 
outcome  and 
impact 
More help and 
guidance in defining 
what is an actual a 
meaningful impact 
and outcome, why do 
we want to see this 
outcome.  
(Epstein and 
Klerman, 2012; 
Ratcliffe, 2012; 
Armitage et al., 
2019; Buelow et al., 
2024) 
Identifying, 
defining and 
prioritising  
activities  
Must help to identify 
where to have 
activities to trigger 
change  
Should help in 
defining and 
prioritising the 
activities to 
trigger the causal 
pathway  
By using the impact 
pathway, 
assumptions, barriers, 
and the identified 
solutions to the 
barriers etc as 
reference to what are 
the activities.   
Almost all articles.  
Guidance  
Must provide clear 
guidance on mapping 
the ToC  
By providing 
instructions and 
examples on how to 
use the support:  
E.g. with steps, 
questions, examples, 
templates, guiding 
sentence or good 
tips.  
(Raymond et al., 
2019b) 
Test with guides, 
test with 
professionals  
 Colours  
Must use colours, 
shapes, icons or 
similar to help in the 
ToC development 
process and 
differentiation of 
elements   
  
Focusing on using as 
little text as possible, 
to increase ease of 
usability.   
Test with guides 
and concepts 
(Simeone et al., 
2017; Dhillon and 
Vaca, 2018) 
Complexity of ToC   
Should help limit 
how big the ToC 
map can be  
To not make the 
mapping process too 
Test with guides, 
and concepts    
==PAGE:65==
overwhelming and/or 
demotivating.   
Causal pathway  
Must make it explicit 
how the project 
activities contribute 
to the projects 
desired impact   
Articulating and 
making the causal 
pathway of 
intervention explicit, 
testable and 
evidence-based  
Almost all articles 
Assumptions  
Must help make 
assumptions explicit  
 
Almost all articles 
Barriers  
Complex systems 
thinking  
Must help in applying 
complex systems 
thinking  
 
 
Adress external 
influential factors and 
how society affects a 
project, and how a 
project affects 
society  
(I4, I5, I6, I7, I9)  
(Wilkinson et al., 
2021; Carey, 2022; 
Claus et al., 2023; 
Eckstein and 
Holyer, 2023) 
Identification of 
barriers  
 
Should help 
identify, assess 
and mitigate 
potential barriers 
and negative 
unintended 
consequences 
within all pillar of 
sustainability: 
economic, social 
and 
environmental.   
This can help revise 
and refine project 
design.   
This ensures a holistic 
approach to project 
evaluation and being 
able to identify any 
important things to 
evaluate on.   
(Dhillon and Vaca, 
2018; Mills, Lawton 
and Sheard, 2019; 
M Kabongo et al., 
2020; Tribaldos and 
Schneider, 2021; 
Wilkinson et al., 
2021; Claus et al., 
2023) 
(I1, I3, I4, I5, I6, I9)  
Identification, 
defining, and 
prioritising 
activities 
Should help 
identify, define 
and prioritise 
activities to 
address identified 
barriers  
(Dhillon and Vaca, 
2018; Mills, Lawton 
and Sheard, 2019; 
M Kabongo et al., 
2020; Tribaldos and 
Schneider, 2021; 
Wilkinson et al., 
2021; Claus et al., 
2023) 
(I1, I3, I4, I5, I6, I9)  
Indicators 
Systematic 
identification of 
indicators  
Must facilitate 
systematic 
identification of 
indicators for 
evaluating projects 
This should be done 
before a project is 
implemented.  
(Mclaughlin and 
Jordan, 2015; 
Ibrahim, El-Zaart 
and Adams, 2017; 
Dhillon and Vaca, 
2018; M Kabongo 
et al., 2020; 
Murphy and Jones, 
==PAGE:66==
2020; Tribaldos and 
Schneider, 
2021)(I6, I7, I10) 
Plan evaluation 
ex-ante  
Must help plan 
evaluation of a 
project within all 
pillars of 
sustainability  
  
Before project 
implementation on all 
pillars: 
Environmental, social 
and economic  
(I6, I7, U10) 
Almost all articles 
Definition of 
indicators  
Must help defining 
indicators for what, 
when and how to 
measure impact as 
well as when they 
are successful using a 
baseline.  
 
(Mclaughlin and 
Jordan, 2015; 
Ibrahim, El-Zaart 
and Adams, 2017; 
Dhillon and Vaca, 
2018; M Kabongo 
et al., 2020; 
Murphy and Jones, 
2020; Tribaldos and 
Schneider, 
2021)(I6, I7, 
I10)Test with 
guides 
Prioritise 
indicators  
Must help in 
prioritising indicators 
that can ensure 
activities contribute 
to the project's 
desired output, 
outcomes, and 
impact.    
 
(Mclaughlin and 
Jordan, 2015; 
Ibrahim, El-Zaart 
and Adams, 2017; 
Dhillon and Vaca, 
2018; M Kabongo 
et al., 2020; 
Murphy and Jones, 
2020; Tribaldos and 
Schneider, 
2021)(I6, I7, 
I10)Test with 
guides 
Manage and evaluate 
Responsible  
Must assign a 
responsible for 
mapping and 
updating the ToC 
map.  
 
Ensuring continuous 
adoption and use of 
approach, then this 
should be stated. One 
who always know 
how to use. 
(I8, I9)  
(Kahan et al., 2014; 
Claus et al., 2023; 
Buelow et al., 2024) 
Workshop CPHM  
Iterative  
Must be iterative, 
and allow for 
changes, updates 
and feedback loop(s) 
throughout a 
project’s life cycle 
phases.  
Should not be a static 
model.   
(Oberlack et al., 
2019b; Murphy and 
Jones, 2020; 
Wilkinson et al., 
2021; Carey, 2022; 
Mattos, Scur and 
Albuquerque, 2022; 
Claus et al., 2023; 
==PAGE:67==
Eckstein and 
Holyer, 2023) 
Continuous 
evaluation  
Must facilitate 
continuous 
evaluation and 
documentation of a 
project throughout 
its life cycle and ex 
post projects    
 
 
(Connell and 
Kubisch, 1998; 
Epstein and 
Klerman, 2012; 
Hargreaves and 
Podems, 2012; 
Dhillon and Vaca, 
2018; Rodrigues et 
al., 2018; Mattos, 
Scur and 
Albuquerque, 
2022) 
(I1, I3, I4, I5, I6, I7) 
Documentation  
  
Should document 
learnings from 
evaluation as well 
as changes to 
activities 
throughout 
project life cycle 
phases   
 
(Mclaughlin and 
Jordan, 2015; 
Ibrahim, El-Zaart 
and Adams, 2017; 
Raymond et al., 
2019b; Tribaldos 
and Schneider, 
2021; Carey, 2022; 
Gienapp and 
Hostetter, 2022; 
Khanna, Gusmerotti 
and Frey, 2022) 
(I1, I5, I6, I7, I8, I9)  
 
==PAGE:68==
7
Development of support concepts
The following chapter will elaborate on the findings from RQ4: How does the developed support
help in facilitation of the project cases? It entails an elaboration of 3 support development cycles
that has led up to the final support. Each cycle presents the support concept developed in that
cycle, evaluation of them, as well as the improvements brought into the next cycle. Additionally,
cycle 3 contains recommendations for the project case SZ.
7.1
Cycle 1 ­ Nine support concept ideas
In development cycle 1, the researchers developed a morphology to generate initial concept
ideas based on the themes in the design specifications. Figure 7.1 illustrates how the themes
from the design specification were used to define the functions for the morphology. See ap­
pendix C7A1 for a full overview of the morphology with all its means.
Figure 7.1: Key factor quality of evaluation plan with themes from design specification translated
into functions used in the morphology
The morphology allowed for a divergent, comprehensive and systematic exploration of possible
concepts solution. It resulted in nine initial concept ideas. Figure 7.2 provides an overview of
the main elements of the nine concept ideas. See appendix C7A2 to se close­up of the figure.
Different categories like ’Fastest’, ’Perfect’, or ’Playful’ were used to develop the concepts to
enhance diversity, and open up the solution space. It ensured a creative process with limited
restrictions in terms of possible solutions. This approach proved highly beneficial in the early
stages of development, where the researchers still had limited understanding of ToC develop­
ment, allowing for the rapid generation of concept ideas and reflection on potential solutions to
the key factor.
7.1.1
Meta­application evaluation of the nine concept ideas
The conceptual drawings of the nine concept ideas were used to discuss their meta­application,
identifying strengths, weaknesses and improvement opportunities for each. See appendix C7A3
for an overview of all the initial conceptual drawings. Although the concepts were very initial
at this stage, they allowed the researchers to critically evaluate the most crucial functions and
determine the best means and concepts to deliver requirements and criteria in the design spec­
ification.
Circular Economy
The ideal way of incorporating CE was found to be in the first step of the concepts, by making
the user point out their preferred CE strategy, taking inspiration from the butterfly diagram or
the waste hierarchy. Choosing a CE strategy could then guide and inspire subsequent steps.
Another good approach was to use cards explaining different CE strategies with definitions, tips
or examples to ensure a common understanding of the CE strategy.
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
65
==PAGE:69==
Figure 7.2: The nine initial concept ideas from cycle 1. See appendix C7A2 for a close up.
Mapping of ToC
The concept ideas presented different approaches for developing and mapping a ToC. Two
approaches proved most user­friendly: 1) Free brainstorming on ToC elements, followed by
drawing the causal links between outputs, outcomes, and impact, or 2) Guided brainstorming
with questions, continuously drawing causal links as new elements were identified. Ensuring a
structured yet simple mapping process without becoming overly complex was generally found
very challenging. The paradox of balancing simplicity and complexity was a common discussion
point across all concepts, as it was evaluated to be hard not making the ToC maps big. Addition­
ally, identifying assumptions was most logical after drawing the causal links, and any existing
evidence for these links should also be documented. Overall, the researchers discussed the
importance of a guided mapping of ToC to be able to do the following sub­function efficiently,
which was documenting, see figure 7.1.
Barriers
Identifying barriers within environmental, social and governance aspects was found to be most
logical through either 1) Step­by­step brainstorming on barriers by examining each causal link
and reflecting on potential barriers that could hinder achieving outputs, outcomes, and impact,
2) Including examples of barriers typical for the specific circular strategy or city project, or 3)
Using questions to initiate discussions among users. Furthermore, it was found beneficial to
address the most crucial barriers, by updating or developing new activities to address them.
Indicators
The best approach to identifying ’what’ to measure involved either 1) Using questions to guide
users in determining which outputs, outcomes and impacts required indicators for project suc­
cess, giving a more playful approach. 2) Using an indicator database relevant to the chosen CE
strategy and city sector to reflect on and identify essential indicators. Furthermore, identifying
’when’ to measure could be decided based on a given project period. Identifying ’how’ to mea­
sure could be done based on existing data collection methods available or the identification of
new ones. Furthermore, prioritising crucial indicators was found necessary, by e.g. prioritising
with a feasibility and impact matrix, or through ratings.
Evaluation plan
Constructing an effective and strategic evaluation plan, using all the findings from the use of the
support, proved to be one of the functions where the concept ideas lacked further iteration and
66
==PAGE:70==
development. However, the evaluation plan was highlighted as a crucial function to incorporate
findings from the other functions and ensure the evaluation of projects. The initial ideas were
to construct a sort of project plan or Gantt chart with dates for measurement, that can be incor­
porated in project teams project description. Another idea was developing a visual dashboard
to communicate key project results.
7.1.2
Improvements for the following cycle
Cycle 1 brought key insights and improvements for further development, identifying opportuni­
ties to merge and detail three new concepts. The first involved merging ’Innovative,’ ’Fastest,’
and ’Playful’ into a physical card game, as they were all designed as physical workshops and
shared similarities, such as the use of cards to guide the ToC mapping process. The second
involved merging ’One­pager’ and ’Visual’ into an online interactive workshop, as they shared
similarities in the prioritisation, ToC mapping, and visual elements. The third involved detailing
’Simple’ into an online Excel tool with a step­by­step development. These new concepts were
also inspired by key strengths from the other initial concept ideas and will be presented in the
next section.
7.2
Cycle 2: Three support concepts
A snapshot of the three concepts emerged from cycle 1 can be seen on figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Overview of the three support concepts. See the following appendix for an in­depth
description and illustrations of the concepts: Concept 1: appendix C7A4, concept 2: appendix
C7A5, and concept 3: appendix C7A6.
Table 7.1 illustrates an overview of the key feature of each concept and how they differentiated.
Concept 1 was a ToC Card Game designed to be playful and make the mapping of a project’s
ToC and identification of relevant indicators fun, exploratory and participatory. Concept 2 was
an interactive toolkit designed as an online workshop tool that guides the ToC development
process. It gives a good overview, makes it easy to edit, way­find and make multiple iterations
on a project’s ToC, having everything gathered in one place. Concept 3 was simple excel tool
designed to be an effective and simple ToC development as well as to get a quick overview and
being easy to document.
67
==PAGE:71==
Table 7.1: Overview and comparison of the three support concepts
Concept 1: Theory of
Change Card Game
Concept 2: Interactive
toolkit
Concept 3: Simple
excel approach
Purpose
Designed to be fun, ex­
plorative
and
participa­
tory.
Designed
to
have
ev­
erything
gathered
in
one­place to give a good
overview
and
easy
to
way­find, edit and make
multiple iterations.
Design to be an effective
and simple to get a quick
overview and good docu­
mentation.
Context
Physical card game work­
shop (prototype online)
Online whiteboard work­
shop
Online tool in excel
Target
user
Project groups and all rel­
evant stakeholders
Project groups
Project Manager
Circular
Econ­
omy
CE strategy cards with
examples and definitions.
Ellen MacArthur butterfly
diagram with supporting
explanations of all strate­
gies.
Table of CE strategies to
cross off.
Mapping
of ToC
Uses question cards in
a guided brainstorm and
mapping of the ToC after
each question.
Visually guided process
(icons
and
colours)
of
open brainstorm on all
ToC elements first, and
then map and connect
them afterwards.
Checklists,
tables
and
system levels to guide
the brainstorm and map­
ping of the ToC. More
similar to a logic model,
no causal links.
Indica­
tors
Not directly connected to
ToC map,
includes an
open brainstorm and dis­
cussion using cards.
Step­by­step across im­
pact pathway looking at
all outputs, outcomes, im­
pacts.
Brainstorm on
when and how to mea­
sure. Prioritise indicators
with matrix on feasibility
and impact.
Questions
to
ask
for
needed
measurements
and prioritisation of indi­
cators by comparing all
listed indicators with QxF.
Eval­
uation
plan
Not included in prototype;
user brings the results
to a supporting document
for the evaluation plan
e.g. an online template.
Project plan according to
RAP including the cho­
sen indicators and all the
tasks required to mea­
sure
impact
are
docu­
mented.
Gantt chart style.
Cur­
rently a template from ex­
cel.
7.2.1
Meta­application evaluation of three concepts and CPHM existing tool
The three concepts were evaluated through a meta­application with the researchers using the
project cases, and compared with an existing tool from CPHM’s toolbox called Realisation of
Benefits tool. Figure 7.2 shows an overview of the application in miro and the WOM results.
The following will elaborate on the key strengths and weaknesses. Due to the concepts current
state of detail, the application was still very overall and not possible to provide recommendations
from project cases.
Concept 1: ToC card game
See appendix C7A7 to see full overview of the application. It resulted in the second highest
score (69%) due to its clear guidance in brainstorming and investigating how the project can lead
to impact. It had the highest potential for a participatory approach. However, by being a physical
68
==PAGE:72==
Table 7.2: Overview of results from meta­application with three concepts and CPHM’s Realisa­
tion of Benefits tool.
card game it needed additional tools to 1) Update and easily iterate on the ToC with the activities
leading to impact, 2) Prioritise the indicators by e.g. using a database, and 3) Construct the
evaluation plan for documentation of results. These were considered big limitations in relation
to the requirements in design specification. Additionally, it was not possible to draw causal links
with a physical game. Key benefits was the guiding questions on the cards, and they could be
improved by providing more guidance on how to use.
Concept 2: Interactive toolkit
See appendix C7A8 to see full overview of the application. It resulted in the highest score (74%)
and was evaluated to be easily adaptable to meet the criteria better. It was also the concept
with the highest level of detail. It provided many options for iterating, documenting and mapping
the ToC. It was evaluated to facilitate a participatory process. However, it needed to have an
extra document with an evaluation plan, if other stakeholders outside the project group should
be able to see it.
Concept 3: Simple excel tool
See appendix C7A9 to see full overview of the application. This concept resulted in the second
lowest score (57%). Among other, this was due to the lack of causal links between the ToC
elements, thus not making the impact pathway explicit, and ended up appearing like a Logic
Model, rather than a ToC. The tool did not provide enough detail to fully execute the application
and was in general hard to use. The format itself was considered limiting to potentially facilitate a
participatory process. A key strength with this concept was the efficient and less time­consuming
69
==PAGE:73==
in providing a quick overview and simplification of brainstorming and mapping.
Existing tool: Realisation of Benefits
See appendix C7A10 to see full overview of the application. It resulted in the lowest score (46%).
This was among other due to the lack of CE definitions and guidance. Furthermore, identification
of assumptions was not included, and it did not facilitate a participatory process. However,
some potential was identified. It seemed similar to ToC due to the systematic consideration and
mapping of how activities are contributing to the benefits and purpose in a project, as well as
what competencies and behavior required to reach this. Considerations for where to place the
early indicators for a project was also included and seen as a benefit. Lastly, it is a well­known
tool within CPHM, and need minimum expertise and training to use it to create an evaluation
plan.
7.2.2
Improvements for cycle 3
Cycle 2 brought key insights into the application of the concepts. All the identified strengths
were highlighted and an improvement of merging all the three concepts into one final concept,
taking off­set in ’Concept 2: Interactive toolkit’. The result will be presented in the next section
with cycle 3.
7.3
Cycle 3 ­ One support concept
This sections presents the combination of the three concepts resulted in one support concept
called Circular City Evaluation Manager which was a 5­step interactive toolkit. An application
evaluation with SZ, recommendations from this, as well as evaluation with CPHM.
The purpose, input and output of each step was defined prior to detailing the concept which can
be seen on figure 7.4.
Step 5, Plan Evaluation, was adapted from a project plan Gantt format into a table describing
the evaluation plan with all identified indicators. The purpose was to clearly describe what,
when, and how to measure, assign responsibility for the measurements, and define the suc­
cess criteria for each indicator. Additionally, space for results, progress, and key learnings of
the measurements were included to ensure an iterative approach and documentation of project
results (Armitage et al., 2019; De Silva et al., 2014; Jones et al., 2023). The following sections
highlight key insights from two evaluations with the concept and identify improvement opportu­
nities.
7.3.1
Application evaluation with Sharing Zone
The Circular City Evaluation Manager was applied by the researcher using the project case
SZ see the output of this application on the Miro board here: https://miro.com/app/board/
uXjVKADpZQU=/?share_link_id=406379056427. As the concept had reached a more detailed
level, it was decided to develop evaluation questions prior to the application, to be able to
evaluate each step in relation to easiness, value, and new insights, see figure 7.5.
The full overview of the application evaluation results can be seen in appendix C7A11, key
insights will be highlighted here. The application evaluation took approximately five hours, in­
dication more time needed for users unfamiliar with the tool. Overall, the tool was found easy
to understand and apply for the researchers. Although there was general awareness that this
might be due to biases of being the developers.
Step 1: Clarify project foundation
This step was found to be easy but time­consuming due to the number of questions. The
researchers found it to lack reflections, as it resulted in pure documentation of what was already
known about SZ. The CE strategy selection from the waste hierarchy felt limiting and did not
broaden the CE perspective. However, it provided a quick overview of involved stakeholders.
70
==PAGE:74==
Figure 7.4: Support concept from cycle 3: Circular City Evaluation Manager. Figure illustrates
the 5­steps, with purpose, content and output.
Figure 7.5: Cycle 3 application evaluation questions asked when testing with SZ.
Step 2: Map the ToC
As with cycle 1 and 2, mapping the ToC was the most challenging step. It was hard to brainstorm
for outcomes. It was also confusing to map the outcomes in short­, intermediate­ and long­
term. Execution of the step included multiple discussions, resolving in restructuring the ToC
map almost for each exercise which made the exercises very time­consuming. Furthermore,
the causal links (arrows) were hard to reconnect when restructuring elements. Despite the ToC
71
==PAGE:75==
being difficult to map, it was seen as very valuable cause it increased understanding of how
the project SZ planned to achieve the desired impact. The ToC map made it clear what was
required by the citizens when delivering and/or collecting reusable items. Additionally, the long­
term outcome: Citizens are more interested in reuse rather than buying new was identified as
an interesting new insight to SZ. Lastly, the outcomes on the map were used to identify new
activities to trigger change.
Step 3: Identify barriers and assumptions
This was a very time­consuming step, because all of the causal links walked through done two
times. First, barriers was identified. Second, assumptions was identified. It was easy to follow
but required high effort. Despite being time­consuming, the step was considered very valuable.
It helped gain a holistic and in­depth understanding of possible barriers that needs addressing.
One barrier identified was that some citizens might not be able to transport the reusable items to
their home. In addition, underlying assumptions was also found such as citizens want to donate
their reusable items. It is crucial that people donate their items in order to even have a sharing
zone.
Step 4: Define indicators
This was tangible and easy to apply, however the decisions about where to measure was maybe
decided too quickly which was discovered after the application of step 5. The prioritisation of
indicators was disconnected from the identified assumptions in step 3, thus there were no clear
connection between the two steps. Defining the indicators was considered very valuable, since
indicators were identified for all three pillars of sustainability, making the project more robust.
This helped getting an overview and recommendation of where SZ should measure for to ensure
reaching desired impact.
Step 5: Plan an effective evaluation
This involved a deep­dive into defining the indicators. It was very easy to apply, though defin­
ing the success criteria were a bit overwhelming because it was very hypothetical. However,
defining the indicators further, especially with the success criteria, were evaluated to be very
valuable cause it ensured valuable measurements. Furthermore, it also helped identifying ideas
for combing data collection of several indicators. Although after having defined the indicators
researchers discussed whether the chosen data collection methods were the right one for that
specific indicator. Therefore, more critical reflections in step 4 would be needed. The key iden­
tified recommendations for SZ from this application has been elaborated upon here below.
7.3.2
Recommendations for SZ
Based on the application evaluation, four key recommendations were identified:
Emphasise the circular value and stakeholder engagement (from step 2: Map the ToC)
The ToC map included an interesting outcome: Citizens are more interested in reusable items
rather than new ones. Therefore, a recommendation is to use the CE strategy to brand the
environmental and social benefits of reusing products to increase citizen’s engagement and
interest in reuse. As well as improving the brand of the SZs in CPHM. Additionally, a thorough
analysis of the target group is recommended to understand who are the typical visitors and what
complicates their user experience. This should be analysed to become aware of who does and
who does not use the SZs. By gaining this understanding the project groups can tailor project
activities to attract a broader audience which could improve attractiveness and increase reuse.
Address potential barriers to enhance engagement and sustainable consumption (from
step 3: Identify barriers and assumptions)
Several potential barriers should be addressed to enhance citizen’s general engagement with
reuse and their consumption habits. 1) Citizens would rather dispose their reusable items rather
72
==PAGE:76==
than maintain them, 2) When it is easier to dispose reusable items, citizens might justify buying
more and new products, 3) Free reusable items may be perceived as having low value of the
citizens, and therefore, they may have a shorter lifespan since people might not maintain and
care for them as much as something they have spent money on, and 4) When products have
been reused once, people may think the products are no longer usable and dispose them for
recycling or incineration.
These identified barriers could potentially hinder the overall circularity and sustainability impact
for SZ. Suggestions for how to address these barriers were identified, though a recommendation
would also be to consider other possible activities to address the barriers. Start pilot testing
with the initial considered project activities of repair workshops at the SZ. Additionally, produce
communication material about e.g. extending product’s lifespan and use cycles or facts about
CO2 savings from reusing products and not buying new products. The communication material
could be signs or posts on social media platform. These activities could encourage and inform
citizens about long­term use, sustainable consumption and environmental impacts.
Focus on crucial measurements and combine simplified measurements in the evaluation
(from step 4: Define indicators and step 5: Plan an effective evaluation plan)
It was identified as essential to measure for reuse to provide argumentation of how SZ reach
success. From the ToC map, different types of indicators were identified, that can potentially
provide some insights to whether or not the project activities were successful. The indicators
included measurements of interest in reusable items, reasons for disposal of reusable items,
number of visitors, user satisfaction, condition of delivered items and amount of reused items
collected. Some of these indicators were easier to measure than others. Some were also very
similar and therefore combination of measurements were identified in step 5: Plan an effective
evaluation plan. E.g. interest in reusable items and reasons for disposal of reusable items could
both be measured through a survey. This could make the data collection more efficient.
Long­term evaluation plan to ensure impact (step 5: Plan an effective evaluation)
A thorough evaluation plan for future and continuation of projects is essential to ensure long­
term success and impact of the projects. Use the insights gained from the measurements to
plan and implement effective activities and remember to have continuous evaluation for better
results and impact. By implementing these recommendations, it would be expected that SZ
could significantly improve its activities which could lead to a potential increase of reuse and
citizen engagement.
7.3.3
Evaluation evaluation with stakeholders from CPHM
Evaluating with stakeholder helped in facilitating discussions of potential value to specific steps
of the concept, as well as several improvement opportunities.
Step 1: Clarify project foundation
There was only very little indication that they understood the inclusion of CE. However, the saw
it ideal to map the project to reach circular impact when presenting step 2.
Step 2: Map the ToC
One participant stated to find it difficult to imagine the future, when it has not yet happened: ”It’s
difficult to map out change.” (I6). This statement indicated that the step was found difficult to
imagine and plan how a project will create change. However, potential and value was seen in
mapping a project’s ToC to show how a project plans to lead to impact prior any implementation
of a project: ”Very valuable, this is the basis for making a project” (I9). The visualisation and
backwards mapping of ToC was liked: ”The mapping makes perfect sense. It’s visualised for
you, with post­it notes and stars. It’s all about organising and tracking your project.” (I9)
Step 3: Identify barriers and assumptions
73
==PAGE:77==
The participants expressed some doubt in identifying barriers, and whether the concept can
help further than their current tools. One participant commented that there will always be barri­
ers when a change is happening, and therefore everything cannot be foreseen no matter what.
However, the importance of identifying barriers was highlighted. This indicates a misunder­
standing of how the causal links in the concept can help addressing barriers.
Step 4: Define indicators and Step 5: Plan an effective evaluation plan
The participants confirmed seeing big potential in using the ToC map to identify indicators be­
cause it showed argumentation for other types of measurements and not just quantitative ones:
”Great, it’s not just about measuring tons and quantities. It’s also about measuring so many
other things, like job satisfaction, among other things.” (I9). They also saw the results as argu­
mentation and good basis for an evaluation plan.
Everything gathered in one­place and allowance of iterations
Overall, stakeholders indicated great interest in everything being gathered in one­place and
the benefits of an iterative tool to enhance documentation of updates and results: ”Not even a
comma gets changed in the project descriptions, even though our projects end up looking very
different in the end. Key findings and results are scattered across different documents, making
it harder to evaluate.” (I6). .
Idea to share essences
The participants mentioned possible ideas for the concept: ”Can you extract essences? Be­
cause sometimes you need to give feedback, a status update, so I can’t just send such a big
board. But I can have the overview and then extract the most important things.” (I6). This in­
dicated as key improvement opportunity for the tool which the researchers were aware of the
need to communicate with project stakeholders, as mentioned in section 6.1.
Ideal for upcoming RAP period but hard to implement
Good insights were identified on how the concept could be implemented in CPHMs toolbox.
”I am about to start a project and it could be perfect to use the tool as an option there.” (I6).
Additionally, one stakeholder recommended a physical format e.g. a playbook: ”My suggestion
for implementing the tool would be to deliver something very concrete to us. Something tangi­
ble that can be brought in.” (I9). All this brought interesting insights about the implementation
possibilities.
7.3.4
Improvements for cycle 4
Cycle 3 brought key insights and improvements for further development. Table 7.3 captures the
identified improvements that was included to further detail the concept of Circular City Evaluation
Manager, which will be presented in chapter 8.
Table 7.3: Overview of improvement from cycle 3 to be included in cycle 4 to develop the final
tool proposal
Application evaluation with researchs and SZ
Evaluation with
CPHM
stakeholders
74
==PAGE:78==
Introduc­
tion
of
tool
1) Present users of
tool and exactly
when and how to
use.
2) Emphasise
importance of partic­
ipatory element to
map ToC and during
implementation to
update
ToC
and
evaluation plan
Step 1:
Clarify
project
foundation
1) Make tool general for all projects working with the cir­
cular transition in cities, by removing CPHM
specific elements
2) Include city sectors
Step
2:
Map
the
ToC
1) Include guidance on identification and
prioritisation of activities
Step 3:
Identify
barriers
and
assumptions
1) Investigate how
activities to address barriers can be
prioritised.
2) Divide barriers and assumptions into two steps.
3) Include an exercise to find evidence for assumptions
1) Include specific
guidelines on how to
use causal links to
identify barriers and
assumptions.
2) Add examples for
CE barriers for each
CE strategy..
Step 4:
Define
indicators
1) Include a systematic approach to consider indica­
tors.
2) Ensure a prioritisation of indicators based on
causal order as
in ToC map.
Step
5:
Plan
an
effec­
tive
evaluation
1) Add validation plan to find evidence for the assump­
tions prior to
implementation of activities.
1) Consider a com­
munication sharing
element to get in­
puts from stakehold­
ers
and share status of
project
7.4
Key takeaways from development of support
Cycle 1 involved developing nine initial concepts called the fastest, perfect, playful, visual, in­
novative, feasible, one­pager and the worst. They helped explore the solution space and get
quick feedback on potential ideas to improve the quality of the evaluation plan. These con­
cepts were build on main functions from the design specification, such as context, CE strategy
identification, ToC mapping, barrier and indicator identification, and evaluation planning. Key in­
sights from a meta­application with the researcher were; considering CE strategies using Ellen
MacArthur butterfly diagram; mapping of ToC through either free or guided brainstorming meth­
ods; identifying barriers and indicators by using examples and questions; the construction of
the evaluation plan and the necessity of a solid ToC map as a foundation for other functions to
work properly.
75
==PAGE:79==
Cycle 2 consolidated the nine concepts into three: A ToC Card Game designed to be fun and
participatory, an Interactive Toolkit designed for to provide overview and gather all­in­one­place,
and lastly, a simple Excel Tool designed to make the mapping process quick and effective.
A meta­application using the project cases were carried out by the researchers on the tree
concepts as well as a tool from CPHM’s toolbox similar to ToC. The Interactive Toolkit was
evaluated the best, by enabling participatory processes, iterative mapping, and comprehensive
documentation. Strengths from the other concepts, like guided brainstorming questions from
the ToC Card Game and efficiency from the Excel Tool, were incorporated into the final design
taking off­set in the Interactive Toolkit.
Cycle 3 introduced the Circular City Evaluation Manager, a five­step Interactive Toolkit. Evaluat­
ing this tool with project case SZ highlighted several insights: Step 1: Clarify project foundation
was found to not sufficiently challenge existing biases of CE perspectives; Step 2: Map the
ToC was again found the most challenging, however it facilitated valuable discussions; Step
3: Identify barriers and assumptions was time­consuming though it ensured a holistic under­
standing of potential barriers and revealed underlying assumptions; Step 4: Define indicators
required more critical reflection on measurements; and Step 5: Plan an effective evaluation, was
hard due to hypothetical aspects, but it emphasised the importance of defining success criteria.
Recommendations for SZ were identified which emphasised circular value, addressing barriers,
focusing on critical measurements, and planning for long­term evaluation. Stakeholders from
CPHM valued the tool’s organisational and tracking capabilities, particularly the integrated ToC
mapping approach. All insight from these evaluation were used to provide improvements to
develop the final tool proposal which will be presented in the next chapter.
76
==PAGE:80==
8
Cycle 4 ­ Tool proposal (PS and DS­II)
The following chapter will present the actual support that represents the final tool proposal from
the research. First, the tool and all its elements will be introduced. Second, three application
evaluations, in which recommendations for the project case CHA is included. Then an evalua­
tion from achievement of design specifications.
8.1
Introduction to the tool
The actual support was designed to be a strategic, interactive evaluation management tool
called Circular City Evaluation Manager (CCEM). This section will introduce key elements of the
tool and explain how to explore the prototype. The prototype can be accessed in an online Miro
board here: https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVKADpZQU=/?share_link_id=406379056427.
8.1.1
Overview of the tool
CCEM was designed for stakeholders engaged with circular transition city projects like project
managers, facilitators, designers, etc., to design, plan, and manage an effective evaluation of
their projects. Figure 8.1 illustrates the tool’s three overall elements: Introduction, 5 steps,
and an Interactive Evaluation area; see appendix C8A1 for a more detailed overview of the
architecture used to design the tool.
Figure 8.1: Overview of the tool
The introduction explains the tool through a landing page and should be looked through before
use. It provides information on the tool, who should use it, why they should use it, and when
and how to use it to ensure a good understanding.
The 5 steps should be used before project implementation to explore how to design and plan
project evaluation. All steps include an introduction explaining the purpose and why to do it, an
overview of the exercises, and guides on where to place the results. Each exercise has guides
explaining what the exercise is about, elaborating on definitions if needed, explaining why and
how to do the exercises, and providing examples and tips. Furthermore, each step contains
templates, tools, questions, post­its etc. to assist the exercises.
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
77
==PAGE:81==
The last element of the tool is the Interactive Evaluation. All prioritised evaluation elements from
the 5 steps will be inserted here to plan the project evaluation. It can thus be used to manage
project evaluation after project implementation. It contains an overview of the given circular
city project’s foundation and context, its intended causal pathway to circular impact with its ToC
map, and three tables to plan: barriers evaluation, assumptions validation, and project suc­
cess evaluation. Therefore, the tables have space to document the project’s results to ensure
continuous and effective evaluation of all crucial elements during project implementation.
It is an iterative tool, meaning steps 1­5 can be revisited and edited.
8.2
Elaboration on each element of the tool
Figure 8.2: Step 1 ­ Clarify project foundation
Figure 8.2 shows the purpose, an overview of the 5 exercises, and the main output of the
first step clarify the project foundation. This step aims to ensure a shared understanding and
alignment among users about the project context (Mills et al., 2019; Valters and Stein, 2016),
it is crucial to reduce misunderstandings during facilitation (M Kabongo et al., 2020; Simeone
et al., n.d.). The five exercises will be elaborated briefly in the following section. Go to the miro
board to read the full description.
8.2.1
Step 1, exercise 1 ­ Define the problem
Often, what seems to be a problem or an issue might be caused by underlying problems and
thus more crucial to solve. Therefore, defining the problem and why this is a problem is essential
to ensure not just solving a problem but solving the right problem (Simeone et al., n.d.).
8.2.2
Step 1, exercise 2 ­ Define the target group
Knowing and clarifying the target group is crucial to ensure a user­oriented approach in the
project (Raymond et al., 2019). To add on that, the target group’s main characteristics should
be elaborated in a customised persona template (Hanington and Martin, 2012).
8.2.3
Step 1, exercise 3 ­ Identify relevant internal & external stakeholders
Identifying and mapping out a network of potential stakeholders with diverse backgrounds to
reach out to and include them will help steer the project in the right direction and enhance
project success (Claus et al., 2023; Hayes et al., 2011; Kahan et al., 2014; Mattos et al., 2022;
Mayne, 2015; Mills et al., 2019; Oberlack et al., 2019; Wilkinson et al., 2021). A template helps
to brainstorm on relevant internal and external stakeholders.
78
==PAGE:82==
8.2.4
Step 1, exercise 4 ­ Define city sector
Identifying the city sector is essential for a targeted evaluation and sector­specific awareness
(Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019). Currently, these are Built Environment, Water Systems,
Consumer Goods, transport & Logistics, Food Systems, Energy Systems, and Waste and Re­
sources inspired by.
8.2.5
Step 1, exercise 5 ­ Define circular strategy
The last exercise is to define the circular strategy. Circular strategy cards are provided and cru­
cial when striving to create real­world change and contribute to enabling the transition towards
circular cities. They have been designed to challenge, educate, and expand users’ perspectives
on circular strategies and the project’s intended impact. A common obstacle in CE projects is
the prevalence of pre­existing biases that can skew planning and evaluation. Thus, the cards
aim to challenge these pre­biases. Currently, circular strategies included are within the technical
cycle of the butterfly diagram (Ellen MacArthur, n.d.).
79
==PAGE:83==
Figure 8.3: Step 2 ­ Map your project’s causal pathway to circular impact (ToC)
Figure 8.3 shows the purpose of the step, an overview of the six exercises, and the main output
of the second step map your project causal pathway to circular impact (ToC), which is an initial
first version of the project’s visual ToC map. Mapping the ToC is crucial to building an explicit
and shared understanding of how the project contributes to desired circular impact (Armitage
et al., 2019; Carey, 2022; Claus et al., 2023; De Silva et al., 2014; Mattos et al., 2022; Rodrigues
et al., 2018; E. Rogers, 1995). The six exercises will be elaborated on briefly in the following
section. Go to the Miro board to read the full description.
8.2.6
Step 2, exercise 1 ­ Define desired circular impact
When starting the mapping process, users must define the desired circular impact by taking
offset in the chosen circular strategy card and reflecting on the real­world impact a project is
trying to contribute to. This aims to open the mindset and think beyond the temporal conditions
of the project by asking questions inspired by theory (De Silva et al., 2014; “TOC Benefits ­
Theory of Change Community”, n.d.).
8.2.7
Step 2, exercise 2 ­ Define Outcomes
Users start brainstorming on potential outcomes in the project guided by questions inspired,
e.g.: What changes are needed to deliver impact? (De Silva et al., 2014). This exercise should
result in a rough causal order of outcomes taking off­set in defined impact and then mapping
backwards (Ibrahim et al., 2017; Kahan et al., 2014; Khanna et al., 2022; Mattos et al., 2022;
TOC, 2023).
8.2.8
Step 2, exercise 3 ­ Define ceiling of accountability
Drawing a ceiling of accountability line helps to ensure a common understanding among users
in regards to what a project is accountable for while still encouraging them to think outside of
the box and reflect on the long­term circular impact (De Silva et al., 2014; Kahan et al., 2014).
It helps and what is the long­term impact that is desired but beyond reach. The exercise is
optional because it can be hard to define and is not always relevant depending on the defined
impact.
80
==PAGE:84==
8.2.9
Step 2, exercise 4 ­ Define activities
When constructing an initial ToC map, users can identify activities needed to produce the desired
outcomes and impact. Users are encouraged to go through all outcomes and ask questions
to identify where activities are required and brainstorm on potential activities to deliver these
outcomes. If an existing activity can not be directly linked to the desired outcomes and impact,
then it should not be included at all (Hayes et al., 2011).
8.2.10
Step 2, exercise 5 ­ Identify direct outputs
It is essential to identify the outputs as they are the direct results of project activities, to en­
able measurements in both the short­, intermediate­, and long­term. Thus, when activities are
placed, users should reflect whether the outcomes is in fact an outcome or output.
8.2.11
Step 2, exercise 6 ­ Draw causal links
Causal links need to be drawn using arrows between mapped elements to ensure explicit artic­
ulation of how change will happen (Claus et al., 2023; De Silva et al., 2014; Dhillon and Vaca,
2018).
81
==PAGE:85==
Figure 8.4: Step 3 ­ Identify barriers and activities
Figure 8.4 shows the purpose of the step, an overview of the three exercises, and the main
output. The purpose is to identify and address potential environmental, social, and governance
barriers that can influence a project’s causal pathway to impact. The output is an updated
ToC map including crucial barriers, potential activities to address them, and a table to plan and
evaluate them. The identification of barriers before project implementation will increase the
circular city project’s resilience, robustness and thus chances of success and real­world impact
(Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Epstein and Klerman, 2012; Ibrahim et al., 2017; M Kabongo et al.,
2020; Mattos et al., 2022; Mclaughlin and Jordan, 2015; Oberlack et al., 2019; Raymond et al.,
2019; Rodrigues et al., 2018; Wilkinson et al., 2021). The three exercises will be elaborated on
briefly in the following section. Go to the Miro board to read the full description.
8.2.12
Step 3, exercise 1 ­ Identify barriers to impact
Barriers can lead to decreased project performance and thus hinder the project’s contribution
to circular impact. It is, therefore, crucial to identify potential barriers. Although it is not always
possible to foresee all potential barriers, considering potential barriers before implementation
can help uncover and prepare the users. Users are guided to use the causal links as a bound­
ary object to reveal barriers by, e.g., asking What could be potential environmental, social, or
governance barriers in the causal link?. To help broaden perspective in terms of what barri­
ers might hinder the causal links, examples of CE barriers are provided within environmental,
social, and governance inspired by (Adabre et al., 2023; Kirchherr et al., 2018).
8.2.13
Step 3, exercise 2 ­ Prioritise barriers and brainstorm on activities to
address critical barriers
To take advantage of the benefits of identifying these barriers before implementation, users
should consider how to address and hinder some of the most critical barriers that could po­
tentially decrease positive circular impact. This exercise guides to prioritise critical barriers
considering their impact and likelihood, and brainstorm on activities to address them. Different
tools, questions, and methods are provided to guide the process of diverging and converging
on the most crucial barriers and activities.
82
==PAGE:86==
8.2.14
Step 3, exercise 2 ­ Plan evaluation of critical barriers
It is crucial to plan how to evaluate the effectiveness of addressing the barriers. Therefore,
all prioritised barriers should be described in the barriers evaluation table in the Interactive
Evaluation area.
83
==PAGE:87==
Figure 8.5: Step 4 ­ Identify assumptions
Figure 8.5 shows the purpose of the step, an overview of the three exercises, and the main out­
put. The purpose is to identify underlying assumptions in the causal pathway in all causal links.
The main output is an updated ToC map with identified assumptions. Underlying assumptions
are crucial to identify to enable efforts to test, validate and find evidence for them, thereby in­
creasing the project’s chances of success (Claus et al., 2023; Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Eckstein
and Holyer, 2024; Harries et al., 2014; Hayes et al., 2011; Jones et al., 2023; Kahan et al.,
2014; Valters and Stein, 2016; Wilkinson et al., 2021). The three exercises will be elaborated
briefly in the following. Go to the Miro board to read the full description.
8.2.15
Step 4, exercise 1 ­ Identify assumptions
This exercise is about being explicit and identifying underlying assumptions to plan how to collect
evidence for them if needed. Questions were provided to determine where assumptions are e.g.
What is the evidence behind each link?. Examples of how to collect data can help in providing
evidence e.g. through surveys, observations and existing literature etc (Eckstein and Holyer,
2024; Simeone et al., n.d.).
8.2.16
Step 4, exercise 2 ­ Prioritise assumptions
This exercise is optional because it will only be relevant if many assumptions are identified and
not all need to be validated. An prioritisation matrix considering feasibility (easiness of collecting
evidence) and impact (of the causal link) is used.
8.2.17
Step 4, exercise 3 ­ Plan the validation of assumption
All prioritised assumptions should be described in the assumption validation table in the inter­
active evaluation area. The assumptions must be confirmed or declined in the table and the
ToC. If an assumption is confirmed, this means that the project is on the right path to success.
However, if the assumption is declined, then this might mean that the project activity must be
re­evaluated to ensure success.
84
==PAGE:88==
Figure 8.6: Step 5 ­ Define indicators
Figure 8.6 shows the purpose, an overview of the three exercises, and the main output. The
purpose is to identify specific measurement points and data collection methods to achieve the
desired impact (De Silva et al., 2014; Jones et al., 2023. The main output is an updated ToC
map with prioritised indicators described in a table. This step is crucial to enable quantifying the
project’s success and to understand and explain what works/doesn’t work. Without identifying
indicators, users cannot indicate whether or not their projects’ reached their intended goals
(Kahan et al., 2014; Mattos et al., 2022; Mills et al., 2019). The three exercises will be elaborated
briefly in the following. Go to the Miro board to read the full description.
8.2.18
Step 5, exercise 1 ­ Identify indicators
When a project’s ToC is mapped out, participants can create indicators for outputs, outcomes,
and impact(s) to measure and document the progress of the project (Hayes et al., 2011; Jones
et al., 2023; Kahan et al., 2014). A potential location to measure is placed on the ToC with
a star. Then the indicator is categorised as an environmental, social or governance indicator.
The most crucial indicators and how to collect data should then be identified. Similar to step 3
(barriers), this step provides examples of potential CE indicators within environmental, social,
and financial indicators inspired by (Kravchenko et al., 2019; Saidani et al., 2019).
8.2.19
Step 5, exercise 2 ­ Prioritise indicators
This is an optional exercise and only relevant if many indicators are identified. Users will pri­
oritise their indicators into early and later indicators (Mattos et al., 2022, Epstein and Klerman,
2012).
8.2.20
Step 5, exercise 3 ­ Plan measurement for indicators
All identified and prioritised indicators should be planned in the indicator evaluation table in the
Interactive Evaluation area.
85
==PAGE:89==
Figure 8.7: Interactive Evaluation Area
8.2.21
Step 6 ­ Interactive Evaluation area
The last part of the tool is the Interactive Evaluation area. Figure 8.7 shows the purpose and
an overview of the five interactive templates including project’s context, ToC map and three
evaluation tables. The purpose is to plan the project evaluation for assumptions, barriers and
indicators. All the templates will be filled out after conducting the 5 steps. Then it should be
used during project evaluation management, and serve as an iterative area where all results can
be documented and progress can be tracked. The ToC map can be used as a visual boundary
object to communicate how far the project has come in reaching intended impact as well as
how and why activities contributes. Furthermore, it can be updated along with any changes and
updates of e.g. new activities or more barriers are revealed.
86
==PAGE:90==
8.3
Application evaluation of tool with researchers, stakeholders
and experts
This section will present results from application evaluations of the tool with researchers, three
professional stakeholders, and two change experts. Furthermore, recommendations for the
project case CHA from the application evaluation carried out by the researchers.
8.3.1
Application evaluation with reseacher using project case CHA
Application evaluation with project case CHA on the final tool provided many new insights in
terms of strengths and weaknesses. The section will summarise key findings and recommen­
dations for CHA, however all results can be seen on the Miro board here: https://miro.com/
app/board/uXjVKADpZQU=/?share_link_id=406379056427.
The same evaluation questions presented in cycle 3, illustrated on figure 7.5 were used to
evaluate the tool.
Time: The total time spent executing all steps was around 5 hours, however it did require a
lot of reflective practice and each step could easily benefit from spending more time, thus full
execution is required to be 1­2 day, preferably with multiple iterations of each step over a longer
period.
Step 1: Clarify project foundation
It was very easy only with a few confusing elements on how to copy elements onto the templates
in the Interactive Evaluation area. Exercise 1: Define the problem, and exercise 2: Define target
group were very open which caused some confusion, indicating some lack of guidance. Overall,
the step was evaluated to be very valuable to execute before proceeding, as it provided a good
understanding of the project’s context through reflections on several involved stakeholders i.e.
legislation that can affect the project as well as circular strategies’ goals.
Step 2: Map your project’s causal pathway to circular impact (ToC)
The mapping of the ToC was, as with the former concepts, still very challenging and complex.
Furthermore, the questions provided for each exercise were not used systematically. Addition­
ally, making crucial causal links (arrows) thicker in exercise 6: draw causal links & identifying
significant causal links seemed irrelevant as all the mapped ToC elements appeared equally im­
portant. However, the ToC map brought a very good and thorough understanding of the causal
pathway. Exercise 3: define ceiling of accountability helped allowing to consider utopian impact
scenarios for the project, and the line provided a scope for the project by clearly marking where
the project was accountable for. Exercise 4: Identify activities was very simple by going through
the causal pathway to identify and discuss where activities would be needed to trigger change.
Step 3: Identify barriers and activities
It was some­how easy to identify barriers and activities for CHA and considered very valuable.
However, it was reflected that many more barriers could be identified if more time was allocated,
thus being an exercise that needs additionally time. The barrier evaluation table was not used
at all, as the columns was not found relevant. Furthermore, the identification of activities was
overwhelming, as there was not any limit of when to stop and what to include/not to include.
The examples of barriers on the three pillars of sustainability was very useful in identifying
underlying barriers that could hinder the project’s success e.g. ’Residents do not use the sorting
system’, will end up being a waste of resources and efforts from the project group. This barrier
emphasised the crucial need to have pilot tests of the activities such as ’Subsidy to buy a sorting
system for inside use’. This showed that it is essential to investigate who and how residents
currently use their sorting system to become aware of whether the residents even need or would
like a sorting system in general.
87
==PAGE:91==
Step 4: Identify assumptions
Identification of assumption was a very tangible and easy step. The identification facilitated
reflections about finding evidence for underlying assumptions. The assumptions helped to not
think too positive of the project’s ToC. In exercise 2: plan validation of assumption the consider­
ation about finding existing data to provide evidence was also helpful to potentially reduce time
spent on irrelevant tests or data collections. Several assumptions were identified, e.g. from
the activity ’communicating correct sorting behaviour’ does not necessarily lead to the outcome
’correct waste sorting’. This communication must be validated if the provided information from
the communication should have the intended outcome. Doing this will help to decide whether
the activity should be implemented or not.
Step 5: Define indicators
The indicators were evaluated to be one of the easiest steps, as an increased understanding
of the project was gained from executing the former steps. However, there were some misun­
derstandings, as the assumptions had already defined some of the crucial measurements. Still,
several indicators on all three pillars of sustainability were identified. The identification of early
indicators helped to understand which measurements should be planned for first. Here, the
timeline with short­, intermediate­ and long­term helped to categorise the indicators into early
or latter indicators. It was the most time­consuming step to define each indicator in the evalua­
tion plan, however, it was still evaluated to be very valuable as it brought strong emphasis on
ensuring measurements that can explain whether and why the project leads to impact. Some
of the key insights were the need to validate the assumption before deciding whether this mea­
surement will even be needed for the project. E.g. one assumption is that A1: If residents have
a sorting system inside their home, then they also sort the waste. This assumption is crucial to
validate before starting the measurement of S2: Amount of households have installed a sorting
system.
8.3.2
Recommendations for CHA
The following recommendations was provided for CHA from the application.
Include relevant stakeholders to clarify the project foundation (Step 1 ­ Clarify project
foundation)
Generally, it is recommended to consider the context of the project before implementation and
it is recommended to include all relevant stakeholders in this process. This both includes the
target group of the project being the residents of the house associations, ARC, regulators etc.
This will increase buy­in and co­ownership of the project. Furthermore it is recommended to
conduct root­cause analysis before project execution, to understand exactly what problems they
are trying to solve, in this case ’Citizens are not sorting their waste, because they do not know
how to and they do not care’. Elaborating on the reason why this is important ’valuable resources
are disposed and they can not be used to make new materials meaning more finite resources
must be used’, can increase understanding and motivation among project groups. Additionally,
it is recommended to always consider the project’s CE strategy to help formalise the project
purpose ’Make residents at house association sort their waste so that it can be recycled’.
Clarify and understand the intended causal pathway to circular impact to help design
project activities (Step 2 ­ Map project causal pathway to circular impact)
It is recommended to use the CE strategy card (recycle) to define the desired circular impact:
There are no longer a need for virgin materials in new products. Doing this will broaden perspec­
tives and increase understanding of the long­term desired impact from the project, potentially
revealing new opportunities. Additionally, it is recommended to draw a ceiling of accountability
line between the outcomes ’residents norm is to sort their waste’, and ’residents sort their re­
sources/waste in the containers’, as well as ’resources are sorted correctly in the common yard’.
88
==PAGE:92==
It will clarify what a project is truly accountable for, being correct sorting, and make the project
goals more realistic and reachable. Potential activities identified are recommended to consider:
‘Help residents install their sorting systems´, as well as ‘measure how much waste is generated
from each household in order to ensure that there is always enough space in containers´.
Use the causal links to identify barriers to address with activities already before project
implementation (Step 3 ­ Identify barriers and activities)
Due to the tool’s current maturity, it only provides examples on potential barriers. From this it
is recommended to search for typical CE barriers within recycling in waste and resources city
sector. Furthermore, the following barriers are recommended to address.
B2E: ’Unwillingness to change’, could be addressed by conducting a survey about residents’
current sorting behaviour and investigate how to motivate changed behaviour.
B3E1: ’Residents do not use the sorting system and is therefore a waste of resources’, could
be addressed by providing a take­back system for the sorting systems not used.
B3E2: ’Residents sort incorrectly inside home’, could be addressed by providing sorting guid­
ance inside homes.
Generally, it is recommended to look for other activities as well to address these barriers, as the
researchers’ investigation was initial and quick.
Validate crucial assumptions (Step 4 ­ Identify assumptions.
Generally, it is recommended to always look for existing evidence for the assumptions be­
fore testing. The following assumptions are recommended to be validated to increase overall
chances of success:
A2: ’The residents read posters, email, etc. about correct sorting behaviour, and this lead to
them understand how to sort correctly’. It comes from the causal links between residents read­
ing text, and using information to then actually know about sorting. It could be tested through
two tests: 1) Invite residents to sort waste before and after they have read poster/message.
Do they sort better after? 2) After a couple of months. Do they still know how to sort? Is it
better/worse/the same?
A3: ’Knowing how to sort leads to correct sorting’. The assumption comes from the causal
link from the outcome: residents know how to sort household waste correctly. The assumption
could be tested by investigating if the sorting behaviour improves in relation to before and after
a resident is given educational material on how to sort correctly.
The results from the assumptions validation are recommended to be used to evaluate if new
activities should be introduced to trigger the causal links.
Measure for success (Step 5 ­ Identify indicators)
Many potential indicators to measure for success were identified, the following are highlighted:
S6: The outcome ’residents are aware of the value of resources’ could be measured by looking
into ‘awareness of the value of resources´ before and after the project.
E8: The outcome ’resources are sorted correctly’ could be measured by looking into ‘error
rates in sorting behaviour´. A baseline is needed for these indicators which could be measured
through sample measurements with collection of waste and investigate rate of error sorting in
X fractions.
8.3.3
Application evaluation with three professional stakeholders using
project case SZ
The facilitation guide used to maintain a structured workshop can be seen in appendix C8A2.
Key findings from the evaluation workshop with three professional stakeholders experienced in
design, CE, and city development will be elaborated below. A close up of the results from the
workshop can be seen on figure 8.8 or on the Miro board here: https://miro.com/app/board/
uXjVKADpZQU=/?share_link_id=406379056427
89
==PAGE:93==
Figure 8.8: Results from evaluation with professional stakeholders.
Difficulty mapping the ToC in Step 2
The professionals struggled with mapping the ToC, needing significant guidance from the fa­
cilitator. This was mainly due to misunderstandings about the terminology and due to lack of
sufficient time to do the mapping. This both highlighted the necessity of a ToC expert to guide
users as well as sufficient time for development and reflections practice. Participants often con­
fused activities with outcomes and the exercises felt rushed, resulting in a ToC map that did not
consider the time considerations. Furthermore, they found the hypothetical part of the exercise
very hard, as they only got a brief introduction to the project case. Despite the challenges and
hypothetical planning difficulties, participants later recognised the value of mapping ToC, find­
ing the following steps easier. This underscores the importance of mapping a good ToC before
proceeding.
Identify indicators
Participants found this step more enjoyable and tangible, likely because it was the final one and
they did not have to identify any new elements to the ToC. They did consider measurements
for environmental, social and governance factors, but needed additional time to detail them.
Their innovative measurement approaches highlighted the importance of brainstorming data
collection methods and balancing diverging and converging strategies. Due to time­constraint
they only quickly defined the indicator in the table. However, this also seemed rushed.
Values of the intended usage to construct evaluation plan
All participants saw the tool’s value in designing and planning effective evaluations, emphasising
90
==PAGE:94==
a positive user experience with its visuals. They noted the benefits of a participatory approach
and early conversations about measurement: ”User­oriented tool, very popular with milestones
that can sometimes be a bit too internally focused. It is nice that the tool guides the conversation
about making the project measurable, there are a lot of projects that are not transparent. It can
also be used as a boundary object between stakeholders.” (I14)
The explicit ToC map’s connection to city development projects was appreciated by the city
professional: I think it is a very nice tool to communicate what we are going to do and what
it will change in the end. I can envision using the tool throughout different project stages in
workshops with project partners to ensure understanding and meeting the partner’s needs and
goals.” (I15)
These insights validate the tool’s intended usage. Participants acknowledged the tool’s ability
to facilitate clearer communication and planning, though some commented the iterative element
and mental block against updating the map after usage: ”Sometimes projects need to be quite
iterative. I would be a little bit afraid of freezing it too soon, with all this work even though we
can change it I think there will be a mental effect challenging the iterative usage.” (I14).
Additionally, one participant mentioned the tool’s thoroughness as both a positive and a potential
frustration: ”The tool is thorough and helps consider many things but can be frustrating as it
prompts many decisions, sometimes without feeling equipped to make them.” (I14).Balancing
thoroughness and usability is crucial, highlighting the possibly to allow for initial usage cycles
of the tool, following projects as they matures.
8.3.4
Evaluation results from ToC expert and change management expert
The evaluation results from both the ToC expert and the change management expert provided
valuable insights into the tool’s application possibilities and thus helped answering RQ5: ’To
what extent can the support be applied in other contexts?’.. This will also be further discussed
later in section 9.1.4.
ToC Expert from Aalborg University
The evaluation with ToC expert, a co­author of (Simeone et al., n.d.), provided several insights
on the value and contribution of the tool in facilitating the circular transition in cities, as well as
reflections on future research investigations.
Contribution to the circular transitions. The ToC expert confirmed the tool’s usefulness in con­
tributing to circular transitions as well as circular transitions in cities. The tool was seen as
robust and standardised, making it a common language for describing change across various
fields: ”I think you’re doing something really, really fantastic. I see that you are contributing to
circular transition. (...) And it seems to me that you are applying ToC in a way that is robust
and standard.” (I11).It was discussed, that the tool does not only contribute to circular transi­
tion in cities, but it can be adapted to circular transition projects in general. Additionally, the
expert explained that he was unfamiliar with ToC applied in circular transition and that this is
very useful.
ToC is a thinking tool. It was highlighted that while ToC helps in sharing processes of think­
ing with a shared vocabulary, it does not necessarily alter cognitive biases or underlying as­
sumptions. The tool’s use of questions, CE barriers and indicators were noted for broadening
stakeholders’ perspectives and challenging pre­existing biases. ToC alone may not be sufficient
to support shifts in thinking, especially in projects involving diverse stakeholders where some
might not be familiar with circular transitions. Additional tools might challenge their immediate
goals and broaden their perspective in terms of the impact of their circular projects: ”ToC, per
se, is not enough to support shift in thinking. It needs other tools (...) You’re broadening our
perspectives, really ” (I11).
91
==PAGE:95==
Temporality defines the ToC. The importance of temporality in transitions was emphasised, with
the ToC expert noting, that the ToC framework must adapt over time. Considering long­term
horizons (e.g., 20 years) was suggested as a critical aspect for future research: ”It’s like, of
course, it’s a transition, right? You can have maybe a one­year time frame and then this is
what you can achieve. But if your project suddenly looks at a 20­year horizon, then your ToC is
completely different” (I11).
Standardisation versus diversity. The standardisation of outputs, outcomes and impacts for
clarity and communication among stakeholders was valued, but it was highlighted to consider
incorporating diverse representations of change to foster a more inclusive approach: ”There are
so many different ways of representing change that we should welcome this diversity” (I14). This
perspective suggests that while standardisation helps unify understanding, it is also essential to
appreciate and incorporate varied interpretations and methods of change representation. This
balance can foster a more inclusive and holistic approach to understand and implement ToC in
diverse contexts.
Change management expert
The evaluation with change management expert was found to be very interesting, providing
valuable feedback on the tool.
Simplicity and Clarity. The tool’s clear and consolidated overview was valued, with all informa­
tion presented on one page. The simplicity was noted for avoiding unnecessary complexity, and
the use of different colored post­its was appreciated for adding clarity and enhancing the user
experience:”The tool’s simplicity, with everything on one side, avoids unnecessary complexity”
(I12).
Stakeholder Engagement. Emphasis was placed on the importance of stakeholder alignment
throughout the project, Highlighting the value of the participatory aspect and the consideration
of stakeholders in the beginning of the tool.
Adaptation and Visual Indicators. Potential for adapting the tool for continuous project planning
was noted, particularly for showing project status and progress. Enhancing the tool with visual
progress indicators like percentages to show the degree of completion was also suggested.
8.3.5
Improvement opportunities for next cycle development (future)
Table 8.1 captures the identified improvements from evaluating the tool, for future development
cycles. Later in section 9.3, a more thorough elaboration will be provided for future research.
Table 8.1: Improvement opportunities for evaluation in cycle 4
Application
evaluation with
researchers (CHA)
Application evaluation
with three
stakeholders (SZ)
Evaluation with experts
Step 1
Clarify
project
founda­
tion
Make
documenta­
tion of the problem
more clear.
Clarify the input of the
tool i.e project matu­
rity, how many stake­
holder etc.
92
==PAGE:96==
Step 2
Map
project
causal
path­
way
to
ciruclar
impact
E4: Brainstorm on
activities, but only
place chosen ones.
Assign
experienced
facilitator.
Minimum 2 hours.
Help users differenti­
ate between the ToC
element through intro­
duciton exercises.
Investigate
possibil­
ities
of
separating
activities and outputs
from the mapping of
the ToC to have the
impact and outcomes
as the foundation.
Ideation on iterative el­
ement to make sure
that the ToC map can
be updated and track
progress.
Emphasise need for
hypothetical thinking.
Consider temporality and acknowl­
edge the importance of time frames
in transitions.
Explore how ToC
evolves over time, considering long­
term goals like in 20 years. Continu­
ously adapt the ToC to reflect project
changes and changes in time.
Consider the balance between stan­
dardisation and diversity with e.g. di­
verse change representations.
Step 3
Identify
barri­
ers
&
activities
Develop new bar­
rier table
Choose the brain­
stormed
activities
that is believed to
have
the
highest
chance of success
and place into the
ToC map.
Minimum 2 hours.
Further investigate a
database
for
typical
CE barriers within CE
strategy
Investigate and integrate additional
tools to address biases and stimu­
late new insights alongside ToC. (all
steps)
93
==PAGE:97==
Step 4
Identify
assump­
tions
Minimum 2 hours.
Include
stakeholders
to
validate
assump­
tions.
Investigate
possibili­
ties to guide process
of identying
causal
links.
Automatic updates of
of map when assump­
tions are confirmed.
Step 5
Identify
indica­
tors
Make clear if there
are
assumptions
that needs valida­
tion before starting.
Should be an itera­
tive process, can not
be done in short time­
frames.
More space and tem­
plates to both diverge
and converge.
Ensure project evaluation manage­
ment part, being adaptable and pos­
sible to track progress. E.g. add vi­
sual progress indicators for clarity.
Other
N/A
Ensure
that
there
is
clear
difference
between the exercise
templates and guides.
All templates should
be in one place and all
guides in one to elimi­
nate need to scroll up
and down (see exam­
ple later in implemen­
tation plan)
Investigate the tools applications be­
yond circular city transition projects.
Investigate and integrate additional
tools to address biases and stimu­
late new insights alongside ToC. (all
steps)
8.4
Evaluation of tool with design specification and success
criteria
This section elaborates on whether and how the design specification has been fulfilled. The
achievements of the requirements (R) and criteria (C) for each theme will be discussed below.
Usage of tool
The tool was designed to be participatory (R) and be used by project group members of circular
transition projects (user of the tool (R)). In this research project, the tool was therefore designed
to applicable to two project cases from CPHM (interventions/projects (R)) and should therefore
also be compatible with project facilitation processes within CPHM (Compatibility (C)).
User of tool (R). The tool was designed for all members of project groups working on circular
transition projects. The workshop with professionals provided indications of this but would re­
quire a bigger pilot test to be fully confirmed as the mapping a ToC is generally challenging and
94
==PAGE:98==
complex (Armitage et al., 2019; Chapman et al., 2023; Harries et al., 2014; P. Rogers, 2014),
which was also seen in multiple evaluation cycles.
Participatory (R). The tool aimed to be participatory with tips for inclusion of stakeholders in
various exercises. The workshop with professionals and researchers tested this, but its effec­
tiveness remained inconclusive. Including relevant stakeholders was crucial, as they are often
excluded from circular transition processes (Fratini et al., 2019). However, the theory argues
that ToC facilitates participatory processes (Claus et al., 2023; Ibrahim et al., 2017; Kahan et al.,
2014; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Mattos et al., 2022; Murphy and Jones, 2020; Rodrigues et al.,
2018), with potentially increasing understanding and co­ownership (Claus et al., 2023; Hayes
et al., 2011; Mattos et al., 2022).
Interventions/projects (R). The tool aimed to be applicable to two project cases CHA and SZ.
This was succeed proved with tests in cycle 3 and cycle 4, where the application seemed easier.
Compatibility (C). To be applicable and integrateable in project facilitation processes within the
RAP, the tool should seek to be compatible with existing project facilitation approaches. This
has been a criteria and thus not key focus. However, project facilitation is mostly executed
through workshops, sprints etc. Thus the tool can be argued to fit as it can be integrated into
workshops (Kahan et al., 2014; Rodrigues et al., 2018; Simeone et al., n.d.).
Complexity (R). Balancing simplicity with representing complexities was key (Armitage et al.,
2019; Chapman et al., 2023; Rodrigues et al., 2018; P. Rogers, 2014; Valters and Stein, 2016).
It was addressed by e.g. providing tips to remove ToC elements not directly connected to the
impact. The size of the ToC map was also limited by framing it into a box.
Decision­making (R). The tool was designed for strategic decision­making about project activi­
ties, barriers, assumptions and indicators (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Epstein and Klerman, 2012;
Ibrahim et al., 2017; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Mattos et al., 2022; Mclaughlin and Jordan, 2015;
Oberlack et al., 2019). Exercises encourage stakeholders to diverge and converge on crucial
elements to evaluate. The decision­making element was not a key focus and was not tested
very thoroughly. From the workshop with professionals one commented, that the tool did not
guide the decision­making, and seemed like a force choosing the first and the best, indicating
a need for further detailing.
Communication and argumentation (R). The tool aimed to enable clear communication and
argumentation about project success and desired circular impact (Armitage et al., 2019; Carey,
2022; Claus et al., 2023; De Silva et al., n.d.; Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a; Mattos et al.,
2022; Rodrigues et al., 2018). In a CE context, this helped stakeholders be more clear about
what they are trying to achieve. Ultimately, this can also help them with getting funding or argue
why a project should be continued. By using the ToC map as a visual boundary object, the
argumentation could be stronger. These benefits were highlighted in cycle 3 (workshops with
CPHM), and cycle 4 (professionals in workshop).
Context
Targer group (R). The target groups were strategically considered (described in sub­section
8.2.2), by addressing their main characteristics relevant in circular city projects using persona
template adapted by (Hanington and Martin, 2012). E.g. level of care for environment and
willingness to change. This can help foster empathy and understanding of the target group’s
needs, enhancing effectiveness and credibility of the evaluation (Kahan et al., 2014). However,
the persona template was not tested.
Roles of stakeholders (R). The tool included identification of internal and external stakehold­
ers (described in sub­section 8.2.3) on multiple complexity levels ensuring a holistic systems
95
==PAGE:99==
thinking approach (Khanna et al., 2022). Which as well can potentially enhance project suc­
cess (Claus et al., 2023; Hayes et al., 2011; Kahan et al., 2014; Mattos et al., 2022; Mayne,
2015; Mills et al., 2019; Oberlack et al., 2019; Wilkinson et al., 2021). This element is crucial to
ensure the participatory element. The change management expert highlighted the importance
of managing stakeholders, thus confirmed the relevance.
Definition (R). The tool provided a clear definition of CE in a city in the introduction. This was
defined, because one of the key challenges of CE is the lack of a clear definitions (Bolger
and Doyon, 2019; Ibrahim et al., 2017; Khanna et al., 2022; Lakatos et al., 2021). The same
challenge was identified in CPHM, as interviewees highlighted varied understandings of CE.
Whether the definitions are understood were not tested. It can be argued, that this inclusion
can foster a deeper and common understanding of CE and align stakeholders’ perceptions and
ideas.
Circular strategy (R). The tool included CE strategy cards, inspired by (Ellen Macarthur Founda­
tion, 2019), (sub­section 8.2.5), to develop the evaluation plan focusing CE strategies in a city.
The cards can be argued to enhance the critical thinking, self­reflection, challenging existing
biases and expand views of what circular impact a project is aiming for (Carey, 2022; Eckstein
and Holyer, 2024). As the cards were currently focusing on the technical cycle of the butterfly
diagram, they do not fit with a specific city sector. Therefore, tips to search for other strategies
was included to allow users choosing the strategy that fits best with their project. The cards
succeeded in challenging the researchers views during test, to think beyond what is reachable
within the project time­frame.
Map of Theory of Change
Understanding (R). Creating a common understanding about ToC terminology was key to avoid
any misunderstanding which is also one of the key challenges in ToC where elements are often
used ambiguously and inconsistently (Claus et al., 2023; Oberlack et al., 2019; Simeone et
al., n.d.; Valters and Stein, 2016, leading to a lot of confusion (Jones et al., 2023). This was
addressed through development of clear definitions. However, this still need further work, as
both researchers and test participants found the terminology and differentiating of elements
hard during application.
Mapping of ToC elements (R). The ToC map is crucial for the rest of the tool to function and
to construct the evaluation plan. Users are guided with a step­by­step backwards mapping ap­
proach, definitions of elements, examples etc. (Ibrahim et al., 2017; Kahan et al., 2014; Khanna
et al., 2022; Mattos et al., 2022; TOC, 2023). The tested guides in DS­I had multiple disadvan­
tages. e.g. researchers felt overwhelmed and sensed a lack of details (section 4.4). Therefore,
key focus in the support development was to figure out how to develop a ToC. The tool proposal
can thus be argued to serve as a new guide for stakeholders to develop a ToC. Furthermore,
many exercises included questions inspired by theory to challenge existing biases, enhance
critical thinking, reflective practice and ensuring making e.g. causal links explicit (Carey, 2022;
Chapman et al., 2023; Claus et al., 2023; Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022b; Mattos et al., 2022;
Oberlack et al., 2019; Tribaldos and Schneider, 2021; Wilkinson et al., 2021). Though during
tests it was difficult choosing which questions to use because of too many options. Therefore,
development of the right questions could be tested further. Additionally, differentiating between
outcomes and outputs were very difficult in applications. Although it is important to include mea­
surable elements on the short­term, the inclusion of outputs can be discussed. In general, the
procedure of mapping the ToC ensured that nothing is included unless it is connected to the
intended circular impact.
Meaningful impact and outcomes (C). A criterion for the tool was to help define meaningful
circular impact (8.2.6), outcomes (8.2.7). This was decided, cause it is crucial to have real­world
96
==PAGE:100==
impact. The tool addressed this through a combination of CE strategy cards and questions,
challenging the existing ideas of what is possible and broaden the perspective of the users.
When testing the tool the strategy cards helped define a more long­term impact, using the
objective in the specific strategy. E.g. for project case CHA, working with recycling, instead
of defining impact as ’increase recycling’ the card helped define the impact to be ’there are no
longer a need for virgin material in new products’. On top of that the ceiling of accountability
line (8.2.8) helped to define how much the project can be accountable for but still allowed users
to reflect on the long­term impact and outcomes. Whether strategy cards and questions are the
best methods to use to broaden perspectives could be further investigated.
Identifying activities (R), defining activities (C) and prioritising activities (C). The ToC map pro­
vided a great way to identify activities (sub­section 8.2.9). It helped to identify exactly where
activities are needed to deliver impact. However, this was not a key focus. Therefore, definition
and prioritisation of activities were not as detailed. The tool also suggested to design activities
after identifying them with additional workshops or similar. Still, using the ToC map to identify,
define and prioritise activities showed great potential to make projects more robust (Dhillon and
Vaca, 2018; Tribaldos and Schneider, 2021).
Guidance (R). The tool was designed with a clear, simple, user­friendly, all­in­one­place inter­
face consolidated with relevant evaluation elements. Additionally, with step­by­step instructions
and examples to guide the mapping of ToC. Examples and clear instructions were also very
helpful when testing the existing guides.
Colors (R). The visual elements of the tool were designed with different colours and shapes to
avoid any misunderstandings or confusion among users (Claus et al., 2023; Jones et al., 2023;
Oberlack et al., 2019; Simeone et al., n.d.; Valters and Stein, 2016). Theory showed many vari­
ations of the visual presentation of ToC in the analysed approaches, and that there were only
few guidelines on how to visualise change (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018). The tool addressed this by
making clear and simple differentiation between elements. Stakeholders also commented the
user­interface: ”Really nice user interface” (I13). The tool thus offered a generic way of visual­
ising a project’s ToC. Whether the current visualisation is the bet could be further investigated.
E.g., using more shapes or different colours might influence the user experience.
Causal pathway (R). The causal pathway/links (8.2.11) to circular impact were represented with
arrows as theory suggests (Claus et al., 2023; De Silva et al., 2014; Dhillon and Vaca, 2018).
The causal links were challenging during mapping; when arrows were drawn, they were hard
to adjust or remove again. Simultaneously, arrows made the causal pathway seem finalised.
This was also the reason why arrows should not be made before the initial causal pathway
was agreed upon. As several outcomes, outputs and activities can have significant influence
in achieving the desired impact. It was important to clarify which causal links can have the
greatest impact in achieving that. Therefore, the most significant causal links were suggested to
be marked with a thicker arrow (Armitage et al., 2019; Kahan et al., 2014). However, identifying
the significant causal links was proven difficult why this was made optional.
Assumptions (R) Identifying underlying assumptions (8.2.15) of is crucial to enable efforts to
test, validate and find evidence for them (8.2.17), thereby increasing the project’s chances of
success (Claus et al., 2023; Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Eckstein and Holyer, 2024; Harries et
al., 2014; Hayes et al., 2011; Jones et al., 2023; Kahan et al., 2014; Valters and Stein, 2016;
Wilkinson et al., 2021). It is a key benefit as it helps stakeholders understand why and how the
circular impact occurs or not. The identification of assumptions proved to be an easier step, but
it required that previous steps were performed properly. It was designed so that users can find
evidence by e.g. investigating existing data before doing their own data collection. The table
developed to plan for validation of assumption (8.2.17) received less attention and it was thus
97
==PAGE:101==
hard to hypothetically plan for validation. The specific measurement elements in the assumption
validation table could be tested further.
Barriers
Identification of risks/barriers (C). Although not being a requirement, addressing potential bar­
riers by using the ToC map proved essential to include (8.2.12). ToC was often criticised for
not paying sufficient attention to its surrounding systems (Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Wilkinson
et al., 2021), and being too optimistic (Oberlack et al., 2019). The identification of barriers were
guided with CE barrier examples (Adabre et al., 2023; Kirchherr et al., 2018) and questions,
which proved to broaden perspectives and think of potential barriers that one might not initially
think of. Although this was not tested with professional stakeholders, they saw the value in iden­
tifying barriers. In addition, addressing barriers also helped applying complex systems thinking
(R) through the explicitness and consideration of different temporal levels of impact.
Identify activities (C), define activities (C), and prioritise activities (C). Additionally, the tool ad­
dressed specific activities to address the most critical barriers (8.2.13). This was an initial idea,
therefore, the tool lacked structure for brainstorming and prioritising these activities. Planning
evaluation of critical barriers was not succeeded in the tool cause the developed table (8.2.14),
was too confusing to fill out during the test for CHA. However, planning of barrier evaluation is
crucial.
Indicator
The tool was designed to facilitate Systematic identification of indicators (R) (8.2.18), Prioritise
indicators (R) (8.2.19), and Definitions of indicators (R) (8.2.18) to ensure planning evaluation
ex­ante (R). These were addressed in the last step of the tool and the explicit ToC elements
made it easier to identify indicators to measure for (Kahan et al., 2014; Mattos et al., 2022;
Mills et al., 2019). Few examples of CE indicators (Kravchenko et al., 2019; Saidani et al.,
2019) were included as an effort to broaden perspectives. Great potential in this inclusion was
proved from evaluation. Identification of indicators proved an easy step from evaluations with
researchers and professionals in workshop. However, the quality of defined indicators depends
on the quality of the ToC map. This emphasised the importance of increased focus on the quality
of ToC map in the future.
The indicator table (8.2.20) was underdeveloped and not tested properly, as it was hard to clarify
on the specific content in the table. Thus the content could be investigated further.
Manage and evaluate
Responsible (R). The developed tool has a high complexity and needs an assigned responsible
to update it. ToCs often require a ToC expert (Chapman et al., 2023; Epstein and Klerman,
2012; M Kabongo et al., 2020; Oberlack et al., 2019; Wilkinson et al., 2021). This was also
confirmed in workshops with professionals, where researchers needed to guide and help cor­
recting ToC elements, despite efforts made with clear definitions. It can be discussed, whether
the decision about making a complex tool that needs a responsible was the right decision. In
general, mapping ToCs require a lot of time which stakeholders do not have. Although, if time
and resource are allocated stakeholders can gain a thorough and in­depth understanding of
their projects.
The interactive evaluation area (8.2.21) was designed to be Iterative (R), and to facilitate con­
tinuous evaluation (R) and documentation (C). The tool enabled documentation of changes and
updates throughout project’s life cycle. This was considered to entail tracking and monitoring
progress and to ensure reflections on the dynamic and ever­changing environments a circular
project is a part of. Despite, efforts of making the tool flexible and iterative, evaluation results
indicated a need for further work because it can not so easily be updated as intended.
98
==PAGE:102==
9
Discussion
The research project resulted in the development of the tool proposal ’Circular City Evaluation
Planner’. The following section will discuss the research results. First, it will discuss the tool and
its ability to address the identified key factor quality of the evaluation plan and its ability to reach
the desired situation by utilising ToC. Additionally, it will discuss integration possibilities with
other contexts. Lastly, a discussion about the process and its limitations and further research
possibilities.
9.1
Discussion of the tool
The key factor quality of evaluation plan was addressed by the tool through a clear and system­
atic approach to design, plan and manage an effective evaluation of circular city projects.
9.1.1
Addressing key factor: Quality of evaluation plan
Based on the researchers’ knowledge, no other tools using ToC for circular city transition projects
exist (Buelow et al., 2024; Jones et al., 2023; Mills et al., 2019), making this tool a novel con­
tribution to facilitating circular city projects through improved quality of evaluation plans and
evaluation. The tools has been developed to a level of detailed, that makes it possible to be
applied already today.
The design specification was fulfilled to a high extent with some further ideas for investigations,
tests and evaluations. Therefore, a clear indication that the tool is useful to systematically design
and plan an evaluation with the intended output of an evaluation plan and a ToC map. However,
the tool would need further work to enable management of evaluations during and after project
implementation.
Empirical research revealed that project groups in RAP struggled with evaluations of projects.
The implementation of activities were often prioritised over the evaluation of them, and activities
did not achieve the intended outputs. Theoretical research on circular transition in cities also
identified measuring and evaluating circularity as a major challenge (Bolger and Doyon, 2019;
Lakatos et al., 2021). Reasons included lack of proper definitions, measurement methods and
targets (Ibrahim et al., 2017; Khanna et al., 2022). Without a proper evaluation it’s unclear if
a project contributes effectively (Lakatos et al., 2021). This highlights the importance of the
development of such a tool.
Aspects from ToC proved to facilitate evaluation of projects and in general manage complex
projects such as circular city projects (Jones et al., 2023; Simeone et al., n.d.). Its benefits in
community and social projects suggested similar advantages for circular transitions in cities.
Some of the benefits for improving evaluation plans included: Better planning and structuring of
evaluations (Gienapp and Hostetter, 2022a), improved understanding of circular impact (Mills
et al., 2019), and identification of specific measurement points and indicators before implemen­
tation (Mattos et al., 2022). This could ensure an increased achievement of circular goals as
well as understanding whether and why activities had an contribution to impact.
Utilising the tool prior to project implementation thus has potential to enhance the quality of
evaluation which could lead to better achievement of circular goals. This would then increase a
project’s success and finally increase positive impacts on circular transitions in cities (De Silva
et al., 2014; Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Harries et al., 2014; Kahan et al., 2014; Tribaldos and
Schneider, 2021 ).
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
99
==PAGE:103==
Figure 9.1: Improved quality of evaluation plan addressing other key factors and reaching de­
sired impact
9.1.2
Addressing other identified key factors from empirical research
The tool was also reflected in relation to address other key factors. Figure 9.1 illustrates the
quality of evaluation plan enabling contributions to the other key factors presented in section
6.1.
The tool showed strong evidence in improving the quality of evaluation plan as well as a strong
potential in providing stronger argumentation for project’s contribution and communication about
projects to stakeholders. This was identified in evaluations with professionals: ”I think it is a very
nice tool to communicate what are going to do and what will it change in the end.” (I15) and ”It
can also be used as a boundary object between stakeholders.” (I14). The application evaluation
showed that the tool illustrated and explained how and why a project has contributed to desired
circular outputs, outcomes and impact. Therefore, it could also assist when communicating
about progress and arguing for whether a project should be continued, changed or dismissed
to external stakeholders i.e politicians.
The intended support showed the potential to address communication of learnings, by consol­
idating all relevant evaluation insights, results and learnings into a single and an accessible
platform. This feature could eliminate time spent on searching for information in multiple folders
and documents. This benefit was identified in evaluation with CPHM: ”It’s scattered across all
sorts of strange documents. It’s sometimes making it harder to summarise and evaluate the
project.” (I6). By having everything in one­place, that is needed to plan the evaluation of a
project including documentation of results and learnings, was enabled in the tool. Though, the
sharing of key learnings could be further explored.
The tool helped making strategic decisions of how to plan and evaluate project activities suc­
cessfully by utilising complex systems thinking during planning of projects and including relevant
stakeholders. These approaches could improve the chances project activities actually having
intended outputs. On top of that an increased understanding of consequences was also ad­
dressed in the tool by the explicit causal pathway to impact increasing the understanding of
potential risks, barriers or unintended consequences. As well as how they could affect the
project before implementation. Thus making it possible to address them in the evaluation plan.
This could therefore also contribute and improve the identification of consequences.
Lastly, the tool could also help streamline the project facilitation across all project life cycle
100
==PAGE:104==
phases by enabling a common evaluation approach. This could also foster increased stake­
holder engagement as well as adaptation, understanding and commitment to the circular tran­
sition in cities.
The tool thus has potential in reaching the desired impact of increased positive impact on circular
transition in cities.
9.1.3
Is ToC the right approach to represent change?
This research project and the actual support were indications that ToC can be used to facilitate
the circular transition in cites. However, one might ask, whether ToC is the optimal approach
for facilitating these transitions. Insights from ToC expert provided critical reflections about
representations of change and how ToC is only one way of representing change. The identified
literature gap of project management approaches and tools revealed a gap of exploration of
different approaches to represent and mange change. Though some efforts for capturing similar
approaches of change was captured through synonyms of ToC used in search string 1 i.e. logic
models and program theory.
Regardless, alternative change management approaches could have been investigated further.
The ToC expert also emphasised the benefits of having multiple representations of change:
”There are so many different ways of representing change, that we should welcome this di­
versity, right? That’s a really interesting perspective”. This diversity in approaches allows for
a more tailored and adaptable change strategy, enhancing the likelihood of successful tran­
sitions. Therefore, while ToC provided a valuable framework, it is crucial to remain open to
alternative methodologies to enrich the understanding and facilitation of change and to address
the complexities of circular transitions.
9.1.4
Integration with case company and other contexts
The case company CPHM
The tool was intended to be compatible and adaptable to various project maturities and circular
city projects. Positive indications of its value were proved from evaluations, but further detailing
is required to fully achieve the intended support. Additionally, the integration into real­world
settings might be challenging. Among others, the tool needs an assigned responsible to track
and update the ToC map and evaluation plan throughout project implementation. The benefits
of an iterative ToC map demand considerable time and effort. Theory also emphasised ToCs
to be resource intensive needing a ToC expert or dedicated responsible, however it is also a
key challenge of ToC (M Kabongo et al., 2020; Oberlack et al., 2019; Raymond et al., 2019;
P. Rogers, 2014).
Empirical research indicated stakeholders already face significant time and resource constraints,
raising concerns about the feasibility of implementing the tool. Stakeholders often preferred
their own familiar tools, showing resistance to new ones, even those provided in established
toolboxes like CPHM’s one stakeholder remarked, ”I think I have all the tools to do project facil­
itation.” (I9). The importance of communicating the tool as a core continuous evaluation tool is
needed to overcome resistance and ensure effective integration. Its continuous usage is cru­
cial to achieve its intended benefits and adapt to changing circumstances. Laying efforts into
developing a simple tool might have the potential to result in a more integrateable tool.
Other contexts
This subsection discusses the integration and application of the tool in other contexts, seeking
to answer RQ5: To what extent can the support be applied in other contexts?.
The generic design of the tool made it well­suited for various circular city transition projects. Its
adaptability means it can be customised to fit different contexts such as energy, transport or
other sectors working with CE transitions without any modifications.
101
==PAGE:105==
The only element explicitly considering cities is ”Defining Circular City Sector” (Step 1, Exercise
4 presented in 8.2.4). The rest is adaptable to any circular transition project, suggesting a
broader applicability beyond city­specific scenarios. To add on that insights from the ToC expert
also confirmed this: ”The flexibility of this tool allows it to be adapted to multiple contexts, making
it a tool for different circular transition initiatives.” (I11)
To optimise its effectiveness in non­city contexts, the city sector element could be removed and
it could thus argue to work for any circular transition project. This would have to be tested. Al­
though, ToC expert also confirmed the researchers had succeeded in ”applying ToC in a way that
is robust and standard” (I11). This means, that the tool should be applicable to other contexts in
which ToC normally is also used e.g. public projects, NGOs, other complex interventions, other
municipal contexts etc. really just any transition projects.
9.2
Discussion on findings and limitations
The following section will discuss the key methods and approaches that have been used as well
as findings and limitations of the research.
9.2.1
Use of design methodology: Design Research Methodology
This research project was guided by the DRM framework, complemented by the divergent and
convergent phases of the double diamond (“The Double Diamond: A universally accepted de­
piction of the design process ­ Design Council”, n.d.) and the cyclical agile Build, Measure, Learn
approach (“Build, Measure, Learn: the Product Management Lifecycle Loop ­ Amplitude | Am­
plitude”, n.d.). This combination provided direction and structure in a complex, iterative design
process, enabling the consolidation of theoretical and empirical data and new knowledge within
a short time­frame. DRM facilitated the identification of key factors to address with the quality
of evaluation plan being the main, which was crucial for developing a tool with the potential
for real­world impact. Developing success criteria for the support, combined with ToC’s focus
on creating real­world impact, highlighted the importance of thinking beyond what is reachable
within the research project time­frame. It supported critical reflections upon how an improved
quality of evaluation plan can ultimately create more successful circular transition projects, thus
enhance contribution to circular transition in cities. However, the linear and rigid nature of DRM
sometimes conflicted with the creative and iterative needs of the research project. Its structured
and linear stages often caused confusion and anxiety about proper methodology use, divert­
ing attention from the project itself. The need to constantly align with DRM stages, rather than
employing more familiar methods like the double diamond, led to significant time spent on un­
derstanding and discussing DRM instead of focusing on design tasks. Meanwhile, use of DRM
combined with known design terminologies sometimes resulted in confusion as terms are used
differently. It can be discussed whether considering an alternative design methodology would
be more suitable for structuring a complex research project focusing on transitions.
9.2.2
Theoretical findings
The overview reviews in RC and SLR in DS­I provided a comprehensive understanding of ex­
isting theory on ToC and CE. The selection of keywords in the search strings (figure 2.4) signifi­
cantly influenced the results. For example, search string 1 did not identify guides for developing
a ToC, resulting in a need to do a backward literature search to find and test these guides.
This limitation has affected the development of requirements and criteria for ToC mapping in
the design specification.
The theoretical findings lacked insights on facilitating circular city projects, showing a gap in
approaches, methods, and tools for circular transitions, as well as a gap in typical project fa­
cilitation or change management approaches. This limited knowledge about cities affected the
support development by e.g. including city sector­specific requirements or criteria. Only one
102
==PAGE:106==
tool element specifically addresses cities (sub­section 8.2.4), and was included rather late in
the development process. However, this element is crucial for targeted evaluation and sector­
specific awareness (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019). The limited adaptation to cities may be
due to the scope of the literature review, as only one article in the SLR specifically addressed
cities, and none focused on circular transitions in cities. Additionally, the consolidated literature
brought information on CE barriers and indicators that was conducted during support develop­
ment was broad, focusing on common CE barriers and indicators rather than those specific to
city sectors 7. Insights from these areas could have helped scope the research project and
shape the support development.
A bias emerged from developing a generic and linear ToC model, despite identifying the chal­
lenges of linearity in ToC models. This influenced the support development to have linear ToC
models. However, the generic model (figure 4.2) facilitated a comprehensive understanding of
all ToC elements, fulfilling its intended purpose. One could argue that the ToC models identified
in the SLR could have been used instead. However, the lack of criticism by the authors (Claus
et al., 2023; Eckstein and Holyer, 2023; Hayes et al., 2011; Ibrahim et al., 2017; Khanna et al.,
2022), as well as highly customised and self­applied approaches, reduced their credibility. Cre­
ating a generic model was argued more beneficial for general understanding and correct use of
ToC.
9.2.3
Empirical findings
The empirical findings provided significant insights into project facilitation in CPHM, confirm­
ing that the challenges identified in theoretical research are also present in circular economy
projects. To mitigate biases from theoretical findings and better understand the project cases,
relevant stakeholders were involved in DS­I and DS­II. However, the stakeholder engagement
in DS­I was limited to 10 relevant stakeholders from CPHM, as well as one from ARC. These
interviews shaped the focus and understanding of circular city project facilitation. A broader
perspective could have been achieved by for example including stakeholders from value recov­
ery companies or other municipalities. Though CPHM does currently house over 11% of the
population in Denmark, therefore they can be argued to represent a wide variety of stakeholders.
The key challenge identified from stakeholder interviews was political influence on projects: “(...)
it depends on who is currently in charge. It is not everyone who is interested in resources or cir­
cular economy. This creates big swings in our projects. And that is very difficult to plan around.”
(I9). Political decisions impact project directions, but the expert survey recommended not in­
vestigating factors like Argumentation for a project’s contribution and Communication about
projects to stakeholders, which would have led to a different support focus. Although not being
the key factor, the support still ended up addressing on this indirectly, as mentioned in (9.1.2).
A limitation from the theoretical findings was the lack of project approaches, methods and tools.
However, CPHM’s toolbox was thoroughly investigated and one tool tested, providing valuable
insights. Further exploration and testing of tools with project cases could have inspired and
gained more insights for PS. Meanwhile, CPHM employees do not use this toolbox, making
one question the value of it.
9.2.4
Development and evaluation of support concepts
Use of design specification
The development of the design specification was an iterative process that served as an anchor
to maintain direction in support development. The final version was scoped down to the cru­
cial requirements and criteria necessary to improve quality of an evaluation plan. Some criteria
such as the Identification of activities: Should help identify activities to address identified barri­
ers originally referring to the key factor: Identification of consequences, were included later to
address critiques of ToC being too optimistic with a lack of sufficient attention to the surrounding
103
==PAGE:107==
system (Claus et al., 2023; Murphy and Jones, 2020; Oberlack et al., 2019; Wilkinson et al.,
2021), potentially influencing results (Armitage et al., 2019; Dhillon and Vaca, 2018; Wilkinson
et al., 2021). This broad scope made detailed development of the support challenging within
the time­frame. Meanwhile, there was a major focus on mapping the ToC due to the lack of
development guides, giving step 2 ­ ’map causal pathway to circular impact’ the main focus in
development. Due to this focus, less attention has been given to other steps of the tool. Al­
though, it was necessary to actually develop a ToC. One might discuss whether the aspects of
ToC could have been used in another way than to develop a ToC map.
Quick iterations
The cyclical, convergent and divergent development approach ensured that the support was on
the right path towards fulfilling the design specification. Quick ”mock­ups” allowed for continuous
evaluation, to not spend too much time on irrelevant details, enabling quick changes in direction.
This resulted in a highly creative process. However, the initial 9 concepts lacked detail, and
decision on directions was based on meta­applications. Spending more time to thoroughly
develop and evaluate the initial concepts might have given other insights. Furthermore, the
insights from CPHM definitely scoped and limited the support development cause the support
was in the beginning designed for circular projects in RAP. The scope of the support was first
made broader in cycle 3 to enable all types of circular city projects.
Confusion on terminology
Throughout the development, there was a high level of confusion between barriers, risks, un­
intended consequences and similar terminology. Initial focus on unintended consequences
highlighted confusion in interviews and evaluations: ”Do we even prepare for unintended con­
sequences?” (I5) and ”The barriers, are what you think of as risks?” (I12). This led to simplifying
the identification of negative project elements as barriers. Still, using the tool has great potential,
as 40% of sustainability gains are missed due to rebound effects (Metic and Pigosso, 2022).
This highlights the need to clearly define and address these elements to enhance understand­
ing.
Use of morphology
The development through morphology ensured a direct connection to the design specification,
though the inclusion of means from all functions could have been reevaluated. Some functions
were unexplored, such as Identify stakeholders under the main function understand context.
Insights from professional stakeholders indicated a need for simplified yet deep­diving tools:
”It is positive that the tool is thorough and helps to consider many things, but it can be a bit
frustrating to use because you are prompted to make a lot of decisions and sometimes do not
feel equipped to make a decision”. (I14) These insights suggest that focusing on specific main
functions might have led to more diverse concepts. Additionally, searching other means to
include in the morphology could have diversified the concepts further. Alternative methods to
morphology could also have been used, potentially resulting in different concepts. Meanwhile,
the morphology and all its means can be illustrated in endless different ways, and after all, the
most crucial thing to consider is the validation of the usefulness and value of support, which
were confirmed in evaluations and further details can be included later.
Evaluation of support concepts
Inclusion of stakeholders as well as project cases to evaluate the support concepts ensured
a user­oriented approach. It provided diverse insights across the 4 cycles, to include in new
and improved concepts. However, the structure and planning of which insights are crucial to
evaluate was a bit unclear. The evaluations varied with workshops and feedback sessions. This
brought confusion of how to compare the evaluations across the 4 cycles, as well as proved hard
to communicate. Overall the planning of evaluation of the support could have been optimised
104
==PAGE:108==
by focusing on the same evaluation elements throughout all cycles. Initially, the support was
evaluated with the design specification to ensure validation of all the requirements and criteria.
The initial idea was to use WOM where the criteria would be evaluated. This worked well in
cycle 2 for the three support concepts. However, it was not used in cycle 3 because it did not
fit in relation to the updates made to the design specification. Additionally, the researchers has
not benchmarked the tool against existing ones, meaning it has not been evaluated whether it
performs better than existing tools. Which would have been an interesting comparison.
Using the two project cases from CPHM was crucial, as they were addressing different project
maturities, thus validating broader application possibilities. However, a bias remained toward
known activities, goals or other crucial factors in these cases, as it was hard to brainstorm on
new ones when evaluating. Despite this, new insights and recommendations for each case
were provided from the application evaluations. Both projects were within the waste and re­
sources sector, limiting tool robustness. Including cases from other city sectors could enhance
tool effectiveness. In retrospective, the evaluation might have benefit from a more clear and
streamlined evaluation framework throughout all cycles.
9.3
Implementation plan ­ recommendation for further research
All of the evaluation results in cycle 4 enabled initial ideas for the intended support. The following
will present the idea behind it with the purpose of handing it over to the next researchers.
The difference between the actual support and the intended support is that the intended sup­
port aims to include databases containing CE indicators, barriers/risks and unintended conse­
quences, as well as key learnings from circular city projects, as well as an evaluation overview
through a dashboard to illustrate and provide clear organisation and tracking of comprehensive
project evaluations. Figure 9.2 shows one idea for a potential visualisation, and how a step
of the tool could be introduced in the intended support. The figure also illustrates a potential
visualisation of how one exercise from the tool could look like to ensure easy navigation and
mapping of a ToC.
9.3.1
Implementation plan for Intended Support
Figure 9.3 illustrates a suggestion for an initial implementation plan.
The suggestion includes first a focused phase of research and detailing scheduled for 2024­
2025. This phase includes revisiting DS­I and conducting more research that was not possible
to investigate within this research project. Therefore, it is recommended to make a competitor
analysis, focusing on project and change management tools used in circular transitions to get
inspiration from these to further detail the tool. Additionally, circular strategies in cities, CE
indicators, CE barriers/risks, unintended consequences should be investigated to understand
possibilities of including elements from these in the tool.
Improvement opportunities identified in cycle 4 in section (8.3) should be integrated, and each
tool element should be iterated with the latest research findings and identified improvement
opportunities in a new cycle. It is recommended to use the developed design specification as a
guide and foundation for further development and update as more learnings and possibly new
requirements and criteria are identified.
The researchers believe that the recommendation for further research should help to enhance
user­friendliness of the tool. Another suggestions is to produce video materials introducing all
tool elements to prepare the users of how to use the tool and to provide an explanation of ToC.
This is considered to enable improvement of the user­experience and understanding of crucial
elements.
105
==PAGE:109==
Figure 9.2: Overview of potential illustration of intended support. See appendix C9A1 for close
up.
Figure 9.3: Implementation plan to reach intended support
Following the research and detailing phase, the actual support should undergo an initial pilot
testing in various circular transition projects within different city sectors. This phase will involve
evaluating the outcomes from the pilot tests to assess the desired impact and decide whether
to proceed or dismiss the further development of the tool. Potentially, the tool could already at
that point have reached the desired situation, and a bigger launch could take place.
After the initial pilot testing, and depending on the findings from here, the focus will shift to back­
end development. This involves creating databases containing CE indicators, barriers/risks and
unintended consequences, as well as a potential logged database containing learnings from
circular city projects. Here, an evaluation dashboard overview should also be developed to
106
==PAGE:110==
provide comprehensive project evaluations, as shown on the example on figure 9.2.
A marketing plan can be developed to secure funding and expand tool usage by targeting in­
vestors, partners and potential users. Around year 2026, expanded pilot testing can be con­
ducted, involving multiple circular transition projects across various city sectors to validate the
tool’s usage across sectors. Comprehensive evaluations can be performed to measure the
tool’s impact and effectiveness in facilitating and enhancing circular city project’s success in
circular transitions.
Upon successful validation, the CCEM tool can be finalised and launched for broader use.
Post­launch, ongoing tracking, detailing and updating will be implemented to ensure the tool
remains current and effective. This can include continuous maintenance and scaling of the
tool’s application based on user feedback and evolving requirements.
This iterative development and implementation plan aims to ensure that the CCEM evolves to
meet the complex and dynamic needs of cities transitioning to a circular economy, ultimately
achieving the desired impact of enhancing circular city project contribution to circular transition.
9.4
Discussion on achievement of learning objectives
The following section will discuss whether the learning objectives (LO) were achieved and how
they could be achieved better. As they were all defined prior to the research project, not all
LOs were fully achieved. Table 9.1 shows an overview of how the LOs helped to answer the
research questions:
Table 9.1: How the research questions (RQs) and learning objectives are connected (LOs)
Research
question
Learnings objectives (LOs)
RQ1
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8
RQ2
5, 9
RQ3
3
RQ4
3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
RQ5
3, 9, 10
LO1 ­ Understand key drivers and dynamics within the circular transition of cities.
LO1 was mainly achieved in RC with an overview review on circular transition in cities, with
findings detailed in (chapter 3). Additionally, it was achieved in the empirical research through
interviews with stakeholders from CPHM and grey literature, with findings presented in chapter
5. This led to a fundamental knowledge of key drivers for the circular transition in cites. This
objective could have been better achieved by focusing more on analysing data specific to the
circular transition in cities such as the dynamics within the city context, or relevant stakeholders
outside of CPHM could have been interviewed. Nevertheless, the insights gained provided a
solid foundation for understanding the circular transition which helped gain an understanding of
to be able to answer RQ1.
LO2 ­ Explore, gather, and systematise key approaches to elicit and manage theories of
change under the light of the program evaluation literature.
LO2 was achieved by conducting a SLR to identify relevant aspects of ToC for facilitating circular
transitions in cities, as detailed in chapter 4. Findings from several synonyms of ToC such as
action theory and logic models were systematised and analysed of the identified approaches.
The analysis of ToC in project facilitation provided insights into its application in design, plan,
manage, evaluate and scale, highlighting the many benefits of ToC for project facilitation. The
107
==PAGE:111==
SLR identified a gap in literature regarding guides for ToC development, therefore LO2 was
also achieved by consolidated literature to ensure a better understanding of how to create a
ToC. Additionally, the ToC elements were explored by creating a generic ToC model (section
4.2) which helped researchers consistently understand and apply ToC elements. LO2 could
be achieved better by e.g. conducting more empirical research to test the applicability of the
existing ToC approaches as well as researching or conducting interviews with organisations
already familiar with ToC to capture more aspects and a deeper understanding of its benefits and
challenges. An in­depth understanding of different approaches to manage ToC was obtained in
this research project which was key to answer RQ1.
LO3 ­ Interpret and illustrate the primary pitfalls when engaging in circular transitions in
cities (e.g., rebound effects and unintended consequences).
LO3 was mainly achieved through conducting an overview review (chapter 3), structuring, analysing
and describing the key pitfalls (in the report stated as challenges) in (section 3.3). The findings
provided a comprehensive understanding, which was further scoped down on challenges in
LO5. These findings emphasised the key challenges for circular transitions in cities and have
mainly helped to answer RQ1 and RQ3.
LO4 ­ Analyse how theory of change can help decision­making in the context of circular
transitions in organisations.
LO4 was partially achieved by outlining how ToC can facilitate decision­making processes dur­
ing project facilitation in section 5.4. However, this was mainly theoretical claims and potential
benefits. As also addressed earlier in the discussion, the design specification included a re­
quirement to facilitate decision­making. This was defined to facilitate decision­making of both
activities, barriers, assumptions, indicators through prioritisation and reflections on what should
be included in the evaluation plan. However, the current evaluation results of the tool lacked
a clear indication of what it offers. Including such examples would have provided a clearer
and more practical perspective of the facilitation of decision­making in the context of circular
transitions in organisation. The findings from this helped to answer RQ1.
LO5 ­ Examine challenges faced by stakeholders engaging in circular transition in cities.
LO5 was achieved together with LO3. In addition to the overview review, key problems and
challenges experienced by CPHM were identified, systematised, illustrated and examined thor­
oughly through a root­cause analysis (section 5.5). Comparing theoretical literature with empiri­
cal research findings led to the identification of the key challenges faced by stakeholder engaged
with the circular transition in cities and the definition of the most influential factor in the existing
situation to quality of evaluation plan (section 6.1).
Additional empirical research from other stakeholders could have resulted in other findings and
therefore revealed other potential problems. This findings have therefore helped to answer
RQ2.
LO6 ­ Synthesise strategies to map the potential consequences of design interventions
while connecting them to the desired circular transition in the city level.
LO6 was mainly achieved through developing support concepts with a cyclical iterative ap­
proach (chapter 7) During development cycles 1­4 (sections 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 8.3). Various meth­
ods for mapping project causal pathways to impact were tested, including questions, templates,
so­that chains, root­cause analysis, user story maps, negative brainstorming, while using back­
wards mapping which was the key mapping process to connect to desired impact. Circular strat­
egy cards were created to helped define the desired circular impact within specific strategies,
linking project activities to both their circular goals and broader circular economy objectives. The
CE strategy cards were useful but also general and not tailored to specific city sectors. The use
of CE barriers and assumptions that could affect the causal pathway were added to address it.
108
==PAGE:112==
The mapping process was tested with stakeholders, and further validation and detailing would
enhance the effectiveness in addressing potential consequences to circular transitions. Overall
this strategies helped to answer both RQ1 and RQ4.
LO7 ­ Synthesise strategies to assess the potential consequences of design interven­
tions in the context of the desired circular transition in the city level.
LO7 has mainly been achieved by investigating ways to prioritise crucial elements in a project.
In cycle 1 (section 7.1) methods such as impact vs. feasibility matrices, QxF matrices and
voting were explored. The assessment of potential consequences of design interventions was
qualitative relying on stakeholders’ opinions to prioritise them, which enhanced the efficiency of
the decision­making process. While qualitative assessments provided valuable insights, incor­
porating quantitative methods could improve the robustness of evaluating design interventions’
potential consequences. Further development in this area could strengthen the strategies for
achieving desired circular transitions at the city level. These findings have helped answering
RQ1 and RQ4.
LO8 ­ Develop an approach to help design and implement circular transitions in cities
through theories of change.
Approach refers to the development of the support which was achieved through iterative design
stages, incorporating knowledge from RC, DS­I, and DS­II to develop the support concepts in
PS, resulting in the actual support presented in chapter 8. By integrating findings from ToC and
CE literature with empirical findings on circular transitions in cities, the intended support was
formulated to achieve the desired improved situation and impact (Chapter 6.2). The developed
tool addressed key factors and improved the quality of evaluation by incorporating the require­
ments and criteria from the design specification (section 6.3). Thus potentially contributing to
its success criteria (section 6.2) and ultimately contribute to help design and implement circular
projects with a clear evaluation plan. The findings and learnings helped to answer RQ1 and
RQ4.
LO9 ­ Assess the application of the approach for circular transition through relevant case
material and stakeholder engagement.
LO9 was achieved through continuous evaluation with project cases SZ and CHA, and di­
verse stakeholder engagements, iterative development, testing, and evaluation (section ??).
Although the research project included multiple evaluation cycles and stakeholder perspectives,
it still lacked extensive real­world case material to validate the support. Testing the support with
more case studies and get feedback from other stakeholders involved in circular transitions
would enhance the robustness. The evaluation with CPHM and applying the project cases to
the tool resulted in new insights about the project facilitation. Therefore, the application evalu­
ation have helped answering RQ2, RQ4 and RQ5.
LO10 ­ Discuss the applicability of the approach for circular transitions in other contexts.
LO10 was achieved by evaluating the tool with experts (section 8.3) and further use the insights
gained to discuss its integration and applicability in other circular transition contexts (section
9.1.4). The discussion highlighted the adaptability of the tool to various circular transition context
not just within city, though further investigation is needed for a full confirmation. The positive
evaluations suggest a promising potential for the tool in other contexts.
109
==PAGE:113==
9.5
Research project’s contribution to our future careers as
design engineers
This research project contributed significantly to our education and future careers as design
engineers. It equipped us with essential skills and knowledge to facilitate sustainable develop­
ment as emphasised in DRM; ”Design is an activity that has an effect on nearly every sphere of
human life” (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009). Designers’ role is crucial in fostering sustainable
change for people and the planet, and this project reinforced that notion by focusing on the CE
transition.
This research project expanded our academic horizons and competences. Investigating how
ToC can facilitate circular transitions in cities highlighted a systematic problem­solving approach
to solve complex problems like the circular transition. Additionally, addressing ToC to improve
quality of evaluation highlighted the importance of evaluation and measuring project success.
Understanding how to identify and validate underlying assumptions, and be able to measure
long­term impact is essential for contributing to sustainable and positive impacts. These learn­
ings helped develop a robust tool to create evaluation plans.
Additionally the management of the research project strengthened our skills to organise, struc­
ture and work systematically with a complex project. The DRM evolved our mindsets in combin­
ing empirical and theoretical research which highlighted the value of a comprehensive approach
to problem­solving. This integration ensured not only addressing current or assumed issues but
also anticipating future and bigger challenges. This methodology will be beneficial in our future
careers, where we will need to draw on a broad spectrum of knowledge to develop effective
solutions that can create real­world change.
Collaborating with stakeholders from CPHM and other experts provided us with a strong pro­
fessional network and valuable insights into the public sector’s approach to CE projects. It was
inspiring, as the people working there were driven by contribution to the community and the
circular transition rather than financial incentives. Additionally, our ability to communicate com­
plex ideas clearly and effectively was enhanced through continuous stakeholder engagement,
presentations and this report. This skill is crucial for advocating for sustainable practices and
leading future projects.
This research project deepened our understanding and passion for working with sustainable
development change. We believe that we can use the mindset and ToC thinking­approach for
all future projects, as change is happening all the time.
110
==PAGE:114==
10
Conclusion
One of today’s leading global concerns is climate change due continuous rising temperatures
and emissions as a result of among other the linear ”take­make­waste” economy as well as
increasing consumption, production and heavy resource extraction (Khanna et al., 2022). Fos­
tering positive change for sustainability is a challenging yet crucial task to have sustainable
development, and the circular economy is one of the key frameworks being acknowledge to
address these global challenges (Oberlack et al., 2019). It provides a solution to the linear
economy, by decoupling value creation from resource consumption, closing resource loops
and maintain all value in the system (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2019). Cities have a crucial
role to play in this transition, as they are a major part of the issue by contributing to around 70%
of the global greenhouse emissions, with numbers expected to continuously rise (Lakatos et al.,
2021).
Therefore, this research project investigated the overall research question: How can Theory
of Change (ToC) facilitate the design and implementation of the circular transition in cities?.
Wherefrom the main goal was to develop a support that can help cities achieve their desired
circular goals.
The research methodology used to structure a systematic and iterative design project was the
Design Research Methodology (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009), divided into four stages: Re­
search Clarification (RC), Descriptive Study I (DS­I), Prescriptive Study (PS) and Descriptive
Study II (DS­II).
DS­I was structured with a comprehensive research approach analysing theoretical research
about the circular transition in cities and ToC, and empirical research taking off­set in two case
studies from the Waste and Resource Management area in Copenhagen Municipality (CPHM).
One project case Circular House Associations (CHA) working to increase recycling practices
in house associations, and one project case Sharing Zone (SZ) working to increase reuse on
recycling stations.
Theoretical research found that ToC is a theory­driven strategic approach that can be used to
describe why and how project activities lead to intended positive circular change. It can be used
to improve success of complex interventions such as circular transition city projects, by helping
stakeholders design and plan projects (ex­ante), as well as manage, evaluate and scale projects
(ex­post). Due to many different ways of representing ToC, a generic ToC model was developed
containing key elements to outline the causal pathway to circular impact. The elements play a
crucial role in the success of circular transition projects.
Empirical research analysing project facilitation approaches with stakeholders from the project
cases revealed multiple problems that resulted in the overall quality and success of the projects
differed. One key problem identified was the difficulty of evaluations. An increased focus on
implementing projects, rather than evaluating them, a lack of pre­defined success criteria as
well as difficulties in anchoring project activities indicated that there was a lack of planning
evaluations systematically before project implementation. All resulting in their projects did not
have intended success and impact.
Without evaluations, circular transitions cannot succeed in city contexts (Lakatos et al., 2021).
Key findings from theoretical and empirical research led to the identification of the key factor to
be addressed quality of evaluation plan. The problem of evaluation was not only seen in the
empirical research, but also theoretical, as on of the key challenges in the circular transition
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
111
==PAGE:115==
was the difficulty of measuring and evaluating circularity progress due to for example lack of
defined indicators or targets etc. (Bolger and Doyon, 2019; Lakatos et al., 2021). Utilising
ToC to address the planning of evaluation was thus found crucial. Ultimately, a systematically
planned evaluation can lead to improved quality of evaluation, thereby enhancing achievement
of circular goals, and having the desired impact to increase the circular city projects’ positive
impact and contribution to the circular transition in cities.
To address the key factor, the tool Circular City Evaluation Manager was developed. It is a
strategic, interactive evaluation management tool designed to help project managers, facilita­
tors, designers etc. engaged with circular city projects to help design, plan and manage an
effective evaluation and increase the overall success of their projects. The tool is the result
of an exploratory, iterative, design­oriented idea­generation process through four development
cycles that ensured continuous evaluation and identification of improvement opportunities for
support concepts, leading up to the development of the final tool that addresses the key factor.
The tool offers a detail­level that can already today help city stakeholders make better evalua­
tions. It consists of three overall elements: First, an introduction, second, a 5­step approach,
and, third, an Interactive Evaluation area.
The introduction ensures an understanding and
preparation of the users of how to use the tool before starting. The five steps consist of a
systematic approach to construct a project’s evaluation plan. Step 1: Clarify the project foun­
dation, ensures a common understanding about the given project context and crucial elements
like the circular strategy and city sector. Step 2: Map your project’s causal pathway to circu­
lar impact provides a systematic guide to help make the causal pathway of a project explicit
through a visual ToC map. Step 3: Identify barriers and activities helps users identify barriers
in the causal pathway that can hinder intended impact and identify activities to address them.
Step 4: Identify assumptions helps make underlying assumptions explicit and enables efforts
to test and validate them. Step 5: Identify indicators is the last step, which helps identify indica­
tors on the ToC map, ensuring measuring on crucial elements. The Interactive Evaluation area
consists of the result from all five steps, being key insights about the city context, a ToC map
and evaluation tables. It is designed to manage project evaluations through iterative, continu­
ous evaluation, tracking of progress, documentation of results, as well as adapt for changing
environments.
Application and evaluation of the tool provided insights and confirmed its potential in improving
quality of evaluation plans and quality of evaluations. The application provided recommenda­
tions for both project cases. An earlier version of the tool from development cycle 3 identified the
recommendation for SZ to address barriers. For example ’citizens potentially justifying buying
new products, when getting more reuse items’. Or measuring for success through indicators of
’interest in reusable items’, or ’reasons for disposal of reusable item’. The last version of the
tool, recommendations were provided for CHA. It was for example recommended to consider
the long­term impact of reuse to be that ’there is no longer a need for virgin materials in new
products’, and use this impact to evaluate what outcomes are needed to achieve this. This will
broaden horizons and challenges their perspectives. Another recommendation for CHA was to
address the assumption of ’knowing how to sort leads to correct sorting’, by conducting test to
investigate if increased knowledge about waste sorting in fact leads to correct waste sorting. A
barrier that could be considered was that ’residents do not sort their waste correctly inside their
home resulting in incorrect sorting in the common areas’, leading to decreased circular impact.
Furthermore, the application evaluations highlighted that utilising a combination of different
tools, methods and questions into the tool helps broaden stakeholders perspectives, and ad­
dress pre­existing biases about how change might happen. It challenges the idea of the long­
term positive impact a project want to achieve, beyond what is reachable within the project
112
==PAGE:116==
time­frame. This increases chances of identifying crucial elements to evaluate upon before
project implementation, thus enhance chances of successful projects.
Although initially scoped to focus on city projects within the Waste and Resource Management
area, evaluation with change experts confirmed the tool’s contribution to broader contexts. By
applying ToC in a generic and standardised way, the tool enables stakeholders to apply it to
a wide variety of projects within the contexts of circular transitions. Furthermore, theoretical
findings showed, that there were a lack of guides to develop ToCs in general. The tool thus
also provides stakeholders with a generic, clear, user­friendly and systematic ToC development
guide, that can help them systematically structure an otherwise complex mapping.
The research project concludes with an elaboration on research limitations and suggestions
for further research. Besides general recommendations to optimise the tool, it is among other
recommended to further research for other ways of representing circular city project’s causal
pathways, as it is crucial to remain open to alternative ways of representing change to address
the complexities of circular transitions. Furthermore, it is recommended to look into how to
represent different temporalities of change and how the tool can ensure a continuous adaptation
to changing contextual environments.
In conclusion, this research project and the developed tool provided some key insights of how
ToC can help facilitate the circular transitions in cities, which was the overarching goal of the
research project. In addition with a tool utilising ToC to help circular city projects design, plan
and manage effective evaluations.
113
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
Adabre, M., Chan, A., Darko, A., & Hosseini, M. (2023). Facilitating a transition to a circular
economy in construction projects: intermediate theoretical models based on the theory
of planned behaviour. Building Research and Information, 51(1), 85–104. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09613218.2022.2067111
Armitage, D., Arends, J., Barlow, N. L., Closs, A., Cloutis, G. A., Cowley, M., Davis, C., Dunlop,
S. D., Ganowski, S., Hings, C., Rotich, L. C., Schang, K., Tsuji, S., & Wiens, C. (2019).
Applying a “theory of change” process to facilitate transdisciplinary sustainability educa­
tion. Ecology and Society, 24(3). https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-11121-240320
Befolkningstal ­ Danmarks Statistik. (n.d.). https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/borgere/
befolkning/befolkningstal
Blessing, L. T. M., & Chakrabarti, A. (2009). DRM, a Design Research Methodology. Springer
London. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-84882-587-1
Bolger, K., & Doyon, A. (2019). Circular cities: exploring local government strategies to facilitate
a circular economy. European Planning Studies, 27(11), 2184–2205. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09654313.2019.1642854
Buelow, C. A., Connolly, R. M., Dunic, J. C., Griffiths, L., Holgate, B., Lee, S. Y., Mackey, B. G.,
Maxwell, P. S., Pearson, R. M., Rajkaran, A., Sievers, M., Sousa, A. I., Tulloch, V. J.,
Turschwell, M. P., Villarreal­Rosas, J., & Brown, C. J. (2024). Enabling conservation
theories of change. Nature Sustainability, 7(1), 73–81. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-
023-01245-y
Build, Measure, Learn: the Product Management Lifecycle Loop ­ Amplitude | Amplitude. (n.d.).
https://amplitude.com/blog/build-measure-learn-the-product-management-lifecycle-loop
Carey, H. (2022). Articulating theories of change towards more just and transformative design
practices. https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2022.626
Chapman, S., Boodhoo, A., Duffy, C., Goodman, S., & Michalopoulou, M. (2023). Theory of
Change in Complex Research for Development Programmes: Challenges and Solu­
tions from the Global Challenges Research Fund. European Journal of Development
Research, 35(2), 298–322. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41287-023-00574-0
Circular Copenhagen is Copenhagen’s innovation platform for partnership­driven circular econ­
omy solutions. | Circular Copenhagen. (n.d.). https://circularcph.cphsolutionslab.dk/cc/
home
Circular Economy Foundation. (2024). CIRCULARITY GAP REPORT (tech. rep.). www.deloitte.
com.
Claus, R., Davel, R., Heykoop, C., Pinto, D., & Belcher, B. M. (2023). How to build Theories of
Change for transdisciplinary research: Guidance and considerations. GAIA ­ Ecological
Perspectives for Science and Society, 32(1), 186–196. https://doi.org/10.14512/gaia.
32.1.18
Connell, J. P., & Kubisch, A. C. (1998). Applying a Theory of Change Approach to the Evaluation
of Comprehensive Community Initiatives: Progress, Prospects, and Problems. Theory
measurement and analysis, 2(15­44), 15–44. http://communities.usaidallnet.gov/fa/
system/files/Applying+Theory+of+Change+Approach.pdf
De Silva, M., Lee, L., & Ryan, G. (2014). Using Theory of Change in the development, imple­
mentation and evaluation of complex health interventions A practical guide (tech. rep.).
De Silva, M., Lee, L., & Ryan, G. (n.d.). Using Theory of Change in the development, imple­
mentation and evaluation of complex health interventions A practical guide (tech. rep.).
114
Facilitating the circular transition through theory of change
==PAGE:118==
Design Method Toolkit Photo safari. (n.d.). https://toolkits.dss.cloud/design/method-card/photo-
safari/
Dhillon, L., & Vaca, S. (2018). Refining Theories of Change. Journal of MultiDisciplinary Evalu­
ation, 14(30), 64–87. http://journals.sfu.ca/jmde/index.php/jmde_1/article/view/496
Eckstein, J., & Holyer, S. (2023). Connecting Agile with Theory of Change. Agile processes in
software engineering and extreme programming – workshops (pp. 3–11).
Eckstein, J., & Holyer, S. (2024). Connecting Agile with Theory of Change (Vol. 2). Springer
Nature Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-48550-3{\_}1
Ellen MacArthur. (n.d.). The butterfly diagram: visualising the circular economy. https://www.
ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy-diagram
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (n.d.). What is circular economy? https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.
org/topics/circular-economy-introduction/overview
Ellen Macarthur Foundation. (2019). City governments and their role in enabling a circular econ­
omy transition: an overview of urban policy levers. (March), 1–34. www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.
org/our-work/activities/circular-economy-in-cities
Epstein, D., & Klerman, J. A. (2012). When is a Program Ready for Rigorous Impact Evaluation?
The Role of a Falsifiable Logic Model. Evaluation Review, 36(5), 375–401. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0193841X12474275
Forti, M. (2012). Six Theory of Change Pitfalls to Avoid. https://ssir.org/articles/entry/six_
theory_of_change_pitfalls_to_avoid#
Forvaltninger | Københavns Kommunes hjemmeside. (n.d.). https://www.kk.dk/om-kommunen/
forvaltninger
Fratini, C. F., Georg, S., & Jørgensen, M. S. (2019). Exploring circular economy imaginaries in
European cities: A research agenda for the governance of urban sustainability transi­
tions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 228, 974–989. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2019.04.193
Gebler, M., Juraschek, M., Thiede, S., Cerdas, F., & Herrmann, C. (2022). Defining the “Positive
Impact” of socio­technical systems for absolute sustainability: a literature review based
on the identification of system design principles and management functions. Sustain­
ability Science, 17(6), 2597–2613. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-022-01168-1
Gienapp, A., & Hostetter, C. (2022a). Developing a Theory of Change Part 3: Documentation
Templates, 1–8. https://assets.aecf.org/m/resourcedoc/aecf-theoryofchange-templates-
2022.pdf
Gienapp, A., & Hostetter, C. (2022b). Developing a Theory of Change Practical Guidance Step­
by­step guidance and examples Part 2. Annie E. Casey Foundation, (2), 1–48.
Grant, M. J., & Booth, A. (2009). A typology of reviews: An analysis of 14 review types and as­
sociated methodologies. Health Information and Libraries Journal, 26(2), 91–108. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-1842.2009.00848.x
Hanington, B., & Martin, B. (2012). Universal Methods of Design : Introduction. Universal Meth­
ods of Design : 100 Ways to Explore Complex Problems, Develop Innovative Strategies,
and Deliver Effective Design So, (3399583), 209. https://www.saxo.com/dk/universal-
methods-of-design_bella-martin-bruce-hanington_epub_9781610581998
Hargreaves, M. B., & Podems, D. (2012). Advancing Systems Thinking in Evaluation: A Review
of Four Publications. American Journal of Evaluation, 33(3), 462–470. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1098214011435409
Harries, E., Hodgson, L., & Noble, J. (2014). NPC­Transforming the charity sector CREATING
YOUR THEORY OF CHANGE NPC’s practical guide (tech. rep.).
Hauschild, M., Rosenbaum, R., & Olsen, S. (n.d.). Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice.
115
==PAGE:119==
Hayes, H., Parchman, M. L., & Howard, R. (2011). A logic model framework for evaluation and
planning in a primary care Practice­based Research Network (PBRN). https://doi.org/
10.3122/jabfm.2011.05.110043
Ibrahim, M., El­Zaart, A., & Adams, C. (2017). Theory of change for the transformation towards
Smart Sustainable Cities. 2017 Sensors Networks Smart and Emerging Technologies,
SENSET 2017, 2017­Janua, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/SENSET.2017.8125067
Idea Generation. (n.d.). https://web1.eng.famu.fsu.edu/~haik/design/idea_generation.htm
Jones, B., Paterson, A., English, M., & Nagraj, S. (2023). Improving child health service in­
terventions through a Theory of Change: A scoping review. Frontiers in Pediatrics, 11,
1037890. https://doi.org/10.3389/FPED.2023.1037890/BIBTEX
Kahan, B. C., Cro, S., Doré, C. J., Bratton, D. J., Rehal, S., Maskell, N. A., & Rahman, N.
(2014). Theory of Change: a theory­driven approach to enhance the Medical Research
Council’s framework for complex interventions. Trials, 15(267), 1–6.
Kaveh, M. H., Motamed­Jahromi, M., & Hassanipour, S. (2021). The Effectiveness of Interven­
tions in Improving Hand Hygiene Compliance: A Meta­Analysis and Logic Model. Cana­
dian Journal of Infectious Diseases and Medical Microbiology, 2021, 8860705. https:
//doi.org/10.1155/2021/8860705
Khanna, M., Gusmerotti, N. M., & Frey, M. (2022). The Relevance of the Circular Economy for
Climate Change: An Exploration through the Theory of Change Approach. Sustainability
(Switzerland), 14(7), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14073991
Kirchherr, J., Piscicelli, L., Bour, R., Kostense­Smit, E., Muller, J., Huibrechtse­Truijens, A., &
Hekkert, M. (2018). Barriers to the Circular Economy: Evidence From the European
Union (EU). Ecological Economics, 150, 264–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.
2018.04.028
Københavns Kommune. (2019). Cirkulær København – Ressource­ og Affaldsplan 2024. Køben­
havns Kommune. https : / / www . kk . dk / artikel / cirkulaer - koebenhavn - ressource - og -
affaldsplan-2024
Københavns Kommune. (2015). Fællesskab København, 1–19.
Københavns Kommunes Statistikbank ­ data og tal. (n.d.).
Kravchenko, M., CIRCit Norden (projekt), Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Sven Read, Nick Jio,
& Mimi Thian. (2020). Circular economy sustainability screening. Technical University of
Denmark.
Kravchenko, M., Pigosso, D. C., & McAloone, T. C. (2019). Towards the ex­ante sustainability
screening of circular economy initiatives in manufacturing companies: Consolidation of
leading sustainability­related performance indicators. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2019.118318
Lakatos, E. S., Yong, G., Szilagyi, A., Clinci, D. S., Georgescu, L., Iticescu, C., & Cioca, L. I.
(2021). Conceptualizing core aspects on circular economy in cities. Sustainability (Switzer­
land), 13(14), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13147549
M Kabongo, E., Mukumbang, F. C., Delobelle, P., & Nicol, E. (2020). Combining the theory
of change and realist evaluation approaches to elicit an initial program theory of the
MomConnect program in South Africa. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 20(1), 1–
11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-020-01164-y
Mattos, C. A., Scur, G., & Albuquerque, T. L. (2022). Evaluation of circular business model:
Theory of Change approach. Evaluation and Program Planning, 92(September 2021),
102069. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2022.102069
Mayne, J. (2015). Useful theory of change models. Canadian Journal of Program Evaluation,
30(2), 119–142. https://doi.org/10.3138/cjpe.230
Mclaughlin, J. A., & Jordan, G. B. (2015). Using Logic Models. Handbook of Practical Program
Evaluation: Fourth Edition, 62–87. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119171386.ch3
116
==PAGE:120==
Metic, J., & Pigosso, D. C. (2022). Research avenues for uncovering the rebound effects of the
circular economy: A systematic literature review. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.
133133
Mills, T., Lawton, R., & Sheard, L. (2019). Advancing complexity science in healthcare research:
The logic of logic models. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 19(1), 1–11. https :
//doi.org/10.1186/s12874-019-0701-4
Murphy, R. J. A., & Jones, P. (2020). Design management for wicked problems: Towards sys­
temic theories of change through systemic design. 22st DMI: Academic Design Man­
agement Conference Impact The Future By Design, 5–6.
Oberlack, C., Schneider, F., Herweg, K., Messerli, P., Tribaldos, T., Breu, T., Giger, M., Harari,
N., Mathez­Stiefel, S. L., Moser, S., Ott, C., Providoli, I., & Zimmermann, A. (2019).
Theories of change in sustainability science: Understanding how change happens. GAIA
­ Ecological Perspectives for Science and Society, 28(2), 106–111. https://doi.org/10.
14512/gaia.28.2.8
Petit­Boix, A., & Leipold, S. (2018). Circular economy in cities: Reviewing how environmental
research aligns with local practices. Journal of Cleaner Production, 195, 1270–1281.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.05.281
Ratcliffe, M. M. (2012). A sample theory­based logic model to improve program development,
implementation, and sustainability of farm to school programs. Childhood Obesity, 8(4),
315–322. https://doi.org/10.1089/chi.2012.0048
Raymond, I., Iasiello, M., Kelly, D., & Jarden, A. (2019). Program Logic Modelling and Complex
Positive Psychology Intervention Design and Implementation: The ‘Resilient Futures’
Case Example. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41042-019-00014-7
Rodrigues, V. P., Pigosso, D. C., Andersen, J. W., & McAloone, T. C. (2018). Evaluating the
potential business benefits of ecodesign implementation: A logic model approach. Sus­
tainability (Switzerland), 10(6). https://doi.org/10.3390/su10062011
Rogers, E. (1995). Consequences of Innovations. Diffusion of Innovations, 405–442.
Rogers, P. (2014). Theory of Change (tech. rep.). www.unicef-irc.org
Sådan udvikler vi København | Bæredygtig byudvikling. (n.d.). https://byudvikling.kk.dk/
Saidani, M., Yannou, B., Leroy, Y., Cluzel, F., & Kendall, A. (2019). A taxonomy of circular
economy indicators. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.10.014
Sides, M., & Carey, H. (2023). Engaging with Theories of Change in Transition Design. (3),
141–158.
Simeone, L., Drabble, D., Morelli, N., de Götzen, A., & Edward Elgar Publishing. (n.d.). Strategic
thinking, design and the theory of change : a framework for designing impactful and
transformational social interventions, 354. https://www.e-elgar.com/shop/gbp/strategic-
thinking-design-and-the-theory-of-change-9781803927701.html
Teknik­ og Miljøforvaltninvns Kommunes hjemmesidegen | Københa. (n.d.). https://www.kk.
dk/om-kommunen/forvaltninger/teknik-og-miljoeforvaltningen
The Double Diamond: A universally accepted depiction of the design process ­ Design Council.
(n.d.). https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-resources/archive/articles/double-diamond-
universally-accepted-depiction-design-process
TOC, C. f. (2023). What is Theory of Change? ­ Theory of Change Community. https://www.
theoryofchange.org/what-is-theory-of-change/
TOC Benefits ­ Theory of Change Community. (n.d.). https://www.theoryofchange.org/what-is-
theory-of-change/toc-background/toc-benefits/
Torrens, J., Westman, L., Wolfram, M., Broto, V. C., Barnes, J., Egermann, M., Ehnert, F.,
Frantzeskaki, N., Fratini, C. F., Håkansson, I., Hölscher, K., Huang, P., Raven, R., Satt­
legger, A., Schmidt­Thomé, K., Smeds, E., Vogel, N., Wangel, J., & von Wirth, T. (2021).
Advancing urban transitions and transformations research. Environmental Innovation
117
==PAGE:121==
and Societal Transitions, 41(November), 102–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2021.
10.026
Tribaldos, T., & Schneider, F. (2021). Enabling Players to Develop Theories of Change for Sus­
tainable Development: A Serious Game. Simulation and Gaming, 52(5), 664–678. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/10468781211022399
Valters, C., & Stein, D. (2016). UNDERSTANDING THEORY OF CHANGE IN INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT. (January).
Waste Framework Directive ­ European Commission. (n.d.). https://environment.ec.europa.eu/
topics/waste-and-recycling/waste-framework-directive_en
Weiss, C. H., Connel, J., Kubish, A., & Schorr, L. (1995). Nothing as practical as good theory:
Exploring theory­based evaluation for comprehensive community initiatives for children
and families. New York: The Aspen Roundtable Institute, 65–92.
Wilkinson, H., Hills, D., Penn, A., & Barbrook­Johnson, P. (2021). Building a system­based The­
ory of Change using Participatory Systems Mapping. Evaluation, 27(1), 80–101. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/1356389020980493
118
