==PAGE:1==
Production and Characterization of Biochar
for Construction Materials
Master Thesis
Sunna Liv Stefánsdóttir
DTU Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
Produktion og Karakterisering af Biokul til Byggematerialer
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Sunna Liv Stefánsdóttir
Supervisors: Giulia Ravenni (DTU), Wolfgang Norbert Stelte (DTU),
Mona Ammitzbøll Rasmussen (Saint­Gobain) and Lotte Buch Salling­Mortensen (StrawTech)
ECTS: 32,5
Cover photo: Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the department of Chemical and Bio­
chemical Engineering, CHEC research centre at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Sunna Liv Stefánsdóttir ­ s222816
Signature
Date
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
For this thesis project, utilizing biochar in the building industry as a construction material,
will be investigated. Pyrolysis process is used to produce biochar, its chemical and me­
chanical properties determined to explore how applicable it could be as an environmental
friendly construction material. Different pyrolysis conditions and biomass types are ex­
amined and their chemical and mechanical properties determined, through experiments,
to compare to materials currently used.
Biochar is a carbon­rich material made through thermochemical processes, in the ab­
sence of oxygen. Pyrolysis is a widely known thermochemical process used to produce
biochar, as well as oil and gaseous products.
For this work, the focus is on a specific construction material, a layer in the foundation,
intended to insulate and act as drainage. Light Expanded Clay Aggregates (Leca) is
currently used by Saint­Gobain for this specific application, therefore the biochar produced
is compared to the Leca clay aggregates. The comparison may indicate how applicable
biochar is for this specific application.
The biochar production will be done through oven pyrolysis at different chosen tempera­
tures (500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C). The produced biochar will be subjected to a series of
tests to determine its chemical composition (carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, oxygen
and ash) and mechanical properties (bulk density, diameter, crushing resistance, water
absorption and pellet durability). Suitability of different biochar types, as a construction
material, will be discussed and carbon storage potential will be estimated.
Keywords: Biochar, construction material, pyrolysis, biomass, carbon storage, Leca,
crushing resistance, bulk density, diameter, elemental analysis, water absorption, pellet
durability.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to DTU Latex Support for this thesis template.
This thesis project was supervised by Researcher Giulia Ravenni (DTU), Senior researcher
Wolfgang Norbert Stelte (DTU), Mona Ammitzbøll Rasmussen (Saint­Gobain) and Lotte
Buch Salling­Mortensen (StrawTech).
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Giulia Ravenni and Wolf­
gang Norbert Stelte, for guidance, valuable advice and continuous support throughout
the project. I am extremely grateful for their support and their time and knowledge shared
with me.
Special thanks to Mona Ammitzbøll Rasmussen, for providing valuable information about
the construction material, current applications and materials and other interesting infor­
mation about the building industry.
Special thanks to Lotte Buch Salling­Mortensen, for providing raw material, chopped and
pelletized miscanthus, from crops located in Denmark, with valuable information about
the feedstock.
I would like to thank the staff at DTU Risø campus, in Roskilde. Special thanks to engineer
Joen Stubbe Teglbjærg, for help with experimental work at Risø, and for valuable insight
and advice.
I would like to thank Christina Frisk and Lidia Benedini at Stiesdal, for valuable information
and help with raw material.
I would like to express my gratitude to my family and friends, for love and support through­
out the project and my studies. Special thanks to my family, for always lending a listening
ear about interesting topics of my studies.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Materials
15
2.1
Biomass types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2
Lightweight Expanded Clay Aggregates (Leca) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Methods
19
3.1
Pyrolysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Crushing resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Bulk density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Diameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5
Elemental analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.6
Water absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.7
Pellet durability test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Results
28
4.1
Pyrolysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2
Crushing resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Bulk density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4
Diameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.5
Elemental analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.6
Water absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.7
Pellet durability test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.8
Comparison of biochar types produced at 600◦C and Leca
. . . . . . . . . 46
5
Discussion
48
5.1
Biochar as a construction material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.2
Carbon storage and quantity of biochar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.3
Thermal insulation and conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Carbon storage estimation
58
B Crushing resistance, bulk density and diameter
59
B.1 Biochar pellets produced at 500◦C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
B.2 Biochar pellets produced at 600◦C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
B.3 Biochar pellets produced at 700◦C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
B.4 Biochar pellets of chosen biomass types produced at 600◦C ­ Repetition . . 62
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
v
==PAGE:7==
B.5 Leca . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
C Elemental analysis ­ CHNO and ash
64
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
vi
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
BRF ­ Biogas Residue Fiber
Leca ­ Lightweight Expanded Clay Aggregates
GHG ­ Greenhouse Gas
EPS concrete ­ Expanded Polystyrene concrete
IBI ­ International Biochar Initiative
EBC ­ European Biochar Certificate
WBC ­ World Biochar Certificate
LWA ­ Lightweight Aggregate
ETA ­ European Technical Assessment
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
1
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The aim of this MSc thesis is to explore the production and characterization of biochar
for use in construction materials, specifically as an alternative to Light Expanded Clay
Aggregates (Leca) used in building foundations. The study involves producing biochar
(in the form of pellets mostly) from various biomasses through oven pyrolysis at different
conditions (temperature), and then evaluating the chemical and mechanical properties of
the biochar. Different pyrolysis conditions might affect the biochar properties, therefore
different biomasses were used for pyrolysis produced at different pyrolysis conditions to
compare. The ultimate goal is to determine if biochar can effectively replace or comple­
ment materials like Leca in construction, thereby offering a more environmental friendly
and potentially superior building material option. For that reason, the biochar produced
will be compared to the Leca clay aggregates. The comparison may indicate how appli­
cable biochar is for this specific application.
For this work, the aim is to determine whether biochar can be used in construction mate­
rials as a sustainable alternative, with the problem formulation:
Can biochar be used in the building industry in construction materials in an ef­
fective and environmental friendly way, specifically as a layer in foundations, and
effectively replace or complement currently used materials?
With the following research questions:
• Pyrolysis conditions and different types of biomasses. Do different pyrolysis
conditions affect the biochar properties and the application? How does the feedstock
affect the properties and the application, as a layer in the foundation?
• Chemical and mechanical properties. Are the chemical and mechanical proper­
ties of biochar and Leca comparable, or do the biochar properties surpass the Leca
properties when used in or as a construction material?
• Improvements utilizing biochar in the building industry. By utilizing biochar, are
there improvements in the foundations properties? By using biochar in foundations,
does it improve environmental sustainability, due to reduction of greenhouse gases
(GHGs) and through carbon storage?
The research questions will be answered by producing biochar under different pyrolysis
temperatures, determining the characteristics of the biochar produced and compare to
the material currently used for the application (Leca). Additionally, biochar in general and
as a construction material will be discussed, through literature review. Estimations will be
used to determine carbon storage potential.
1.1
Project description
This research involves production of biochar from selected biomass types, including wood
pellets, pine pellets, beech pellets, miscanthus (pellets and chopped), straw pellets and
biogas residue fibers (BRF pellets). The biochar production will be done through oven
pyrolysis at different chosen temperatures, 500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C.
The produced biochar will be subjected to a series of tests to determine its chemical and
mechanical properties. Chemical composition will be determined, that is carbon, hydro­
gen, nitrogen, sulfur, oxygen and ash. Mechanical properties will be determined, that is
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
2
==PAGE:10==
bulk density, size (diameter), crushing resistance, water absorption and pellet durability
for the biochar types as well as the Leca aggregates.
The evaluation is mostly in regard to construction materials such as foundations in build­
ings (layer under the floor) and by replacing expanded polystyrene (EPS) concrete. For
this specific application mentioned, Leca is currently used. The biochar would be used
directly or mixed with Leca[1].
Biochar has been used for different applications for many thousands years and the ap­
plications evolve throughout human history[2]. Some of the different applications will be
presented in the introduction.
The main learning objectives of the project are stated below:
• Understand and apply the oven pyrolysis equipment and process
• Produce biochar from different biomasses, using oven pyrolysis
• Determine mechanical and chemical characteristics of the biochar
• Understand and apply methods/equipment used in order to test the biochar and
determine characteristics
• Understand and determine how biochar from different biomasses could be used as
or in construction materials
• Compare different biochar characteristics to Leca clay aggregates characteristics
• Through literature review, determine how biochar is used currently and suggest new
solutions for biochar, as a construction material.
Regarding the thesis outline, first chapter introduces the thesis and biochar production,
biochar as material and different applications. Second and third chapter, the materials
and methods are discussed. Chapter 4 contains results, from pyrolysis and chemical
and mechanical testing of the materials. Lastly, the research topic will be discussed and
conclusions drawn based on results, in chapter five and six.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
3
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Literature review
1.2.1
Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis is a thermochemical process, products from the pyrolysis process are solid,
liquid and gas[3]. Different thermal, thermochemical and biochemical processes can be
used to produce solid, liquid and gaseous products and fuels from different feedstocks
or biomasses. The solid product of pyrolysis is biochar, which is desired for this thesis
project. Gaseous product, known as syngas, consists mostly of methane, hydrogen, car­
bon monoxide and carbon dioxide but also ethane, ethylene, propane and acetylene[4].
Liquid product is oil (bio­oil).
A general pyrolysis process includes, pretreatment (drying, pelletizing, washing, size re­
duction), pyrolysis and condensation, see figure 1.1[5].
Figure 1.1: Pyrolysis process flow diagram[5].
Possible applications and utilization of biochar will be discussed in chapter 1.2.4. Possi­
ble applications for the bio­oil and syngas would be as energy source, that is bioenergy.
The syngas could be used to generate heat or electricity[4]. The bio­oil and gas, used
as energy source, could be used to replace fossil fuels[6]. The products from the pyroly­
sis process can be categorized as bioproducts, bioenergy and biochar. Bioenergy is for
example bio­oil, heat and electricity[7]. Bioproducts can be produced by using additional
bioenergy, that is not needed to maintain the pyrolysis process, beauty products or food
flavour for example[7].
The ratio of each product generated via pyrolysis depends on the temperature, heating
rate, residence time and feedstock. Those factors are important and affect the final prod­
ucts distribution and properties, but the most important factor according to Hornung [3]
is the temperature profile for controlling the process. The peak temperature is also more
important than the residence time, but longer residence time leads to lower biochar yield.
The gas flow and pressure can also affect the char yield, low gas flows and if the py­
rolysis process is under pressure exothermic conditions produce higher char yields. This
process can be done with different types of reactors and depending on the desired product
the pyrolysis process can be slow, fast, intermediate or flash pyrolysis[3].
There are different available types of reactors used for pyrolysis. Different types of reactor
technologies are fluid bed reactor, auger reactor, circulating fluid bed reactor, cyclonic
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
4
==PAGE:12==
reactor, ablative reactor, rotating cone reactor and entrained flow reactor.
The technology strength and market attractiveness, according to Campuzano et al. and
the biomass Pyrolysis Network (PyNe), of these reactors can be seen on figure 1.2[8].
Figure 1.2:
Technology strength and market attractiveness of different pyrolysis
reactors[8].
Auger reactor or screw reactor is a type of pyrolyzer that works for fast, intermediate and
slow pyrolysis to produce solid, liquid and gaseous products (figure 1.3). The reactor is,
according to Campuzano et al. and the biomass Pyrolysis Network (PyNe), strong tech­
nology wise and high in market attractiveness. The auger reactor technology is applicable
for heterogeneous feedstock[9]. The speed control can be programmed for these differ­
ent types of pyrolysis to produce different fractions of biochar (solid fraction), bio­oil (liquid
fraction) and bio­gas (gaseous fraction)[8].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Single­auger reactor[8].
Slow pyrolysis is the most common and oldest method used. The residence time for a slow
pyrolysis process is quite long, from hours to weeks. The heating rate for slow pyrolysis is
generally few degrees celsius every minute, with the range 1­50◦C/s. The feedstock size
for slow pyrolysis can differ. Typical temperature for slow pyrolysis is 350­400 degrees
celsius, but the range is 250­750 degrees celsius. Slow pyrolysis is used, generally, if the
desired product from the pyrolysis process is biochar[3].
Stiesdal SkyClean is an example of a climate technology company that uses slow pyroly­
sis. It produces EBC (European Biochar Certificate) certified biochar using slow pyrolysis,
at maximum 650◦C. This production is on large­scale. The company uses biomass as
feedstock to produce biochar as well as bioenergy or biofuels in different forms (bio­gas,
bio­oil or even methanol). The company combines green fuel production and carbon cap­
ture and sequestration by producing the biochar and biofuel and utilize it differently. The
biochar is produced in order to remove and store CO2 as well as improve soil properties
for agriculture, the biochar is a long­term carbon sink in soil. In GreenLab in Skive (Den­
mark), a 2 MW Stiesdal SkyClean plant is located (see figure 1.4). The plant is able to
transform most biomasses into biochar and biofuels[10].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
6
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.4: GreenLab, a Stiesdal SkyClean plant at Skive (Denmark)[10].
The intermediate pyrolysis process is similar to the fast pyrolysis in many ways, except
the heating rate is much lower. The heating rate for a intermediate pyrolysis is around
200 to 300 ◦C/min, with the range of 10­100 ◦C/s. The residence time is also longer,
that is several minutes rather than seconds. The temperature of the process is typically
350­450 degrees celsius, with the range 320­500 degrees celsius. For both methods
the cooling rate is done quickly in order to avoid or reduce further breaking down of the
feedstock due to heat after the process. Theoretically, char yield on dry basis is highest
using intermediate pyrolysis, that is about 30­40 wt% but with the range of 19­73 wt%[3].
Fast pyrolysis is, as the name suggests, a quick process. The residence time is only about
half a second to several seconds, with high cooling and heating rates. The heating rate
is approximately 100­500 ◦C/s, up to 1000 degrees celsius per second. The temperature
used for fast pyrolysis is approximately 400­550 degrees celsius, with the range 450­
1050 degrees celsius. The feedstock used for fast pyrolysis is rather small in size, with
the size of several millimeters to micrometers. The liquid yield of fast pyrolysis is quite
high, typically 46­53 wt% on dry basis. The char yield range is only about 15­35%.
For fast pyrolysis, fluid bed reactors (figure 1.5) are suitable due to capability of handling
high heating rates, as well as consistency in the bed temperature[9].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.5: Fluid bed reactor, with an electrostatic precipitator[9].
Flash pyrolysis process has even higher temperatures, with the typical range 1050­1150
degrees celcius, with high heating rate (higher than 1000 ◦C/s) and low residence time
(less than 1 second), using small particle sizes[3]. Ablative pyrolysis reactors could be
suitable for flash pyrolysis, due to capability of high heating rates as well as mass transfer
rates, regardless of size of the feedstock. Rotating cone reactor is a type of ablative
pyrolysis reactor (figure 1.6) [9].
Figure 1.6: Rotating cone pyrolysis reactor[9].
BTG Bioliquids, a company located in the Netherlands, developed a rotating cone reactor
technology for fast pyrolysis to produce renewable bio­oil from biomass residue. The bio­
liquid can be used as fuel to replace fossil fuels, while the by­products are heat (steam)
and power (electricity). The rotating cone reactor is a patented technology. This pyrolysis
technology, compared to other technologies, provide a small reactor and a less complex
system. First, the biomass is dried until the moisture content is below 5%, then mixed with
sand and pyrolyzed. Then, char and sand are seperated from the gas which is condensed
to yield the fast pyrolysis bio­oil. The biochar is combusted with the biogas that was not
condensed to oil, to reheat the sand. The sand is then cooled to desired temperature to be
reused for the fast pyrolysis process. The steam generated from the process can be used
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
8
==PAGE:16==
as heat or power and the solid, containing ash, can be used as soil amendment[11]. An
example of a rotating cone pyrolysis reactor can be seen on figure 1.6, and the pyrolysis
process[9].
1.2.2
Feedstock
Feedstock used for the producing biochar can differ and many options are available cur­
rently. Theoretically, biomasses can be divided into four generations, that is[3]:
• 1st generation biomass: from crops, used as food. Sugar crops for example.
• 2nd generation biomass: also from crops but can not be used as food. Wood, grass,
waste for example.
• 3rd generations biomass: micro­algae.
• 4th generations biomass: also algae, crops which are altered genetically.
Biomass consist generally of lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose in different ratios. Cel­
lulose is a glucose polymer, hemicellulose is a polymer of different sugars. Lignin is not
a carbohydrate but important in cell walls and works as a glue or cement between cells.
Lignin content is quite high in wood types[3].
The type of biomass and ratio of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin in the biomass affects
final products of the pyrolysis process. Generally, lignin gives off more char as a final
product compared to cellulose and hemicellulose under same conditions[3].
1.2.3
Biochar
Biochar is a material with a high carbon content, produced from organic matter (biomass)
through pyrolysis under high temperatures, above 250◦C, without oxygen or air. Biochar
can contain a high content of carbon, in the range of 10­90% [7, 12]. Remaining fraction
of biochar is made up by ash or inorganics, such as phosphorus, calcium and magne­
sium. The biochar term was, in the beginning, used to differentiate between char made
from biomass and char made from fossil fuel. Charcoal and biochar is made with same
methods, but those materials differ mostly in regard to applications. Biochar applications
are mostly in regard to environmental management[7].
An example of biochar produced through pyrolysis can be seen on figure 1.7, produced
from pelletized miscanthus as a feedstock.
Figure 1.7: Biochar pellets produced through pyrolysis, from pelletized Miscanthus.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
9
==PAGE:17==
The use of biochar has been different throughout the years, regardless of the applica­
tion utilizing biochar can reduce greenhouse gases emissions by carbon sequestration
or storage, with sustainably made biochar. For sustainable production of biochar, avail­
able feedstock that does not risk food security or habitat and is economically sustainable
is used. Sustainable production of biochar is without emission of methane and nitrous
oxide and energy generated from the process needs to be utilized[13].
The way in which biochar is a potential solution in reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide
(CO2) and methane emissions, is with deceleration of carbon emission rate, from photo­
synthesis. Anaerobic decomposition of biomass will eventually lead to emission of carbon
dioxide and methane. By carbonizing the biomass, this emission of photosynthetically
fixed carbon is greatly decelerated[13].
The carbon content, initially in the biomass, is distributes equally to biochar and the
gaseous product of the pyrolysis process. The carbon distribution differs depending on
feedstock used. The distribution of inital carbon in the biomass is not affected consid­
erably by the pyrolysis temperature according to Lehmann et al[14]. Biochar stores the
captured carbon for considerably longer time compared to carbon emission from biomass
decay or combustion, by stabilizing the carbon from the organic matter[13].
Annual net emission of greenhouse gases could be decreased significantly by employing
biochar to mitigate climate change. Biochar can be utilized with different applications,
such as storing it in soil or buildings, with a possibility of improving properties for of the
specific application[13].
Gaseous by­products of the biochar production should be utilized further. Firstly, to main­
tain the pyrolysis process to produce the biochar. Additional gas can either be utilized as
energy source (heat or electricity) or condensed to produce bio­oil and non­condensable
gas[13, 6]. By doing so, fossil fuels can be replaced[6].
According to the International Biochar Initiative (IBI) and their Guiding Principles pub­
lished in 2012, there are several principles that should be followed in order for the biochar
industry to be as sustainable as possible in regard to environmental, social and eco­
nomical values or outcomes[15]. The environmental outcomes includes according to the
guidelines[16]:
• Production, quality and diversity of the biochar.
• In regard to energy and greenhouse gases, the production of the biochar should be
neutral. Ideally, the greenhouse gases should be negative and the energy negative
as well, that is net energy export.
• Biochar used as fertilizer should improve the soil.
• The feedstock used should preferably be waste biomass.
• The production of biochar should not pollute or affect water negatively.
The social outcomes from the guidelines regard using feedstock that does not affect avail­
ability of food, that is 1st generation biomass is not used as feedstock. Another social out­
comes mentioned in the guidelines are in regard to local communities and using research
continuously to improve biochar production and applications[16].
Economical values mentioned regard safe and fair production in regard to labor rights.
Economical growth in communities is also important according to the guidelines[16].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
10
==PAGE:18==
The IBI biochar standard was created and approved in order to make sure the biochar
industry is sustainable and the applications and characterization of biochar is standard­
ized. The standard is intended for biochar use as fertilizer in soil, but parts of the standard
could be useful for application of biochar in the building industry[15].
The European Biochar Certificate (EBC) and the World Biochar Certificate (WBC) have
published guidelines for certification and possibilities for carbon storage through biochar
production as well as a list of biomasses that could be used as feedstock for the production[17].
The World Biochar Certificate is meant for certification of biochar for countries outside Eu­
rope and EFTA countries[18]. For this project, in Denmark, the EBC guidelines would be
appropriate to follow if the certificate is desired and therefore those guidelines will be
explored in more detail.
According to the EBC guidelines the definition of biochar is[19]:
”Biochar is a porous, carbonaceous material that is produced by pyrolysis of biomass and
is applied in such a way that the contained carbon remains stored as a long­term C sink
or replaces fossil carbon in industrial manufacturing. It is not made to be burnt for energy
generation.”[19]
According to the guidelines, biochar is produced at the temperature range 350­1000◦C
with low amount of oxygen. This is, according to the EBC guidelines, done through pyrol­
ysis process or gasification.
Construction materials can receive certification called EBC­BasicMaterials, where spec­
ifications need to be met according to the guidelines. Properties of the biochar need to
adhere to the guidelines, to receive the certificate. The organic carbon needs to be men­
tioned and is, according to the guidelines, from about 35% to 95% on dry basis. Several
properties of the biochar need to be met according to guidelines (table 1.1).
Table 1.1: Properties, that need to be met for the EBC certification, according to the EBC
guidelines.
Specification
Guidelines
H/Corg
<0,7 or <0,4 (for EBC­FeedPlus
or EBC­Feed)
O/Corg
<0,4
Properties that
need to be mentioned,
according to guidelines
Carbon content, VOC, nutrients,
pollutants, pH, water holding capacity,
electrical conductivity, bulk density,
16 EPA PAHs, water and salt content.
8 EFSA (PAHs)
<4 mg/kg
The H/Corg ratio is an indicator of the biochar stability, it indicates that the biochar contains
stable carbon if the ratio is less than 0,7. The amount of volatile organic compounds
(VOC) needs to be mentioned and determined using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA).
The organic carbon content needs to be stated as well as nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus,
magnesium, calcium, potassium and iron) and pollutants (PCB and PCDD/F)[19].
For the EBC­BasicMaterial certification the 8 EFSA polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) content in the biochar needs to be less than 4 mg/kg, and the 16 EPA PAHs
need to be stated[19].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
11
==PAGE:19==
1.2.4
Biochar ­ applications
General applications
As has been mentioned, the pyrolysis process produces bio­oil, syngas and biochar, and
while the gas and liquid products can be used as an energy source the biochar can be
used for different applications[4]. Biochar has been used for different applications for
many years, several of the applications are mentioned below [2, 7, 20, 21].
• In soil as amendment,
• for filtration (water filtration),
• as fuel,
• animal feed,
• in metallurgy,
• in construction materials in the buildings industry.
Those applications have been researched for the literature review, main focus is on ap­
plications as or in construction materials in the building industry.
Biochar used as soil amendment can have several different advantages. The biochar can
store carbon dioxide in soil but also decrease methane and nitrous oxide released from
the soil. The biochar can also improve microbial life in the soil which can increase stored
carbon in the soil[3, 15]. By using biochar as a amendment in soil, GHGs emissions
can be minimized. It can increase soil fertility, nutrient availability, water retention and
increase the plant productivity and repairing of the soil [3, 7]. Another reason is to replace
chemical fertilizers, which can minimize greenhouse gas emissions from manufacturing
of the chemical fertilizers[15].
Some types of biochars are richer in nutrients, depending on feedstock used, which can
be beneficial for the crops. Biochar can possibly affect the pH of the soil as well[4].
Biochar as a construction material in the building industry
Biochar has valuable properties that can be beneficial for the building industry. For ex­
ample, low thermal conductivity and high water absorption are properties, that may result
in insulating effects, humidity regulation and purification of air. These properties might be
desired for applications, such as construction materials[20]. Current applications are for
example additive to clay, lime, cement mortar or asphalt[20, 7].
Reasons for using biochar as additive, is the possibility of making the concrete or the
construction material more environmental friendly or greener, by replacing the cement
partly. Also, some properties of the construction material might be improved by adding
biochar. Currently, biochar as a part of cement is also being researched as a carbon
dioxide capture method. The research is in regard to reaction between biochar and carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, giving calcium carbonate[7].
Concrete and mortar are both mixtures used in construction, mixed differently where con­
crete has coarse aggregates and mortar does not. Both types are used in the building
industry as a construction material with different usage. Asphalt is also a mixture of aggre­
gates, filler and binder and is used for roads and runways. When using biochar in the mix­
ture for concrete, the porosity can increase, depending on the biochar properties. Due to
the increase in porosity the fluidity of the cement decreases. For mortar, the compressive
strength can be increased, improving the mortar, by adding biochar. This is dependent on
how much biochar is added to the mixture, as well as the type of biochar. Compressive
strength can decrease if excessive amount of biochar is added to the mixture[7].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
12
==PAGE:20==
For structures built along the seaside or in marine industry, adding biochar to the concrete
or mortar can improve qualities such as durability and therefore extend the life­time of
the structures. According to research, mortar was tested in sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate for 120 days, which resulted in higher strength. The mortar was less weak as well,
when biochar was present in the mortar compared to when it was not. Reasoning for using
sodium sulfate and sodium chloride, is due to chloride and sulfate ions present in concrete.
These ions may, due to chemical reactions, lead to cracks in the construction. For this
research the ratio of biochar in the mixture was 1­2% w/w, with biochar produced from
wood. According to researchers, the compressive strength improved when the biochar
was present in the mixture, after testing it in the sulfate solution[7].
The feedstock used for the biochar can affect the concrete, mortar and asphalt differ­
ently. As an example, biochar produced from rice husk ash affected the compressive and
flexural strength of the mortar, according to researchers[7].
For asphalt, if biochar is added to the mixture the viscosity increases. If the viscosity is
increased the mechanical flexibility improves resulting in improved ability for the asphalt to
keep its shape under high temperatures. As well as improving mechanical flexibility of the
asphalt, adding biochar to asphalt can result in absorption of volatile organic compounds
that may form during heating of the asphalt. According to researchers, biochar produced
from straw and waste wood absorbed different volatile organic compounds. By adding
biochar to the asphalt, the asphalt can be made more sustainable due to the absorbed
volatile compounds. The structure of the pores and functional groups of the biochar can
also improve aging of asphalt[7].
Biochar can also, according to researchers, minimize shrinkage in the concrete due to
moisture, it can act as ”reservoirs” and store the water which results in less water in the
cements pores[7].
Biochar can be used as a part of clay plaster sprayed on walls, where the plaster spray
mixture can contain 30­50% biochar, rest is sand and clay. This was done in several
rooms at the Ithaka Institute in Switzerland, with 50% biochar, 30% sand and 20% clay.
Biochar can also be mixed with mud for plaster, this technology was created by the Ithaka
Institute. The rooms in the Institute and a wine cellar in Valais are the first reconstructed or
built buildings that uses biochar in plaster, mixed with mud or clay and sand[21]. Biochar
mixed with lime can be used outside of buildings, replacing Styrofoam. Those mixtures of
biochar and mud used as plaster can absorb toxins as well as smell and electromagnetic
radiation, improving indoor conditions. Using biochar as a construction material, such as
plaster, does not only provide possible improvements in the properties of the material, but
works also as a carbon storage, making the building a carbon sink[20].
The reasoning, stated in the article, for using biochar plaster is due to two properties of the
biochar, low thermal conductivity and water absorption. Those abilities resulted in good
insulation and humidity regulations. As mentioned, biochar can also be used as a mixture
in concrete but also in bricks, mixed with mud, lime or cement. By using biochar as a
construction material, the carbon can be stored in buildings as well as possibly improving
indoor climate.[21].
1.2.5
Lightweight Expanded Clay Aggregates (Leca)
Lightweight Expanded Clay Aggregates (Leca) is a lightweight, hard shell, porous clay
aggregates. These Leca clay aggregates have been used for many years and the Leca
lightweight aggregate (LWA) has variety of applications, as a sustainable construction
material[22]. For the application investigated (layer in foundations), Leca clay aggregates
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
13
==PAGE:21==
are currently used by Saint­Gobain[1].
The Leca clay aggregates are produced with rotary kilns up to 1150◦C transforming 1 m3
of clay to 5 m3 expanded clay aggregates. The carbon emissions are minimized as much
as possible when producing the Leca aggregates. As an example, the clay is extracted
from locations close to the production site. After extracting and pre­treating the clay the
aggregates are produced using a rotary kiln, and cooled to attain the final product[23].
The intended application of biochar in this work is in subfloors, both in ground floor (foun­
dations) and in between floors (intermedium floor). Currently, Saint­Gobain uses Leca
lightweight aggregates for this application with the main purpose of providing thermal and
acoustic insulation[1, 24].
In the ground floor the main purpose for the material is drainage and thermal insulation[24].
In the ground floor the material can also serve as a ”radon suction layer”[1].
The main purpose for the material in between floors (intermedium floors) is as filler to
even out for layers above, as sound and thermal insulation[1].
Figure 1.8: Current application for the Leca aggregates at Saint­Gobain[25].
Figure 1.8 shows different applications where Leca is used by Saint­Gobain. For this
work, utilizing biochar for applications 6. Ground floor, 8. Intermedium floor and possibly
10. Radon ventilation, will be explored.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
14
==PAGE:22==
2
Materials
2.1
Biomass types
In this work, several types of biomasses were chosen and utilized for production of biochar,
those were:
• Wood pellets, commercial, Austrian pine and European beech pellets,
• Miscanthus, pelletized and chopped,
• Straw pellets,
• Biogas residue fiber (BRF) pellets, BB Biogas and Vrå.
These types of biomasses were sourced from various locations in Denmark (table 2.1).
Table 2.1: Overview of types biomasses and their origin.
Biomass type
Origin
Wood with diameter 8mm and 6mm
Denmark (from Rosager ApS)
Pine
Zealand, Denmark
Beech
Zealand, Denmark
Straw
Denmark (from Højgaard halmpille)
Miscanthus (pelletized and chopped)
Thise, North Jutland (Denmark)
BB Biogas
Denmark
Vrå
Denmark
Wood pellets with diameter of 6 mm and 8 mm Commercial wood pellets with the
diameter of 6 mm (ø6 mm) and 8 mm (ø8 mm) were used as feedstock. The main reason,
for utilizing those pellets was to determine if there was a difference in the biochar pellets
mechanical properties due to their diameter. The pellets were obtained from Rosager
ApS (Denmark), and were produced from an unknown wood type.
Pine pellets The type of pine used was Austrian pine or Pinus nigra, that is softwood. The
pine was from Zealand in Denmark, and was about 40 years old. The moisture content
in the pine wood before processing was around 53 wt%[26].
Both pine and beech pellets went through several processing steps (chipping and milling
for example) before pelletizing. Several characteristics of the biomass pellets were de­
termined by Masche et al. [26] for both pine and beech pellets. Average pellet moisture,
diameter and length was also determined and the pellet moisture resulted in 8,5 wt%,
pellet diameter 6,1 mm and length 10,1 mm[26].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.1: Pine pellets.
Beech pellets The type of beech used was European beech or Fagus sylvatica, that is
hardwood. The beech was also from Zealand in Denmark and was about 50 years old.
The moisture content in the beech wood before processing was around 36 wt%[26].
Several characteristics of the biomass pellets were determined by Masche et al. [26]
for both pine and beech pellets. Average pellet moisture, diameter and length was also
determined and the pellet moisture resulted in 4,2 wt%, pellet diameter 6,1 mm and length
11,8 mm[26].
Figure 2.2: Beech pellets.
Miscanthus Gitantum The miscanthus gitantum pellets (figure 2.3a) were obtained from
StrawTech, a company that utilizes the miscanthus for making drinking straws. The mis­
canthus field was planted in April 2019 in Thise, North Jutland in Denmark and harvested
in April 2021. The pellets were made in May 2021, by Højgaard halmpiller[27]. The di­
ameter of the pellets, before pyrolysis, was approximately 8 millimeters.
Chopped miscanthus gitantum (figure 2.3b) was also received from StrawTech in order
to pyrolyse and compare to the miscanthus biochar pellets and other biochar types. The
chopped miscanthus was planted April 2019 and harvested April 2023, from the same
field in Thise, North Jutland[27].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
16
==PAGE:24==
(a) Miscanthus pellets.
(b) Chopped miscanthus.
Figure 2.3: Miscanthus biomass, pelletized and chopped.
Straw pellets Commercial straw pellets (figure 2.4) were obtained from Højgaard halmpiller
(Denmark). Different types of biochar from different types of biomasses were produced in
order to compare, both to each other and the Leca aggregates. The diameter of the pel­
lets, before pyrolysis, was similar to the miscanthus pellets, approximately 8 millimeters.
Figure 2.4: Straw pellets.
Biogas Residue Fiber (BRF) pellets from Stiesdal The biogas residue fiber (BRF) pel­
lets (BB Biogas and Vrå) were from Stiesdal, named by Stiesdal. The fibers were from
the same biogas plant, in Vrå[28]. The pellets were produced in Denmark. The diameter
of the BRF pellets, before pyrolysis, was approximately 8 millimeters.
(a) BB Biogas BRF pellets.
(b) Vrå BRF pellets.
Figure 2.5: Vrå pellets.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
17
==PAGE:25==
2.2
Lightweight Expanded Clay Aggregates (Leca)
The Lightweight Expanded Clay Aggregates (Leca) are porous clay aggregates from
Saint­Gobain. The aggregates are currently used for the specific application explored,
as a layer in the foundation (ground floor and intermedium floor). In this work, two sizes
of Leca were obtained to compare to biochar, with a diameter of 4­10mm and 10­20mm
(figure 2.6).
(a) Leca, with a diameter of 10­20 millimeters.
(b) Leca, with a diameter of 4­10 millimeters.
Figure 2.6: Two sizes of Leca aggregates, from Saint­Gobain.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
18
==PAGE:26==
3
Methods
When using biochar as a construction material or as a part of a construction material,
characteristics of the biochar need to be determined in order to determine applicability.
The conditions of the production process (temperature for example) can affect the char­
acteristics of the biochar and its applicability as a construction material, or in a mixture
with other materials.
In this work, the following properties of biochar were tested, in order to assess its suitability
to be used in substitution or in combination with Leca aggregates in foundations:
• Size (diameter),
• Crushing resistance,
• Loose bulk density,
• Water absorption according to adjusted EN 1097­6,
• Elemental analysis (CHNS) and ash content,
• Pellet durability.
First three were crucial to test for the initial evaluation to determine how applicable and
comparable the biochar pellets were compared to the Leca aggregates. For further test­
ing, standards were followed as possible, and adjusted if needed.
3.1
Pyrolysis
For this thesis work, the biochar was produced using a pyrolysis oven at Risø, Roskilde.
The pyrolysis oven can be seen on figure 3.1. This process was done at high temperature
(from 500­700◦C) in absence of air or oxygen. The oxygen­free atmosphere was obtained
by using a close reactor, continuously flushed with nitrogen (about 1 L/min). The gas and
tar produced during the process exits from the back of the oven, where combustion takes
place by a gas burner. The parameters that needed to be set for the pyrolysis process
were:
• Target temperature [◦C].
• Hold time or retention time, also called residence time.
• Heating rate in ◦C per minute.
Those parameters need to be set before the process starts.
In this work, different pyrolysis temperatures were tested, 500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C. The
heating rate and the retention time at maximum temperature were kept constant for all
samples, 10 ◦C/min and 30 minutes, respectively. This heating rate was the setpoint, the
oven heats up with a slower rate. Precise heating rate for each test will be reported in the
results. Afterwards, the oven was opened and the samples were allowed to cool down
under a flow of nitrogen.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
19
==PAGE:27==
(a) Oven at Risø, being cooled down.
(b) Oven at Risø, closed.
Figure 3.1: Pyrolysis oven at Risø.
If the biomasses were not dry before pyrolysis, the moisture content was determined.
The biochar yield can be calculated from the mass weight on dry basis. The trays were
weighed, the samples and the weight after pyrolysis to determine the biochar yield.
The trays used were marked by cutting marks on the edges. For pyrolysis at temperature
700◦C ceramic crucibles were used, instead of the trays, since the aluminum trays will
melt at such high temperatures.
The trays, with the samples, were then placed in the reactor and the reactor sealed with
thermal insulation, both between the reactor and the lid, as well as inlets and outlets at
the back of the oven.
The reactor was then placed in the pyrolysis oven before the oven door was closed. Nitro­
gen gas was connected to the reactor, flowing 1 L per minute and the reactor was flushed
for about 10 minutes, to remove oxygen or air. Thermocouple was connected, as well, to
the reactor, to monitor the heating rate.
Next step would be programming the oven settings as desired. For this project, the tem­
perature differs but the setpoints for the retention time (30 minutes) and heating rate
(10◦C/minute) were kept constant in all experiments. The actual heating rate, for every
production, was determined from several data points (temperature and time).
Finally, before turning on the oven, the heating gun was turned on at the backside of the
oven, heating up the reactor outlet, and a gas burner was started. The burner combusts
the tar vapours and gaseous products coming from the reactor. This setup can be seen
on figure 3.2.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
20
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: Heating gun and burner, at the backside of the oven in Risø.
The oven was monitored while the process was running. After the pyrolysis process,
retention time and cooling, the samples were weighed again and the biochar yield deter­
mined.
3.1.1
Moisture content of the biomass pellets
The moisture content of the biomasses, before pyrolysis, was determined or the biomasses
were dried before pyrolysis, in order to have the biomass pellets on dry basis. The pellets
were dried at 105◦C in an oven for 24 hours in order to determine the moisture content.
The moisture content was then used to determine the biochar yield on dry basis.
3.1.2
Biochar Yield
The biochar yield was calculated using the mass of the biochar sample before and after
pyrolysis, on dry basis (equation 3.1).
Biochar yield [wt%] =
Sample after pyrolysis [g]
Sample before pyrolysis [g] ∗100
(3.1)
3.2
Crushing resistance
The crushing resistance was determined according to the method described by Nielsen
et al.[29] and Stelte et al [30]. Equipment used was a compression tester (MTS Exceed,
Series 40, MTS Systems Corporation, USA) with a disc shaped compression platen with
the diameter of 100 mm (Grip­100 kN 100mm compress platen, MTS Systems Corpora­
tion, USA) attached to a 50 kN loadcell (figure 3.3). A biochar pellet, one at a time, was
placed on its side on the platen when performing the test. The biochar pellets tested had
the average diameter of around 4­6mm ± 0,7mm and the length 1,2cm ± 0,2cm. The
tested Leca aggregates had the diameter 4mm, 6mm, 10mm and 20mm.
The test was run at a compression rate of 0,08 mm/min and stopped after the pellet failure.
The average force at break and its standard deviation were calculated based on at least
5 samples, for each type of biochar pellets and Leca aggregates with different diameter.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Compression tester.
Figure 3.4 is an example of a curve from a compression test of a biochar pellet. The ”force
of break” indicated as ”Peak Index” shown in the figure represents the point at which
the pellet or aggregate fails and loses its mechanical integrity. That point is therefore
the critical value for determining the crushing resistance of the biochar pellet or Leca
aggregate. When performing the tests it was made sure, by monitoring the test sample,
that the ”Peak Index” was the point when the pellet or aggregate breaks, and not only
parts of it.
Figure 3.4: Example of a curve after compression test, for a biochar pellet after pyrolysis
at 600◦C.
3.3
Bulk density
The bulk density was determined using a volumetric cylinder, where the volume of the
sample in the flask was determined and then weighed in grams, to determine the bulk
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
22
==PAGE:30==
density. This was repeated three times for each type of biochar or Leca. The volumetric
cylinder used can be seen on figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: The volumetric flask used to determine the bulk density.
3.4
Diameter
The diameter was determined using a digital caliber (figure 3.6). The diameter was de­
termined for the biochar pellets, in triplicate for each type of biochar pellet from different
biomasses or produced at different temperatures. Biochar pellets differ in length, and
therefore the diameter was the chosen measure in order to compare with the Leca.
Figure 3.6: Digital caliber used to determine the diameter of the biochar pellets.
3.5
Elemental analysis
3.5.1
CHNS elemental analysis
Elemental analyzer, EuroVector S.P.A. Euro model EA 3000, was used to determine the
elements in biochar types. Instrument used for the elemental analysis, can be seen on
figure 3.7. The elements quantified for each sample were nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen and
sulfur (CHNS).
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
23
==PAGE:31==
Before using the analyzer the biochar pellets were prepared by crushing them to powder,
then put into tin capsules and folded into a small cube, maximum 2 mg per sample.
Before running and determining the CHNS analysis of the samples, one or two capsules
with a standard, 3 blanks and then four to six standards were put in the sample wheel in
the instrument and run before the biochar samples. The blanks were empty tin capsules
folded into small cubes. The standard used before calibration was BBOT, which stands for
2,5­Bis(5­tert­butyl­2­benzo­oxazol­2­yl) thiophene[31]. There were three repetitions for
each type of biochar sample, from different biomasses, and weight for each determined,
of maximum 2 mg.
The instrument determines the elemental analysis through gas chromatography, after
combustion. Different gas types (N2, CO2, H2O, SO2) were separated and TCD (thermal
conductivity detector) detects the CHNS elements in each sample[32]. The reactor was
kept at 1000◦C.
Figure 3.7: Instrument used for elemental analysis.
An example of gas chromatography results from the elemental analyzer can be seen on
figure 3.8. From the baseline three peaks that can be seen, the position shows different
retention times (RT) and the size of the peak indicates the quantity of each element.
The first peak (green), with the retention time of around 25, indicates the amount of nitro­
gen in the sample. Second peak (gray), with the retention time around 41, indicates the
amount of carbon in the sample. The last peak (red) shown on the figure indicates the
amount of hydrogen in the sample, with the retention time around 164. If sulfur is present
in the sample the peak should appear around the retention time 388. For this sample, the
results show that there was some sulfur present, with no visible peak on the graph. The
peak is most likely too small to be seen on the chromatogram, due to the size of the other
peaks.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.8: Example of gas chromatography results from the elemental analyzer.
3.5.2
Ash content analysis
The ash content of the biochar pellets was determined using Nabertherm furnace (figure
3.9). The samples were crushed into powder and placed in a crucible, three samples for
each type of biochar. The samples were kept in the furnace at 550◦C for 12 hours, with air
flowing constantly in order to attain complete carbon oxidation. The weight of the crucible,
weight before oven and after oven were measured in order to determine the ash content.
Figure 3.9: Nabertherm furnace to determine ash content.
When the ash content had been determined, the oxygen content can be determined as
well, using the carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur content from the elemental analysis
instrument. This was done using equation 3.2.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
25
==PAGE:33==
Oxygen content [wt%] = 100% −(C)% −(H)% −(N)% −(S)% −ash%
(3.2)
3.6
Water absorption
The water absorption was determined based on a modified version of the standard DS/EN
1097­6:2022. The principle behind the water absorption testing method concerns measur­
ing the increase in weight of the biochar pellets or Leca aggregates, after being immersed
in water for 24 hours, to determine the water retention capacity.
According to the standard, several different methods were available to use, depending
on the weight and size of the aggregates. Wire basket methods, pyknometer or Büchner
funnel method can be used, depending on weight and size. The wire basket method was
followed as possible, using the instrument mentioned below.
Instead of using a pyknometer or a basket, as in the standard, the instrument in figure
3.10 was used to determine the water absorption. The instrument had a sieve with fine
mesh (diameter less than 1mm), fixed at the bottom of an open steel cylinder with the
length and diameter, respectively, 65mm and 26mm.
Figure 3.10: Instrument used to determine water absorption.
The sample, about 1­5 grams, of biochar pellets or aggregates were placed on the sieve
until the mesh was completely covered. Distilled water was used and placed in a glas
tray, tall enough for the sample to be soaked in the water. The trays were filled with
distilled water, the instrument with the sample were placed in the water.To remove air, the
instrument was lifted up and down 25 times and shaken. After 24 hours the samples was
weighed and then placed in oven to be dried. The samples were dried for 24 hours and
weighed again, to determine the water absorption.
The water absorption after 24 hours in water was calculated with equation 3.3 below.
WA24[%] = M1 −M4
M4
∗100
(3.3)
Where the M1 was the mass of surface dried biochar pellets after soaking them in water
for 24 hours. The M4 was the mass of biochar pellets oven dried at 105◦C for 24 hours,
according to the standard samples should be dried at 110◦C ± 5◦C.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
26
==PAGE:34==
3.7
Pellet durability test
The pellet durability test was done according to DS/CEN/TS 15210­1 using the pellet
durability tester (Andritz) at Risø (figure 3.11).
Figure 3.11: Pellet durability tester.
The biochar pellets were sieved before testing, using a sieve with round holes with the
diameter of 3,15 mm and a bottom according to ISP 3310­2. The biochar pellets were
sieved in order to remove any small particles that pass the 3,15 mm holes. This was
done by placing biochar pellets on the sieve, so the grid was completely covered, then
the pellets were shaken using a Retsch AS 200 shaker with the amplitude of 1 mm/g for
about 20 seconds.
After sieving the sample, about 300 grams were weighed of the same type of sample for
each box of the durability tester, total weight of around 600 grams. The samples were
rotated 500 times, the counter was set on 500. Then, the samples were sieved again,
using the same procedure as before testing, and weighed.
The durability was determined using equation 3.4.
Durability[%] = mafter
mbefore
∗100
(3.4)
Where mafter was the mass in grams after testing and sieving. The mbefore was the mass
in grams after sieving, but before testing.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
27
==PAGE:35==
4
Results
Different types and/or sizes of wood were pyrolyzed at three different temperature, 500◦C,
600◦C and 700◦C. Several tests were done in order to determine the characteristics of the
biochar pellets from different biomasses at different temperatures. Results can be seen
below, with the standard deviation.
Crushing resistance, bulk density and diameter was determined for different types/sizes
of biochar pellets produced at 500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C. The elemental analysis, ash
content and water absorption was determined for six chosen biochar pellets and chopped
miscanthus, produced at the chosen temperature (600◦C). The initial evaluation showed
(chapter 4.2), that the crushing resistance difference for the commercial wood biochar
pellets with a different diameter (ø6mm and ø8mm) was not significant, therefore those
pellets were not utilized for further production and testing.
4.1
Pyrolysis
4.1.1
Biochar production
Different types of biomasses were used as feedstock for pyrolysis at different tempera­
tures (500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C). These biomasses were wood pellets with the diameter
of 8 millimeters (ø8mm) and 6 millimeters (ø6mm), pine pellets (ø6mm), beech pellets
(ø6mm), straw pellets (ø8mm), miscanthus pellets (ø8mm) and two types of BRF pellets
(ø8mm) (BB Biogas and Vrå). The commercial wood pellets (ø8mm and ø6mm) were
solely pyrolyzed and tested in order to determine if there was difference in results, due to
size of the pellets (diameter).
After determining the crushing resistance, bulk density and diameter of the biochar pellets
produced at 500◦C, 600 and 700◦C, the results were compared. From the comparison,
pyrolysis temperature and several of the biomasses were chosen for further production
and testing.
For further testing, one pyrolysis temperature was chosen (600◦C). Feedstock used for
further testing were the pine and beech pellets, BRF pellets (BB Biogas and Vrå), straw
pellets and miscanthus (chopped and pelletized). For industrial production of biochar, the
pyrolysis temperature is commonly close to 600◦C. The reason is that pyrolysis at 600◦C
generates high biochar yields, with good carbon stability. According to Schmidt et al.[33],
the carbon in the biochar is stable if the pyrolysis temperature is above 550◦C and the
H:C ratio below 0,4. Another reason for using this pyrolysis temperature is to avoid high
costs, due to expensive materials required for higher temperature production. For those
reasons, 600◦C was the chosen temperature for further production and testing.
The six chosen biomasses produced at 600◦C can be seen on figures 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.
Two biochar types were produced through the pyrolysis process each time, figures below
show each type before and after pyrolysis.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.1: Pyrolysis, before and after. From top to bottom: BB Biogas and Vrå, produced
at 600◦C.
Figure 4.2: Pyrolysis, before and after. From top to bottom: straw and miscanthus, pro­
duced at 600◦C.
Figure 4.3: Pyrolysis, before and after. From top to bottom: pine and beech, produced at
600◦C.
4.1.2
Moisture content of biomasses, before pyrolysis
The moisture content needed to be determined in order to have the biomasses on dry
basis before pyrolysis, in order to determine the biochar yield on dry basis. The values in
table 4.1 were derived after drying the biomasses at approximately 105◦C.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
29
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.1: Moisture content of biomasses before pyrolysis.
Type
Moisture content [%]
Wood 6mm
7,3
Wood 8mm
7,2
Pine
10,0
Beech
8,6
BB Biogas
13,3
VRÅ
2,0
Straw
7,0
Miscanthus
7,3
Chopped miscanthus
8,5
Vrå pellets were the biomass with the lowest moisture content before pyrolysis, while the
BB Biogas pellets had the highest moisture content before pyrolysis. This may be affected
by a possible water addition when producing the BRF pellets.
4.1.3
Heating rate
Biochar pellets produced at 500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C.
The heating rate of the pyrolysis process at each temperature was determined, according
to the thermocouple in the oven at Risø. Several biomasses were pyrolyzed simultane­
ously, as can be seen in table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Heating rate in [◦C/min] for biochar types, according to thermocouple in the
oven. Produced at the pyrolysis temperature 500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C.
Biomass type
Temperature [◦C]
Heating rate
[◦C/min]
BB Biogas, miscanthus, Vrå, straw
500◦C
8,1
Wood 6&8mm, pine, beech
500◦C
7,1
BB Biogas, miscanthus, Vrå, straw
600◦C
5,9
Wood 6&8mm, pine, beech
600◦C
6,0
BB Biogas, miscanthus, Vrå, straw
700◦C
4,7
Wood 6&8mm, pine, beech
700◦C
4,9
The heating rate was generally similar for the same pyrolysis temperature, except for the
processes at 500◦C. The heating rate was lower with higher production temperature, the
oven was able to provide higher heating rates for lower process temperatures.
The heating rate was slightly lower for the pyrolysis process at 500◦C when the wood
biochar pellets were produced, compared to when the BRF, straw and miscanthus biochar
pellets were produced, for an unknown reason.
Repetition of six chosen biomasses at 600◦C and chopped miscanthus.
The heating rate was determined for the six chosen biomasses produced at 600◦C (table
4.3).
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
30
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.3: Heating rate in [◦C/min] according to thermocouple in the oven, for six types of
biomasses produced at 600◦C.
Biomass type
Temperature [◦C]
Heating rate
[◦C/min]
BB Biogas and Vrå
600◦C
5,9
Straw and miscanthus
600◦C
5,8
Pine and beech
600◦C
6,4
Chopped miscanthus
600◦C
6,0
As can be seen in tables 4.2 and 4.3 the heating rate was similar for both pyrolysis pro­
cesses produced at 600◦C. The heating rate was slightly higher for the repetition. For the
first production, the pine and beech production process had the heating rate 6,0 ◦C/min
and the repetition 6,4 ◦C/min. The heating rate for BRF, straw and miscanthus pellets
resulted in 5,9 ◦C/min for the first production, and for the repetition 5,8 and 5,9 ◦C/min.
This negligible difference in heating rates, for productions at 600◦C, did most likely not
affect the properties of the obtained biochar in any way.
4.1.4
Biochar yield
Biochar pellets produced at 500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C.
The biochar yield for each type of biochar was determined after production at Risø. This
was done on dry basis, using the mass of dry biomass before pyrolysis. The biomass
was either dried before pyrolysis, or the moisture determined after pyrolysis and taken
into account when calculating the biochar yield. The biochar yield, for biochar pellets
produced at different pyrolysis temperature, can be seen in table 4.4.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
31
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.4: Biochar yield on dry basis, of different biomasses, after pyrolysis at 500◦C,
600◦C and 700◦C.
Biomass type
Temperature
[◦C]
Biochar Yield
[wt%]
Wood 8mm
500
27,73
600
24,92
700
24,27
Wood 6mm
500
27,82
600
24,85
700
24,26
Pine
500
26,87
600
23,87
700
23,71
Beech
500
26,14
600
23,14
700
23,16
BB Biogas
500
44,43
600
41,82
700
41,36
Vrå
500
51,04
600
48,84
700
48,26
Straw
500
30,76
600
29,32
700
28,43
Miscanthus
500
33,68
600
32,03
700
31,13
The biochar yield for BRF pellets (Vrå and BB Biogas), miscanthus, straw and wood types
(pine and beech and commercial wood) were approximately 41­51wt%, 31­34wt%, 28­
31wt%, 23­28wt%, respectively. The yield depends on feedstock and pyrolysis tempera­
ture.
The wood types, wood ø6mm, wood ø8mm, pine and beech, had similar biochar yield
after production at 500◦C, around 27 wt%. The biochar yield was lowest for beech pel­
lets compared to the other types of wood pellets. Overall, beech biochar yield at 500◦C
resulted in the lowest yield, while the highest yield resulted in 51 wt%, for Vrå biochar
pellets produced at 500◦C.
The biochar yield for all types of biochar pellets was similar after pyrolysis at 500◦C and
600◦C, the yield decreased with higher temperatures but the difference was not significant.
The difference was around 1­3 wt%, with lower yield when the pyrolysis process was at
600◦C compared to 500◦C.
For most types of biochar pellets the biochar yield decreases slightly when the pyrolysis
process was done at 700◦C compared to 600◦C. The decrease was only about 1 wt%,
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
32
==PAGE:40==
the yield for beech pellets was slightly lower when the biochar was produced at 600◦C
compared to 700◦C.
The results show that the temperature was not affecting the biochar yield greatly, but the
difference was higher when biochar yield for pyrolysis at 500◦C compared to pyrolysis at
600◦C.
Repetition of six chosen biomasses and chopped miscanthus
Six types of biomasses were chosen and pyrolyzed again at 600◦C, for further testing
and comparison. The biochar yield of six chosen biochar pellets, as well as chopped
miscanthus, produced at 600◦C was determined (table 4.5).
Table 4.5: Biochar yield for the repetition, biochars for chosen biomasses produced at
600◦C.
Biomass/biochar type
Biochar Yield
[wt%]
Pine pellets
24,71
Beech pellets
24,23
BB Biogas pellets
42,02
Vrå pellets
48,67
Miscanthus pellets
32,42
Straw pellets
29,40
Miscanthus, chopped
27,39
The biochar yield for the chosen biochar pellets resulted in similar values as for the first
production at the same temperature (600◦C), see tables 4.4 and 4.5. The largest differ­
ence in biochar yield, produced at 600◦C, was for beech pellets, with the difference of
1,09 wt%.
4.2
Crushing resistance
The crushing resistance, for biochar pellets, chopped miscanthus biochar and Leca ag­
gregates, was determined using a compression tester. Firstly the crushing resistance
was determined for eight different types of biochar pellets, produced at 500◦C, 600◦C
and 700◦C and the results compared before further production and testing.
4.2.1
Crushing resistance for biochar pellets produced at 500◦C, 600◦C
and 700◦C
The crushing resistance was determined, for biochar pellets produced from wood feed­
stock (figure 4.4), wood with the diameter of 8 and 6 millimeters (before pyrolysis), pine
and beech biochar pellets.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: Crushing resistance in [kN] for different types of wood biochar pellets produced
through pyrolysis at different temperatures.
The crushing resistance values were similar for each type of biochar pellets, regardless
of the temperature the biochar pellets were produced at. In general, the values increase
slightly with increase in production temperature, but considering the measurement stan­
dard deviation, the increase was very small or not significant.
The commercial wood pellets (ø8mm and ø6mm) had similar crushing resistance values,
regardless of diameter size, when measurement standard deviation was considered. The
wood pellets with diameter of 8mm, before pyrolysis, had slightly higher crushing resis­
tance. This indicates that the difference in diameter was not affecting the crushing resis­
tance significantly.
The crushing resistance for straw, miscanthus and biogas residue fiber (BB Biogas and
Vrå) biochar pellets can be seen on figure 4.5.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.5: Crushing resistance in [kN] for different types of biochar pellets produced
through pyrolysis at different temperatures.
The values were similar for each type, as for the wood types, at every production tem­
perature. The values did not always increase with increase in production temperature,
the lowest value was for the biochar pellets produced at 600◦C. Taking the standard de­
viation into account the crushing resistance values were similar for every production tem­
perature. Therefore, temperature was most likely not influencing the crushing resistance
significantly. The most noticeable difference, for different production temperatures, was
for BRF biochar pellets (BB Biogas and Vrå).
Among all tested biochar pellets, the crushing resistance was greatest for BRF biochar
pellets, BB Biogas and Vrå. The strength of the pellets might be beneficial for the appli­
cations in construction materials, in layers in foundations.
4.2.2
Comparison of crushing resistance of biochar pellets produced at
600◦C
Biochar pellets produced from the six chosen biomass types were compared to the former
produced biochar pellets at the same temperature. The values for the crushing resistance
of the biochar pellets, for both productions at 600◦C, can be seen in table 4.6, with the
average of both values.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
35
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.6: Crushing resistance in [kN] for different types of biochar pellets produced
through pyrolysis at 600◦C.
Type of biochar pellet
Produced at
600◦C [kN]
Repetition at
600◦C [kN]
Average
[kN]
BB Biogas
0,19 ± 0,02
0,23 ± 0,03
0,21 ± 0,03
Vrå
0,24 ± 0,06
0,23 ± 0,03
0,24 ± 0,05
Straw
0,13 ± 0,01
0,15 ± 0,00
0,14 ± 0,01
Miscanthus
0,14 ± 0,01
0,16 ± 0,01
0,15 ± 0,02
Pine
0,17 ± 0,03
0,18 ± 0,01
0,17 ± 0,02
Beech
0,17 ± 0,01
0,17 ± 0,01
0,17 ± 0,01
The crushing resistance values for the repetition at 600◦C were, mostly, similar to previous
values for the same sample. This indicates, that the experiment appears to have a good
repeatability.
The crushing resistance for the chopped miscanthus biochar produced at 600◦C was
determined as well and resulted in 0,11 ± 0,00 kN. The average value, for different biochar
pellet types, was used to compare to the Leca aggregates.
4.2.3
Comparison of biochar pellets to Leca
The crushing resistance was determined for several sizes of Leca aggregates, in order
to compare to the biochar pellets. The crushing resistance for the Leca with diameter of
20 millimeters was at first tested using 5 samples, but the standard deviation resulted in
53%. The average crushing resistance for those samples resulted in 0,58 kN. Possible
reason, for a large standard deviation, might be due to different shapes of the aggregates,
with similar diameter. For that reason, the experiment was repeated and the crushing
resistance for Leca with diameter of 20 millimeters was determined with more samples
(9 aggregates). This resulted in the values on figure 4.6. The standard deviation turned
out to be much lower, that is 23%, and the average crushing resistance 0,33 kN. The
crushing resistance turned out to be lower for the repeated samples, but much lower
standard deviation and therefore most likely more accurate results.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.6: Crushing resistance in [kN] for different types of Leca, with different diameters.
The crushing resistance for smaller Leca, with diameter of 4, 6 and 10 mm, resulted in
similar values as most of the average values for the biochar pellets produced at 600◦C.
Vrå pellets had higher crushing resistance than the Leca aggregates with the diameter
4mm, 6mm and 10mm.
The crushing resistance for Leca aggregates with the diameter of 20 millimeters was
higher than for other sizes of Leca, and higher than all of the biochar pellets values. Leca
with the diameter of 10 millimeters had the crushing resistance of 0,19 ± 0,03 kN, close
to the crushing resistance value of miscanthus, straw, pine and beech.
Leca with the diameter of 4 and 6 millimeters both had the crushing resistance of 0,12
± 0,01 kN, which was closest to the average value of straw pellets produced at 600◦C.
Chopped miscanthus biochar, produced at 600◦C, resulted in the lowest crushing resis­
tance compared to both the biochar types and the Leca aggregates. The value was clos­
est to smaller size Leca (ø4mm and ø6mm).
The average crushing resistance value for the biochar pellets produced at 600◦C and the
Leca aggregates were in the same range (0­1 kN), however differed depending on Leca
size and biochar type. All values were below 1 kN, using the method described in chapter
3.2.
Biochar pellets had, mostly, similar values as Leca aggregates in regard to compression
testing. Therefore, it can be assumed that using biochar pellets, for the specific application
in the building industry, would be as efficient as using the Leca aggregates.
4.3
Bulk density
4.3.1
Bulk density for biochar pellets produced at 500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C
The bulk density was determined for biochar pellets produced from different biomasses,
and at different temperatures to compare. The bulk density for different types of wood
feedstock, wood with different diameter, pine and beech, was determined (figure 4.7).
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.7: Bulk density in [kg/m3] for different types of wood biochar pellets produced
through pyrolysis at different temperatures.
The bulk density values for wood biochar pellets closely resembled each other, in the
range of 300­400kg/m3. Lowest bulk density value resulted in 308 ± 12 kg/m3 (beech
pellets produced at 500◦C) to the greatest value of 364 ± 8 kg/m3 (pine pellets produced
at 700◦C).
The bulk density of the commercial wood pellets (ø8mm and ø6mm) had similar values.
This might indicate that the diameter does not affect the bulk density significantly.
The bulk density was determined for straw, miscanthus and BRF biochar pellets as well
as the wood types (figure 4.8). The values differ considerably, compared to the wood
biochar pellets.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.8: Bulk density in [kg/m3] for different types of biochar pellets produced through
pyrolysis at different temperatures.
The biogas residue fibers had quite high bulk density, compared to the bulk density of
straw and miscanthus biochar pellets.
Vrå biochar pellets had the highest bulk density compared to every other type of biochar
pellet, with the bulk density of 542 ± 14 kg/m3 (produced at 700◦C). Lowest bulk density
was for straw biochar pellets produced at 500◦C, 245 ± 8 kg/m3.
Results showed, that the bulk density differed with different production temperatures. The
difference, considering measurement standard deviation, was not very large or significant.
The difference in bulk density was much greater between biochar types, from different
feedstocks. This might indicate that different production temperatures did not affect the
bulk density of the biochar types significantly.
4.3.2
Comparison of bulk density of biochar pellets produced at 600◦C
The bulk density of biochar pellets produced at 600◦C was determined, as well as the
average for both productions (table 4.7).
Table 4.7: Bulk density in [kg/m3] for different types of wood biochar pellets produced
through pyrolysis at 600◦C.
Type of biochar pellet
Produced at
600◦C [kN]
Repetition at
600◦C [kN]
Average at
600◦C [kN]
BB Biogas
396 ± 6
393 ± 10
395 ± 8
Vrå
478 ± 60
523 ± 7
501 ± 45
Straw
260 ± 11
253 ± 1
256 ± 8
Miscanthus
297 ± 11
306 ± 10
302 ± 10
Pine
360 ± 14
341 ± 8
351 ± 12
Beech
315 ± 31
303 ± 7
309 ± 17
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
39
==PAGE:47==
The bulk density was mostly similar for both productions of the biochar pellets, at 600◦C.
Largest difference in bulk density, for same type of biochar produced at 600◦C, was for
Vrå pellets.
The bulk density was determined for the chopped miscanthus biochar produced at 600◦C
and resulted in 62 ± 2 kg/m3. Chopped miscanthus biochar had considerably lower bulk
density than the biochar pellets.
4.3.3
Comparison of biochar pellets to Leca
The bulk density for the Leca aggregates was using same method as for the biochar
(chapter 3.3).
The bulk density for Leca with diameter of 10­20mm, resulted in 168 ± 29 kg/m3 from
three samples, with the relative standard deviation of 17%. In order to hopefully attain
more accurate values, the experiment was repeated and the bulk density determined with
three additional samples. This resulted in the bulk density of 178 ± 24 kg/m3. The aver­
age from both experiments was used, with the total of six samples from both experiments
(table 4.8). The bulk density for Leca aggregates with the diameter of 4­10mm was de­
termined as well.
Table 4.8: Bulk density in [kg/m3] for different sizes of Leca.
Size of Leca
Bulk density [kg/m3]
Leca 4­10mm
252 ± 22
Leca 10­20mm
173 ± 25
The Leca aggregates, with a diameter of 4­10mm, and the straw biochar pellets, produced
at 600◦C, had similar bulk density. Miscanthus and the wood biochar pellets, produced at
600◦C, had slightly higher bulk density, compared to Leca aggregates. The BRF pellets,
produced at 600◦C, had notably higher bulk density compared to the Leca aggregates.
The chopped miscanthus, produced at 600◦C, had significantly lower bulk density com­
pared to both the biochar pellets and the Leca aggregates.
It can be assumed, that less material is needed for the application in foundations for
biochar types with lower bulk density, compared to those with higher bulk density. From
these results, it can be assumed, for the BRF pellets, that more mass is needed for same
amount of volume, due to high bulk density.
4.4
Diameter
4.4.1
Diameter for biochar pellets produced at 500◦C, 600◦C and 700◦C
The diameter of the biochar pellets after pyrolysis at different temperatures (500◦C, 600◦C
and 700◦C) was determined.
The diameter was determined for wood biochar pellets (commercial wood pellets, pine
pellets and beech pellets) and resulted in values on figure 4.9.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
40
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.9: Diameter for different types of wood biochar pellets produced through pyrolysis
at different temperatures.
The diameter of pine and beech after pyrolysis was approximately 4 millimeters. The
diameter of wood pellets, with the diameter of 6 millimeters before pyrolysis, resulted in
approximately 4 millimeters after pyrolysis. For the wood pellets, with the diameter of
8 millimeters before pyrolysis, the diameter resulted in approximately 6 millimeters after
pyrolysis. The diameter, for each type of biochar pellet, was similar, regardless of the
pyrolysis temperature.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.10: Diameter for different types of biochar pellets produced through pyrolysis at
different temperatures.
The diameter of both types of BRF pellets, straw and miscanthus was about 6­7 millime­
ters after pyrolysis, as can be seen on figure 4.10 with the standard deviation for each
type of biochar pellet.
The diameter of the biochar pellets after pyrolysis resulted in similar values, mostly depen­
dent on the size of the pellets before pyrolysis. As an example, biomass pellets with the
diameter of 8 millimeters, before pyrolysis, resulted in the diameter of about 6 millimeters,
after pyrolysis. Biomass pellets with the diameter 6 millimeters, before pyrolysis, resulted
in biochar pellets with the diameter of about 4 millimeters, after pyrolysis.
4.4.2
Comparison of diameter of biochar pellets produced at 600◦C
The diameter for the repetition of six of the biochar types was determined as well and the
average diameter for the biochar pellets produced at 600◦C. As can be seen in table 4.9
the diameter was similar for both productions, as was expected due to same feedstock
used and conditions.
Table 4.9: Diameter for different types of biochar pellets produced through pyrolysis at
different temperatures at 600◦C.
Type of biochar pellet
Produced at
600◦C [kN]
Repetition at
600◦C [kN]
Average at
600◦C [kN]
BB Biogas
6,3 ± 0,1
6,4 ± 0,1
6,3 ± 0,1
Vrå
6,6 ± 0,1
6,7 ± 0,1
6,7 ± 0,1
Straw
6,3 ± 0,2
6,3 ± 0,1
6,3 ± 0,1
Miscanthus
6,4 ± 0,0
6,3 ± 0,3
6,3 ± 0,2
Pine
4,3 ± 0,1
4,3 ± 0,0
4,3 ± 0,0
Beech
4,1 ± 0,0
4,2 ± 0,1
4,1 ± 0,1
Additionally, chopped miscanthus biochar was produced at 600◦C. The chopped mis­
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
42
==PAGE:50==
canthus was oval in shape, therefore the size (diameter) could not be determined and
compared to the diameter of the biochar pellets and Leca aggregates.
4.4.3
Leca
Leca was much different in shape compared to the biochar pellets, as can be seen on
figures 1.7 and 2.6. The Leca aggregates were grouped together, depending on diameter
size. Aggregates with the diameter of 4­10mm were grouped together and aggregates
with the diameter of 10­20mm were grouped together. These Leca aggregates are used
as construction materials in foundations.
Even though the shape of the Leca aggregates and the biochar pellets was different, the
diameter could be be compared. The diameter of the biochar pellets was similar to the
Leca aggregates with the diameter of 4­10mm, since the biochar pellets had the diameter
of about 4 to 6 millimeters. The biochar pellets differ in length. The aggregates and the
biochar pellets did not differ greatly in size, therefore it most likely does not affect the
application as a layer in the foundation. The biochar pellets are most likely as applicable
for the application as the aggregates, in regard to size.
4.5
Elemental analysis
4.5.1
CHNS content for each type of biochar
The carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur content was determined using the elemental
analyzer (Chapter 3.5.1). The elemental analysis (CHN) results can be seen in table 4.10.
Table 4.10: Carbon (C),hydrogen (H) and nitrogen (N) content on average for different
types of biochar produced at 600◦C and the standard deviation.
Biochar type
(N) %
(C) %
(H) %
BB Biogas
1,7 ± 0,03
57,2 ± 0,97
1,6 ± 0,04
Vrå
1,5 ± 0,24
55,2 ± 8,68
1,5 ± 0,27
Straw
0,8 ± 0,04
73,3 ± 0,71
2,1 ± 0,08
Miscanthus
1,1 ± 0,03
68,9 ± 3,22
1,9 ± 0,06
Pine
0,2 ± 0,33
93,3 ± 4,28
2,5 ± 0,25
Beech
0,1 ± 0,23
95,9 ± 4,51
2,6 ± 0,08
For all biochar samples, sulfur content resulted in 0%. For the samples, the sulfur can be
assumed to be a part of the ash content, if present in the biochar, with other nutrients.
The biochar type with the highest carbon content, and could therefore store the highest
amount of carbon in buildings as a construction material, were pine and beech biochar
pellets. The carbon content resulted in more than 90% for pine and beech biochar. The
beech biochar had the highest content, 95,9 ± 4,5%. This suggests wood types, at least
pine and beech, are more suitable as a construction material in regard to functioning as a
carbon storage. In addition, those biochar wood types had the highest hydrogen content
compared to the other types of biochar.
The biochar types with the highest nitrogen content were the BRF biochar, BB Biogas and
Vrå biochar, and the lowest carbon content.
4.5.2
CHNO and ash content
For a complete elemental analysis, the ash was determined. Consequently, the oxygen
content could be determined using the CHN and ash results, with equation 3.2.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
43
==PAGE:51==
The ash content was determined, with a furnace at 550◦C for 12 hours. The ash content
differs greatly depending on the biochar type.
From the ash and CHN result, the oxygen content was below zero for several types of
biochar (Vrå and beech biochar pellets), most likely due to standard deviation. The ash
content experiment was repeated, in order to ascertain whether those CHNO and ash
content results were accurate.
The second experiment and determination of the ash content resulted in oxygen content
below zero for Vrå, beech and straw biochar when calculated, using the ash and CHN
content. The most likely reason for these results could be due to the standard deviation
of CHN and/or ash.
The ash content was averaged, from both experiments. Those result can be seen in table
4.11.
Table 4.11: Average ash content, from two separate experiments, for different types of
biochars produced at 600◦C.
Biochar type
Ash content [%]
BB Biogas
36,5 ± 1,3
Vrå
44,6 ± 1,4
Straw
22,2 ± 3,4
Miscanthus
22,3 ± 3,7
Pine
1,5 ± 0,1
Beech
2,1 ± 0,1
The CHN, ash content, and the oxygen content resulting from those averaged values can
be seen in table 4.12.
Table 4.12: CHNO and ash content, using average ash content from two experiments.
Biochar pellets were produced through pyrolysis at 600◦C.
Type of biochar
(N) %
(C) %
(H) %
Ash %
(O) %
BB Biogas
1,7
57,2
1,6
36,5
3,0
Vrå
1,5
55,2
1,5
44,6
­2,8
Straw
0,8
73,3
2,1
22,2
1,6
Miscanthus
1,1
68,9
1,9
22,3
5,8
Pine
0,2
93,3
2,5
1,5
2,6
Beech
0,1
95,9
2,6
2,1
­0,7
Assuming the ash content contains nutrients, such as phosphorus and potassium, the
BRF pellets BB Biogas and Vrå could possible be more suitable for applications where
nutrients are important, as soil amendment for example[4]. The BRF pellets also had the
highest content of nitrogen.
Straw and miscanthus biochar had about 70% carbon content, and about 22% ash con­
tent. Utilizing straw and miscanthus biochar, more carbon can be stored compared to
the BRF biochar. However, those types of biochar could also be suitable for applications,
where nutrients are important.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
44
==PAGE:52==
As mentioned, pine and beech contain the highest carbon content compared to the other
biochar types. Pine and beech biochar would be especially suitable for applications where
the main goal is to store carbon and the nutrients are not of importance.
4.6
Water absorption
The water absorption was determined for six types of biochar pellets: BB Biogas pellets,
Vrå pellets, straw pellets, miscanthus pellets, pine pellets and beech pellets produced at
600◦C and the Leca aggregates (figure 4.11).
Figure 4.11: Water absorption comparison of biochar pellets at 600◦C and Leca.
As can be seen above, the water absorption differs for different types of biochar pellets
but Leca had generally lower water absorption values. The Vrå biochar pellets had the
lowest water absorption values, compared to other biochar types. The values were similar
for Vrå biochar pellets and the Leca aggregates (10­20mm), when the standard deviation
was taken into account.
Straw biochar pellets had the highest water absorption, of the biochar pellet types. The
chopped miscanthus had substantially greater average water absorption value, compared
to the biochar pellets and Leca. This suggests that the chopped miscanthus is a highly
porous material, resulting in high water withholding abilities.
Higher water absorption indicates that using it as a construction material could possibly
result in improved moisture control. This capability of biochar could be beneficial for hu­
midity regulation[20]. Whether the capability of withholding water influences this specific
application as a layer in the foundation, regarding thermal conductivity and drainage, is
not known for certain. Further testing is needed to know for sure if the water absorption
is beneficial for the specific construction material as a layer in the foundation, in regard to
the thermal insulation, drainage or sound insulation.
4.7
Pellet durability test
The pellet durability was determined with two types of biochar pellets from Stiesdal, pro­
duced from wood and biogas residue fibers (table 4.13).
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
45
==PAGE:53==
Table 4.13: Average pellet durability of two types of biochar pellets from Stiesdal.
Type of biochar pellet
Average
durability [%]
Wood biochar pellets from Stiesdal
94,172
BRF biochar pellets from Stiesdal
84,759
Surprisingly, the wood biochar pellets had higher durability value. As an example, the
crushing resistance was higher for BRF pellets (BB Biogas and Vrå) compared to wood
pellets (pine and beech). Therefore, BRF pellets would be expected to be more durable.
The BRF biochar pellets from Stiesdal were possibly not of the best quality, as they
seemed quite broken and in bad shape before testing with the tumbling tester. Another
possible reason, for why the BRF pellets from Stiesdal were less durable, might be due to
the handling process of the pellets. Also, the material used for BRF, before pelletization,
was a powder material, whereas the wood pellets were produced from larger sawdust
particles.
Leca clay aggregates were also tested with the durability tester in order to compare the
aggregates to the biochar pellets from Stiesdal.
Table 4.14: Average durability of two different sizes of Leca aggregates from Saint­
Gobain.
Type of Leca
Average
durability [wt%]
Leca 4­10mm
93,509
Leca 10­20mm
84,738
Table 4.14 shows durability for Leca aggregates, with the diameter 4­10 millimeters and
10­20 millimeters. The durability was lower for the aggregates with larger diameter. Pos­
sible explanation was due to the size and shape, even though the crushing resistance
was higher for Leca with larger diameter.
Compared to the biochar pellets from Stiesdal, the durability of Leca resulted in similar
values. The durability of BRF biochar pellets from Stiesdal and Leca 10­20mm resulted
in similar values, approximately 85 wt%. Durability of wood biochar pellets and the Leca
aggregates with smaller diameter resulted in similar values, approximately 94 wt%.
4.8
Comparison of biochar types produced at 600◦C and Leca
For the initial evaluation, the crushing resistance, size (diameter) and bulk density was
determined. The average values for biochar types, produced through pyrolysis at 600◦C,
and different sizes of Leca were compared, as well as the average water absorption for
each type of biochar and Leca (Table 4.15).
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
46
==PAGE:54==
Table 4.15: Comparison of average results for biochar types produced at 600◦C and dif­
ferent sizes of Leca aggregates (ø4­10mm and ø10­20mm).
Type
Average crushing
resistance [kN]
Average bulk
density
[kg/m3]
Average
diameter
[mm]
Water
absorption
[%]
Leca 10­20mm
173 ± 25
10­20
26 ± 5
Leca 4­10mm
252 ± 22
4­10
14 ± 1
Leca 4mm
0,12 ± 0,00
4
Leca 6mm
0,12 ± 0,01
6
Leca 10mm
0,19 ± 0,03
10
Leca 20mm
0,33 ± 0,08
20
BB biogas
0,21 ± 0,03
395 ± 8
6,3 ± 0,1
39 ± 2
Vrå
0,24 ± 0,05
501 ± 45
6,7 ± 0,1
27 ± 1
Straw
0,14 ± 0,01
256 ± 8
6,3 ± 0,1
75 ± 2
Miscanthus
0,15 ± 0,02
302 ± 10
6,3 ± 0,2
64 ± 5
Pine
0,17 ± 0,02
351 ± 12
4,3 ± 0,0
42 ± 0
Beech
0,17 ± 0,01
309 ± 17
4,1 ± 0,1
44 ± 2
Chopped miscanthus
0,11 ± 0,00
62 ± 2
344 ± 23
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
47
==PAGE:55==
5
Discussion
5.1
Biochar as a construction material
Utilizing biochar as a construction material, carbon can be stored as well as possibly im­
proving properties of the construction material. The biochar produced, for this work, was
compared to properties of Leca aggregates, currently used as a layer in the foundation.
The purpose of the layer in foundations is as subfloor insulation, in ground or intermedium
floor.
The comparison could indicate whether biochar pellets, or chopped miscanthus biochar,
could be an alternative to Leca clay aggregates as a construction material, in the building
industry. The results indicate, that some types of biochar could function as efficiently as
different sizes of Leca, in regard to the properties tested.
For different process conditions (temperature), the initial evaluation showed that the dif­
ference in values, was generally not significant. For that reason, one process temperature
was chosen for further testing and production of biochar. The chosen temperature was
600◦C, mostly due to stability of the carbon at such temperatures and due to the fact that
600◦C is close to the process temperature mostly used in industry[13].
The commercial wood pellets, with different diameter (ø8mm and ø6mm, before pyroly­
sis), were used as feedstock to determine if the diameter would affect the results. It was
concluded, after testing, that the difference in diameter did not have significant affect on
test results, regarding the crushing resistance. For that reason, those commercial pellets
were not used for further production and testing.
For the initial evaluation (Table 4.15), the crushing resistance of the biochar pellets should
not be lower than the crushing resistance for Leca aggregates similar in size[1]. For these
biochar types in table 4.15, produced at 600◦C, this requirement is fulfilled, if the biochar
pellets with diameter of approximately 4mm or 6mm are compared with Leca aggregates
with the same diameter. Crushing resistance for BRF biochar pellets was closer to larger
Leca, with higher values than Leca with diameter of 10mm.
Regarding crushing resistance, every value resulted in crushing resistance below 1 kN,
with different values depending on the type of sample.
Pine and beech biochar pellets, produced at 600◦, resembled crushing resistance values
for Leca (ø10mm). Chopped miscanthus, miscanthus pellets and straw biochar pellets,
produced at 600◦C, had similar crushing resistance values as smaller Leca, with a di­
ameter of 4mm and 6mm. The biochar, produced at 600◦C, that resembled larger Leca
(ø10­20mm) were the BRF pellets (BB Biogas and Vrå), in regard to crushing resistance.
Higher crushing resistance for Leca (ø20mm) might affect the application, but further test­
ing would be needed to be certain.
The clay aggregates and the biochar pellets had similar crushing resistance values, though
some were slightly higher than others (BRF pellets and larger Leca). Consequently, the
biochar would be as affective as the Leca clay aggregates in that sense. Possible reasons
for the difference in crushing resistance values, for the BRF pellets and larger Leca, could
be due to size and shape, especially of Leca, and the feedstock used for the production
of the biochar pellets.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
48
==PAGE:56==
Overall, the bulk density of Leca aggregates was generally lower than of the biochar
pellets. Chopped miscanthus had significantly lower bulk density, compared to the biochar
pellets and Leca. Leca, with diameter 10­20mm, resulted in lower bulk density values
compared to the biochar pellets, while Leca (ø4­10mm) had similar values to straw biochar
pellets.
The bulk density was quite different between types of biochar and Leca aggregates, which
might affect the application in regard to mass of material needed.
Miscanthus, and the wood types (pine and beech) produced at 600◦C, had higher bulk
density values, and the BRF pellets (BB Biogas and Vrå) had significantly higher values
than the Leca aggregates. This indicates more mass is needed for the application, for
higher bulk density.
As has been mentioned, the diameter of the biochar pellets was around 4mm or 6mm,
after pyrolysis. Wood types (pine and beech) had the diameter of approximately 4mm,
and the BRF pellets (BB Biogas and Vrå), straw and miscanthus had the diameter of
around 6mm, after pyrolysis.
Regarding size or diameter, the Leca clay aggregates and biochar types were different
in shape. As a construction material, the size and shape difference is most likely not
significant enough to affect the application greatly. The diameter of the biochar pellets
resembled Leca with smaller diameter (ø4­10mm).
Chopped miscanthus biochar differed, compared to Leca and the biochar pellets, in bulk
density and water absorption, which might affect the application.
Water absorption or the ability to withhold water differs depending on the type of sample.
The water holding capacity was significantly larger for the chopped miscanthus biochar,
which might be beneficial for a construction material. Most biochar types had higher water
absorption values compared to the Leca aggregates. Whether this property influences
the purpose of the specific application as a layer in the foundation, in regard to thermal
or sound insulation, drainage, filler or radon suction is unknown and would need further
testing to determine. The water absorption, according to Schmidt et al.[20], is a property
for regulating humidity. This means, utilizing biochar could possibly improve humidity
levels in buildings.
For transportation, the durability might be important. Durability testing of the biochar pel­
lets from Stiesdal and Leca aggregates resulted in similar values. The results suggests
that, in general, the durability might be similar for biochar pellets and Leca aggregates. It
can be assumed from those results, that biochar pellets could be as efficient as Leca clay
aggregates, in regard to durability.
As has been discussed in the literature review, the EBC certificate released guidelines
for a biochar certification, where specific properties of the biochar need to be met if the
certificate is desired. As a a part of these properties, the carbon content needs to be
stated. The ratio of hydrogen and organic carbon as well as oxygen and organic carbon
needs to be lower than values specified in the guidelines. The H/Corg needs to be, ac­
cording to the guidelines, lower than 0,7 and the O/Corg ratio needs to be lower than 0,4,
should the biochar be used as a construction material. For interest´s sake, the ratio for
the biochar types produced for this thesis project was determined, in order to determine
whether these types would meet the guidelines. The results can be seen in table 5.1.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
49
==PAGE:57==
Table 5.1: The hydrogen or oxygen and carbon ratio according to guidelines and the actual
ratio for the biochar types produced at 600◦C.
Type of biochar
H/Corg according
to guidelines
H/Corg
O/Corg according
to guidelines
O/Corg
BB Biogas
<0,7
0,03
<0,4
0,05
Vrå
<0,7
0,03
<0,4
0,05
Straw
<0,7
0,03
<0,4
0,02
Miscanthus
<0,7
0,03
<0,4
0,08
Pine
<0,7
0,03
<0,4
0,03
Beech
<0,7
0,03
<0,4
0,01
The results demonstrate that the H/Corg for all biochar types meet the value in the EBC
guidelines. The H/Corg ratio is 0,0 for every type of biochar, when rounded up. The ratio
indicates the biochar stability, as has been mentioned in the literature review[19]. This
indicates that these biochar types, produced at 600◦C, contain stable carbon. The O/Corg
ratio is also in accordance with the guidelines, that is below 0,4.
5.2
Carbon storage and quantity of biochar
The carbon storage potential and quantity of biochar needed annually in danish market
were estimated, from calculations from Saint­Gobain.
Average square meters built annually from the years 2018 to 2021 was calculated by
Saint­Gobain to be around 6.000.000 m2, from information from Statistic Denmark. It was
also assumed, by them, that 75% of the floor area could be filled with the biochar, with
the thickness of 10cm (or 0,1 m), that is 0,1 m3/m2 could be filled with biochar[1].
The bulk density in [ton/m3] for each type of biochar was used in order to determine the
carbon storage, and the annual amount of biochar needed. How much biochar needed
annually was calculated using equation 5.1, giving tons every year needed of biochar[1].
Biochar needed annually [tons] = 6.000.000m2 ∗75% ∗0, 1m3/m2 ∗bulk density
(5.1)
It was assumed by Saint­Gobain that 90% of biochar from wood is carbon[1], but carbon
percentage for each type of biochar from different biomasses will be used, determined
with elemental analysis.
By using the amount of biochar needed annually and multiplying with the carbon percent,
the ton of carbon needed could be found.
The carbon storage potential was determined, using the security margin of 85% from a
”Preview of the Global Biochar C­Sink Certification” from ”Materials”[34]. This security
margin is 15% and was subtracted from the carbon value, the equation was multiplied
with 85%[1].
The carbon storage potential in tons of CO2 could be determined with equation 5.2[1].
Further calculations and data used can be seen in appendix A.
Carbon storage potential = ton biochar needed annually ∗mol CO2/mol C ∗85% (5.2)
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
50
==PAGE:58==
This estimation was calculated from the bulk density and the carbon content of each
biochar type.
The quantity of biochar needed every year as well as carbon stored potential in CO2
equivalent for each type of biochar pellets can be seen in table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Average carbon stored in buildings and amount of biochar needed in Denmark
every year for biochar pellets produced at 600◦C.
Type
Average carbon
stored annually
[ton CO2]
Average amount
of biochar needed
annually [ton]
BB Biogas biochar pellets
315.028
176.850
Vrå biochar pellets
404.945
235.350
Straw biochar pellets
260.093
113.850
Miscanthus biochar pellets
295.833
137.700
Pine pellets
445.981
153.450
Beech pellets
407.475
136.350
Additionally, the average carbon storage potential and biochar amount needed annu­
ally for chopped miscanthus was estimated. This estimation resulted in, respectively,
59.940 tons CO2 and 27.900 tons biochar needed annually. Due to low bulk density of
the chopped miscanthus, these values are considerably lower compared to the biochar
pellets.
Average annual carbon storage potential ranges from 260.000 to 450.000 tons of CO2.
Those values depend on the type of biochar, its bulk density and carbon content of the
biochar.
With the high carbon content, pine biochar pellets can store most carbon annually, ap­
proximately 446.000 tons CO2 every year. The possibility to store carbon in buildings
is one of the advantages of using biochar in construction materials. According to Woolf
et al.[13], biochar stores the captured carbon for considerably longer time compared to
carbon emission from biomass decay or combustion, by stabilizing the carbon from the
organic matter.
If biochar was to completely substitute Leca in foundation layers, the amount of biochar
needed on average in Denmark every year would be from around 114.000 to 240.000 tons
of biochar. The average amount of biochar needed annually depends on the bulk density
of the material. With the highest bulk density, most volume of Vrå biochar pellets would
be needed annually, approximately 235.000 tons every year. Less than 200.000 tons are
needed annually for every other type of biochar. Due to low bulk density, straw biochar
pellets resulted in lowest average amount needed annually compared to other biochar pel­
lets. Chopped miscanthus biochar had significantly lower values, both in carbon storage
and average amount needed annually, due to low bulk density.
5.3
Thermal insulation and conductivity
Thermal insulation, as one of the main purposes of the explored construction material
(layer in foundations), is associated with the thermal conductivity. Lower thermal conduc­
tivity results in improved thermal insulation[35].
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
51
==PAGE:59==
The thermal conductivity can be determined through literature. The thermal conductivity,
for Leca, can be seen in table 5.3[36, 37].
Table 5.3: Thermal conductivity for Leca.
Type
Thermal conductivity
Leca 10­20mm
0,095 W/mK
Leca 4­10mm
0,095 W/mK
Biochar has, according to literature, low thermal conductivity as a result of porous char­
acteristics of the biochar. Thermal conductivity, of mixtures of mortar and biochar, de­
creased with increase of biochar amount in the mixture[35].
This indicates, that using biochar as a construction material, with low thermal conductivity,
might be efficient for the purpose of insulating thermally[35].
5.4
Future work
For future work, further testing would be needed before the biochar can be used as a
construction material in the building industry, for the specific applications as a layer in
foundations.
Since the material and application is new to the CE­marking standards, the solution will
need an European Technical Assessment (ETA) where key properties relevant for the
application have to be tested and declared when selling the product[1]. The CE marking
indicates that the material meets requirements in regard to safety, health and environmen­
tal protection[38]. These tests must be conducted by certified test institutes, relevant tests
based on similar applications can be found in standards for Leca (EN 14063­1). The test
standards for Leca differ from the test performed in this thesis, however this initial testing
gives a good indication of which biochar type would be suitable for the application[1]. In
order to make sure the biochar is safe to use as a construction material, several experi­
ments would need to take place, such as reaction to fire and testing for toxic chemicals.
Large­scale testing of the biochar for this specific application might also be needed, pos­
sibly in layers in foundations.
For this work, the retention time and heating rate was kept contant. For future work, it
could be interesting to change those conditions in order to determine if it has any affect
on the biochar and the properties of it.
For this thesis work, several different biomasses were used in order to compare biochar
yield and other experiments on the biochar types. For future works, solely waste biomass
would preferably be used as feedstock. As an example, wood waste could be used.
Wood from buildings, that are being demolished, could be pelletized or used directly as
feedstock for biochar production. This could be a sustainable and environmental friendly
way to use waste wood from buildings.
Possibly, further utilization (recycling) of the biochar pellets, used in foundations, at the
end­of­life stage would be desired. That way, biochar could gain a different purpose after
the buildings demolition.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
52
==PAGE:60==
6
Conclusion
This work investigates production and utilization of biochar for construction materials in
the building industry, as a layer in the foundation. Utilizing biochar is an excellent way of
storing captured carbon, to minimize carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere. Simul­
taneously, properties of the construction material might possibly be improved.
The properties determined for the biochar were compared to the Leca properties, in order
to estimate how applicable the biochar types would be as a layer in foundations (ground
and intermedium floors). If these properties are similar, it might suggest that biochar would
be as efficient as Leca, for this specific application as a construction material, in regard
to those properties.
The properties of biochar and Leca resulted, mostly, in similar values, indicating that
biochar would be suitable for the application as a construction material. Chopped miscant­
hus values, not pelletized, differed more from the Leca compared to the bicohar pellets,
especially in regard to bulk density and water absorption. Pelletizing the biochar might be
more suitable for this application, if the properties of Leca and biochar ought to be similar.
Pine and beech pellets, with the greatest carbon content, showed potential for being
utilized in the building industry, to store the carbon without the need of nutrients in the
biochar. Pine and beech, as well as straw and miscanthus had similar crushing resis­
tance to Leca with diameter of 4mm and 6mm, indicating these biochar pellets would be
as efficient in regard to compression testing.
BRF biochar pellets (BB Biogas and Vrå), showed great potential in regard to crushing
resistance. If the building material ought to be able resist breaking, these types of pel­
lets would be preferred. In applications, where Leca 10­20mm would be used, the BRF
biochar pellets might be appropriate. The carbon content, and therefore carbon storage,
was lower for the BRF pellets, which might not be desired for construction materials.
Biochar amount needed annually, according to estimation, shows how bulk density af­
fects the amount of biochar needed for buildings annually. With higher bulk density, more
amount of biochar is needed annually to meet the need in the building industry.
Utilizing biochar in construction materials might improve the properties of the material, as
well as store carbon simultaneously. The carbon storage depends mostly on the carbon
content and bulk density of the biochar type, resulting in different values for different types
of biochar. In this work, wood types (pine and beech) had significantly higher carbon
content compared to the other types, resulting in highest carbon storage ability. For future
work, utilizing waste wood from buildings would be an excellent way of reducing waste
and making the application, as a construction material, more environmentally sustainable.
Overall, properties and qualities desired for the construction material should be the decid­
ing factor for the type of biomass used for the biochar production. For the initial evaluation,
different biochar types resulted in similar values to different sizes of the Leca aggregates.
It needs to be considered what size of Leca (ø4­10mm or ø10­20mm) is needed for the
application when choosing the type of biochar preferred. Water absorption for most of
the biochar types, except BRF biochar pellets (Vrå), resulted in significantly higher values
compared to Leca. For humidity regulation, this property of the biochar could be beneficial
as a construction material, in layers in foundations.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
53
==PAGE:61==
For this work, the focus was on the initial evaluation and testing. Before utilizing the
biochar for this application, further testing of important properties relevant for the applica­
tion is needed. The initial evaluation, however, did give a good indication of which biochar
type would be preferred for the application, in layers in foundations.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
54
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1] Mona Ammitzbøll Rasmussen, Saint­Gobain, Private conversation, 2024.
[2] D. Meyer, “Biochar—a survey,” Special assignment in energy and process engineer­
ing. Finland: Tampere University of Technology, 2009.
[3] A. Hornung,
Pyrolysis.
John Wiley
Sons,
Ltd,
2014,
ch. 1,
4,
pp. 1–
19 , 99–112. [Online]. Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
9781118693643.ch4
[4] M. Irfan, Q. Chen, Y. Yue, R. Pang, Q. Lin, X. Zhao, and H. Chen, “Co­production
of biochar, bio­oil and syngas from halophyte grass (achnatherum splendens l.)
under three different pyrolysis temperatures,” Bioresource Technology, vol. 211, pp.
457–463, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0960852416303716
[5] D. Gahane, D. Biswal, and S. Mandavgane, “Life cycle assessment of biomass py­
rolysis,” BioEnergy Research, vol. 15, p. 1390, 01 2022.
[6] M. D. Peter Weisberg and p. f. C. E. C. Janet Hawkes (The Climate Trust,
“Carbon market investment criteria for biochar projects,” Public Interest Energy
Research (PIER) Program FINAL PROJECT REPORT, pp. 1–2, September, 2010.
[Online]. Available:
https://biochar­international.org/wp­content/uploads/2018/04/
WestCARB­Biochar­Report­Final.pdf
[7] J. Lehmann and S. E. Joseph, Eds., Biochar for Environmental Management: Sci­
ence, Technology and Implementation (3rd ed.).
Routledge, 2024, ch. 1, 28.
[8] F. Campuzano, R. C. Brown, and J. D. Martínez, “Auger reactors for pyrolysis of
biomass and wastes,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 102, pp.
372–373; 375, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364032118308098
[9] P. Gvero, I. Mujanić, S. Papuga, S. Vasković, and R. Anatunović, Review of Synthetic
Fuels and New Materials Production Based on Pyrolysis Technologies, 07 2017, pp.
70–73.
[10] Stiesdal A/S,
“Skyclean,
carbon
capture
and
bioenergy,”
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.stiesdal.com/wp­content/uploads/2023/04/32514­Stiesdal­
SkyClean­brochure.pdf
[11] BTG Bioliquids, “Technology to convert biomass residues into a bio­oil.” [Online].
Available: https://www.btg­bioliquids.com/our­technology/
[12] IBI, “Biochar is a valuable soil amendment.” [Online]. Available: https://biochar­
international.org/about­biochar/
[13] D. Woolf, J. Amonette, F. Street­Perrott, J. Lehmann, and S. Joseph, “Sustainable
biochar to mitigate global climate change. nat comm 1:56,” Nature communications,
vol. 1, p. 56, 08 2010.
[14] J. Lehmann, J. Gaunt, and M. Rondon, “Bio­char sequestration in terrestrial ecosys­
tems – a review,” Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, vol. 11, p.
403, 06 2006.
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
55
==PAGE:63==
[15] IBI, “Removing carbon.” [Online]. Available: https://biochar­international.org/about­
biochar/sustainability­climate­change/
[16] IBI, “Guiding principles for a sustainable biochar industry,”
2012. [Online].
Available:
https://biochar­international.org/wp­content/uploads/2018/04/Guiding_
Principles_Sustainable_Biochar.pdf
[17] EBC, “Ebc and wbc guidelines
documents.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.
european­biochar.org/en/ct/2­EBC­and­WBC­guidelines­documents
[18] WBC (2023), “World biochar certificate – guidelines for a sustainable production of
biochar and its certification,” Carbon Standards International, Frick, Switzerland, p. 4,
Version 1.0 from 15th September 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.european­
biochar.org/media/doc/2/wbc_1_0b.pdf
[19] EBC (2012­2023), “European biochar certificate ­ guidelines for a sustainable
production of biochar.” Carbon Standards International (CSI), Frick, Switzerland.,
pp. 10, 21–26, Version 10.3 from 5th Apr 2022. [Online]. Available:
https:
//www.european­biochar.org/media/doc/2/version_en_10_3.pdf
[20] W. K. Schmidt HP, “The 55 uses of biochar,” the Biochar Journal 2014, Arbaz,
Switzerland, Version of 12 th May 2014. [Online]. Available:
www.biochar­
journal.org/en/ct/2
[21] S. HP, “The use of biochar as building material,” the Biochar Journal 2014, Arbaz,
Switzerland, Version of 12 th May 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.biochar­
journal.org/en/ct/3
[22] Leca International, “What is leca® lwa.” [Online]. Available: https://www.leca.com/
[23] ——, “Production.” [Online]. Available: https://www.leca.com/production
[24] ——,
“Housing,
application of leca® lwa in buildings;
walls,
slabs,
floor
fillings or draining around and under the structure.” [Online]. Available:
https:
//www.leca.com/Home/applications/housing
[25] ——,
“Housing.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.leca.com/Home/applications/
housing
[26] M. Masche, M. Puig Arnavat, P. Jensen, J. Holm, S. Clausen, J. Ahrenfeldt, and
U. Henriksen, “From wood chips to pellets to milled pellets: The mechanical pro­
cessing pathway of austrian pine and european beech,” Powder Technology, vol.
350, 03 2019.
[27] Lotte Buch Salling­Mortensen, StrawTech, Private conversation, 2024.
[28] Christina Frisk, Stiesdal, Private conversation, email, 2024.
[29] N. Nielsen, J. Holm, and C. Felby, “Effect of fiber orientation on compression and
frictional properties of sawdust particles in fuel pellet production,” Energy Fuels, vol.
23(6):3211­6, pp. 3211–3216, 06 2009.
[30] W. Stelte, J. Holm, A. Sanadi, S. Barsberg, J. Ahrenfeldt, and U. Henriksen, “A study
of bonding and failure mechanisms in fuel pellets from different biomass resources,”
Biomass and Bioenergy, vol. 35(2), pp. 910–918, 02 2011.
[31] E.
Microanalysis,
“2,5­bis(5­tert­butyl­2­benzo­oxazol­2­yl)
thiophene
(bbot)
oas
see
certificate
435345
expiry
15­nov­28
1g.”
[Online].
Available:
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
56
==PAGE:64==
https://www.elementalmicroanalysis.com/product_details.php?product=B2044&
description=2,5­(Bis(5­tert­butyl­2­benzo­oxazol­2­yl)%20thiophene%20(BBOT)
%20OAS%20See%20Certificate%20For%20Values%201gm
[32] EuroVector. [Online]. Available: https://www.eurovector.it/
[33] H. N. M. z. D. J. Schmidt HP, Abiven S, “Permanence of soil applied biochar,”
the Biochar Journal 2022, Arbaz, Switzerland, Version of 23 th December 2022.
[Online]. Available: www.biochar­journal.org/en/ct/109
[34] Carbon Standard International AG, “Preview of the global biochar c­sink certifica­
tion.” [Online]. Available: https://www.european­biochar.org/media/doc/139/matrix_
list_ebc.pdf
[35] M. Boumaaza, A. Belaadi, M. Bourchak, K. A. Juhany, M. Jawaid, M. T. Marvila,
and A. R. de Azevedo, “Optimization of flexural properties and thermal conductivity
of washingtonia plant biomass waste biochar reinforced bio­mortar,” Journal of
Materials Research and Technology, vol. 23, p. 3524, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2238785423002417
[36] Leca Denmark A/S, “Leca, declaration of performance,” 2021. [Online]. Avail­
able:
https://www.leca.dk/sites/leca.dk/files/DoP/16021000/DoP_DK_16021000_
EN%2014063­1_UK_Ver2_01012020.pdf
[37] The Norwegian EPD Foundation, Leca International, “Environmental product decla­
ration, in accordance with 14025 and en15804+a2, leca® 10­20, leca® large,
leca denmark,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.leca.dk/sites/leca.dk/files/pdf/
NEPD­4156­3384_Leca­­10­20­­Leca­­Large­­Leca­Denmark.pdf
[38] European Union, 07.03.2024. [Online]. Available:
https://europa.eu/youreurope/
business/product­requirements/labels­markings/ce­marking/index_en.htm
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
57
==PAGE:65==
Production and Characterization of Biochar for Construction Materials
67
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.kt.dtu.dk
