==PAGE:1==
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evap-
orators considering accumulated frost
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Jian-Ting Jhou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Master of
Science in Mechanical Engineering Programme at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
The thesis was completed at the Section of Thermal Energy, Department of Civil and Me-
chanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark. The work was carried out
in a five-month period from January 22nd to June 22nd, 2024. The thesis was conducted
under the supervision of Jonas Kjær Jensen who is Head of Studies and Associate Pro-
fessor at DTU, and Wiebke Brix Markussen who is a senior consultant at the Center for
Refrigeration and Heat Pump Technology of Danish Technological Institute (DTI).
Jian-Ting Jhou - s222641
Lyngby, Denmark, 22.06.2024
ii
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This Master’s thesis models the heat transfer performance of ammonia finned-tube evap-
orator for large-scale heat pump applications. Heat pumps are regarded as a potential
pathway towards achieving the EU’s carbon neutrality goal in the heating sector. How-
ever, the most common air-source heat pumps frequently encounter the challenge of frost
accumulation in cold weather regions. Moreover, the promotion of natural refrigerants
has driven changes in the materials used for evaporators, questioning the validity for the
adoption of conventional performance evaluation models.
Considering the employment of thin-walled stainless steel tubes with large fin pitch used
for typical ammonia finned-tube evaporators, a one-dimensional heat diffusion model fea-
turing a transient frost development is constructed in this thesis. This thesis quantifies
the heat transfer performance of an ammonia finned-tube evaporator under frosting con-
ditions with the use of the constructed model. Furthermore, this thesis investigates the
effects of varying environmental parameters, including the humidity, velocity, and temper-
ature of airflow, on the frost accumulation on evaporator surface.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my parents and my sister for their unconditional
love. Thank you for always being supportive and for giving me key values. Also thank
you for listening when I felt homesick halfway around the world, as you always gave me
the confidence I needed to complete the degree.
I would like to thank Professor Jensen, who has been my supervisor of this Master’s thesis
for the last semester in DTU and the special project in the second semester. Thank you for
your guidance through the challenges I met in model construction, as well as continuous
support and discussion about my works.
I would like to thank my co-supervisor Markussen from Danish Technological Institute,
who provided immense knowledge and insightful comments within this Master’s thesis,
and also thank you for patiently and kindly answering my questions about the background
of this research project.
Thank you Arturo for looking at my work and thesis, and for helping me answer some
questions and giving me advice on how to proceed. Also thank you Ignacio, and Bruce,
alongside Arturo, for all the groupwork and for enjoying DTU outside courses. Finally,
thank you Arun for being such a nice friend, for so much time working together and for
the motivation you provided me to be better.
Finally, to whomever reads this thesis, I hope you find it interesting and useful for your
own research.
iv
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Towards decarbonization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Heating in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Heat pump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
CFD model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Results
31
4.1
Flow investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
No frost condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Frosting conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Discussion and Conclusion
49
5.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Bibliography
53
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Latin letters
Variable
Description
Units
A
area
m2
Ctb,ratio
area correction factor
−
cp
isobaric specific heat capacity
J·kg-1·K-1
D
mass diffusivity
m2·s-1
DHX
depth of heat exchanger
m
Dh
hydraulic diameter
m
dqa
sensible heat loss of an air stream passing a
heat exchanger
W
dmv,a
mass loss of water vapor within an air stream
passing a heat exchanger
kg·s-1
Fp
fin pitch
m
HHX
height of heat exchanger
m
h
convective heat transfer coefficient
W·m-2·K-1
hm
mass heat transfer coefficient
kg·m-2·s-1
k
thermal conductivity
W·m-1·K-1
L
length of tube half
m
Ls
sublimation or desublimation heat of water
J·kg-1
Le
Lewis number
−
M
molar mass
kg·mol-1
m
heat transfer parameter for one-dimensional dif-
fusion equation
m-1
m
mass flow rate
kg·s-1
m
′′
mass flux
kg·m-2·s-1
m
′′
δ
mass flux of frost layer thickness growth
kg·m-2·s-1
m
′′
ρ
mass flux of frost layer densification
kg·m-2·s-1
N
number of tube segment
−
Nu
Nusselt number
−
Pr
Prandtl number
−
p
pressure
pa
q
heat transfer rate
W
q
′′
heat flux
W·m-2
R
thermal resistance
K·W-1
RH
relative humidity
%
T
temperature
K or ◦C
t
time
s or hr
t
fixed thickness
m
˙V
volume flow rate of air
m3·hr-1 or m3·s-1
v
velocity
m·s-1
WHX
width of heat exchanger
m
X
characteristic length of plain fin
m
z
axial direction of the tube
−
Greek letters
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
1
==PAGE:10==
Variable
Description
Units
α
thermal diffusivity
m2·s-1
δ
transient thickness
m
ϵ
porosity
−
η
efficiency
−
µ
viscosity
kg·m-1s-1
ρ
density
kg·m-3
τ
tortuosity
−
ω
humidity ratio (mixing ratio)
kg·kg-1
Subscripts
Variable
Description
a
air or air-side or atmospheric
b
base
c
critical or cross-section
conv
convective
eff
effective
emb
embryo
f
fin
fr
frost
i
inner or ice
in
inlet
l
longitudinal
lat
latent
m
mean or moist air
max
maximum
o
overall or outer
out
outlet
r
refrigerant or refrigerant-side
ref
reference
row
tube row of finned-tube evaporator
prow
per tube row of finned-tube evaporator
s
surface
sat
saturation
seg
segment
sen
sensible
sup
supersaturation or supercooling
t
transitional or transverse
tb
tube
tot
total
v
water vapor
∞
free stream
2
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Towards decarbonization
Decarbonization usually refer to the reduction of greenhouse gases (GHGs) emissions
and the advancement of renewable energy sources. This concept has become one of the
most pivotal factors influencing the economic strategies and policies of nations. “Human
activities, principally through emissions of greenhouse gases, have unequivocally caused
global warming” as the opening statement of the latest 2023 report from United Nations’
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (UN-IPCC), with an increment of 1.1°C in
global surface temperature was measured in 2011-2020 compared to 1850-1900 [1]. This
rise in temperature can be mainly attributed to the emissions of GHGs, with the largest
share from carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and the rapid growing use of fluorinated
gases (F-gases).
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), global energy-related CO2 emissions
reached a record high of 37.4 billion tonnes (Gt) in 2023, with a growth of 1.1% [2] from
2022. Further studies of human-caused climate change regarding to GHGs emissions has
indicated that the results of warming effect, such as affecting water cycle, shifting weather
patterns, and melting land ice, would only make the situation worse [3]. As the surface
temperature of earth rises, deadly wildfire, record-high heatwaves, extreme precipita-
tion, devastating hurricanes, prolonged droughts, and severe floods will happen more
frequently and more intensely, increasing the risk to nature and human assets. People
will wonder if there is any hope of changing the situation. The answer is positive given by
IEA, with the data showing that two-third of possible energy-related emissions between
2019 and 2023 were saved due to the growing development of renewable energy and
clean energy technologies since 2019, resulting a structural slowdown of growth in total
CO2 emissions.
As the world’s third-largest economy, Europe historically accounted for 16% of CO2 emis-
sions in the past 150 years (from 1850 to 2019). In response to climate change, Europe
has delivered the European Green Deal, laying out the roadmap for the transformational
change towards climate-neutral by 2050 [1]. In order to meet this challenge, the short- and
mid-term climate target is set to reduce net GHGs emissions by at least 55% by 2030 (also
known as Fit for 55), compared to 1990 levels, and to 90% within the next decade. Since
75% of total GHGs emissions in the EU comes from the energy sector, the Commission
suggested that at least 42.5% of energy mix should be shifted to renewable energy fol-
lowing with a reduction of 36% to 39% in energy consumption for EU 2030 climate goal to
accelerate permitting for renewables development. Within this framework, it is expected
that there will be an increase in the integration of renewable energy into the power grid
which is able to support the transitions toward electrification in transportation and housing,
including the adoption of electric vehicles and the expansion of electricity-based heating,
refrigerating, and air conditioning systems.
1.2
Motivation
Heat pumps, as the major promoting heating technology in Europe, have several chal-
lenges to surpass. For air-source heat pumps, the most common issue arises from the
frost deposition on the evaporator surface when operating under cold weather. To explain,
when the operating temperature of the refrigerant at the evaporator section is below the
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
3
==PAGE:12==
dew temperature and freezing point of water, the frost starts accumulating on the heat
transfer surface. This problem can cause a severe degradation of the evaporator’s heat
exchange performance. When the accumulated frost layer seriously affects the energy
efficiency of the heat pump system, the intervention of the defrosting process is neces-
sary to restore the performance of the evaporator. To maximize the operational energy
efficiency, a model capable of predicting the frost deposition on the evaporator and esti-
mating the impact on the performance of the evaporator is required.
1.3
Objectives
The main objective of this Master’s thesis is to study and predict the performance of an
ammonia finned-tube evaporator with frost accumulation. Additionally, this study also
aims to analyze the impact of key environmental parameters of the frost accumulation on
the heat transfer surface. Therefore, the primary objectives of the present study are:
• To study the characteristics of stainless steel finned-tube evaporator with ammonia
as refrigerant for district heating system.
• To study the frosting behavior on the finned-tube evaporator.
• To modify the published one-dimensional (1D) heat diffusion equation with the con-
sideration of frost accumulated on the air side of the finned-tube evaporator.
• To construct a 1D transient model with possible frost accumulation to solve heat
diffusion equation for finned-tube evaporator.
• To construct three-dimensional (3D) computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models of
finned-tube evaporator with commercial software.
• To analyze and demonstrate heat transfer performance of finned-tube evaporator
through a quantitative comparison with different methods.
4
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
Heating in Denmark
Recognizing that ”decarbonising the heating and cooling sector is central to achieving the
energy transition,” in the European Green Deal [4], it is essential to transition industrial
processes, services, and household heating and cooling systems to utilize renewable
energy sources. According to Eurostat data, 50% of total gross of energy consumed
in EU is used for heating and cooling purpose, making it one of the three focus area
in Renovation Wave Initiatives, with 24.8% of total energy consumption from renewable
energy in 2022, steadily increasing from 12% in 2004 [5]. However, although the share
of renewable energy used for heating and cooling has doubled since 2004, more than
70% of energy consumption still comes from fossil fuels (mostly natural gas). In the span
of 10 years between 2012 and 2022, the average increase in the share of energy from
renewable sources for heating and cooling was 0.62 percentage point annually [6][7].
To promote the transition in heating and cooling sector, a revision of Renewable Energy
Directive was proposed by European Commission and came into force at the end of 2023.
This Directive requires EU countries to increase the average share of renewables by at
least 0.8 percentage point annually from 2021 to 2025, and 1.1 percentage points from
2026 to 2030. Moreover, according to the Directive, EU nations should also promote the
electrified renewable heating and cooling to reach 49% of renewable sources in building
sector by 2030 [8].
Being one of the leading nation in promoting decarbonisation among the member states
in EU, Denmark has furthered its climate actions and targets towards the EU 2030 goal,
aiming a reduction of 70% in GHG emissions and ensuring at least 90% of district heat-
ing consumption based on fossil-free energy sources by 2030, proposed in its National
Energy and Climate Plan (NECP) [9]. According to the analysis data from Denmark’s
Comprehensive Assessment 2020, the end-users heat demand in 2020 is 69 TWh, while
the final energy consumption for energy conversion unit is 82 TWh. The gap between
end-users heat demand and gross final energy requirement comes from the local loss
in all the steps of energy transformation within the energy conversion unit. As the num-
ber of construction projects is expected to keep growing in the near future, the end-users
heat demand in 2050 will have an increase of 5% compared to the level in 2020, esti-
mated by Rambøll, a global architecture, engineering and consultancy company based in
Copenhagen [10].
District heating plays a key role in heat demands from residential and service sectors
in Denmark, especially in urban areas. Today, district heating is accounting for around
80% of households heat demand, while the remaining 20% are heated individually via
oil boilers or increasing biomass boilers and domestic heat pumps [11]. Providing the
collective heat supply from district heating systems can be divided into two categories, one
of them is to generate the heat at the central district heating plants or the combined heat
and power (CHP) plants, and deliver them in the form of hot water distributing in the pipe
networks underground. The other type is to deliver the natural gas to each local household
via gas pipes and generate the heat by domestic natural gas boilers. According to a
report regarding to heat generation in Denmark by Danish District Heating Association in
2022, around 72% of energy consumed in district heating systems comes from renewable
sources, with 90% of them from biomass (include wood, straw, bio-degradable waste, bio-
gas and bio-oil), 4% from solar energy, and the rest from heat pumps and green electricity
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
5
==PAGE:14==
[12]. To reach a more ambitious climate goal by 2030, it is imperative to replace fossil fuel-
based energy conversion technologies like natural gas boilers, and combined heat and
power plants to more efficient and climate-friendly district heating systems.
2.2
Heat pump
As mentioned in the previous section, boosting electrification in heating system is a promis-
ing solution to meet the challenge of both reducing GHG emissions and improving energy
usage efficiency. Heat pump, with its ability of integrating to the growing renewable energy
into power grid and relatively high coefficient of performance (COP), current models are
three to five times higher than that of gas boilers, according to International Energy Agency
[13] and data from European Heat Pump Association [14], becomes a key in making heat-
ing more cleaner. It is clear to the reader that burning hydrocarbon generates emissions,
which occurs in the process of biomass boiler, another type of renewable-based heat-
ing technology. The solar thermal systems, on the other hand, might be a good choice
possessing non-emission feature; however, the unstable heat production due to weather
conditions could lower the annual efficiency. Compared to these renewable-based heat-
ing technologies, heat pumps might contribute a more stable and reliable heat generation
without emissions. However, there is no perfect heating technology in the world, heat
pumps also have their own challenges and limitations under a few certain environmental
conditions. This section aims to provide a glimpse into the fundamentals of heat pump
technology and focus on the potential challenges a specific type of heat pump, studied for
its adaptability in Denmark’s large-scale district heating systems, may encounter during
its operation.
2.2.1
Technologies behind heat pump
According to the Granryd [15], describing in chapter ”Heat Pumps - Technology and Appli-
cations” of Refrigerating Engineering published by the Department of Energy Technology
at KTH Royal Institute of Technology, ”free” energy of a low temperature (heat source) can
be ”pumped” to a higher temperature (heat sink) where it is used for heating purposes with
the help of heat pump. Similar to a refrigerating system which is also built for pumping the
heat from a lower temperature to a higher, the only difference is merely the purpose of
application. In heat pump systems, the heat source can be where low-temperature heat
energy is available, whether it is in nature or in waste of any kinds. The heat sink, on
the other hand, is where the heat is transferred to and utilized for heating purpose. To
move the heat from a low-temperature heat source to a high-temperature heat sink, four
essential thermodynamic processes are required: evaporation, compression, condensa-
tion, and expansion, each corresponding to four different phases within the refrigeration
cycle [16]. A schematic of basic components and how a heat pump system works is
demonstrated in Figure 2.1.
To help explain the operation of a heat pump system, the refrigeration cycle described
in this paragraph traces the journey of the working fluid (refrigerant) as it passes suc-
cessively through evaporator, compressor, condenser, and expansion device. Starting
from the refrigerant flowing into the evaporator, the refrigerant captures heat from the
heat source and is then evaporated into vapor-phase almost under constant pressure
and temperature. In the compressor, the mechanical energy - usually through the elec-
tric motors or engines - is used to compress the refrigerant vapor, resulting in a pressure
increase. Then, the boiling point of refrigerant and the refrigerant temperature also climb
with increasing pressure to the levels required for different heat demands. At a high tem-
perature, the refrigerant vapor enters the condenser where the heat is transferred from
the vapor-phase refrigerant to the heat sink. The refrigerant is then cooled down and
6
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:15==
turn into liquid-phase again in this step. Finally, the high-pressure refrigerant is fed into
the expansion valve where the temperature of the liquid-phase refrigerant decreases as
a result of the pressure drop, preparing a low-temperature liquid refrigerant to absorb the
heat in the evaporator again [16].
Figure 2.1: Basic components for a heat pump system and the refrigeration cycle.
2.2.2
Heat sources and refrigerants
The heating performance and energy efficiency matters to both industries and individuals
since the capital investment of heat pump systems is higher than that of traditional heat-
ing systems. Heat source and refrigerant selections are the most crucial considerations
influencing the performance of heat pump systems. Of the two factors, the heat source
is related to the heat capacity, for instance how much and how frequently can be taken
to satisfy heat demand, directly affecting the operating efficiency over heat pumps’ lifes-
pan, while the refrigerant plays a vital role in the energy efficiency but is also limited by
cost-effectiveness and environmental impact.
Two of the most common natural heat sources, air and ground, for heat pump applications
are discussed and compared. Ground heat sources, including groundwater and soil, have
a larger heat capacity compared to the ambient air. The benefit of maintaining the temper-
ature from varying significantly with season changes ensures a higher annual efficiency.
However, despite the superior heat capacity of using ground heat sources compared to
the ambient air, utilizing the groundwater or soil as heat sources usually requires investi-
gations and permissions for development to preserve the environment and ensure annual
heat balance within the heat source, thus posing difficulties to development efforts.
Refrigerants, another key factor influencing the energy efficiency of heat pump systems
are nowadays subject to strict regulation in Europe, recognized as the global leader in
phasing out the usage of F-gases, such as the most common human-made hydroflu-
orocarbons (HFCs). HFCs with zero ozone depletion potential (ODP) are widely used
as replacements for chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs),
which are known as the main cause of the ozone layer depletion when released into the
atmosphere and were phase out following the introduction of the Montreal Protocol in
1987 and its later updated version. However, it was found that HFCs, due to their charac-
teristics of high volatility and very low solubility in water, almost reside in the atmosphere
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
7
==PAGE:16==
if releasing into the environment according to Tsai (2005) [17]. These properties make
them a concern when it comes to global warming. For instance, the most used HFC gas,
1,1,1,2-Tetrafluoroethane (HFC-134a) or called R134a, has a lifetime of 13.4 years in at-
mosphere and the global warming potential (GWP) of 1300, which indicates that 1 kg of
R134a released into the environment has the same climate impact as 1.4 metric tonnes
(thousand kilograms) of CO2, according to the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) by IPCC
[18] and the overview of HFCs environmental impact and exposure risk [17]. With the
implementation of former F-gases regulation, which sets the limits on the production and
consumption of these gases, EU has successfully controlled and reduced the emissions.
Following the climate neutrality by 2050, the new EU’s F-gases regulation was adopted
in 2014, aiming to reduce the HFCs on the EU market to zero by 2050 [19]. This shift has
later led a widespread adoption of natural refrigerants like ammonia, carbon dioxide, and
hydrocarbons in heating and refrigerating industries in Europe.
Among these natural refrigerants, ammonia has already been widely used as refrigerant
in food processing and industrial process cooling purposes for many years with its supe-
rior thermodynamics efficiency and heat transfer properties [20]. Nowadays, benefit from
its environmental impact of zero GWP and ODP along with thermodynamics properties
of high latent heat and high critical temperature, ammonia also becomes a popular sus-
tainable option for centralized applications, such as district heating systems. According
to the data from HEATPUMPDATA [21] supported by Danish District Heating Association,
there are 155 large electric and gas driven heat pumps coupled into the district heating
network in Denmark until 2022, with total heat capacity of around 522 MW. Among all
these installed heat pumps, at least 51 plants (not all refrigerant uses are provided) use
ammonia as refrigerant, with 20 of them extracting the heat from the ambient air.
2.2.3
Frosting on heat pump evaporator
When moist air passes through the evaporator of a heat pumps system with surface tem-
perature below dew point, the water vapor carried by the airflow starts to condense on
the wall. While the surface temperature is lower than the freezing point, frosting can be
observed.
The frost growing on the surface of evaporators is a serious and common problem de-
grading the performance of air-source heat pumps. A finned-tube heat exchanger as the
evaporator of air-source heat pumps under frosted conditions is discussed in the follow-
ing paragraphs. When the temperature on the refrigerant side of an air-source heat pump
drops below the freezing point of water to absorb the heat efficiently in cold weather, the
frost starts forming on the heat transfer surface.
First, frost layer acts as an insulation layer with poor thermal conductivity of frost itself
and reduces the heat transfer area on the air side, which decreases the heat exchanging
capability of the evaporator. Further, the continuous accumulation of frost layer blocks
the air passages, causing an increase in air-side’s pressure drop and thus decreasing the
airflow rate.
Consider a case when an automatic control of compressor and fan at evaporator is ap-
plied. When sensing a decrease in heat transferring from the heat source to heat sink,
the compressor will most likely to ramp up its operating speed in order to maintain the
heat load. This could also impose a heavier load to the fan which is controlled in re-
sponse to both speed of the compressor and temperature of refrigerant in the evaporator,
attempting to optimize the operating efficiency. All of these frosting issues can lead to a
reduction in the overall efficiency of heat pump system.With reduction in heat transfer rate
and blockage of air passage at the evaporator, increased energy consumption for the fan
8
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:17==
and compressor is required.
Once the accumulation of frost reaches levels that significantly diminish the energy effi-
ciency, initiating the defrosting process becomes imperative to restore the performance of
the evaporator, albeit at the expense of an additional energy consumption. Therefore, it
is of great significance to study frost formation behavior and its impact on evaporator per-
formance degradation. Following sections provides a brief introduction to frost research,
starting with frost formation process and moving on to the investigation of frost properties
and formation models.
2.2.4
Frost formation process
Sanders (1974) [22] indicated that ”study of the phenomena during frost growth process
is required for the evaluation and interpretation of the experimental values of physical
properties of frost layers.” The author conducted the experiments through microscopic
investigation under following conditions:
Condition
Range of conditions
air velocity above the cooled surface
1 ∼10 m/s
wall temperature
0 ∼−40◦C
air temperature
0 ∼−30◦C
dew point temperature of the air
0 ∼−30◦C
Table 2.1: Conditions of microscopic investigation in frost formation by Sanders.
Sanders observed the supercooling phenomena of water droplet forming and coalescing
on the cooled surface with relative supersaturation up to approximate 125% and wall
temperature above -15◦C. This initial period before the transition from supercooled water
droplet to ice crystal is prolonged when operating with higher cooling surface temperature,
lower air velocity, and smaller partial vapor pressure difference between cooling surface
and supply air. The conclusions by Sanders include:
1. A certain amount of supersaturation degree on the cooling surface is necessary to
initiate the phase change of the water vapor.
2. The minimum supersaturation degree is dependent on the surface properties, such
as surface temperature and water contact angle.
3. The phase transition of water vapor through condensation (gas to liquid phase) or
desublimation (gas to solid phase) depends on the magnitude of supersaturation
degree, wall temperature, and water contact angle.
Within the span of ten years after Sanders study, two widely used classifications of frost
formation process from Hayashi et al. (1977) [23] and Tao et al. (1991, 1993) [24] [25]
were published. Both research groups classified the process into three characteristic
periods depends on the changes in the nature of the frost structure and its growing mech-
anism. However, the definition of formation stages is slightly different from each others.
Based on Hayashi et al. and Tao et al’s studies, Song et al. (2018) [26] further divided
the frost formation into four stages. These periods of frost nucleation and formation pro-
cesses are demonstrated in the following paragraphs, with the description referring to the
study by Na and Webb (2003) [27] and Piucco et al. (2008) [28].
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Psychrometric representation of supersaturation and subcooling for frost nu-
cleation process, reproduced from the work by Piucco et al. [28].
Figure 2.3: Schematic of frost formation process, reproduced from the work by Song [26].
First, in cases when the cooled surface temperature and dew point temperature are both
below 0◦C, the frost nucleation and formation on the cooled surface may occur. As illus-
trated in Figure 2.2, the water vapor in the air stream (A) is cooled down to the dew point
(A
′) within the thermal boundary layer. To initiate the nucleation process, certain supersat-
uration and supercooling conditions between the surface and the dew point are required
for the water vapor to exceed the Gibbs energy barrier and start the phase change on the
cooled wall. Therefore, the water vapor has to be cooled down a certain level to point (B).
Once the energy barrier is surpassed, the phase change occurs at phase (B −C). The
difference in temperature ∆Tsup to start the nucleation process is called supercooling de-
gree, possessing a difference in humidity ratio ∆ωsat, so-called supersaturation degree,
10
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:19==
between the air stream and the cooled surface. Depending on the supersaturation de-
gree, vapor embryo (a concentration of the water molecular that will change its phase
into frost nucleus) will form on the surface via condensation or desublimation. Due to the
conditions in the present study, a frost formation process via condensation is discussed.
Since the increase in surface area during the growth of cooled water droplet requires a
higher amount of energy to maintain, after reaching a critical time, tc, the water droplet
will stop growing due to lack of maintenance energy and turn into ice crystals.
The process enters the solidified liquid tip-growth period when the transition of water
droplet to ice crystals occurs. When the energy barrier for phase change is broken on
the surface of the original ice crystal, the secondary nucleation takes place. Again, once
the energy barrier is broken, new nucleation process will happen on the ice crystal surface
and form a embryo. The third period starts from the transitional time, tt, when the frost
grows and forms a homogeneous layer over the cooled surface. Starting from this stage,
the frost layer is considered to possess the characteristic of porous materials. And the
increase in both density and thickness of the frost layer is led by the diffusion of water va-
por. During these two periods, the successive nucleation and embryo growth processes
will continue until the saturation degree on the frost surface approaches zero.
The last period is further distinguished by Hayashi et al. [23] in situations when the tem-
perature of the airflow is above the freezing point of water. It is known that the surface
temperature of the frost layer will keep rising during the growth of the frost layer thickness
which acts as an increasing thermal resistance between the frost layer’s surface and the
cooled surface. When the frost layer grows sufficiently, causing the surface temperature
to reach 0◦C, the frost on the surface begins to melt. This melted water infiltrates the
porous frost layer and refreezes, making the layer more dense. As a result, the ther-
mal resistance decreases, the surface temperature drops below the freezing point, and
frost begins to deposit again. This cycle of melting, refreezing, and deposition continues
periodically until an equilibrium condition of heat transfer is achieved.
2.2.5
Frost properties
Frost properties, such as frost density ρfr, thermal conductivity kfr, and thickness δfr,
depend on varying environmental and operating conditions. Summarized by Byun (2022)
[29] in a review of frost formation under conditions from general-low (0◦C to -30◦C) to
ultra-low (below 100◦C) temperatures, there are four major parameters affecting frost
properties. These parameters include cooled surface temperature, air temperature, ab-
solute humidity, and airflow rate.
For heat pump applications, the temperature of refrigerant at the evaporator is typically 10◦
to 20◦F (approx. 5◦to 10◦C) colder than the temperature of outdoor air source [30], falling
in the range of general-low temperatures. Within this range, the frost density increases as
the four frosting parameters increase. The thermal conductivity of the frost layer, on the
other hand, is independent of the temperature range but determined by the frost porosity.
Therefore, the thermal conductivity of the frost layer is often discussed together with its
density, which can be seen in most of the existing correlations. From a microscopic view,
the structure of ice crystal is also a key factor affecting the thermal conductivity of the frost
layer. Nakaya (1954) [31] discovered that ice crystal grows in distinct shapes at different
supersaturations and temperatures. The other most discussed frost property, the frost
thickness, is mainly affected by the absolute humidity in air, where the difference between
air absolute humidity and surface saturated humidity acts as a driving force for the frost
deposition.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodology for predicting frost formation and its impact on the
ammonia evaporator in heat pump systems. The methodology includes a mathematical
model for frost formation implemented on Matlab and 3D CFD simulation models con-
structed on STAR-CCM+ for verification. All modeling processes and CFD settings are
described in sufficient detail to allow replication of the results.
The chapter starts by presenting the schematic of the ammonia finned-tube evaporator
along with the dimensions and thermal properties of the materials used. Then, the mathe-
matical model is employed under no frost and frosting conditions verified with CFD simu-
lation. For no frost condition, analytical solutions from the mathematical model by Kærn et
al. (2022) [32] are compared with the simplified CFD model, including the flow simulation
on the air side. The influence on the frost formation of three major environmental param-
eters (air temperature, relative humidity, airflow rate) is investigated for frost conditions.
3.1
Mathematical model
In this section, a quasi-steady mathematical model, including a 1D heat diffusion and
a 1D frosting model, for frost formation is developed to study the frosting behavior and
performance impact on the ammonia evaporator for air-source heat pump systems.
3.1.1
1D heat diffusion model
In general, the heat transfer performance of a finned-tube heat exchanger is estimated
using overall surface efficiency for a tube segment with a single fin illustrated in Figure 3.1.
This overall surface efficiency ηo is defined as the ratio between actual heat transfer rate
q and maximum possible heat transfer rate qmax (assuming 100% fin efficiency ηf),
ηo =
q
qmax
= ha(ηfAf + Ab)(Tb −Ta)
haAtot(Tb −Ta)
(3.1)
where ha is the heat transfer coefficient on the air side, Af the fin surface area, Ab the
base surface area (surface area on tube) on the air side, Atot the total area exposes to
the airflow, that is, Atot = Af + Ab. Temperature Tb refers to the base temperature of the
fin, and Ta is the free stream temperature of the airflow.
Figure 3.1: The schematic of a finned-tube segment.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
13
==PAGE:22==
Rewriting Equation 3.1 gives the equation of overall surface efficiency that are typically
used,
ηo = 1 −Af
Atot
(1 −ηf)
(3.2)
The relationship between actual heat transfer rate q and temperature of air stream Ta and
tube base Tb can then be expressed by the thermal resistance circuit giving,
Ro = Tb −Ta
q
=
1
ηohaAtot
(3.3)
where Ro represents the thermal resistance of the convection between the airflow and
finned-tube exchanger. This performance equation can be applied when assuming a
constant base temperature Tb along the axial direction of the tube where a high thermal
conductivity of tube material, such as copper tubes, and a small fin pitch are suggested.
However, when it comes to a tube material with poor thermal conductivity and a large
fin pitch, the assumption and application of the performance equation Equation 3.3 is no
longer applicable. Based on the work from Kærn et al. [32], a 1D heat diffusion equation
along the axial direction of a round tube with different heat transfer coefficients at both
sides under frosting conditions is developed. Some assumptions were made:
1. There is no temperature difference at the radial direction of the round tube along its
thickness.
2. There is no heat flux flowing between interfaces of the corner frost to fin and to
frost-on-fin, illustrated in Figure 3.2.
3. The convective heat flux transmitted to the frost surface on the tube is then evenly
distributed along the base area of the tube.
4. The convective heat flux transmitted to the frost surface on the fin is transferred to
the fin in the direction perpendicular to the frost layer.
5. The convective heat transfer on the refrigerant side is constant and uniform over the
heat transfer surface.
6. Radiation heat transfer is neglected.
Under these assumptions, the general form of one-dimensional heat diffusion equation
for this specific application is given as,
d2T(z)
dz2
−m2
r(T(z) −Tr) −m2
a(T(z) −Ta) = 0
(3.4)
m2
r =
hrri
ktbrmttb
(3.5a)
m2
a = ho,tbro
ktbrmttb
(3.5b)
where mr and ma are the parameter at both refrigerant and air sides, ri and ro the inner
and outer radius of tube, rm = (ri + ro)/2 the mean radius of tube, ktb the thermal con-
ductivity of tube, ttb the thickness of tube, Tr the refrigerant side free stream temperature,
14
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:23==
hr the heat transfer coefficient at refrigeration side. ho,tb refers to the overall heat transfer
coefficient on the air side of the tube calculated via a thermal resistance network and an
area correction factor giving,
ho,tb =
(
1
(ro+δfr,tb)∗ha∗Ctb,ratio + ln((ro+δfr,tb)/(ro))
kfr
)−1
ro
(3.6)
where δfr,tb is the thickness of frost layer on tube, kfr the thermal conductivity of frost. The
area correction factor Ctb,ratio is defined as the ratio of surface area of frost-on-tube under
the situations with and without frost-on-fin, demonstrated in Figure 3.2. The solution of
Equation 3.4 gives,
T(z) −Tb = M1 + sin (M2z)C2 + cos (M2z)C1
(3.7)
with
M1 = m2
aTa + m2
rTr
m2a + m2r
−Tb
(3.8a)
M2 =
√
−m2a −m2r
(3.8b)
Figure 3.2: The schematic of a finned-tube segment under frosting conditions.
Applying the boundary conditions: Tz|z=0 = Tb at the tube base (refer to the axial position
of the tube right below fin base) and dT/dz|z=L = 0 at half of the fin pitch Fp denoted
as L, the temperature profile along the axial direction can be obtained as,
T(z) = Tb + M1 −M1 cos (M2(L −z))
cos (M2L)
(3.9)
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
15
==PAGE:24==
From the expression of temperature along the axial direction, it can be observed that the
amount of heat transferred via thermal conduction through the tube half will continue to
decrease and finally reach zero at the boundary (z = L). Introducing the Fourier’s law
q
′′ = −k∇T, the heat transfer rate q at the tube base is obtained,
q|z=0 = ktb(2rmttbπ)M1M2 sin (M2L)
cos (M2L)
(3.10)
Considering the other half of the tube segment, the total heat transfer rate qz,tot|z=0 trans-
ferring from the tube base in axial direction through a whole tube segment have to be twice
as much of q|z=0 shown in Figure 3.3. Apply the same concept as for fin efficiency ηf, the
tube efficiency ηtb can be expressed as the ratio between the amount of heat transferred
at the tube base and the maximum possible convective heat transfer rate at refrigerant
side based on the assumption of a constant tube temperature corresponding to the tube
base, where T(z)|z=0 = Tb,
ηtb = q|z=0
qr,max
= ktb(2rmttbπ)M1M2 sin (M2L)
hr(2riπL)(Tb −Tr) cos (M2L)
(3.11)
Suggested by Kærn et al. [32], this tube efficiency ηtb is probably better to be viewed
as a correction of the otherwise constant tube temperature assumed in general perfor-
mance estimation formula of finned-tube heat exchangers. Finally, based on fin and tube
efficiencies, an energy balance for heat transfer at the tube base can be expressed as,
qz,tot|z=0 + qf = qz,tot|z=0 + [qf,sen + qf,lat]
= ηtbhrAi(Tb −Tr) + [ηfho,fAf,s(Tb,f,fr −Ta) + qf,lat]
= 0
(3.12)
where Ai is the refrigerant side heat transfer area (internal tube surface area) within a tube
segment, Af,s the frost surface area on fin that exposes to airflow, qf the heat transfer rate
through the fin to the base, and qf,lat the latent heat transfer rate from the phase change of
the water vapor on the surface of frost-on-fin. This latent heat transfer rate can be obtained
from the latent heat flux q
′′
lat derived in the later section, 1D frosting model. Considering
a frost layer formed on the fin with thickness δfr,f, the overall heat transfer coefficient on
the air side of the fin ho,f is calculated by,
ho,f =
( 1
ha
+ δfr,f
kfr
)−1
(3.13)
Here, it is important to note that the base temperature for fin efficiency ηf calculation under
frosting conditions Tb,f,fr is set at the same radial position as the surface of the frost layer
formed on the tube shown in Figure 3.2, ensuring that the fin efficiency retains its original
significance.
Based on the assumptions of zero heat flux transmitted through interfaces of the corner
frost to fin and frost-on-fin, the convective heat transfer rate transferred from the air to the
frost layer above the fin will all pass through the fin and reach the base (z = 0). Then,
the relationship between the base temperature Tb and virtual base temperature for fin
efficiency under frosting conditions Tb,f,fr can be obtained by,
16
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:25==
Tb −Tb,f,fr = qf
[ln((ro + δfr,tb)/(ro))
kf2πtf
]
(3.14)
where tf and kf denote the thickness and thermal conductivity of fin respectively.
The overall fin efficiency ηf,o over the whole fin surface can be derived from the fin ef-
ficiency ηf with virtual fin base temperature Tb,f,fr under frosting conditions. Since part
of the fin surface, covered by the corner frost, has no access to the airflow in the normal
direction to the fin surface, the heat transfer efficiency of this part of fin is considered to
be zero. With the concept of fin efficiency corresponding to the base temperature Tb, the
overall fin efficiency is calculated by,
ηf,o =
qf
ho,fAf(Ta −Tb) = ηfAf,s(Ta −Tb,f)
Af(Ta −Tb)
(3.15)
indicating that the heat transfer rate through the fin to the fin base only comes from the
convective heat transfer rate on the surface of frost-on-fin.
Figure 3.3: The schematic of heat flow from fin and tube with the arrow representing the
heat flow direction.
It has to be recognized that the energy balance in Equation 3.12 is not the energy balance
of the whole tube segment between air and refrigerant sides, but solely for the heat flow
balance at the tube base (z = 0). To derive the overall heat transfer rate by the finned-tube
from air to refrigerant, the average temperature of the tube is needed. By integrating the
temperature profile of the tube half along the axial direction, the average tube temperature
can be obtained,
T = 1
L
∫L
0
T(z)dz = M2L cos (M2L)(M1 + Tb) −M1 sin (M2L)
M2L cos (M2L)
(3.16)
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
17
==PAGE:26==
then, the overall energy balance of the evaporator within a tube segment can be expressed
as,
qr + qa = qr + qtb + qf
= qr + [qtb,sen + qtb,lat] + [qf,sen + qf,lat]
=
[
hrAi(T −Tr)
]
+
[
ho,tbAtb,s(T −Ta) + qtb,lat
]
+ [ηfho,fAf,s(Tb,f,fr −Ta) + qf,lat]
= 0
(3.17)
where Atb,s is the frost surface area on the tube that exposes to airflow. The latent heat
transfer rate from the phase change of the water vapor on the surface of frost-on-tube
qtb,lat and frost-on-fin qtb,lat are discussed together in the later section, 1D frosting model.
The energy balance of the airflow is also calculated to obtain the average air temperature
Ta which is used for the getting the air properties, including density ρa, viscosity µa, thermal
conductivity ka, Prandtl number Pr, and specific heat cp,a, from Coolprop [33], an open-
source thermophysical property database. The sensible heat transfer rate from the air to
the evaporator qa,sen within a tube segment and the sensible heat loss of the airflow dqa
flowing through the whole evaporator are balance in the following equation,
dqa + Nsegqa,sen = ρacp,a ˙V (Ta,in −Ta,out) + Nseg(qf,sen + qtb,sen) = 0
(3.18)
where Nseg is the number of tube segments of the evaporator, ˙V the volume flow rate
of the airflow at the inlet of evaporator, and Ta,in and Ta,out represent the inlet and outlet
air temperature respectively. The sensible heat transfer rate from frost-on-fin qf,sen and
frost-on-tube qtb,sen can be derived from Equation 3.17. Assuming there is no air trapped
in the evaporator, then, the average air temperature Ta can be calculated as,
Ta = Ta,in + Ta,out
2
(3.19)
3.1.2
1D frosting model
A one-dimensional and quasi-steady frosting model by Hermes et al. (2009) [34] is applied
to simulate the frost thickness and latent heat flux from frost formation on the air side of
the finned-tube evaporator. Some assumptions were introduced to the present study:
1. The frost density ρfr is assumed to be constant within the frost layer over time. The
thermal conductivity of frost kfr varies only with the frost density, thus remains con-
stant. The frost is assumed to be evenly distributed over the fin and tube surfaces
respectively. That is, the frost thickness δfr is homogeneous over fin or tube.
2. The air pressure is uniform with a value of 1 atm at the air stream and within the
frost layer, and the air properties only vary with the average air temperature.
3. The processes of heat and mass diffusion within the frost layer is treated as a quasi-
steady-state and one-dimensional for heat and mass transfer analogy.
4. The Lewis analogy is applicable.
5. The relatively short early frost growth period is omitted.
18
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:27==
In general, the mass flux m
′′ of the water vapor condensing and turning into frost is divided
into two parts, the thickness growth mass flux m
′′
δ and densification mass flux m
′′
ρ,
m
′′ = m
′′
δ + m
′′
ρ = ρfr
dδfr
dt
+ δfr
dρfr
dt
= hm(ωa −ωs)
(3.20)
where ρfr is the density of frost, δfr the thickness of frost, hm the mass transfer coefficient.
ωa and the humidity ratio (or called mixing ratio, representing the ratio of the mass of
water vapor to the mass of dry air) of the air stream, and ωs the saturated humidity ratio
at the subcooled surface. According to Humidity Report by SENSIRION [35] (a sensor
company), the humidity ratio (or called mixing ratio of water vapor in air) with the unit of
gH2O/gdry air can be derived as,
ω = MH2O
Mdryair
=
18.02pv/(RT)
28.97(pa −pv)/(RT) = 0.622
pv
pa −pv
(3.21)
where MH2O and Mdryair are the molar mass of water and dry air, pv the partial pressure
of water vapor in air, and pa the atmospheric pressure of moist air. Expressed in terms of
relative humidity RH and temperature T, the equation for humidity ratio becomes,
ω = 0.622
λ1 RH
100%exp
(
λ2T
λ3+T
)
pa −λ1 RH
100%exp
(
λ2T
λ3+T
)
(3.22)
The range of temperature and parameters for the above equation are provided in Table 3.1
[35].
Conditions
range of T
λ1
λ2
λ3
◦C
hPa
-
◦C
Above water
-45 ∼60
6.112
17.62
243.12
Above ice
-80 ∼0.01
6.112
22.46
272.62
Table 3.1: Parameters for Equation 3.22.
The surface condition is assumed to be saturated instead of a supersaturation degree sug-
gested by Na and Webb (2003) [27]. It is because the model is considered to be suddenly
exposed to the air stream with no frost forming on the surface, and both temperatures of
the fin and tube satisfy the requirement of condensation and freezing for each materials.
After that, the minimum subcooling degree for the further condensation and freezing on
the ice, posses a contact angle of 12◦, is almost zero in Piucco et al.’s correction [28] of
supercooling degree to contact angle by Na and Webb [27], hence, the humidity ratio of
the subcooled surface is set to be at the saturated condition in this model.
Since the frost density is assumed to be constant over time, the mass flux only contribute
to the growth of frost thickness. Then, the thickness growth rate of the frost can be cal-
culated by,
dδfr
dt
= m
′′
ρfr
= hm(ωa −ωs)
ρfr
(3.23)
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
19
==PAGE:28==
The latent heat flux from frost formation can also be calculated from the following equation,
q
′′
lat = Lsm
′′ = Lshm(ωa −ωs)
(3.24)
where Ls is the sublimation/desublimation heat of water derived from a function of the
temperature at air-frost interface condition by Mago (2005) [36] (the unit mentioned in the
reference paper was incorrect, this error has been corrected in the following equation),
Ls = (2833 −0.1083(1.8(Tfr,s −273.15) + 32)) × 103
(3.25)
Mass transfer coefficient hm can be derived by using Lewis heat and mass transfer anal-
ogy,
hm =
ha
cp,mLe2/3
(3.26)
where cp,m is the specific heat of moist air, and Le = αa/Deff is the Lewis number which
represents the ratio of thermal diffusivity to mass diffusivity of air. According to Na and
Webb (2004) [37], consider a porous media of frost layer, the effective mass diffusivity
Deff can be calculated as,
Deff = τϵDv
(3.27)
where Dv is the diffusivity of water vapor in air, τ and ϵ represent the tortuosity and porosity
of the frost layer. Dv can be derived as a function of air temperature by Hermes (2009) [34]
curve-fitting the data from Lee (1997) [38], the correlation of τ for various porous media
is given by Zehnder (1970) used in Sanders’s study [22], together with the equation of ϵ
are shown below,
Dv = (0.136Ta −14.042) × 10−6
(3.28a)
τ = (1 −
√
1 −ϵ)/ϵ
(3.28b)
ϵ = ρfr −ρi
ρv −ρi
(3.28c)
where ρi and ρv are the density of ice and vapor respectively.
Then, the derivation of the total latent heat transfer rate from the frost-on-fin and frost-on-
tube within a tube segment can be written as,
qf,lat = Ls,fmf = Ls,fhmAf,s(ωf,s −ωa)
(3.29a)
qtb,lat = Ls,tbmtb = Ls,tbhmAtb,s(ωtb,s −ωa)
(3.29b)
where mf and mtb denote the mass transfer rate from the surface of frost-on-fin to the fin
and from the surface of frost-on-tube to the tube respectively.
20
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:29==
For the balance of humidity ratio of the airflow, which represents the amount of water vapor
in the air, the balance of mass flow rate similar to the energy balance in Equation 3.18
can be written as,
dmv,a + Nsegm = ρa ˙V (ωa,in −ωa,out) + Nseg(mf + mtb) = 0
(3.30)
where dmv,a represent the loss in the mass of water vapor within the airflow through the
evaporator, ωa,in the humidity ratio of the inlet flow, and ωa,out the humidity ratio of the
outlet flow. And the average humidity ratio of the airflow can be derived from the inlet and
outlet flow humidity ratio as,
ωa = ωa,in + ωa,out
2
(3.31)
3.1.3
Main geometry and conditions
In this section, the dimensions of the finned-tube heat exchanger and conditions of the
cases study are provided along with the specific correlations used, such as air side heat
transfer coefficient, fin efficiency, and frost properties.
The geometry of the finned-tube heat exchanger is given in Table 3.2 with the schematic
shown in Figure 3.4. The fin and tube materials in the present study are 1100 aluminum
alloy and AISI 304 stainless steel respectively. The fin type is plain and tube arrangement
is inline for the present study.
Parameter
Value
Description
Fin type
plain fin
Tube arrangement
inline arrangement
Width of heat exchanger WHX
1360 mm
Height of heat exchanger HHX
18 × 50 mm
Depth of heat exchanger DHX
8 × 50 mm
in the flow direction
Number of tube rows Nrow
8
in the flow direction
Number of tubes per row Nprow
18
Number of tube segments Nseg
8 × 18 × 1360/12
from Nrow × Nprow × WHX/Fp
Longitudinal tube spacing Xl
50 mm
Transverse tube spacing Xt
50 mm
Outer tube diameter dtb,o
15.6 mm
Inner tube diameter dtb,i
14.6 mm
Fin pitch Fp
12 mm
Fin thickness tf
0.35 mm
Fin thermal conductivity kf
213.55 W/mK
1100 aluminum alloy
Tube thermal conductivity ktb
13.85 W/mK
AISI 304 stainless steel
Table 3.2: Specifications of the finned-tube heat exchanger.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.4: The schematic of the finned-tube heat exchanger (left) and single finned-tube
segment (right). The arrows represent the flow direction.
The correlations of fin efficiency ηf and air side heat transfer coefficient ha for the inline
plain finned-tube heat exchanger from VDI Heat Atlas [39] are employed. First of all, the
convective heat transfer coefficient is calculated by the definition of Nusselt number Nu,
Nu = hDh
k
(3.32)
where Dh is the hydraulic diameter, usually defined as four times the minimum flow area
and the characteristic length, then divided by total heat transfer area for finned-tube heat
exchangers, such that Dh = 4AcL/Atot. For some study, such as the correlation used
in present study, the outer tube diameter Dtb,o is also being used as hydraulic diameter.
Under frosting conditions, the frost thickness δfr,tb forming on the tube should be consid-
ered, thus Dh = Dtb,o + 2δfr,tb. The empirical data of Nusselt number for more than four
rows and inline tube arrangement gives,
Nud = 0.22Re0.6
d
( A
At0
)−0.15
Pr1/3
(3.33)
where (A/At0) is the ratio of the finned surface area to the surface area of the base tube,
and Pr is the Prandtl number of the air. This correlation is verified with Reynolds number
Red = ρavmaxDh/µa in range 1 × 103 ≤Red ≤1 × 105, and the ratio (A/At0) in range
5 ≤A/At0 ≤30. For the definition of Reynolds number, vmax is the maximum average
flow velocity passing the minimum flow area of finned-tube heat exchanger.
Consider the frost thickness δfr,tb on tube, the correlation of fin efficiency ηf for rectangular
plain fins can be derived by,
ηf = tanh χ
χ
(3.34)
with
22
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:31==
χ = ϕ(ro + δfr,tb)
√
2ho,f
kftf
(3.35a)
ϕ = (ϕ
′ −1)(1 + 0.35ln(ϕ
′))
(3.35b)
ϕ
′ = 1.28
Xt
(ro + δfr,tb)
√
Xl
Xt
−0.2
(3.35c)
The frost density for the present study are assumed to be constant at 150 and 50 kg/m3
depends on relative humidity RH and cooled surface temperature Tw based on Mao’s
experimental study (1999) [40], operating under subfreezing conditions. The correlation
of frost thermal conductivity as a function of density by Sanders (1974) [22] is applied due
to the similar subfreezing conditions as the present study, as shown below,
kfr = 1.202ρ0.963
fr
× 10−3
(3.36)
The cases conducted in the present study is shown in Table 3.3. The convective heat
transfer coefficient and temperature on the refrigerant side are assumed to be a constant
value from Kærn et al. (2020) [41]. For the cases with higher air side temperature, the
temperature difference between the air and refrigerant sides is maintain at a constant
level, similar to how a heat pump functions in practice. It is important to notice that the
heat transfer coefficient is assumed to be the same as lower temperature case because
the thermal resistance of convective heat transfer on the refrigerant side is relatively small
compared to that on the air side with frost layer forming on the heat transfer surface.
Therefore, the resulting heat flux will not vary significantly if assuming a constant heat
transfer coefficient on the refrigerant side.
Conditions
case
˙V
Ta,in
RHin
Tr
hr
ρfr
[m3/s]
[◦C]
[%]
[◦C]
[W/m2K]
[kg/m3]
Relative humidity
1
˙V
-20
70
-29.1
2213
150
2
˙V
-20
85
-29.1
2213
150
3
˙V
-20
95
-29.1
2213
50
Air temperature
4
˙V
-10
70
-19.1
2213
150
5
˙V
-10
85
-19.1
2213
150
Airflow rate
6
0.5 × ˙V
-20
70
-29.1
2213
150
7
1.5 × ˙V
-20
70
-29.1
2213
150
˙V = 19390 m3/hr = 19390/3600 m3/s
Table 3.3: Conditions of cases in the present study.
3.1.4
Flowchart algorithms
The computing process of the 1D mathematical model is demonstrated step-by-step in
Figure 3.5. The model starts from the setup of the evaporator geometry and operating
conditions of different cases. The initial frost thicknesses of frost-on-fin and frost-on-tube
are both zero. With initial or updated average air temperature Ta giving the air properties,
the heat transfer coefficient ha, mass transfer coefficient hm and the fin efficiency ηf can
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
23
==PAGE:32==
be calculated by Equation 3.32 and Equation 3.33, Equation 3.26, and Equation 3.34
respectively. Then, inside the for-loop of base temperature in range Tr < Tb < Ta,in,
the virtual fin base temperature Tb,f,fr, temperature profile of tube T(z), average tube
temperature T, heat transfer rate at the base q|z=0, refrigerant side heat transfer rate
qr, and sensible heat transfer rate qsen are calculated from Equation 3.14, Equation 3.9,
Equation 3.16, Equation 3.10, Equation 3.17.
With initial or updated latent heat transfer rate on fin and tube as well as the calculated
sensible heat transfer rate, the surface temperature of fin (or frost-on-fin) Tf,s and tube
(or frost-on-tube) Ttb,s can be calculated, and so do the surface humidity ratios ωf,s and
ωtb,s. With the assumptions mentioned in mathematical model, the surface temperatures
Tf,s and Ttb,s can be calculated from,
Tf,s = Tf −(qf,sen + qf,lat)/2
(Af,s/2)kfrδfr,f
(3.37a)
Ttb,s = T|z∈[tf+δfr,f,L] −Ctb,ratio
(qtb,sen + qtb,lat
2
)
ln((ro + δfr,tb)/ro)
2πkfr(L −(tf + δfr,f))
(3.37b)
where Tf is the average temperature of fin, which can be derived from the definition of
fin efficiency ηf with the fin base temperature Tb,f under no frost conditions or the virtual
base temperature of fin under frosting conditions Tb,f,fr.
The surface saturated humidity ratio ωf,s and ωtb,s can also be calculated from these two
surface temperatures. And then, the average humidity ratio of the airflow can also be
derived by the mass balance of water vapor in Equation 3.30 and Equation 3.31. From
Equation 3.29a and Equation 3.29b, update the latent heat transfer rate and repeat the
process (following the blue line in Figure 3.5), from obtaining the surface temperature to
the latent heat, several times until the convergence of latent heat transfer rate is satisfied.
Afterwards, using the energy balance equation Equation 3.12 at the tube base together
with the overall energy balance equation Equation 3.17 at both air and refrigerant sides,
the base temperature Tb is determined. The energy balance of airflow Equation 3.18
is checked and the average air temperature Ta is updated (following the red line in Fig-
ure 3.5) until the convergence is satisfied. Three stopping criteria of the model is set. One
of them is when the difference between the average humidity ratio of airflow ωa and both
fin ωf,s and tube’s ωtb,s surface saturated humidity ratio are less than 0.5% of ωa, where
the equilibrium of mass and energy is satisfied. The other two are for the use of corre-
lation for heat transfer coefficient, where is applicable for the Reynolds number in range
1×103 ≤Red ≤1×105 and the area ratio of fin to tube base in range 5 ≤Af,s/Atb,s ≤30.
If the stopping criteria are not met, the time step dt is determined based on the frost thick-
ness growth rate, ensuring that the maximum increase in frost thickness does not exceed
0.05 mm (following the green line in Figure 3.5). Then, the entire process is repeated and
the thickness of the frost-on-fin and frost-on-tube are updated until the stopping criteria is
met.
24
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.5: The flowchart of the mathematical model.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
25
==PAGE:34==
3.2
CFD model
Two different CFD models are developed and the simulations are performed in STAR-
CCM+, a commercial CFD software developed by Siemens Digital Industries Software, to
analyze and verificate the results from the mathematical model. The first model includes
the simulation of airflow across the entire tube row (comprising eight tube segments) to
evaluate the heat transfer performance, and thus the frost layer thickness growth rate is
based on its simulation results, such as the surface temperatures and convective heat
transfer coefficient. These results are then compared with the predictions of the mathe-
matical model. Furthermore, this model can also demonstrates variations in temperature
and heat transfer rate between each tube, which cannot be obtained from the mathemat-
ical model. The second model simulates the temperature distribution and heat flux of a
single tube segment using convection parameters and frost thickness results derived from
the mathematical model. This focuses on estimating the error of mathematical model in
modelling temperature distribution and heat transfer rate. For convenience, the model
with air stream simulation is referred to as the ”Simulation Model”, while the one focusing
on the heat conduction of a single tube segment is called the ”Verification Model”.
3.2.1
Simulation domain
The 3D geometry of both models are demonstrated in Figure 3.6. In order to reduce
the computational load, both the Simulation and Verification models are constructed as a
quarter tube segment.
Figure 3.6: The geometry of the Simulation and Verification Models. The arrow represents
to the airflow direction. The blocks: (a) inlet air block, (b) outlet air block, (c) top air block,
(d) main air block, (e) frost-on-tube, (f) frost-on-fin, (g) corner frost.
For the Simulation Models, the purpose of including the inlet air block is to ensure the
airflow entering entering the heat exchanger is fully developed. On the other hand, the
outlet air block is implemented to prevent the air outside the simulation domain from enter-
26
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:35==
ing it, a situation caused by the backflow phenomenon occurring after the airflow passes
through the last tube in the row. The purpose of top air block is to reduce computational
load by setting a coarser mesh than the main air block. the The frost deposition on tubes
is assumed to be uniform based on the average surface temperature of tube (or frost-
on-tube). The same goes for the frost formation on the fin, but depends on the surface
temperature of fin (or frost-on-fin).
3.2.2
Solver settings
For both Simulation and Verification Models, the physics models of the solver for differ-
ence domains are provided in Table 3.4 based on the user guide by Siemens Simcenter
STAR-CCM+ 2306 [42]. For the air domain, the air is modelled as an idea gas with prop-
erties such as dynamic viscosity µa, specific heat cp,a, and thermal conductivity ka. The
value of these fluid properties are all based on the local air temperature at a constant
pressure of 1 atm given from the Coolprop library [33]. Also, since it is unknown whether
the flow will be laminar or turbulent during the frost accumulation process, the k −ϵ turbu-
lence model is applied. The simulation results will show whether the flow remains turbulent
over the simulation domain or not. The Segregated Flow solver is adopted for mass and
momentum conservation equations in a sequential manner, while the Segregated Fluid
Temperature model is selected to solve the energy conservation equation with air temper-
ature as the solved variable. For the solid domain, the Segregated Solid Energy model is
employed to solve the energy conservation equation in the solid phase using segregated
approach.
Parameter
Model
Fluid Domain (air)
Space
Three Dimensional
Material
Gas
Flow
Segregated Flow
Equation of State
Ideal Gas
Energy
Segregated Fluid Temperature
Time
Steady state
Viscous Regime
Turbulent (Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes)
Turbulent model
K-Epsilon (Realizable K-Epsilon Two-Layer)
Solid Domain (fin, tube, frost)
Space
Three Dimensional
Material
Solid
Time
Steady state
Energy
Segregated Solid Energy
Equation of State
Constant Density
Table 3.4: Basic physics models applied for the CFD simulation in the present study.
3.2.3
Mesh settings
The mesh sensitivity study is conducted by changing two meshing parameters of the air
domain within the heat exchanger (does not include the inlet and outlet air domains), the
base size (with a near-wall mesh size of 0.5 mm) and the numbers of layer (with an initial
near-wall thickness of 0.05 mm) in the direction normal to the fin, refer to Figure 3.7. The
default settings for both base size and number of layers case are 1 mm of base size or 20
layers. The results of pressure drop dp, heat transfer coefficient h, reference temperature
for heat transfer coefficient Tref, number of cells, energy convergence, and total solver
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
27
==PAGE:36==
elapsed time with different mesh settings are shown in Table 3.5. The finer mesh setting
has 25% more cells along the airflow direction within the top air domain, the base size of
the mesh is 1 mm/0.5 mm with 20 layers in axial direction, and the near-wall mesh size
(on tube) is lower to 0.05 mm to capture the thermal and momentum boundary layers.
However, the computational cost is extremely high for the finer mesh setting, considering
using 2.5 times the number of cores (120 cores) compared to other coarse mesh settings.
The result doesn’t exist a big difference, with less than 3% in heat transfer coefficient and
around 0.06 ◦C difference in reference fluid temperature for heat transfer coefficient.
Conditions
case
Number
Elapsed
Energy
dp
h
Tref
of cells
time
convergence
[-]×105
[s]
[-]×10−5
[pa]
[W/m2K]
[◦C]
Base size
0.5 mm
7.5
3999
4.4
46.9
45.1
-21.3
1.0 mm
1.7
2241
7.3
47.1
45.2
-21.3
1.5 mm
1.1
2040
8.7
47.1
45.3
-21.3
2.0 mm
0.9
1963
10.8
47.6
45.4
-21.3
Number
10
0.9
2001
6.4
47.2
45.0
-21.3
of layers
20
1.7
2241
7.3
47.1
45.2
-21.3
30
2.6
2745
7.1
47.1
45.2
-21.3
40
3.5
2592
7.1
47.1
45.2
-21.3
Finer Mesh
1 mm
5.9
2731∗
7.7
46.1
44.0
-21.3
0.5 mm
9.3
3237∗
6.5
46.1
44.0
-21.3
∗The number of cores used for Finer Mesh cases is 120. (48 cores for other cases)
Table 3.5: Results of mesh sensitivity study.
By considering the trade-off between result accuracy and computational cost, the basic
mesh settings of all simulations is provided in Table 3.6 with the demonstration in Fig-
ure 3.7.
Parameter
Value
Description
Fluid domain
Base size
1 mm
Near-wall mesh size (on tube)
0.2 mm
Near-wall mesh size (on fin)
0.05 mm
Number of layers
20 - 15
in axial direction
depend on the frost
thickness on fin
Solid domain
Base size for Simulation Models∗
0.25 mm
Base size for Verification Models
0.1 mm
tube
0.2 mm
fin and frost
thickness of layer
0.06 mm
in axial direction
∗The mesh of part of fin and frost-on-fin is following the contacting
volume mesh of fluid domain.
Table 3.6: Mesh settings of all CFD simulation models.
28
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.7: The demonstration of mesh of the Simulation Models. The arrow represents
the airflow direction. (a) the side view of all mesh. (b) the bottom view of the mesh (air
domain is circled with the orange dotted line). (c) the side view of air mesh within heat
exchanger.
3.2.4
Boundary conditions
For Simulation Models, the boundary conditions of the whole simulation domain are all
set as a symmetry plane, except for the upstream face of the inlet air block and the down-
stream face of the outlet air block. The upstream face is designated as a velocity inlet,
featuring a uniform airflow velocity and a specified inlet air temperature. And the physics
settings of the inlet air flow is given in Table 3.7. The downstream face is configured as
a zero-pressure outlet with the same temperature as the inlet airflow. The solid surfaces
of fin, tube, and frost exposed to the airflow are all assumed to be smooth (in wall sur-
face specifications in STAR-CCM+). The refrigerant-side boundary conditions are set as
uniform convection over the inner tube surface with the specified temperature and heat
transfer coefficient depends on study cases.
Parameter
Values
Static Temperature
[-20, -10] ◦C
Velocity Magnitude
[2.2, 4.4, 6.6] m/s
Turbulence Intensity
0.01
Turbulent Length Scale
0.001 m
Table 3.7: The physics settings of the inlet air stream.
For Verification Models, as mentioned before, the convection parameters, such as tem-
perature and heat transfer coefficient, on the air side are derived from the mathematical
model. The convection condition on the refrigerant side are the same as Simulation Mod-
els, which is assumed to be uniform over the inner tube surface with parameters depend
on the mathematical model that required verification. Any other boundary conditions,
namely those at the cutting planes, are set as a symmetry plane.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
29
==PAGE:38==
3.2.5
Simulation process
The simulation process of the frost development Simulation Models is shown in Figure 3.8.
The initial frost thickness on both fin and tube is starting from zero. For each cases, six
iterations of frost development are done over time. For each frost thickness condition, the
model is simulated twice. The first simulation is performed without applying latent heat
flux on the heat transfer surface on the air side. In the second run, latent heat flux is
calculated based on the surface temperature and heat transfer coefficient obtained from
the first run and applied to the surface (following the red line in Figure 3.8). Then, the
results of the second simulation are employed to calculated the frost thickness growth
rate using Equation 3.23 (following the blue line in Figure 3.8).
In order to reduce the computational cost, the time step for each cases is selected based
on the results of mathematical model shown in Table 3.8. The stopping criteria of the
present models are set to meet the energy convergence to 1×10−4 for the Simulation
Models and 1×10−5 for the Verification Models with no frost conditions, 5×10−5 with frost-
ing conditions.
Case
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
time step [s]
30,000
20,000
5,000
15,000
10,000
60,000
20,000
Table 3.8: The time step of each iteration for different cases.
Figure 3.8: The simulation process flowchart of the Simulation Models.
30
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:39==
4
Results
This section provides the results of ammonia finned-tube heat exchanger performed under
the frosting periods by the mathematical model. The effect of three different environmen-
tal parameters, relative humidity RH, inlet air temperature Ta,in and air volume flow rate
˙V , is reported and verified by the CFD model. The investigation begins with the results
of the airflow behavior visualized in the CFD Simulation Model. Then the heat transfer
performance results of evaporator under two scenarios, no frost and frosting conditions,
are provided. The prediction of heat transfer performance by the mathematical model is
verified with CFD Verification Models, and then be compared to the CFD Simulation Mod-
els. The results include the temperature profile T(z) of the tube along the axial direction,
total heat transfer rate q (can be seen as heat transfer rate qr on the refrigerant side), air-
side heat transfer coefficient ha, reference temperature Tref, fin efficiency ηf, and tube
efficiency ηtb. In the section considering the frost accumulation, the predictions of frost
layer developed on fin and tube are presented.
4.1
Flow investigation
The mathematical model is restricted to 1 × 103 ≤Red ≤1 × 105 due to the use of
correlation for heat transfer coefficient. According to Beale (2011) [43], for cross flow
over tube banks ”the boundary layer remains laminar up to a critical Reynolds number of
2×105, thus the flow is laminar for all cases in the present study. However, it should be
noticed that the surface condition of the frost is not considered in this study. In the real
case, the surface roughness of the frost layer could induce the turbulence which might
increase the heat transfer coefficient and influence the mass transfer rate of the frost.
Figure 4.1: The temperature and velocity of the airflow with default settings of inlet airflow
under no frost condition.
For studying the airflow temperature and velocity, the case with no frost condition, an inlet
temperature Ta,in of -20◦C, and an volume flow rate ˙V of 19390 m3/hr (called as ”default
settings of inlet airflow” in this chapter) is investigated. The temperature and velocity of the
airflow is visualized in Figure 4.1. It can be observed that with inline arrangement of the
tube banks, part of the air tends to be trapped between the tube rows. This is due to the
occurrence of large backflow area downstream when airflow pass through the cylindrical
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
31
==PAGE:40==
tubes. The presence of the trapped air downstream of each tube becomes colder due to
the heat transferred from the air to the tubes and decreases the heat transfer performance
of the finned-tube heat exchanger. Furthermore, because of the inline arrangement of the
tube banks, the air stream tends to have a higher velocity and temperature far away from
the tube rows in transverse direction. This is a serious consideration when it comes to the
heat transfer performance of a heat exchanger. Since the surface temperature of the fin
is also higher far from the tube rows, the heat transfer rate may not benefit significantly
from the higher temperature and velocity of the flow at this region.
4.2
No frost condition
4.2.1
Verification of the mathematical model
First, the accuracy and validity of the mathematical model for no frost conditions are veri-
fied by the CFD Verification Model in predicting heat transfer performance. The results of
surface temperature by the Verification model and the comparison of temperature profile
can be seen in Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.3. Other variables regarding the heat transfer
estimation are provided in Table Table 4.1. It is important to notice that the heat transfer
coefficient ha and fluid temperature Ta on the air side, used as the convection parameters
in the Verification Model, are derived from the mathematical model. Also, the temperature
profile T(z) from the Verification model is extracted by taking the average value of each
cells at the same axial direction. The average temperature T of the tube and average
temperature of the fin Tf from the CFD model are obtained by taking the volume average
values. And average temperature of the fin Tf of the mathematical model is calculated
using the definition of fin efficiency. From the results of the case using the default settings
of inlet airflow, the precision of the results predicted by the 1D mathematical model is good
when comparing to the results from 3D CFD Verification Model. For other cases in this
study with inlet air temperature of 10◦C or different inlet volume flow rate of 0.5 ˙V /1.5 ˙V ,
the errors of heat transfer rate are all around 1% to 3%, with less than 0.1◦C and 0.2◦C
difference in temperature on tube and on fin respectively.
ha
Ta
q
Tb
T
Tf
[W/m2K]
[◦C]
[W]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
Math.
48.5
-21.2
1.08
-26.5
-28.2
-25.1
Ver.
1.05
-26.7
-28.2
-25.0
error
-
-
+2.9%
+0.2
0.0
+0.1
Table 4.1: The comparison of heat transfer results for a single tube segment between the
mathematical model (Math.) and the CFD Verification Model (Ver.).
From the temperature profile T(z) results, it is clear to observe a difference at the tube
base (z = 0) between the results from the mathematical model and the Verification Model.
This difference could come from:
1. The boundary condition in 1D mathematical model at the tube base is set as a base
temperature Tb without considering the thickness of the fin.
2. The temperature in the radial direction of the tube is assumed to be constant for the
derivation of heat transfer rate qr on the refrigerant side.
The results from the Verification Model (seen in Figure 4.4) show that the temperature
32
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:41==
profile T(z) at three different radial positions of the tube deviates from each other near
the tube base. Therefore, applying the assumption of a constant temperature in the radial
direction could cause some errors. For instance, the under-predicted heat transfer rate on
the refrigerant side qr, derived from the average temperature of the tube T, might come
from this assumption. And this heat transfer rate qr can seriously influence the prediction
of the base temperature Tb, which is obtained from the energy balance equation in the
mathematical model.
Figure 4.2: The visualized temperature results of the Verification Model.
Figure 4.3: The comparison of temperature profile between the mathematical model and
the Verification Model.
Figure 4.4: The temperature profile at different radial positions of the tube from the Veri-
fication Model.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
33
==PAGE:42==
4.2.2
Comparison with the Simulation Model
In Figure 4.5, the temperature profile T(z) from the mathematical model is plotted along
with the results from the Simulation Model. The temperature profile T(z) from the Simula-
tion Models is obtained by taking the average temperature value at the same axial position
of all tube rows. It can be seen that the temperature profile predicted by the mathematical
model is higher near the tube base, but slightly lower after a certain distance from the
tube base.
In the Simulation Models, the specified y+ heat transfer coefficient is used as the average
heat transfer coefficient ha from all the heat transfer area. This specified y+ heat transfer
coefficient uses the reference fluid temperature Tref at a specified y+ value automatically
calculated by the CFD software. These convective heat transfer parameters are then
provided along with the overall heat transfer rate q in Table 4.2. The heat transfer rate
from the Simulation Model includes eight tube segments of the tube rows, while the one
from the mathematical model only includes only one tube segment. Hence, the value
from the CFD Simulation Model must be divided by 8 to compare with the heat transfer
rate of the mathematical model. It should also be noted that in the mathematical model,
the reference temperature for convective heat transfer is the average air temperature
(Ta = (Ta,in + Ta,out)/2).
From Table 4.2, it is clear to observe that the heat transfer rate q predicted by the math-
ematical model is close to the result from the Simulation model, with only an error of 6%.
The heat transfer coefficient ha value given by the correlation used for the mathematical
model is 8.2% higher than the overall surface average value from the Simulation Model.
ha
Ta
q
Tb
T
Tf
[W/m2K]
[◦C]
[W]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
Math.
48.5
-21.2
1.08
-26.5
-28.2
-25.1
Sim.
44.8
-21.4
8.15*
-27.0
-28.2
-25.3
error
+8.2%
+0.2
+6.0%
+0.5
0.0
+0.2
*This heat transfer rate is from eight tube segments of all tube rows,
compared to a single tube segment in the mathematical model.
Table 4.2: The comparison of heat transfer results between the mathematical model
(Math.) and the CFD Simulation Model (Sim.).
Figure 4.5: The comparison of temperature profile between the mathematical model and
the Simulation Model.
Aside from the results of the average temperature profile T(z) and heat transfer rate q from
all tube rows, the variations between each tube row are also available from the Simulation
34
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:43==
Models, as shown in Figure 4.6. Also, the air-side convective heat transfer parameters
(ha, Tref) and the surface temperature Ts from each component is provided in Figure 4.7
and Figure 4.8 to give more detail in understanding the convective heat transfer of the
heat exchanger.
Figure 4.6: The temperature profile between each tube row from the Simulation Model.
Figure 4.7: The results of the reference and surface temperatures of each components
from the Simulation Model.
Figure 4.8: The results of heat transfer coefficient ha and air-side convective heat transfer
rate qsen from the Simulation Model between different components surface on the air side.
From Figure 4.6, it can be observed that the temperature profile T(z) of the first tube row
is much higher than that of the remaining tube rows, and these temperature profiles tend
to decrease along the direction of airflow, as expected. It is because when the airflow
passes through the first tube row, the airflow velocity and temperature for the following
downstream tube row decrease, thus reducing the convective heat transfer rate. This is
also why for most of the convective heat transfer correlations used for cross flow over tube
banks, the constant value for the correction based on the number of tube rows decreases
when tube rows increase. From Figure 4.8, it is clear that the average value of the heat
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
35
==PAGE:44==
transfer coefficient for the tube rows (ha = 59.9) is much higher than the overall surface
average (ha = 44.8), where the heat transfer coefficient (ha = 42.9) of the fin weights
more due to relatively larger area (the ratio of fin to tube base area is 8.3). Therefore,
even though the heat transfer coefficient ha from the correlation is closer to the overall
surface average value from the Simulation Model, the heat flux q
′′
sen is far underestimated
to the tube and slightly over-predicted to the fin. However, since the surface area of the
tube rows is relatively small compared to the fin area, the contribution to the total heat
heat transfer rate qsen due to this error is also smaller.
4.3
Frosting conditions
In the section of the results under frosting conditions, the effect on frost formation and time-
dependent heat transfer values under varying environmental parameters is presented.
4.3.1
Verification of the mathematical model
First of all, the mathematical model’s results of different cases are verified. Here, the
Case 1 and 3 (conditions shown in Table 3.3) are demonstrated as examples for the
verification in this section. The frosting period results at t = 30, 000 s and 150, 000 s for
Case 1 and t = 5, 000 s and 25, 000 s for Case 3 are selected to be compared with the
Simulation Model in the later paragraphs. Since the thickness growth rate of frost layer
dδfr/dt is mainly dependent on the surface conditions and convective parameters, the
surface temperatures Ts on frost-on-fin and frost-on-tube are analyzed with a detail in
heat flow investigation within the frost layer.
In Figure 4.9, the temperature profile T(z) of the mathematical model and the Verification
Model is shown. The results show that the temperature profile predicted by the mathe-
matical model is in good agreement with the results of the Verification Model.
Figure 4.9: The comparison of temperature profile at two different times during the frosting
process between the mathematical model (Math.) and the Verification Model (Ver.)
The heat transfer results of the mathematical model and the Verification Model is pro-
vided in Table 4.3 and Table 4.4. In general, the prediction of the heat transfer rate and
temperature is close to the CFD Verification Model. The verification of some assumptions
applied in the mathematical model, especially for the heat flow at the boundary of the cor-
ner block, can also be carried out through the Verification Model, as shown Figure 4.10
and Table 4.5. The heat flow of the two cases from the CFD Verification Model are illus-
trated, which could give a better understanding and explanation of the assumptions. It is
clear that the heat flow passing through the boundary of frost-on-fin to corner frost and fin
to corner frost is relatively small. The assumption then enables the simplification of the
model without causing significant errors.
36
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:45==
δfr,tb / δfr,f
ha
Ta
q
Tb
T
Ttb,s
Tf,s
[mm]
[W/m2K]
[◦C]
[W]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
Math.
0.95 / 0.32
50.5
-21.1
1.03
-26.6
-28.3
-24.8
-26.6
Ver.
1.02
-26.7
-28.2
-24.6
-26.4
error
-
-
-
+2.0%
+0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.2
Math.
3.00 / 1.03
56.8
-21.0
0.92
-26.9
-28.3
-24.6
-24.2
Ver.
0.90
-26.9
-28.3
-24.3
-24.1
error
-
-
-
+2.2%
0.0
0.0
-0.3
-0.1
Table 4.3: The comparison of Case 1 heat transfer results between the mathematical
model (Math.) and the CFD Verification Model (Ver.) at t = 30, 000 s and 150, 000 s.
δfr,tb / δfr,f
ha
Ta
q
Tb
T
Ttb,s
Tf,s
[mm]
[W/m2K]
[◦C]
[W]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
Math.
1.00 / 0.67
52.6
-20.9
0.89
-26.9
-28.4
-24.5
-23.6
Ver.
0.85
-27.0
-28.4
-24.4
-23.5
error
-
-
-
+4.7%
+0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.1
Math.
3.20 / 2.23
68.2
-20.6
0.57
-27.7
-28.6
-22.3
-21.8
Ver.
0.58
-27.7
-28.6
-22.1
-22.0
error
-
-
-
-1.7%
0.0
0.0
-0.2
+0.2
Table 4.4: The comparison of Case 3 heat transfer results between the mathematical
model (Math.) and the CFD Verification Model (Ver.) at t = 5, 000 s and 25, 000 s.
Figure 4.10: The illustration of heat flow from the surface of frost-on-fin, through the fin to
the tube.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
37
==PAGE:46==
qfr,f = 100%
qb,f = 100%
To fin
To frost
To tube
To / from frost
Case 1 t = 30, 000 s
99.5%
0.5%
98.1%
1.9%
Case 1 t = 150, 000 s
98.7%
1.3%
99.0%
1.0%
Case 3 t = 5, 000 s
99.3%
0.7%
100.0%
< 0.01%
Case 3 t = 25, 000 s
97.3%
2.7%
101.9%
-1.9%
Table 4.5: The percentage of heat flow going through the fin to the tube with loss to the
corner frost block.
4.3.2
Mathematical model: case study
This section presents the results predicted by the mathematical model, including the evo-
lution of frost layer, UA value, and surface efficiency over time for the finned-tube evap-
orator. Since the only case meeting the equilibrium of heat and mass transfer before
reaching other stopping criteria is Case 1 and Case 4, with inlet air temperatures of -20◦C
and -10◦C, a relative humidity of 70%, and an air volume flow rate of 19390 m3/hr. Ad-
ditional results of lower relative humidity and inlet air temperature Ta,in are provided to
comprehensively compare the effects of different environmental factors.
Effects of relative humidity
Figure 4.11 −Figure 4.15 show the evolution of frost layer, UA value, and surface ef-
ficiency over time, depending on different relative humidities of inlet airflow. From Fig-
ure 4.11 and Figure 4.12, higher relative humidity results a larger frost thickness growth
rate dδfr/dt, and a larger degradation in heat transfer rate q and UA value, as shown in
Figure 4.13 and Figure 4.14. For the case with lower relative humidity, since the saturated
humidity ratio ωsat on the cooled surface is much closer to the value of air humidity ratio
ωa, the equilibrium phase of heat and mass transfer happens earlier. Furthermore, if the
relative humidity of inlet airflow is below 60%, the frost formation only occurs on the tube
surface.
From Figure 4.13, for the case of 95% relative humidity, the heat transfer rate q drops by
57.6% within 10 hours after the onset of frosting period, compared to 13.5% and 6.9% for
the other two cases (85% and 70% relative humidity). For lower humidity cases, as shown
in Figure 4.14, the improvement of the UA value at the final equilibrium phase is benefit
from the frost-free fin surface, with only 2.1% and 7.6% degradation for relative humidity
of 50% and 60% respectively, while for case with 70% relative humidity, the degradation
rises to 26.5%. Furthermore, the blocking ratio for relative humidity of 50% and 60% is
2.6% and 11.3% respectively, which can greatly reduce the load of fan compared to cases
with higher relative humidity when operating under cold weather.
Figure 4.11: The change of frost layer thickness and blocking ratio for different relative
humidities (higher relative humidity).
38
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.12: The change of frost layer thickness and blocking ratio for different relative
humidities (lower relative humidity).
Figure 4.13: The change of UA value and total heat flux on the air side of heat exchanger
for different relative humidities (higher relative humidity).
Figure 4.14: The change of UA value and total heat flux on the air side of heat exchanger
for different relative humidities (lower relative humidity).
From Figure 4.15, the fin and tube efficiencies ηf and ηtb of all different relative humidities
RH increase over time. It is because the frost layer forming on the heat transfer surface
will make the temperature distribution more uniform both on fin and on tube. However,
the trends of overall fin efficiency ηf,o present differently between higher and lower hu-
midity cases. For lower humidity cases, the overall fin efficiency ηf,o gradually goes down
because the frost forming on the fin is much slower than that on the tube. This decrease
in overall fin efficiency ηf,o mostly follows the frost thickness on the tube which blocks part
of the fin from accessing the convective heat transfer. For higher humidity cases, such
as 85% and 95% relative humidity, the frost thickness growth rates dδfr/dt are higher on
both fin and tube. The values are also closer between the frost on the fin and the frost
on the tube. The growth of frost thickness on fin results a higher fin efficiency ηf. On the
other hand, the growth of frost thickness on tube lowers the overall fin efficiency ηf,o by
blocking more area of the fin surface from accessing the convective heat transfer. There-
fore, the overall fin efficiency ηf,o rises at the beginning due to faster frost thickness growth
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
39
==PAGE:48==
rate on fin dδfr,f/dt, but decreases after a certain time due to the frost accumulation on
tube. The values of tube efficiency ηtb for all different conditions are very closed to each
other, showing less sensitivity to the change on the air side. This is mostly due to the low
thermal conductivity of stainless steel tube ktb, high convective heat transfer coefficient of
the refrigerant side hr, and the design of large fin pitch Fp for frost accumulation during
the frosting periods.
Figure 4.15: The change of fin and tube efficiencies for different relative humidities.
Cases study: Effects of inlet air temperature
Figure 4.16 −Figure 4.21 show the evolution of frost layer, UA value, and surface ef-
ficiency over time, depending on different inlet air temperatures Ta,in. It is important to
notice that the temperature difference between the inlet air and refrigerant remains con-
stant. All cases with relative humidity of 70% reach final equilibrium phase.
Figure 4.16: The change of frost layer thickness and blocking ratio for different inlet air
temperatures Ta,in (RH = 70).
From Figure 4.16, the results of the cases with 70% relative humidity shows that when the
inlet air temperature Ta,in is lower, the frost thickness growth rate is slightly larger. This
is because the relationship between maximum humidity ratio ωsat and air temperature is
non-linear. And the maximum humidity ratio ωsat increases faster when the air is warmer.
However, this difference is not very big within a 5◦C temperature difference under freezing
condition. When reaching the final equilibrium phase, the frost thickness of the case with
40
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:49==
lower air inlet temperature is slightly larger when reaching the final equilibrium of heat and
mass transfer. This is mostly due to the difference in air properties. When air is colder,
the heat transfer coefficient ha is slightly larger, with a 0.5% to 1.0% difference between
different inlet air temperatures at the start of the frost formation and a 3% to 6% at the
final phase. Hence, the results at the final equilibrium phase between different inlet air
temperatures does not vary a lot, as shown in Figure 4.16, Figure 4.17, and Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.17: The change of UA value and total heat flux on the air side of heat exchanger
for different inlet air temperatures Ta,in (RH = 70).
Figure 4.18: The change of fin and tube efficiencies for different inlet air temperatures
Ta,in (RH = 70).
For the cases with 85% relative humidity, from Figure 4.19 the trends of frost thickness
growth rate dδfr/dt between different inlet air temperatures Ta,in are also same as the
cases with 70% relative humidity. A higher inlet air temperature Ta,in results a higher frost
thickness growth rate dδfr/dt. For UA value and heat transfer rate q shown in Figure 4.20,
the tends are also similar to that of the cases with 70% relative humidity. Thus, the results
of final equilibrium phase are also expected to be close to the results of the cases with
70% relative humidity. In Figure 4.21, the trends of three efficiencies over time can be
related to the results from the higher humidity cases in the previous cases study. While
the increasing rate in fin efficiency ηf and tube efficiency ηtb and the decreasing rate in
overall fin efficiency ηf,o is dependent on the frost thickness growth rate dδfr/dt.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.19: The change of frost layer thickness and blocking ratio for different inlet air
temperatures Ta,in (RH = 85).
Figure 4.20: The change of UA value and total heat flux on the air side of heat exchanger
for different inlet air temperatures Ta,in (RH = 85).
Figure 4.21: The change of fin and tube efficiencies for different inlet air temperatures
Ta,in (RH = 85).
Cases study: Effects of air volume flow rate
Figure 4.22 −Figure 4.23 show the evolution of frost layer, UA value, and surface effi-
ciency over time, depending on different air volume flow rates. Among all three different
volume flow rates ˙V , only the case with smaller volume flow rate does not reach the equi-
librium of heat and mass transfer.
42
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.22: The change of frost layer thickness and blocking ratio for different volume
flow rates ˙V .
Figure 4.23: The change of UA value and total heat flux on the air side of heat exchanger
for different volume flow rates ˙V .
Figure 4.24: The change of fin and tube efficiencies for different volume flow rates ˙V .
From Figure 4.22, it is clear that the frost thickness for higher volume flow rate is smaller
when reaching the equilibrium phase. This is because a higher surface temperature is
obtained within a thermal resistance network. To explain, a higher volume flow rate results
in a higher heat transfer coefficient ha, indicating a lower convective thermal resistance
between the air and the cooled surface, as shown in Figure 4.23. This lower convective
thermal resistance induces a higher convective heat transfer rate qconv from the air to the
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
43
==PAGE:52==
cooled surface. If the ratio of increased heat transfer rate qconv is not big enough to com-
pensate the ratio of reduced convective thermal resistance, the temperature difference
between the air and the cooled surface becomes smaller. And a small temperature dif-
ference results an earlier approach to the equilibrium of heat and mass transfer. From
Figure 4.24, higher volume flow rate ˙V results a lower fin efficiency ηf and overall fin ef-
ficiency ηf,o. This is because a higher convective heat transfer rate qconv induced by the
higher volume flow rate ˙V over the fin surface makes the temperature gradient from the
base become higher. That is, the area towards the fin tip is closer to the fluid temperature
Ta. In this situation, the height of fin is over-designed, resulting a lower fin efficiency ηf.
The overall fin efficiency ηf,o of all different volume flow rates ˙V , as mentioned in other
cases study, decreases due to the growth of frost thickness on tube.
4.3.3
Comparison with the CFD Simulation Model
The deviation of frosting and heat transfer results
The comparison of the frost layer development results between the mathematical model
and the CFD Simulation Model is illustrated in Figure 4.25 −Figure 4.30. The results
show that the frost thickness on the tube predicted by the mathematical model is much
higher than the CFD simulation results, especially for Case 1. The maximum heat transfer
deviation occurs also in Case 1, with around 20% of error from the CFD results. These
error comes from the use of average heat transfer coefficient ha and reference tempera-
ture Tref from all the surfaces in the CFD Simulation Model, as discussed in the no frost
condition section. Due to a large surface area ratio of fin (or frost-on-fin) and tube (or frost-
on-tube), the average convective parameters are much closer to the value on the surface
of fin (or frost-on-fin). That is the reason why the frost thickness on the fin estimated by
the mathematical model matches quite well with the CFD simulation.
On the other hand, the heat transfer coefficient ha used in mathematical model from the
correlation under-predicts the convective heat transfer on the tube. When deriving the
surface temperature of the tube using this smaller heat transfer rate, the calculated surface
temperature of the frost-on-tube becomes lower, compared to the CFD simulation. Since
the surface temperature is a key parameter influencing the mass transfer rate of the frost
deposition, the much lower estimated surface temperature by the mathematical model
gives a larger mass transfer rate, resulting an over-predicted frost thickness growth rate
on the surface of frost-on-tube. However, in some cases, especially for higher relative
humidity ratio and higher inlet air temperature, the influence of this estimation error is
much smaller or does not seem to exist. For the results of heat transfer rates, the deviation
between two methods is not very big. This is because the overall heat transfer rate is still
dominated by the convection though the surface of fin (or frost-on-fin).
Figure 4.25: The comparison of frost thickness for different relative humidity between the
mathematical model (Math.) and the Simulation Model (Sim.)
44
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.26: The comparison of frost thickness for different airflow temperatures and rela-
tive humidities between the mathematical model (Math.) and the Simulation Model (Sim.)
Figure 4.27: The comparison of frost thickness for different air volume flow rates between
the mathematical model (Math.) and the Simulation Model (Sim.). ( ˙V = 19390 m3/hr)
Figure 4.28: The comparison of heat transfer rate for different relative humidities between
the mathematical model (Math.) and the Simulation Model (Sim.)
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.29: The comparison of heat transfer rate for different airflow temperatures and
relative humidity between the mathematical model (Math.) and the Simulation Model
(Sim.)
Figure 4.30: The comparison of heat transfer rate for different air volume flow rates be-
tween the mathematical model (Math.) and the Simulation Model (Sim.). ( ˙V = 19390
m3/hr)
The investigation of deviation in frost thickness
To explain the difference in error between the mathematical model and the Simulation
Model, the ratio of mass transfer parameters, including the ratio of mass transfer coeffi-
cient hm, the the humidity ratio difference between air and cooled surface dω = (wa −ws),
and the frost thickness growth rate of the mathematical model to the Simulation Model, of
Case 1 and Case 2 are shown in Figure 4.31 and Figure 4.32.
It is clear that the error of Case 1 mainly comes from the humidity ratio difference between
the free air stream and the surface of frost-on-tube, which is assumed to be saturated.
This difference in humidity ratio of the mathematical model is around three times larger
than that of the Simulation Model. Since the air temperature of both models are close to
each other, the difference in surface temperature estimation is the major contribution to
this error, resulting a higher frost thickness growth rate. In Case 2, due to the high relative
humidity of the inlet airflow, the humidity ratio of the air is higher. As a result, errors in
surface temperature prediction have a smaller impact on the frost thickness growth rate
when the surface saturated humidity ratio is not yet close to the humidity ratio of the free
air stream. However, as time goes by, the difference in humidity ratio of the cases with
higher environmental humidity ratio will also decrease, requiring a more accurate surface
temperature for simulating the frost thickness growth rate.
46
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.31: The frost-on-fin’s mass transfer-related parameters ratio of the mathematical
model (Math.) to the Simulation Model (Sim.)
Figure 4.32: The frost-on-tube’s mass transfer-related parameters ratio of the mathemat-
ical model (Math.) to the Simulation Model (Sim.)
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:57==
5
Discussion and Conclusion
This section aims to offer some general reviews on the thesis’s findings and opportunities
from the author’s perspective, as well as propose some suggestions of future work for
model improvements and expansions. Last but not least, some comments of whether the
thesis meets its stated objectives at the beginning of this work is provided.
5.1
Discussion
5.1.1
About the results of the mathematical model
The one-dimensional model is in good agreement with the CFD Verification Model, as
shown in temperature, heat transfer rate, and fin efficiency with different levels of frost
accumulation. Furthermore, the one-dimensional model provides quality results with less
computational resources than the CFD Verification Model.
However, the model could benefit from improvements such as:
1. The correlations for local heat and mass transfer related variables could give more
accurate results for the frost layer development, as indicated by the CFD Simulation
Model.
2. Considering surface roughness of frost may reduce the error in predicting the flow
regime (laminar or turbulent), and the heat and mass transfer coefficients.
3. A wider range of correlations for heat transfer coefficients and a more comprehen-
sive correlation of frost properties could help expand the range of applications.
4. Including the estimation of pressure drop on the air side could support the simula-
tions considering the fan control.
5. Including the simulation of two-phase heat transfer on the refrigerant side of the
evaporator could advance the model in practical applications.
5.1.2
About the results of the CFD Simulation Model
The mesh sensitivity analysis was conducted to optimize of the CFD Simulation Model,
yielding decent results while efficiently utilizing computational resources and time. How-
ever, it is found that in most cases, the airflow remains laminar for a long time after the
onset of frost formation. Also, the temperature distribution pattern within the frost layer is
similar for different cases at different levels of frost accumulation.
Yet, there are some tips for the improvements of CFD simulation as follow:
1. To introduce surface roughness to the frost surface to obtain a more accurate flow
regime (laminar or turbulent), and the heat and mass transfer coefficients.
2. To allow switching the solver settings from laminar to turbulent based on transitional
correlations.
3. To improve the mesh quality for different flow characteristics and operating con-
ditions, providing a trade-off between the accuracy of results and computational
resources (e.g. time).
4. To automate the iterative process between the frost accumulation iterations and CFD
calculations.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
49
==PAGE:58==
5. To investigate two different approaches of convective parameters for frost devel-
opment: (a) using local average value of each component surface. (b) using local
value of the mesh.
6. To consider using mesh morphing features of CFD software to increase the data
points and save the time to update the CAD and mesh manually.
5.1.3
The future work
Potential future work for the models’ validation would be to conduct the experimental tests
of frost developed on the evaporator’s surface under different conditions. Also, the devel-
opment of two-dimensional numerical analysis is preferred to study the heat flow within
the frost layer and verify some assumptions of the one-dimensional mathematical model.
Then, the model can be further implemented into the whole system level simulation under
frosting and defrosting cycles by introducing the defrosting process and the components’
control strategies.
5.2
Conclusion
A mathematical model was constructed based on a published one-dimensional heat diffu-
sion model, and by adding a frosting model to suit the finned-tube heat exchangers under
frosting conditions. The model can dynamically predict the heat transfer performance and
the frost accumulation on the evaporator. Furthermore, the adoption of a new definition
for fin efficiency ηf considering the frost accumulation is proposed, applied, and studied
in this thesis.
The Verification Model showed that the heat flow passing through the border of the corner
frost to the frost-on-fin is usually less than 3% that of the convective heat transfer rate from
the surface of the frost-on-fin. Similarly, the heat flow passing through the border of the
corner frost to the fin is usually less than 2% that of total heat transferred through the fin.
Therefore, the omission of the heat transfer rates q at these boundaries does not lead to
a significant error in heat transfer predictions. The Simulation Model indicated that the
convective heat flux q
′′
conv is not evenly distributed to the tube and fin surfaces. Therefore,
some computational errors in predicting frost thickness growth rates dδfr/dt occur due to
the use of overall surface average values of convective parameters. Using these overall
surface average values from the heat transfer coefficient h for the mass transfer analogy
estimation may not be preferable. It is recommended to extract these convective heat
transfer values from the simulation results separately and use them individually for the
development of the frost layer on the fins and tubes.
The model was tested under no frost and frosting conditions. The effects of three key en-
vironmental parameters on frost accumulation on the surface of the ammonia finned-tube
heat exchanger were investigated. From the results of the mathematical model, it was
found that the humidity ratio ω of air stream is the main driving force of the frost devel-
opment, as expected. For a temperature difference of 9 ◦C between the ambient air and
the refrigerant, and a relative humidity below ≈60% the frost only accumulates on the
tube. For finned-tube surfaces, the overall fin efficiency is dependent on both frost thick-
ness growth rates dδfr/dt on the fin and on the tube. In general, the frost that formed on
any surface decreases the overall heat transfer coefficient ho, resulting in a more uniform
temperature distribution across the surface. This uniform temperature distribution also
leads to an increase in fin efficiency ηf and tube efficiency ηtb. However, since part of the
fin, blocked by the frost on the tube, has no access to the convective heat transfer, the
overall fin efficiency ηf,o decreases when the frost accumulates on the tube.
50
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:59==
With a constant temperature difference between the ambient air and the refrigerant, an
increase in inlet air temperature results a higher frost thickness growth rate dδfr/dt at the
onset of the frosting period, a shorter time reaching the equilibrium phase, and a thinner
terminal frost layer. This is due to the non-linear relationship between the maximum hu-
midity carried by the air and the air temperature. Also, the heat transfer coefficient ha was
found to be slightly higher when air temperature is lower. From the results of different
volume flow rates ˙V of the air stream, a higher convective heat transfer coefficient ha,
induced by a higher volume flow rate ˙V , leads to a higher surface temperature. Then,
the lower humidity ratio ω difference between the surface and the free stream outweighs
the increase in the mass transfer coefficient hm, resulting in a lower frost thickness growth
rate. Finally, fin efficiency ηf increases with higher volume flow rates ˙V , as expected, due
to the enhanced convective heat transfer rate qconv over the fin surface, which causes a
large temperature difference between the base and the average surface value.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
H. Lee Core Writing Team and J. Romero (eds.) IPCC, 2023: Climate Change 2023:
Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2023. DOI: 10.
59327/IPCC/AR6- 9789291691647. URL: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/
downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_SYR_LongerReport.pdf.
[2]
IEA (2024). CO2 Emissions in 2023. 2024. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/co2-
emissions-in-2023.
[3]
NASA. Extreme Weather and Climate Change. URL: https://science.nasa.gov/
climate-change/extreme-weather/.
[4]
European Commission. Heating and cooling. URL: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/
topics/energy-efficiency/heating-and-cooling_en.
[5]
Eurostat. Renewables steadily increasing in heating and cooling. 2022. URL: https:
//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/en/web/products-eurostat-news/-/edn-20220211-1.
[6]
Eurostat. Renewable energy for heating and cooling up to 25 % in 2022. 2024. URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/w/ddn-20240227-2#:~:
text=Energy%20for%20heating%20and%20cooling,)%20from%202021%20(23.0%25)
..
[7]
Eurostat. Share of energy from renewable sources. 2024. URL: https://ec.europa.
eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/NRG_IND_REN__custom_9909313/default/bar?
lang=en.
[8]
European Commission. Renewable Energy Directive. URL: https : / / energy . ec .
europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-and-rules/
renewable-energy-directive_en.
[9]
Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy, and Utilities. Denmark’s Integrated National En-
ergy and Climate Plan. 2019. URL: https://kefm.dk/media/7095/denmarks-national-
energy-and-climate-plan.pdf.
[10]
Danish Energy Agency. Comprehensive Assessment 2020, Denmark. URL: https:
//energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-03/dk_ca_2020_en_0.pdf.
[11]
Danish Energy Agency. Heat. URL: https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/heat.
[12]
Danish District Heating Association. HEAT GENERATION IN DENMARK. 2022.
URL: https://danskfjernvarme.dk/media/w1ghiibk/faktaark_heat_generation_in_
denmark-v2.pdf.
[13]
International Energy Agency. Heat Pumps. 2023. URL: https://www.iea.org/energy-
system/buildings/heat-pumps.
[14]
European Heat Pump Association. Metadata and Methodologies. URL: https://
stats.ehpa.org/home/annex/.
[15]
Granryd et al. Refrigerating Engineering. 2005.
[16]
Thomas Nowak. Heat Pumps Integrating technologies to decarbonise heating and
cooling. 2018. URL: https://www.ehpa.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/White_
Paper_Heat_pumps-1.pdf.
[17]
Wen Tien Tsai. An overview of environmental hazards and exposure risk of hydroflu-
orocarbons (HFCs). 2005. DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2005.03.084.
[18]
T.F. Stocker et al. IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change. 2013. URL: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/
uploads/2018/02/WG1AR5_all_final.pdf.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
53
==PAGE:62==
[19]
European Commission. EU-Rules Guidance on the EU’s F-gas Regulation and
its legal framework. URL: https : / / climate . ec . europa . eu / eu - action / fluorinated -
greenhouse-gases/eu-rules_en.
[20]
Andy Pearson. Refrigeration with ammonia. 2008. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijrefrig.2007.11.011.
[21]
An overview of large scale heat pumps in Danish district heating systems. URL:
https://varmepumpedata.dk.
[22]
C.T. Sanders. Frost formation: The influence of frost formation and defrosting on
the performance of air coolers. 1974. URL: http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:b99381a0-
893c-4382-8b14-b1d9bdb370dd.
[23]
Y. HAYASHI et al. “STUDY OF FROST PROPERTIES CORRELATING WITH FROST
FORMATION TYPES”. In: JOURNAL OF HEAT TRANSFER-TRANSACTIONS OF
THE ASME 99.2 (1977), pp. 239–245. DOI: 10.1115/1.3450675.
[24]
YX. TAO, RW. BESANT, and KS. REZKALLAH. “MODELING OF FROST FORMA-
TION IN A FIBROUS INSULATION SLAB AND ON AN ADJACENT COLD PLATE”.
In: (1991), pp. 609–618. DOI: 10.1016/0735-1933(91)90074-E.
[25]
YX. TAO, RW. BESANT, and KS. REZKALLAH. “A MATHEMATICAL-MODEL FOR
PREDICTING THE DENSIFICATION AND GROWTH OF FROST ON A FLAT-PLATE”.
In: (1993), pp. 353–363. DOI: 10.1016/0017-9310(93)80011-I.
[26]
Mengjie Song and Chaobin Dang. “Review on the measurement and calculation of
frost characteristics”. In: (2018), pp. 586–614. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.
2018.03.094.
[27]
Byeongchul Na and Ralph L. Webb. “A fundamental understanding of factors af-
fecting frost nucleation”. In: (2003), pp. 3797–3808. DOI: 10.1016/S0017-9310(03)
00194-7.
[28]
Robson O. Piucco, Christian J.L. Hermes, and Jader R. Melo Cláudio; Barbosa. “A
study of frost nucleation on flat surfaces”. In: (2008), pp. 1710–1715. DOI: 10.1016/
j.expthermflusci.2008.06.004.
[29]
Sungjoon Byun et al. “Frost formation from general-low to ultra-low temperatures:
A review”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2022.123164.
[30]
Yoni Butbul. Heat Pump Cycle Fundamentals. 2022. URL: https://www.esmagazine.
com/articles/102492-heat-pump-cycle-fundamentals.
[31]
Ukichiro Nakaya. “Snow Crystals”. In: (1954). DOI: 10.3189/S0022143000016956.
[32]
Martin R. Kærn et al. “Overall surface fin efficiency and dry angle for ammonia finned
tube evaporators”. In: (2022).
[33]
Ian H. Bell et al. “Pure and Pseudo-pure Fluid Thermophysical Property Evalua-
tion and the Open-Source Thermophysical Property Library CoolProp”. In: Indus-
trial and Engineering Chemistry Research 53.6 (2014), pp. 2498–2508. DOI: 10.
1021/ie4033999. eprint: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/ie4033999. URL:
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ie4033999.
[34]
Christian J.L. Hermes et al. “A study of frost growth and densification on flat sur-
faces”. In: (2009), pp. 371–379. DOI: 10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2008.10.006.
[35]
Sensirion AG. “Humidity at a glance”. In: (). URL: https://sensirion.com/media/
documents/A419127A/6163F5FE/Sensirion_AppNotes_Humidity_Sensors_at_a_
Glance.pdf.
[36]
Pedro J. Mago and S. A. Sherif. “Frost formation and heat transfer on a cold surface
in ice fog”. In: (2005), pp. 538–546. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrefrig.2004.10.004.
[37]
Byeongchul Na and Ralph L. Webb. “Mass transfer on and within a frost layer”. In:
(2004), pp. 899–911. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2003.08.023.
54
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
==PAGE:63==
[38]
Kwan Soo Lee, Woo Seung Kim, and Tae Hee Lee. “A one-dimensional model for
frost formation on a cold flat surface”. In: (1997), pp. 4359–4365. DOI: 10.1016/
S0017-9310(97)00074-4.
[39]
Verein Deutscher Ingenieure. “VDI Heat Atlas”. In: (2010), Online–Ressource (XXII,
1586p. 1069 illus., 24 illus. in color. eReference, digital) (unknown). DOI: https :
//doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1007/978-3-540-77877-6.
[40]
Y. Mao, R. W. Besant, and H. Chen. “Frost characteristics and heat transfer on a flat
plate under freezer operating conditions: Part I, Experimentation and correlations”.
In: (1999).
[41]
M. R. Kærn, W. B. Markussen, and J. Kristófersson. “Numerical analysis of flow
maldistribution in large-scale liquid overfed finned-tube ammonia evaporators”. In:
(2020), pp. 251–256. DOI: 10.18462/iir.gl.2020.1152.
[42]
Siemens Digital Industries Software. “Siemens Simcenter STAR-CCM+ 2306 User
Guide”. In: (2023).
[43]
Steven B. Beale. Tube Banks and Crossflow over. 2011. URL: https://www.thermopedia.
com/content/1211/.
Overall surface efficiency of finned tube evaporators considering accumulated frost
55
==PAGE:64==
This Master’s thesis models the heat transfer performance of ammonia finned-tube evaporator for
large-scale heat pump applications.
Heat pumps are regarded as a potential pathway towards
achieving the EU’s carbon neutrality goal in the heating sector. However, the most common air-
source heat pumps frequently encounter the challenge of frost accumulation in cold weather regions.
Moreover, the promotion of natural refrigerants has driven changes in the materials used for evap-
orators, questioning the validity for the adoption of conventional performance evaluation models.
Considering the employment of thin-walled stainless steel tubes with large fin pitch used for typical
ammonia finned-tube evaporators, a one-dimensional heat diffusion model featuring a transient frost
development is constructed in this thesis. This thesis quantifies the heat transfer performance of an
ammonia finned-tube evaporator under frosting conditions with the use of the constructed model.
Furthermore, this thesis investigates the effects of varying environmental parameters, including the
humidity, velocity, and temperature of airflow, on the frost accumulation on evaporator surface.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.construct.dtu.dk
