==PAGE:1==
How are fires impacting Central Kalimantan?
Can the extent of this impact be quantified through
satellite image analysis?
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej
Bygning 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Cover Image Credits: NASA Earth Observatory
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study was conducted in collaboration with the Ørsted’s Bioenergy Sustainability
department. Its goal was to assess the impact of forest fires in Central Kalimantan
over the past two decades through satellite images and establish correlations between
these fires and measurable climate variables.
Using Machine Learning and supervised classification techniques, it was first deter-
mined the annual burnt area and then correlated it with climate variables retrieved
from both in-situ measurements and model data. The results showed a persistent
impact of forest fires on the region, revealing a strong correlation between the burnt
area, soil moisture levels and the Oceanic Niño Index (ONI).
Finally, the results were shared with Ørsted’s Bioenergy Sustainability department
for future reference.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Geodesy and Earth
Observation, Department of Space Research and Technology, at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Kongens Lyngby, June 30, 2024
François Goor (s222722)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This work would not have been possible without the assistance of my supervisors.
Therefore, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Sine M. Hvidegaard, Senior
Advisor at DTU Space, and Lærke Stürup Chrintz, Senior Climate Advisor at Ørsted,
for their guidance and support over the past five months.
I would also like to thank everyone indirectly involved in the completion of this thesis.
Starting with my roommates. Carol, Gemma, Sara, and Elise, you have been my
lighthouse in a stormy sea.
Diﬀicult days were suddenly lightened just after one
step in the house. Carol, the chaotic harmony you bring into other people’s lives
is the closest thing to a superpower I have ever experienced. I’d follow your steps
everywhere you go, my sergeant. Dear Gemma, since the first day we met in Lundto,
your wise lightness struck me. Your story, your kind messages and your support have
been and will be my spiritual guide through harsh times. Thank you is not enough.
Sara, to your being solar, to your head in the clouds, to your singing, to your soul,
please don’t change. You are a source of joy. To Artemis and Thanos, my Adonis and
my Sappho, respectively. To the countless group chats we have. No matter where
we will end up, the memories built together are sealed in my heart. I demand a
scheduled series of meetings for the years to come. To Fez and Luke, to Matte and
Ale, to Marco, to the whole “GnR” group. Having you as friends feels as good as it is
diﬀicult to describe in English. Give me a couple of weeks and remind me I owe you
some proper Italian acknowledgments. To “Cacatso” and the people orbiting around.
To my Danish Italian family, to Alessandro and Nic. To Nele, to us, to the Portuguese
songs, the shakshuka, the SMK, the windmill hole-in-one, the northen lights, and to
whatever the future is concealing. Finally, to my family. To Mamma e Papà. What
kind of Italian would I be without thanking you. I have missed you. I always knew
I was lucky to have you as my parents, but in the past months, being re-united to
fight back another harsh battle made me realize the true meaning of family.
For the next shooting star, my wish is set. I wish I could return all the love I have
received from you all.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Approval
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Report structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Study Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The Tropical Climate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Climate Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
In-situ: BMKG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Climate Model: ERA5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Multi-Spectral Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Landsat Missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Radiometers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.1
The FIRMS Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Vegetation indeces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.1
NDVI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.2
EVI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.3
NBR, NBR2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.4
NDWI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7.1
Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.8.1
Pearson correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Methods
21
3.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Climate Variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.1.2
Satellite Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.3
FIRMS - Fire Information for Resource Management System .
24
3.2
Landsat 7 - Gap Filling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Labelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.1
Algorithm Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.2
Data Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.3
Image Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.4
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4.5
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Results
35
4.1
Algorithm outcomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Amount of Fires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Images selection and Cloud Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Climate Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.1
Rainfall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.2
Temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4.3
Soil Moisture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.4
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Area burnt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.6
Correlation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.6.1
Area burnt and Rainfall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.6.2
Area burnt and Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.6.3
Area burnt and Soil Moisture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6.4
Area burnt and ONI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.6.5
Excluding 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Discussion
55
6
Conclusions
57
A
59
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The scope of this thesis is to assess the feasibility of satellite images as supporting doc-
umentation for projects developed for climate change mitigation in collaboration with
Ørsted Bioenergy Sustainability. This can be seen as a good example of why satellite
data should be widely available and without cost for the user. In fact, one argument
for providing free satellite images from space agencies is to support local businesses
and the development of more advanced methods and interesting case studies [1]. Ad-
ditionally, in a period where the world is clamoring for climate action, satellite images
can provide vital insights for the development of ecosystem restoration, support for
local communities that are struggling with a more sustainable approach, and climate
change mitigation.
In this specific case study, the partnership between Ørsted and the Save the Orangutan
organization has conceived a project for fire prevention in Central Kalimantan, a
southern region of Borneo Island in Indonesia. The decision on the location is based
both on the feasibility of the project and on Ørsted’s strong commitment to empower-
ing local communities in the management of their land. In fact, with the help of local
communities and surrounding villages such as Mangkutup, Tumbang Nusa, Taruna,
and the local Borneo Orangutan Survival Foundation, the idea is to prevent dried
tropical peatlands from catching fire. This specific type of wetland is formed by de-
composing organic matter, primarily plants, submerged in water. This soil is crucial
for carbon sinking and carbon storage. However, if its equilibrium is disturbed, the
situation can potentially reverse [2] [3]. Preventing fires is done by restoring a higher
soil water content in the area through the construction of dams and more frequent
guarding of the territory to raise early fire alerts. In addition, tropical peatland is
one of the ecosystems that burns the most carbon per hectare, making the project an
obvious choice for companies aiming at net-neutrality objectives through mitigation
actions or investments beyond their value chain.
Ørsted’s project began with the presentation of an overview and a survey of the will-
ingness and consent of the local communities to participate in such projects. Once the
project’s contribution receives approval from the local communities, a more detailed
plan is presented. In this particular case, the number and position of the dams are
initially considered. The equipment to be used is designed and selected, programs
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
are organized, and the environmental plan, including fire prevention techniques with
clearly defined procedures, is established.
This study focuses on analysis of historical conditions of the region of interest shown
in Figure 2.1, through satellite images.
The main goal for Ørsted is to use this
investigation as the basis and future comparison for their nature restoration project.
In the past, the government of Indonesia has formed a task force directly respon-
sible for peatland restoration, which highlights the importance of prioritizing these
efforts. Additionally, the government acknowledges the need for private sector in-
vestment and NGOs support to enhance the restoration process [4]. This results in a
favourable condition for Ørsted to operate. For the private sector to intervene, a cost-
benefit analysis needs to be carefully considered and previous studies have shown that
peatland restoration is cheaper than other carbon offset projects, as they are highly
cost-effective [5].
Satellite data to measure burnt area is not a new methodology as specific vegetation
indices exist to quantify it and multiple types of machine learning techniques to
achieve the classification have been researched [6]. However, the research and private
sectors are still somewhat distant on this topic. With the rise of ’green goals’ set by
companies to achieve net neutrality, there has been an increase in small companies
that offer environmental and nature restoration monitoring for other businesses.
Few case studies have been found regarding the use of satellite data for nature-based
restoration projects.
Notably, the Center for Climate Crime Analysis (CCCA), a
Dutch nonprofit organization, conducted a case study analyzing two projects aimed
at avoiding deforestation in Brazil.
The study suggests that there are significant
discrepancies between the amount of timber logged declared to authorities and the
amount identified through satellite images, impacting the credibility of restoration
projects [7]. This demonstrates the transparency that satellite images provide and
strengthens the reasons behind Ørsted’s decision to use this methodology as the
foundation for their study.
Finally, another advantage of using satellite images is their continuous provision of in-
formation at consistent intervals. This ensures a constant stream of reliable data. For
businesses and governmental agencies, this could be streamlined through automated
algorithms, allowing for a quicker and more eﬀicient response to any discrepancies in
reported data, ensuring better regulatory compliance.
1.1
Report structure
This report is organized into five main chapters.
It begins with an exposition of
the theories underlying the climate variables, the satellites’ instrumentation, and the
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Report structure
3
geospatial datasets. This is followed by a detailed explanation of the methodology
applied and the different tools used. Results are then presented and structured fol-
lowing the same scheme presented in the theory section. Finally, a discussion of the
findings and possible future improvements anticipate the conclusions.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Study Area
The thesis primarily focuses on evaluating an area in Indonesia that has been largely
affected by fires.
The susceptibility of this region to fires is largely attributed to
historical governmental decision and following human activities.
The study area is situated in the Borneo Island. The Borneo Island is the third largest
island in the world, and it is divided between three different countries: Malasya,
Indonesia and Brunei. As shown in Figure 2.1, the majority of the island is within
Indonesia borders.
The study area, outlined in yellow in the map, is located in
southern Borneo, in the Central Kalimantan region, and it is positioned east of the
city of Palangkaraya. The area covers an estimated 1,398 km2 and features rivers,
agricultural fields, and tropical forests.
Being located at equatorial latitudes, the climate follows the typical pattern of tropical
regions, characterized by two distinct seasons. The rainfall season from November to
April, while the dry season dominates from May to October. During the latter, lower
precipitation and higher temperatures create conditions that increase the region’s
susceptibility to forest fires.
In addition to weather conditions, historical human activities and decisions played a
significant role in the region’s vulnerability to fires. In fact, in 1996/1997, the area was
part of the Ex-Mega Rice Project, a government initiative aimed at clearing peatland
through draining channels, to expande the rice cultivation production to compensate
the food shortage. The project left the peat hydrology equilibrium severely disrupted,
resulting in a high forest fire risk for the region [8].
2.2
The Tropical Climate
Firstly, it is important to elaborate on the climate that characterizes the island of
Borneo for a better understanding in the climate variables that play a crucial role
in the region. Due to its proximity to the equator and its location surrounded by
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theory
Figure 2.1:
In white are Indonesia’s borders, and in yellow is the location and
boundaries of the region of interest in Southern Borneo.
the Pacific Ocean, Borneo experiences a tropical climate with abundant precipitation
year-round, while keeping distinct dry, or less wet, and wet seasons.
This aligns with the Köppen classification system, developed by Wladimir Köppen
in the early 1900s to define global climate boundaries using temperature and pre-
cipitation data. Although the system has been revised multiple times, it remains a
key reference for climatologists. In this classification, five major climate regions are
identified based on temperature and dryness, labeled A, B, C, D, and E, and then
further divided into multiple subtypes [9].
As shown in Figure 2.2, Borneo is classified as having a “wet equatorial” climate with
the code ”Af.” The A climate regions are concentrated around the equatorial area,
where higher solar radiation illuminating the area results in higher temperatures.
More specifically, the criteria for a region to be classified as type A is that the coolest
month must have an average temperature of at least 18°C. While the ”f” indicates
that the driest month experience at least 60 mm of cumulative precipitation [9].
In Borneo, as mentioned before, although precipitation occurs year-round, two dis-
tinct seasons can be identified: the wet season, which usually spans from November
to May, and the dry season, which extends from June to October.
As in any other part of the world, the weather in the Borneo region results from the
intricate interaction of multiple factors, including temperature, winds, pressure, sea
surface temperature, the Coriolis effect, and many others. However, these dependen-
cies can be viewed collectively for a broader understanding. The trade winds are the
stepping stones of the entire weather system. These winds are relatively constant
over time and result from Earth’s rotation, causing them to blow from east to west.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 The Tropical Climate
7
Figure 2.2: Köppen-Geiger climate type classification in Asia [10].
In the Pacific Ocean, trade winds blow warm surface water from the coasts of South
America towards Indonesia and North Australia, causing an upwelling of deeper,
colder water along the South American coasts. In the warmer waters, higher evap-
oration rates induce air circulation over the Pacific tropical region, with warm air
rising from the west side and cooler, dry air descending on the other one. As shown
in Figure 2.3 this process creates a self-sustaining cycle.
However, if conditions that maintain this self-sustained cycle change it can lead to
anomalous years. For example, if the trade winds weaken, warm water is no longer
pushed entirely to the west and instead accumulates along the western coast of South
America. This situation is known as the El Niño phenomenon. With warmer waters
no longer concentrated in the western area, less precipitation and drier conditions are
expected there. On the other hand, when the trade winds are particularly strong,
a situation known as La Niña occurs, resulting in a wetter season for the island of
Borneo [11].
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
Figure 2.3: The water cycle and the interaction between the ocean and atmosphere
over the Pacific Ocean, with Australia on the left and South America on the right.
[11].
The oscillation between these two phenomena is known as the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO). Studying the periodicity and patterns of this oscillation is crucial
for better understanding the large-scale climate, improving forecasts and prevention
measures in case of extreme weather conditions [12].
Different indices have been produced to monitor the Southern Pacific Ocean’s sea
surface temperature (SST). Initially, the area was divided into four regions, labelled
with numbers from 1 to 4. However, over time, additional indices were created that
explain better large-scale climate events, while the original four regions were more
useful for local analysis. The Niño 3.4 index and the Oceanic Niño Index (ONI) are
currently the primary references for studying the ENSO. Both indices cover the same
area (5°N-5°S, 170°W-120°W), but they differ in their methodologies. The Niño 3.4
index uses a 5-month SST running mean, defining La Niña and El Niño events when
the average is ±0.4°C. On the other hand, the ONI uses a 3-month running average
window and defines these events with a threshold of ±0.5°C [13].
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Climate Data
9
2.3
Climate Data
While conducting this study, climate data were acquired both by retrieving in-situ
data from the nearest meteorological station and by the results of climate models.
2.3.1
In-situ: BMKG
Weather observation and data collection in Indonesia began as early as 1841. Over the
years, these activities continued, and during the period of the Dutch East Indies, a
government institution was established to collect geophysical and metereological data.
After Indonesia’s proclamation of independence following World War II, the institu-
tion’s name changed multiple times but maintained its objective. Finally, in 2008,
the institution was named Badan Meteorologi, Klimatologi, dan Geofisika (BMKG)
[14], as it is known today.
Once subscribed and logged in to the BMKG portal, users can explore and download
datasheets containing both climate data (up to 1 month) and earthquake event data
(up to 10 days) for various locations. With more than 190 stations spread across
Indonesia, shown in Figure 2.4, users can access data by filtering by province or
even by station name. Available climate variables include maximum, minimum, and
average humidity, average temperature, daily cumulative rainfall, wind intensity and
direction. The meteostation of Tjilik Riwut, east of Palanga Raya and west to the
study area was selected as being the closest to the study area. In fact, the distance
between the closest points and the furthest one is around 20 and 60 km, respectively.
The downloaded sheet will contain information on the geographic location of the
meteorological station, the date of acquisition, and columns containing the selected
variables’ data.
2.3.2
Climate Model: ERA5
In addition to in-situ data, the study includes data retrieved from one of the datasets
offered by the Copernicus Earth Observation program. This program was established
by the European Union to monitor the planet by gathering both satellite Earth Ob-
servation data and in-situ measurements. All the information is released for free to
the scientific community, as the program aims to benefit all European citizens by
supporting service providers and public authorities [15].
Six different themes drive the Copernicus program, among them the Copernicus Cli-
mate Change Service (C3S) which contains vital information regarding historical,
present, and forecast data to understand climate change in detail and support Eu-
ropean authorities in their decisions. Specifically, C3S has been developed by the
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF). As part of C3S,
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
Figure 2.4: Map displaying the locations of the available meteorological stations for
data download spread across Indonesia [14].
ECMWF has developed a global climate model that estimates various climate vari-
ables spanning from 1940 to the present day: the ECMWF Reanalysis v5, named
ERA5 in short [16].
The weather analysis used by numerical weather prediction centers is based on the
data assimilation principle. Here, forecasted predictions and data later observed are
compared one to the other, and ingested to improve the model’s accuracy. The same
is done in the ERA5, at a coarser resolution. However, the prefix ”re-” in reanalysis
is used for the ERA5 model because it not only aims to improve future predictions
but also reruns on historical data to provide better past data [17].
This model has spatial resolution cells of 31 km and presents the variables with
different temporal resolutions; hourly, daily, and monthly aggregates are available to
users. Within this dataset, for this case study, three different variables were accessed
in the daily aggregates: precipitation, temperature, and soil moisture. The rainfall
data include all the estimated precipitation that fell in one day, while the temperature
is an average measured at 2 meters height.
For soil moisture, the ERA5 dataset
proposes 3 different depth layers that measure the water content in the soil, which is
estimated using C-band scatterometers mounted on satellites such as MetOp-A/-B,
ERS-1, ERS-2, and by including in-situ data [16].
2.4
Multi-Spectral Imaging
To correctly assess the impacts of fires on Central Kalimantan, continuous aerial
imaging of the area is key. Satellite images, especially those from satellites equipped
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Multi-Spectral Imaging
11
with instruments capable of capturing the visible light spectrum, are valuable tools.
In this study, satellites with multi-spectral sensors were used.
Multi-spectral imaging, as the name suggests, is a technique that allows differentiation
between different spectral bands. Once the Sun’s radiation reaches Earth, part of it
is reflected back to space, and a part penetrates the atmosphere. In Figure 2.5, the
light grey curve in the background indicates the percentage of specific frequencies not
absorbed by molecules and particles suspended in the atmosphere. The higher the
curve value, the better the atmospheric transmission. Due to these properties, these
frequencies are the ones that can be captured the best from satellites and are often
referred to as atmospheric windows.
When this radiation hits physical bodies on Earth, they partially absorb it, while the
rest is reflected. Although the visible spectrum is continuous, adjacent frequencies
share similar properties, allowing them to be grouped into discrete intervals. As RGB
screens have shown us, using different intensities of red, green, and blue light can re-
construct almost the entire visible spectrum. This principle is utilized in satellite
instrumentation, where instead of sensing a continuous spectrum, which would result
in heavier and redundant data, it is more practical and eﬀicient to build optics that
detect specific frequency intervals. This intervals have different intensities, the sensi-
tivity of an instrument to detect different levels of intensity is defined as radiometric
resolution.
In the same figure, it is possible to see which intervals (or channels) are sensed by
the instruments on board of the Landsat’s satellites. The first Landsat mission was
the pioneering satellite designed to monitor Earth through optical sensors for agricul-
ture, forestry, and coastal observation. To date, the Landsat mission includes eight
additional follow-up satellites [18].
Optical sensors are defined as passive sensors because they capture radiation reflected
from physical objects illuminated by the Sun. This is important because their effec-
tiveness depends on the presence of sunlight and the absence of clouds.
2.4.1
Landsat Missions
In this report, images over the area of interest were acquired using three different
Landsat satellites. The decision to use Landsat for this study was taken since images
to observe long-time landscape changes and to ensure data sensing from both El
Niño and La Niña occurrences were needed. The continuity of the Landsat mission
guaranteed access to multispectral images from comparable instruments over more
than 20 years. An overview of the timeline of the Landsat missions is presented in
Figure 2.6.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
Figure 2.5: The percentage of atmospheric transmission over various radiation wave-
lengths. The channels of the different Landsat instruments are shown in colored boxes
[19].
Figure 2.6: A timeline showing in different colors the Landsat missions duration
over the past 50 years.
The first satellite data used were retrieved from Landsat 5. Launched on March 1st,
1984, it began acquiring images just 5 days after launch. Its orbit was positioned at
approximately 705 km in a sun-synchronous, near-polar trajectory to ensure suﬀicient
power for operation and maximize coverage. This orbit completed a full cycle every
99 minutes, with a repeat cycle of 16 days. The repeat cycle is the time it takes for
the satellite to pass over the same point on the ground.
Landsat 5 carried two different instruments for imaging: the Multispectral Scanner
(MSS) and the Thematic Mapper (TM). The multispectral scanner was included to
maintain consistency in scientific data acquisition with the previous satellite, Landsat
4, which also carried the MSS. The Thematic Mapper represented a new generation
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Multi-Spectral Imaging
13
of multispectral acquisition scanners, adding three bands, including a mid-infrared
and a thermal band.
Additionally, with a resolution of 30-by-30 meters, the TM
represented a significant advancement compared to the 57-by-79 meters resolution of
the MSS.
After the failure of Landsat 6 to reach orbit in 1993, ensuring continuity following
the Landsat 5 mission became soon necessary.
Thus, Landsat 7 was launched in
1999. The satellite was equipped with the Enhanced Thematic Mapper Plus (ETM+),
an upgraded version of the TM utilized in the previous mission. This iteration of
the sensor introduced a panchromatic band with a resolution of 15 meters, while
maintaining consistency with the TM in the remaining bands to ensure seamless
continuity. The orbit characteristics mirrored those of the Landsat 5 mission.
Four years after its launch, on May 31, 2003, the Scan Line Corrector responsible for
compensating the satellite’s motion during image acquisition failed [20] [21]. This led
to missed scan lines, particularly noticeable in off-nadir acquisitions. Figure 2.7 and
Figure 2.8 illustrate the issue and the resulting image after the failure, respectively.
To address this issue, band-specific gap mask files were produced in order for the
users to correctly interpolate between valid pixels. Additional details regarding this
approach are provided in section 3.2.
Acquisitions were halted in April 2022 to
conduct maneuvers aimed at lowering the orbit by 8 km. After a month, the satellite
resumed operation. However, in January 2024, the satellite experienced issues with its
batteries due to prolonged exposure to full sunlight, resulting in another suspension
of imaging operations.
Figure 2.7: On the left the alignment provided by the Line Scanner. On the right
acquisition of the after the SLC failure [21].
Finally, the Landsat 8 mission, launched in 2013 and still operational, maintains the
same orbit as the two aforementioned satellites. It is equipped with a multispectral
sensor named Operational Land Imager (OLI). The OLI sensor shares the same bands
as its predecessors but with a narrower bandwidth and a resolution of 30-by-30 meters.
Notably, it introduces the Coastal Aerosol band and the Cirrus band, which were
absent in the previous sensors. The same equipment was mounted on board of the
Landsat 9 mission in 2021 with an improved radiometric resolution [20].
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
Figure 2.8: Resulting image over southern Borneo on the left and over the study
area on the right after the SLC failure showing the missing data stripes off-nadir.
2.5
Radiometers
In addition to optical sensors, other passive sensors called radiometers exist. Unlike
optical sensors, which sense surface reflectance and spans the visible part of the
electromagnetic spectrum, radiometers detect the thermal radiation in the microwave
region emitted by a physical body, known as brightness temperature.
Planck’s law relates the brightness temperature of a body to its physical temperature.
Given that Planck’s law for black bodies around the microwave region is linear, it
is easy to relate the two temperatures.
When an instrument capable of sensing
microwave frequencies is mounted on a satellite, it provides insightful data for both
land and sea temperatures. It follows naturally that in case of fires, the thermal
temperature registered by the instrument increases. Therefore, this information can
be used to achieve global coverage of fires as they occur.
In this study, a dataset that includes data from two different radiometers instruments
mounted on multiple satellites was used to obtain reliable information on the location
of fires in Central Kalimantan.
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Radiometers
15
Figure 2.9: Landsat satellites orbit parameters [22] (Altered version).
2.5.1
The FIRMS Dataset
The Fire Information for Resource Management System (FIRMS) dataset, provided
by NASA, offers historical and near real-time (NRT) products to support fire inter-
vention authorities. It mostly comprises data from two different instruments: MODIS
and VIIRS.
The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) is deployed on two
satellites: Terra and Aqua. Together, they observe the Earth’s surface every 1 to
2 days. This frequency is achieved due to their much wider swath width compared
to the Landsat missions.
Specifically, MODIS covers 2330 km, whereas Landsat
instruments only covers 185 km. Despite this, both missions share common orbit
characteristics. MODIS senses 36 different bands, but for this study, the 4- and 11-
micrometer radiances are particularly relevant. As mentioned above, these bands are
used in the Fire and Thermal Anomalies algorithm to detect fires [23].
Additionally, data from the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) in
the FIRMS dataset were utilized. Although VIIRS offers higher resolution, it has
less historical data available, starting from 2012. VIIRS is mounted on board the
Suomi National Polar-orbiting Partnership (Suomi NPP), NOAA-20 and NOAA-21
satellites. These satellites, provide observations within one hour of each other. With
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theory
a swath width of 3060 km, an altitude between 824 km and 834 km and an inclination
between 97.1° to 98.75° they achieve full global coverage every 12 hours. The VIIRS
product was designed to build upon previous observation retrieved from MODIS [24].
As shown in Figures 2.10(a) for MODIS and 2.10(b) for VIIRS, if an anomaly in
the thermal temperature is detected, the location of the fire is always placed at the
center of the pixel. Additionally, two fires occurring within the same resolution cell
are indistinguishable by the instrument and will be counted as one. This is acceptable
for this study case because the focus is on the area affected by fires, not the number
of fires. Therefore, the only requirement is a fairly accurate validation of the fire’s
location.
Combining the data from both instruments and including both the archive and near
real-time datasets, it is possible to obtain data covering the period from 2001 to
present day.
(a) MODIS: hotspot pixel allocation
(b) VIIRS: hotspot pixel allocation
Figure 2.10: Visualization of the output display from MODIS (a) and VIIRS (b)
in three instances. From left to right: one fire is detected in one resolution cell, and
one hotspot is registered; two fires are in the same resolution cell, still registering one
hotspot; and finally, a fire saturates all four resolution cells [25].
==PAGE:27==
2.6 Vegetation indeces
17
2.6
Vegetation indeces
Vegetation after fires drastically changes its surface reflactance. The typical color
for forest fire scars in true color images tends towards brown.
However, relying
solely on color for classification lacks the desired certainty. Various elements within
a landscape may exhibit similar reflectance characteristics in the visible spectrum,
leading to misinterpretation by automated algorithms. For instance, features such
as dirt roads, agricultural patches, or even rivers with a brownish appearance due to
suspended particles can be confounding factors.
As presented in the section 2.4.1, the instruments mounted on board of the different
satellites used do not only sense the red, green and blue reflectances, but also wave-
lengths outside the visible spectra. These additional information present the chance
of examining the different radiance transfer for all the topography features in a scene,
alongside the possibility of further features enhancement through combining two or
more bands. This spectral bands combination practice follows established theoretical
principles which are here presented. When the aim is to amplify the properties of
vegetation, it is often referred to as a Vegetation Index (VI).
2.6.1
NDVI
The Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) is a commonly utilized method
for assessing vegetation health in remote sensing applications. Plants primarily absorb
solar radiation, particularly in the visible red light spectrum, to fuel photosynthesis
[26]. The mesophyll layer within leaf cell structures strongly reflects near-infrared
light, as photons within this wavelength range lack the energy needed for photosyn-
thesis [27]. The combination of these leaf characteristics enables better differentiation
between healthy and unhealthy vegetation within a landscape through the computa-
tion of the NDVI as shown in equation 2.1 and in Figure 2.11.
NDV I = NIR −Red
NIR + Red
(2.1)
2.6.2
EVI
If the NDVI index is more sensitive to the presence of chlorophyll and thus to pho-
tosynthesis, the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) is more responsive to variations
in canopy structure. This makes it ideal for delineating regions with dense biomass,
such as forests, from lower vegetation zones and detecting fire scars edges [28]. As
a general case, the enhanced vegetation index is computed as shown in the equation
2.2. G, C1, C2, and L are different constant that applies for different instruments.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theory
Figure 2.11: Two examples of NDVI computation. On the left, healthy vegetation
returns a value close to 1, while on the right, unhealthy vegetation returns a value
closer to 0.
EV I = G ·
NIR −Red
NIR + C1 · Red −C2 · Blue + L
(2.2)
2.6.3
NBR, NBR2
Additionally, alongside bands targeted for assessing vegetation health, particularly
relevant technique for this study is the normalized burn ratio (NBR). This method,
originally investigated for Landsat 5, is designed to highlight burn scars in post-fire
scenarios, often aiding in understanding the severity of the burn. It utilizes the Near-
Infrared (NIR) and Shortwave Infrared (SWIR) bands, as demonstrated in equation
2.3. These two bands offer complementary insights into vegetation and soil conditions,
facilitating the evaluation of burned areas [29].
The Normalized Burn Ratio 2 (NBR2) refines the previously mentioned Normalized
Burn Ratio (NBR) to accentuate water sensitivity in vegetation. It can be computed
when more than one Shortwave Infrared (SWIR) band is captured by the instrument,
as shown in equation 2.4 [30]. SWIR2 is the band sensed at the longer wavelenght.
NBR = NIR −SWIR
NIR + SWIR
(2.3)
NBR2 = SWIR1 −SWIR2
SWIR1 + SWIR2
(2.4)
==PAGE:29==
2.7 Machine Learning
19
2.6.4
NDWI
Due to the structure of water molecules and the bonds between hydrogen and oxy-
gen, radiation in the near-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum is highly
absorbed compared to the visible part, with the least absorbance centered around
500 nm, close to visible green light [31].
This specific spectral signature is utilized to highlight water bodies from other land-
scape features through the computation of the Normalized Difference Water Index
(NDWI) by taking the difference between these two extremes, green and infrared.
NDWI = Green −NIR
Green + NIR
(2.5)
2.7
Machine Learning
Machine Learning, often referred to as ML, is a sub-type of artificial intelligence.
As the name suggests, its scope is to develop algorithm that are able to learn from
dataset and improve their performance, through utilization of these data [32]. This
technique can be further subdivided into different types depending on the degree of
independence given to the machine and on the task that is tried to achieve.
2.7.1
Random Forest
In this case study, a method for fast classifying more than 1.5 millions pixels in each
image is required. The algorithm will require some training data to correctly classify
each pixel. Therefore, a supervised classification learning algorithm is utilized. This
means the developer provides insights on which data are representative, performs
feature engineering to identify valuable data, and guides the results [33] [34].
Among various supervised classification algorithms such as logistic regression, K-NN,
Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Random Forest (RF), the latter was selected due
to its lower computational power demands while still effectively performing post-fire
detection classification [35].
By definition a random forest classifier is a collection of various decision trees clas-
sifiers, where each tree independently votes for the most likely class [36]. The term
”tree” is used because the structure and visualization resemble a biological tree. At
the top lies the root node, representing the initial pixel or data point being inves-
tigated. From this root, branches extend downwards, each representing a decision
based on different assumptions, thresholds, or features of the data. Finally, the leafs
are the classification outcomes. Once multiple trees are setup, with different thresh-
olds and decision making nodes, the final pixel classification for a class or the other
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theory
is determined by aggregating the votes from all the trees, with the class receiving the
majority of votes being selected as the overall prediction.
2.8
Statistical analysis
To achieve the final goal of this thesis, physical analysis on vegetation spectral signa-
ture, climate data and machine learning techniques must be combined with statistical
analysis. Therefore, to investigate whether there is a relationship between the area
burnt per year and various measurable climate variables it is necessary to analyse
how the studied climate variables vary in conjunction with the annual variation in
the burnt area.
2.8.1
Pearson correlation
Following a statistical approach, it is possible to measure how two datasets vary
together by measuring their correlation. To explain what correlation is, it is useful
to distinguish three situations: positive correlation, negative correlation, and zero
correlation.
Positive correlation implies that if one variable increases, the second
one is also expected to a mirror behaviour. On the other hand, negative correlation
indicates that an increase in one variable corresponds to a decrease in the other.
Zero correlation describes the case where the points in the two datasets show no
distinguishable pattern, suggesting no direct link between the two.
To simplify the understanding, it is possible to compute a correlation coeﬀicient.
The Pearson correlation coeﬀicient ranges from -1 to +1, where the extremes of this
range describe perfect linear negative or positive correlation, respectively, while the
midpoint describes zero correlation [37].
Correlation does not prove causality. It measure to what scale two variables change
together. The proof of causality between the weather system and fires in Indonesia
has been proved by other to environmental studies [38] [39].
Finally, if a strong correlation is found between the studied climate variables and
the annual variation in the burnt area, this information could be used by Ørsted for
future reference and to support claims that their fire mitigation efforts were effective.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
3.1
Datasets
In this chapter the different processing and algorithm scripting on the various dataset
explored to ensure an accurate study are presented.
3.1.1
Climate Variables
The first milestone is processing the climate variables, described in Chapter 2, to
extract valuable insights for future comparison analysis with the area that burnt each
year.
Meteorological Station of Tjilik Riwut
The initial analysis focused on sourcing a dataset from the nearest meteorological
station, which happened to be the Tjilik Riwut station, as mentioned in Chapter 2.
Rainfall monthly data were obtained from the Data Online PUSAT Database, offered
by the BMKG agency with daily temporal resolution spanning from 2000 to early
2024, resulting in approximately 280 CSV files [40]. Each file includes details about
the acquiring station, such as the name and its geographical coordinates and two
columns: “Date” for date of measurement and “RR” for precipitation in millimeters.
To handle cases of unmeasured or missing data, specific values of 8888 and 9999 were
used in the ”RR” column. These were disregarded during the analysis. Additionally,
blank entries in the data were treated similarly to the previous cases. To reduce the
number of files, ensure easier python scripting and better data visualization, monthly
files were merged annually. Similarly to what was done for the rainfall data, was
repeated for the mean temperature observations.
While computing the monthly rainfall mean using in-situ data, it was noticed that
in a few years, only partial data were available. Therefore, it was determined that
months with less than 18 days (approximately 60%) of accurate measurements would
be considered unreliable for calculating a mean and excluded. This resulted in some
gaps in the time series data, particularly noticeable from 2015 to 2019.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methods
ERA5
To address these gaps in the data, the decision to incorporate the ERA5 dataset
was made. Of interest, at first, the rainfall and temperature data. This data were
accessed using the Google Earth Engine platform and JavaScript coding that provides
free and easy access to various dataset and allows the user to run geospatial analysis
on Google’s infrastructure [41].
As mentioned in Chapter 2, the ERA5 Reanalysis offers multiple temporal resolu-
tion. In this case, the daily aggregate were accessed to ensure consistency with the
observations retrieved from the meteorological station. More in details, for the precip-
itation, the ’total_precipitation’ variable measured in meters was used and scaled to
millimeters. While, for the temperature, the ’mean_2m_air_temperature’ variable
measured in Celsius was accessed. The area of interest was imported in the code edi-
tor as a shape file and a daily average of the values over the area was computed. The
results were exported in CSV files, to be later be processed in python as dataframe
using the pandas library.
A third variable, soil moisture, was accessed through the Google Earth Engine plat-
form and the ERA5 dataset. Since daily measurements from the in-situ station were
unavailable and no measurements were available at all, it was decided to directly
access the monthly aggregates. Since the presence of peat can vary from a few cen-
timeters up to several meters [42] to avoid processing redundant data without adding
value to the analysis among the four different layers modelled by the reanalysis, only
the ’volumetric_soil_water_layer_1’ modelling the first 7 centimeters was accessed,
computed as a mean over the area and finally exported in a CSV file.
3.1.2
Satellite Images
For showcasing the analysis and capturing the changes over the area, optical images
were sourced from the Landsat missions. Multispectral images do not only enable
the direct observation of fire scars but also, through the integration of infrared bands,
offer the opportunity to enhance these features using additional vegetation indices.
Due to the SLC issue on the Landsat 7 a combination of images between surface
reflectance (SR) and top of atmospheric (TOA) reflection had to be selected. The
difference between SR and TOA lies in the corrections applied to the images before
they are downloaded by users. Sun radiation has to pass through the atmosphere
twice before being sensed by the optical satellite instruments. As shown in figure 2.5,
the atmospheric transmission is never 100%, therefore part of the radiation is lost
during its path through the atmosphere. To account for this effect, image processing
is performed to reconstruct the correct surface reflectance based on the atmospheric
conditions at the time. Perhaps, top of the atmosphere images are always referred
to as level-1, while SR ones with level-2. Each level corresponds to additional pro-
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Datasets
23
cessing from the raw data. To ensure that even Landsat 7 images were not discarded
completely, gap-filling band-specific masks were provided for the top of atmosphere
product only from the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), allowing missing data to be
interpolated with neighboring values.
Therefore, surface reflectance was used for
Landsat 5, 8 and 9, as it provides images less influenced by thin clouds and aerosols.
For Landsat 7 images sensed after May 31, 2003, top of atmosphere images were
downloaded and corrected with corresponding gap-filling masks. Similarly to what
done for the climate variables, the Google Earth Engine platform was used to access
the different Landsat dataset and download the images.
To train and test the machine learning algorithm and increase the training dataset,
images for each year were downloaded with different boundaries.
One image in-
cluded only the region of interest to test the algorithm and classify the pixels. While,
to expand the training dataset, training images were downloaded including the sur-
roundings of the area of interest. A rectangular bounding box was defined, limited by
coordinates in the bottom-left corner of 114.0°E, -2.65°S, and in the top-right corner
of 114.515°E, -2.145°S. The two types of images are shown in Figure 3.1, with the
training one on the left side and the overlay of the testing image in light blue.
As mentioned previously, the temporal resolution of the sensed images stands at 16
days, while the pixel resolution is around 30-by-30 meters. Despite the 16-day interval,
cloud cover frequently diminishes the availability of clear images, often reducing the
(a) Training area
(b) Testing area
Figure 3.1: Landsat 5 image from February 2010. Figure (a) shows the training
area and the AOI (area of interest) in light blue. The test image is extracted from
the light blue area and shown in Figure (b).
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methods
usable data to just a couple of cloud-free images per year. Another challenge was
posed by the need for cloud-free images capturing all fires occurring during the dry
season in the area, which further restricted the available image pool.
To be more specific, Table 3.1 summarizes the used bands from the different Landsat
missions form the Thematic Matter to the latest OLI version mounted on Landsat 9.
Band
Landsat 5 TM
Landsat 7 ETM+
Landsat 8/9 OLI
Description
λ [µm]
Description
λ [µm]
Description
λ [µm]
B1
Blue
0.45 - 0.52
Blue
0.45 - 0.52
Coastal aerosol
0.43 - 0.45
B2
Green
0.52 - 0.60
Green
0.52 - 0.60
Blue
0.45 - 0.51
B3
Red
0.63 - 0.69
Red
0.63 - 0.69
Green
0.53 - 0.59
B4
Near Infrared
0.76 - 0.90
Near Infrared
0.76 - 0.90
Red
0.63 - 0.69
B5
Shortwave Infrared 1
1.55 - 1.75
Shortwave Infrared 1
1.55 - 1.75
Near Infrared
0.85 - 0.88
B6
Thermal Infrared
10.40 - 12.50
Thermal Infrared
10.40 - 12.50
Shortwave Infrared 1
1.57 - 1.65
B7
Shortwave Infrared
2.08 - 2.35
Shortwave Infrared 2
2.08 - 2.35
Shortwave Infrared 2
2.11 - 2.29
B8
–
–
–
–
Panchromatic
0.52 - 0.90
B9
–
–
–
–
Cirrus
1.36 - 1.38
B10
–
–
–
–
Thermal Infrared 1
10.60 - 11.19
B11
–
–
–
–
Thermal Infrared 2
11.50 - 12.51
Table 3.1: An overview of the bands sensed by the instruments mentioned in section
2.4.1 for the Top of the Atmosphere dataset.
The Panchromatic, Cirrus, Coastal
Aerosol and the different thermal bands were not used in this study.
3.1.3
FIRMS - Fire Information for Resource Management System
The FIRMS website, allows users to download data from both the MODIS and the
VIIRS instruments. Here, the same bounding box that was applied when download-
ing the multi-spectral images is used. Files were downloaded in the shapefile format.
After importing these files in QGIS, it was possible to extrapolate the data of pixels
containing fires within the region of interest by using the ’clip’ function. This pro-
cedure is performed to ensure that only the fires happened inside of the region of
interest are presented in section 4.2. However, information on the location of the fires
outside of the region of interest are also kept as valuable information on the location
of the fires in the training images.
Using the QGIS ’Field Calculator’ feature and the acquisition date of the observations,
it was possible to separate the data points by year. This allowed for displaying data
points specific to each year and a correct later labelling. Additionally, these data were
exported to CSV files for easier handling in python scripting and plot visualization.
3.2
Landsat 7 - Gap Filling
As detailed in section 2.4.1, the Landsat 7 mission encountered an issue with its Line
Scanner Corrector on May 31st, 2003, resulting in some data gaps in the images
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Labelling
25
acquired after this date. To ensure the continued provision of meaningful data, the
USGS offers gap filling masks to interpolate valid data in the missing pixels [43].
This process involves downloading the post-failure images of interest, band by band,
from the USGS website, along with their corresponding gap filling masks.
These
masks are binary and contain zeros where data is missing. It’s essential to use each
mask with its correct band due to slight delays in the satellite’s sensing of different
bands, resulting in data gaps not aligning across all bands.
Then, the imported bands and their corresponding masks are imported into QGIS.
Using the GDAL plugin, specifically its ’Fill No Data’ option, the interpolation of
missing data by extrapolating from neighbouring valid pixels is performed band by
band. Once the interpolation procedure is finalized, individual bands are exported
and saved. Finally, these are imported in python, stacked together and saved, com-
pleting the dataset composed by the other Landsat images.
3.3
Labelling
The data preparation for the algorithm starts in Quantum Geographic Information
System (QGIS), a free software for analyzing and processing geospatial data. QGIS
provides a user-friendly interface for handling raster, polygons, and data points.
As the first step, satellite images previously downloaded, which will be used to train
the algorithm, are imported into QGIS. Thus, the correct assignment of RGB values
is verified to ensure proper image display, this is accomplished by making sure that
the spectral bands are correctly assigned in the correct channels. To this layer, the
dataset containing the geographical information from the FIRMS dataset for the year
of the specific image is overlaid. These data points are displayed, as shown in Figure
3.2 as scattered red points. Then, a new vector layer is created. In this vector layer,
polygons that outline fire scars, other features, or clouds are drawn and assigned a
precise unique ID.
To ensure accurate classification, the RGB image and fire location data from FIRMS
are visualized together, providing guidance due to the potential limitations of the
30-by-30 meters resolution. Fire scars outside the region of interest, if present, are
used as training data. If fire scars are only present within the study area, a portion
of these is used as training dataset.
The ’other’ class contains various features such as rivers, canals, agricultural patches,
forests, and grasslands.
Multiple polygons representing these diverse features are
included in the training dataset to ensure comprehensive landscape representation
and precise classification results. Finally, this layer is saved with a name that ensures
the correct match to the corresponding satellite scene.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Methods
Figure 3.2: An example of an RGB image taken on February 10, 2010, with labels
and fire locations. Burnt areas are labeled in yellow, the ’other’ class is labeled in
blue, and red dots represent fires that occurred in 2009.
3.4
Algorithm
In this section, the python scripting methodology employed for data ingestion, model
training, testing, and outcomes is described.
3.4.1
Algorithm Scope
The algorithm aims to classify hectares burnt annually. As described in section 2.7,
instead of manually labeling every pixel in each image over the entire time-frame,
artificial intelligence was selected as a faster and still reliable alternative. The results
will return both visual maps of where the fire hit alongside a numerical report of
hectares burnt per year.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Algorithm
27
Figure 3.3: The algorithm flowchart showing the three main steps: preprocessing,
training and testing.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Methods
3.4.2
Data Overview
The data collection was already extensively discussed in Chapter 3. However, before
describing the algorithm computational steps, it is important to clarify how these
data were organized to be correctly ingested by the code. First, images including
the region of interest and its surroundings were saved in a directory dedicated to the
training process of the algorithm. On the other hand, images containing only the
target area have been saved for the subsequent testing phase. Finally, all the training
labels were stored in a single directory following a name convention that ensures the
correct matching with their image of reference.
3.4.3
Image Preprocessing
Image preprocessing is essential in this study to properly prepare the data for further
analysis, improving accuracy and result reliability.
Irregular Shaped Images
It is important to note that the testing images follows the contours of a geographical
area instead of straightforward rectangular boundaries. Despite this irregular shape,
the images are still represented as matrices in python.
The cells of each matrix
that fall outside of this geographical boundaries are filled with not-a-number (NaN)
values. It is necessary to correctly handle these values from the start. To ensure that
the analysis is conducted only within the desired area, a binary mask is created to
distinguish the values inside the boundaries (1s) from those outside (0s).
Cloud Coverage
Even if the images were carefully selected to contain the least amount of clouds,
small clouds and their shadows are still present in most of them. Since optical images
cannot penetrate clouds, it is impossible, from a research point of view, to determine
if the pixel below them was burnt or not. This uncertainty was addressed by the
decision of masking-out pixels containing clouds.
Landsat missions from 4 to 9 all have bands dedicated to pixel quality assessment.
This information is recorded in one of the bands that composes the image. In par-
ticular, for missions 4 to 7, the ”SR_Cloud_QA” band, produced by the LEDAPS
algorithm [44], returns flag bits that inform the user about the presence of clouds,
their shadows, snow or water, as shown in Table 3.2. Meanwhile for the later missions,
the ”QA_Pixel” band was used to achieve the same result. As shown by Figure 3.4,
in this case, pixel values differ from the above-mentioned bit flags. Every value inside
the table showed in the figure was masked beside 21824, 21826, 21888 and, 21890.
The reason to not mask dilated cloud over land (value 21826) has to be sought in
the penetration of NIR and higher wavelengths through this type of clouds. In fact,
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Algorithm
29
when dilated clouds are present in the scene these are almost transparent to frequen-
cies lower than the visible ones. Thanks to this property, the algorithm continues to
perform accurately.
The case for images retrieved from Landsat 7 after the SLC failure. In these instances,
it is not feasible to use any quality assessment pixel bands, as gap-filling masks are
not available for these bands. To overcome this issue, a third class in the labelling
was introduced, which was titled as ’clouds’. For these images, the algorithm will not
only determine which pixels belong to the burnt scars and which do not, but it will
also predict the presence of clouds.
Vegetation Indices and Stacked Image
In the preliminary phase of the algorithm, the satellite imagery data is processed
to extract individual bands using the GDAL python library.
GDAL (Geospatial
Data Abstraction Library) offers a powerful set of tools for working with raster data
formats like .tif files, enabling to extract bands singularly. This step is crucial for
computing the vegetation indices as discussed in Chapter 2.
Once the bands are
correctly extracted, a second part of the algorithm is dedicated to computing these
vegetation indices.
Once this procedure is completed, the bands sensed by the satellite and the vegetation
indices are stacked together in a multi-dimensional matrix, where each dimension
corresponds to a specific band or vegetation index.
This consolidates the future
training dataset incorporating both raw spectral and derived vegetation metrics.
Before the training phase, labels are imported and aligned with the image using the
rasterio library to ensure they share the same Coordinate Reference System (CRS).
This step is crucial for accurate training. A visual check is performed by plotting
the RGB channels from the stacked image and overlaying the labels, as shown in the
Bit
Bit Value
Cumulative Sum
Attribute
0
1
1
Dark Dense Vegetation (DDV)
1
2
3
Cloud
2
4
7
Cloud Shadow
3
8
15
Adjacent to cloud
4
16
31
Snow
5
32
63
Water
6
64
127
Unused
7
128
255
Unused
Table 3.2: Bit values and their attribute generated by the LEDAPS algorithm and
contained in the SR_Cloud_QA band for Landsat mission 4-7.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Methods
Figure 3.4: Bit values and their detailed description contained in the QA_Pixel
band for Landsat missions 8 and 9.
second image of Figure 3.3. Finally, from the labels, masks are generated to indicate
the matrix locations of each labeled class.
3.4.4
Machine Learning
Specifically for this case study, the random forest algorithm from the sklearn python
library was selected since among the different uses of the random forest algorithm,
one application is for performing classification predictions.
In Figure 3.5, a simplified version of a decision tree is presented. In this figure, con-
sider a single pixel from the stacked image produced in the previous phase. Suppose
the first decision node checks the value of the NDWI band. If the NDWI value is high
(> 0.5), indicating a strong presence of water in the pixel, it is classified as ”others”,
not belonging to a burnt area. If the NDWI value is low, the decision tree proceeds to
another level where it checks the RGB color. If the pixel color is brown, it is classified
as a fire scar, otherwise, it is classified as ”others”.
In reality, random forest generates multiple trees and different decision nodes based
on the training data provided, spanning all the bands.
It operates by averaging
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Algorithm
31
Figure 3.5: Study case example of a decision tree used to classify a single pixel.
predictions from these multiple decision trees, and the number of trees can be selected
by the user. Choosing a larger number of trees enhances the reliability and robustness
of the algorithm despite a higher computational time demand [34].
Training
Here, the algorithm is trained with the aid of human pre-labeled data, as described in
section 3.3, to classify, in an image, three different types of classes: fire scars, clouds,
and everything else. The standard number of 1000 parallel trees was kept.
However, a further step is needed to ensure the correct algorithm performance. In
fact, random forest is designed to ingest 2D tabular data [45], while the stacked
image that was assembled in the previous step is a multi-dimensional matrix. This
transformation can be easily done in python by reshaping the array so that each row
represents a pixel and each column represents a band. Finally, the outcome model
comprising the trees and their decision nodes is saved.
Testing
In the testing phase, the saved model is applied to the area of interest to classify all
the other pixels that were not manually labeled. First the images containing only the
area of interested are loaded, followed by the model, and the different classes.
It is important to note that the model produced was not a single model used to
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Methods
predict all the images. Instead, each year has its specific model assigned to the cor-
responding image. This approach was adopted to handle the heterogeneous dataset,
which comprises data from different satellites, dates, and atmospheric conditions.
When the model is applied, the random forest algorithm averages predictions from
its 1000 trees. If the majority of these trees classify a pixel as burnt, the pixel will be
flagged as burnt. Finally, the classification outcome is reshaped to match the original
image dimensions, and the results are saved in numpy files for further processing.
3.4.5
Post-processing
The post-processing phase involves several steps between the python and QGIS envi-
ronments.
The classification algorithm does not produce entirely accurate results. Moreover, the
algorithm does not have the information that fires typically spread from a starting
point and expanding to a larger area. Additionally, the recovery of the ground after
a fire varies depending on factors such as soil water retention, vegetation type, and
human intervention. In other words, regions classified mostly as burnt may contain
sporadic pixels classified as not burnt, which is unlikely. On the other hand, consider-
ing fire prevention efforts and the average area burnt per fire in the region, if a single
pixel is classified as burnt while the surrounding area is not, it is likely to be a false
positive. To address both scenarios and improve accuracy, it is common to apply a
combination of opening and closing transformations to cluster similar pixels [46].
In python, this process starts by transforming the numpy files generated at the end
of the algorithm testing phase into a binary mask.
Pixels classified as burnt are
assigned a value of 1, while others are assigned to 0.
Subsequently, the skimage
library, specifically its morphology feature, is utilized. The opening operation removes
isolated pixels classified as burnt within larger non-burnt areas, while the closing
operation fills small gaps or missing spots in areas predominantly classified as burnt.
Both the original binary masks and the ones post-processed are imported in QGIS to
evaluate their accuracy.
3.5
Accuracy
Initially, to validate the algorithm’s results, the idea was to generate ground truth
labels, similarly to the process described during the labeling step. However, this time,
the focus would be on labeling only a portion of the area within the AOI, rather
than outside it. This approach would allow for a comparison between the algorithm’s
outcomes and this ground truth, enabling an assessment of the classification accuracy.
However, this procedure would be biased as the person that is producing the ground
truth labels is also who is inspecting the results.
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Accuracy
33
To address this challenge, rather than partially labeling the image, it was determined
to generate random samples for each of the two classes and individually assess them
in comparison to the RGB image.
In more detail, the process involved importing the binary files into QGIS, followed
by conversion to polygons using the ”Polygonize” tool. Since the classification files
returned by numpy are in a matrix with a rectangular shape, it was necessary to clip
these results to the AOI once again. To generate 100 random samples in each class
result, the vector layer needed to be split into the two different classes based on their
unique ID fields, where 1s represented burnt areas and 0s represented other features.
This splitting resulted in all polygons being separated into individual features. To
use the random sampling tool, all features needed to be merged into one. Then, 100
points per class were produced.
Finally, point by point, with the assistance of the RGB image and the fires locations
dataset displayed alongside, it was possible to confirm whether each pixel was classi-
fied correctly. This procedure was repeated for both the image before morphological
processing and the one without for 6 different images. A total of 2400 points were
manually assessed and results were exported in CSV files.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In this section all the results from the climate variables analysis to the algorithm
outcomes and finally the correlation between the two are presented.
4.1
Algorithm outcomes
One figure resulting from the algorithm is illustrated in Figure 4.1. This figure shows
the classification results for the image captured on February 10, 2010. It is evident
that most of the area is classified as not burnt, labeled as ’Others’ in green. However,
a significant number of fires are observed in the northern part of the area, displayed
in red.
In the middle of the area, some white spots are not classified. These are clouds that
mask the terrain below, resulting in no prediction being made in those regions.
Figure 4.1: The results of the supervised classification for Landsat 5 image taken
on February 10, 2010. In green the ’Others’ class, while in red the ’Burnt’ pixels.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Results
It is evident that some pixels are misclassified: ’non-burnt’ pixels appear within clearly
burnt clusters, and ’burnt’ pixels are found in open, non-burnt areas. To address this,
as mentioned in Chapter 3, morphology techniques will be applied, and the resulting
accuracy of both methods is later investigated. All the classification results are shown
in Appendix A.
4.2
Amount of Fires
By analyzing the FIRMS dataset, it is feasible to quantify the number of pixels
identified with active fires.
Figure 4.2(a) provides an overview of the hot-spots detected by the MODIS instru-
ment, illustrating the count of pixels containing active fires per year. Overall, fire
activity is consistently observed almost every year, with minimal to zero active fires
recorded during the three-year period from 2020 to 2022. In the first decade, the
number of pixels containing fires registered per year consistently exceeded 75, except
for 2008 and 2010. The highest value registered was in 2015, causing one of the sever-
est Southeast Asian haze events, forcing the local population to wear face masks to
protect themselves from pollution [47].
As discussed in section 3.1, the FIRMS dataset includes data not only from the
MODIS instrument but also, starting from 2012, from the VIIRS instrument.
A
similar analysis was conducted for fire occurrences per year using VIIRS data, and
the results are illustrated in Figure 4.2(b). It can be seen that during the years when
both instruments were operational, VIIRS reports higher fire activity compared to
MODIS. This disparity arises because VIIRS has a finer spatial resolution, resulting
in smaller sensing grid cells that detect a greater number of active fire pixels. Overall,
as expected, the trends observed in the MODIS dataset align with those seen in the
FIRMS dataset.
Since results are similar, the MODIS dataset is selected to present some considerations.
In Figure 4.3(a), fires per year are categorized by month, providing an overview of
when the dry season typically affects Central Kalimantan. The figure shows that
although 2009, in dark green, didn’t registered the highest overall number of fires,
it recorded the highest number in a single month: September.
In contrast, 2015,
here in sand color, exhibits a more distributed curve, with significant fire activity
observed from August to October.
Apart from 2003, in blue, fires tend to peak
around September. This observation aligns with the findings in Figure 4.3(b), which
displays the average number of fires per month across all years.
Overall, the fire
season starts as early as June and ends in November.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Amount of Fires
37
(a) Data retrieved from the MODIS instrument.
(b) Data retrieved from the VIIRS instrument.
Figure 4.2: Number of pixels containing active fires detected by the two instruments,
displayed annually.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Results
(a) Monthly distribution of the number of pixels containing active fires detected by the
MODIS instrument.
(b) Average monthly distribution of pixels containing active fires detected by MODIS in-
struments over the past two decades.
Figure 4.3
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Images selection and Cloud Coverage
39
4.3
Images selection and Cloud Coverage
As mentioned in Chapter 3, efforts were made to select images with minimal cloud
coverage. However, global average cloud coverage stands at approximately 67% at
any given time [48], and this value is particularly high in tropical regions where
precipitation and cloud cover are frequent.
Therefore, it was challenging to find
images without any cloud coverage for this study.
High cloud cover could significantly impacts the accuracy of estimating the burnt
areas in the study region since it hides the vegetation below. However, given the
project’s nature, it is preferable to underestimate rather than overestimate the burnt
area to avoid inflating the results.
Figure 4.4 not only includes details about when the satellite images were captured
but also conceals the entire strategy behind the image selection process. The image
reports on the y-axis the two decades analysed, while on the x-axis the months of
the year. First, an attempt was made to visualize when fires had the most impact
over the area. While sporadic single fires were occasionally detected in January or
February in some years, these did not significantly contribute to the total burnt area.
To provide a clearer visualization on when the fire season started each year, only
months with more than 5 fires detected are shown in the chart.
The number of pixels labeled as containing fires is indicated in two ways. Firstly,
visually through the colorbar: a yellow bar indicates a low amount, while purple
indicates a high amount. Additionally, the specific value of pixel count per year is
reported numerically on the right side of the chart. This chart implicitly indicates
the optimal timeframe for selecting satellite images. Images should be chosen after
the end of the fire season of the year intended for analysis, but before the start of the
subsequent fire season.
As additional information, black ’+’ symbols indicate the selection date of the satellite
image each year, along with the satellite code from which the image was retrieved.
The letter ’L’ denotes Landsat, followed by the mission number.
Unfortunately, no suitable images were found for the years 2011 and 2018.
Table 4.1 shows the number of pixels flagged as clouds, identified either by the satellite
instruments dedicated bands or through the classification process. Initially, for the
first 18 years of observations, cloud coverage over the study area remained below 10%
in the images used. From 2020 onward, there was a notable increase, peaking in 2023
at approximately 23%. Fortunately, images from these years, except for late 2023,
are not relevant to this case study as there were few recorded fires in the area during
these periods.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Results
Figure 4.4: A timeline displaying the start and end of the fire season, with satellite
image selections indicated by a black cross.
The colorbar aids in visualizing the
number of pixels labeled as containing fires.
Year
CC[%]
Year
CC[%]
Year
CC[%]
2002
0.02
2010
1.70
2018
5.58
2003
4.06
2011
0.00
2019
-
2004
1.07
2012
-
2020
21.03
2005
0.00
2013
5.10
2021
19.65
2006
2.98
2014
6.89
2022
17.69
2007
7.80
2015
5.99
2023
23.16
2008
6.95
2016
4.39
late 2023
20.35
2009
0.02
2017
0.00
Table 4.1: Annual cloud cover (CC) percentage for each selected image.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Climate Variables
41
4.4
Climate Variables
In this section, the results and plots showing the outcomes from the processing of the
climate data are presented. This section also introduces some concept later used for
a comparison with the area burnt in section 4.6.
4.4.1
Rainfall
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the in-situ data show some gaps, particularly noticeable
between 2015 and 2019. Figure 4.5 compares the monthly average rainfall from the
local data with the ones from the ERA5 model dataset.
The comparison reveals
that the ERA5 model performs well during the dry season, closely matching the in-
situ data. However, it tends to underestimate precipitation amounts during the wet
season and especially for extreme events. Fortunately, the gaps in the in-situ dataset
mostly occur during dry months when the precipitation are lower, allowing an almost
seamless integration with the model. To reconstruct the time-series, missing values
in the in-situ dataset are filled with data from the ERA5 model.
Figure 4.5: The in-situ and ERA5 datasets showing monthly precipitation from
2000 to 2024. In blue are the in-situ data, and in orange are the ERA5 data.
As shown in the previous section, the dry season for the area of interest spans from
June to October, while the wet season covers the remaining seven months. Figure 4.6
illustrates the precipitation per month in histograms, with the background gray and
white bands representing the wet and dry seasons, respectively. It can be observed
that precipitation is significantly lower during the dry season.
Additionally, the dark blue line on the chart indicates the cumulative average pre-
cipitation during the wet season. The lowest recorded average occurred in mid-2002,
with approximately 74 mm of cumulative rainfall. On the other hand, the three-year
period from 2016 to 2018 shows consistently high values, peaking at 126 mm in 2016.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Results
Figure 4.6: The histograms display monthly precipitation after merging the in-situ
and ERA5 datasets. The dark blue line shows a 7-month, from November to May,
cumulative value with a data point for each year.
4.4.2
Temperature
Another variable studied that could contribute to raising fire hazards alerts is temper-
ature. Similar to the approach used for rainfall, Figure 4.7 illustrates the comparison
between in-situ data and the ERA5 model for temperature over two decades. It is
important to note that, the ERA5 model tends to overestimate temperatures, unlike
the precipitation case where the model was more prone to under-estimate, during
some of the summer seasons. Despite these discrepancies at peak temperatures, the
two measurements generally match closely throughout the rest of the time series.
A small gap in the in-situ data is reported at the end of the summer in 2015. As with
precipitation, this gap was filled using values from the ERA5 model. The in-situ data
is used as the primary dataset, with the ERA5 data integrated to fill any small gaps.
The average temperature per month through the whole time period is shown in Figure
4.8 through histograms. In this case, the gray bands represent the driest months, July
to October. The average temperature during these months is calculated and plotted
on top of the histograms in dark green.
Overall, data show an increasing trend
comparable to the one registered globally, with peaks and lows. In particular, 2015
registered the highest temperature, reaching a record average of above 28 degrees.
Additionally, high values were also registered in the summer of 2009 and 2019 were
recorded. While the lowest average recorded is dated 2004.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Climate Variables
43
Figure 4.7: The in-situ and ERA5 datasets showing monthly average temperatures
from 2000 to 2024. In blue are the in-situ data, and in orange are the ERA5 data.
Figure 4.8: The histograms display monthly average temperatures. The dark green
line shows a 4-months, from July to October, average value with a data point for each
year.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Results
4.4.3
Soil Moisture
No in-situ data were available regarding the soil moisture in the area, therefore the
data shown are retrieved from the ERA5 dataset only. Figure 4.9 depicts the modelled
soil moisture in the area from 2001 to 2023. Additionally, to the monthly value shown
in dark brown, to be consistent with the analysis presented above, it was decided to
take the average over July to October, which are also the months affected the most
by the fires, which is shown in ocher yellow.
With no surprise, the least amount of volumetric soil water is recorded during the dry
season, while the wet season consistently shows values just above 40%. During the dry
months, two distinct patterns can be observed. In some years, soil moisture scarcity
is concentrated in a single month, whereas in other years, it is spread over several
months. For example, the lowest value for a single month was recorded in September
2019, with just 21%. However, when considering the average over the driest months,
2019 ranks as the third lowest, with an average of 27%. This is preceded by 2015,
with an average of 24%, and 2006, with 26%.
Figure 4.9: Soil moisture values over the area from 2001 to 2024. Monthly values
are shown in dark brown. A 4-month average from July to October is displayed in
light brown.
4.4.4
Accuracy
In the last section of Chapter 3 it was described how the accuracy was assessed on
raw and clustered results. Table 4.2 contains the accuracy evaluation.
The left part of the table shows the results for the images where no morphological
operations were applied. Although the overall accuracy for fire scar pixels is around
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Area burnt
45
80%, two cases, 2015 and 2020, reveal lower accuracy percentages at 70% and 66%,
respectively. The ’others’ class shows a constant accuracy rate around 90%.
Meanwhile, the right part of the table illustrates the results for the images where
morphological operations were applied. Here, it is evident that the accuracy increased
for every year. However, the two lowest values remain in 2015 and 2020. The ’other’
class shows a slight improvement, but the overall accuracy is just above 90%.
Consequently, since the results with morphological operations applied show higher
accuracy, these were used for further comparison with climate variables.
4.5
Area burnt
The area burnt is determined by counting the number of pixels classified as burnt by
the machine learning algorithm. Given that each pixel has a size of 30-by-30 meters,
every pixel classified as burnt corresponds to an area of 900 square meters, or 0.09
hectares.
Despite the cloud coverage for the late 2023 image being above 20%, as reported
in Table 4.1, and part of the burnt area being covered by the clouds, this image is
included in the analysis. This decision was taken due to the lack of better images
and to include a year of significant impact of forest fires in Indonesia. Later in this
Chapter, a comparative analysis will be conducted with and without this image to
assess its impact on the results.
In Figure 4.10 the area burnt every year in the region of interest is shown.
As
mentioned before, this region is particularly prone to fires, and the chart clearly
demonstrates this trend. The years with no registered fires are a very limited, while
multiple years recorded more than 5,000 hectares burnt.
Date
No Morphology applied
Morphology applied
Fire Scar
Others
Fire Scar
Others
Correct
Incorrect
Correct
Incorrect
Correct
Incorrect
Correct
Incorrect
2003
83
17
92
8
89
11
89
11
2007
82
18
89
11
85
15
93
7
2010
77
23
93
7
87
13
92
8
2015
70
30
92
8
76
24
93
7
2016
88
12
88
12
93
7
91
9
2020
66
34
91
9
78
22
90
10
Table 4.2: Correct and incorrect classifications with and without the morphology
technique applied
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Results
Particularly notable is the area burnt in 2015, which reached a peak of just below
30,000 hectares, or 300 km2. Given that the region covers around 1,400 km2, this
means that around 20% of the study area was affected by fires. Also, the peak in
2019 is significant, with 20,000 hectares burnt before a three-year period of relatively
quiet fire seasons.
Figure 4.10: Area burnt computation outcomes per year from 2001 to 2023.
4.6
Correlation
In this section, the burnt area is individually compared with all the studied climate
variables to investigate if any direct links are found. The aim is to examine whether
there are any direct correlations or links between the occurrence and extent of fires
and specific climate factors.
4.6.1
Area burnt and Rainfall
If the chart showing the area burnt is overlaid with the one illustrating the precipi-
tation it is possible to investigate if any correspondence between these two dataset
exist. This is shown in Figure 4.11.
Intuitively, a simple assumption would be that the less precipitation during the wet
season would lead to drier soil and therefore, more fires. In the first four years this
assumption seems to be correct, where to high precipitation rate correspond low fires
(e.g. 2001) and vice-versa (e.g. 2002). However, this is rapidly disproved in later years.
In fact, although the cumulative precipitation in 2009 was nearly at its maximum
compared to previous years, a significant number of fires were still registered. The
same pattern is observed for 2015.
==PAGE:57==
4.6 Correlation
47
Figure 4.11: Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.10 are overlaid here to examine any relationship
between the two, maintaining the color scheme with blue representing precipitation
and red indicating area burnt.
Figure 4.12 shows the distribution of the rainfall versus and the area burnt in a scatter
plot, revealing no distinguishable pattern. The Pearson coeﬀicient, calculated for the
years where data from both datasets were available, returned a value just above zero.
This result aligns with the lack of correlation observed in the figure.
Figure 4.12: Scatter plot of the area burnt each year versus the 7-months cumulative
rainfall. The plot does not shows any type of correlation.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Results
It can be concluded that the rainfall data are not a reliable indicator to use for future
fire prevention claims.
4.6.2
Area burnt and Temperature
Similarly to what was done for the precipitation, the burnt area chart was overlaid
with the temperature one and shown in Figure 4.13. Higher temperature correspond
to higher evapotranspiration [49] [50].
Once again, a simple assumption could be that higher evapotranspiration leads to
drier soil conditions, which could favor fire occurrence. In the graph, this assumption
is somewhat respected, especially after 2008.
For instance, when average temper-
atures in the dry season peak, the area burned by fires also shows an increase, as
evidenced in the years 2009, 2015, and 2019. However, this pattern does not hold
true for 2002 and 2003, where despite lower temperatures in 2002, the area burned
was almost tripled compared to 2003.
Figure 4.13: Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.10 are overlaid here to examine any relationship
between the two, maintaining the color scheme with green representing temperature
and red indicating area burnt.
In addition, when the two dataset are plotted together as a scatter plot, displayed in
Figure 4.14 they show a weak linear correlation, with a notable presence of outliers.
The Pearson correlation coeﬀicient returns a value of 0.48.
The temperature appears to be a better indicator of potential fire hazards if compared
to precipitation. However, due to the weak correlation and years where this relation-
ship does not hold true, achieving strong certainty in this relationship is challenging.
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Correlation
49
Figure 4.14:
Scatter plot of the area burnt each year versus the the 4-months
average temperature. The plot shows a weak positive correlation.
4.6.3
Area burnt and Soil Moisture
All the assumptions made so far have been based on how previous climate variables
affect soil water content. As discussed in Chapter 3.1, the ERA5 model provides an
estimate of the water content in the soil based on various in-situ data and satellite data.
Figure 4.15 displays the annual burnt area alongside soil moisture levels. Compared to
the figure shown in section 4.4.3, the monthly value is more transparent to emphasize
the average over the dry months July to October.
In this case, the results show a strong correlation. A mirror trend is reported, indi-
cating that the driest the soil the more area was affected by fires. The only exception
happened to be in 2023 where it seems that the area affected by fires is smaller than
expected.
However, in this case the premises on cloud coverage presented at the
beginning of this chapter applies.
Finally, looking at the spread of the data points in Figure 4.16, the relationship
between the two looks almost quadratic. However, the lack of points in the left end
does not allow for a proper curve fitting study. The Pearson coeﬀicient returns a
value of -0.86, indicating a strong reverse correlation, as expected.
From this, it is clear that the soil moisture is a climate parameters that highlights
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Results
Figure 4.15: Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10 are overlaid here to examine any relationship
between the two, using a color scheme where brown represents soil moisture and red
indicates area burnt. Transparency of the soil moisture monthly values is increased to
better illustrate the relationship between dry months and the area burnt each year.
Figure 4.16: Scatter plot of the area burnt each year versus the 4-months average
soil moisture. The plot shows a strong negative correlation.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 Correlation
51
the fire hazard. This aligns with Ørsted’s strategy to increase soil water content as a
preventive measure against fires.
However, considering one of the goals of this thesis is to identify a correlation that
could be used to assess future Ørsted’s effectiveness in fire prevention, it’s important
to note that if Ørsted successfully restores soil water content, this change will be
detectable through satellite data, as described in section 2.3.2. Therefore, this will
be reflected in the ERA5 dataset. Consequently, this variable may not serve as a
future reference for Ørsted to quantify the area prevented from burning and the
corresponding reduction in CO2 emissions.
4.6.4
Area burnt and ONI
Individual climate variables that might influence fire risk in the area have been shown.
However, it is the combination of all these variables and the entire climate system
that truly describes this dependency. As described on Chapter 2, what affects the
local climate of Borneo the most is the ocean.
At the end of section 2.2, a brief description to the Oceanic Nino Index is given.
Tabular data on the 3-months average running window that describe this index can
be found on the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) website.
The advantage of this index is its broad coverage, spanning a large area that is
geographically distant from Ørsted’s region of interest. It is reasonable to say that
Ørsted’s impact on soil water content will not influence this larger-scale index, unlike
the soil moisture one.
Therefore, if a correlation between this index and fires is
identified, Ørsted could use it as benchmark for future reference.
Figure 4.17 shows the ONI index and the area burnt together. As in the case for soil
moisture, a correlation, this time positive, between the two datasets is clear. Again,
2023 stands out as a clear outlier with a significantly lower fire area than expected. On
the other hand, 2019 shows a higher burnt area than anticipated, possibly reflecting
the El Niño phenomena and anomalies on the ocean surface temperature persisting
for nearly two entire years.
At first, as done for the other climate variables and to make the two dataset com-
parable in terms of data points; an average of the ONI over the driest months was
considered. However, Figure 4.17 shows that the years with the highest burnt areas
coincide with peaks in the ONI towards the end of the year and beginning of the
next one, rather than during the driest months. Therefore, an average from October
to February was calculated. Finally, the fire area per year and the corresponding
average ONI were plotted together as shown in Figure 4.18. This figure is similar
but mirrored compared to the one showing the correlation with soil moisture. In this
case, a positive correlation can be seen, and again, the lack of data points on the right
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Results
Figure 4.17: The area burnt (shown in red) is overlaid with the Oceanic Niño Index
(ONI, shown in purple) to investigate if any relationship between the two exists.
end of the graph precludes the possibility of understanding if a linear or quadratic fit
would be best. For this case, the Pearson coeﬀicient shows a value of 0.80, showing a
strong correlation between the ONI index and the amount of area that burnt.
4.6.5
Excluding 2023
If the year 2023 is excluded from the analysis, the correlation coeﬀicients improve sig-
nificantly: -0.89 for soil moisture and 0.91 for the ONI. Once again, this demonstrates
that these variables are strong indicators of fire hazards. Given that the Pearson cor-
relation coeﬀicients range from -1 to 1, these results indicate close to perfect negative
and positive correlations, respectively.
Figure 4.19 presents the area during and after the fire season. Figure 4.19(a), from
October, shows the area that burned in 2023, particularly in the southeastern part,
with smoke plumes still rising in the northern part. The first image available after the
fire season and which was used in the analysis is Figure 4.19(b), where it can be seen
that cloud coverage hides most of the burnt area in the southern part but provides a
clear view of the northeastern side. Finally, Figure 4.19(c) shows the area just four
months after the fire season, where scars are still visible, but part of the vegetation
has recovered. From this, it can be concluded that in this analysis 2023 results are
clearly underestimated, although not drastically.
With better data, for example, from other private satellite sources, the ONI coeﬀicient
would likely fall between 0.80 and 0.91, maintaining the high reliability previously
indicated.
==PAGE:63==
4.6 Correlation
53
Figure 4.18: Scatter plot of the area burnt each year versus the October-to-February
average ONI. The plot shows a clear positive correlation.
(a)
Image
acquired
from
Sentinel-2 October 7, 2023
(b)
Image
acquired
from
Landsat9 November 5, 2023
(c) Image acquired from
Sentinel-2
February
14,
2024
Figure 4.19: The three figures that show the evolution of the area affected by the
fires. (a) was taken in October 2023, when fires were still occurring, (b) is the image
that was used for the analysis, and (c) depicts the area four months after the fire
season.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
Although the direct link between rainfall, temperature data, and the susceptibility
of an area to fires is not evident, the roles of these variables, along with others, con-
tribute to the overall weather system and consequently affect the area’s vulnerability
to fires. In contrast, soil water content proofed to be a clear indicator of fire hazard,
as expected, since higher water content typically results in fewer occurring fires. How-
ever, since the goal of the project is to restore higher water content in the area, this
variable cannot be used as a benchmark for future comparisons of project effective-
ness. Finally, the relationship between fire occurrences and the Oceanic Niño Index
(ONI) appears to be clear. Due to the large-scale nature of this phenomenon and its
distant geographical location from the project area, ONI emerges as a crucial refer-
ence point for future comparisons regarding project effectiveness. The high Pearson
correlation coeﬀicients observed between the annual burnt area and the ONI index in
the latter part of the year indicate a strong statistical relationship. This coeﬀicient
does not imply causation. Instead, it suggests that in anomalous years, the ocean
tends to exhibit high anomalies towards the end of the year, reflecting a complex
weather equilibrium that takes time to stabilize.
This thesis presents multiple strengths. Firstly, every tool utilized, including software
like QGIS and python, as well as in-situ and model climate datasets and satellite im-
ages, was obtained at no cost. This highlights the transparency of the research meth-
ods and indicates that similar studies can be conducted without requiring significant
financial resources. This accessibility creates opportunities for future collaboration
among private companies, environmental organizations, and space agencies, all aiming
towards the common goal of sustainability. The results covered two decades despite
the limitations of satellite images, such as cloud coverage and satellite repetition time.
This provided a medium-long time series, demonstrating reliable long-term outcomes.
Correspondence was found with investigations into years with the most fires and the
restoration plan, validating the findings and providing a strong foundation for future
work.
On the other hand, certain limitations need to be recognized. Firstly, the random
forest machine learning algorithm offers relatively eﬀicient computational times and
reliable classification methods, but it does not provide perfectly accurate results. As
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Discussion
other machine learning and AI techniques advance and become more reliable and
with reduced computational time, better outcomes are anticipated in the future. Ad-
ditionally, the resolution provided by the Landsat mission presents another challenge.
The 30-by-30 meters pixel size can result in mixed spectral signals from burned areas,
agriculture, and forests, thereby affecting classification accuracy.
Finally, all the results regarding the calculation of the burnt area are likely to be
underestimated for two reasons. The first reason is due to cloud coverage, which
shades part of the burnt area and the second one is the vegetation recovery that
occurs within a few months and affect the optical images. While vegetation height,
structure, and carbon sequestration do not recover as quickly, different vegetation
types such as grass or forest share similar spectral signatures. This similarity makes
it challenging for an optical sensor to distinguish between recovered burnt areas and
intact forests shortly after the fire. Therefore, the longer the time interval between the
satellite image and the end of the dry season, the more vegetation regrowth obscures
the detection of burnt areas on the ground.
The positive aspect of this case study limitations is that they are constraints imposed
by the current state of technology and tools available.
For future reference, the
resolution of optical satellites is expected to continue improving.
The Sentinel-2
mission already provides freely distributed data with a spatial resolution of 10-by-10
meters and a repeat cycle of 10 days, starting from 2015. Additionally, optical images
with resolutions as high as 30 centimeters can be purchased from private space sector
companies.
Since optical sensors are sensitive to spectral signatures rather than
physical structures, the introduction of data retrieved from active sensors, such as
SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar), could potentially overcome this obstacle.
SAR
sensors are highly sensitive to the physical structure of objects they sense and may
distinguish changes before and after a fire over a longer timespan. Moreover, their
ability to penetrate clouds is an advantage that adds value to fire detection and
monitoring efforts. Alongside, the integration of advanced AI techniques like Neural
Networks promises to significantly enhance the accuracy of future studies. Beside the
technological advancements, it’s important to note that most fires in the area stem
from human activities. A valuable future research would be to correlate population
density or trading routes with fire locations to pinpoint vulnerable areas for enhancing
monitoring and early fire detection systems.
The practical implications introduced by this study are limitless. Firstly, it empha-
sizes the importance of freely distributed data with a resolution suﬀicient to produce
reliable results. This will benefit not only the academic community engaged in devel-
oping new and improved techniques but also open up opportunities for new businesses
or business units within larger companies. Moreover, this study demonstrates that,
through transparent and consistent satellite data, it should be possible to strengthen
accountability of nature restoration projects advertised by private companies.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions
In this report, the answer to the question on how fires are impacting Central Kali-
mantan and if this is can be quantified in through satellite images is sought.
The study opened with the investigation of climate variables over a study area lo-
cated in Central Kalimantan strongly affected by forest fires. In the data processing
phase, missing in-situ data were integrated with values from the ERA5 model. After
downloading satellite images from various Landsat missions sensing the area for the
past two decades, an algorithm based on machine learning was developed to ingest
them and estimate the amount of area burnt per year. Finally, an analysis on which
climate variable can be used to explain the fire hazard is presented.
The results demonstrated that studying individual climate variables to understand
their correlation with an area affected by fires in a complex system like the weather
one can be misleading, and lead to some unexpected results. Despite each variable
playing a role in either increasing or decreasing the susceptibility of fires in the area
considering them alone may not fully capture their combined impact. On the other
hand, if the root of the weather system in the area (the ocean) is identified, anomalies
in this variable can potentially explain the relationships with the burnt area. The
accuracy of the results in the order of 80 to 90%, is confirmed by random samples
evaluation in the classification process, but also from the fact that the area burnt
strongly correlates with the dryness of the soil.
The results are transferred to the Ørsted Bioenergy Sustainability department as a
historical data archive, ensuring future reference to measure the project’s effectiveness
post-implementation.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Figure A.1
==PAGE:70==
60
A
Figure A.2
==PAGE:71==
A
61
Figure A.3
==PAGE:72==
62
A
Figure A.4
==PAGE:73==
A
63
Figure A.5
==PAGE:74==
64
A
Figure A.6
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Zhe Zhu et al. “Benefits of the free and open Landsat data policy.” In: Remote
Sensing of Environment 224 (2019), pages 382–385. issn: 0034-4257. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2019.02.016. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0034425719300719.
[2]
Steve Frolking et al. “Peatlands in the Earth’s 21st century climate system.” In:
Environmental Reviews 19.NA (2011), pages 371–396. doi: 10.1139/a11-014.
url: https://doi.org/10.1139/a11-014.
[3]
N.O.E. Ofiti, M.W.I. Schmidt, and S. et al. Abiven. “Climate warming and
elevated CO2 alter peatland soil carbon sources and stability.” In: Nat Commun
14.7533 (2023), NA. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43410-z. url: https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-023-43410-z.
[4]
Agung Wicaksono and Zainal. “Peatlands Restoration Policies in Indonesia: Suc-
cess or Failure?” In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science
995.1 (September 2022), page 012068. doi: 10.1088/1755-1315/995/1/012068.
url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/995/1/012068.
[5]
Z D Tan et al. “Peatland restoration as an affordable nature-based climate
solution with fire reduction and conservation co-benefits in Indonesia.” In: Envi-
ronmental Research Letters 17.6 (May 2022), page 064028. doi: 10.1088/1748-
9326/ac6f6e. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac6f6e.
[6]
Doi Lee et al. “Single-Temporal Sentinel-2 for Analyzing Burned Area Detection
Methods: A Study of 14 Cases in Republic of Korea Considering Land Cover.”
In: Remote Sensing 16.5 (2024). issn: 2072-4292. doi: 10.3390/rs16050884.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/16/5/884.
[7]
Fernanda Wenzel. Top brands buy Amazon carbon credits from suspected timber
laundering scam. May 21, 2024. url: https://news.mongabay.com/2024/
05/top-brands-buy-amazon-carbon-credits-from-suspected-timber-
laundering-scam/.
[8]
Hans-Dieter Boehm and Florian Siegert. “Remote Sensing verification by Aerial
Surveys and Ground Truth Campaigns 1997 and 1998 in Central Kalimantan,
Indonesia -Peat Swamp Forest, Mega-Rice-Project and Fires.” In: March 1999.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[9]
M. Allaby. A Dictionary of Earth Sciences. Oxford Paperback Reference. OUP
Oxford, 2008. isbn: 9780199211944.
[10]
M. C. Peel, B. L. Finlayson, and T. A. Mcmahon. “Updated world map of
the Köppen-Geiger climate classification.” In: Hydrology and Earth System Sci-
ences Discussions 4 (2007), pages 439–473. url: https://hal.science/hal-
00298818.
[11]
Edward S. Sarachik and Mark A. Cane. The El Niño-Southern Oscillation Phe-
nomenon. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[12]
M. Hagen and A. Azevedo. “El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Variations
and Climate Changes Worldwide.” In: Atmospheric and Climate Sciences 14
(2024), pages 233–249. issn: 2160-0422. doi: 10.4236/acs.2024.142015. url:
https://doi.org/10.4236/acs.2024.142015.
[13]
Kevin Trenberth and National Center for Atmospheric Research Staff (Eds).
The Climate Data Guide: Nino SST Indices (Nino 1+2, 3, 3.4, 4; ONI and
TNI). March 20, 2024. url: https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climate-
data/nino-sst-indices-nino-12-3-34-4-oni-and-tni.
[14]
BKMG. BADAN METEOROLOGI, KLIMATOLOGI, DAN GEOFISIKA. url:
https://www.bmkg.go.id/.
[15]
Copernicus. About Copernicus. 2024. url: https://www.copernicus.eu/en/
about-copernicus.
[16]
Hans Hersbach et al. “The ERA5 global reanalysis.” In: Quarterly Journal of
the Royal Meteorological Society 146.730 (2020), pages 1999–2049. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/qj.3803. eprint: https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/qj.3803. url: https://rmets.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/qj.3803.
[17]
ECMWF C3S. ERA5 hourly data on single levels from 1940 to present. url:
https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/reanalysis-
era5-single-levels?tab=overview.
[18]
Short N.M. et al. Mission to Earth: LANDSAT Views the World. NASA, 1976.
[19]
Julia Barsi and Laura Rocchio. The Intervening Atmosphere: Tracing the Prove-
nance of a Favorite Landsat Infographic. 2020. url: https://landsat.gsfc.
nasa.gov/article/the-intervening-atmosphere-tracing-the-provenance-
of-a-favorite-landsat-infographic/.
[20]
U.S. Geological Survey. Landsat-Earth observation satellites Version 1.4. Tech-
nical report. 2015. doi: 10.3133/fs20153081.
[21]
Landsat Missions. Landsat 7 Scan Line Corrector (SLC) Failure. url: https:
//www.usgs.gov/landsat-missions/landsat-7#:~:text=On%20May%2031%
2C%202003%2C%20the,along%20the%20satellite%20ground%20track..
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
67
[22]
Andrew Harris. “Satellite orbits and sensor resolution.” In: Thermal Remote
Sensing of Active Volcanoes: A User’s Manual. Cambridge University Press,
2013, pages 113–152.
[23]
NASA Earth Data. MODIS/Aqua+Terra Thermal Anomalies/Fire locations
1km FIRMS V0061 NRT (Vector data). doi: 10.5067/FIRMS/MODIS/MCD14DL.
NRT.0061.
[24]
NASA Earth Data. VIIRS (S-NPP) I Band 375 m Active Fire Product NRT
(Vector data). doi: 10.5067/FIRMS/VIIRS/VNP14IMGT_NRT.002.
[25]
NASA Earth Data. FIRMS Frequently Asked Questions. url: https://www.
earthdata.nasa.gov/faq/firms-faq.
[26]
Robert Emerson and Charlton M. Lewis. In: American Journal of Botany 30.3
(1943), pages 165–178. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2437236.
[27]
Michèle Slaton, E. Hunt, and William Smith. “Estimating Near-Infrared Leaf
Reflectance from Leaf Structural Characteristics.” In: American journal of botany
88 (March 2001), pages 278–84. doi: 10.2307/2657019.
[28]
The University of Arizona TBRS team. MODIS Vegetation Indices. 2002. url:
https://web.archive.org/web/20060902144430/http://tbrs.arizona.
edu/cdrom/VI_Intro/VI_MOD_VI.html.
[29]
María José López García and V. Caselles. “Mapping burns and natural refor-
estation using Thematic Mapper data.” In: Geocarto International 6 (March
1991), pages 31–37. doi: 10.1080/10106049109354290.
[30]
U.S. Geological Survey. Landsat Normalized Burn Ratio. url: https://www.
usgs.gov/landsat-missions/landsat-normalized-burn-ratio-2.
[31]
Yukihiro Ozaki et al. “Far-Ultraviolet Spectroscopy in the Solid and Liquid
States: A Review.” In: Applied Spectroscopy 66.1 (2012), pages 1–25. doi: 10.
1366/11-06496. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1366/11-06496. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1366/11-06496.
[32]
Stefan Edelkamp. “Machine Learning.” In: Algorithmic Intelligence: Towards an
Algorithmic Foundation for Artificial Intelligence. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2023, pages 181–192. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-65596-3_11. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65596-3_11.
[33]
Patrick Bangert. “3 - Machine learning.” In: Machine Learning and Data Science
in the Power Generation Industry. Edited by Patrick Bangert. Elsevier, 2021,
pages 41–75. isbn: 978-0-12-819742-4. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-12-819742-4.00003-2. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780128197424000032.
[34]
Justus Schlenger. “Random Forest.” In: Computer Science in Sport: Modeling,
Simulation, Data Analysis and Visualization of Sports-Related Data. Edited by
Daniel Memmert. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2024, pages 201–
207. isbn: 978-3-662-68313-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-68313-2_24. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-68313-2_24.
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
[35]
Alexis Apostolakis et al. “Implementation of a Random Forest Classifier to Ex-
amine Wildfire Predictive Modelling in Greece Using Diachronically Collected
Fire Occurrence and Fire Mapping Data.” In: June 2021. isbn: 978-3-030-67834-
0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-67835-7_27.
[36]
Breiman Leo. “Random Forests.” In: Machine Learning 45 (2001), pages 5–32.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324.
[37]
Jules J. Berman. “Chapter 4 - Understanding Your Data.” In: Data Simplifica-
tion. Edited by Jules J. Berman. Boston: Morgan Kaufmann, 2016, pages 135–
187. isbn: 978-0-12-803781-2. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 -
12-803781-2.00004-7. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780128037812000047.
[38]
Sri Nurdiati, Ardhasena Sopaheluwakan, and Pandu Septiawan. “Spatial and
Temporal Analysis of El Niño Impact on Land and Forest Fire in Kalimantan
and Sumatra.” In: Agromet 35.1 (2032). doi: 10.1366/11-06496. url: https:
//doi.org/10.29244/j.agromet.35.1.1-10.
[39]
Xiaohua Pan et al. “Connecting Indonesian Fires and Drought With the Type
of El Niño and Phase of the Indian Ocean Dipole During 1979–2016.” In: Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 123.15 (2018), pages 7974–7988. doi:
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1029 / 2018JD028402. eprint: https : / / agupubs .
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2018JD028402. url: https:
//agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2018JD028402.
[40]
BMKG. Data Online Pusta Database - BMKG. url: https://dataonline.
bmkg.go.id/home.
[41]
Noel Gorelick et al. “Google Earth Engine: Planetary-scale geospatial analysis
for everyone.” In: Remote Sensing of Environment (2017). doi: 10.1016/j.rse.
2017.06.031. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.06.031.
[42]
Jenny Farmer et al. “Assessing existing peatland models for their applicability
for modelling greenhouse gas emissions from tropical peat soils.” In: Current
Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 3.5 (2011). Carbon and nitrogen cycles,
pages 339–349. issn: 1877-3435. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.
2011.08.010. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1877343511000881.
[43]
U.S. Geological Survey - Landsat Missions. Landsat 7 SLC-off Gap-Filled Prod-
ucts Phase Two Methodology. url: https : / / d9 - wret . s3 . us - west - 2 .
amazonaws . com / assets / palladium / production / s3fs - public / atoms /
files/L7SLCGapFilledMethod.pdf.
[44]
Gail Schmidt et al. Landsat ecosystem disturbance adaptive processing system
(LEDAPS) algorithm description. Technical report. U.S. Geological Survey,
2013. doi: 10.3133/ofr20131057.
[45]
Jason Brownlee. Random Forest for Time Series Forecasting. 2020. url: https:
//machinelearningmastery.com/random-forest-for-time-series-forecasting/.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
69
[46]
Martino Pesaresi and Jon Benediktsson. “A new approach for the morphological
segmentation of high-resolution satellite imagery.” In: Geoscience and Remote
Sensing, IEEE Transactions on 39 (March 2001), pages 309–320. doi: 10.1109/
36.905239.
[47]
Severianus Endi. West Kalimantan on high smog alert. 2015. url: https://
www.thejakartapost.com/news/2015/09/10/west-kalimantan-high-smog-
alert.html.
[48]
Michael D. King et al. “Spatial and Temporal Distribution of Clouds Observed
by MODIS Onboard the Terra and Aqua Satellites.” In: IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 51.7 (2013), pages 3826–3852. doi: 10.1109/
TGRS.2012.2227333.
[49]
Richard Snyder et al. “Evapotranspiration response to climate change.” In: Acta
Horticulturae 922 (December 2011), pages 91–98. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.
2011.922.11.
[50]
Preeyaphorn Kosa. “Air Temperature and Actual Evapotranspiration Corre-
lation Using Landsat 5 TM Satellite Imagery.” In: Agriculture and Natural
Resources 43.3 (September 2009), pages 605–611. url: https://li01.tci-
thaijo.org/index.php/anres/article/view/244709.
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
