==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Investigation of Fractured
Surfaces in RCA Concrete
MSc. Thesis by
Henriette Elena Sørensen, s220416
Supervisors:
Researcher Jesper Harrild Sørensen
Professor Cao Linh Hoang
PH.d. student Cecilie Kristensen
June 2, 2024
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This report presents the work conducted by Henriette Elena Sørensen on the master thesis
project, Investigation of fractured surfaces in RCA concrete. The project is credited with 30
ECTS points and finalises the MSc. programme in Civil Engineering on the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU.
Many skilled people have contributed with their knowledge and experience to make this project
possible. Without the valued help and guidance regarding the practical and experimental work
from Ditte Jul Valentin, Ebba Cederberg Schnell and Emil Mejlhede Kinslev in the geotechni-
cal lab, Troels Vestergaard Kristensen, Ian Rasmussen and Christian Peter Rasmussen in the
structural lab and Klaus Bræmer in the concrete plant, the project would have had very difficult
terms.
The valuable inputs from Lars Zenke Pørlov Hansen from NIRAS A/S regarding analysis of the
fractured concrete surfaces have also been highly appreciated.
Finally, a great thank you is owed to my supervisors, especially Ph.d student Cecilie Kristensen,
for always providing great guidance and help to answer my many questions related to the project.
Kongens Lyngby, June 2024
Henriette Elena Sørensen
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Concrete is by far the most used building material in the world, and the development only points
towards growing consumption. In the light of the increasing focus on sustainable and circular
consumption of the resources of the earth, it is inevitable to also look at concrete, where the
supply of aggregates, that take up the largest part of the concrete volume, is not endless.
In the present project, the influence of replacing virgin, natural aggregates with recycled concrete
aggregates in new structural concrete is investigated.
More specifically, the influence of the
recycled aggregates on strength and failure mechanisms is in focus, with the end goal of allowing
for more accurate physical models of structural failure in the material.
An initial determination of the material properties of both natural and recycled aggregates
available for the project is carried out, allowing for the design of a large number of concrete mixes
with varying strength and use of recycled concrete aggregates. The aggregate properties conform
with previous experience.
The porosity and thus water absorption capacity of the recycled
concrete aggregates is much higher compared to the natural ones, due to attached old cement
paste. However, the methods for testing the absorption capacity of aggregates prescribed by the
standard are not ideal for the recycled aggregates and probably introduce an overestimation.
A total of 33 concrete mix designs are investigated, where the replacements of fine and coarse
aggregates as well as target compressive strength are varied independently, from 0-100% and
20-90 MPa respectively. Testing of the fresh concrete shows that the mixes with a content of the
coarse recycled aggregates gain a higher slump, most likely due to a higher content of water than
intended which is mainly attributed to an overestimation of the absorption capacity. Further,
the use of fine recycled aggregate tend to slightly increase the air content. Both of these factors
are believed to reduce the final strength of the hardened concrete.
Cylinders cast of the mentioned concrete mixes are tested after 28 days in compression and tensile
splitting strength tests, where the use of recycled aggregates is seen to decrease both strength
parameters. For a constant w/c-ratio, the strength is reduced with increasing replacement of both
fine and coarse aggregates. For a constant replacement ratio, the strength reduction compared
to reference mixes is up to 30% for low target strengths and as small as zero for the highest
target strengths.
The failure surfaces of the fractured cylinders are then analysed through image processing, made
possible by colour pigment having been mixed into the paste during casting. A simple digital tool
to automatically detect the aggregate particles between the coloured cement paste is developed
and applied. The method proves effective at isolating the aggregates in the fracture surfaces,
especially for specimens with red paste. A more thorough validation process of the method will be
valuable as well as further development enabling distinction between original natural aggregate
and old paste in the recycled aggregate particles.
The fracture surface analysis shows that more aggregate particles fracture in concretes with higher
amounts of the recycled aggregate, and the trend is more eminent for higher paste strengths.
However, a direct relation between increased aggregate fracture and decreased strength is not
found. In total, the outcome of the work indicates that the influence of recycled concrete ag-
gregates on the strength of the final concrete is to a greater extent attributable to the influence
on the porosity of the paste and bond strength, at least for the materials tested here. A model
aiming to predict the strength of concrete with recycled aggregates should consider these factors.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure and scientific method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Concrete mix design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Strength of concrete
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Fracture of concrete
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Statistical considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Experimental programme
18
3.1
Scope of experimental work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Mix design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Fresh concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Strength parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Fracture surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Empirical strength prediction
36
4.1
Derivation and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Parameter study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Model fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Discussion
42
6
Conclusions and future work
45
6.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
References
I
i
==PAGE:8==
List of Symbols
A
Area of fracture surface
CV
Coefficient of variation
D
Maximum grain size
K
Constant in Bolomeys equation
L
Length
Vi
Volume of water in portion i
WA24
Water absorption capacity, 24 hours
We
External work
Wi
Internal work
Wl
Energy dissipation per unit length
a
Half loading strip width
ai
Area of aggregate particles in size interval i
aC
Area of aggregate particles ≥4 mm
aF
Area of aggregate particles < 4 mm
b
Width
c
Cohesion
d
Grain size
f
Strength parameter
fA
Separation resistance
fc
Compressive strength of concrete
fcem
Compressive strength of cement paste
fcem,opt
Optimal compressive strength of cement paste
fcm
Mean compressive strength of concrete
fcm,tar
Target mean compressive strength of concrete
fct
Tensile strength of concrete
fctm
Mean tensile strength of concrete
fct,sp
Splitting tensile strength of concrete
fctm,sp
Mean splitting tensile strength of concrete
fck
Characteristic compressive strength of concrete
fck,tar
Target characteristic compressive strength of concrete
fNA
Compressive strength of NA
fNA,opt
Optimal compressive strength of NA
fRCA
Compressive strength of RCA
fRCA,opt
Optimal compressive strength of RCA
ft
Tensile strength
ft,cem
Tensile strength of cement paste
ft,cem,opt
Optimal tensile strength of cement paste
ft,NA
Tensile strength of NA
ft,NA,opt
Optimal tensile strength of NA
ft,RCA
Tensile strength of RCA
ft,RCA,opt
Optimal tensile strength of RCA
fv
Shear strength
ii
==PAGE:9==
h
Height
i
Integer
mc
Mass of cement
mw
Mass of water
n
Number of samples
p
External load
p(d)
Fuller curve
q
Constant in Popovics equation
rI
Ratio of fraction I
rII
Ratio of fraction II
rIII
Ratio of fraction III
rC
Volume ratio of coarse aggregate fractions
s
Standard deviation
s2
Variance
si
Slump of portion i
t
Thickness
u
Displacement vector
u1
Component of displacement vector in direction 1
u2
Component of displacement vector in direction 2
xagg
Aggregate volume ratio in mix design
xi
Sample i
ˆx
Sample mean
y
Combined grading curve
yI
Grading curve of fraction I
yII
Grading curve of fraction II
yIII
Grading curve of fraction III
α
Constant in Bolomeys equation
α
Replacement ratio of natural aggregates with recycled aggregates
αC
Replacement ratio of coarse natural aggregates with coarse recycled aggregates
αF
Replacement ratio of fine natural aggregates with fine recycled aggregates
β
Angle of yield surface
γRCA
Strength reduction factor for RCA
µ
Coefficient of friction
ρa
Apparent particle density
ρs
Solid particle density
ρssd
ssd particle density
σ
Normal stress
σ1
Largest principal stress
σ2
Intermediate principal stress
σ3
Smallest principal stress
φ
Angle of friction
χ
Ratio of transgranular failure in given fracture surface
χC
Ratio of transgranular failure for d ≥4 mm
χF
Ratio of transgranular failure for d< 4 mm
χtot
Total ratio of transgranular failure
ω
Damage factor for RCA
ωopt
Optimal damage factor for RCA
iii
==PAGE:10==
List of Abbreviations
C-RCA
Coarse RCA
C-RCA 2-6 mm
C-RCA with grain size 2-6 mm
C-RCA 6-16 mm
C-RCA with grain size 6-16 mm
F-RCA
Fine RCA
F-RCA 0-2 mm
F-RCA with grain size 0-2 mm
HSV
Hue-Saturation-Value
ITZ
Interfacial Transition Zone
MSE
Mean Squared Error
NA
Natural Aggregate
NA 0-4 mm
NA with grain size 0-4 mm
NA 2-8 mm
NA with grain size 2-8 mm
NA 6-16 mm
NA with grain size 6-16 mm
RCA
Recycled Concrete Aggregate
REF
Reference
SSC
Self compacting concrete
C-RCA 50-100
Coarse RCA concrete mixes with 50-100% C-RCA
F-RCA 10-50
Fine RCA concrete mixes with 10-50% F-RCA
M-RCA 10-50
Mixed RCA concrete mixes with 50% C-RCA and 10-50% F-RCA
RCA 20-90
RCA concrete mixes with fck,tar = 20-90 MPa
REF 20-90
Reference concrete mixes with fck,tar = 20-90 MPa
ssd
Saturated, surface-dried
w/c
Ratio between water and cement in a concrete mix
iv
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Constituents and definitions of concrete. Adopted with modifications from [2]. . .
4
2.2
Particle in different states. Adopted with modifications from [2].
. . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Modified Coulomb criterion for concrete with limits for sliding failure (green) and
separation failure (purple). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Failure modes for concrete.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Failure mechanisms of a prismatic body in pure compression. Adopted from [25].
11
2.6
Failure mechanism of a circular cylinder in splitting tensile test. Adopted with
modifications from [25].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
Diagrammatic representation of the interfacial transition zone and bulk cement
paste in concrete. Reprinted from [24]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.8
Principal differences between interfacial transition zone for concrete containing
aggregates with dense (left) or porous (right) outer surfaces. Reprinted from [1]. .
14
2.9
Schematic illustration of failure in traditional concrete as a two-phase material. .
14
2.10 Considered phases of concrete with NA (left) and RCA (right). . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.11 Assumed possible failure paths in RCA concrete for NA (red) and RCA (blue)
particles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.12 Characteristic compressive strength based on a normal distribution. . . . . . . . .
17
3.1
Natural and recycled aggregates used in the project.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Grading curves for the used aggregate fractions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Combined grading curves for the outer mix designs compared to the ideal Fuller
curve.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Slump and air content for mixes with varying replacement ratios. . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Slump and air content for mixes with varying target strength. . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
Tested strength of specimens with varying replacement ratio.
. . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.7
Tested strength of specimens with varying replacement ratio related to measured
slump. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Tested strength of specimens with varying target strength. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.9
Relation between strength parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.10 Examples of cut-outs of processed fracture surface images. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.11 Examples of accepted and unaccepted image processing results. . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.12 Sliding failure, varying replacement ratios. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.13 Separation failure, varying replacement ratios. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.14 Sliding failure, varying target strength. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.15 Separation failure, varying target strength. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.16 Fine and coarse transgranular ratios for sliding failure against separation failure.
33
v
==PAGE:12==
3.17 Transgranular failure for mixes with varying RCA replacement. . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.18 Transgranular failure for mixes with varying target strength. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.19 Transgranular failure relative to aggregate volume ratio for mixes with varying
target strength. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1
Proposed failure mechanism for concrete with RCA in pure compression. Adopted
with modifications from [25].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Parameter study of Equation 4.3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Test results and model prediction for the series with varying replacement ratio. .
41
4.4
Test results and model prediction for the series with varying target strength. . . .
41
vi
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
2.1
Recommended and allowed maximum use of recycled aggregates in mass-%. . . .
5
3.1
Overview of concrete mixes investigated in the project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Aggregate properties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Results of compressive and splitting tensile strength tests for all concrete mixes. .
25
4.1
Optimal aggregate strength for fcem = 60 MPa and ω = 1.0 in sliding failure. . .
39
4.2
Optimal damage factor for fcem = 60 MPa, fNA = 34.7 MPa, fRCA = 23.5 MPa
in sliding failure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Optimal aggregate strength for ft,cem = 5 MPa and ω = 1.0 in separation failure.
40
4.4
Optimal damage factor for ft,cem = 5 MPa, ft,NA = 3.2 MPa, ft,RCA = 2.2 MPa
in separation failure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Resulting strength parameters for models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
vii
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
1.
Introduction
In recent years, an increased focus on and need for sustainability and circular thinking has been
seen. This does not exclude the building industry, where the option to replace the increasingly
limited natural aggregates (NA) with recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) in new concrete struc-
tures is seen as a possible part of a solution [8]. The use of RCA in structural concrete holds
some challenges related to strength, stiffness and chemical contamination among others, which
sensibly leads to limitations in the European and Danish standards [13, 14].
The inevitable trade off between saving resources and maintaining structural safety can be made
easier if accurate models of the mechanical behaviour of the used materials are available. Knowl-
edge about the failure path is an important part of that, when aiming to obtain accurate me-
chanical models of the material.
In this master thesis project, the influence of a replacement of NA with RCA on the strength of
structural concrete is investigated. Specifically, the fractured surfaces of concrete cylinders where
colour pigment has been added to the paste are assessed visually to gain a better understanding of
the nature of the fracture in RCA concrete. Concrete cylinders with varying replacement as well
as varying target strength are tested in compression and tensile splitting tests and subsequently,
the produced fracture surfaces are analysed utilising the coloured cement and a simple, digital
tool developed for the purpose.
1.1
State of the art
In the context of a need for sustainable and responsible consumption in the building industry, the
influence of replacing natural aggregates (NA) with recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) on the
mechanical properties, especially compressive and tensile strength, of concrete has been studied
at numerous occasions [30, 31]. At this point it can be said without reasonable doubt that both
compressive and tensile strength is reduced when NA is replaced by increasing amounts of RCA,
while the performance of structural elements with RCA has been treated less.
The found degree of strength reduction due to RCA replacement in literature varies from close
to nothing up to 20-30% for high replacement ratios. The great variation probably has a lot
to do with the origin of the donor concrete and processing methods. Researchers attribute the
mechanical inferiority of concrete with RCA to many factors such as a weaker bonding between
the new paste and old paste on the aggregate particles, microcracks in the old ITZ and a lower
crushing value of the used RCA, but it has proved hard to model this complex behaviour [4, 6,
32].
Even though models of fracture in conventional concrete usually assumes that the paste is the
weakest part and that the fracture therefore travels around the strong aggregate particles [25],
it is well known that the aggregate properties have a great influence on the final hardened con-
crete properties. For instance, in [27] the authors compared concretes with different types of
coarse natural aggregates, namely limestone, gravel and basalt. They found that the effect of the
strength of the used aggregates becomes more eminent with higher target strength. Simultane-
ously, the results implied that a less rounded geometry of the aggregates and thus larger surface
area, increasing the bond strength, could increase the compressive strength. They also found
that for high strength concrete, the compressive strength is mainly determined by the aggregate
strength while the tensile strength is mainly determined by the mortar strength. For concrete
with RCA, those observations can be imagined to be even more eminent.
1
==PAGE:16==
The above implies that knowledge of the used RCA in itself and its interaction with the new
paste is important when assessing the mechanical properties of RCA concrete. However, only
few studies have been conducted that link the strength of concrete with RCA with the behaviour
of the fracture. One of the few is [35], where the crack propagation in concrete with coarse RCA
was studied and a strong influence by the new mortar strength relative to the old on the failure
patterns was seen. The authors showed that the cracks clearly tended to propagate along the
ITZ of the weakest of the new and old mortar under uniaxial compression.
For conventional concrete, more studies have been conducted that show that knowledge of the
fracture surface can provide valuable insights when aiming to model a failure mode [7, 21]. The
methods used to assess the fracture surfaces are all relatively time consuming and thus only
applied to a few test specimens at a time. Further, they all need to either destroy the frac-
tured surfaces in some way, which prevents control and repetition, or require relatively advanced
technologies such as a laser scanner or fringe projection equipment [34, 36]. In [36], the fractal
dimension of concrete with different paste strength and types of aggregate was studied using a
laser scanner. It was found that a decrease in paste strength and increase in aggregate strength
both independently increase the fractal dimension.
This was not directly tied together with
mechanical properties of the total concrete volume, however.
Another experimental study of concrete fracture surfaces was conducted in [34]. Here, the frac-
tured surfaces of the specimens were pretreated in an acidic solution to break down the outer
layer of cement paste around the aggregates. This enabled image detection of the ruptured ag-
gregates in the surfaces. The authors found the method to be effective though time consuming.
Results of the study showed a strong relation between the ratio of fractured aggregate particles in
the surface and paste strength (water-binder ratio). Thus, the rupture probability of aggregates
was suggested to be a good parameter to represent the failure mode in concrete but again, the
final concrete strength was not taken into account.
Combined, the available literature indicates that there is a potential to better understand fracture
behaviour and thus model the strength reduction of RCA concrete by investigating the fractured
surfaces of the material. Further, it seems that an accessible and time efficient method to analyse
the fractured surfaces of concrete without destroying them and thus preventing repeatability, does
not exist at the moment.
1.2
Problem statement
It is already broadly established that the use of recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) in new struc-
tural concrete causes some degree of reduction in mechanical properties including compressive
and tensile strength. However, little is still known about the exact sources of the inferiority to
conventional concrete on a sub-macroscopic and microscopic level (micro cracks, bond strength
etc.). By investigating and comparing the failure paths in fractured concrete specimens with
increasing amounts of RCA, this thesis aims to shed some light on the inhomogeneous nature of
the material. The aim is to ultimately allow for more accurate physical models of failure types
in structural elements cast with RCA concrete.
2
==PAGE:17==
Thus, the following questions will be investigated in the project:
• How are the material properties, such as particle size distribution, density and absorption
capacity, of RCA from production surplus different from those of virgin NA and what
influence does that have on the fresh and hardened properties of RCA concrete?
• To what extent is it possible, by the use of coloured cement paste and simple image recog-
nition developed for the purpose, to detect a difference in the observed fracture surface
of concrete with varying replacement of fine and coarse NA with RCA when experiencing
sliding and splitting failure respectively?
• What is the relation between strength reduction in concrete with increasing replacement
of RCA and the amount of fractured aggregates in the observed fracture surface?
• How can answers to the above serve as full or partial input into a simple physical model
to predict the compressive and tensile failure load in RCA concrete more accurately than
approaches typically adopted for conventional concrete?
Other important issues related to the use of RCA in concrete structures such as stiffness, creep,
contamination, durability, sustainability and logistics connected to sourcing suitable concrete for
recycling are not treated in this project.
1.3
Structure and scientific method
The project is based on the method of natural science [28]. By gathering empirical knowledge
about a small piece of reality, the aim is to be able to describe that reality in more general terms.
That is, through observations about some samples of concrete with RCA, the behaviour of RCA
concrete in more general terms is investigated.
In investigations such as this, objectivity must be demonstrated. Conclusions can not be drawn
if they are not backed by evidence. The desired results are quantitative, but qualitative observa-
tions can also be valuable in order to point out focus areas for further investigations. Deductions
that can be explained by established theory of course has more weight than mere guess work.
Further, the experimental work must be conducted and reported in such a way that it allows for
repeatability [28].
The work in this project is based on existing, well-documented knowledge and experience, applied
to the specific case of study through experiments and analysis. In chapter 2, the theoretical
background for the investigations is gathered and reviewed.
Chapter 3 contains results and
analysis of the experimental work, where patterns and possible causal relations are explored. In
chapter 4, the gathered empirical foundation is applied in an attempt to model the strength of
RCA concrete. The findings are finally discussed and conclusions are drawn based on facts in
chapters 5 and 6.
Methods and outcome of the experimental work used in this project are gathered in Annex A and
Annex B. Testing of aggregate properties in Annex A originates from this project, while casting
and testing of cylinders was conducted in relation to three bachelor thesis projects, where only
the results are used in this project. Annex B covers fracture surface analysis of the investigated
concretes and is made entirely in relation to the present project.
3
==PAGE:18==
2.
Theory
This chapter contains the background theory and methods used in the work of this project,
regarding mix design, strength and fracture mechanisms of concrete.
2.1
Concrete mix design
In order to enable meaningful comparisons between concretes with different amounts of RCA,
the mix design must be understood and controlled carefully. In the following, the theory and
parameters behind concrete mix design is described, focusing on the application to the current
project.
2.1.1
Basic constituents
Concrete can be many things but essentially, it is a composite material made up of aggregates
glued together by a paste, solely or mainly produced by the hydration products of cement and
water. Modern concrete often contains other additives to secure or enhance certain properties,
and concrete structures are almost always reinforced to make up for the materials poor perfor-
mance in tension [2]. However, in the present project the interaction between aggregate particles
and the cement paste is in focus.
The general composition of concrete is schematically shown in Figure 2.1. As illustrated, ag-
gregates usually take up the majority of the concrete volume. A distinction is made between
fine aggregates of grain sizes up to 4 mm which is called sand and coarse aggregates of grain
sizes over 4 mm, denoted stones. The stone fraction can be divided into further sub intervals
according to grain size [2]. A small, natural air content will always be present.
Figure 2.1: Constituents and definitions of concrete. Adopted with modifications from [2].
4
==PAGE:19==
2.1.2
Aggregate composition
Particle size distribution
An important parameter used to describe fine and coarse aggregates is the particle size distribu-
tion. It is found by sieving a test portion of the aggregate on a number of sieves and determining
the mass that is retained on each aperture size according to DS/EN 933-1 [15].
The distribution of aggregate particle sizes in a concrete mix combining all fractions is vital
for the workability of the fresh concrete, which is addressed in . Obtaining an optimal grain
distribution makes it possible to reach the same concrete strength with as low a cement content
as possible since this will require the lowest amount of paste to reach a given workability. The
amount of fines is specifically important as they decrease friction between the coarser particles
together with the cement [20]. Further, a concrete mix with poor packing is prone to bleeding
where pockets of water are formed close to large aggregate particles, which among other things
results in a strength reduction [24].
Several methods of varying complexity and accuracy exist to determine a good distribution for
a given concrete mix. In this project, the Fuller curve is adopted as a supposedly ideal grain
distribution that secures good packing of the particles. It is calculated as:
p(d) = 100 ·
r
d
D
(2.1)
where d and D represent the particle size and maximum particle size respectively. In practice
it is impossible to reach the exact distribution of the ideal curve so the aim is to combine the
available fractions in a way that approaches it as much as possible. For three aggregate fractions
with the grading curves yI-yIII the combined curve y can be described as:
y = rI · yI + rII · yII + rIII · yIII
,
rI + rII + rIII = 1
(2.2)
where rI, rII and rIII are factors determining the ratio of each fraction included. Based on
Equation 2.2 the factors can be chosen by solving three equations with three unknowns for three
specific grain sizes [2] or by the method of least squared errors. The latter is adopted for the
work in this project.
Recycled aggregates
According to the European standard, DS/EN 206:2013 + A2:2021 [14], the use of reclaimed or
recycled aggregates in concrete structures is possible to a limited extend. A distinction is made
between reclaimed washed aggregate, reclaimed crushed aggregate and recycled aggregates. The
latter, which is used in this project, covers aggregates resulting from the processing of inorganic
materials previously used in construction, where a use of over 5% is only allowed if the donor
material comes from structural concrete [14].
Table 2.1: Recommended and allowed maximum use of recycled aggregates in mass-%.
EN 206:2013
DS/EN 206 DK NA:2023 [13]
+A2:2021 [14]
≤C35/45
> C35/45
Fine
-
100
20
Coarse
50
100
50
The European standard only contains recommendations regarding the use of recycled aggregate,
and only for coarse fractions, while the danish annex, which in normative in Denmark, contains
5
==PAGE:20==
specific regulations.
Common for both is that the use is limited to certain exposure classes
and subject to various requirements for control and documentation of geometric, physical and
chemical properties of the aggregate and hardened concrete [13, 14]. In Table 2.1, the maximum
recommended and allowed uses of recycled aggregates according to the European standard and
danish annex are given. The use of recycled concrete aggregates in this project exceeds those
limitations.
2.1.3
Aggregate density and water absorption
In order to design a concrete mix with the desired fresh and hardened properties, it is paramount
to know the density, water absorption and water content of the used aggregates. These properties
are connected and are described in the following.
Natural aggregates and to an even greater extend recycled concrete aggregates are porous mate-
rials. This means that the particles are not completely dense but have pores and voids where air
and water can enter. A distinction is made between water accessible voids, that are connected
to the surface of the particle, and internally sealed voids that are not accessible from the surface.
A sand or stone particle can generally be found in one of the three moisture states depicted in
Figure 2.2 or somewhere in between [2].
Figure 2.2: Particle in different states. Adopted with modifications from [2].
The oven-dried state is defined by no evaporable water being present and is usually found by
drying the aggregate in a ventilated oven at 110°C ± 5°C for 24 hours [9]. A particle is called
wet when all water accessible voids are water filled and more or less water is also present on its
surface.
The saturated and surface-dried (ssd) state is found when all water accessible voids are water
filled but the surface of the particle is dry. This is the hardest state to determine as it lies
somewhere in between the two extremes and one way or another relies on human judgement.
However, it is arguably the most important one since the concrete mix design assumes this state
for the added aggregates as described later in this section [9].
In the European norm the apparent particle density, ρa, is defined as the ratio obtained by
dividing the oven-dried mass of an aggregate sample by the volume it occupies in water, including
the volume of any internal sealed voids but excluding the volume of water in in any water
accessible voids. The saturated and surface-dried density, ρssd, as the ratio obtained by dividing
the sum of the oven-dried mass of an aggregate sample and the mass of water in any water
accessible voids by the volume it occupies in water, including the volumes of any internal sealed
voids and water accessible voids.
The water absorption capacity is defined as the difference
between the two and is expressed in percentages as the ratio to the oven-dried density [9].
The actual water content of an arbitrary aggregate sample is found as the difference between the
weight of the sample as is and the oven-dried mass. Free water is any water beyond what can
6
==PAGE:21==
be absorbed by the aggregates as defined by their absorption capacity. If the water content is
below the absorption capacity, the aggregate will absorb some water from the concrete mix, and
if above, the aggregate will add extra free water. This has to be accounted for in the mix design
when casting the concrete.
2.1.4
Paste composition
The fresh and hardened concrete properties are highly dependent of the free, or effective, water
content in the mix. As previously mentioned, the aggregates are assumed to be in the ssd state
and any water beyond that is considered free water, accessible for either reacting with the cement
or creating pores in the paste. The concrete mixes used in this project are designed by optimising
according to grading curve and cement paste as described in Betonhåndbogen [2]. Here, the first
step is to determine the required free water content to obtain the desired workability of the fresh
concrete and then choose cement content according to strength and possibly exposure class.
Workability
Different consistencies of fresh concrete are useful for different purposes. Extrusion of hollow-
core slabs require a very stiff concrete while a liquid consistency is desired e.g. for cast-in-place
slabs. The workability is often described by the slump where a 300 mm cone is filled with fresh
concrete, lifted and the collapse is measured. Very liquid concretes that collapse completely are
referred to as self compacting concrete (SCC) and are not treated further in this project [2].
When designing a concrete mix, it can be assumed that slump only depends on the effective free
water content and geometric composition of aggregates. Thus, the cement content only affects
the hardened properties and can be determined separately later. In reality, workability of the
fresh concrete also depends on other factors such as air content and any use of fly ash, silica
fume and super-plasticizer [5]. Only the latter is relevant in this project and will be treated in
the forthcoming section about additives.
According to [2], experience has showed that for aggregates with maximum grain size D = 16
mm, natural air content and a target slump of 100-150 mm, between 183-206 litres of water
per m3 of concrete is needed. The accurate amount mainly depends on the roughness of the
aggregates. Rounder particles such as sea sand require less water to give the same workability
compared to more angular grains. Only by testing the mix can the right slump be ensured.
The water content can then be adjusted by keeping everything else constant and using Popovics
equation:
V2
V1
=
s2
s1
q
(2.3)
where V1 and V2 are the volumes of free water before and after adjusting s1 is the measured
slump, s2 is the desired slump and q is a constant often set to 0.10. Equation 2.3 shows that the
relationship between effective water content and observed slump is highly non-linear. For mixes
with a large slump even a change in of 2-3 L/m3 can change the slump significantly. This makes
it practically impossible to reach the exact same slump for different mix designs but a variation
of ± 30 mm is considered acceptable [2].
7
==PAGE:22==
Cement content
When the water content is chosen the w/c-ratio, defined as:
w/c = mw
mc
(2.4)
where mw is the mass of water and mc is the mass of cement, can be determined.
In the
passive exposure class the target compressive strength, fc, alone decides the required w/c-ratio.
Bolomeys equation for concrete with natural air content is used, assuming the concrete strength
to be determined by the cement paste exclusively [5]. It states that:
fc = K ·
 1
w/c −α

for
0.45 < w/c < 1.25
(2.5)
where K and α are constants that depend on the used cement and maturity age at test time.
The cement content can then immediately be found from Equation 2.4. Equation 2.5 shows that
a higher w/c-ratio yields a lower concrete strength. This is because the strength of the paste
is entirely attributed to the hydration products of cement and water. Any excess water or air
pockets increase the porosity and weakens the hardened paste. For each extra 1% of air trapped
in the paste, the final strength should be expected to decrease 4-5% [24].
To reach high concrete strengths it might not be enough to keep lowering the w/c-ratio as
indicated by the limits. When the relative amount of water is exactly the amount that is needed
for all of the cement to hydrate the degree of hydration can potentially reach 100% over time.
When the amount of water is decreased below this, the degree of hydration will not be able to
reach 100% and the cement content will so to speak never reach its full strength potential [24].
It is common to add silica fume to concrete mixes with a target compressive strength above 50
MPa however, that is not used or treated in this project [5].
Additives
Apart from virgin and recycled aggregates, water and cement, the concrete mixes investigated
in this project contain super-plasticizer and pigment powder. The super-plasticizer works by
affecting the surface forces between the cement grains and water molecules so that the workability
is increased for the same water content or kept constant for a lower water content. That way,
less water and thus less cement is needed to obtain the desired slump value [5].
The purpose of the pigment powder is to enable visual detection of the aggregate particles in
the fracture surfaces of the concrete specimens after experiencing failure in the strength tests.
It is assumed that the pigment, which is added in low amounts, does not affect either fresh
or hardened properties of the concrete which is also investigated in Annex A by the use of a
reference mix.
8
==PAGE:23==
2.2
Strength of concrete
The content of this section covers established theoretical considerations traditionally used to
describe and asses strength of concrete.
2.2.1
Modified Coulomb failure criterion
It has been found that concrete is well-described as a frictional material as proposed by Coulomb’s
frictional hypothesis. The materials poor performance in tension calls for an addition of a tensile
stress cut-off, leading to the Modified Coulomb failure criterion. It allows for mechanical failure
in concrete to be described by the two basic failure types, namely sliding and separation [25].
The Modified Coulomb material model can be seen as a special case of the Mohr failure envelope,
which generally states that failure occurs when a combination of normal stress, σ, and shear
stress, τ, in a section satisfies the condition:
f(σ, τ) = 0
(2.6)
where f is a material specific function of the stresses. If the principal stresses are defined as
σ1 ≥σ2 ≥σ3 with tensile stress being positive, Mohr’s circle can be drawn through the points
(σ3, 0) and (σ1, 0), leaving out the intermediate stress. By definition, a Mohr circle of a given
stress state cannot exceed the envelope since failure will occur when the two intersect. The
hypothesis for a modified Coulomb material is depicted in Figure 2.3.
(a) Parameters.
(b) Mohr circle.
Figure 2.3: Modified Coulomb criterion for concrete with limits for sliding failure (green) and
separation failure (purple).
Sliding failure is identified by the two straight lines:
|τ| = c −µσ
with
µ = tan φ
(2.7)
where the cohesion, c, and friction angle, φ, are material constants. The value of c is determined
by the inherent bond between hydration product particles [25].
9
==PAGE:24==
Separation failure limits the tensile stress with:
σ = fA
(2.8)
where fA defines the separation resistance.
By inserting the principal stresses for different load situations, the usually used strength param-
eters can be derived as seen in Figure 2.4. For pure compression σ3 is the only principal stress
with a value different from zero and thus the failure situation will look as shown in Figure 2.4a.
The larger c and φ are, the larger the circle (and by that the compressive strength, fc) can
grown before reaching the failure envelope. Note also that only sliding failure is relevant for pure
compression [25].
For pure tension, the model holds potential of either sliding or separation failure, depending on
the relationship between fA and c and µ. When the typical values for concrete are adopted
however, pure tension will always result in a separation failure. That way, the tensile strength,
ft, equals the separation strength, see Figure 2.4b. Pure shear similarly holds the potential of
either failure type but again, separation failure dominates for concrete. Seeing that the principal
stresses |σ1| = |σ3| = |τ| in this stress state, the shear strength fv becomes equal to the separation
strength as well, see Figure 2.4c [25].
(a) Compressive strength
(sliding failure).
(b) Tensile strength
(separation failure).
(c) Shear strength
(separation failure).
Figure 2.4: Failure modes for concrete.
The model suggests that failure of a concrete section in any given (2-dimensional) stress state can
be predicted if fc and ft are known. It is often useful to convert the criterion to principal stress
space [25]. Adopting this model for concrete has proven useful for most engineering purposes
though not exact [1].
2.2.2
Upper and lower bound solutions for cylinder tests
The content of the following section is adopted from [1, 25] unless stated otherwise. By applica-
tion of limit analysis, it can be shown how fc and ft of concrete are determined using cylinder
tests. An upper bound solution approaches the exact solution from the unsafe side, while lower
bound solutions approach the exact solution from the conservative side.
First, the two possible failure mechanisms for a prismatic body under the uniaxial compression, p,
depicted in Figure 2.5 are considered, denoted failure mechanism I and II respectively. In failure
mechanism I, the body is separated into two parts by a single yield plane with the angle β to the
loading surface. Part II is assumed to be fixed while part I is moved by the displacement vector,
u. The angle between the yield plane and u can be shown to take the size of φ, corresponding
to a pure sliding failure in the Modified Coulomb failure criterion.
10
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.5: Failure mechanisms of a prismatic body in pure compression. Adopted from [25].
The work equation can be used to determine the upper bound solution of p. Dissipation per unit
length of the yield line, for a constant out-of-plane thickness, t, is:
Wl = 1
2ufc t(1 −sinφ)
(2.9)
And when the work is conducted along the yield plane, the internal work becomes:
Wi = 1
2ufct(1 −sinφ)
b
cosβ
(2.10)
The external work can be expressed as:
We = p t b u sin(β −φ)
(2.11)
Utilising the work equation, We = Wi, the value of externally applied loading leading to failure
can be found as:
p = 1
2fc
1 −sinφ
sin(β −φ)cosβ
(2.12)
Minimising Equation 2.12 with respect to β gives the upper bound solution:
β = π
4 + φ
2
→p = fc
(2.13)
That is, the cylinder fails under a compressive force p corresponding to the compressive strength,
fc. The same result can be found for failure mechanism II and for cylindrical specimens. Further,
the upper bound solution can be shown to be exact for the considered case.
For a concrete cylinder in splitting tensile test, the upper bound solution is found by observing
the failure mechanism in Figure 2.6 where the load is applied on a thin strip of width 2a along
the out-of-plane length, L. The vertical compressive strip load induces a splitting of the cylinder
due to tensile stresses over the horizontal yield plane.
11
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.6: Failure mechanism of a circular cylinder in splitting tensile test.
Adopted with
modifications from [25].
The internal work is:
Wi = ft2(h −a cotβ)u L sin(β + φ) + 1 −sinφ
2
fc
2a
sinβu L
(2.14)
And with P = p 2a L the external work is:
We = P u cos(β + φ)
(2.15)
If the work equation is adopted again, an upper bound solution can be found. However, solving
this is not trivial, as the value of β will depend on the relation between the compressive and
tensile strength.
The elastic solution for a sufficiently small width of the loading plates, 2a, gives an even stress
distribution of ft over the entire splitting surface. The size of the load leading to failure will
then be:
P = ft π h L
→
ft =
P
π h L
(2.16)
The difference between the upper bound solution of ?? and the elastic lower bound solution in
Equation 2.16 is small for a sufficiently small width of the loading plates, which means that the
deviation from the exact solution somewhere in between is also small. The value of Equation 2.16
must be used when testing the splitting tensile strength in accordance with DS/EN 12390-6 [11]
and is therefore also adopted in all work related to this project.
2.2.3
Relation between compressive and tensile strength
The relationship between the compressive and tensile strength in traditional concrete is well
established. It is described in various literature with minor differences. For comparison of exper-
imental results in this project, the relation between mean tensile strength, fctm, and compressive
strength, fcm = fck + 8 MPa, given in Eurocode 2 [12] is used:
fctm = 0.3 (fck)2/3
for
fck ≤50 MPa
fctm = 2.12 ln

1 + fcm
10

for
fck > 50 MPa
with
fctm ≈0.9 fctm,sp
(2.17)
Regarding fck, see subsection 2.4.2. The distinction between direct tensile strength, fctm, and
splitting tensile strength, fctm,sp, is made because the latter way of testing yields higher values
12
==PAGE:27==
due to not using the exact solution to calculate the strength as seen in the previous section.
In this project, where the separation strength is assessed using splitting tensile tests, the direct
tensile strength will not be addressed further. Where the relationship in Equation 2.17 is held
up against test results, it will thus be converted to approximate fctm,sp.
2.3
Fracture of concrete
Concrete is a complex, heterogeneous material where many factors contribute to decide the path
of the failure. In the following section, some established theory regarding fracture in concrete
and modelling of it, as well as relations to RCA concrete, is reviewed. Further, the literature
used as a basis for the fracture surface assessment in the present project is presented.
2.3.1
Interfacial Transition Zone
As previously described, the effective w/c-ratio is the main decider of the strength of cement
paste. The closer the hydration products are packed, the higher a strength can be obtained.
Close to the wall of an aggregate particle, which is orders of magnitudes larger than the clinker
minerals of cement, they are not able to pack as closely.
The wall effect results in a zone called the interfacial transition zone (ITZ) around the aggregate
where the w/c-ratio is inevitably increased. Further, the types of hydration products that are
formed in the zone are influenced by the wall effect as well as the increased w/c- ratio in the area.
Figure 2.7 illustrates the effect, including the variation in hydration products. The mineralogy
of concrete is generally not treated in this project, but the main takeaway is that the ITZ is
much weaker than the bulk cement paste mainly due to these factors [24, 26].
Figure 2.7: Diagrammatic representation of the interfacial transition zone and bulk cement paste
in concrete. Reprinted from [24].
The thickness of the ITZ is small, in the range of µm, but the importance is nearly impossible
to overestimate. Its strength is often seen as the limiting factor of the strength of the concrete
mix in total. The stiffness of the natural aggregates is generally higher than that of the cement
paste, which results in stress concentrations around the aggregate particles at loading far below
the failure load of the concrete. This causes microcracks, that were maybe already present due
to residual stresses from shrinkage, to develop in the interfacial transition zones [25]. As the load
is increased, the micro cracks develop further and starts connecting until global crack systems
finally causes the concrete to fail [24].
The properties of the aggregates have a great influence on the ITZ. The larger the aggregate
13
==PAGE:28==
particles, the more pronounced the wall effect gets, which is the main reason that concrete with
larger maximum grain size is generally weaker [24]. It has also been found that e.g. calcareous
aggregates improve the properties if the ITZ because they enable chemical reactions that decrease
porosity in the zone [26]. In [38], the authors showed that concrete with aggregates with a porous
outer surface had a denser and thus stronger ITZ compared to aggregate with a more dense outer
layer. Further, the bond between aggregate and cement paste appeared to be stronger due to
better mechanical interlocking. The difference is illustrated in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Principal differences between interfacial transition zone for concrete containing ag-
gregates with dense (left) or porous (right) outer surfaces. Reprinted from [1].
In relation to concrete with RCA, several different types of interfacial transition zones appear
between the new paste, old paste and natural aggregates. They might behave very differently
and are discussed later.
2.3.2
Two- and multi-phase models
In order to accurately predict strength and stiffness parameters for concrete, the heterogeneous
nature of the material must be considered.
The approach is a two-phase model where it is
assumed that the concrete is made up of hard, strong aggregate particles embedded in softer,
weaker cement paste so that the fracture always goes around the aggregate [25]. See Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Schematic illustration of failure in traditional concrete as a two-phase material.
In [37] and subsequently [1], confined concrete was modelled as a two-phase material consisting of
aggregate particles embedded in a new two-phase material of cement paste with hard, unhydrated
cement grains with good results.
For concrete with RCA, the mechanisms inevitably become more complicated. In [29], concrete
with RCA is treated as six-phase material in order to construct a 3D finite element model
simulating behaviour under cylinder tests. The phases are; natural aggregate, old paste, new
paste and the three different interfacial transition zones between NA and new paste, NA and old
paste and old paste and new paste.
It is out of the scope of this project to apply any of the models mentioned in this subsection in
practice. It is, however, worth noting the degree of complexity that is necessary to model and
predict the micromechanical behaviour of traditional concrete and to an even greater extent RCA
14
==PAGE:29==
concrete. Identifying relevant indicators of strength reduction due to the use of RCA will be of
great value in itself and an important step if aiming to ultimately model the micromechanical
behaviour of RCA concrete.
Figure 2.10: Considered phases of concrete with NA (left) and RCA (right).
In Figure 2.10, the different phases that should be considered of concrete with NA as well as
RCA are schematically shown. A distinction is made between new and old paste and new and
old natural aggregates. The NA used for the donor concrete of the RCA could be equivalent to
the virgin NA, but even then it is very possible that the decomposition process to obtain the
RCA has damaged the original NA as well as the old paste.
The new ITZ between NA and new paste is expected to behave as in traditional concrete, while
the one between new and old paste is probably different. In one way, the high porosity of the
surface of the RCA particle could cause a better mechanical interlocking, but less reactivity
between the hardened and new cement could cause a worse bond strength. Fine dust of crushed,
hardened cement on the outer surface of the RCA could also decrease the potential for obtaining
a high bond strength. The old ITZ within the RCA particle is must be considered a weak link
too, potentially with large damage from previous loading and the crushing process [29].
Finally, microcracks can exist in the entire concrete volume, particularly in the three interfacial
transition zones and in the paste and natural aggregates of the recycled concrete aggregate
particle. The resistance to stresses of these different phases in the material can be expected to
decide the failure failure path [29].
2.3.3
Fracture surface analysis
The two types of failure paths depicted for NA (red) and RCA (blue) respectively in Figure 2.11
are considered in the fracture surface analysis of this project. Intergranular failure denotes a
failure that travels around the aggregate particle, likely in the weak ITZ. Transgranular failure
on the other hand, is used to describe a failure path that travels through the aggregate particle
[23]. Such a failure can for an RCA particle go directly through the grain or though the old paste
and around the old NA particles.
(a) Intergranular failure
(b) Transgranular failure.
Figure 2.11: Assumed possible failure paths in RCA concrete for NA (red) and RCA (blue)
particles.
15
==PAGE:30==
Assessment of the fractured surfaces of conventional concrete has been carried out extensively in
available literature. The measurable parameters, fracture surface roughness and fractal dimen-
sion are often used to describe the irregularity of the fracture surface. A higher surface roughness
and fractal dimension will be found for a more rough surface, i.e., if the fracture has been more
prone to travel around the aggregate particles [7]. Previously, before the introduction of more
advanced digital technologies, especially the slit-island method was used to evaluate the fractal
dimension. Here, the fractured surfaces would have to be polished down and thus destroyed in
the process, making it impossible to repeat or validate the test [21].
More recently, the use of laser scanners and the so-called fringe projection technology, where
the fractured surfaces are kept unaltered, has gained ground [7, 21, 36]. The studies generally
find that the roughness parameters correlate well with a varying paste strength. That is, when
the paste strength is decreased by adjusting the w/c-ratio, the fracture surface roughness is
increased.
That corresponds well with the observations discussed previously in this section,
seeing that concrete with a weaker paste will produce a larger degree of intergranular failure and
thus a more rough surface.
For the present project, it has not been possible to find any research where fractured surfaces
of RCA concrete specifically are assessed quantitatively. A few studies contain related work,
e.g. in [6], where it was shown qualitatively through a comparison between fractured surfaces
of NA concrete and RCA concrete that the RCA concrete specimens, which sustained a lower
failure load, had experienced a much higher degree of transgranular failure. In [35] the section
perpendicular to the failure path of RCA concrete in uniaxial compression was studied. The
authors found that the cracks clearly tended to propagate along the ITZ of the weakest mortar,
new or old, and rarely through the natural aggregate.
The concepts of surface roughness and fractal dimension are not treated further in this project,
but they serve as indicators for the belief that digital, visual detection of the degree of transgran-
ular failure in observed fracture surfaces might prove valuable. The adopted method for visually
assessing fractured surfaces of RCA concrete in this project is described briefly in section 3.5
and in detail in Annex B.
2.4
Statistical considerations
2.4.1
Descriptive statistics
Basic descriptive statistics are adopted in the quantitative evaluation of test results in this
project, as expressed in e.g. [17]. The sample mean, ˆx, of observations x = [x1, x2, ..., xn] is
found as:
ˆx = 1
n
n
X
i=1
xi
(2.18)
The variability of the data is assessed using the standard deviation, s, found as the square root
of the variance:
s =
√
s2
where
s2 =
1
n −1
n
X
i=1
(xi −ˆx)2
(2.19)
16
==PAGE:31==
For comparison of data sets with values of different orders of magnitude, the dimensionless sample
coefficient of variation, CV , is convenient and used as a supplement to the standard deviation:
CV = s
ˆx
(2.20)
2.4.2
Characteristic concrete strengths
Knowing that concrete is a heterogeneous material, natural variations in everything from the
aggregate properties to the formation of micro cracks are to be expected. This means that even
within the same batch of concrete, the final properties can vary significantly. Since it is impossible
to test a whole batch as nothing would then be left to build with, the strength assessment must
rely on random samples and statistical considerations [20].
The strength variation of a concrete batch follows a normal distribution, defined by the mean
value and standard deviation. This implies that theoretically, values can fall anywhere from
minus infinity (or logically, zero) to infinity but with decreasing probability for higher distances
from the mean value. See Figure 2.12. It is thus impossible to guarantee a minimum strength
higher than zero [20]. Instead, the expected 95%-fractile is adopted. It gives the value which 95%
of the batch should lie above if tested. It is denoted the characteristic strength, fck. A concrete
mix that is required to have a certain characteristic strength must be designed for higher value,
the expected mean strength [12].
Figure 2.12: Characteristic compressive strength based on a normal distribution.
17
==PAGE:32==
3.
Experimental programme
This chapter contains results and analysis of the experimental work that is used as input in this
project. Descriptions of the work and raw results are gathered in Annex A and Annex B.
3.1
Scope of experimental work
The overall scope of the experimental work in this project is to study the influence of replacing
fine and coarse NA with RCA on the strength and fracture surfaces of concrete.
In section 3.2, a thorough investigation of the physical properties of the used natural and recycled
concrete aggregates serves as a foundation for the design of a total of 33 concrete mixes that are
tested. They are designed for the passive exposure class, with a target slump of 120 mm and
only natural air content. The cement paste is coloured using iron oxide pigment to enable easier
detection of aggregates in the failure surfaces. Overall two series of mix designs are investigated
as seen in Table 3.1, where either replacement of NA with RCA or target compressive strength
is varied.
The ratio αF [0; 1] denotes the replacement ratio of fine aggregates while αC [0; 1] is the re-
placement ratio of coarse aggregates. The total aggregate replacement ratio is introduced as
αtot = αF (1 −rC) + αC rC where rC is the ratio of coarse aggregates in the mix.
Table 3.1: Overview of concrete mixes investigated in the project.
(a) Varying replacement ratios.
(b) Varying target strength.
Target
Replacement ratios
fck,tar
αF
αC
αtot
ID
[MPa]
[-]
[-]
[-]
REF 35
35
0.0
0.0
0.00
C-RCA 50
35
0.0
0.5
0.35
C-RCA 60
35
0.0
0.6
0.41
C-RCA 70
35
0.0
0.7
0.48
C-RCA 80
35
0.0
0.8
0.54
C-RCA 90
35
0.0
0.9
0.60
C-RCA 100
35
0.0
1.0
0.67
F-RCA 10
35
0.1
0.0
0.03
F-RCA 20
35
0.2
0.0
0.06
F-RCA 30
35
0.3
0.0
0.10
F-RCA 40
35
0.4
0.0
0.13
F-RCA 50
35
0.5
0.0
0.17
M-RCA 10
35
0.1
0.5
0.37
M-RCA 20
35
0.2
0.5
0.40
M-RCA 30
35
0.3
0.5
0.43
M-RCA 40
35
0.4
0.5
0.47
M-RCA 50
35
0.5
0.5
0.50
Target
Replacement ratios
fck,tar
αF
αC
αtot
ID
[MPa]
[-]
[-]
[-]
REF 20
20
0.0
0.0
0.00
REF 30
30
0.0
0.0
0.00
REF 40
40
0.0
0.0
0.00
REF 50
50
0.0
0.0
0.00
REF 60
60
0.0
0.0
0.00
REF 70
70
0.0
0.0
0.00
REF 80
80
0.0
0.0
0.00
REF 90
90
0.0
0.0
0.00
RCA 20
20
0.5
1.0
0.81
RCA 30
30
0.5
1.0
0.81
RCA 40
40
0.5
1.0
0.81
RCA 50
50
0.5
1.0
0.81
RCA 60
60
0.5
1.0
0.81
RCA 70
70
0.5
1.0
0.81
RCA 80
80
0.5
1.0
0.81
RCA 90
90
0.5
1.0
0.81
18
==PAGE:33==
In series (a), the target characteristic compressive strength is kept constant at 35 MPa while the
fine and coarse replacement ratios are varied independently. The name C-RCA is used for mix
designs with a replacement ratio of coarse aggregates of 50-100%, F-RCA for a fine replacement
ratio of 10-50% and M-RCA for a mixed replacement of 50% of the coarse aggregate and 10-50%
of the fine aggregate. In series (b), the target compressive strength is varied from 20 MPa all the
way up to 90 MPa and constant, high replacement ratios in mixes named RCA 20-90, compared
to reference mixes with only NA, named REF 20-90.
The properties of the fresh concrete are used to control the quality and comparability of the
mixes, reviewed in section 3.3. Subsequently, a minimum of 12 cylinders of each mix are cast so
that four are available for each test; tensile splitting strength, compressive strength and Young’s
modulus. In the present project only the cylinders used in strength tests are investigated, see
section 3.4. Finally, in section 3.5, the surfaces of the fractured cylinders are analysed visually
to assess the ratio of transgranular failure and its coherence with previous findings.
As a side note, the experimental work in Annex A contains further two concrete mixes that are
tested but not used in this project. For the REF 35 mix, another equivalent mix without red
pigment in the paste was made to ensure that the addition of pigment powder does not influence
the properties of the concrete. In Annex A, they are named REF and REF RØD respectively,
and REF RØD is the one adopted as REF 35 in this project. In addition to that, due to issues
with the C-RCA 100 mix, a new batch was made and tested. The new specimens were not
available in time to be included in the fracture surface analysis however, and therefore it was
chosen not to include any of the results related to them in this report. Thus, C-RCA 100 in this
report corresponds to C-RCA 100 v1 in Annex A.
3.2
Mix design
3.2.1
Experimental foundation
The concrete mixes tested in this project are using a total of six aggregate fractions; one fine
fraction and two coarse fractions of both NA and RCA. They are shown in Figure 3.1 at approx-
imately same scale.
In the following, the fractions are referred to as in the figure, where the numbers indicate the
grain size intervals. From mere visual assessment, the corresponding NA and RCA fractions
look relatively similar in size and shape. The densities, water absorption capacity and grain size
distribution of all six fractions are evaluated in the next subsection.
The RCA fractions are made from a donor concrete from hollow core slab production leftovers
at Spæncom A/S. The donor concrete was tested to the high compressive strength of 65 MPa. It
was separated from reinforcement using a jaw crusher and subsequently more finely divided by
a rotary crusher. The method of processing the material into the final RCA must be expected
to have a great impact on the strength reduction, but it is not treated further here.
The virgin aggregates used in the project are as far as possible equivalent to the ones that were
used in the production of the donor concrete. However, the circumstances at the production
facility means that concrete from different batches is mixed before being sent to the recycling
facility, making it impossible to guarantee the exact content of the resulting RCA. Supplier data
sheets were available for the virgin aggregate fractions and C-RCA 6-16 mm and can be found
attached in Annex A.
19
==PAGE:34==
NA 0-4 mm
NA 2-8 mm
NA 6-16 mm
F-RCA 0-2 mm
C-RCA 2-6 mm
C-RCA 6-16 mm
Figure 3.1: Natural and recycled aggregates used in the project.
3.2.2
Analysis of test results
The saturated and surface-dried particle density, ρssd, apparent particle density, ρa, and water
absorption capacity after 24 hours, WA24, of the used aggregate fractions are tested and docu-
mented in Annex A in accordance with DS/EN 1097-6:2022 [9] and partly as described in [19].
Further, the solid particle density, ρs, which is comparable to ρa, has been found using a different
testing method in accordance with DS/EN ISO 17892-3:2015 [16] as a way to validate the other
results. Table 3.2 summarises all results.
Table 3.2: Aggregate properties.
Density
Water absorption
ID
ρssd [kg/m3]
ρa [kg/m3]
ρs [kg/m3]
WA24 [%]
NA 0-4 mm
2647
2654
2666
0.2
NA 2-8 mm
2633
2668
2681
0.8
NA 6-16 mm
2645
2677
2692
0.7
F-RCA 0-2 mm
2397
2631
2599
6.4
C-RCA 2-6 mm
2367
2634
2615
7.4
C-RCA 6-16 mm
2503
2649
2628
3.7
The found apparent particle densities of the natural aggregates are very similar and lie in the
range that could be expected. The values for the recycled aggregates all lie a bit lower, which
should be expected because of the higher porosity of cement paste. The density of C-RCA 6-16
mm is found to be somewhat larger than the other RCA fractions, which could indicate that it
contains less old cement paste. The solid particle densities generally comply well with ρa, with
deviations that can probably be attributed to the difference in testing methods.
The absorption capacities of RCA fractions are found to be significantly higher compared to the
NA, as expected due the the increased porosity. As a result of a higher absorption capacity, the
ssd particle densities are correspondingly lower for the RCA.
20
==PAGE:35==
However, as described in Annex A, the standard methods to determine whether a sample is in the
ssd state are developed for the use on natural aggregates. This complicated the determination
of WA24 and ρssd for the RCA fractions and entailed a substantial uncertainty related to these
results, where the absorption capacity is probably overestimated.
The particle size distribution of each aggregate fraction is tested in Annex A where also a
thorough review of the procedure in accordance with DS/EN 933-1:2013 [15] is presented. The
resulting grading curves are shown in Figure 3.2. The two coarse RCA fractions are a little more
coarse than the NA ones but lie relatively close to the corresponding coarse NA fractions, which
is desirable. The fine NA and RCA fractions deviate more. The fine natural fraction seems to
be more well-graded and has a smaller amount of very fine particles than the corresponding fine
recycled fraction and a larger fraction of particles in the range 0.25-2 mm.
Figure 3.2: Grading curves for the used aggregate fractions.
In Annex A, the method for obtaining the mix design of the concretes used and tested in the
project is described, but the procedure was also covered in broad terms in section 2.1. The
recipes for the mixes in Table 3.1 are also given in Annex A and not covered in detail here. Most
importantly, the recipes use the target compressive strengths and replacement ratios.
As a part of the mix design, the combined grading curves have been optimised according to the
Fuller curve for each combination of αF and αC. Examples hereof are depicted in Figure 3.3
together with the Fuller curve for reference.
It should be noted that the grading curves for
all reference concretes should have been identical, equal to the one depicted for REF 20-40.
By mistake however, the optimised distribution between fine and coarse aggregate fractions for
the RCA 20-90 mixes was applied to REF 50-90 mixes. Because of the difference in individual
grading curves as seen in Figure 3.2 the resulting curve for REF 50-90 deviates more from the
Fuller curve than intended.
Due to the great similarity between natural and recycled aggregates in each size interval, it was
generally possible to obtain a set of combined grading curves that are close to identical as well
as relatively close to the Fuller curve.
For sizes 2 mm and up, the Fuller curve is matched close to perfectly while the curves deviate
more towards the smaller sizes. The deviation of the curve for REF 50-90 is mainly due to a too
high content of particles smaller than 0.5 mm. As observed in Figure 3.2 both sand fractions
21
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.3: Combined grading curves for the outer mix designs compared to the ideal Fuller
curve.
are measured to have a low content of fines which makes it practically impossible to mimic the
Fuller curve on the first part. For the upper half of the sand fraction however, the combined
grading curves lie above the Fuller curve which can possibly balance the full gradation. It must
also be noted that the chosen test method (dry sieving) holds the risk of not accounting properly
for the content of fines as described in Annex A.
3.2.3
Main points
The found densities and absorption capacities of the aggregates are realistic and reliable, however,
the absorption capacities of the RCA fractions are possibly overestimated. The particle size
distributions are comparable between corresponding NA and RCA fractions which has enabled a
series of concrete mix designs with very similar grading curves regardless of replacement ratios.
The combined grading curves are believed to enable good concrete mixes with the desired and
not the least comparable packing of particles. The overall comparable grading curves are vital in
order to extract conclusions from the following tests and analyses. The unintended deviation in
particle size distribution in the REF 50-90 mixes might however influence the workability, which
should be a focus point. It is also noted, that the particle size distribution says nothing about
the shape of the particles but merely the size of an opening needed to let them pass.
22
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Fresh concrete
Cylinders of all the concrete mixes were cast as described and reported in Annex A. In the
beginning of each day of casting, the water content in all types of aggregate was tested since
storing and weather conditions enabled large variations in the water content. The measurements
were used to adjust the concrete recipes to obtain the correct free water content. The method of
microwave drying was used due to equipment availability and for time efficiency. As described
in Annex A, however, the method does hold some potential of error.
Before casting the cylinders, air content and slump of the fresh concrete was tested. Those results
are presented in subsection 3.3.1.
3.3.1
Analysis of test results
Test results are depicted in Figure 3.4 and 3.5. Note that the mixes C-RCA 100 and RCA 40
both turned out very wet and thus, the flow instead of slump was measured, giving 500 mm and
450 mm respectively. These measurements are not included in the graphs below. Additionally,
the air content for C-RCA 60 is missing due to failed measurement.
Figure 3.4: Slump and air content for mixes with varying replacement ratios.
All mixes with a degree of replacement of coarse aggregates (C-RCA 50-100, M-RCA 10-50 and
RCA 20-90) tend to have a higher slump than the corresponding reference mixes. It can not be
deduced whether an increase in αC directly yields an increase in slump. For F-RCA, the slump
values land both above and below the reference mix without showing a clear pattern.
If assuming that the workability of concrete is mainly determined by free water content and
aggregate geometry, the tendency could indicate that unintentionally, the free water content has
been increased in mixes with C-RCA. This is plausible if the water absorption capacity of the
recycled aggregates have been overestimated as already discussed. As seen in Figure 3.1, the
NA and RCA particles have comparable shapes from sole visual assessment. Since the particle
shapes have not been investigated further it can not be said whether any difference between NA
and RCA plays a role in the increased slump of RCA concrete mixes.
Another factor to consider is time. Water absorption capacities have been determined after 24
hours in accordance with DS/EN 1097-6:2022 [9], and the slump is measured immediately after
mixing the concrete. It can be imagined that the highly porous RCA particles need more time
23
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.5: Slump and air content for mixes with varying target strength.
to reach their full absorption. Measuring the slump again after e.g. 15 and 30 minutes a could
have shed some light on this.
However, the slump values for all the mixes fluctuate both above and below the target of 120 mm
and also outside of the ±30 mm tolerance of variation. This indicates that it has been difficult
to control the amount of free water in the concrete in general. The general variation is probably
mostly due to the previously discussed uncertainties tied with determination of water absorption
capacity as well as actual water content. Anyway, a natural variation should be expected when
working with such a complex material as concrete [2]. The use of super-plasticizer further adds
a possible source of variation.
The air content for mixes in with varying replacement ratio seen in Figure 3.4 are found to have
a natural air content close to the targeted value of 1.5%, spanning between 0.8% and 2.2%. The
air content tends to increase with increasing αF for F-RCA 10-50 and M-RCA 10-50 while an
increase in αC for C-RCA 50-100 yields a negligible variation. This could indicate that the fine
RCA particles somehow introduce some extra air to the paste.
Looking at the mixes with varying target strength in Figure 3.5, the air content varies between
0.8% and 3.4% and mostly falls above the target value. There is a clear increasing trend with
increasing target strength for the REF 20-90 mixes and slightly for the RCA 20-90 mixes. A
higher strength requires a higher cement content and thus a higher total paste content for a
constant free water content. It can be imagined that this is the reason for an increase in air
content, since the air is captured in the paste. The fine aggregate replacement ratio for REF
20-90 is αF = 0.5. If the suspicion holds that the fine RCA introduces extra air to the mix, the
decrease in aggregate content might even out the trend with extra paste.
3.3.2
Main points
Properties of the fresh concrete generally conform well with the target values for the mixes with
varying replacement ratio and fluctuate more for the varying target strength. The measured
slump values indicate that potentially, the water content is higher than intended for concrete
mixes with coarse RCA fractions. The air content increases somewhat with the replacement of
especially fine RCA. Both observations would mean an increased porosity in the cement paste
and thus a strength reduction.
24
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Strength parameters
All concrete mixes were tested in compressive strength test in accordance with DS/EN 12390-
3:2019 [10] and tensile splitting strength test in accordance with DS/EN 12390-6:2012 [11] after
28 days as described in Annex A. Results are presented in subsection 3.4.1.
3.4.1
Analysis of test results
For all mixes, the mean results of the strength tests, based on designated cylinder dimensions,
have been computed. They are listed in Table 3.3 and plotted in Figure 3.6 to 3.8 together
with target values according to mix design and the theoretical relation between compressive and
tensile splitting strength in Equation 2.17 given by EC2.
Table 3.3: Results of compressive and splitting tensile strength tests for all concrete mixes.
(a) Varying replacement ratio.
(b) Varying target strength.
Compression
Splitting tensile
fcm
CV
fctm
CV
ID
[MPa]
[-]
[MPa]
[-]
REF 35
58.7
0.02
4.6
0.05
C-RCA 50
52.1
0.01
4.1
0.06
C-RCA 60
52.1
0.03
4.0
0.03
C-RCA 70
50.9
0.07
3.9
0.07
C-RCA 80
53.8
0.03
4.0
0.05
C-RCA 90
50.4
0.03
3.8
0.02
C-RCA 100
40.0
0.04
3.6
0.04
F-RCA 10
53.3
0.07
4.4
0.06
F-RCA 20
52.0
0.07
4.6
0.03
F-RCA 30
60.2
0.02
4.3
0.04
F-RCA 40
54.2
0.07
4.5
0.05
F-RCA 50
55.4
0.03
4.2
0.04
M-RCA 10
48.8
0.03
4.1
0.02
M-RCA 20
54.9
0.02
4.4
0.03
M-RCA 30
46.7
0.06
4.1
0.08
M-RCA 40
47.0
0.01
4.0
0.06
M-RCA 50
45.8
0.02
3.9
0.06
Compression
Splitting tensile
fcm
CV
fctm
CV
ID
[MPa]
[-]
[MPa]
[-]
REF 20
38.8
0.01
3.5
0.04
REF 30
54.8
0.00
4.2
0.06
REF 40
64.3
0.04
4.6
0.02
REF 50
67.7
0.01
4.8
0.07
REF 60
73.3
0.04
5.2
0.04
REF 70
85.2
0.01
5.7
0.03
REF 80
86.5
0.03
5.8
0.05
REF 90
82.4
0.09
5.3
0.03
RCA 20
27.4
0.01
3.1
0.08
RCA 30
41.5
0.01
3.6
0.07
RCA 40
42.9
0.02
3.5
0.08
RCA 50
58.9
0.03
4.5
0.06
RCA 60
61.5
0.03
4.2
0.06
RCA 70
72.8
0.03
5.5
0.06
RCA 80
79.7
0.04
5.6
0.05
RCA 90
83.2
0.04
5.6
0.07
In Figure 3.6, the results generally lie well above the target strength values, except the com-
pressive strength of C-RCA 100 which also turned out very wet as previously described. Note
that a new batch of C-RCA 100 was made and tested to investigate this. The results did not
get finished in time to be included in this project, but the new tests can be seen in Annex A
and showed a much better performance of C-RCA 100. The figure shows that both the tensile
and compressive strengths tend to decrease with increasing replacement ratios. The compressive
strengths are relatively scattered with results ranging from 46 MPa to 60 MPa if C-RCA 100 is
left out. The tensile splitting strength follows an almost completely straight line from 4.6 MPa
for REF 35 to 3.6 MPa for C-RCA 100. The remarkable drop in compressive strength for C-RCA
100 is not mirrored in the tensile strength, which is interesting.
25
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.6: Tested strength of specimens with varying replacement ratio.
Figure 3.7: Tested strength of specimens with varying replacement ratio related to measured
slump.
As seen in section 3.3, the slump generally increased with RCA replacement, especially αC.
Therefore, it is interesting to investigate the relation between slump and tested strength prop-
erties of the series with varying replacement ratios. Those results are compared in Figure 3.7.
The figure shows that the relation between compressive strength and slump is just as strong as
the one between compressive strength and replacement ratio in Figure 3.6. The data points do
not completely follow a straight line, but there is a clear downwards trend that seems to be less
governed by αC and αF . This indicates that the high slump values have indeed been a sign of
an unintentionally high free water content which might be the reason for some of or the entire
strength decrease. For the tensile strength, the relation to the measured slump is not as strong as
to the replacement ratio. The variation in air content probably influences the strength reduction,
too.
The same comparison does not make sense to make for the series with varying target strength.
However, it should be kept in mind that the strength decrease in RCA concrete mixes might be
at least partly attributed to difficulties with controlling the porosity.
26
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.8: Tested strength of specimens with varying target strength.
For the series with a varying target strength in Figure 3.8, the compressive strength is consistently
around 10 MPa lower for the RCA 20-90 specimens. The two only exceptions are REF/RCA 40,
where the difference is a little above 20 MPa, and REF/RCA 90, where the strength is remarkably
the same. Keeping in mind that the RCA 40 batch turned out very wet, it is possible that the
larger deviation can be attributed to a mistakenly high w/c-ratio here. Seeing that the strength
of REF 90 is lower than both REF 70 and REF 80, it is reasonable to suggest that there has been
some error with that batch. Apart from those deviations, the decrease in compressive strength
for RCA 20-90 specimens is close to 30% for the low strength specimens and only around 10%
for the strongest specimens.
It is remarkable that the percentage decrease varies like that, contrary to the obvious expectation
that the compressive strength of higher strength concretes are more affected by the aggregate
properties. This could indicate two things. As previously suggested, the fact that the mixes
with RCA had a higher slump value than the references could mean that the w/c-ratio had been
increased. Alternatively, if it assumed that the paste properties of REF 20-90 and RCA 20-90
mixes are similar for each target strength, the strength reduction would more likely be due a
weakened bond strength of the RCA particles.
The decrease in tensile strength due to RCA replacement lies around 0.5-1.0 MPa for the lower
target strengths and at only 0.2 MPa for REF/RCA 70-80. REF 90 is again unreliable. The fact
that the tensile splitting strength seems almost unaffected by RCA replacement for high concrete
strengths support the findings in [27], that tensile strength of high strength concrete is primarily
decided by paste properties. Again, the percentage strength decrease is significantly larger for
lower strength concretes. More light can possibly be shed on this in the fracture surface analysis
in section 3.5.
It should also be noted, that even for the reference cylinders, values of fcm,tar above 80 MPa are
not reached and even before that, the curve starts flattening out. This could be expected due to
the used w/c-ratios lying far below the recommended limits given in Equation 2.5 in section 2.1.
To reach the very high concrete strengths, the use of e.g. silica fume is probably necessary [2].
27
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.9: Relation between strength parameters.
In Figure 3.9, the measured compressive and tensile splitting strengths are shown against each
other. The test results generally lie very close to the Eurocode relationship (Equation 2.17),
which is also depicted, fluctuating independently of RCA content. Figure 3.9 indicates that the
used recycled aggregates affect the tensile and compressive strength equally so that the concrete
can be expected to behave similarly to traditional concrete, at least regarding the considered
failure mechanisms.
3.4.2
Main points
The strength test results clearly show a decrease in both compressive and tensile strength when
increasing amounts of the natural aggregates are replaced by recycled concrete aggregate. When
held up against the test results for the fresh concrete properties however, it is possible to argue
that the strength decrease is mostly or at least partly attributed to difficulties in controlling the
paste porosity of concretes with RCA rather than the actual strength of the RCA.
Further, the relation between compressive and tensile strength of the investigated RCA concrete
seems to follow that of traditional concrete. This could prove valuable when seeking to predict
strength properties of RCA concrete and practical in general for engineers working with structural
concrete with RCA.
28
==PAGE:43==
3.5
Fracture surfaces
3.5.1
Detection of aggregates in fractured surfaces
As already mentioned, the cement paste of all the tested concrete cylinders has been coloured
to enable visual distinction between new paste and fractured, naturally coloured NA and RCA
particles in the fracture surfaces. A method to digitally detect those particles from images taken
of the fracture surfaces has been developed and is reviewed briefly here. The full technical details
of the process are described in Annex B.
The method uses a relatively simple python script, where colour filters based on the Hue-
Saturation-Value (HSV) space [22] and the two open source libraries, OpenCV [3], and rembg [18]
are utilised. The output has two parts. Firstly, each processed image is returned with contours
marking the found aggregate particles. Examples of such images are given in Figure 3.10.
REF 35 01-1
C-RCA 100 01-2
Figure 3.10: Examples of cut-outs of processed fracture surface images.
The detected aggregate particles are marked with red and blue contours for approximate grain
sizes below and above 4 mm respectively. This is not related to the red and blue colours that
are generally used to distinguish between NA and RCA through this report. That is, the results
do not include any information about whether the detected particles belong to NA or RCA
fractions. The determination of the particle sizes are approximate, as described in Annex B.
Any area found to be larger than 32 mm is marked with a green colour and indicates error, since
the largest used grain size in the mixes is 16 mm.
That being said, the examples in Figure 3.10 show that the processing has successfully found
particles of both NA (REF 35) and RCA (C-RCA 100). The fractured RCA particles reveal old
paste as well as natural aggregate. The second part of the output is a vector containing the total
area of particles found in each sieve aperture size interval from 0.063 mm to 16 mm, as well as
the total fracture surface area in pixels.
29
==PAGE:44==
The ratio of transgranular failure is introduced to describe the amount of fractured aggregates
in relation to the full fracture surface area. The ratios of transgranular failure of fine particles
with d ≤4 mm, χF , coarse particles with d > 4 mm, χC, and all particles, χtot are calculated
for a given fracture surface as:
χF =
P aF
A
,
χC =
P aF
A
,
χtot = χF + χC
(3.1)
where P aF is the total area of detected aggregate particles with d ≤4 mm, P aC is the total
area of detected aggregate particles with d > 4 mm and A is the total fracture surface area.
3.5.2
Analysis of results
A detailed overview of the total outcome of the performed fracture surface processing is given in
Annex B. The cement colours deviate significantly in some concrete mixes due to limited avail-
ability of the red pigment powder. This complicated the possibilities of achieving satisfactory
detection of aggregates in some of the analysed fracture surfaces. Especially some specimens
tested in compressive strength test gave issues because of a more uneven surface. As a conse-
quence hereof, the results for specimens where the output images showed clear, insensible errors
were disregarded. An example of the difference between good and poor outcomes of the aggre-
gate detection is given in Figure 3.11. Note the green contour on the disregarded surface of RCA
80 08-1, where large areas of new paste is detected as aggregate which would introduce a large
error if included. All disregarded specimens are reported in Annex B.
RCA 50 05-2 (included)
RCA 80 08-1 (disregarded)
Figure 3.11: Examples of accepted and unaccepted image processing results.
For most of the mixes, the number of remaining results was sufficient to still produce a fine
mean result. For the compressive strength test of RCA 80, however, only two vaguely acceptable
results were left and thus, that measurement was taken out. In the following analysis, the results
that were deemed acceptable are treated.
In the graphs in Figure 3.12 to 3.16, the found transgranular ratio of aggregate particles larger
than 4 mm, χC, is depicted with a square symbol, while the ratio for fine particles, χF , is
depicted with a diamond symbol. Each point corresponds to the mean of all the satisfactory
results for the given concrete mix. It is generally observed that separation failure leads to higher
30
==PAGE:45==
ratios of transgranular failure compared to sliding failure. Put differently, more aggregate tends
to fracture in tensile failure than in compression failure.
Figure 3.12 shows the found ratios of transgranular failure in the series with varying replacement
ratios for compressive strength tests. The amount of fine particles found in the surfaces is close to
constant. There might be a slight increase in χF for higher values of αtot but the effect compared
to the total fracture surface is negligible.
The amount of coarse aggregate found in the fracture surfaces of the compressed specimens
varies a lot more. It seems, looking at F-RCA 10-50 and M-RCA 10-50, that χC is not directly
affected when fine natural aggregate is replaced by RCA. The values fluctuate above and below
the one of the reference, probably due to other factors. In exchange, an increase in replacement
of coarse aggregates in C-RCA 50-100 generally leads to higher values of χC. An exception from
this is C-RCA 100 where compressive strength tests also showed unexpectedly low results. This
backs the assumption that the w/c-ratio for this batch was higher than intended. The obvious
conclusion from this seems to be that the weakening of compressive strength due to coarse RCA
replacement can be at least partially attributed to a higher degree of transgranular failure.
Figure 3.12: Sliding failure, varying replacement ratios.
Figure 3.13: Separation failure, varying replacement ratios.
31
==PAGE:46==
Results for the same batches in tensile splitting test are depicted in Figure 3.13. Here, χF clearly
increases with increasing αF for F-RCA 10-50 and M-RCA 10-50 while it is still unaffected by an
increase in αC for C-RCA 50-100. The amount of coarse aggregate found in the fracture surfaces
tends to increase with αC in the C-RCA 50-100 mixes, again with the exception of C-RCA 100.
For the F-RCA 10-50 and C-RCA 50-100 mixes, αC fluctuates above and below the reference and
reveals no clear pattern. The fluctuations could be due to many factors such as unintentional
variations in w/c-ratio and air content as well as general uncertainties related to the fracture
surface analysis.
Apart from the relatively large variability, the main takeaway from Figure 3.12 and 3.13 is that
for both sliding and separation failure, χC is mainly affected by αC and χF is to a lesser extent
affected by αF . That is, higher replacement ratios lead to higher degrees of transgranular failure.
Figure 3.14: Sliding failure, varying target strength.
Figure 3.15: Separation failure, varying target strength.
Figure 3.14 and 3.15 show fine and coarse transgranular ratios for concrete mixes with varied
target strength. As mentioned, results for RCA 80 from compression tests are left out due to
unsatisfactory image processing results. For compression test specimens in Figure 3.14 a clear
increase in χF and especially χC is seen with increasing paste strength. For the reference mixes,
32
==PAGE:47==
the curve seems to flattens out for target strengths 50 MPa and up. However, it should be kept in
mind that the relative amount of aggregate in the mix designs decrease as the cement content is
increased to obtain higher strengths. A constant value of χ for increasing fcm,tar thus effectively
means an increase in the relative amount of the volume of aggregates in the mix found in the
fracture surface. This will be elaborated later.
It is noteworthy that the transgranular ratios of REF 20-90 and RCA 20-90 mixes for both fine
and coarse particles follow each other relatively close up to a target strength of 50 MPa. The, the
amount of coarse aggregate in the fracture surfaces of the RCA 50-90 concrete mixes rises much
more than of the reference mixes. An explanation to this could be that the donor concrete of
the used RCA had a compressive strength around this value. When that strength is exceeded, it
could be expected that the RCA starts rupturing much more. Interestingly, a similar trend was
not seen in the strength tests where the compressive strength of RCA 20-90 mixes was more or
less constantly 10 MPa lower than for the REF 20-90 mixes. This indicates that the compression
strength is maybe less governed by aggregate rupture than expected.
For tensile splitting test specimens in Figure 3.15 both fine and coarse transgranular ratios follow
each other with a more or less constant offset of the RCA 20-90 mixes. The result of χC for REF
40 (fcm,tar = 49 MPa) deviates from this trend with a value that is almost as high as for RCA
40.
In Figure 3.16 the found transgranular ratios for compression and tensile tests are compared.
As previously seen, they show that the amount of fine fractured aggregate is generally similar
for sliding and separation failure and close to unaffected by both fine and coarse replacement
ratios. The amount does increase somewhat with increasing paste strength though, for both
compressive and tensile failure. The amount of coarse fractured aggregate is clearly larger for
separation failure but follows the same constant slope regardless of α and fcm,tar. The only
noteworthy deviation from this is for RCA 70 and 90 where the values of χC for sliding failure
starts to exceed those for separation failure.
(a) Varying replacement ratios.
(b) Varying target strength.
Figure 3.16: Fine and coarse transgranular ratios for sliding failure against separation failure.
33
==PAGE:48==
3.5.3
Relation to strength parameters
In the following, the found total transgranular ratio, χtot = χF + χC, for each concrete mix
is compared to the compressive and tensile splitting strengths already discussed in section 3.4.
Figure 3.17 displays for the series with varying replacement ratios the transgranular ratios for
compressive strength specimens against their corresponding compressive strength and similarly
for tensile splitting strength specimens.
The results show no relation between the strength and the amount of fractured aggregate particles
what so ever. This suggests that the strength reduction due to RCA replacement is governed
by other factors than increased rupture of aggregate. Again, an increased water and air content
leading to a more porous and thus weaker cement paste is a likely explanation as well as weakened
bond strength in the ITZ zone between new and old paste. It must also be kept in mind that for
most of these concrete mixes the total replacement ratio is below 0.5. The effect could be more
pronounced for higher replacement ratios.
Figure 3.17: Transgranular failure for mixes with varying RCA replacement.
Figure 3.18 shows the same results as Figure 3.17 for the series with varying target strength. As
previously mentioned the aggregate volume ratio, xagg, in the concrete recipes is decreased as
paste strength is increased which most likely has an effect on χ. Therefore, Figure 3.19 shows
χtot relative to xagg in the y-axis. It can be noted that the tendency of χtot for REF 40-90 to
seemingly level off is eliminated when analysing the results that way.
As would be expected, strong linear relationships between tested strength parameters and aggre-
gate fracture can be seen for reference mixes as well as mixes with RCA. Trend lines have been
added to enhance comprehension. For the compressive strength specimens the trends follow two
different slopes, the one for RCA 20-90 being more steep. Extensions of the trend lines would
cross around fcm = 20 MPa and χtot close to zero. It is easy to imagine that at some point the
paste can become so weak that the failure path chooses to travel around all aggregate particles,
NA or RCA. For the 20 MPa mixes, the strength of the specimens with RCA is lower than for
the references, but the ratios of transgranular failure are equal. The opposite is observed for the
high strength specimens, where a much lager value of χ does not seem to reduce the compressive
strength.
For the tensile splitting strength specimens, the increase in transgranular failure with paste
strength is also clear. However, the slopes of the trend lines for REF 20-90 and RCA 20-90
are almost equal, giving the RCA 20-90 specimens a more or less constant offset. This could
34
==PAGE:49==
indicate that some fraction of the RCA particles are very weak and split easily, imaginably
because of damaging during the crushing process. The small tensile strength reduction could
have something to do with this.
Figure 3.18: Transgranular failure for mixes with varying target strength.
Figure 3.19: Transgranular failure relative to aggregate volume ratio for mixes with varying
target strength.
3.5.4
Main points
The results show that there is an increase in transgranular failure when NA is replaced with RCA
for both sliding and separation failure. The trend for sliding failure is clearly more pronounced
for higher replacement ratios and and higher paste strengths. For separation failure the offset is
more constant. However, a causality between the increase in transgranular failure and decrease
in strength parameters is not obvious.
35
==PAGE:50==
4.
Empirical strength prediction
In this chapter, a simple and mostly empirical model to predict the strength of RCA concrete is
proposed and tested. The model is based on existing theoretical knowledge already presented in
chapter 2 and the experimental results presented in chapter 3.
4.1
Derivation and assumptions
The aim is to propose a simple model that can predict the strength of concrete with RCA based
on replacement ratio and ratio of transgranular failure. The fact that the results in section 3.5
showed that transgranular failure might not be a good predictor for strength reduction is ignored
for the time being.
Figure 4.1: Proposed failure mechanism for concrete with RCA in pure compression. Adopted
with modifications from [25].
The failure mechanism in Figure 4.1 is assumed for specimens in compression, having already seen
that failure mechanism I and II in Figure 2.5 yields the same failure load. The basic assumptions
are the same as considerations for traditional concrete. The difference is that here, the energy
dissipation along the yield line is assumed to be made up of three contributions; failure through
the bulk cement paste, transgranular failure though natural aggregate particles and transgranular
failure though recycled concrete aggregate particles. The direction of the yield line is assumed to
be unaffected by what it travels through and around. Based on those assumptions, an alternative
work equation can be formulated. The external work is the same as in Equation 2.11:
We = ptbusin(β −φ)
(4.1)
36
==PAGE:51==
Since the available data does not include the distribution between NA and RCA in the fracture
surfaces, it is assumed that it equals that of the original mix designs. Then, the internal work
can be expressed as:
Wi = 1
2ut(1 −sinφ)
b
cosβ(fcem (1 −χ) + fNA χ (1 −α) + ω fRCA χ α)
(4.2)
where fcem is the cement paste strength, fNA and fRCA are more or less fictional aggregate
strengths and ω [0;1] is a damage factor considering the possible damaging of the RCA during
crushing. In this case, the NA used in the donor concrete of the RCA is known to be the same as
the new NA in the concrete mixes. Any inferiority of the RCA to the virgin NA must therefore
be related to the old cement paste and any damage from the crushing process, already introduced
by ω. The influence of the old cement paste is hard to assess. The strength reduction factor,
γRCA [0;1], is introduced so that fRCA = γRCA fNA. Solving We = Wi then yields the failure
load:
p(χ, α) = fcem (1 −χ) + fNA χ (1 −α) + ω fRCA χ α
,
fRCA = γRCA fNA
(4.3)
The most simple relation is adopted where α = αtot and χ = χtot, ie., no distinction between
the effect of fine and coarse aggregates is made. Having seen that mainly χC is affected by
RCA replacement and paste strength, this simplification might introduce an error. Further, it is
seen that the model attributes the entire strength reduction of concrete with RCA to aggregate
rupture, which is not supported by the current results.
For tensile splitting strength, a similar formulation can be reached based on assumed tensile
strengths of the cement paste, ft,cem, natural aggregate, ft,NA, and recycled aggregate ft,RCA:
p(χ, α) = ft,cem (1 −χ) + ft,NA χ (1 −α) + ω ft,RCA χ α
,
ft,RCA = γRCA ft,NA
(4.4)
In the following, it will be investigated if the proposed models can be used to predict the strength
parameters of concrete with RCA based on the available test results.
4.2
Parameter study
According to Equation 4.3, χ and α are variables that should be determined for a specific concrete
mix design while fcem, fNA, fRCA and ω are parameters that can be tuned to fit the model to
experimental data. Figure 4.2 shows a small study with the implications of varying the values of
those parameters for the prediction of compressive strength in Equation 4.3. The implications
are equivalent for the prediction of tensile splitting strength in Equation 4.4.
Variation in the cement strength in Figure 4.2a moves the whole surface up and down. The effect
is most pronounced for lower values of χtot where a greater part of the fracture goes through the
paste. When the strength of the virgin aggregate is varied and RCA strength kept constant as
in Figure 4.2b the resulting failure load is mostly affected for high χtot and low αtot. When the
RCA strength is varied together with the NA strength, fRCA = γRCA fNA, as in Figure 4.2c
the failure load for high values of χtot and all values of αtot is affected. Finally, the decrease in
ω seen in Figure 4.2d decreases the predicted failure load for high replacement ratios and high
degrees of transgranular failure.
37
==PAGE:52==
(a) Influence of fc.
(b) Influence of fNA with constant fRCA.
(c) Influence of fNA with dependent fRCA.
(d) Influence of ω.
Figure 4.2: Parameter study of Equation 4.3.
4.3
Model fitting
In this section, an attempt is made to fit the parameters of Equation 4.3 and 4.4 to the test
results of the concrete series with varying replacement ratio.
4.3.1
MSE
The mean squared error, MSE, is used as a method to asses the conformity between the model
prediction, p(χ, α) and the strength actually measured, fcm:
38
==PAGE:53==
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(fcm,i −p(χi, αi))2
(4.5)
4.3.2
Aggregate strength
Looking firstly at Equation 4.3, the model contains five unknown parameters. Many different
combinations of those can probably be made that fit the experimental data fairly good but are
not necessarily meaningful. It is chosen to lock two; fcem = 60 MPa and γRCA = 44/65 = 0.68.
Then, with ω = 1.0 and fRCA = γRCA fNA only the aggregate strength, fNA, is left as an
unknown. By calculating the MSE for model predictions with fNA ranging from 0-60 MPa and
tested and known values of χ, α and fcm for each concrete mix, the optimal value is found for
REF 35, C-RCA 50-100, F-RCA 10-50 and M-RCA 10-50 respectively. The outcome can be seen
in Table 4.1 with fRCA = γRCA fNA and MSE for the corresponding result of optimal value of
fNA.
The results differ a lot with the reference preferring the highest aggregate strength and M-RCA
10-50 mixes the lowest. The MSE values for F-RCA 10-50 and M-RCA 10-50 are very high and
indicate bad model fits. It is chosen to move forward with the mean value of fNA,opt for the
mixes with RCA since those are the most interesting in this context. It is then interesting to
investigate the damage factor. Corresponding MSE calculations have been made for ω in the
range from 0 to 1 and results can be seen in Table 4.2. The influence on REF 35 is of course
zero. Again C-RCA 50-100 and F-RCA 10-50 seem to agree. According to their results the value
of ωopt = 1.0, i.e., no additional damage to the RCA aggregate. For M-RCA 10-50 ωopt = 0.0
which unrealistically attributes no strength to the RCA at all. In absence of better solutions a
value of the damage factor for sliding failure is chosen as the mean, ω = 0.67.
Table 4.1: Optimal aggregate strength for fcem = 60 MPa and ω = 1.0 in sliding failure.
REF 35
C-RCA 50-100
F-RCA 10-50
M-RCA 10-50
CV
fNA,opt [MPa]
54
40
41
23
0.32
fRCA,opt [MPa]
37
27
28
16
0.32
MSE [-]
0.0
1.5
10.4
26.0
1.26
Table 4.2: Optimal damage factor for fcem = 60 MPa, fNA = 34.7 MPa, fRCA = 23.5 MPa in
sliding failure.
REF 35
C-RCA 50-100
F-RCA 10-50
M-RCA 10-50
CV
ωopt [-]
-
1.0
1.0
0.0
1.15
MSE [-]
3.3
12.2
24.1
19.1
0.61
The same procedure is followed to fit the model in Equation 4.4 for tensile splitting strength
prediction, only with ft,cem = 5 MPa. The found optimal aggregate strengths can be seen in
Table 4.3. The value of ft,NA,opt ranges between 2.9 MPa and 3.9 MPa which is significantly less
deviation than for sliding failure. Again, the mean value for RCA mixes is chosen. The study of
the damage factor can be seen in Table 4.4 where good agreement between results for concretes
with RCA is found. The mean, ω = 0.9 is chosen for the model to predict separation failure.
39
==PAGE:54==
Table 4.3: Optimal aggregate strength for ft,cem = 5 MPa and ω = 1.0 in separation failure.
REF 35
C-RCA 50-100
F-RCA 10-50
M-RCA 10-50
CV
ft,NA,opt [MPa]
3.9
2.9
3.5
3.1
0.15
ft,RCA,opt [MPa]
2.6
2.0
2.4
2.1
0.15
MSE [-]
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.04
1.49
Table 4.4: Optimal damage factor for ft,cem = 5 MPa, ft,NA = 3.2 MPa, ft,RCA = 2.2 MPa in
separation failure.
REF 35
C-RCA 50-100
F-RCA 10-50
M-RCA 10-50
CV
ωopt [-]
-
0.8
1.0
0.9
0.14
MSE [-]
0.07
0.00
0.03
0.04
0.81
4.4
Results
The found optimal values of the strength parameters in Equation 4.3 and 4.4 are listed in
Table 4.5.
The strengths of the aggregates are much lower than of the paste for both the
compressive and the tensile splitting strength model, which seems unrealistic.
Table 4.5: Resulting strength parameters for models.
(a) Compressive strength.
(b) Tensile splitting strength.
fcem
fNA
fRCA
ω
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[-]
60.0
34.7
23.5
0.7
ft,cem
ft,NA
ft,RCA
ω
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[-]
5.0
3.2
2.2
0.9
In Figure 4.3, the strength test results from section 3.4 for varying replacement ratio are shown
with the model predictions based on the values in Table 4.5 and a mean of χtot = 0.26 for com-
pressive strength and χtot = 0.39 for tensile splitting strength specimens. For both compressive
and tensile splitting strength, the model predictions lie fairly close to the observations which
could be expected since the parameters have been adjusted to do so. However, both models tend
to underestimate the failure load for low values of αtot and overestimate it for high values of
αtot. A steeper slope, i.e., a greater strength reduction for high replacement ratios would give
more accurate predictions. As previously discussed, at least a part of the strength reduction
due to RCA replacement seems to come from a weakening of the paste and or ITZ which is not
accounted for in the very simple failure models.
It is also interesting to see how the models perform with the observations from the series with
varying target strength. The parameters for natural and recycled aggregate in Table 4.5 should
be assumed to be valid regardless of target strength. Instead of a fixed cement strength, the
target strength for each mix design is used as input in the model. The transgranular ratio for
each mix design is taken according to experimental results in Figure 3.14 and 3.15. Results can
be seen in Figure 4.4.
The model predictions in Figure 4.4 generally follow the right slopes but are conservative, which
could be expected when the target strength is set as the upper limit, corresponding to no trans-
granular failure at all.
For the compressive strength of RCA 20-90, the slope of the model
prediction is very off towards the higher target strengths. This is the direct consequence of the
high values of transgranular ratio that were found for those specimens, while the strength was
less affected.
40
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.3: Test results and model prediction for the series with varying replacement ratio.
Figure 4.4: Test results and model prediction for the series with varying target strength.
Even though the models have some obvious flaws due to simplifications and wrong assumptions,
they make it clear that transgranular ratio can not be used as the sole predictor of strength
reduction due to RCA replacement.
41
==PAGE:56==
5.
Discussion
The studies in this thesis have involved an extensive experimental programme, ranging from the
physical properties of natural and recycled aggregate fractions to the behaviour of fresh and
hardened concrete made with these aggregates, including assessment of the fractured surfaces
after experiencing both sliding and separation failure. The approach has made it possible to assess
the influence of replacing NA with RCA in structural concrete in detail, especially regarding
fracture.
Despite of the subject of strength properties of concrete with RCA in no way being fully covered
in literature, the application of existing knowledge and experience regarding concrete in general
made it possible to conduct systematic and meaningful analyses of the materials. The applied
fracture surface analysis was to a great extent based on a trial and error due to limited preexisting
experience of the adopted approach. The results of this part are thus harder to validate, though
interesting.
Determination of the physical properties of the used aggregates was an important initial step in
the experimental work. The use of standardised test methods allowed for the making of a large
number of different concrete mix designs, where as far as possible only one parameter at a time
was varied (w/c-ratio or replacement ratio). Determination of the point at which the aggregate
particles was in the saturated and surface-dried state proved especially difficult for the porous
RCA fractions. This probably resulted in an overestimation of the water absorption capacity of
the RCA aggregates and a general uncertainty related to the absorption capacity of the natural
aggregates. The size of the error is hard to verify, but it was observed that the slump of concrete
mixes with coarse RCA was generally higher, which strongly indicates that more water than
intended was added due to this.
Theoretically, it is also possible that the RCA particles are less angular, which would increase
workability for the same water content. The only information on this is the visual assessment,
where the corresponding coarse fractions look rather similar. Further investigation of this would
be interesting but more obviously, the absorption capacity of RCA should be treated in more
detail. An alternative and likely more exact method to determine the absorption capacity of
crushed concrete aggregates is discussed in [33]. Here, the sample is continuously weighed as it
is dried at a high temperature. It would be interesting to compare the results of such tests to
the ones found here.
Another possible source of additional water in the concretes is the determination of actual water
content in the aggregates on each day of casting. Large variations in water content from day to
day could be expected since the materials were stored outside in different weather conditions,
which makes it hard to judge if the test results are realistic.
The water content is mainly prone to underestimation, if the samples were not completely dried
before the final weighing. Further, since the RCA particles are much more porous and thus able
to hold much more water, it is possible that the water content in those are even more prone to
underestimation. This uncertainty likely results in too much water being added to the concrete
as well. Combined, the possibility of the actual w/c-ratios being higher than intended is large,
especially for mixes with RCA. The large fluctuations in the measured slump values for especially
RCA 20-90 and REF 20-90 mixes enhance this suspicion.
42
==PAGE:57==
Under the production process in a large-scale facility, the conditions regarding water content
could probably be controlled better through the use of e.g.
moisture meters for continuous
measurements of the moisture content in the aggregates. On the other hand, the properties of
recycled aggregates could be expected to vary more than natural ones between batches, which
would require increased control.
In agreement with existing literature, a reduction in both compressive and tensile splitting
strength was found with increasing replacement of NA with RCA. However, due to the fac-
tors just discussed, it must be argued that the strength reduction is caused by several different
factors such as increased water and air content, weakened bond strength, and maybe a higher
degree of aggregate rupture.
According to the performed fracture surface analyses, the coarse RCA fractions clearly rupture
more than the virgin ones in both compressive and tensile failure. It is not obvious to connect
that trend directly to a decrease in strength for any of the series. It might be possible that
the tensile strength is mostly affected by additional cracks already present in the RCA and the
compressive strength being more sensitive to a weakening of the bond strength with the RCA.
Also here, indications were thus found that at least some of the strength decrease is attributed
to other factors than the reduced strength of the recycled aggregates. If that is in fact the case,
there might be a possibility to improve the mechanical properties of RCA concrete by e.g. being
able to control the free water content better.
The relatively strict limits for the use of RCA in structural concrete given in the standards are
not necessarily justified by the available results of strength parameters. The strength reduction
with increasing replacement ratio is linear and thus predictable. Further, the reduction of both
tensile and compressive strength was found to be larger for lower strength concretes. According
to the available results, high strength concrete with RCA performs almost just as good as the
concrete with virgin aggregates. On the other hand, the material is generally harder to control
with the addition of RCA and some caution must of course be practised. At the same time,
it must be kept in mind that the recycled aggregates used in this project are produced from a
strong donor concrete, which probably means that they behave more like virgin aggregates than
other types. The observations made here are not necessarily valid for other types of RCA.
For the empirical strength prediction of RCA concrete, the analysis indicated that knowledge
of the replacement ratio and degree of transgranular failure alone is not sufficient to accurately
predict the strength of concrete with RCA - at least not with the simple model adopted here.
Further, the work in this project is based on only one type of natural aggregate and one type
of recycled aggregate containing the same NA. For different aggregate properties, it must be
expected that the differences are even greater.
It is of course also interesting whether the behaviour of concrete with RCA is the same when more
complicated and realistic stress states are applied. The great agreement of all tested concrete
mixes, with and without RCA, with the relationship between tensile and compressive strength
given in Eurocode 2 indicates that RCA concrete behaves comparable to conventional concrete,
with a proportional strength reduction.
The method adopted in this project to assess the fractured surfaces showed good potential, at
least within the limited possibilities of validating the results. Apart from having to colour the
cement paste, only a decent camera is really needed in order for the method to work, which
makes it more simple than other known methods requiring laser scanners or the like.
43
==PAGE:58==
A clear weakness is that the colour filter has to be adapted for each specific cement colour and
evidently works better with certain nuances. However, it is not impossible to imagine that an
AI algorithm could be trained on the images with detected aggregate particles that came out of
this project. If an algorithm was able to learn to distinguish between cement paste and natural
aggregates regardless of the cement colour, the method would be much more stable and applicable
to a larger number of cases. Further, it would be valuable to be able to distinguish between old
paste and natural aggregates within the RCA particles. The present results namely do not say
anything about the type of transgranular fracture of RCA particles.
As already mentioned, a more extensive validation of the image processing results would be
valuable. One way would be to simultaneously measure one of or both the established parameters,
surface roughness and fractal dimension, of the same test specimens. If there is a correlation
between those and the ratio of transgranular failure, the latter might be a good and accessible
alternative. Another way to validate the output of the image processing could be to cut open
some undamaged cylinders and apply the aggregate detection to those surfaces.
The found
aggregate ratio as well as grain size distribution could be held up against the known mix design,
which should match for any random section through the material.
44
==PAGE:59==
6.
Conclusions and future work
6.1
Conclusion
Based on the outcomes of the work throughout this project, some observations can be stated.
Initial testing of the physical properties of the aggregates used for the concrete in the project
was important in order to obtain comparable concrete mix designs for further investigation.
The virgin and recycled concrete aggregates had similar grading curves, which enabled design of
comparable concrete mixes with varying amounts of RCA. However, the porosities and thus water
absorption capacities were much higher for the RCA fractions, as could be expected. The free
water content in the fresh concrete was hard to control, and a big factor in this was probably
an overestimation of absorption capacity of RCA fraction.
The uncertainty can possibly be
minimised by adopting another test method. Fine RCA possibly caused more air to be captured
in the paste.
The applied image recognition in combination with coloured cement paste successfully enabled
detection of fractured aggregate particles in most of the failure surfaces, where the red colour
was clearly more efficient for the applied method. Increased amounts of aggregate fracture in
surfaces of concrete mixes with RCA were found, and the trend was more pronounced for higher
concrete strengths.
A relation between replacement ratio and strength reduction was observed, as well as increased
aggregate fracture.
However, no direct correlation between aggregate fracture and strength
reduction could be proved. Other factors such as bond strength and complications in controlling
water and air content are probably more important. Thus, replacement ratio alone turned out
to be a stronger predictor of strength reduction than combined with aggregate rupture.
A simple, partly empirical model seeking to predict strength reduction based on replacement ratio
and aggregate fracture was proposed. It performed acceptably given the great simplifications but
probably mostly due to the influence of the replacement ratio. A simple linear strength reduction
trend would be more accurate for the available test results. The results indicate that a detailed
micromechanical model to predict strength of RCA concrete does not necessarily have to take
increased aggregate fracture into account, but more focus should be put on the bond strength
between the new paste and the RCA.
6.2
Future work
The project has touched many fields of interest regarding strength and fracture of concrete
with RCA and thus, many areas are still left for further investigations. The ones deemed most
important are mentioned below.
A determination of the water absorption capacity of the RCA that is as accurate as possible,
will be of great value in the pursuit of controlling the free water content of the fresh concrete.
Another method more suitable for RCA might be adopted. In relation to this, obtaining more
stable slump and air content values for the investigated concrete mixes would contribute to a
better determination of the reason behind the found strength decrease in concretes with RCA.
Perhaps, it would even be possible show that the strength reduction could be minimised by this.
45
==PAGE:60==
The method adopted to analyse the fractured concrete surfaces showed potential but needs more
validation, e.g. by comparison to established fracture surface roughness parameters, to gain more
credibility. The simple python script can be developed further to include distinction between
old paste and natural aggregates, possibly ultimately without colouring the cement paste. Then,
application to various other cases could be imagined.
Finally, the whole reason for conducting these investigations is the desire to ultimately be able
to apply the gained knowledge to real-life structural purposes, where the impacts are far from
the idealised conditions investigated here. More knowledge regarding the behaviour of fracture
in concrete with RCA is necessary in order to model such situations.
46
==PAGE:61==
References
1.
Andersen, L. Strength of Confined Concrete - Applying Theory of Plasticity including Sub-
macrosopic Composite Structure of Concrete PhD thesis (Aarhus University - Department
of Engineering, 2017).
2.
Betonhåndbogen Revision B (Dansk Betonforening, IDA, 2023).
3.
Bradski, G. The OpenCV Library. Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools. Documentation:
https://opencv.org/ (2000).
4.
Butler, L., West, J. S. & Tighe, S. L. Effect of recycled concrete coarse aggregate from mul-
tiple sources on the hardened properties of concrete with equivalent compressive strength.
Construction and Building Materials 47, 1292–1301 (2013).
5.
Cement og Beton - Håndbogen om cement, beton og mørtel 25th ed. (Aalborg Portland,
2023).
6.
Chakraborty, S. & Subramaniam, K. V. L. Fracture and Shear Behaviours of Recycled
Aggregate Concrete in Building for the Future: Durable, Sustainable, Resilient (Springer
Nature Switzerland, 2023), 468–475.
7.
Dai, M., Wang, X., Cheng, C., Chen, Z. & Deng, J. Efficient Evaluation of Concrete Fracture
Surface Roughness Using Fringe Projection Technology. Materials, 16, 1–20 (2023).
8.
Danish, A. & Mosaberpanah, M. A. A review on recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) char-
acteristics to promote RCA utilization in developing sustainable recycled aggregate concrete
(RAC). European Journal of Environmental and Civil Engineering, 26, 6505–6539 (2022).
9.
DS/EN 1097-6: Tests for mechanical and physical properties of aggregates - Part 6: Deter-
mination of particle density and water absorption (Dansk Standard, CEN, 2022).
10.
DS/EN 12390-3: Testing hardened concrete - Part 3: Compressive strength of test specimens
(Dansk Standard, CEN, 2019).
11.
DS/EN 12390-6: Testing hardened concrete - Part 6: Tensile splitting strength of test spec-
imens (Dansk Standard, CEN, 2012).
12.
DS/EN 1992-1-1, Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures - Part 1-1: General rules and
rules for buildings (Dansk Standard, CEN, 2008).
13.
DS/EN 206 DK NA: Concrete - Specification, performance, production and conformity -
Rules for Application of EN 206 in Denmark (Dansk Standard, CEN, 2023).
14.
DS/EN 206: Concrete - Specification, performance, production and conformity (Dansk Stan-
dard, CEN, 2021).
15.
DS/EN 933-1: Tests for geometrical properties of aggregates - Part 1: Determination of
particle size distribution - Sieving method (Dansk Standard, CEN, 2013).
16.
DS/EN ISO 17892-3: Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory testing of soil -
Part 3: Determination of particle density (Dansk Standard, CEN, 2015).
17.
Faber, M. H. Statistics and Probability Theory - In Pursiut of Engineering Decision Support
1st ed. (Springer Science+Business Media, 2012).
18.
Gatis, D. rembg Library. Documentation: https://github.com/danielgatis/rembg (2022).
19.
Hansen, K. K. Grusøvelse 2023 - Grusprøvniing og proportionering (2023).
I
==PAGE:62==
20.
Hansen, T. C. Beton i henhold til DS 411-84 2nd ed. (Laboratoriet for Bygningsmaterialer,
Danmarks tekniske Højskole, 1985).
21.
Issa, M. A. & Hammad, A. M. Assessment and evaluation of fractal dimension of concrete
fracture surface digitized images. Cement and Concrete Research, 24, 325–334 (1994).
22.
Koschan, A. & Abidi, M. Digital Color - Image Processing (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2007).
23.
Lia, D., Jina, L., Dua, X. & Liub, J. Determination of intergranular and transgranular
failure of mesoscale model concrete under mode-I fracture. Theoretical and Applied Fracture
Mechanics 107, 1–13 (2020).
24.
Mehta, P. K. & Monteiro, P. J. M. Concrete: Microstructure, Properties, and Materials
4th ed. (McGraw-Hill Education, New York, 2014).
25.
Nielsen, M. P. & Hoang, L. C. Limit Analysis and Concrete Plasticity (CRC Press, Taylor
& Francis Group, 2011).
26.
Ollivier, J., Maso, J. & Bourdette, B. Interfacial transition zone in concrete. Advanced
Cement Based Materials 2, 30–38 (1995).
27.
Özturan, T. & Cecen, C. Effect of coarse aggregate type on mechanical properties of con-
cretes with different strengths. Cement and Concrete Research, Vol 27, 165–170 (1997).
28.
Reinecker, L. & Jørgensen, P. S. Den gode opgave 5th ed. (Samfundslitteratur, 2017).
29.
Ren, Q., Pacheco, J. & de Brito, J. 3D mesoscale modelling of recycled aggregate concrete.
Construction and Building Materials 411 (2024).
30.
Silva, R., de Brito, J. & Dhir, R. Tensile strength behaviour of recycled aggregate concrete.
Construction and Building Materials 83, 108–118 (2015).
31.
Silva, R., de Brito, J. & Dhir, R. The influence of the use of recycled aggregates on the
compressive strength of concrete: a review. European Journal of Environmental and Civil
Engineering, 19, 825–849 (2015).
32.
Tabsh, S. W. & Abdelfatah, A. S. Influence of recycled concrete aggregates on strength
properties of concrete. Construction and Building Materials 23, 163–1167 (2008).
33.
Thrysøe, J. & Frølich, L. Nyt fra Aalborg Portland: Absorption i tilslag til beton (2019).
34.
Wu, K.-R., Liu, J.-Y., Zhang, D. & Yan, A. Rupture probability of coarse aggregate on
fracture surface of concrete. Cement and Concrete Research 29, 1983–1987 (1999).
35.
Xiao, J., Li, W., Sun, Z. & Shah, S. P. Crack Propagation in Recycled Aggregate Concrete
under Uniaxial Compressive Loading. ACI Materials Journal/July-August, 451–461 (2012).
36.
Yan, A., Wu, K.-R., Zhang, D. & Yao, W. Influence of concrete composition on the char-
acterization of fracture surface. Cement & Concrete Composites 25, 153–157 (2003).
37.
Zhang, J.-P. Strength of cracked concrete: Shear strength of conventional reinforced concrete
beams, deep beams, corbels, and prestressed reinforced concrete beams without shear rein-
forcement English. Part 2: Micromechanical modelling of shear failure in cement paste and
concrete. PhD thesis (Technical University of Denmark, 1997).
38.
Zhang, M.-H. & Gjørv, O. E. Microstructure of the interfacial zone between lightweight
aggregate and cement paste. Cement and Concrete Research 20, 610–618 (1990).
II
==PAGE:63==
