==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Occupant-Centric Daylight Assessment
Investigating the Relationship Between Subjective Assessments and
Spatial Daylight Autonomy in Oﬀices
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Jørn Toftum
Co-supervisors: Natalia Giraldo Vasquez & Luca Zaniboni
Advisor: Helle F. Rasmussen
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Building 402
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
People’s perception has been used to establish daylight performance metrics targets,
such as UDI and DGP. Previous studies have correlated the perception of daylit/non-
daylit areas in educational facilities to the spatial Daylight Autonomy. This study
investigated the relationship between spatial Daylight Autonomy (sDA) and subjec-
tive assessments in oﬀices by assessing illuminance and the perceived daylit area in
the room. Environmental data such as vertical and horizontal illuminance, indoor
temperature and air quality were collected through a field study in oﬀices at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark. Simultaneously with the measurements, nine volunteers
answered questionnaires to obtain their subjective assessments. The measurements
were conducted on separate days, under two different conditions: one with blinds/cur-
tains as the participants typically use and one with the blind/curtains open. Under
both scenarios, the electric light was always off. Besides correlating illuminance levels
with occupant perceptions and preferences, the study develops a predictive model for
sDA targets based on occupant satisfaction. The research findings demonstrate a
stronger correlation between occupant satisfaction and the proportion of daylit space
as opposed to illuminance levels. This can be attributed to the negative impact of
high illuminance levels on occupant comfort due to glare. Consequently, enhanced
occupant satisfaction can be attained through daylighting standards that prioritize a
larger fraction of daylit area. Therefore, this approach aims to optimise daylighting
in indoor environments for well-being by providing insights for more occupant-centric
standards in daylighting.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my sincere gratitude to my thesis co-supervisors, Natalia Giraldo
Vasquez and Luca Zaniboni, for their invaluable guidance, support, and encourage-
ment during this project. Their expertise and insights have been crucial in shaping
this research. I also appreciate my supervisor, Jørn Toftum, for his involvement. Fur-
thermore, I am deeply grateful to Helle F. Rasmussen for her contribution to the
conceptualisation and proposal of this project. I extend my appreciation to the par-
ticipants who generously shared their time, without whom this study would not have
been possible. Additionally, I am sincerely thankful for the support and resources
provided by the staff and faculty of DTU, which have been crucial to the successful
completion of this work.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
ASE
Annual Sunlight Exposure
BRE
Building Research Establishment
BREEAM
Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method
CBDM
Climate-Based Daylight Metrics
cDA
Continuous Daylight Autonomy
CS
Circadian Stimulus
DA
Daylight Autonomy
DF
Daylight Factor
DPG
Daylight Glare Probability
EML
Equivalent Melanopic Lux
IES
Illuminating Engineering Society
IF
Image-Forming
IQR
Interquartile Range
IWBI
International WELL Building Institute
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
NIF
Non-Image-Forming
sDA
Spatial Daylight Autonomy
UDI
Useful Daylight Illuminance
US-GBC
United States Green Building Council
WFR
Window-to-Floor Ratio
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
Introduction
1
1
Background
3
1.1
Investigating the diverse aspects of light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Lighting response physiology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.2
Quantifying lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.2.1
Lighting quantity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.2.2
Biological potency of light
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Utilizing daylight for well-being and energy eﬀiciency . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.1
International frameworks for daylight requirements . . . . . . .
7
1.2.1.1
American standard IES LM-83-12 . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.1.2
European standard CEN 17037:2018 . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.2
Voluntary certification schemes for daylight requirements
. . .
9
1.2.2.1
BREEAM - Building Research Establishment Envi-
ronmental Assessment Method . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.2.2
LEED - Leadership in Energy and Environmental De-
sign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.2.3
WELL Building Standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Previous research on subjective daylight assessment in Climate Based
Daylight Metrics (CBDMs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.1
Integrating subjective assessments in metrics
. . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.2
Relation between subjective assessments and CBDMs - Case
studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.2.1
The influence of cultural background . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.2.2
Inconsistencies between simulated and perceived day-
light conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3.2.3
Correlation between subjective responses and CBDMs
13
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
2
Field study
15
2.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.1
Rooms and participants selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.2
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.3
Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.4.1
Correlation study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.5
Satisfaction prediction modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.6
Identifying Outliers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2
Implementation of the model in previous study . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Results
23
3.1
Data inclusion and exclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Indoor environmental conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Visual conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.1
Distance from window . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.2
Daylight amount on the desk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.3
Spatial daylight suﬀiciency and uniformity in the room . . . . .
30
3.5
Association between illuminance, daylit area and subjective responses
32
3.6
Satisfaction prediction model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.6.1
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.6.2
Cross-validation and model training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6.3
Model performance indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.7
Implementation of the prediction model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Conclusion
39
Appendices
41
Appendix A Previous study
43
Appendix B Questionnaire
75
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
The importance of daylighting in buildings is dual-fold, encompassing both energy
savings and its considerable impact on the well-being of occupants. While prevailing
building standards predominantly emphasize the energy-saving benefits of daylighting,
recent research has underscored its pivotal role in enhancing occupant well-being.
In particular, there is a growing interest in understanding the correlation between
Climate-Based Daylight Metrics (CBDMs) and subjective evaluations.
Spatial Daylight Autonomy (sDA) has emerged as a widely utilised metric for
evaluating daylight availability within buildings. Since 2018, it has been integrated
into the European Standard 17037 [1] and numerous national building regulations,
such as BR18 [2] in Denmark. Despite its extensive implementation, sDA is primarily
outlined to ensure adequate daylighting in rooms to diminish reliance on electric
lighting, but it does not directly encompass occupant satisfaction.
Building upon prior research at DTU (see Appendix A) that identified deficiencies
in existing daylighting regulations and established new benchmarks for appraising day-
light provision in educational buildings, this study aims to deepen the understanding
of how daylight influences occupant perception, preference, and satisfaction in oﬀice
environments. This involves a combination of objective measurements and subjective
assessments by occupants. Specifically, the study aims to:
• Determine horizontal and vertical illuminance thresholds that align with occu-
pant perception, preferences, and satisfaction.
• Explore the relationship between the perceived illuminated area in a room and
occupant satisfaction.
• Develop a predictive model for satisfaction based on the sDA metric.
• Assess the proposed new threshold indicators from previous study (see Appendix
A) in relation to predicted occupant satisfaction.
The study seeks to provide insights into CBDMs, particularly sDA, regarding
occupant satisfaction. Ultimately, the aspiration is to promote daylight assessments
in buildings that are more focused on occupant needs and preferences.
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Background
This section presents a comprehensive overview of the theoretical framework under-
pinning this study.
This encompasses the discussion of both image-forming (IF)
and non-image-forming (NIF) impacts of light, the physiological basis of lighting re-
sponses, metrics for light quantification, the biological potency of light, international
building standards and certification systems, as well as prior scholarly investigations
concerning subjectivity and Climate-Based Daylight Metrics (CBDM).
1.1
Investigating the diverse aspects of light
The quality of lighting is intimately tied to the extent to which it meets the needs and
preferences of occupants. While it cannot be objectively measured, it must consider
many applications and characteristics, including but not limited to well-being, safety,
architectural impact, and the illuminated environment [3]. ”Integrative lighting”, also
known as ”human-centric lighting”, encompasses both the visual (IF) and non-visual
(NIF) effects of lighting on human health, offering physiological and psychological
benefits [4].
1.1.1
Lighting response physiology
The term ”light” refers to the visible radiation within the wavelength range of 380 nm
to 800 nm, which evokes the visual sensation in humans [5]. The boundaries of the
visible spectrum may vary, approximately from 360 nm to 400 nm up to 760 nm to 830
nm, due to the radiant flux reaching the retina and individual response [6]. Within the
visible spectrum, the ”radiant flux” is defined as the photometric quantity ”luminous
flux”, representing the light power emitted from a light source in all directions [7].
As depicted in Figure 1.1, light emitted from a source leads to physiological light
effects through various mediating factors and neuroanatomical processes. The retinal
photoreceptors, including cones, rods, and intrinsically photosensitive retinal gan-
glion cells (ipRGCs), are activated by incoming light, transmitting diverse stimuli to
different brain regions. [8] [9] [10]
The visual pathway involves the optic nerve, chiasm, and tract to relay infor-
mation to areas involved in image formation, such as the lateral geniculate nucleus
(LGN), intergeniculate leaflet (IGL), and the visual cortex of the occipital lobe. Fur-
thermore, light information from the retina is conveyed via the retinohypothalamic
tract (RHT) to the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), regulating circadian
neuroendocrine rhythms. [11] [12]
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Background
Figure 1.1. Diagrammatic illustration of the physiological processes in lighting response
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Investigating the diverse aspects of light
5
Traditionally, it was believed that rods and cones were the sole receptors in the
eye to respond to light stimuli. However, the discovery of ipRGCs has unveiled a dual
role for the human eye in response to light: facilitating vision through image-forming
(IF) effects and preserving health through non-image-forming (NIF) effects [13]. The
mediating factors that activate the retinal photoreceptors and account for the NIF
effects of light have been established over time [14] [15] [16] [17] [18]. In summary,
Khademagha et al. [13] identified six factors that elicit NIF light effects: spectrum,
quantity, directionality, timing, duration, and history. Nevertheless, it has been noted
that when daylight serves as the primary lighting source, not all six mentioned light
factors bear the same characteristics. Hence, the NIF light factors can be categorised
into two groups: luminous and temporal [13].
1.1.2
Quantifying lighting
The acknowledgement of the effects of lighting, particularly the non-visual impacts on
human health, known as non-visual effects (NIF), has been widely recognised. Tradi-
tional building regulations and frameworks have predominantly emphasised metrics
assessing the visual aspects of lighting while overlooking the equally, if not more cru-
cial, NIF effects on human health [13]. Measuring light involves not only assessing the
intensity and distribution to meet occupants’ task-related needs but also evaluating
its biological impact on humans. This evaluation involves studying the influence of
light on mood, circadian rhythms, and overall well-being.
1.1.2.1
Lighting quantity
Kruisselbrink et al. [19] have identified eleven key lighting quality characteristics
in the literature. They have observed that the amount of light is associated with
lighting quality and impacts occupant satisfaction and performance [19]. Generally,
higher light levels are linked to enhanced satisfaction and performance. However, it
is noteworthy that while performance maintains consistency, satisfaction experiences
a notable decline at high light levels [20]. The quantity of light can be evaluated
through illuminance and luminance, as illustrated in Figure 1.2.
• Illuminance E(Lux) is defined as the amount of luminous flux incident on a
specific area. It reveals the amount of light that reaches a particular location:
Ev = dΦv
dA
(1.1)
where Φv is luminous flux and A is the area on which the luminous flux is
incident [21]. Luminous flux Φv (Lumens) is the total luminous energy emitted,
transferred or received per unit of time [22].
• Luminance Lv(Candela/m2) is described as the density of luminous intensity
relative to the projected area in a certain direction at a given point:
Lv = dIv
dA
1
cosα
(1.2)
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Background
where Iv is the luminous intensity, A is the area and α is the angle between the
normal to the surface at a certain point and direction [23]. Luminous intensity
Iv(Candela) refers to the density of luminous flux for a certain angle in a given
direction [24].
Figure 1.2. Lighting metrics
1.1.2.2
Biological potency of light
Two prominent methods can be used to assess the biological potency of light: the
Equivalent Melanopic Lux (EML) and the Circadian Stimulus (CS).
• Equivalent Melanopic Lux (EML) (m −lux) is calculated using the spectral
response of photopigments in rods, cones, and ipRGCs [25] [26]:
EML = E × R
(1.3)
where E represents the photopic illuminance and R signifies the melanopic ratio.
Melanopic ratio R denotes the proportion of melanopsin-activating radiation to
photopic-activating radiation multiplied by 1.218 and typically ranges between
0.45 and 1.70 [26].
However, the only widely accepted method for defining the instantaneous bio-
logical potency of a light stimulus is given by CIE [25] and refers to Melanopic
Equivalent Daylight Illuminance ED65
v,mel (Lux). ED65
v,mel pertains to the illumi-
nance of standard daylight D65 at a specific location that generates an equiva-
lent melanopic irradiance to the test source:
ED65
v,mel = E × γD65
mel,v
(1.4)
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Utilizing daylight for well-being and energy eﬀiciency
7
where E denotes the photopic illuminance, and γD65
mel,v is determined by the
melanopic eﬀicacy of luminous radiation from a specified light source divided
by the melanopic eﬀicacy of luminous radiation from D65. The value of γD65
mel,v
ranges approximately from 0.40 to 1.60. [25]
The relation between Equation 1.3 and 1.4 is expressed as:
EML ≈ED65
v,mel × 1.103
(1.5)
• Circadian Stimulus (CS) is associated with the nighttime inhibition of the hor-
mone melatonin, influenced by both the quantity and spectrum of light, with
a recommended exposure time of one hour [27] [28] [29] [30]. CS represents a
connection between the retina and the pineal gland based on spectral sensitivity
differences in the ”blue” and ”yellow” channels, from which Circadian Light val-
ues are derived. A logistic function with four parameters is used in conjunction
with Circadian Light data to determine CS, the span of which is from 0.00 to
0.70. [25] [26]
According to Houser et al., the reliance of EML and ED65
v,mel solely on photopigment
signals is considered a limitation due to the ambiguous nature of how photoreceptors
integrate and process such signals in the brain. The CIE system’s output values may
not fully represent the impact of light on non-visual reactions in real-world situations.
Nevertheless, it remains the predominant method for quantifying the immediate bio-
logical effectiveness of a light stimulus [31]. Additionally, it is noted that CS may not
consistently capture the influence of light on other non-visual reactions, and there is
no direct correlation between melatonin suppression and circadian patterns [32].
1.2
Utilizing daylight for well-being and energy eﬀiciency
The existing requirements regarding suﬀicient daylight conditions have predominantly
centred on enhancing visual performance with the goal of reducing electric light en-
ergy consumption [1] [33] [34]. However, it is essential to recognise that, aside from
its energy-saving advantages, daylighting significantly influences the well-being of in-
dividuals. When assessing daylighting quality, it is crucial to acknowledge that solely
relying on photometric measurements may not fully encompass the subjective nature
of the lighting environment.
Hence, subjective assessments of daylight conditions
should be integrated to comprehensively grasp and improve human satisfaction with
daylight [35].
1.2.1
International frameworks for daylight requirements
The presence of increased daylight has the potential to enhance user well-being, health,
mood, and overall performance [35]. In 2018, the European framework EN17037 was
initially introduced to ensure adequate daylight within buildings [1]. Similarly, in
North America, the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) has defined standards for
evaluating the provision of natural light in buildings [34].
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Background
Both methodologies include a target illuminance and a minimum fraction of space
that should receive the target illuminance. However, in IES LM-83-12 [34], the dif-
ferent recommended levels are determined by adjusting the fraction of space, while
in EN17037 [1], they are based on varying illuminance thresholds.
1.2.1.1
American standard IES LM-83-12
The IES LM-83-12 [34] metric provides a comprehensive overview of building day-
lighting performance. In 2012, the Spatial Daylight Autonomy (sDA) metric was
first introduced to assess the appropriate amount of daylight for a given area. SDA
shows the percentage of the floor area that is higher than a certain level of illumi-
nance for half of the hours between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. Table 1.1 shows the levels of
recommendation to achieve various levels of daylighting performance based on project
goals.
Level of
Recommendation
Target illuminance
Fraction of space for
the target level
Fraction of analysis
period for the
minimum threshold
ET(lux)
Fplane(%)
Ftime(%)
Nominally accepted
300
55%
50%
Preferred
300
75%
50%
Table 1.1. Spatial daylight criteria according to LM-83-12
1.2.1.2
European standard CEN 17037:2018
EN17037 [1] framework for evaluating daylight provision in indoor spaces involves
two distinct calculation methods as follows:
• Method 1 relies on determining the daylight factor (DF) for a specific geo-
graphic location. It represents the ratio of illuminance at a particular indoor
point to the median external diffuse illuminance, both measured under a CIE
Standard Overcast Sky.
DF(%) =
Et
Ev,d,med
× 100
(1.6)
where Et (lux) denotes the illuminance at a specific indoor point, and Ev,d,med
(lux) represents the median external diffuse illuminance. The latter value varies
based on geographical location, for instance, in Denmark, Ev,d,med equals 14200
lux.
• Method 2 employs dynamic simulations to calculate illuminance levels for a
minimum of half of the daylight hours, considering the climatic data of a spe-
cific geographic area.
Table 1.2 provides the recommended levels and their
corresponding illuminance levels. [1]
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Utilizing daylight for well-being and energy eﬀiciency
9
Level of
Recommendation
Target illuminance
Fraction of space for
the target level
Minimum target
illuminance
Fraction of space for
the minimum target
level
Fraction of analysis
period for the
minimum threshold
ET(lux)
Fplane(%)
ETM(lux)
Fplane(%)
Ftime(%)
Minimum
300
50%
100
95%
50%
Medium
500
50%
300
95%
50%
High
750
50%
500
95%
50%
Table 1.2.
Recommendations of daylight provision by daylight openings in vertical and
inclined surfaces
1.2.2
Voluntary certification schemes for daylight requirements
The emergence of the green architecture movement has driven the creation of envi-
ronmental certification programs that establish minimum daylight levels for regularly
occupied spaces [36]. Numerous voluntary certification programs globally integrate
daylight criteria into building environmental standards, which are in line with current
regulations. Notable examples include BREEAM, LEED, and WELL.
1.2.2.1
BREEAM - Building Research Establishment Environmental
Assessment Method
BREEAM [37], a British sustainability scheme established by BRE (Building Re-
search Establishment), was first introduced in the UK for new oﬀice buildings in
1990, with implementation commencing in 1988. Several European countries have
implemented country-specific BREEAM schemes managed by National Scheme Op-
erators (NSOs). In cases where country-specific schemes are not in place, BREEAM
International is utilised.
BREEAM International offers two options for assessing
daylight and stipulates varying minimum requirements for different building types:
• Option 1 involves the calculation of the DF, with BREEAM specifying the
minimum average DF based on latitude and the required minimum compliance
areas within the building. Additionally, the project must adhere to uniformity
criteria.
• Option 2 is centered on meeting the average and minimum point daylight illumi-
nance requirements for the minimum compliance areas within the building. [37]
1.2.2.2
LEED - Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LEED [38] was established by the United States Green Building Council (USGBC), a
non-profit organisation, and has evolved since 1998 based on energy and environmen-
tal principles. Similar to BREEAM, LEED incorporates country-specific adaptations,
but a unified version of LEED is utilised worldwide. The daylight criteria in LEED
offer three compliance paths/options that are based on the IES LM-83-12 and are as
follows:
• Option 1 is based on sDA300,50% and annual sunlight exposure ASE1000,250. For
sDA300,50%, the typically occupied floor area that achieves at least 300 lux for
50% of the time should be 45%, 65% or 75%.
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Background
• Option 2 is based on the simulation of illuminance levels that should be between
300-3000 lux at 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. The simulations should be made under a
clear-sky day with 15 days of the equinox, and the typically occupied floor area
should be 55%, 75% or 90%.
• Option 3 is based on the measurement of illuminance levels that should be
between 300-3000 lux at 9 a.m.
and 3 p.m.
The measurements should be
conducted two or three days per year, and the typically occupied floor area
should be 55%, 75% or 90%. [38]
1.2.2.3
WELL Building Standard
WELL [39] is a sustainability framework regulated by IWBI (International WELL
Building Institute). Its development commenced in 2008, and the initial release of
the WELL standards occurred in 2014. Certain subcategory criteria align with those
of LEED or BREEAM certifications, enabling projects to potentially attain multiple
certifications. Within the WELL framework, three daylight-related categories exist,
each offering various options:
• ”Light Exposure and Education” encompasses requirements for sDA200,40% to
be met in at least 40% of the typically occupied floor area, in addition to
minimum light transmittance and glazing area requirements.
• ”Circadian Lighting Design” presents two options for sustaining circadian health
through adequate light exposure, involving measurements on a vertical plane
and at eye level from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.
– Option 1 specifies EML levels of 150 (136 melanopic equivalent daylight
D65) or 240 (218 melanopic equivalent daylight D65)
– Option 2 mandates EML levels of 120 (109 melanopic equivalent daylight
D65) or 180 (163 melanopic equivalent daylight D65) if the project obtains
credit from the ”Enhanced Daylight Access” category.
• ”Enhanced Daylight Access”, which, among other criteria, requires the attain-
ment of sDA300,50% for over 55% or 75% of the floor area. [39]
1.3
Previous research on subjective daylight assessment in
Climate Based Daylight Metrics (CBDMs)
In order to gain a better understanding of human visual perception and satisfaction
with daylighting conditions, it is imperative to take into account subjective assess-
ments. [35]
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Previous research on subjective daylight assessment in Climate Based Daylight Metrics (CBDMs)
11
1.3.1
Integrating subjective assessments in metrics
Veitch and Newsham [40] proposed a behavioral-oriented definition of lighting quality,
encompassing visual and post-visual performance, social interaction, communication,
mood, health, safety, and aesthetics [40]. While assessing lighting quality behaviorally
in the early design stages is challenging, insights from existing spaces can facilitate
the comparison of subjective evaluations to objective measurements for determining
minimum acceptable thresholds for daylit environments [41].
Tunahan et al. [35] highlighted that subjective assessment of daylight conditions
primarily involves questionnaires [35], addressing a broad range of topics from envi-
ronmental exposure to specific perceptions and satisfaction of the participants under
the tested conditions [42]. Interviews, though less commonly used, are also viable for
the subjective evaluation of daylight [33].
Subjective evaluations are often combined with results from simulations and field
or laboratory measurements. Comparing subjective perceptions of daylit and non-
daylit spaces with simulation results allows for the prediction of daylight availabil-
ity [43] [44] [45].
Additionally, methods combining participants’ preferences and
satisfaction with instantaneous [46] and long-term illuminance evaluations on their
workstations can estimate daylight perception [46] [35] [47].
High-dynamic imag-
ing [48], 3D representations [49], and virtual reality-generated scenes [50] are also
employed for subjective assessment.
In addition to questionnaires, subjective daylight assessment can complement par-
ticipants’ monitoring data and self-written records. Wearable light meters can be
utilised to monitor daylight and light exposure [51]. This method, combined with
tracking daily routines and activities offers a comprehensive approach to compre-
hending individuals’ sleep patterns and their exposure to daylight [52].
1.3.2
Relation between subjective assessments and CBDMs - Case
studies
The investigation of the relationship between CBDMs and occupants’ satisfaction
with daylight adequacy has gained more attention in recent years. Thirteen of the
published studies related to subjective assessments and CBDMs [53] [54] [55] [46] [56]
[42] [57] [35] [58] [59] [43] [44] [45] are related to higher education buildings, while one
study has been conducted for high school buildings [60] and residences [61]. Most of
the studies have been conducted in Asia [53] [61] [46] [56] [57] [60] [58] [45], followed
by the United States of America [54] [55] [59] [43] [44]. Only two studies in Europe
have been performed in Italy [42] and the United Kingdom [35]. Lastly, part of one
study refers to Africa [44]. The geographical representation of the studies can be seen
in Figure 1.3.
1.3.2.1
The influence of cultural background
The spatial distribution of data plays a critical role in the interpretation of study
findings, as daylight satisfaction varies depending on the cultural backgrounds of
individuals. Studies have shown that Asian individuals tend to perceive daylight as
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Background
Figure 1.3.
Geographical representation of studies investigated the relationship between
CBDMs and occupants’ satisfaction with daylight adequacy
equal to or less favourable than the existing conditions, while Caucasians tend to
view daylight as equivalent or better than the measured levels [35]. This cultural
disparity in daylight satisfaction has been highlighted in research by Vásquez et al.
[62], indicating that East Asians are generally less content with daylighting conditions
compared to Europeans and South Americans. Additionally, it has been noted that
while daylight levels serve as the primary indicator of satisfaction for Europeans and
Americans, Asians correlate satisfaction more strongly with glare [62] [63].
Furthermore, differences in the perception of daylighting conditions are evident
even within the same country. For instance, Arango-Díaz et al. [64] explored the
perception of daylight in classrooms across four cities in Colombia, revealing that a
significant portion of the population may deem daylighting levels lower than 300 lux
as adequate, even when actual illuminance measures below 100 lux. This disparity
could be attributed to variations in global sun radiation across different cities, as
areas with lower yearly average global radiation tend to have a greater percentage of
individuals who find lower indoor illuminance levels satisfactory compared to regions
with higher radiation levels. [64]
1.3.2.2
Inconsistencies between simulated and perceived daylight
conditions
Observations have revealed disparities between the perceived daylight conditions
and the simulations employed to validate daylight suﬀiciency, particularly with re-
gard to Daylight Autonomy (DA).
In general, occupants often report experienc-
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Previous research on subjective daylight assessment in Climate Based Daylight Metrics (CBDMs)
13
ing daylight conditions that are equal to or better than those estimated by simula-
tions [54] [42] [35] [59] [43] [44] [45]. As illustrated in Figure 1.4, the cited studies
indicate the percentage of rooms that align with simulation results, as well as those
where subjective assessments indicate higher or lower daylight levels compared to the
simulations.
Figure 1.4. Comparison of perceived daylight conditions to DA simulations
1.3.2.3
Correlation between subjective responses and CBDMs
CBDMs demonstrate a correlation with the occupants’ satisfaction with daylight [53].
Despite the typical CBDMs - DA, UDI, and cDA - Jakubiec et al. [53] have reported
a stronger correlation between occupant satisfaction and annual mean or median
horizontal illuminance at occupant desks.
Another study by Jakubiec et al. [46]
suggests that a satisfactory condition in rooms can be achieved with an annual mean
horizontal illuminance of 150 lux and an annual mean vertical illuminance of 200
lux. [46].
Several research studies have integrated findings from simulations on Spatial Day-
light Autonomy (sDA) for different illuminance levels and subjective responses over a
long time period in order to examine which illuminance threshold is more closely asso-
ciated with subjective aspects. As depicted in Figure 2.1, a significant correlation be-
tween occupant satisfaction and illuminance levels ranging from 100 to 200 lux. How-
ever, the correlation diminishes as illuminance levels increase, suggesting that higher
illuminance does not necessarily result in increased occupant satisfaction [57] [58].
Similar trends are observed in the relationship between occupants’ pleasure in a room
and the amount of daylight present [55]. Subjective responses reflecting daylighting
suﬀiciency and satisfaction on the desk demonstrate the strongest correlation at 100
lux [55], with correlations fluctuating as illuminance levels increase [57]. Conversely,
higher illuminance levels exhibit an increased correlation with satisfaction related to
daylight uniformity in the room [58] and occupants’ happiness while in the room [57].
==PAGE:24==
14
1 Background
Figure 1.5. Correlation coeﬀicients related to sDA illuminance thresholds and subjective
responses in various studies
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Field study
2.1
Methodology
The methodology integrates subjective survey assessments with quantitative illumi-
nance measurements to evaluate the impact of daylighting conditions on occupant
perception, preference, and satisfaction. Additionally, a statistical analysis was con-
ducted to develop a predictive model for occupant satisfaction based on Spatial Day-
light Autonomy (sDA).
2.1.1
Rooms and participants selection
The selected rooms are situated across three buildings on the Lyngby campus of the
Technical University of Denmark, specifically identified as buildings B118, B404, and
B412. The selection of the rooms took into consideration varying window-to-floor
ratios, different orientations, and surroundings to ensure diverse daylight conditions.
The choice of rooms was greatly influenced by participant availability. The types and
numbers of rooms selected for measurements, along with the count of participants,
are presented in Figure 2.1. The Figure reports the specifications for the selected
rooms. In total, five rooms and eleven participants were selected.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Field study
Figure 2.1. Specifications of the selected rooms. Orientation, surroundings, floor level and
window-to-floor ratio are reported along with the number of participants in each room
2.1.2
Data collection
The field study was conducted at the Technical University of Denmark in April 2024.
The parameters that were measured, along with the equipment used during the mea-
surements, are listed below:
• Extech SDL400 Luxmeter, for measuring horizontal and vertical illuminance.
• HOBO U12-012, for measuring temperature and relative humidity.
• Vaisala CO2 monitor, for measuring CO2 levels.
Extech SDL400 Luxmeter and Vaisala CO2 monitor devices were calibrated ac-
cordingly before the measurements to gather reliable results.
In each room, one
HOBO U12-012 and one Vaisala CO2 monitor were placed far from the windows to
avoid direct radiation. In addition, two Extech SDL400 Luxmeters were set in each
participant position to measure horizontal (Eh) and vertical illuminance (Ev) at the
desk level (0.85 m) and the eye level (1.2 m), respectively [1]. A schematic represen-
tation outlining the distribution of the equipment within room B118-0 is depicted in
Figure 2.2.
The experimental schedule encompassed two measurement rounds per room over
a two-week period, conducted during standard working hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Each room was observed for two days per week, repeated over two weeks. On
the first day, the shadings were not drawn, and on each second day, the shadings were
in accordance with the participants’ preferences.
Throughout the field study, participants were instructed to turn off the lights for
the entire day. If this was unfeasible, participants were required to turn off the lights
15 minutes before completing the questionnaire. Moreover, participants were advised
to remain within the oﬀices for at least 15 minutes before completing the questionnaire
to acclimate to the indoor environmental conditions. Participants were requested to
complete the questionnaire three times a day: at the beginning, middle, and end of
the day, in order to capture diverse environmental conditions. If the aforementioned
schedule was impractical, participants had the option to complete the questionnaire
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Methodology
17
twice a day.
A visual representation of the experimental schedule is presented in
Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.2.
Equipment distribution in
room B118 −0
Figure 2.3. Experimental schedule
2.1.3
Questionnaire
The questionnaire adhered to the guidelines outlined in ISO 10551:2019 [65] and ISO
28802:2012 [66] to appraise comfort, perception, preference, and satisfaction regarding
thermal, visual, and air quality conditions within indoor spaces. The questionnaire
consisted of six sections, including:
• Demographics and general information (one per participant)
• General information about the conditions in the room
• Subjective indoor environment assessment
• Subjective daylight assessment
• Spatial daylight amount suﬀiciency in the room (drawing assessment)
• Assessment of indoor climate conditions throughout the day (one per day)
The evaluation of perception, preference, and satisfaction utilised a 5-point Likert
scale ranging from -2 to 2. In addition, participants received a printed floor plan
of the room accompanied by the questionnaire. In the printed floor plan, they were
instructed to delineate areas within the room where they perceived suﬀicient natural
daylight for work without the need for electric lighting to assess ”spatial daylight
suﬀiciency in the room.” The complete questionnaire is provided in Appendix B.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Field study
The data obtained from the field study was systematically collected and organised
on a daily basis for each participant. This methodical approach aimed to maintain
consistency in data collection and minimise the potential for data loss. To ensure
that no artificial lighting was utilised, the average data from illuminance and indoor
environment measurements in the 15 minutes leading up to questionnaire submission
was calculated. Furthermore, participants’ hand-drawn representations of perceived
daylit areas were digitised using AutoCAD software to quantify the assessed daylit
area, excluding the area 0.5m off the walls so the daylit area calculation would follow
the calculation framework as stated in EN17037 sDA [1].
2.1.4
Data analysis
The data analysis was conducted using MATLAB. The analysis includes the visuali-
sation and the interpretation of the results derived from the measurements and the
questionnaires, as well as the statistical analysis.
2.1.4.1
Correlation study
In the conducted study, the Spearman’s coeﬀicient was employed to establish a cor-
relation between the ordinal Likert scale data, representing subjective responses, and
the measurements.
The Spearman’s correlation coeﬀicient (rho) serves to signify
the magnitude and direction of the association between two ranked variables and is
determined using the following formula [67]:
rho = 1 −
6 ∑d2
n(n2 −1)
(2.1)
where d is the difference in rank between two variables and n is the number of
cases. [67]
The Spearman’s coeﬀicient (rho) ranges between -1 and 1. A positive value de-
notes a direct correlation between the two variables, whereas a negative value indicates
an inverse relationship. The degree of correlation is detailed in Table 2.1. [67]
rho
Strength of correlation
0.0 <0.1
no correlation
0.1 <0.3
low correlation
0.3 <0.5
medium correlation
0.5 <0.7
high correlation
0.7 <1
very high correlation
Table 2.1. Spearman’s correlation coeﬀicient ρ and strength of correlation
The p −value, in conjunction with the rho value, indicates the significance of
the correlation.
A p −value of less than or equal to 0.05 indicates a substantial
association between the two variables. However, a p −value above 0.05 suggests a
weak association and any observed correlation based on the rho may be attributed
to chance. [67]
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Methodology
19
2.1.5
Satisfaction prediction modeling
The statistical model was developed to predict and illustrate the correlation between
occupant satisfaction levels with daylight and two variables, illuminance and daylit
exposure area.
The initial stage of the analysis involved the computation of an overall satisfac-
tion score derived from two questions pertaining to satisfaction with ”the amount of
daylight in the room” and ”the amount of daylight on the desk.” The satisfaction as-
sessments were classified into ordered levels ranging from -2 to 2 to establish an overall
satisfaction score. Additionally, illuminance measurements and the proportion of the
area that received adequate daylight from subjective responses were documented.
The satisfaction score was transformed into an ordinal categorical variable. This
categorisation facilitated the utilisation of ordinal logistic regression to analyse the
data, foreseeing the likelihood of achieving different satisfaction levels depending on
illuminance and the daylit area in the room. The k-fold cross-validation technique
was employed to assess the predictive performance of a model, considering the limited
size of the data. This approach allows for the computation of error estimates and the
development of a final model, providing an effective means to evaluate the model’s
predictive capability [68]. The model produced a logit function of the cumulative
probabilities of falling into the satisfaction categories, as illustrated by the following
equation:
logit(P(y <= j|x)) = a + b1x1 + b2x2
(2.2)
where P(y ≤j|x) represents the probability that the satisfaction level y is less
than or equal to a specified level j, given the predictors x1 and x2, which denote the
estimated fraction of daylit area and the horizontal illuminance, respectively. The
parameter a serves as the intercept term, portraying the baseline log odds of being
in the lowest category, while b1 and b2 correspond to the coeﬀicients for x1 and x2,
respectively. These coeﬀicients quantify the change in the log odds of y being less
than or equal to j per unit change in each predictor.
The predicted satisfaction score was determined through a calculated weighted
average of the scores related to each satisfaction category.
This was achieved by
weighting with the probabilities predicted by the model, as represented in the follow-
ing equation:
Predicted Satisfaction score =
∑
(Satisfaction category × P)
(2.3)
Following the evaluation of the model using a confusion matrix, performance indi-
cators were computed, encompassing accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-Score. These
indicators take into account true or false positives and negatives.
In the context
of a specific category, positives represent alignment between the model’s predictions
and the category, while negatives occur when the predictions deviate from the cat-
egory. Furthermore, positives and negatives can be classified as true or false based
on whether the prediction is correct. The detailed explanation of each indicator is
outlined as follows [69]:
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Field study
• Accuracy: The frequency of overall correctness in the model’s predictions.
• Precision: Evaluation of the model’s accuracy in predicting positives.
• Recall: Estimation of the model’s ability to correctly identify actual positives.
• F1-Score: Provision of a balanced assessment of the model’s performance, inte-
grating both precision and recall. [69]
2.1.6
Identifying Outliers
The research encompassed an examination of scenarios where visual perception was
primarily influenced by illuminance rather than glare. This involved the removal of
outliers in the horizontal illuminance (Eh) and vertical illuminance (Ev) measure-
ments.
The process of outlier elimination was carried out using the Interquartile
Range (IQR) method, as described in the literature [70]. The IQR technique entails
the computation of the interquartile range by subtracting the first quartile (Q1) from
the third quartile (Q3). Subsequently, data points falling below (Q1 −1.5) × IQR
or above (Q3 + 1.5) × IQR were identified as outliers and eliminated from the analy-
sis [70].
2.2
Implementation of the model in previous study
The study utilized the ordinal logistic regression model to assess occupant satisfaction
concerning the proposed ”Threshold indicators for daylight provision in the European
Daylight Standard EN17037” as detailed in the previous study, which is fully docu-
mented in Appendix A.
Conducted at DTU as part of a special course, the study put forward revised
standards for daylight provision in the European Standard EN17037 and focused
on assessing daylight availability in rooms through a range of daylight metrics. The
primary objective was to ensure suitable compliance rates and enhance daylight condi-
tions in educational buildings while acknowledging the constraints of existing building
layouts within the Danish context.
The study evaluated 218 rooms to determine EN17037 Spatial Daylight Autonomy,
employing diverse illuminance thresholds (100, 150, 200, 300, and 500 lux) and space
proportions (50%, 55%, 75%, 85%, and 95%). The results revealed that a significant
majority of rooms met the lower thresholds of 100 lux and 150 lux for 50% space
compliance, with 87% and 56% meeting these criteria, respectively. However, only
36% of the simulated rooms were able to achieve the current threshold of 300 lux for
a 50% proportion of the area.
The proposed sDA recommendations retained the three levels, with adjustments
to the target levels to ensure reasonable compliance rates based on the analyzed
rooms:
• Level I, where simulated rooms had a compliance rate of 66% or higher, ac-
counting for more than two-thirds.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Implementation of the model in previous study
21
• Level II, where simulated rooms had a compliance rate of roughly 50%, account-
ing for half of the simulated rooms.
• Level III, where simulated rooms had a compliance rate of approximately 36%,
which met the existing criterion and accounts for roughly 1/3 of simulated
rooms.
Finally, the new proposals for new threshold indicators for daylight provision in
EN17037 were defined as follows:
• Proposal 1: The proposal was based on a fixed illuminance threshold of 150
lux for three different space compliance areas (50%, 55%, and 75%), aiming to
improve daylight distribution within rooms. This suggestion emphasized the
challenge of complying with requirements in densely built areas.
• Proposal 2: Based on 55% of the space area and three distinct illuminance
thresholds (100, 150, and 300 lux), this proposal was outlined to be adaptable
to various rooms without imposing substantial geometric constraints, offering
greater design flexibility in densely built locations. However, it was noted that
uneven daylight distribution can result in a higher risk of visual discomfort.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Results
3.1
Data inclusion and exclusion
Two out of the eleven participants in this study were excluded from the data anal-
ysis due to non-completion of the questionnaires. Nevertheless, the parameters and
conditions of the examined rooms remained consistent with those outlined in Section
2.1.1.
3.2
Participants
The research comprised a cohort of nine subjects, with detailed demographic data
presented in Table 3.1.
The majority of the participants were female, and their
ages spanned from the early twenties to the late fifties, signifying a predominantly
youthful to middle-aged sample. Nearly all subjects had undergone either temporary
or permanent vision enhancement procedures.
Category
Gender
Ethnicity
Age
Vision improvement
Participants count
Female = 6
Male = 3
Caucasian = 7
Asian = 1
Latin = 1
22-58
(median = 28)
Glasses = 4
Contact lenses = 3
Laser surgery = 1
NA = 1
Table 3.1. Demographic information on the participants
3.3
Indoor environmental conditions
The indoor environmental conditions documented in Table 3.2 and Table 3.3 were
derived from both objective measurements and subjective assessments. The data re-
veals that the temperature ranged from 21 oC to 26 oC, with humidity levels between
26% and 49%. Additionally, the CO2 concentration exceeded 400 PPM in certain
instances. Overall, the conditions were deemed comfortable based on the subjective
responses, suggesting that the indoor environment did not significantly impact the
occupants’ comfort within the rooms.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Results
Range
Average
Temperature (oC)
21-26
23
Humidity (%)
26-49
36
CO2 above outdoors (PPM)
18-449
147
Table 3.2. Indoor environmental conditions in the rooms - measurements
Comfortable
# of responses
Uncomfortable
# of responses
Thermal conditions
98
1
Indoor air quality
97
2
Acoustic conditions
98
1
Table 3.3. Indoor environmental conditions in the rooms - subjective assessments
3.4
Visual conditions
In more than 40% of the observed instances, the sky conditions were categorised
as ”clear/sunny sky,” with ”partly cloudy/partly sunny” and ”cloudy” conditions
accounting for approximately 30% each. Furthermore, the recorded horizontal (Eh)
and vertical (Ev) illuminance values mostly fell within the range of 100 lux to 800 lux,
as depicted in Figure 3.1. However, instances of both lower and higher illuminance
values were also documented.
Figure 3.1. Measured horizontal Eh and vertical Ev illuminance ranges
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Visual conditions
25
3.4.1
Distance from window
Figure 3.2 depicts the survey participants’ perceived comfort levels in relation to their
proximity to the windows. The majority of responses indicated a comfortable distance.
However, respondents who found the distance uncomfortable were generally located
at a median distance of 3.45 meters from the windows. Specifically, 14 participants
expressed a preference for closer proximity to the windows, while 4 preferred a greater
distance. Conversely, when participants were asked to assess their comfort levels at
their desks in relation to daylight exposure, both comfortable and uncomfortable
conditions shared a median distance of 1.9 meters, as shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.2. Comfort level with distance from
window
Figure 3.3. Comfort level with daylight on
the desk
Figure 3.4 illustrates the factors contributing to discomfort levels associated with
daylight exposure at desks, taking into account distance, horizontal illuminance, and
vertical illuminance. Desks situated less than 2m from the window were found to cause
discomfort due to ”glare from the window/sunlight on the desk” (n=8). Conversely,
at a distance of 5m or more, the primary source of discomfort was attributed to ”being
too far from the window” (n=2).
Furthermore, discomfort due to glare was primarily observed at horizontal illumi-
nance (Eh) levels exceeding 1500 lux, while discomfort due to vertical illuminance
(Ev) typically began at approximately 800 lux. In addition, illuminance levels below
300 lux led to discomfort because of ”no electric lights/the room is too dim” (n=11).
Consequently, seats positioned in close proximity to windows may offer greater com-
fort at illuminance levels surpassing 300 lux. However, excessively high illuminance
levels may also induce discomfort in these areas.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Results
((a)) Distance from window
((b)) Horizontal illuminance Eh
((c)) Vertical illuminance Ev
Figure 3.4. Factors that contribute to occupants’ discomfort on desk location
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Visual conditions
27
3.4.2
Daylight amount on the desk
Figure 3.5 illustrates the response data from participants who indicated their pref-
erence for having electric light to ensure adequate lighting conditions alongside the
corresponding horizontal and vertical illuminance levels. Analysis of the subjective
responses for Eh and Ev reveals a narrower range of responses for Ev overall. When
the median Eh measured approximately 500 lux, 79 participants did not deem it
necessary to have the lights on. However, the interquartile range (IQR) of 300 to
850 lux, with some outliers reaching up to 3600 lux, indicated substantial variation
in responses. Conversely, when participants required the lights to be on (n=19), the
median Eh decreased to around 150 lux, with an IQR ranging from 50 to 350 lux.
Similarly, the range of Ev displayed analogous patterns. A median Ev of approx-
imately 350 lux, an interquartile range from 200 to 650 lux, and outliers reaching up
to 2200 lux depicted significant variability in responses where participants indicated
not needing electric light. Conversely, respondents expressing the necessity of having
the ”lights on” reported a median Ev of roughly 125 lux, with a narrow IQR of about
50 to 250 lux, indicating a greater consistency in subjective responses to the measured
illuminances.
((a)) Horizontal illuminance Eh
((b)) Vertical illuminance Ev
Figure 3.5. Preference of having electric light, along with the measured illuminances
The distribution of subjective responses regarding comfort, perception, preference
and satisfaction regarding daylight amount for the measured horizontal and vertical
illuminances on participant’s spot location are illustrated in Figure 3.6 and Figure
3.7, respectively. Perception and preference change proportionally as the illuminance
levels increase in both cases. However, satisfaction and comfort decrease for both low
and high illuminance levels. In addition, when the participants found the illuminance
levels high, the preferred daylighting conditions were not always darker.
Specifically, the results for Eh in Figure 3.6 indicate that the majority of par-
ticipants expressed comfort with the amount of daylight on their desks (n=77) with
a median level at 450 lux. The perceived illuminance levels exhibit a clear pattern,
with a median of 150 lux and an interquartile range (IQR) of 100 to 300 lux for ”low”
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Results
((a)) Comfort
((b)) Perception
((c)) Preference
((d)) Satisfaction
Figure 3.6. Subjective responses of horizontal illuminance Eh
illuminance and a median of 1500 lux with an IQR of 750 to 1650 lux for ”high”
illuminance. Notably, a preference for ”slightly darker” conditions is evident at a
median of 1500 lux, despite the small sample size for the ”slightly darker” (n=7) and
”darker” (n=3) groups. Additionally, most responses (n=45) indicated a preference
for ”slightly brighter” conditions, with a median of around 300 lux and an IQR from
200 to 450 lux. The ”slightly dissatisfied” responses were associated with a median
illuminance of 250 lux and an interquartile range of 100 to 750 lux, highlighting a
stronger dissatisfaction with lower illuminance levels. Higher illuminance values also
showed potential discomfort based on outlier responses. Furthermore, ”neutral” sat-
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Visual conditions
29
isfaction was observed at a median of 300 lux, with a higher limit of 900 lux within
the interquartile range of ”satisfied” responses.
((a)) Comfort
((b)) Perception
((c)) Preference
((d)) Satisfaction
Figure 3.7. Subjective responses of vertical illuminance Ev
Similarly, the data presented in Figure 3.7 for Ev indicates that participants who
reported feeling ”comfortable” experienced a median illuminance of approximately
300 lux, with an interquartile range (IQR) of 150 to 500 lux. In comparison, those
who reported feeling ”uncomfortable” had a similar median illuminance but a wider
IQR of 150 to 850 lux, with outliers reaching 2200 lux. Participants who perceived
illuminance levels as ”slightly low” or ”low” reported a median illuminance of 180 lux,
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Results
while those who perceived the illuminance as ”high” reported a median of 1000 lux.
Additionally, responses illustrating a preference for ”slightly darker” conditions were
associated with a median illuminance of approximately 1500 lux and an IQR of 1100 to
1650 lux. On the other hand, responses indicating a preference for ”darker” conditions
were linked to higher illuminance levels. Participants favouring ”brighter” conditions
reported a median illuminance of 150 lux. Furthermore, satisfaction levels showed
that participants reporting ”slight dissatisfaction” experienced a median illuminance
of 150 lux, while those reporting ”dissatisfaction” had outliers reaching 2200 lux.
Participants who reported a ”neutral” condition had a median illuminance of 250 lux,
while those reporting ”satisfaction” had a higher IQR limit of 725 lux.
The findings related to illuminance levels for Eh and Ev suggest a correlation be-
tween higher illuminance levels and discomfort. Notably, most measured illuminance
levels reached 1000 lux, with some outliers even higher. This raises the possibility that
dissatisfaction may not be definitively associated with illuminance levels exceeding
1000 lux in this study. Conversely, lower illuminance levels below the 300 lux thresh-
old correlated with decreased satisfaction. It is important to highlight that the range
of illuminance levels associated with ”slight satisfaction” and ”satisfaction” was wider
compared to those linked to a ”neutral” condition. This indicates that individuals can
tolerate a broader range of daylighting conditions before experiencing dissatisfaction,
demonstrating their adaptability and preference for varying illuminance levels.
3.4.3
Spatial daylight suﬀiciency and uniformity in the room
Figure 3.8 illustrates the relation between perceived daylit areas and varying levels of
satisfaction. The data suggests that satisfaction with perceived daylit areas increases
significantly when the fraction area exceeds 50%. In contrast, subjective responses
indicate dissatisfaction when the fraction area falls below 45%. A state of ”neutral”
satisfaction can be delineated for a fraction area surpassing 50%, with satisfaction
levels peaking at daylit areas of 80% and 95%. These findings suggest a positive
association between larger daylit areas in a room and higher satisfaction levels.
The standard deviation values for the perceived daylit area among the nine par-
ticipants are as follows: 18.9 (B118-0), 18.7 (B118-1), 19.4 (B118-1), 21.0 (B118-2),
17.4 (B412-0), 13.4 (B412-0), 6.2 (B412-0), 16.3 (B412-0), and 39.2 (B404-2). Obser-
vations indicate that participants with higher standard deviations had perceptions
closely aligned with actual variations in illuminance from dynamic simulations, while
the participant with a lower standard deviation exhibited a more stable perception
of daylight suﬀiciency, less impacted by fluctuating weather conditions.
However,
fluctuations between the subjective responses for the perceived daylit area were gen-
erally observed, indicating that the results may be applicable to dynamic weather
conditions.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Visual conditions
31
Figure 3.8. Satisfaction with the perceived daylit area in the room
Additionally, Figure 3.9 demonstrates the distribution of satisfaction levels among
participants regarding the uniformity of daylight in the room. The majority of re-
sponses fell into the higher satisfaction categories, with ”slightly satisfied” and ”sat-
isfied” accounting for over half of all responses. The ”dissatisfied” condition received
the fewest responses, indicating that most participants were at least somewhat satis-
fied with the daylight uniformity.
Figure 3.9. Satisfaction with the daylight uniformity in the room
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Results
3.5
Association between illuminance, daylit area and
subjective responses
The association between subjective responses and illuminance measurements, as well
as the perceived daylit area, is depicted below. For this analysis, Spearman’s correla-
tion coeﬀicient was utilised as outlined in Section 2.1.4.1.
Table 3.4 presents the correlation coeﬀicients rho and corresponding p −values
for the correlations between participants’ satisfaction with the amount of daylight
on the desk, the daylight in the room, and the measured illuminance levels together
with the perceived daylit area. The rho value for horizontal illuminance (Eh) is 0.19
with a p −value of 0.06, indicating a low positive correlation that is not statistically
significant. Conversely, vertical illuminance (Ev) exhibits a rho value of 0.24 and a
p−value of 0.02, suggesting a low positive correlation with statistical significance. The
percentage of the daylit area demonstrates a strong positive association (rho = 0.72,
p−value≤0.05), indicating a very high and significant correlation. The results reveal
that satisfaction is positively associated with both horizontal and vertical illuminance,
with the most robust and significant correlation found with the perceived daylit area
in the rooms.
Horizontal illuminance Eh
Vertical illuminance Ev
% daylit area
rho
0.19
0.24
0.72
p −value
0.06
≤0.05*
≤0.05*
Table 3.4. Correlation of satisfaction with the measured illuminance levels and the perceived
daylit area - All responses.
Illuminances are correlated with the question related to the
”satisfaction with daylight amount on the desk”, while the proportion of the daylit area is
correlated with the question related to the ”satisfaction with daylight amount in the room”.
*indicates statistically significant correlations (p −value ≤0.05)
Upon the removal of outliers for Eh and Ev, an analysis was conducted to ex-
amine the correlation between satisfaction and illuminance under conditions where
perception was primarily influenced by illuminance rather than glare. The data pre-
sented in Table 3.5 indicated that illuminance demonstrated a moderate correlation
and was significantly associated with satisfaction.
Horizontal illuminance Eh
Vertical illuminance Ev
% daylit area
rho
0.39
0.39
0.76
p −value
≤0.05*
≤0.05*
≤0.05*
Table 3.5.
Correlation of satisfaction with the measured illuminance levels without the
outliers. *indicates statistically significant correlations (p −value ≤0.05)
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Satisfaction prediction model
33
3.6
Satisfaction prediction model
The statistical model has been developed to predict occupant satisfaction with Spatial
Daylight Autonomy (sDA). This model is applicable in conditions where perception
is predominantly influenced by illuminance and is valid for Eh values below 1500 lux.
Upon removing outliers, the prediction model was established based on 93 subjective
responses and measurement data.
3.6.1
Data preparation
The overall satisfaction score for each response was computed as the weighted average,
accounting for the correlation coeﬀicients, of the ”satisfaction with the amount of
daylight in the room” and ”satisfaction with the amount of daylight on the desk”.:
Overall Satisfaction Score = 0.76 × Satisfaction(room) + 0.39 × Satisfaction(desk)
0.76 + 0.39
(3.1)
The overall satisfaction ranges from -2 to 2, reflecting the responses in the 5-point
Likert scale, with 17 categories in total, as can be seen in Table 3.6. To address
category imbalance, the model inspected and merged the satisfaction categories into
three groups: ”Dissatisfied/Slightly dissatisfied (-2 to -1)”, ”Neutral” (-0.34 to 0.32),
and ”Satisfied/Slightly satisfied” (0.66 to 2). This merging proved beneficial due to
the limited data in this study, providing a balanced and enhanced performance in the
ordinal logistic regression as it allowed the model to have more samples for training
in each category.
However, it is worth noting that the low variability observed in the ”neutral”
category could pose a challenge, reducing the suﬀiciency to distinguish data, while
the heightened variability in the ”Satisfied/Slightly satisfied” category may lead to
decreased model accuracy due to outliers within this category.
Category
Data
Merged category
Data
Standard deviation
1
4
Slightly dissatisfied/
Dissatisfied
20
0.40
2
3
3
13
4
3
Neutral
17
0.23
5
1
6
1
7
7
8
1
9
4
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Results
Category
Data
Merged category
Data
Standard deviation
10
2
Slightly satisfied/Satisfied
56
0.48
11
1
12
2
13
13
14
2
15
2
16
6
17
28
Table 3.6. Categories before and after merge. Standard deviation is reported for the merged
categories to report the variability and distribution of the data
3.6.2
Cross-validation and model training
The dataset was partitioned into training and testing subsets, consisting of 75 and 18
data points, respectively, in order to conduct a 5-fold cross-validation. The model’s
optimal parameters, determined through the cross-validation process, form the foun-
dation of the prediction equation. Subsequently, the data was once again split into
training and testing sets, containing 75 and 18 data points, respectively. The ordinal
logistic regression model was then applied to the training data. Finally, the value of
a in the logit equation was computed as 4.14, while the estimates for b1 and b2 were
found to be 6.38 and -0.09, respectively, as illustrated below:
logit(P(Sat <= j|x)) = 4.14 + 6.38x1 −0.09x2
(3.2)
where P(Sat ≤j|x) represents the probability of the satisfaction level, denoted
as Sat, being less than or equal to j = 1 and j = 2. Here, j = 1 and j = 2 correspond
to the transition points between ”Dissatisfied/Slightly dissatisfied,” ”Neutral,” and
”Satisfied/Slightly satisfied.” These transitions are based on the predictor variables
x1 and x2, which respectively represent the estimated fraction of daylit area and the
horizontal illuminance.
The graph depicted in Figure 3.10 illustrates the predicted satisfaction score, as
estimated by the weighted average of the scores related to each satisfaction category,
alongside three anticipated satisfaction categories (y). The satisfaction level is antic-
ipated to rise with an increase in the proportion of daylit area and the illuminance
level. Considering the current threshold of 300 lux and 50% of the area for the ET
in EN17037, the expected daylighting conditions are likely to be classified under the
”neutral” satisfaction category, with an approximate predicted satisfaction score of 0.
==PAGE:45==
3.6 Satisfaction prediction model
35
Figure 3.10. Predicted satisfaction score depending on illuminance and fraction of daylit
area
3.6.3
Model performance indicators
The analysis generated a confusion matrix to compare actual and predicted satisfac-
tion categories and assess the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score of the model’s
performance, as presented in Table 3.7.
Accuracy
83%
Precision
75%
Recall
86%
F1-Score
74%
Table 3.7. Model performance indicators
Specifically, the accuracy of 83% indicates that the model correctly estimated
satisfaction categories in the majority of cases. Furthermore, the precision metric
demonstrates consistency in true positive predictions, where 75% of the predicted
data were actually correct. Additionally, the model appropriately identified 86% of
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Results
all actual positive predictions. The F1-score of 74% suggests that the model correctly
determines satisfied conditions while minimising false positives.
Furthermore, the model’s performance is visually depicted in Figure 3.11 and
Figure 3.12. The discrepancies in the residuals shown in Figure 3.11 indicate that
the model’s predictions were inaccurate in three sample indices. Similarly, Figure
3.12 illustrates that, although most predicted satisfaction aligns with actual satisfac-
tion, some discrepancies are noticeable, particularly in the ”Neutral” and ”Slightly
satisfied/Satisfied” categories.
Figure 3.11. Residual plot
Figure 3.12. Compariston between the actual overall satisfaction categories with the pre-
dicted categories
==PAGE:47==
3.7 Implementation of the prediction model
37
Overall, the performance metrics for the ordinal logistic regression model indicate
a moderate level of predictive capability.
The mentioned indicators demonstrate
that the model accurately captures satisfaction levels, providing a reliable tool for
estimating user satisfaction based on sDA.
3.7
Implementation of the prediction model
The proposed prediction model was utilised for the simulated rooms from the previous
study (refer to Section 2.2) with a target illuminance of 300 lux and 50% of the area.
The majority of simulated rooms failed to meet the satisfaction threshold of 50%.
Specifically, out of 218 rooms, 77 recorded a satisfaction score of 50% or more based
on the developed prediction model, accounting for 36% of the total rooms. Notably,
in the previous study, the compliance rate of rooms providing adequate daylighting
according to EN17037 sDA [1] was 36% of the total rooms.
The model was then applied to the suggested new threshold indicators from the
previous study to estimate the percentage of rooms falling into the ”neutral” or
”slightly satisfied/satisfied” category. The compliance rates related to the daylight
requirements and the predicted satisfaction are outlined in Table 3.8 and Table 3.9.
Level
Diﬀiculty
Proposal 1 - sDA150, 50%
Compliance rate
with daylight requirements
Compliance rate
with satisfaction
Level I
Minimum
50% area
84%
47%
Level II
Medium
55% area
49%
43%
Level III
High
75% area
36%
34%
Table 3.8. Compliance rates of Proposal 1
Level
Diﬀiculty
Proposal 2 - 55% area
Compliance rate
with daylight requirements
Compliance rate
with satisfaction
Level I
Minimum
sDA100, 50%
56%
74%
Level II
Medium
sDA150, 50%
49%
43%
Level III
High
sDA300, 50%
36%
34%
Table 3.9. Compliance rates of Proposal 2
Proposal 1, based on the fixed illuminance level of 150 lux and varying proportions
of area, illustrates a decline in compliance rates as levels increase, dropping from 47%
to 34% for satisfaction, as shown in Table 3.8.
Similarly, Proposal 2, evaluating
55% of the area under 100, 150, and 300 lux, demonstrates a decrease in compliance
rates with heightened complexity, as evidenced in Table 3.9. As diﬀiculty increases,
satisfaction ratings also decline, from 74% to 34%. This comparison indicates that
Proposal 2 yields higher satisfaction scores at the lowest diﬀiculty level, aligning with
the results of the correlation analysis, which revealed that the fraction of daylit area
has a stronger correlation with satisfaction than illuminance.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
Conclusion
The study aimed to explore the connection between Spatial Daylight Autonomy (sDA)
and subjective assessments. Besides correlating daylighting conditions in the rooms
with occupant perceptions and preferences, the study developed a predictive model
for sDA based on occupant satisfaction. The results revealed a significant correlation
between occupant satisfaction and both illuminance levels and perceived daylit areas
under no-glare conditions.
However, in the presence of glare, satisfaction showed
a more important correlation with the proportion of the daylit area rather than
illuminance.
The field study demonstrated that participants situated near windows generally
experienced comfort but could encounter glare. Conversely, discomfort might arise
when individuals were further from the windows or when lighting was inadequate.
Glare was reported when vertical illuminance (Ev) exceeded 800 lux and horizontal
illuminance (Eh) exceeded 1500 lux. Discomfort due to insuﬀicient lighting was re-
ported when Ev and Eh were below 300 lux, with the perception of daylight on the
desk being assessed as ”slightly low” or ”low”. Satisfaction levels were observed to
decrease for both high and low illuminance levels, although individual preferences
varied, showing tolerance for both low and high illuminances. In addition, when par-
ticipants were asked to draw the floor area of the room where daylight was suﬀicient
to work without electric light, their satisfaction level started to increase (“neutral”
and above) for a perceived daylit floor area above 50%.
Notably, the study found that satisfaction correlated better with the proportion
of the daylit area in the room, indicating that compliance with different levels of
recommendation in standards such as IES LM-83-12 [34] and LEED [38], based on
the fraction of daylit space, could lead to improved satisfaction with daylighting
conditions in rooms. Additionally, a slightly better correlation was observed between
satisfaction and Ev.
A predictive model reflecting the findings of a field study and correlating satis-
faction with the Spatial Daylight Autonomy (sDA) was developed. This predictive
model allowed for the evaluation of new threshold indicators for daylight provision in
the EN17037 standard [1], as proposed in a previous DTU study (see Appendix A).
The results indicated that a similar proportion of rooms complied with the daylight
requirement of sDA300lux50% and a ”neutral” or higher satisfaction category, demon-
strating agreement between current standards and occupants’ satisfaction. However,
as there is a challenge in achieving the established daylighting requirements, the model
showed that ”Proposal 2” from the previous study could lead to better satisfaction in
the lower compliance category, with 74% of the rooms meeting a ”neutral” or higher
satisfaction category with sDA100lux50% for 55% of the area. Hence, a higher compli-
==PAGE:50==
40
Conclusion
ance rate with satisfaction could be attained by reducing the daylight requirements
to a lower illuminance level while increasing the required fraction of area.
Limitations
The investigation of the correlation between Spatial Daylight Autonomy (sDA)
and occupant satisfaction is subject to various limitations. It is crucial to acknowl-
edge these constraints for the accurate interpretation of findings and to provide a
foundation for future research in the realms of daylighting and occupant satisfaction:
• Sample size: The limited number of participants and rooms does not wholly
represent the diversity in the wider population and built environment.
• Temporal limitations: The short-term measurements over one month do not
encompass the seasonal variations that can impact occupants’ satisfaction with
daylight and could be more effectively associated with CBDMs.
• Geographical limitations: The research was conducted exclusively in Copen-
hagen, Denmark, making it diﬀicult to extrapolate the findings to a broader
geographical context.
• Reliability of subjective responses: Participants’ responses may be influenced
by external factors, such as mood, and may not accurately reflect their true
preferences. Furthermore, the requirement to turn off lights or keep the curtains
open during the study could introduce bias.
==PAGE:51==
Appendices
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX A
Previous study
The previous study, ”Threshold Indicators for daylight provision in the European
Daylight Standard EN17037”, is attached to this Appendix. The study concluded
with two proposals for new threshold indicators in EN17037 based on the compliance
rates of the simulated rooms with current thresholds. The proposal was used to be
evaluated based on the satisfaction model.
==PAGE:54==
Threshold Indicators for daylight provision in the
European Daylight Standard EN17037
Athanasia, Kloura1*, Helle F. Rasmusen2, and Mandana Sarey Khanie1
1Section of Indoor Environment, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical
University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
2MicroShade A/S
*Email: s222912@dtu.dk
==PAGE:55==
Abstract
In this study, 218 rooms, located in educational buildings at DTU Lyngby campus,
were simulated. The investigation includes rooms with different orientations, floor levels,
obstacle distances, depths, and window-to-wall ratios. The focus was given to how each
of these parameters affects the daylight results based on three daylight metrics: sDA
EN17037 (modified method), sDA LM-83-12, and daylight factor EN17037. As a first
step, it was examined the proportion of the rooms that meet the current threshold followed
by an in-depth investigation of the actual indicators that affect the variation in daylight
provision.
Based on the findings of this study, two methods were proposed to assess
daylight, using spatial daylight autonomy, based on variations in compliance areas or
illuminance thresholds. Overall, the recommended threshold indicators aim at achieving
realistic daylight conditions based on the results of the existing building stock, as the
current thresholds are insufficient to be met.
==PAGE:56==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
1
2.1
European standard CEN 17037:2018
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.2
IES LM-83-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Methodology
2
3.1
Buildings and rooms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.2
Daylight metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.3
Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4
Results
4
4.1
Spatial daylight autonomy, EN17037 (modified method) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.1.1
Obstacle distance correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Spatial daylight autonomy, LM-83-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Daylight factor, EN17037 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Proposal for new threshold indicators
9
5.1
Proposal 1 - sDA150, 50% for various space compliance areas . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.2
Proposal 2 - 55% area for various illuminance thresholds
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6
Conclusion
11
7
Limitations and future work
12
8
Appendix
i
8.1
Material input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
8.2
Overview of the examined parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
8.3
Results for the examined buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
8.3.1
Building 202 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
8.3.2
Building 127 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
8.3.3
Building 116 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
8.3.4
Building 310 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xii
==PAGE:57==
1
Introduction
Daylight has a significant impact on both the well-being of users and the overall energy usage
of buildings. Comfort, productivity, and well-being are all positively impacted by exposure to
natural light, according to several studies [1] [2] [3]. In terms of energy, by introducing daylight
into buildings, there are significant energy savings and reductions in CO2 emissions [4].
The first version of the European Standard EN17037 ”Daylight in Buildings” was published
in 2018. The goal was to stimulate better lighting design in buildings and to give designers
and developers high standards [5]. Currently, the technical committee, CEN TC169 WG11
Daylight, is working on evaluating the current standard in order to create more balanced
standards, with the goal of improving daylighting.
This study is part of a larger endeavor to identify alternative and more suitable requirements
for daylight availability in buildings. The proposed new threshold indicators represent the
existing educational building stock and, therefore, the difficulties that there are in the industry.
Four educational buildings and in total 218 rooms, located on DTU Lyngby Campus, were
simulated. During the study, various parameters were examined to evaluate their influence on
daylight. Those parameters include the obstacle distance, the room depth, and the window
area, as well as the orientation and the floor level. The outcomes of this study are interpreted in
correlation with the current recommendations for daylight provision in the European Daylight
Standard EN 17037, as well as LM (Lighting Measurements) 83-12 daylight metric specified
by the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES). Finally, the aim of this study is to propose
new threshold indicators for daylight provision in the European Standard EN17037 that can
provide a satisfactory level of daylight.
2
Background
Daylight is crucial for the physical and psychological well-being of people. Increased daylight
enhances user comfort, health, productivity, and functioning.
In that regard, in 2018, the
European standard EN17037 was first introduced to provide sufficient daylight in the interior of
the buildings [5]. Similarly, the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) has developed guidelines
regarding daylight [6].
2.1
European standard CEN 17037:2018
In 2018, the European Committee introduced the standard EN17037 for the evaluation of
daylight in interior spaces. The standard consists of two calculation methods:
• Method 1, which is based on the calculation of the daylight factor in relation to the given
site.
• Method 2, which is based on the calculation of the illuminance levels for half of the
daylight hours and in relation to the climatic data of the given site. Table 1 shows the
levels of recommendation and the corresponding illuminance levels. [5]
1
==PAGE:58==
Level of
Recommendation
Target illuminance
Fraction of space for
the target level
Minimum target
illuminance
Fraction of space for
the minimum target
level
Fraction of analysis
period for the
minimum threshold
ET(lux)
Fplane(%)
ETM(lux)
Fplane(%)
Ftime(%)
Minimum
300
50%
100
95%
50%
Medium
500
50%
300
95%
50%
High
750
50%
500
95%
50%
Table 1: Recommendations of daylight provision by daylight openings in vertical and inclined
surfaces
2.2
IES LM-83-12
The IES LM-83-12 was developed to generate a new set of metrics that can describe several
significant aspects of daylighting performance in buildings. Spatial Daylight Autonomy (sDA)
measures the quantity of daylight illumination that is sufficient for a specific area. It represents
the proportion of floor area that is greater than a given illuminance level for 50% of the hours
from 8 am to 6 pm.
Table 2 shows the levels of recommendation and the corresponding
illuminance levels. [7]
Level of
Recommendation
Target illuminance
Fraction of space for
the target level
Fraction of analysis
period for the
minimum threshold
ET(lux)
Fplane(%)
Ftime(%)
Nominally accepted
300
55%
50%
Preferred
300
75%
50%
Table 2: Spatial daylight criteria according to LM-83-12
3
Methodology
3.1
Buildings and rooms
For the purpose of this study, four buildings and in total 218 rooms were simulated, all located
at DTU Lyngby campus. Table 3 shows the buildings and their main characteristics.
Building
Simulated rooms
Floors
Building function
Orientation
202
47
3
Laboratories, offices, meetings rooms
N, S, W, E
127
7
2
Classrooms, study rooms
N
116
60
1
Classrooms, IT rooms, study rooms
W, E
310
104
5
Laboratories, offices, meetings rooms
W, E
Table 3: Simulated buildings and rooms
2
==PAGE:59==
3.2
Daylight metrics
The following criteria to evaluate daylight are examined. The inputs for the simulations are
illustrated, in detail, in Section 3.3 and Table 5.
• Spatial daylight autonomy, EN17037 (modified method). The climatic data from Copen-
hagen were used, while the examined illuminance levels were set to 100 lux, 150 lux,
200 lux, 300 lux, and 500 lux. In addition, the main fraction areas, that are examined
thoroughly in this study, were set to 50%, 55%, 75%, 85%, and 95%. The occupancy
schedule as it is determined in EN17037 was adopted [5].
It has to be noted that this calculation method is modified compared to the current
method. The current standard describes a calculation order of area-time [5], while the
modified method outlines a calculation order of time-area.
• Spatial daylight autonomy, LM-83-12. Similarly, the Copenhagen weather data were used
for the simulations and the illuminance threshold was set to 300 lux for 55% of the area.
The occupancy schedule as it is determined in LM-83-12 was adopted [6].
• Daylight factor, EN17037. For this metric, the threshold of 2.1% was selected, as the
minimum value for the median daylight factor in order to achieve 300 lux for Copenhagen.
The CIE standard overcast sky was selected for the simulations.
3.3
Simulations
The simulations were done in Grasshopper and specifically using the Ladybug tools that are
based on the radiance daylight simulation engine. The radiance simulation parameters that
were used in the simulation are:
-ab 5 -ad 1024 -as 128 -aa 0.1 -ar 256
Furthermore, the material input is indicated in Table 8.1. The inputs for each building are
illustrated, in detail in Appendix 8.1. Lastly, the overview of the simulation inputs is illustrated
in Table 5.
Reflectance
Transmittance
Floor
Interior walls
Ceiliing
Ground
Surrounding buildings
Exterior walls
Frames
Shadings
Glazing
0.2
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.2
Per building
Per building
Per building
0.7
Table 4: Material input
Grid height
Grid size
Grid offset
Location
Schedule
0.75 m
0.5 m
0.5 m
Copenhagen
sDA, EN17037
4,380 daylight hours
sDA, LM-83-12
8 am – 6 pm
Table 5: Simulation inputs
3
==PAGE:60==
4
Results
4.1
Spatial daylight autonomy, EN17037 (modified method)
This section shows the results in terms of spatial daylight autonomy. The findings are catego-
rized and displayed using illuminance criteria of 100 lux, 150 lux, 200 lux, 300 lux, and 500 lux
for different space compliances.
Figure 1 shows the compliance rate in rooms for different fraction areas and thresholds.
The results indicate that for a fraction area below 50%, the current illuminance threshold of
300 lux cannot be met for the majority of rooms. For a fraction area of 50% and illuminance
level of 300 lux, only 36% of the rooms comply with the current standards. In addition, 87%
and 56% of the rooms meet 100 lux and 150 lux for 50% of floor area respectively, while for
compliance areas of 60% and 65% only the illuminance level of 100 lux can be achieved for
most of the rooms.
Figure 1: Compliance rate in rooms for different fraction areas and thresholds
Additionally, Figure 2 illustrates the distribution of daylight for the different thresholds
4
==PAGE:61==
and the main examined space compliance areas. For 95% of the area, the selected rooms give
0% for all thresholds; thus, the results are not shown in the figures below.
The box charts indicate that in most rooms the average sDA is higher than the median
value, which is usually lower than an sDA above the limit of 50%. Specifically, it can be seen
that the average value for the space compliance area of 50% is 78%, 63%, and 55% for 100 lux,
150 lux, and 200 lux respectively. Moreover, the same illuminance values are 73%, 59%, and
52% respectively for 55% of the space compliance area. Lastly, for the space compliance area
of 75% the mean percentage for 100 lux is 53%.
(a) Fraction of area 50%
(b) Fraction of area 55%
(c) Fraction of area 75%
(d) Fraction of area 85%
Figure 2: Daylight distribution in rooms for different thresholds and space compliance areas.
In addition to the results above, a thorough examination of the parameters that may influ-
ence daylight gain has been conducted. The daylight distribution affected by these parameters
is shown in Appendix 8.2. The distribution of daylight may be affected by the room typologies,
however, the small sample or the rooms that were examined in this study may lead to inac-
curate conclusions. Figure 3 shows the daylight distribution for the different types of rooms,
where laboratories have the less daylight.
5
==PAGE:62==
Figure 3: Daylight distribution in rooms for the different room types
Moreover, Figure 4, 5, and 6 illustrate the parameters that affect significantly the daylight,
in this study, which are the obstacle distance, the window-to-wall ratio, and the room depth.
In compact areas, the illuminance levels increase when the obstacle distance is greater than 12
m. In addition, in the rooms where the building depth is bigger than 10 m, the window-to-wall
ratio is mainly larger than 50%, and, thus, the illuminance is relatively high.
Figure 4: Compliance rate for different obstacle distance ranges (<12m or >12m)
6
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5: Compliance rate for different room depths ranges (<5m, <10m or >10m)
Figure 6: Compliance rate for different window-to-wall ranges (<20%, <40%, <60% or >60%)
4.1.1
Obstacle distance correlations
In Figures 7 and 8 the correlation between the obstacle distance and the room depth or window-
to-wall area is shown for the different illuminance levels and areas. The correlation coefficient
(r) is mentioned in the following graphs as the absolute value to be easily compared between
the two examined parameters. It has to be pointed out that the coefficient for the depth is
negative. Based on the coefficient value, the strength of the relationship between the variables
can be described as: r<0.3: none, 0.3<r<0.5: weak, 0.5<r<0.7: moderate, r>0.7: strong
For the rooms with a small obstacle distance, Figure 7 indicates that the depth affects
moderately, in most cases, the daylight probability, while for the window area, a low correlation
is observed, which increases slightly for higher illuminance levels. In general, the daylight inside
a room is affected by both parameters. Taking a closer look at the rooms with small obstacle
distances, where it is harder to meet the current regulations, a room depth less than 7m and
a window-to-wall ratio bigger than 20% give adequate results for the purpose of this study.
7
==PAGE:64==
For the rooms with a larger obstacle distance, it is clear the depth does not influence at a
high level the results, however, a strong correlation is noticed to the window area.
Figure 7: Correlation between small obstacle distances and room depth/window-to-wall ratio
Figure 8: Correlation between large obstacle distances and room depth/window-to-wall ratio
4.2
Spatial daylight autonomy, LM-83-12
For the spatial daylight autonomy based on the LM-83-12 method, the average result is 45%,
while 36% of the rooms receive 300 lux for 55% of the space. The results are shown in Figure
9.
8
==PAGE:65==
Figure 9: Daylight distribution in rooms
4.3
Daylight factor, EN17037
For the daylight factor, 34% of the rooms meet the limit of 2.1%, with an average of 1.91%.
The results for all rooms are shown in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Overall daylight factor results
5
Proposal for new threshold indicators
Firstly, a comparison of the compliance rates between the three daylight metrics is illustrated
in Figure 11. Compliance rates for spatial daylight autonomy for both EN17037 and LM-83-12
methods are the same (36%). In contrast, the daylight factor threshold of 2.1% is slightly
harder to be achieved and 34% of the rooms meet the current standard.
9
==PAGE:66==
Figure 11: Compliance rate for the three daylight metrics
The new recommendations for the EN17037 sDA still include the three levels of recom-
mendations, but the target levels are readjusted to provide reasonable compliance rates in
educational buildings, based on this study that reflects the existing building stock in Denmark.
In that regard, the guiding principles, based on the compliance rates results, to define the three
levels are listed below.
• Level I, compliance rate around 66% or higher which represents the 2/3 or more of the
simulated rooms
• Level II, compliance rate around 50% which represents half of the simulated rooms.
• Level III, compliance rate around 36% which constitute the compliance rate of the current
threshold and represents roughly 1/3 of the simulated rooms.
5.1
Proposal 1 - sDA150, 50% for various space compliance areas
Proposal 1 is based on having 150 lux for three different space compliance areas in contrast
to the current minimum recommendation of 300 lux which can only be met for 36% of the
rooms. This proposal offers the possibility of better distribution of the daylight inside the
room, as the compliance area is higher for Level III. Therefore, fraction areas below 50% were
not examined to avoid having poor daylight conditions deeper into the rooms. However, based
on the previous analysis, there are some constraints for the rooms that are located in close
proximity to other buildings. In these cases, Level I and II can be achieved if the room depth
is less than 7m and the window-to-wall area is greater than 30%. The compliance rates of
Proposal 1 can be seen in Figure 12.
10
==PAGE:67==
(a) All rooms
(b) Rooms in dense areas with room depth< 7m and window-to-wall ratio >30%
Figure 12: Compliance rates of Proposal 1
5.2
Proposal 2 - 55% area for various illuminance thresholds
Proposal 2 relies on having 55% of space area and three different illuminance thresholds. This
proposal can be easily applied, to a high degree, to the rooms that were examined, without
any restrictions to the geometry of the room. Furthermore, Level III set the illuminance to 300
lux related to the lower limit of the current standards. Despite the design flexibility that this
recommendation gives to dense-built areas, the chance of visual discomfort is increased due to
the uneven daylight distribution. Figure 13 illustrates the compliance rates of Proposal 2.
Figure 13: Compliance rate for all rooms - Proposal 2
6
Conclusion
Four educational buildings and in total 218 rooms were simulated in order to assess the current
daylight metrics. The aim of this study was to propose new daylight provision thresholds for
EN17037 sDA by evaluating the impact of varied illuminance levels and targeted area rates.
Overall, the results indicated that the current thresholds were insufficient to be met for the
majority of the simulated rooms; only 1/3 of the rooms comply with the present standards.
In addition, it can be concluded that a number of parameters, such as the urban density,
the building depth, and the window area had a substantial impact on compliance rates. As a
result, it is critical to incorporate daylighting into the early design stages and urban planning
in order to assure a high degree of daylight provision in buildings.
In order to reflect the current compliance rates regarding educational buildings, the new
recommendations are based on three levels of compliance.
Two methods were adopted to
11
==PAGE:68==
determine the ideal illuminance level and space compliance area. Table 6 summarizes the two
suggested indicators to assess daylight in educational buildings.
Level of Recommendation
Difficulty
Proposal 1 - sDA150, 50%
Compliance rate
Proposal 2 - 55% area
Compliance rate
Level I
Minimum
50% area
84%
sDA100, 50%
56%
Level II
Medium
55% area
49%
sDA150, 50%
49%
Level III
High
75% area
36%
sDA300, 50%
36%
Table 6: Proposals of new threshold indicators
The first method imposes more focus on attaining uniform daylighting conditions than on
certain levels of illuminance, which can offer users improved visual comfort. This is accom-
plished by different targeted area rates (50%, 55%, and 75%) while maintaining a specified
illuminance threshold (150 lux). However, this method implies some design limitations on the
densely built areas. The second method involves changing the illuminance thresholds (100 lux,
150 lux, and 300 lux) while keeping the intended fraction area unchanged (55%). In this case,
the design can be more flexible, but it is in contrast with the visual comfort that is provided
with the first method.
7
Limitations and future work
Additional studies are required in order to properly analyze the daylight conditions in the
existing building stock.
More rooms with bigger variations in orientation, floor level, and
obstacle distance should be examined in order to have more accurate correlations between
those parameters and daylight. Furthermore, this study should be expanded and include data
from other European countries in order to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of
the current daylight conditions in buildings. These findings can provide insight into possible
changes in the overall outcomes across various environments, which might be helpful for the
future development of daylight threshold indicators.
12
==PAGE:69==
8
Appendix
8.1
Material input
This Appendix includes information on the material inputs used in each building. Table 7
shows the aforementioned data. In general, the reflectance inputs were given by the technical
committee CEN/TC 16. However, the reflectance values for exterior walls and frames were
specified per building, thus, they differ from case to case. In order to calculate the reflectance
values the Spectral Materials Database was used, based on the material and the color of the
buildings that were examined [8] [9]. Lastly, an average transmittance for lowE glazing was
selected.
Building
Reflectance
Transmittance
202
Floor
Interior walls
Ceiliing
Ground
Surrounding buildings
Exterior walls
Frames
Shadings
Glazing
0.2
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.2
Rreflectance=0.50
Greflectance=0.37
Breflectance=0.15
0.02
-
0.7
127
Floor
Interior walls
Ceiliing
Ground
Surrounding buildings
Exterior walls
Frames
Shadings
Glazing
0.2
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.02
Rreflectance=0.50
Greflectance=0.37
Breflectance=0.15
0.7
116
Floor
Interior walls
Ceiliing
Ground
Surrounding buildings
Exterior walls
Frames
Shadings
Glazing
0.2
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.2
Rreflectance=0.51
Greflectance=0.37
Breflectance=0.21
0.02
-
0.7
310
Floor
Interior walls
Ceiliing
Ground
Surrounding buildings
Exterior walls
Frames
Shadings
Glazing
0.2
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.2
Rreflectance=0.08
Greflectance=0.05
Breflectance=0.03
0.02
Rreflectance=0.08
Greflectance=0.05
Breflectance=0.03
0.7
Table 7: Material input
i
==PAGE:70==
8.2
Overview of the examined parameters
This Appendix provides insight into all the parameters that were examined during this study.
In the main text of this report the influence of the obstacle distance, the room depth, and the
window area are mentioned. However, the orientation and the floor level were also analyzed.
Moreover, the room type can also be correlated with the daylight gain, as for the laboratories
the current standard is difficult to be met. In spite of that observation, the small sample of
rooms that were examined in this study may lead to false conclusions.
The following box charts illustrate the distribution of daylight based on these parameters
for a space compliance area equal to 50%.
ii
==PAGE:71==
(a) Room type
(b) Obstacle distance
(c) Room depth
(d) Window to wall ratio
(e) Orientation
(f) Floor level
Figure 14: Daylight distribution in rooms for 50% of space based on different parameters.
iii
==PAGE:72==
8.3
Results for the examined buildings
8.3.1
Building 202
This Appendix includes the analysis of Building 202. Only some of the rooms were simulated,
due to the poor quality of the provided 3D model.
Figure 15 shows the building and its
surroundings.1
The rest of the Figures illustrate the building’s daylight analysis that was
described in the main text.
Figure 15: Aerial view
Figure 16: Ratio of compliance for the different metrics
(a) Space compliance area 50%
(b) Space compliance area 55%
(c) Space compliance area 75%
(d) Space compliance area 85%
Figure 17: Daylight distribution in rooms for different thresholds and space compliance areas.
1source: earth.google.com
iv
==PAGE:73==
Figure 18: Daylight autonomy
v
==PAGE:74==
Figure 19: Daylight factor
vi
==PAGE:75==
8.3.2
Building 127
This Appendix includes the analysis of Building 127. The building consists of big classrooms
and study rooms. Figure 29 shows the building and its surroundings.2 The rest of the Figures
illustrate the building’s daylight analysis that was described in the main text.
Figure 20: Aerial view
Figure 21: Ratio of compliance for the different metrics
(a) Space compliance area 50%
(b) Space compliance area 55%
(c) Space compliance area 75%
(d) Space compliance area 85%
Figure 22: Daylight distribution in rooms for different thresholds and space compliance areas.
2source: earth.google.com
vii
==PAGE:76==
Figure 23: Daylight autonomy
viii
==PAGE:77==
Figure 24: Daylight factor
ix
==PAGE:78==
8.3.3
Building 116
This Appendix includes the analysis of Building 116. Figure 25 shows the building and its
surroundings.3
The rest of the Figures illustrate the building’s daylight analysis that was
described in the main text.
Figure 25: Aerial view
Figure 26: Ratio of compliance for the different metrics
(a) Space compliance area 50%
(b) Space compliance area 55%
(c) Space compliance area 75%
(d) Space compliance area 85%
Figure 27: Daylight distribution in rooms for different thresholds and space compliance areas.
3source: earth.google.com
x
==PAGE:79==
Figure 28: Daylight autonomy and daylight factor
xi
==PAGE:80==
8.3.4
Building 310
This Appendix includes the analysis of Building 310. Figure 29 shows the building and its
surroundings.4
The rest of the Figures illustrate the building’s daylight analysis that was
described in the main text.
Figure 29: Aerial view
Figure 30: Ratio of compliance for the different metrics
(a) Space compliance area 50%
(b) Space compliance area 55%
(c) Space compliance area 75%
(d) Space compliance area 85%
Figure 31: Daylight distribution in rooms for different thresholds and space compliance areas.
4source: earth.google.com
xii
==PAGE:81==
Figure 32: Daylight autonomy
xiii
==PAGE:82==
Figure 33: Daylight factor
xiv
==PAGE:83==
References
1.
Boyce P, Hunter C, and Howlett O. The Benefits of Daylight through Windows. Lighting
Research Center, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 2003.
2.
Edwards L and Torcellini P. A Literature Review of the Effects of Natural Light on Building
Occupants. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy 2002.
3.
Heschong L. Daylighting and Human Performance. ASHRAE Journal 2002.
4.
Mantzourani K, Doulos L, Kontadakis A, and Tsangrassoulis A. The effect of the daylight
zone on lighting energy savings. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science
2020.
5.
CEN. Daylight in buildings: DS/EN 17037:2018. 2018.
6.
IES. Spatial Daylight Autonomy (sDA). url: https://help.iesve.com/ve2021/2_2_4_
3__spatial_daylight_autonomy__sda_.htm.
7.
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. Approved Method: IES Spatial Day-
light Autonomy (sDA) and Annual Sunlight Exposure(ASE). 2012.
8.
Jakubiec J. Data-Driven Selection of Typical Opaque Material Reflectances for Lighting
Simulation. 2022.
9.
Jakubiec JA, Inanici M, Wymelenberg KVD, and Mahic A. Improving the Accuracy of
Measurements in Daylit Interior Scenes Using High Dynamic Range Photography. PLEA
2016–Cities, Buildings, People: Towards Regenerative Environments, Proceedings of the
32nd International Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture 2016.
xv
==PAGE:84==
74
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Questionnaire
The entire questionnaire can be seen in Table B.1. In addition, Figure B.1 illustrates
the printed paper provided along with the questionnaire for the drawing evaluation
of the perceived daylit area in the room.
Figure B.1. Printed paper for drawing evaluation in B118-0
==PAGE:86==
76
Appendix B Questionnaire
Demographics and general information
Age, gender, ethnicity
Vision improvement
Glasses, Contact lenses,
Laser surgery, Other
General information about the conditions in the room
At this moment, the curtains/blinds are:
Open, Partly open/closed, Closed
If the blinds/curtains are partly open, which part of the window is covered?
Upper part, Sides, Bottom part
If the blinds/curtains are closed, can you still see through them?
Yes, No
At this moment, the area of the window that can be open is:
Open, Partly open/closed, Closed
Would you like to have the electric light on?
Yes, No
How do you describe the sky conditions now?
Clear/Sunny, Partly sunny/Partly cloudy, Cloudy
At this moment, how satisfied are you with the daylight amount in this room?
Dissatisfied
Slightly dissatisfied
Neither dissatisfied nor satisfied
Slightly satisfied
Satisfied
At this moment, how satisfied are you with the daylight uniformity in this room?
Dissatisfied
Slightly dissatisfied
Neither dissatisfied nor satisfied
Slightly satisfied
Satisfied
How do you find the distance between the desk and the window?
Comfortable, Uncomfortable
Regarding the distance between the desk and the window, would you rather be:
Further, No change, Closer
Subjective indoor environment assessment
At this moment, how would you prefer the thermal conditions to be?
Cooler
Slightly cooler
No change (Neither cooler nor warmer)
Slightly warmer
Warmer
At this moment, how comfortable are you with the thermal conditions?
Comfortable, Uncomfortable, Extremely uncomfortable
At this moment, how would you prefer the acoustic conditions to be?
Quieter
Slightly quieter
No change (Neither quieter nor noisier)
Slightly noisier
Noisier
At this moment, how comfortable are you with the acoustic conditions?
Comfortable, Uncomfortable, Extremely uncomfortable
At this moment, how do you perceive the indoor air quality?
Stuffy, Neither stuffy nor fresh, Fresh
At this moment, how comfortable are you with the indoor air quality?
Comfortable, Uncomfortable, Extremely uncomfortable
Subjective daylight assessment
At this moment, how do you perceive the daylight amount on your desk?
Low
Slightly low
Neither low nor high
Slightly high
High
At this moment, how would you prefer the daylight level to be?
Darker
Slightly darker
No change (Neither darker nor brighter)
Slightly brighter
Brighter
At this moment, how satisfied are you with the daylight level?
Dissatisfied
Slightly dissatisfied
Neither dissatisfied nor satisfied
Slightly satisfied
Satisfied
At this moment, how comfortable are you with the daylight amount on your desk?
Comfortable, Uncomfortable, Extremely uncomfortable
Which aspects contributed the most to feeling uncomfortable?
Spatial daylight amount suﬀiciency in the room
In the printed plan drawing draw the curve(s) that enclose the area(s) that you think the daylight amount is suﬀicient to work without turning on the lights at this moment.
Assessment of indoor climate conditions throughout the day
The daylight conditions in the room positively influenced my productivity today.
Disagree
Slightly disagree
Neither disagree nor agree
Slightly agree
Agree
Through the day, did you have to make any changes in the room?
Table B.1. Questionnaire
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
CEN, “Daylight in buildings: Ds/en 17037:2018,” 2018.
[2]
Social-
og
Boligstyrelsen,
“Lys
og
udsyn
(§
377
-
§
384).”
https://bygningsreglementet.dk/. [Online; accessed 13-June-2024].
[3]
International Electrotechnical Commission, “Lighting / lighting technology
and
daylighting.”
https://www.electropedia.org/iev/iev.nsf/display?
openform&ievref=845-29-029, 12 2020. [Online; accessed 13-March-2024].
[4]
International Electrotechnical Commission, “Lighting / lighting technology
and
daylighting.”
https://www.electropedia.org/iev/iev.nsf/display?
openform&ievref=845-29-028, 12 2020. [Online; accessed 13-March-2024].
[5]
International
Electrotechnical
Commission,
“Lighting
/
radiation,
quan-
tities
and
units.”
https://www.electropedia.org/iev/iev.nsf/display?
openform&ievref=731-01-04, 10 1991. [Online; accessed 13-March-2024].
[6]
International
Electrotechnical
Commission,
“Lighting
/
radiation,
quan-
tities
and
units.”
https://www.electropedia.org/iev/iev.nsf/display?
openform&ievref=845-21-003, 12 2020. [Online; accessed 13-March-2024].
[7]
G. Macangus-Gerrard, “Chapter 14 - offshore lighting,” Offshore Electrical En-
gineering Manual (Second Edition), pp. 145–164, 2018.
[8]
D. Berson, F. Dunn, and M. Takao, “Phototransduction by retinal ganglion cells
that set the circadian clock,” Science (New York, N.Y.), vol. 295, pp. 1070–3, 03
2002.
[9]
S. Hattar, H. Liao, M. Takao, D. Berson, and K.-W. Yau, “Melanopsin-
containing retinal ganglion cells: architecture, projections, and intrinsic pho-
tosensitivity,” Science (New York, N.Y.), vol. 295, pp. 1065–70, 03 2002.
[10] I. Provencio, I. Rodriguez, G. Jiang, W. Hayes, E. Moreira, and M. Rollag, “A
novel human opsin in the inner retina,” The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬀicial
journal of the Society for Neuroscience, vol. 20, pp. 600–5, 02 2000.
[11] J. Gooley, J. Lu, D. Fischer, and C. Saper, “A broad role for melanopsin in
nonvisual photoreception,” The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬀicial journal of
the Society for Neuroscience, vol. 23, pp. 7093–106, 09 2003.
==PAGE:88==
78
Appendix Bibliography
[12] S. Hattar, M. Kumar, A. Park, P. Tong, J. Tung, K.-W. Yau, and D. Berson,
“Central projections of melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion cells in the mouse,”
The Journal of comparative neurology, vol. 497, pp. 326–49, 07 2006.
[13] P. Khademagha, M. Aries, A. Rosemann, and E. van Loenen, “Implementing
non-image-forming effects of light in the built environment: A review on what
we need,” Building and Environment, vol. 180, pp. 263–272, 08 2016.
[14] M. Rea, M. Figueiro, and J. Bullough, “Circadian photobiology: An emerging
framework for lighting practice and research,” Lighting Research and Technology,
vol. 34, pp. 177–187, 09 2002.
[15] W. van Bommel and G. Beld, “Lighting for work: A review of visual and bio-
logical effects,” Lighting Research
Technology - LIGHTING RES TECHNOL,
vol. 36, pp. 255–269, 12 2004.
[16] C. Cajochen, “Alerting effects of light,” Sleep medicine reviews, vol. 11, pp. 453–
64, 01 2008.
[17] M. Andersen, J. Mardaljevic, and S. Lockley, “A framework for predicting the
non-visual effects of daylight-part i: Photobiology-based model,” Lighting Re-
search and Technology, vol. 44, pp. 37–53, 03 2012.
[18] J. Mardaljevic, M. Andersen, N. Roy, and J. Christoffersen, “A framework for
predicting the non-visual effects of daylight - part ii: The simulation model,”
Lighting Research and Technology, vol. 46, pp. 388–406, 07 2013.
[19] T. Kruisselbrink, R. Dangol, and A. Rosemann, “Photometric measurements of
lighting quality: An overview,” Building and Environment, vol. 138, 04 2018.
[20] M. Boubekri, “Appraisal of the lighting conditions in an oﬀice building: Results
of a survey,” Indoor and Built Environment, vol. 4, pp. 162–169, 05 1995.
[21] International Electrotechnical Commission, “Lighting / radiation, quantities and
units, illuminance.” https://www.electropedia.org/iev/iev.nsf/display?
openform&ievref=845-21-060, 12 2020. [Online; accessed 13-March-2024].
[22] International Electrotechnical Commission,
“Lighting / radiation,
quanti-
ties and units, luminous flux.” https://www.electropedia.org/iev/iev.nsf/
display?openform&ievref=845-21-039, 12 2020. [Online; accessed 13-March-
2024].
[23] International Electrotechnical Commission, “Lighting / radiation, quantities and
units,
luminance.” https://www.electropedia.org/iev/iev.nsf/display?
openform&ievref=845-21-050, 12 2020. [Online; accessed 13-March-2024].
[24] International Electrotechnical Commission, “Lighting / radiation, quantities
and units, luminous intensity.” https://www.electropedia.org/iev/iev.nsf/
display?openform&ievref=845-21-045, 12 2020. [Online; accessed 13-March-
2024].
==PAGE:89==
Appendix Bibliography
79
[25] International Commission on Illumination (CIE) and L. Schlangen, International
Standard: CIE System for Metrology of Optical Radiation for iPRGC-Influenced
Responses to Light. CIE, December 2018. CIE S 026:2018.
[26] R. J. Lucas, S. N. Peirson, D. M. Berson, T. M. Brown, H. M. Cooper, C. A.
Czeisler, M. G. Figueiro, P. D. Gamlin, S. W. Lockley, J. B. O’Hagan, L. L.
Price, I. Provencio, D. J. Skene, and G. C. Brainard, “Measuring and using light
in the melanopsin age,” Trends in Neurosciences, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[27] M. Rea, M. Figueiro, J. Bullough, and A. Bierman, “A model of phototransduc-
tion by the human circadian system,” Brain research. Brain research reviews,
vol. 50, pp. 213–28, January 2006.
[28] M. Rea, M. Figueiro, A. Bierman, and J. Bullough, “Circadian light,” Journal
of circadian rhythms, vol. 8, p. 2, February 2010.
[29] M. Rea, M. Figueiro, A. Bierman, , and R. Hamner, “Modeling the spectral
sensitivity of the human circadian system,” Lighting Research and Technology,
vol. 44, pp. 386–396, December 2012.
[30] M. Rea and M. Figueiro, “Light as a circadian stimulus for architectural lighting,”
Lighting Research and Technology, vol. 50, December 2016.
[31] K. W. Houser and T. Esposito, “Human-centric lighting: Foundational consider-
ations and a five-step design process,” Frontiers in Neurology, vol. 12, 2021.
[32] S. Rahman, M. S. Hilaire, C. Gronfier, A. Chang, N. Santhi, C. Czeisler, E. Kler-
man, and S. Lockley, “Functional decoupling of melatonin suppression and cir-
cadian phase resetting in humans,” The Journal of Physiology, vol. 596, October
2017.
[33] M.-C. Dubois, N. Gentile, C. Amorim, W. Osterhaus, S. Stoffer, R. Jakobiak,
D. Geisler-Moroder, B. Matusiak, F. Onarheim, and E. Tetri, “Performance
evaluation of lighting and daylighting retrofits: Results from iea shc task 50:,”
Energy Procedia, vol. 91, pp. 926–937, 06 2016.
[34] IES, “Spatial daylight autonomy (sda).”
[35] G. I. Tunahan, H. Altamirano, J. U. Teji, and C. Ticleanu, “Evaluation of day-
light perception assessment methods,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 13, 04 2022.
[36] J. Wines, “Green architecture,” 09 2019. [Online; accessed 07-April-2024].
[37] BRE Global Ltd 2021, “Breeam international new construction version 6.0.”
[38] U.S. Green Building Council, “Leed bd+c: New constructionv4.1 - leed v4.1.”
[39] International WELL Building Institute, “Well v2.”
[40] J. A. Veitch and G. R. Newsham, “Determinants of lighting quality ii: Research
and recommendations.,” 1996.
==PAGE:90==
80
Appendix Bibliography
[41] I. Bournas, M.-C. Dubois, and T. Laike, “Perceived daylight conditions in multi-
family apartment blocks – instrument validation and correlation with room ge-
ometry,” Building and Environment, vol. 169, 12 2019.
[42] V. R. M. L. Verso, F. Giuliani, F. Caffaro, F. Basile, F. Peron, T. D. Mora,
L. Bellia, F. Fragliasso, M. Beccali, M. Bonomolo, F. Nocera, and V. Costanzo,
“Questionnaires and simulations to assess daylighting in italian university class-
rooms for ieq and energy issues,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 252, 09 2021.
[43] C. Reinhart and D. Weissman, “The daylit area – correlating architectural stu-
dent assessments with current and emerging daylight availability metrics,” Build-
ing and Environment, vol. 50, p. 155–164, 04 2012.
[44] C. Reinhart, D. Weissman, and T. Rakha, “Predicting the daylit area—a compar-
ison of students assessments and simulations at eleven schools of architecture,”
LEUKOS, vol. 10, 10 2014.
[45] A. Handina, N. Mukarromah, R. A. Mangkuto, and R. T. Atmodipoero, “Pre-
diction of daylight availability in a large hall with multiple facades using com-
puter simulation and subjective perception,” Building and Environment, vol. 170,
pp. 313–319, 2017.
[46] Z. Kong and J. Jakubiec, “Instantaneous and long-term lighting design metrics
for higher education buildings in a tropical climate,” 09 2019.
[47] Z. Keskin, Y. Chen, and S. Fotios, “Daylight and seating preference in open-plan
library spaces,” International Journal of Sustainable Lighting, vol. 17, pp. 12–20,
06 2017.
[48] B. Jung and M. Inanici, “Measuring circadian lighting through high dynamic
range photography,” Lighting Research Technology, vol. 51, pp. 742–763, 2019.
[49] S. Rockcastle and M. Andersen, “Human perceptions of daylight composition in
architecture: A preliminary study to compare quantitative contrast measures to
subjective user assessments in hdr renderings,” 12 2015.
[50] K. Chamilothori, J. Wienold, and M. Andersen, “Daylight patterns as a means
to influence the spatial ambience: a preliminary study.,” 09 2016.
[51] K. Chamilothori, G. Chinazzo, J. Rodrigues, E. Dan-Glauser, J. Wienold, and
M. Andersen, Subjective and physiological responses to façade and sunlight pat-
tern geometry in virtual reality. PhD thesis, 01 2019.
[52] M. Adamsson, T. Laike, and T. Morita, “Seasonal variation in bright daylight ex-
posure, mood and behavior among a group of oﬀice workers in sweden,” Journal
of Circadian Rhythms, vol. 16, 02 2018.
[53] J. Jakubiec, Q. Geraldine, and S. Thanyalak, “Long-term visual quality evalua-
tions correlate with climate-based daylighting metrics in tropical oﬀices – a field
study,” Lighting Research and Technology, vol. 53, 06 2020.
==PAGE:91==
Appendix Bibliography
81
[54] A. Nezamdoost and K. Wymelenberg, “Revisiting the daylit area: Examining
daylighting performance using subjective human evaluations and simulated com-
pliance with the leed version 4 daylight credit,” LEUKOS The Journal of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, vol. 13, 11 2016.
[55] A. Nezamdoost and K. Wymelenberg, “A daylighting field study using human
feedback and simulations to test and improve recently adopted annual daylight
performance metrics,” Journal of Building Performance Simulation, vol. 10,
pp. 1–13, 06 2017.
[56] Z. Kong and J. Jakubiec, “Evaluations of long-term lighting qualities for com-
puter labs in singapore,” Building and Environment, vol. 194, 02 2021.
[57] B. Liu, Y. Liu, Q. Deng, and K. Hu, “A study on daylighting metrics related
to the subjective evaluation of daylight and visual comfort of students in china,”
Energy and Buildings, vol. 287, 03 2023.
[58] N. Shafavi, M. Tahsildoost, and M. Zomorodian, “Investigation of illuminance-
based metrics in predicting occupants’ visual comfort (case study: Architecture
design studios),” Solar Energy, vol. 197, 01 2020.
[59] M. Zomorodian and M. Tahsildoost, “Assessing the effectiveness of dynamic
metrics in predicting daylight availability and visual comfort in classrooms,” Re-
newable Energy, vol. 134, 11 2018.
[60] S. Korsavi, M. Zomorodian, and M. Tahsildoost, “Visual comfort assessment of
daylit and sunlit areas: A longitudinal field survey in classrooms in kashan, iran,”
Energy and Buildings, vol. 128, 07 2016.
[61] J. Jakubiec, T. Srisamranrungruang, Z. Kong, G. Quek, and R. Talami, “Sub-
jective and measured evidence for residential lighting metrics in the tropics,” 09
2019.
[62] N. G. Vásquez, C. Amorim, B. Matusiak, J. Kanno, N. Sokol, J. Martyniuk-
Pęczek, S. Sibilio, M. Scorpio, and Y. Koga, “Lighting conditions in home oﬀice
and occupant’s perception: exploring drivers of satisfaction,” Energy and Build-
ings, vol. 261, 02 2022.
[63] D. H. Kim and K. Mansfield, “A cross-cultural study on perceived lighting quality
and occupants’ well-being between uk and south korea,” Energy and Buildings,
vol. 119, 03 2016.
[64] L. Díaz, Y. A. Hernández Duque, H. Gallego, and M. Piderit, “Differences in
perception of daylighting suﬀiciency related to the geographical location in the
context of university classrooms,” Journal of Green Building, vol. 17, pp. 181–
209, 03 2022.
[65] ISO/TC 159/SC 5, “Iso 10551:2019,” 06 2019.
[66] ISO/TC 159/SC 5, “Iso 28802:2012,” 03 2013.
==PAGE:92==
82
Appendix Bibliography
[67] DATAtab, “Spearman’s rank correlation coeﬀicient.” https://datatab.net/
tutorial/spearman-correlation.
[68] Mehrdad
Hassanzadeh,
“Why
we
should
use
k-fold
cross
validation?.”
https://medium.com/@mehrdadhz.75/why-we-should-use-k-fold-cross-
validation-63209c8046f9. [Online; accessed 22-June-2024].
[69] Teemu
Kanstrén,
“A
look
at
precision,
recall,
and
f1-score.”
https:
//towardsdatascience.com/a-look-at-precision-recall-and-f1-score-
36b5fd0dd3ec. [Online; accessed 10-June-2024].
[70] The Pennsylvania State University, “3.2 - identifying outliers:
Iqr method.”
https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat200/lesson/3/3.2. [Online; accessed 09-
June-2024].
