==PAGE:1==
Limited Resource Chatbots
How well can they perform?
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Limited Resource Chatbots
How well can they perform?
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Ambrus Török
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five and a half months at the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of machine learning and statistics.
Ambrus Török ­ s212910
Signature
Date
ii
Limited Resource Chatbots
Ambrus Török
10-03-2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Background: Many organizations face challenges when trying to efficiently utilize knowl­
edge from their document collections. These documents could internal wikis, customer
cases and their analyses, research reports, documentations, etc. The common denomi­
nator is that they are mostly text based. Often, current ways of tapping into this knowledge
is manual search, which is not particularly effective and introduces a bottleneck in the re­
search process.
Objective: This thesis aims to review and experiment with various approaches for self­
hosted solutions for efficiently running Large Language Models (LLMs) and providing them
with more information in order to enhance the information content of their output.
Methods: The study uses a mixed method approach: a literature review, prototype cre­
ation followed by automated and user testing, concluded by quantitative and qualitative
analyses.
Results: The study found that open­source LLMs hosted on low resources compare mod­
estly to their commercially available peers. They perform meaningful embeddings that
can used to setup a document store. Additionally, the study compared various Retrieval
Augmented Generation (RAG) approaches and found that active approaches work best.
Implications: This research study suggests solutions that combine locally hosted LLMs
enhanced with RAG approaches to extract and process information from large document
collections. With proper prompting the models can leave hallucinations behind, but will
compromise their speed for accuracy. Such models are useful when users want help
formulating factually correct and thorough answers, but they do not need immediate re­
sponses.
Limited Resource Chatbots
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to like to express my gratitude towards my supervisors and
mentors from, DTU Sneha Das and Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen and from Topsoe
A/S, Jimmy Kjærsgaard­Rasmussen and Mark Hoffmann who patiently yet enthusiasti­
cally guided, supported and motivated me throughout the project.
I would like to thank Topsoe A/S for the opportunity, their trust in me with this project and
for providing me with the space and infrastructure to work.
I would like to thank my family and friends for always being available for providing encour­
agement and motivation whenever I was in need of a break.
iv
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
About the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Evolution Large Language Models (LLMs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.3
Vector Databases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Technological overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Stack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.1
Python
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.2
Docker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5.3
Qdrant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.6
Obstacles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2
Methodology
12
2.1
Finding the optimal parameters for the vector database
. . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.1.1
Test preparations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.1.2
Testing approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Experiments with LLMs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2.1
Embedding using LLMs on CPU vs GPU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2.2
Comparing model sizes against agent performances . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2.3
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Results
24
3.1
Optimal Vector Database setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.2
LLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.2.1
Embeddings on CPU vs GPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.2.2
Agents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3
Comparing RAG approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3.1
Best RAG Approach ­ within Same Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3.2
Comprehensive analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3.3
Comparing Automatic and Human evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Discussion
35
4.1
Vector DB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.1.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
LLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2.1
Embeddings on CPU vs GPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2.2
Comparing different sized models as agents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2.3
Retrieval Augmented Generations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Limited Resource Chatbots
v
==PAGE:8==
5
Conclusion
38
5.1
How do open­source LLMs hosted on low resources compare to their com­
mercially available peers? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.2
How can various RAG approaches be utilized to extract knowledge stored
in documents?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Bibliography
39
A Appendix
43
A.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.2 Vector database experiment tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.3 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
A.4 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
vi
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
About the problem
Many organizations face the challenge of efficiently utilizing knowledge from their doc­
ument collections. These documents might be internal wikis, customer cases and their
analyses, research reports, documentations, etc. The common denominator is that they
are mostly text­based, occasionally with some amount of diagrams, charts, or visualiza­
tions.
Organizations currently have methods of varying effectiveness for tapping into this knowl­
edge. They are often not more than a search engine or manual search. Moreover, even
search engines will fluctuate between varying degrees of usefulness. This often makes
accessing this knowledge ineffective and cumbersome, requiring a lot of manual or semi­
manual maintenance. These limitations can originate from various problems such as lack
of common data structure and easy access, then one has to consider that an organization
might have access to modest IT resources only.
The partner for this thesis Topsoe A/S [1] has access to a few thousand scientific articles
that are not publicly available. These papers are primarily on various fields of chemistry
and physics and scientists use them for their research. The current way of tapping into this
knowledge is manual search. That being not particularly effective introduces a bottleneck
in the research process as scientists are required to do a lot of searching, and then read­
ing. In some cases the paper they have read might turn out to be about something else
and in other cases, useful information might go unnoticed as not all papers have relevant
titles or use synonyms. Given the confidential nature of these documents, any solution for
extracting and processing information must be implemented without using external APIs.
The available IT resources follow a similarly modest structure as described above. With
no more than a single A100 GPU [2] available for this project, they are significantly lag­
ging behind leading tech companies. This resource limitation introduces the low­resource
environment to this thesis.
1.1.1
Problem statement
This thesis is scoped to review and experiment with various approaches for self­hosted
solutions for efficiently running Large Language Models and providing them with more
information to enhance their output’s information content.
The project proposes 2 major questions:
1. How do open­source LLMs hosted on low resources compare to their commercially
available peers?
2. How can various RAG approaches extract knowledge stored in documents?
1.1.2
Thesis structure
The introduction to the different experiments made can be found in chapter 2:
• Comparing different embedding models for vector databases
• Discovering relationships between the length of stored chunks and the length of the
query text
• Comparing the performance of generating embeddings on CPU and GPU
Limited Resource Chatbots
1
==PAGE:10==
• Testing performance of open­source LLMs as agents
• Comparing different RAG approaches
Data collected during the experiments is organized into tables and visualizations inchapter 3.
Assessment of said data and visualizations is in chapter 4.
Understanding and explaining the visualizations and the experiments is in chapter 3.
Summaries and takeaways of the experiment are presented in chapter 5.
1.2
Literature Review
1.2.1
Evolution Large Language Models (LLMs)
Early Language Models
Language models have seen significant improvements in the field of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) over the past few years. Early models were rule­based systems like
n­gram models, followed by more advanced models such as Hidden Markov Models [3].
As neural networks gained popularity, models such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
and Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM) networks emerged [3]. The latest development is
the transformer­based LLMs, which excel in complex, sequence­based language tasks,
such as translation [3] [4].
Transformers in LLMs
LLMs, such as Google’s BERT model introduced in 2018 [5] or OpenAI’s GPT­3 introduced
in 2020 [6][7], rely on transformers [4], introduced in 2017. The self­attention mechanism
at the core of transformers allows the model to consider the importance of different tokens
in a sentence when predicting output tokens. This allows Transformers to capture long­
range dependencies and context, making them highly effective for tasks like translation,
summarization, question answering, and following conversations.
In a nutshell, the architecture comprises an encoder­decoder framework, with each layer
containing multiple self­attention heads that operate in parallel to learn different aspects of
the data. The model is trained using a large text corpus, enabling it to learn rich language
representations[4].
Autoregressive Generation in Large Language Models
An Autoregressive model is used to describe the behavior of a process, typically as a
function of time. This means it specifies the probabilities of future values based on past
values. In the context of Large Language Models (LLMs), it is customary to refer to chat­
bots as autoregressive, as they generate an output message based on previous input
message(s)[8] [9].
The autoregressive property of LLMs allows for the generation of coherent and contextu­
ally relevant responses by conditioning the generation of each word (token) on the words
(tokens) before it (including both the ones that have been generated and the ones that
served as an input). Such LLMs generate text until they meet a certain stopping criteria –
generally generating a special token, or reaching the maximum number of allowed tokens
[9].
The way LLMs generate contextually coherent text and maintain the flow of conversations
is by sampling from a distribution of plausible or likely tokens or sentences in the case of
more mature models. This distribution contains patterns coming from the training data
and is used to generate text. As long as the model samples from patterns the distribution
we consider correct or true, its output is considered correct as well, but as the model
starts to diverge from the imaginary true distribution, hallucinations start to occur. This
2
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:11==
divergence is not due to the model’s lack of understanding of the real world, but rather
its heavy reliance on the patterns in the training data. The current project aims to bridge
this gap between the two distributions by providing the model with relevant information,
thereby reducing the likelihood of generating misleading or hallucinated text.
Embeddings and Vector Spaces
For Large Language Models (LLMs) to understand text, it needs to be embedded. Embed­
ding a token or text is the process of converting it to fixed­length, dense vector(s). Earlier
similar methods were bag of words (BoW), or TF­IDF. Those were not text embeddings,
they simply measured the importance of phrases in documents [10].
The currently widespread concept of transformers was introduced in ”Attention Is All You
Need” by Vaswani et al. in 2017 [4]. The Transformer architecture is based solely on
attention mechanisms, dispensing recurrence and convolutions entirely. Embeddings in
such systems are created by the embedding layer(s) and are therefore learned automati­
cally and are customized to that given model [4]. These embeddings capture the semantic
meanings of words or tokens in a high­dimensional space [10] [4], allowing for the model
to process them.
As text embeddings are learned by a given model, that given embedding only makes
sense in the vector space of that given model [4]. Embeddings of texts that have a more
similar meaning have a smaller distance between them than those further apart (for ex­
ample the cat and dog will be closer than a cat and a drone [10]. Figure 1.1 showcases a
set of example sentences (Table A.1) embedded using the same approach as throughout
this thesis, then reduced to 2 dimensions. It is visible how points in the same subjects are
closer together while sentences further apart are in different categories.
Figure 1.1: Sentence embeddings reduced to 2 dimensions
Running LLMs in Cloud and Locally
Most LLMs operate in a cloud infrastructure and publish various APIs to interact with them.
Current project’s nature demands rather frequent switching between different models,
thus relying on local models is the preferable approach.
Cloud LLMs operate on multiple GPUs and may shard the models to allow for larger mod­
els to run, as well as load them dynamically depending on the load the server experiences.
Local pipelines keep the model loaded on a single GPU and wait for inference requests.
The most well­known ways of running LLMs locally are probably the llama.cpp project
[11], as well as the Huggingface Python library [12]. They are intertwined in multiple ways
Limited Resource Chatbots
3
==PAGE:12==
and are different in technological fundamentals, but their core concepts are somewhat
similar.
The llama.cpp [11] project is a high­performance, low­latency C++ library designed for
running Language Models (LLMs) locally. Its interface allows users to load models and
perform inference tasks efficiently. The project is particularly known for its speed and
efficiency, making it a preferred choice for applications that require fast response times
and high throughput.
The Huggingface Python library [12] [13], on the other hand, is a comprehensive library
that supports a wide range of models and tasks for Natural Language Processing (NLP).
Being written in Python, it is accessible and easy to use for a large number of developers.
The library provides pre­trained models for various NLP tasks, including text generation
for running LLMs. Its interface allows for high customization and easy integration into
applications.
LLM Model Size Reductions
Conversational LLMs have billions of parameters. For META’s LLaMa­2­70B model, 280
GB VRAM is required to be loaded as is, at full precision (32­bit floats): [14].
VRAM size = 70 × 109 parameters × 32, bits/parameter
8bits/byte
= 280 GB
GPUs are expensive, thus to reduce the need for such resources, various techniques
have been introduced.
Quantization is a method used to reduce the computational and memory costs of run­
ning inference. There are different approaches to do that, but overall it achieves this by
representing the numerical values (weights and activations) within AI models using low­
precision data types, such as 8­bit floats (float8), instead of the traditional 32­bit floating­
point (float32) data types. The purpose of all quantization methods is to reduce the size
of the data and make it easier to manage, store, and process [15] [16]. After reducing the
precision of weights, a quantized model is required to be fine­tuned to ensure that the lost
precision is somewhat compensated.
Pruning is used to reduce a model’s size by eliminating unimportant weights. To achieve
this, weights contributing the least to a model’s output are identified after training and are
either set to zero or removed completely [16].
In the case of neural networks, quantization outperforms pruning [16]. Pruning may be
beneficial for very high compression ratios but will often result in higher errors due to
rounding weights to zero. As proven to be better by Kuzmin et al. in ”Pruning vs Quanti­
zation: Which is Better?”, there are also more quantized versions of LLMs (for example)
in the Huggingface online collection [12] [13] [17] to be used in research or commercial
environments.
4
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:13==
1.2.2
Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG)
Figure 1.2: Retrieval Augmented Generation Concept
LLMs generate their output based on their input. The current trajectory in AI research is to
utilize LLMs as replacements and/or extensions for search engines. The outputs of LLMs
mimic patterns in their training data. Consider this a distribution of patterns that are likely
to occur next. Given their training data and instructions, LLMs generate responses that
can sometimes be confident, but factually incorrect [18]. One mitigation strategy for such
errors is the use of Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) models, which range from
fine­tuned models [19] to those that rely solely on prompt engineering [20].
Hallucinations
LLMs can generate outputs that are factually incorrect or misleading, a phenomenon
known as hallucination. Hallucinations are grammatically correct and fluent pieces of
text, that are nonsensical or unfaithful to the provided context [18]. Hallucinations can
occur when the LLM’s next token (or set of tokens) sampling deviates from the distribu­
tion we consider to be correct. RAG models aim to mitigate this issue by retrieving factual
information from external sources and appending that to the input of the model. Under the
hood, it moves the LLM’s hidden state in a direction to sample from the factually correct
distribution.
Change in information
LLMs are trained on massive datasets of free text, code, then are aligned on structured
text. Their first­round training information might not always be up­to­date or accurate.
Additionally, LLMs are not programmed with the ability to discern the real world or under­
stand the passage of time. Therefore, they might not be able to account for changes in
information over time, potentially leading to outdated or inaccurate outputs. This draw­
back originates from the resources required to train them. There is an immense amount
of information entering various knowledge bases every day. Re­training billion parameter
models [14] [21] is not always an available option.
Concept of RAG
RAG models address the limitations of LLMs by combining retrieval and generation tech­
niques.
• Retrieval: The model uses a retrieval engine to search for relevant information from
a vast corpus of external knowledge, such as documents, databases, or knowledge
graphs.
• Generation: The retrieved information is then fed into the model together with the
original input, and the LLM is instructed to utilize information from within that context.
Limited Resource Chatbots
5
==PAGE:14==
RAG vs Basic LLMs
Compared to basic LLMs, RAG models offer several advantages:
• Increased Factual Accuracy: By leveraging external knowledge sources, RAG mod­
els are less prone to generating hallucinations or factually incorrect information.
• Improved Coherence and Consistency: RAG models can access and integrate rel­
evant information from external sources, leading to more coherent and consistent
outputs compared to LLMs that rely solely on their internal knowledge base.
• Enhanced Task Performance: RAG models have been shown to outperform ba­
sic LLMs on various NLP tasks, such as question answering, summarization, and
dialogue generation.
Applications of RAG
RAG models have the potential to be applied in various domains and tasks. Current
project’s interests are in question answering, however, the following use cases may also
utilize this approach for increased accuracy.
• Question Answering: RAG models can be used to answer complex questions by
retrieving relevant information from knowledge bases and integrating it into their
responses.
• Conversational Systems: Chatbots and other dialogue systems can leverage RAG
models to provide more informative and comprehensive responses to user queries.
• Document Summarization: RAG models can be used to generate summaries of
factual content by retrieving relevant information and condensing it into a concise
and informative format.
• Machine Translation: RAG models can be used to improve the accuracy and fluency
of machine translation by accessing and incorporating context­specific information.
• Agents: Agents are models that can interact with the world through performing ac­
tions. For that, they require data from various sources, which they can then use to
decide on their next interaction.
Examples of RAG approaches
There are passive and active RAG approaches. The simplest passive approaches simply
take the query coming from the user and use that to retrieve data which they append to
the input of the model for a better output. More complex ones might transform the user’s
input through several steps, for example by generating queries based on it or extracting
keywords, the outcome of these are not directly reviewed by the model.
Active approaches on the other hand iteratively improve their answers, for example by
identifying low­probability tokens or by judging the returned response in some way. FLARE
[20] and Self­RAG [19] are two such active approaches. FLARE generates the output
sentence­by­sentence and extracts low­probability tokens to search for those, while Self­
RAG introduces a fine­tuning approach that teaches the language model to evaluate its
answer while generating it.
The self­reflection ability of Self­RAG raises the question: Why not make every language
model with that in mind? The answer is that the cost of this special ability is losing perfor­
mance at general tasks.
Some agents are also examples of RAG. For example, retrieving weather information
or collection data from a database before [22] will affect the output of the model by the
content of their returned data.
6
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:15==
Challenges and Limitations of RAG
Despite their potential, RAG models also face some challenges and limitations:
• Bias and Fairness: The retrieved information might still contain biases present in
the underlying knowledge sources, which can be reflected in the generated outputs.
Addressing bias and ensuring fairness in RAG models is an ongoing research area.
• Quality of External Knowledge Sources: The accuracy and reliability of the gener­
ated outputs ultimately depend on the quality and trustworthiness of the information
retrieved from external sources.
By addressing these challenges and continuing further research, RAG models have the
potential to become even more powerful and versatile tools for various NLP applications,
leading to more informative and reliable AI systems.
1.2.3
Vector Databases
Traditional relational databases excel at finding records based on indexed columns but
have difficulties storing vectors and calculating similarities between them. As the need for
databases finding similar vectors has risen, vector databases emerged. These databases
are optimized to handle high­dimensional data efficiently. They usually have a single vec­
tor representing a record (which may contain other structured or unstructured data) and
return records most similar to a query vector. The degree of similarity can be determined
by various vector similarity metrics, the most widespread ones being Cosine similarity, Eu­
clidean distance, dot product, and Jaccard similarity (Jaccard similarity was more popular
with TF­IDF­based embeddings) [23].
Difference between search engines and vector databases
Traditional search engines, such as Bing and Google, operate primarily based on key­
words, lexical similarity, and the frequency of word occurrences. When users submit
queries, search engines match them to indexed documents using textual information.
Their indexing approach relies heavily on textual content, metadata, and links. As a re­
sult, they excel at retrieving relevant documents that are matched using specific keywords.
However, their limitations become apparent when dealing with context, nuances, and se­
mantic relationships between words. Exact keyword matches are crucial for accurate
results in traditional search engines. They rely on exact keyword matches, with optional
synonyms defined. This is preferred when looking for exact phrases, and when using
various other search tools, but not when we require semantical match [24][23].
These two sentences have similar semantic meanings, but a system operating on key­
words would have difficulties identifying them as similar:
1. ”I adopted a dog from the animal shelter.”
2. ”I got a new pet from the pound.”
In contrast, vector databases serve a different purpose. They are specialized systems
designed specifically for handling high­dimensional vector data. The vectors represent
complex data points—such as images or pieces of text. Instead of keywords and in­
dexes, vector databases represent data as mathematical vectors. These vectors capture
both magnitude and direction in multi­dimensional space (for example BERT has 768 long
vectors [5]). The primary use case for vector databases is performing similarity searches.
When a query is submitted, these databases compare vectors to find the nearest neigh­
bors in the given embedding space. Applications of vector databases include recommen­
dation systems, image and speech recognition, and most relevantly to current projects,
semantic search. To make search operations faster, vector databases employ various
Limited Resource Chatbots
7
==PAGE:16==
indexing techniques, such as quantization and clustering, which group similar vectors to­
gether [24].
Vector database priorities and parameters
As other databases, vector databases have various hyperparameters to adjust to find a
setup that matches a given project’s needs. When setting up a new database, three major
settings always have to be selected. These are:
1. Embedding model
2. Length of chunks
3. Distance function
Embedding model: a suitable embedding model needs to be chosen, that can produce
meaningful embeddings from the text that the user intends to store. If for example the
user chooses an embedding model that was trained on English text but the embedded
text is in Spanish, the database will perform significantly worse at finding relevant records.
The reason for this is that the model didn’t learn the relationship between those tokens,
but different ones. This is not directly mentioned in ”Attention Is All You Need” by Vaswani
et al. in 2017, but a consequence [4].
Length of chunks: finding the optimal length for the stored chunks is also crucial. If
the lengths of chunks are too short, they might not contain enough information to be
meaningful, while if they are too long, the model might not be large enough to capture all
that meaning, or it will get lost due to its large amount. The length of the chunks should
be determined based on the use case, as well as the embedding model as well, to ensure
they are compatible.
Distance function: the distance function is the metric used to measure the similarity/dis­
tance of the query and the stored vectors. Choosing the right distance function depends
on the embedding model of choice.
1.3
Technological overview
The technological overview section shall serve as an introduction to the available infras­
tructure and the tools used to integrate working models into that infrastructure. The chap­
ter also introduces the created framework including design choices, considerations, and
obstacles. The chapter highlights key differences between proof of concept models that
appear in research papers and implementing them for potential real­world use.
8
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:17==
1.4
Infrastructure
Figure 1.3: Overview of server architecture
The confidential nature of the underlying documents demanded completely on­premises
solutions. The server set out to be used for this project had a single NVIDIA A100 [2]
available, equipped with 80 GB of VRAM. This is just large enough to fit one model with
up to 20 billion parameters, assuming 32­bit floats and no cache.
80 × 109 bytes × 8 bits/byte
32 bits/parameter
= 20 × 109 parameters = 20 billion parameters
As this calculation only includes the model’s weight, as soon as the cache and other
necessary data are considered to be loaded, the actual sizes get smaller.
The project’s host server runs a Linux­based Ubuntu operating system. This, combined
with Python virtual environments enables the resources to be easily manageable. The
setup is not using the newest version of CUDA, but 11.8, because the resource is shared
with others as well. This served as a drawback, causing compatibility issues with certain
model formats, as well as ready­to­run tools. To create an easy­to­be­deployed solution,
an already­existent Docker installation was used.
1.5
Stack
1.5.1
Python
There are many ways to run Large Language models, but the most versatile and flexible
approach is Python. The use of Python virtual environments allowed to effortlessly use
environments on the GPU, and then move those environments to a Docker container. The
primary supporting Python packages were Huggingface, Langchain, and Gradio.
• Huggingface is a platform and a Python library for various machine learning­related
tasks. They provide easy access to various models, including most open­source
LLMs. Most of the interface is available with both Pytorch and Tensorflow support
(two major machine learning libraries). Pytorch was a better choice for the project
as Pytorch handles memory more efficiently. [25]
• Langchain is a Python library assisting in handling LLMs. It provides easy­to­use
templates for certain tasks. The library has great integration with OpenAI as well as
Huggingface interfaces.
Limited Resource Chatbots
9
==PAGE:18==
• Gradio is an open­source Python library used to effortlessly create easy­to­use user
interfaces to interact with machine learning models.
Two different approaches were chosen for handling the data. The first approach was
Jupyter notebooks, which can be executed either from a GUI or from the console. Using
the GUI has the benefit of being interactive while later has the benefit of being encap­
sulated, allowing for more dynamic load­transform pipelines. The other approach was
creating Python scripts, collecting them in a Jupyter notebook, and running the collective
Jupyter notebook. This way it was possible to run them without having to keep an SSH
connection open, creating a more robust pipeline.
1.5.2
Docker
To deploy the LLMs for production, as well as for compatibility reasons, Docker images
were created with GPU support. These images mimicked either the Huggingface Text
Generation Interface or the OpenAI API, as some of Langchain’s components were only
compatible with them. The Docker images were built upon a compatible CUDA image as
a base, allowing for simple utilization of the GPU.
1.5.3
Qdrant
Qdrant [26] is an open­source vector database, capable of handling high­dimensional
vectors efficiently. Qdrant already appeared in other parts of the existing infrastructure,
thus it seemed like an obvious choice. Qdrant has a well­functioning API that integrates
into the rest of the environment via its official Python package [27]. Qdrant supports
multiple distance functions such as Cosine similarity or Euclidean distance, but only one
at a time.
1.6
Obstacles
The project experienced a few setbacks due to compatibility issues between the utilized
libraries and interfaces. Much of the Langchain library’s solutions are accessible via a
standardized interface. However, given the community­based nature of certain parts of
the library, many of the available solutions depend on various APIs. The two primary are
the proprietary OpenAI API and the open­source Huggingface Text Generation Interface.
The latter can either be subscribed to as a PaaS or can be run on­premises. Unfortunately,
though being open­source, it required specific drivers, different from the ones available,
as well as resources that exceeded the available ones.
The project’s need for localized solutions did not align with using public APIs, resulting
in having to allocate part of the available time towards developing solutions for the cus­
tom infrastructure. As a result, the project ended up consisting of code that enables the
deployment of an API that emulates the OpenAI API and the Huggingface Text Genera­
tion Interface. It also includes various reusable components for different segments of the
project.
For instance, the aforementioned Huggingface Text Generation Interface is the inter­
face available when working with the Huggingface deployed models (as PaaS). Many
of Langchain’s tools assume this interface’s availability to make calls to. The most effi­
cient solution to this issue was to implement the interface with partial functionality, thereby
creating a local endpoint that behaves identically to the interface.
Another significant setback was the inability to directly utilize algorithms from research
papers, as they were either reliant on older versions of OpenAI APIs or were overly inte­
grated into their respective frameworks. The process of re­implementing these algorithms
10
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:19==
in a functional and reproducible manner also constituted a large portion of the effort in­
vested in the project. More information about the created implementations is available in
chapter 2.
Limited Resource Chatbots
11
==PAGE:20==
2
Methodology
2.1
Finding the optimal parameters for the vector database
To find a setup for the vector database that fits the project’s needs (as described in sub­
subsection 1.2.3, an optimal vector database setup means that it only returns relevant
documents and returns all of them), a series of tests were planned, essentially a way of
hyperparameter tuning. The goal was to identify the embedding model, distance func­
tion and chunk size parameters in such a combination, that they would allow for accurate
and efficient querying in the VectorDB. A sub­optimal setup would return irrelevant chunks
or would miss relevant chunks.
2.1.1
Test preparations
Multiple combinations of models and metrics were collected to choose from, followed by
tests in multiple rounds, each round eliminating the worst­performing models.
Embedding model
Two available models had both a large enough context window and promising enough
performance (based on their respective research papers) for the present use case:
1. Jina­AI ­ jina­embeddings­v2­base­en [28]
2. Meta­AI ­ LLama2­7B Chat [14]
Jina­AI’s jina­embeddings­v2­base­en [28] model (short: Jina) is an embedding model,
specifically for sequences. It is a monolingual model, supporting up to 8192 tokens on its
input. Its small size (137 million parameters) enables it to efficiently run on a single GPU,
even a CPU.
Meta­AI’s LLama2­7B Chat [14] model (short Llama) is an autoregressive, encoder­decoder
model for text generation. Its 7 billion parameters require more power, but it still fits on a
single NVIDIA A100 GPU [2], even the smaller 40GB version. As this is not an embed­
ding model, it requires special handling to extract embeddings. This is discussed more in
detail in subsubsection 2.1.2.
Length of chunks
Chunk size refers to the amount of data processed (stored) at once and this parameter
has a major influence on the accuracy of the database’s responses. A page worth of
English text is between 250­500 words [29], depending on spacing, font size, figures, etc.
Assuming that embedding anything less than half a page worth of text would not contain
enough relevant information, chunk sizes of 256, 512, 1024, 2048, and 3072 tokens were
selected for testing. The chosen models had different input lengths, with 4096 tokens at
the lowest, therefore testing for chunks that large was unnecessary.
Distance function
The 3 most widely used distance metrics [23] between vectors are:
1. Euclidean Distance
2. Cosine Similarity
3. Dot Product
Euclidean Distance calculates the straight­line distance between two points in a multi­
dimensional space.
12
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:21==
Cosine Similarity measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors, accounting for
orientation over magnitude, making it suitable for text data.
Inner Product or Dot Product measures both distance and angle but doesn’t normalize
the result, making it less effective where normalization is crucial.
While all metrics can be used and will return similar vectors, Cosine Similarity and Eu­
clidean Distance are often preferred due to their ability to account for data variability and
relative frequencies [30].
2.1.2
Testing approach
Figure 2.1: Testing phase 1
Before testing began, the available documents were loaded into the vector database.
subsubsection 2.1.2 subsubsection 2.1.2 will further describe these.
The testing was conducted in 3 phases. The initial phase compared models with various
hyperparameters, then after seeing the outcomes, the second phase proceeded with the
top­performing models. The third phase happened similarly.
The first phase (Figure 2.1) was conducted by generating questions and answers to 250
randomly sampled chunks for each chunk size. The database stored the embedding of
the chunk, then the database was queried using the generated questions. The database
returned the top 5 hits. Each model was assigned a score based on the accuracy of the
returned chunks. If the chunks of the correct document were in the top 5 hits, the model
gained 1 point, then if the correct chunk was in the top 5 hits it gained one more.
The second phase took a similar approach but with different transformations. This time
300 random chunks were sampled for each chunk size. These were summarized for
querying the database with them. In the second phase, the records had to be within the
top 2 results returned from the database. This was expected to help narrow down the
available choices for an embedding model. The purpose of generating summaries was
to prevent the scenario where a question, derived from a larger text segment, would be
Limited Resource Chatbots
13
==PAGE:22==
solely based on just one or two paragraphs of that segment. The second phase was
meant to further reduce the options for choices of embedding models.
The third and final phase also took a similar approach but with different transformations
again. This one was aiming to discover connections between the length of the query text
and the length of the stored text. By this stage, the number of potential embedding models
could be reduced to just 2 approaches. In this last testing phase, a different approach
was followed, and only meaningful chunks were sampled. This was done by asking the
LLM to evaluate each chunk. The queries created are summaries (shorter), paraphrased
versions (around the same length), and elaborated (longer) versions of selected chunks.
While one might contend that the second and the third tests could have been merged,
it is important to note that the second was for model selection, while the third was for
discovering more insights about connections between the length of the embedded and
the queried text.
Creating the chunks
The files available for testing were PDFs. While it might be straightforward to separate
these documents by pages, this approach may break the natural forming of sentences.
To avoid this, each of the PDFs was concatenated into a single string and then split recur­
sively (using the langchain library’s RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter [31]) until the desired
chunk size was reached.
These chunks were then embedded using each model, and stored in the vector database,
as can be seen on Figure 2.1.
Generating test data
As mentioned before, tests were conducted using chunk sizes of 256, 512, 1024, 2048,
and 3072 tokens. There were 66 documents available to test, and with the varying chunk
sizes, they were divided into 7476, 3542, 1599, 738, and 492 total chunks respectively
(see in Table 2.1).
To ensure the quality of the testing data, any chunks that only contained citations or were
just the title page were removed using an LLM. It is important to note this was only imple­
mented at the start of the third phase, which may have slightly affected the scores of the
first two tests. The results of this can be seen in Table 2.1.
After comparing the ratio of relevant to irrelevant documents, the majority (approximately
80%) were still found to be relevant. This suggests that the score still provides a real­
istic comparison of the different models. Following this analysis, three variations of the
selected chunks were created:
• Summarized versions: These were shorter than the original text.
• Paraphrased versions: These were approximately the same length as the original
text.
• Elaborated versions: These were longer than the original text.
However, not all attempts to create these versions were successful. The results of these
generations can be seen in Table 2.1. The table is interpreted in the following way:
• Summary 70: This refers to the number of summaries that were shorter than 70%
of the original text’s length.
• Paraphrase70­130: This refers to the paraphrases that were between 70% and
130% of the original text’s length.
14
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:23==
• Elaborate130: This refers to the elaborations that were longer than 130% of the
original text’s length.
These metrics were used to ensure that the compared texts varied in length, but still had
similar meanings. It can be seen that after a certain chunk size, creating text with identical
meaning failed.
Chunk length
Number
Useful
Summary70
Paraphrase70­130
Elaborate130
256
7476
5727
156
187
296
512
3542
2884
236
153
201
1024
1599
1363
287
37
71
2048
738
681
­
­
­
3072
492
385
­
­
­
Table 2.1: Number of chunks for each length, their usefulness, the number of successfully
generated summaries, paraphrases and elaborations
Creating the embeddings
As introduced in subsubsection 2.1.1, 2 different models were chosen to create the em­
beddings. Only one of the chosen is a dedicated embeddings model (Jina­AI ­ jina­
embeddings­v2­base­en [28], Jina for short), and the other is an LLM (Meta­AI ­ LLama2­
7B Chat [14], Llama for short). There are multiple different ways of extracting embeddings
from an LLM. These depend on how the LLM in Question is set up.
Llama is a decoder using left­to­right attention [14]. Weighted­mean­pooling is based
on the concept that tokens towards the end of a chunk should have a greater contribution
than those at the start. This is because the weights of later tokens are contextualized with
the preceding tokens, whereas the initial tokens have considerably less context represen­
tation [32].
Based on this information, it is possible to extract meaningful embeddings from LLMs by
using weighted mean pooling. For this, the model’s last hidden state is necessary for
each token. These output vectors should represent the tokens in their contexts. Taking
the mean of them should result in a vector representing the input text [32].
Another way of extracting embeddings from a model is called PromptEOL [33]. This
approach showed promising results for the OPT model family [34] without finetuning. This
concept pushes the model to transform a sentence into a single word that represents it.
As this output word should represent the sentence, the model’s last state should also
represent the text before it [32].
Ground truth
In the first phase, LLaMa2­7B was used to generate questions and answers (answers only
for potential later use) for each chunk. The locations of the correct chunks were stored
alongside each question­answer pair. This provided the tests with a ground truth.
After that, The VectorDB was queried with the questions and checked if the correct docu­
ment was identified, or was present in the top­5 results. As information about the chunks’
original document and location within those documents was stored, the vector database’s
accuracy could be verified.
In the second phase, LLaMa2­7B was used to create summaries of each chunk. In this
phase, the top two hits of the vector database were considered.
Limited Resource Chatbots
15
==PAGE:24==
The established scoring system was made of 2 parts. It gave a point for finding the correct
document and another point if the chunk was correct as well. This approach was selected
because with its use it was possible to evaluate both the document­level and the chunk­
level accuracy of the VectorDB. Finding a correct document might be relevant, as it is
probably on a similar topic, however finding the correct chunk is the best­case scenario.
2.2
Experiments with LLMs
2.2.1
Embedding using LLMs on CPU vs GPU
Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT3 or LLaMa­2­7B, are characterized by
their substantial size, primarily determined by the number of parameters they possess.
For instance, a model with 7 billion parameters like LLaMa­2­7B might be considered
small, yet it still demands a significant amount of VRAM. With each parameter as a 32­bit
float, the memory requirement can be calculated as follows:
7 · 109 parameters · 4 bytes/parameter = 28 · 109 bytes = 28 GB
This calculation, however, only accounts for the storage of the model parameters. During
the operation of the model, additional memory is required for computations and caching,
including memory for storing intermediate results, gradients during training, and other
operational necessities. Therefore, the actual memory usage on the GPU’s VRAM will be
higher than the calculated 28 GB.
This is important, as the resource(s) available is a single A100 GPU, with 80 GB of
VRAM. As a consequence, loading the LLaMa­2­13B model for inference, while keep­
ing the LLaMa­2­7B for creating the embeddings, would result in running out of VRAM
However, the creation of embeddings using mean­pooling is a process that can be exe­
cuted on a CPU. Keeping the embedding model on the CPU, a larger model could fit on the
GPU for running inference. This approach is not only feasible but also efficient in terms
of resource allocation and usage. In comparison, when it comes to running inference,
the scenario changes. The computational requirements for inference are considerably
higher, making it impractical to run on a CPU (no matter how much RAM is available),
therefore it is necessary to keep the inference model the GPU.
The Python function illustrating how to generate an embedding is provided in Appendix
Listing A.1.
2.2.2
Comparing model sizes against agent performances
An LLM agent is an artificial intelligence system reaching beyond simple text production.
It utilizes LLM as its base, enabling it to carry on conversations, perform tasks, reason,
and exhibit a degree of autonomy. Agents are not limited to generating text; they can also
reason, and perform actions. For example, when planning a trip to Paris, the user can ask
the LLM about the weather. The LLM will generate a special intermediary response where
it specifies that it is curious about the weather in Paris and for what dates. The weather
API (assume it exists) will return the weather, and the LLM will be able to generate a
response with the available information.
This works great as a concept, but instructing LLMs to return the special intermediary
response that contains the action in the desired format can be a challenging task. It of­
ten takes multiple tries. These experiments compared models of 3 different sizes (Meta
AI’s LLaMa2 7B, 13B, and 70B chat models [14]). The output was expected to contain a
JSON object file, wrapped in triple backticks, a special format that the langchain library’s
AgentOutputParser class can process [35]. The models were given up to 4 tries to gen­
16
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:25==
erate a successful output, otherwise it was marked as a fail. The models were given
identical inputs and inference parameters.
The models were tasked to generate queries for questions to find relevant documents.
The prompt used can be found in Prompt A.4.1. The questions used were randomly sam­
pled from TriviaQA [36]. All models were given the same questions to generate queries
from.
2.2.3
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) is a powerful approach that combines the bene­
fits of retrieval­based and generative methods. It leverages the strengths of both vector
databases and Large Language Models to provide more accurate and contextually rel­
evant responses. The experiment considered multiple approaches to implement RAG,
some more distinct than others. They all had their respective methodology, benefits, and
drawbacks.
The models of choice for evaluating different RAG approaches were:
• LLaMa­2­13B Chat by Meta AI [14]. The authors of the Self­RAG paper [19] also
published their fine­tuned version of this model (based on the non­chat version)
for their approach, enabling an effortless comparison between that and other ap­
proaches.
• LLaMa­2­70B Chat by Meta AI [14] in 4 bit quantization [37]. The open­source model
showed promising performance when compared to ChatGPT.
• Mistral­7B­Instruct­v0.1 by Mistral AI [38] in 4 bit quantization [39]. Similar to LLaMa­
2­70B, this open­source model also displayed a promising performance when com­
pared to ChatGPT.
Passive approaches
A passive approach for RAG is when a model is provided some context and a question,
and is prompted to answer a question based on the available context, but does not check
the correctness or support of its answer post­generation. The system message for these
approaches can be found in the appendix in the appendix under Prompt A.4.2.
The system message also contains instructions for rejecting the context if it is irrelevant to
the input. This approach was chosen over setting similarity thresholds in the database as
it allows for more flexibility in handling the context. By dynamically assessing relevance,
the system should be able to adapt better. It aims to avoid rigid constraints imposed by
fixed similarity thresholds, which might inadvertently exclude relevant context.
Baseline
To observe whether RAG is improving the performance of the chosen models, a baseline
was set, where the model was asked to pretend it has a context available.
Prompt 2.2.1: Mimicked context
USER
question: <user question>
context: Pretend there is a context.
MODEL
<model response>
Naive approach
Limited Resource Chatbots
17
==PAGE:26==
The naive approach is straightforward and efficient. It involves directly taking the query
that the user submitted, looking through the vector database with that, and returning the
first n results. As the locally available models are smaller and have shorter context win­
dows than their public cloud­based competitors, n = 7 ended up being a reasonable
choice. This number was found using trial and error.
The returned chunks are grouped by document and are ordered by their position with their
documents. Please note that the indentations are only present here for demonstration
purposes.
Prompt 2.2.2: Grouped and ordered documents as context
USER
question: <user question>
context:
Document 1
Chunk 4
Chunk 7
Document 2
Chunk 4
Chunk 17
MODEL
<model response>
Transformed Queries
This approach builds upon the first by not only running the user’s query on the vector
database as is, but also including alterations of the query. These alterations are generated
by using the same model that will then generate the answer. This method increases
the chances of finding a match in the database, by considering variations of the user’s
question. It can be particularly useful when dealing with complex or ambiguous queries,
as it broadens the search scope and provides a more comprehensive set of potential
matches.
As there are multiple queries here, the number of returned documents needs to be con­
trolled. Each generated query returns the most relevant chunk from the database. These
are then formatted the same way as Prompt 2.2.2.
Neighbors
The Neighbors approach extends the previous one (2.2.3) by also returning neighboring
chunks of the matched vectors. This method provides a broader context for the gener­
ated response, as it includes related information that may not be directly linked to the
query but is still relevant. This approach can enhance the quality of the output by provid­
ing additional context and detail, making the generated responses more informative and
comprehensive.
Regarding fitting into the context, the larger local models should be able to handle it with­
out any issue, but it is expected that the smallest model would have problems with it.
Nevertheless, framing the relevant pieces of information right should increase the accu­
racy of the returned answer.
Each of these approaches has its strengths and potential applications, and the choice
between them depends on the specific requirements of the task at hand. Exploring these
18
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:27==
different methods should reveal a better, deeper understanding of the potential of RAG
and how it can be effectively utilized in various use cases.
Prompt 2.2.3: Grouped and ordered documents as context, neighbors included
USER
question: <user question>
context:
Document 1
Chunk 3
Chunk 4
Chunk 5
Chunk 6
Chunk 7
Chunk 8
Document 2
Chunk 3
Chunk 4
Chunk 5
Chunk 16
Chunk 17
Chunk 18
MODEL
<model response>
Active approaches
An active approach for RAG is when a model’s answer goes through post­processing and
is prompted to further reflect on responses. This should assist the model in iteratively
improving its response.
Self­RAG
Self­Reflective Retrieval­Augmented Generation (Self­RAG) is an innovative framework,
specifically designed to enhance the quality and factuality of LLMs through a combination
of retrieval and self­reflection. Unlike traditional approaches, Self­RAG aims to improve
generation without compromising the versatility of large language models (LLMs) [19].
The original paper offers a whole framework for training and fine­tuning LLMs for this
purpose, but they also published their own fine­tuned models. As one of their models
was based on LLaMa­2­13B [14], the very model was also chosen for current experiment’s
comparisons. The fine­tuning of the quantized models was also attempted, as according
to the rule of thumb it should take (at least) around 3x more VRAM to train a model than
to run it [40], but was not successful. Sharding the models and loading only a part of them
on GPU also was not a successful attempt.
Using the model for inference happens the following way [19] [selfrag_llama2_13b ]:
1. On Prompt 2.2.4 it is possible to see how the model will start answering and will
eventually generate a [Retrieve] special token in its response. What comes after
that token is not relevant now.
2. In post processing the generated [Retrieval] token is searched, and if found, every­
thing that comes after it gets discarded. If there is a [Retrieve] special token, and
its log probability is above a certain threshold, the retriever is called.
Limited Resource Chatbots
19
==PAGE:28==
3. The retriever returns some documents, and the prompt is resubmitted to the model
in a special format (see Prompt 2.2.5)
4. The model rates the relevance of documents to decide if more are needed, answers
the question and rates its utility on a 1­5 scale.
5. This can be repeated n times, or until a desired score is achieved.
Prompt 2.2.4: Self­RAG initial response
USER
### Instruction:
Can you tell me the difference between llamas and alpacas?
### Response:
MODEL
Sure![Retrieval]<paragraph>Llamas and Alpacas are both hairy animals...
Prompt 2.2.5: Self­RAG after retrieval
USER
### Instruction:
Can you tell me the difference between llamas and alpacas?
### Response:
[Retrieval]<paragraph>The alpaca (Lama pacos) is a species of South American
camelid mammal. It is similar to, and often confused with, the llama. Alpacas
are considerably smaller than llamas, and unlike llamas, they were not bred to be
working animals, but were bred specifically for their fiber.</paragraph>
MODEL
[Relevant]Alpacas are considerably smaller than llamas, and unlike llamas, they
were not bred to be working animals, but were bred specifically for their fiber.[Fully
supported][Utility:5]</s>
FLARE
Forward­Looking Active REtrieval augmented generation (FLARE) is an algorithm de­
signed to address the challenge of rare entity retrieval [20]. It combines both generation
and retrieval techniques to improve the quality of generated content.
FLARE uses an arbitrary LLM to predict the next sentence in a document. It actively antic­
ipates future content by iteratively generating sentences, considering the context and the
upcoming tokens. To enhance the quality of its generated sentences, FLARE retrieves rel­
evant documents. If the generated sentence contains low­confidence tokens (determined
using logprobs), it leverages retrieved information to regenerate more accurate content.
The custom implementation of FLARE builds on top of the langchain implementation [42]
of the algorithm by using the same prompts.
The algorithm works the following way:
1. Generate a sentence using Prompt 2.2.6.
2. Check for unsure tokens based on logprobs.
20
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:29==
3. Generate queries for rare tokens using Prompt 2.2.7.
4. Execute queries
5. Add context to Prompt 2.2.6 and regenerate the answer.
6. Move onto next sentence.
Prompt 2.2.6: FLARE initial response
USER
Respond to the user message using any relevant context. If context is provided, you
should ground your answer in that context. Once you’re done responding return
FINISHED.
>>> CONTEXT:
>>> USER INPUT: Which English queen consort was mother to two queens -
Mary II and Anne?
>>> RESPONSE:
Prompt 2.2.7: FLARE query generation
USER
Given a user input and an existing partial response as context,
ask a question to which the answer is the given term/entity/phrase:
>>> USER INPUT: {user_input}
>>> EXISTING PARTIAL RESPONSE: {current_response}
The question to which the answer is the term/entity/phrase ”{uncertain_span}” is:
Comparison based testing
Table 2.2 contains the different models and methods available (16 in total). To make it
simple for users, pairwise comparison was used, a special case of AB testing and Pear­
son’s chi­squared test [43]. Considering a confidence level of 95% (Z = 1.96) with 50%
(P = 0.5) estimated probability of success (assuming any two models are equally good
as a null hypothesis) and a desired margin of error to be 5% (E = 0.05),
n = Z2 · P · (1 −P)
E2
= 385
is calculated as a sample size [44].
To eliminate randomness in scenarios where both models answered questions equally
good or equally bad, both good and both bad options were handled separately.
The available models evaluated two types of questions. Chemistry­related questions sub­
mitted by scientists and researchers, and a random sample of questions from the TriviaQA
datasets [36].
Comparing all 16 models in pairs would result in
(16
2
)
= 120 pairs. If each pair were to
be fully evaluated, that would be 120 · 385 = 46200 comparisons. This is out of the scope
of the project. Creating comparison groups and having enough comparison within those
groups is just as good of a solution, as well as it is more cost­effective too.
A lower number of comparisons (around 100 −200) was conducted between any two
models to create a global overview of their performances.
Limited Resource Chatbots
21
==PAGE:30==
Group
Model
LLaMa­2­13B
Base
LLaMa­2­13B
Just query
LLaMa­2­13B
Transformed
LLaMa­2­13B
Neighbors
LLaMa­2­13B
Self­RAG
LLaMa­2­13B
FLARE
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Base
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Just query
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Transformed
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Neighbors
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
FLARE
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Base
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Just query
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Transformed
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Neighbors
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
FLARE
Table 2.3: Comparison groups
Model
SelfRAG
No context
Just input
Transformed query
Neighbors
FLARE
LLaMa­2­7B
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Mixtral 8x7B
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
LLaMa­2­70B
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Table 2.2: Models and approaches availability
Automatic testing
Automated testing was conducted using GPT­4 [45]. This does not hurt the confidentiality
of the documents, as the very chunks were not submitted to the private Azure endpoint,
only the answers generated based on them. Using GPT­4 as a judge for evaluating other
models became a standard practice by 2024 [46] [47]. The prompt used to instruct GPT­4
for decision­making can be found in the appendix in Prompt A.4.3. To ensure fairness
and avoid the model choosing one answer over the other solely based on its position, the
order of answers was randomized.
User testing
User testing was conducted by a homogeneous group of scientists and researchers. They
were presented with a UI (Figure 2.2), where they had the option to select between the
two randomly chosen answers for a randomly chosen question. To ensure fairness and
avoid the users choosing one answer over the other solely based on its position, the order
of answers was randomized.
22
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.2: User Interface for testing
Limited Resource Chatbots
23
==PAGE:32==
3
Results
3.1
Optimal Vector Database setup
To illustrate the performance of various models for the current use case, a novel indicator
metric was devised that translates to the accuracy of the embedding model. After the hits
from the vector database are returned, the top n hits are evaluated to see if the original
document for the generated texts has been found. If there was any chunk from the original
document within the returned hits, the model was given one point, and if the original chunk
was returned, it was awarded 1 more point. This brings the total maximum score to twice
the sample size, precisely: 150 · 2 = 300.
Testing phase 1
The first round of testing quickly excluded the Jina model, as well as the prompt­based
approach. They scored consistently worse than than the mean pool (Figure 3.2 and Fig­
ure 3.1). While the Jina model and the prompt­based approach showed promise [28] [34],
they were unable to match the amount of information captured by the high dimensionality
of the LLaMa2­7B vectors combined with mean pooling. This doesn’t diminish their po­
tential utility in other contexts, but for the current requirements, the mean pooled LLaMa2
vectors proved to be the most effective. It is worth noting that in the first round Euclidean
distance with normalized vectors, cosine similarity with non­normalized and cosine sim­
ilarity with normalized vectors performed perfectly identically in all context lengths. It is
best visible on Figure 3.1.
Table A.2 shows a detailed breakdown of how each model performed, using the metric
defined above.
context_len
256
512
1024
2048
3072
model
distance
normalized
Jina
Cosine
Yes
31
42
44
29
25
Jina
Euclidean
Yes
31
42
44
29
25
LLaMa2 (prompt­based)
Euclidean
Yes
45
47
33
40
37
LLaMa2 (prompt­based)
Cosine
No
45
47
33
40
37
LLaMa2 (prompt­based)
Cosine
Yes
45
47
33
40
37
LLaMa2 (prompt­based)
Euclidean
No
43
42
32
27
38
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Euclidean
Yes
259
230
250
242
215
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Cosine
No
259
230
250
242
215
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Cosine
Yes
259
230
250
242
215
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Euclidean
No
248
245
210
203
182
Table 3.1: VectorDB ­ Testing phase 1 ­ Correct answer in top 5 returned ­ Outcomes
24
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.1: VectorDB ­ Testing phase 1 ­ Grouped by context ­ Correct answer in top 5
returned
Figure 3.2: VectorDB ­ Testing phase 1 ­ Grouped by model ­ Correct answer in top 5
returned
Testing phase 2
The second round yielded similar results to the first one (Figure 3.4 and Figure 3.3). The
four approaches that were selected in the previous phase performed similarly well within
all context lengths. It is possible to observe a decline in their performance as the context
grows. The previously highlighted three models that performed identically in the previous
phase (Euclidean distance with normalized vectors, cosine similarity with non­normalized,
and cosine similarity with normalized vectors) performed identically in this one as well.
context_len
256
512
1024
2048
3072
model
distance
normalized
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Euclidean
Yes
396
318
311
291
286
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Euclidean
No
397
325
299
271
236
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Cosine
Yes
396
318
311
291
286
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Cosine
No
396
318
311
291
286
Table 3.2: VectorDB ­ Testing phase 2 ­ Correct answer in top 2 returned ­ Outcomes
Limited Resource Chatbots
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.3: VectorDB ­ Testing phase 2 ­ Grouped by context ­ Correct answer in top 2
returned
Figure 3.4: VectorDB ­ Testing phase 2 ­ Grouped by model ­ Correct answer in top 2
returned
Testing phase 3
For the third phase, the number of relevant records was defined in the way mentioned pre­
viously (based on their lengths). Due to the minor asymmetries in the amount of available
data, the scale had to be adjusted. The scores in ??, on Figure 3.5, and on Figure 3.6
show the ratio of how many times the model successfully identified the correct records.
Table 3.3 also displays the aggregated data underlying the plots. For each context length,
it displays the score of each model, the number of tests (times 2 is the maximum score),
and then the adjusted score on a 0 −1 scale.
As previously, the best performance can be observed in the shortest context length. The
best matches were returned by the paraphrased versions of texts. Then shorter versions,
and finally the elongated versions have been found the fewest times.
26
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:35==
context_len
256
512
1024
distance
score
Summaries
Euclidean
Custom
222
307
340
Cosine
Custom
215
289
348
Relevant records
­
­
156
236
287
Euclidean
Adjusted
0.711538
0.650424
0.592334
Cosine
Adjusted
0.689103
0.612288
0.606272
Paraprases
Euclidean
Custom
312
235
49
Cosine
Custom
311
231
51
Relevant records
­
­
187
153
37
Euclidean
Adjusted
0.834225
0.767974
0.662162
Cosine
Adjusted
0.831551
0.754902
0.689189
Elaborations
Euclidean
Custom
329
230
80
Cosine
Custom
343
236
90
Relevant records
­
­
296
201
71
Euclidean
Adjusted
0.555743
0.572139
0.563380
Cosine
Adjusted
0.579392
0.587065
0.633803
Table 3.3: VectorDB ­ Testing phase 3 ­ Scores and adjusted scores outcomes
Figure 3.5: Testing round 3 ­ Top 2 results ­ Grouped by context
Limited Resource Chatbots
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.6: Testing round 3 ­ Top 2 results ­ Grouped by distance metric
3.2
LLM
3.2.1
Embeddings on CPU vs GPU
(a) Normal scale
(b) Logarithmic scale
Figure 3.7: Embedding times of different context lengths CPU vs GPU vs CPU (batch)
On Figure 3.7 it can be observed how the time of embedding various chunks changes as a
function of context length. On average it can be said that running embeddings on a CPU is
around 10 times slower than running them on a GPU. But when comparing CPU batched
and CPU, it is evident that there is barely any difference between them. This is good for
the current use case, as even when collecting relevant chunks based on multiple (short)
queries, the time of retrieval does not increase compared to collecting chunks based on
just 1 query.
3.2.2
Agents
Figure 3.8 displays how a larger model size will result in a better success rate, even if it
is quantized. Responses can be always re­generated with a different seed in the hopes
of a more successful output. This somewhat works in practice, but calling it robust is an
overstatement. Individually observing some of the test cases has revealed that it may
occur that the model won’t generate a successful output for some inputs. That may be
attributed to the complexity of the prompt, however, a complex prompt with examples is
necessary for the smaller models, while larger models can handle a more descriptive and
abstract prompt as well.
28
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:37==
(a) Success ratios for generating valid output in
4 tries using agent
(b) Average number of tries it took to generate
valid output (if successful)
Figure 3.8: Comparing performance of different LLMs as an agent
3.3
Comparing RAG approaches
This section will present the results of the automated and user testing of the various LLMs.
The results of the automated testing will be presented first, and then compared to the
outcomes of the results of user testing. The reason for this is that user testing did not
collect enough responses necessary to evaluate solely based on those answers.
For a more standardized comparison, the models were assigned into homogenous com­
parison groups. That means the responses have been separated into larger groups, di­
vided along model and approach. These groups are essentially the rows and columns of
Table 2.2. The primary objective is to find and compare various RAG approaches. For
that reason, only these groups (RAG approaches, separated by model) and the overall
analysis are included in this chapter. The comparison for the rest of the groups can be
found in the Appendix A.
Each of the groups has been analyzed in a two­steps. The analysis starts by looking at
the global overall frequencies for the models in each group, then for a deeper analysis,
the chi­square test is conducted between models that appear to be closer.
The overall frequency fmodel is calculated as the number of times the model was chosen
(count half when ”both” was selected) divided by the number of times that model was
an option (for each group). The option ’neither’ does not explicitly appear in the formula
as it is already a part of the number of occurrences. For chi­square analysis, the null
hypothesis was that the models perform equally well, so the expected frequency can be
expressed as half of the total number of appearances.
fmodel = Omodel + 1
2 · Bmodel
Tmodel
where:
• fmodel is the overall frequency of model
• Omodel is the number of times model was chosen
• Bmodel is the number of times ’both’ was chosen and model was an option
• Tmodel is the number of times model was an option
Insert citation for chi­square
Limited Resource Chatbots
29
==PAGE:38==
Briefly, the chi­square returns 3 important pieces of information.
1. Chi­square (Chi2): This value measures the degree of difference between observed
and expected frequencies. The higher the Chi­square value, the greater the differ­
ence between what was observed and what was expected based on the model.
2. p­value: This is the measure of the probability that the observed results could have
occurred by random chance. Smaller p­value indicates that the results are statisti­
cally significant, meaning the difference is not due to random chance. Typically, a
p­value of less than 0.05 is considered statistically significant.
3. Proportion: Based on the frequency of each option (Model 1 and Model 2), it is possi­
ble to calculate a proportion that will establish which model was selected more times
as the preferred one. The outcome of this is denoted as ”Better” in the subsequent
tables.
This made it possible determine whether there was a statistically significant difference
in the performance between two models. It is important to note that these two methods
of analysis may yield contradictory results due the scope of their underlying data. For
that reason when interpreting the results, both the overall frequencies and the results
of the chi­square tests were considered. In cases where they contradicted each other,
further investigation was conducted to gain a more accurate understanding of the models’
performance.
3.3.1
Best RAG Approach ­ within Same Models
LLaMa­2­13B Chat
Figure 3.9 shows how many times answers from each RAG approach were chosen when
using the LLaMa­2­13B Chat model. Looking at the chemistry­related questions, one can
observe FLARE to outperform all other approaches by up to a factor of almost 1.5. What
is more interesting however is the fact that the base model outperformed all other naive
approaches. This came as a surprise, as one would assume that the more information a
model has available, the better its answers are supposed to be. Self­RAG ended up in
the last place, underperforming all other models.
However, that is not the case for General questions, based on the trivia dataset. This
time Self­RAG achieved the highest score, but the base model still outperformed all other
models.
The combined results show that FLARE performed the best, closely followed by the base
model, the Self­RAG. The naive approaches scored the lowest again.
Table 3.4 shows that there is a statistically significant difference between the top perform­
ers within the individual categories, but indicates no significant difference between the top
performers when combined. The analysis suggests a major difference at the lower end
of the spectrum, even though their scores are closer together.
30
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.9: Overall frequency of models being chosen ­ LLaMa­2­13B Chat
Group
Category
Model 1
Model 2
Better
Chi2
p­value
Comparisons
LLaMa­2­13B
Chemistry
Transformed
Neighbors
Neighbors
0.056664
0.972065
330
LLaMa­2­13B
Chemistry
Just query
Transformed
Transformed
0.385332
0.824758
328
LLaMa­2­13B
Chemistry
Base
Neighbors
Base
4.190023
0.123069
328
LLaMa­2­13B
Chemistry
Base
FLARE
FLARE
6.033377
0.048963
328
LLaMa­2­13B
Chemistry
Just query
Self­RAG
Just query
6.136442
0.046504
332
LLaMa­2­13B
General
Transformed
Neighbors
Neighbors
1.009898
0.603536
382
LLaMa­2­13B
General
Base
Just query
Just query
2.007979
0.366415
424
LLaMa­2­13B
General
Just query
FLARE
Just query
2.078947
0.353641
380
LLaMa­2­13B
General
Neighbors
FLARE
Neighbors
5.085045
0.078668
380
LLaMa­2­13B
General
Base
Self­RAG
Self­RAG
6.297169
0.042913
408
LLaMa­2­13B
Overall
Transformed
Neighbors
Neighbors
0.482061
0.785818
712
LLaMa­2­13B
Overall
Base
Self­RAG
Base
2.082539
0.353006
738
LLaMa­2­13B
Overall
Base
FLARE
FLARE
2.143853
0.342348
728
LLaMa­2­13B
Overall
Just query
Self­RAG
Just query
3.776785
0.151315
720
LLaMa­2­13B
Overall
Just query
Neighbors
Just query
4.784658
0.091417
714
Table 3.4: Chi­square comparison for neighboring models ­ LLaMa­2­13B Chat
LLaMa­2­70B Chat (4bit)
Figure 3.10 indicates a significant jump in performance when answering Chemistry ques­
tions using the FLARE approach, but a decrease in all other categories. The more trans­
formations the initial user input has gone through, the lower its score became.
Answering general questions is steadier regarding performance and shows less fluctua­
tion between approaches. This time a performance improvement is seen by transforming
the user’s questions. The best performer however is the base approach, which has not
seen any context to answer the questions based on.
The overall assessment of LLaMa­2­70B Chat (4bit) indicates that FLARE performed the
best, then the baseline model without context. Just like answers in the Chemistry category,
a decrease in score can be seen as more transformations occur to the initial user input.
subsubsection 4.2.3 reveals a statistically highly significant difference in over half of the
comparisons, and none in the rest. This is unexpected, especially for the General ques­
tions category, where each approach was selected a similar amount of times.
Limited Resource Chatbots
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.10: Overall frequency of models being chosen ­ LLaMa­2­70B Chat (4bit)
Group
Category
Model 1
Model 2
Better
Chi2
p­value
Comparisons
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Chemistry
Base
Just query
Base
0.916875
0.632271
328
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Chemistry
Just query
Transformed
Just query
3.499108
0.173851
328
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Chemistry
Transformed
Neighbors
Transformed
11.051238
0.003983
328
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Chemistry
Base
FLARE
FLARE
22.363708
0.000014
328
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
General
Transformed
FLARE
FLARE
3.359313
0.186438
380
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
General
Transformed
Neighbors
Neighbors
5.836251
0.054035
380
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
General
Just query
Neighbors
Neighbors
7.581583
0.022578
380
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
General
Base
FLARE
Base
9.333320
0.009404
420
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Overall
Base
Just query
Base
1.274725
0.528685
748
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Overall
Just query
Transformed
Just query
1.883789
0.389889
708
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Overall
Base
FLARE
FLARE
6.368207
0.041415
748
Llama­2­70B (4 bit)
Overall
Transformed
Neighbors
Transformed
20.089561
0.000043
708
Table 3.5: Chi­square comparison for neighboring models ­ LLaMa­2­70B Chat (4bit)
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4bit)
subsubsection 4.2.3 brings similar results to Figure 3.9 as well as Figure 3.10, displaying
difference between the base model and FLARE against the naive approaches.
Most of the approaches showed similar performance, except for the FLARE approach
when answering Chemistry related questions. Like in the previous cases, it outperformed
the compared models.
Statistically, there are significant differences between the Base model and the FLARE
approach only in the General and Overall cases. The higher p­value for Chemistry on
Table 3.6 indicates that its peak performance might only be a coincidence.
Figure 3.11: Overall frequency of models being chosen ­ Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4bit)
32
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:41==
Group
Category
Model 1
Model 2
Better
Chi2
p­value
Comparisons
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Chemistry
Just query
Neighbors
Neighbors
0.495323
0.780624
328
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Chemistry
Transformed
Neighbors
Transformed
1.102751
0.576157
328
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Chemistry
Base
Transformed
Base
2.663845
0.263969
328
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Chemistry
Base
FLARE
FLARE
3.314366
0.190675
328
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
General
Just query
Transformed
Just query
0.131365
0.936428
380
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
General
Transformed
Neighbors
Transformed
1.125001
0.569783
380
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
General
Just query
FLARE
FLARE
1.231982
0.540105
380
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
General
Base
FLARE
Base
6.593826
0.036997
420
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Overall
Just query
Transformed
Transformed
0.686534
0.709449
708
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Overall
Transformed
Neighbors
Transformed
3.638706
0.162131
708
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Overall
Base
FLARE
FLARE
6.305696
0.042730
748
Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4 bit)
Overall
Base
Just query
Base
7.500374
0.023513
748
Table 3.6: Chi­square comparison for neighboring models ­ Mixtral­8x7B­Instruct­v0.1
(4bit)
3.3.2
Comprehensive analysis
The comprehensive comparison of all models on subsubsection 4.2.3 reveals that Mixtral­
8x7B­Instruct­v0.1 (4bit) combined with FLARE might be the best choice for answering
Chemistry related questions, however, the extremely high p­value on Table 3.7 works
against it. Taking one step to the right and comparing the LLaMa­2­70B Chat (4bit) base
model with the LLaMa­2­13B Chat using the FLARE approach, a lower p­value is present,
indicating that there there is an actual difference, even though Chi2 says it is small.
Regarding General questions, both subsubsection 4.2.3 and Table 3.7 tell that there is
hardly any difference between the top models.
When the categories are combined, the low Chi2 values on Table 3.7 again indicate a
lower difference between the top performers. It is interesting to note how only FLARE
and Base approaches appear in the top 5 models for the combined categories, but the
Neighbors approach also makes it to the top 5 when answering Chemistry related ques­
tions only.
Figure 3.12: Overall frequency of models being chosen ­ all models and approaches
Limited Resource Chatbots
33
==PAGE:42==
Group
Category
Model 1
Model 2
Better
Chi2
p­value
Comparisons
Global
Chemistry
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ FLARE
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ FLARE
0.613475
0.735844
328
Global
Chemistry
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Neighbors
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
4.190023
0.123069
328
Global
Chemistry
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ FLARE
6.033377
0.048963
328
Global
Chemistry
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
6.508032
0.038619
328
Global
General
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ Base
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ Base
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ Base
1.549626
0.460790
88
Global
General
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
1.897996
0.387129
104
Global
General
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ FLARE
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ Base
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ Base
6.593826
0.036997
420
Global
General
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ Base
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ Base
9.333320
0.009404
420
Global
Overall
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ FLARE
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ FLARE
1.655435
0.437046
708
Global
Overall
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
2.040984
0.360417
708
Global
Overall
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ FLARE
2.143853
0.342348
728
Global
Overall
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ Base
Mixtral 8X7B Instruct v0.1 (4bit) ­ Base
6.144907
0.046307
92
Table 3.7: Chi­square comparison for neighboring models ­ all models and approaches
3.3.3
Comparing Automatic and Human evaluation
The user test resulted in 201 human responses, where the models were evaluated. Con­
sidering the low number of comparisons it is no surprise that some models had a much
higher selection frequency than others. Looking at the Chemistry specific plot, the same
phenomenon can be seen as what was present during the analysis of automated tests.
Models using FLARE perform the best, then a Base model and then then Base model
outperforms passive RAG approaches.
Figure 3.13: Best performers of user test
Model 1
Model 2
More frequent model
Comparisons
Chi2
P­value
Proportion
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Neighbors
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
19
5.796759
0.214849
0.800000
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Neighbors
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Transformed
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Transformed
21
4.781405
0.310471
0.666667
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Neighbors
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
27
2.492086
0.646054
0.647059
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Transformed
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
24
9.208889
0.101017
0.625000
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Neighbors
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Just Query
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Neighbors
29
4.413072
0.491598
0.600000
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Transformed
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
24
2.400000
0.791474
0.600000
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
22
2.867521
0.580234
0.600000
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Just Query
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
31
1.527401
0.675961
0.590909
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Transformed
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Just Query
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Transformed
25
2.792245
0.731978
0.555556
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Just Query
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Base
equal
20
2.428571
0.488338
0.500000
LLaMa­2­13B Chat ­ Self­RAG
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
equal
3
3.000000
0.223130
0.500000
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ FLARE
LLaMa­2­70B (4bit) Chat ­ Neighbor
equal
2
0.000000
1.000000
0.500000
Table 3.8: Chi­square comparison data by users where at least 2 comparisons have been
made between 2 models
34
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:43==
4
Discussion
4.1
Vector DB
4.1.1
Conclusion
This experiment compared different embedding models, and the tests showed that using
a Large Language Model (LLaMa2­7B) performs the best within the current framework
to create text embeddings Figure 3.2. The tests returned more favorable outcomes with
shorter context lengths, but the length of embedded texts and the distance function of
choice depends on the use case Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.3.
In the case of retrieval augmented generation, the users are expected to use shorter
queries as an input, in a similar­to­chats fashion. Depending on the length of the embed­
ded texts, it is most similar to the case where a shorter text is used to find a longer text
in the vector database. Up to embedded text length of 512, Euclidean distance proved to
be the best choice by test phase 3 Figure 3.5.
Concluding the vector database tests, the best combination in the use­case of retrieval
augmented generation is using Euclidean distance with shorter context lengths for
4.2
LLM
4.2.1
Embeddings on CPU vs GPU
Figure 3.7 displays an approximately 10­15 times increase in inference time when cre­
ating embeddings on a CPU instead of a GPU. The experiment’s relevancy originates in
the amount of resources. LLaMa­2­7B works well to create text embeddings but performs
worse at complex text­generation tasks when compared to larger models [14]. One pos­
sible solution is to move the creation of embeddings to the CPU, while the GPU can host
a larger LLM for text generation. Comparing embeddings on a CPU single and batched,
there is a slight increase in embedding multiple (5 in the experiment) pieces of text as a
batch.
Depending on the immediacy required by the application, this can be an option. For a
chatbot relying on having to calculate embeddings only once at the beginning of informa­
tion retrieval, this might be applicable. As users prefer real­time information when using
a chatbot, indicating that the model is in the data collection phase might be advisable to
increase user satisfaction.
Considering this application with active/iterative approaches such as FLARE and Self­
RAG, creating embeddings on a CPU appears to be a non­viable option. That would
heavily increase the time it takes from the user sending their input to the final answer to
be generated. These algorithms make multiple requests to the vector database.
4.2.2
Comparing different sized models as agents
The experiment to measure how successful LLMs are at generating specially formatted
input yielded the expected results. The larger the model, the more successful it is at fol­
lowing instructions, even if it takes more tries. Figure 3.8 shows that the average number
of tries does not even reach 2 for successful instructions. This means that if the first try
was not successful, there is a higher chance of failing again than succeeding.
This indicates that some inputs are more challenging for the model to process. Having to
re­evaluate an agent’s output multiple times as in the experiment might further increase
the overall response time of a model, worsening the user experience.
Limited Resource Chatbots
35
==PAGE:44==
A significant difference to note is the quality of the generated queries. Manual sampling
and examination of the generated queries revealed that model(s) with fewer parameters
had more difficulty generating meaningful queries in the experiment, than model(s) with
more parameters. Queries coming from the smallest model (LLaMa­2­7B chat) often re­
sembled the examples in Prompt A.4.1 by following the same sentence structure. In some
other cases the smaller models also hallucinated irrelevant queries, that could carry on
and potentially cause issues in applications using small models. The larger the model
was the higher the quality of the query as well.
It is possible that the quality of outputs could have been improved by better prompting
or processing of that prompt. Fine­tuning the model to be better at working as an agent
would improve its performance the most, however that would have taken more resources
than currently available. Self­RAG for example was fine­tuned from the same model using
4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs [19].
4.2.3
Retrieval Augmented Generations
General questions and TriviaQA
Each of figures Figure 3.9, , and show that there are only smaller differences between the
RAG approaches when evaluating trivia questions. This claim is supported by the con­
sistently low chi2 values corresponding to the models in Table 3.4, subsubsection 4.2.3,
Table 3.6 and Table 3.7, reinforced by consistently low p­values, hinting at high statistical
significance.
Each comparison has 2 degrees of freedom. For the target confidence (p­value) of 0.05,
the chi­square threshold is set at 5.991 [48]. A higher p­value will result in a lower threshold
and lower confidence in a higher threshold. Based on the Chi­square distribution table
[48], comparisons for the TriviaQA question group fall under the threshold, making the
original null­hypothesis (that models are equally good) accepted.
Chemistry related questions
On Figure 3.9 shows that the Base model consistently outperforms the most passive RAG
approaches. FLARE performs the best both by the calculated frequencies and by the chi­
square test. According to Table 3.4, there is a statistically significant difference between
the Base model and the passive approaches, as well as Self­RAG, in favor of the Base
model.
This behavior carries onto the larger models as well. In case of the larger LLaMa2­70B
4­bit quantized model, a trend can be observed on Figure 3.9 and in Table 3.4, according
which the more information the model had available the worse it’s performance became.
This is against a fundamental principle in ML/AI.
Random sampling and reviewing of the generated answers revealed that the Base models
confidently answered questions (as they were instructed to) even though they had no
context available. The passive models that looked for queries only once rather stated the
lack of information in their answers. This behavior is expected, but difficult to catch with
automated testing. The uploaded documents can not cover the whole field of Chemistry
and therefore may lack information on certain topics.
As for identifying the unexpected surge in performance for the large LLaMa model, manual
checking the samples revealed that it often started by summarizing the documents and
ran out of the maximum tokens to be generated before getting to answering the question.
FLARE without doubt had the best performance regardless of the available model. The
benefit of using FLARE for question answering is receiving well­thought­out, concise, and
36
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:45==
precise answers, at the cost of time. FLARE takes multiple iterations to construct its
response sentence by sentence.
Self­RAG (based on LLaMa­2­13B) underperformed in the case of Chemistry related doc­
uments. Its behavior can be explained by not receiving the documents in the desired
format. Self­RAG appears to expect a coherent document on its input for context rather
than a collection of documents. To achieve this, another LLM could have summarized the
returned documents, potentially enhancing the quality of answers by this approach.
4.3
Future Work
This section serves as a collection of directions and ideas a similar project could chase.
The project had a thorough exploratory analysis for vector databases researching the
relations between embeddings and the query vector, as well as the possibility of creating
embeddings using LLMs. The lowest context length for chunking documents in the project
was 256 tokens (around half of an English page). Testing the limits of how short a chunk
may become to still contain meaningful embeddings could reveal new connections and
could help further optimize the settings of the vector database.
Evaluating and comparing models happened using GPT­4 over the course of this project.
Having even just temporary access to multiple GPUs could have moved evaluation onto
a local scope as well, by being able to utilize various local LLMs without quantization, and
then compare their outcomes.
Taking two quantized models and loading them on the single available GPU is going to
fit them just fine. The Mixtral­8x7B [38] in 4­bit quantization [39] takes around 23.81 GB
+ cache to load, and the LLaMa­2­70B Chat [14] in 4­bit quantization [37] takes around
35.33 GB VRAM. These two models could cross­check each other’s answers to ensure
that the context supports the answer.
Fine­tuning larger models according to the Self­RAG algorithm could potentially further
increase the quality of responses, but that would require more resources.
Microsoft recently released a model trained on synthetic data called Phi2 [microsoft_phi2].
This model has 2.7 billion parameters but should be on par if not better than LLaMa­2­
7B and LLaMa­2­13B. Exploring this model for the use­cases of this project could further
reveal information on the model size and quality relationship. This could especially be
useful for creating embeddings, where a model requiring less resources may increase
embedding speed without a loss of quality.
User testing when enough samples are available becomes more valuable than automated
testing, as it directly represents the preference of users. Collecting more samples to
compare automated testing within a specialized field could reveal more about the quality
of different approaches. Regarding the collected data, seeing how much users trust the
answers they see could serve as valuable feedback.
Limited Resource Chatbots
37
==PAGE:46==
5
Conclusion
This thesis addressed applications of LLMs on limited resources as explored throughout
the project.
5.1
How do open­source LLMs hosted on low resources
compare to their commercially available peers?
Due to the confidential nature of the underlying documents, no direct comparison was
made between local open­source models and more mature, commercially available ones
such as GPT­3 [7] or GPT­4 [45]. According to it’s original paper, both Meta AI’s LLaMa2­
70B [14] and Mistral AI’s Mixtral 8x7B instruct [38] should be on­par with OpenAI’s GPT
3.5 regarding performance.
When it comes to using these models as agents, OpenAI’s models become significantly
better, as those models are prepared to be used for such tasks [22].
Further fine­tuning for agent­like tasks (specifically returning specialized input), as well
as for retrieval augmented generation tasks could have improved the performance of the
quantized models used in the project [37] [39], however that would still have required more
resources than available.
5.2
How can various RAG approaches be utilized to extract
knowledge stored in documents?
The project revealed that models running on low resources can achieve decent perfor­
mance for RAG when they are provided with suitable conditions.
FLARE for example outperformed all other approaches in the experiments, but its infer­
ence time is well over a minute, thanks to the multiple iterations it takes to construct its
answer.
On the contrary, answers without proofreading perform significantly worse the more in­
formation they have, as they start to get confused and summarize that information before
answering the question. This might make them run out of the maximum allowed output
tokens.
A stable middle ground could elevate the benefits of both approaches while eliminat­
ing their shortcomings. Active approaches such as FLARE and Self­RAG take multiple
rounds of evaluating their own answers, while passive approaches generate answers sig­
nificantly faster. Having a model that generates an answer and ensures that the answer
is supported by the available context could improve user satisfaction with faster answers
while still staying accurate enough to keep the users’ trust as well.
38
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Topsoe A/S. Topsoe. https://www.topsoe.com/. [Accessed on: 06­10­2023]. 2022.
[2]
MIKE WHEATLEY. Nvidia’s A100 GPU sets new performance records in MLPerf
benchmarks. https://siliconangle.com/2020/10/21/nvidias- a100- gpu- sets- new-
performance-records-mlperf-benchmarks. [Accessed on: 25­10­2023]. 2020.
[3]
Appy Pie. “Evolution of Language Models”. In: Appy Pie Blog (2024). [Accessed on:
01­03­2024]. URL: https://www.appypie.com/blog/evolution-of-language-models.
[4]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
[5]
Jacob Devlin et al. BERT: Pre­training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Lan­
guage Understanding. 2019. arXiv: 1810.04805 [cs.CL].
[6]
Tom B. Brown et al. Language Models are Few­Shot Learners. 2020. arXiv: 2005.
14165 [cs.CL].
[7]
OpenAI. ChatGPT: A Large­Scale Generative Model for Open­Domain Chat. https:
//github.com/openai/gpt-3. 2021.
[8]
Wikipedia. Autoregressive model. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autoregressive_
model. [Accessed on: 01­03­2023]. 2024.
[9]
Content Editor. What Is an Autoregressive Model? LLMs Explained. [Accessed on:
01­03­2023]. 2024. URL: https : / / www . chatgptguide . ai / 2024 / 02 / 29 / what - is -
autoregressive-model-llms-explained/.
[10]
Mariya Mansurova. “Text Embeddings: A Comprehensive Guide”. In: Towards Data
Science (2024). [Accessed on: 01­03­2023]. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/
text-embeddings-comprehensive-guide-afd97fce8fb5.
[11]
Georgi Gerganov. “Llama.cpp: LLM Inference in C/C++”. In: GitHub Repository
(2023). URL: https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp.
[12]
Thomas Wolf et al. HuggingFace’s Transformers: State­of­the­art Natural Language
Processing. 2020. arXiv: 1910.03771 [cs.CL].
[13]
HugginFace. Hugging Face. https://huggingface.co//. [Accessed on: 23­10­2023].
2023.
[14]
Hugo Touvron et al. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine­Tuned Chat Models. 2023.
arXiv: 2307.09288 [cs.CL].
[15]
Maarten Grootendorst. Which Quantization Method is Right for You? (GPTQ vs.
GGUF vs. AWQ) — maartengrootendorst.com. https://www.maartengrootendorst.
com/blog/quantization/. [Accessed 03­03­2024]. 2023.
[16]
Andrey Kuzmin et al. Pruning vs Quantization: Which is Better? 2024. arXiv: 2307.
02973 [cs.LG].
[17]
HugginFace. Hugging Face ­ Quantize. https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/
main/main_classes/quantization. [Accessed on: 23­10­2023]. 2023.
[18]
Ziwei Ji et al. “Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation”. In: ACM
Comput. Surv. 55.12 (Mar. 2023). ISSN: 0360­0300. DOI: 10.1145/3571730. URL:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/3571730.
[19]
Akari Asai et al. Self­RAG: Learning to Retrieve, Generate, and Critique through
Self­Reflection. 2023. arXiv: 2310.11511 [cs.CL].
[20]
Zhengbao Jiang et al. Active Retrieval Augmented Generation. 2023. arXiv: 2305.
06983 [cs.CL].
[21]
Matt Walsh. ChatGPT Statistics (2023) — Essential Facts and Figures. https://
www . stylefactoryproductions . com / blog / chatgpt - statistics. [Accessed on: 04­10­
2023]. 2023.
Limited Resource Chatbots
39
==PAGE:48==
[22]
Function calling ­ OpenAI API. https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/function-
calling. Accessed: March 10, 2024.
[23]
Toni Taipalus. “Vector database management systems: Fundamental concepts, use­
cases, and current challenges”. In: Cognitive Systems Research 85 (June 2024),
p. 101216. ISSN: 1389­0417. DOI: 10.1016/j.cogsys.2024.101216. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2024.101216.
[24]
Zhi Jing et al. When Large Language Models Meet Vector Databases: A Survey.
2024. arXiv: 2402.01763 [cs.DB].
[25]
Vihar Kurama and Brennan Whitfield. “PyTorch vs. TensorFlow for Deep Learning
in 2024”. In: Built In (2023). Accessed: November 5, 2023. URL: https://builtin.
com/data-science/pytorch-vs-tensorflow.
[26]
Qdrant. Qrant. https://qdrant.tech/. [Accessed on: 12­10­2023]. 2023.
[27]
Andrey Vasnetsov. Qrant client. https://pypi.org/project/qdrant-client/. [Accessed
on: 12­10­2023]. 2023.
[28]
Michael Günther et al. Jina Embeddings 2: 8192­Token General­Purpose Text Em­
beddings for Long Documents. 2023. arXiv: 2310.19923 [cs.CL].
[29]
Word Counter Blog. “How Many Pages Is 2000 Words?” In: Word Counter Blog
(2015). [Accessed on: 30­09­2023]. URL: https://wordcounter.net/blog/2015/09/
18/10655_how-many-pages-is-2000-words.html.
[30]
Dr. Anjing Wang. Similarity Metrics in Vector Databases. https://www.wwwinsights.
com/ai/similarity-metrics-vector-databases/. [Accessed on: 03­12­2023]. 2023.
[31]
LangChain. RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter. https : / / api . python . langchain . com /
en/latest/text_splitter/langchain.text_splitter.RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter.html.
[Accessed on: 09­03­2024]. 2024.
[32]
cronoik. Sentence embeddings from LLAMA 2 Huggingface opensource. https://
stackoverflow.com/a/77441536/12425131. [Accessed on: 15­11­2023]. 2023.
[33]
Ting Jiang et al. Scaling Sentence Embeddings with Large Language Models. 2023.
arXiv: 2307.16645 [cs.CL].
[34]
Susan Zhang et al. OPT: Open Pre­trained Transformer Language Models. 2022.
arXiv: 2205.01068 [cs.CL].
[35]
LangChain. AgentOutputParser. https://api.python.langchain.com/en/latest/agents/
langchain.agents.agent.AgentOutputParser.html. [Accessed on: 09­03­2024]. 2024.
[36]
Mandar Joshi et al. “triviaqa: A Large Scale Distantly Supervised Challenge Dataset
for Reading Comprehension”. In: arXiv e­prints, arXiv:1705.03551 (2017), arXiv:1705.03551.
arXiv: 1705.03551.
[37]
TheBloke. Llama 2 70B Chat ­ GPTQ. https://huggingface.co/TheBloke/Llama-2-
70B-Chat-GPTQ. Accessed: January 24, 2024. 2024.
[38]
Albert Q. Jiang et al. Mixtral of Experts. 2024. arXiv: 2401.04088 [cs.LG].
[39]
TheBloke. Mixtral 8X7B v0.1 ­ GPTQ. https://huggingface.co/TheBloke/Mixtral-
8x7B-Instruct-v0.1-GPTQ. Accessed: January 24, 2024. 2024.
[40]
Danilo Vucetic et al. “Efficient Fine­Tuning of BERT Models on the Edge”. In: 2022
IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS). IEEE, May 2022.
DOI: 10.1109/iscas48785.2022.9937567. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCAS48785.
2022.9937567.
[41]
Akari Asai et al. “Self­RAG: A 13B Self­Reflective Autoregressive Generator”. In:
Hugging Face (2023). URL: https://huggingface.co/selfrag/selfrag_llama2_13b.
[42]
LangChain. FLARE ­ langchain. https://python.langchain.com.cn/docs/modules/
chains/additional/flare. [Accessed on: 09­01­2024]. 2024.
40
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:49==
[43]
Francesco Casalegno. A/B Testing: A Complete Guide to Statistical Testing. https:
/ / towardsdatascience . com / a - b - testing - a - complete - guide - to - statistical - testing -
e3f1db140499. [Accessed on: 08­01­2024]. 2021.
[44]
calculator.net. Sample Size Calculator. https://www.calculator.net/sample- size-
calculator.html. [Accessed on: 08­01­2024]. 2008 ­ 2024.
[45]
OpenAI et al. GPT­4 Technical Report. 2024. arXiv: 2303.08774 [cs.CL].
[46]
Lianmin Zheng et al. Judging LLM­as­a­Judge with MT­Bench and Chatbot Arena.
2023. arXiv: 2306.05685 [cs.CL].
[47]
Kasey Uhlenhuth Quinn Leng and Alkis Polyzotis. “Best Practices for LLM Evalu­
ation of RAG Applications”. In: Databricks Blog (Sept. 2023). URL: https://www.
databricks.com/blog/LLM-auto-eval-best-practices-RAG.
[48]
Shaun Turney. Chi­Square (Χ²) Table | Examples Downloadable Table. https://
www.scribbr.com/statistics/chi- square- distribution- table/. [Accessed on: 08­01­
2024]. June 2023.
Limited Resource Chatbots
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
A.1
Introduction
Category
Sentence
Cars
The red sports car zoomed down the highway at an incredible speed.
Cars
The vintage car, with its rusty exterior and worn­out tires, emitted a nostalgic charm.
Cars
With its sleek design, advanced technology, and impressive fuel efficiency, the brand new electric car is revolutionizing the automotive industry.
Cars
The classic car, meticulously restored to its former glory, turned heads wherever it went.
Cars
The hybrid car, with its hybrid engine and regenerative braking system, is an environmentally friendly choice for conscious drivers.
Animals
The majestic lion, exhausted from a long day of hunting, lay down under the shade of a tree.
Animals
The playful lion cub frolicked joyfully in the grassy meadow.
Animals
The sly fox, tired from its cunning escapades, found solace in a cozy den.
Animals
The graceful gazelle leaped gracefully across the vast savannah, showcasing its agility and elegance.
Animals
The curious rabbit nibbled on a fresh carrot, its favorite treat.
Food
The mouthwatering pizza, topped with a generous amount of cheese and a variety of savory toppings, delighted the taste buds.
Food
The refreshing salad, made with crisp lettuce, juicy tomatoes, and crunchy cucumbers, provided a burst of freshness.
Food
The piping hot soup, filled with aromatic herbs and spices, warmed the body and soul on a chilly evening.
Food
The decadent chocolate cake, with its rich, velvety texture and luscious frosting, was a true indulgence.
Food
The perfectly grilled steak, seasoned to perfection and cooked to a juicy medium­rare, satisfied even the most discerning carnivores.
Music
The energetic music, with its pulsating beats and electrifying melodies, set the dance floor on fire.
Music
The soothing music, with its gentle harmonies and tranquil melodies, provided a moment of serenity in a chaotic world.
Music
The rhythmic music, with its infectious grooves and catchy hooks, had everyone tapping their feet and nodding their heads.
Music
The melodic music, with its beautiful melodies and heartfelt lyrics, stirred emotions and touched the soul.
Music
The harmonious music, with its seamless blend of instruments and voices, created a symphony of sound that resonated with the audience.
Sports
The exhilarating game, filled with suspense and adrenaline­pumping moments, kept the spectators on the edge of their seats.
Sports
The talented player, with their exceptional skills and strategic moves, dominated the field and led their team to victory.
Sports
The cohesive team, with their synchronized teamwork and unwavering determination, overcame all obstacles and emerged triumphant.
Sports
The fiercely competitive match, with its intense rivalries and nail­biting moments, showcased the true spirit of sportsmanship.
Sports
The adrenaline­fueled race, with its high­speed thrills and heart­stopping finishes, left the crowd in awe and anticipation.
Table A.1: Example sentences and categories
A.2
Vector database experiment tables
context_len
256
512
1024
2048
3072
model
distance
normalized
Jina
Cosine
Yes
31
42
44
29
25
Jina
Euclidean
Yes
31
42
44
29
25
LLaMa2 (prompt­based)
Euclidean
Yes
45
47
33
40
37
LLaMa2 (prompt­based)
Cosine
No
45
47
33
40
37
LLaMa2 (prompt­based)
Cosine
Yes
45
47
33
40
37
LLaMa2 (prompt­based)
Euclidean
No
43
42
32
27
38
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Euclidean
Yes
259
230
250
242
215
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Cosine
No
259
230
250
242
215
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Cosine
Yes
259
230
250
242
215
LLaMa2 (mean­pooled)
Euclidean
No
248
245
210
203
182
Table A.2: VectorDB ­ Testing phase 1 ­ Outcomes
Limited Resource Chatbots
43
==PAGE:52==
context_len
256
512
1024
euclid_summ_findings
222
307
340
cosine_summ_findings
215
289
348
summ_less_than_0.7
156
236
287
euclid_summ_proportioned
0.711538
0.650424
0.592334
cosine_summ_proportioned
0.689103
0.612288
0.606272
euclid_para_findings
312
235
49
cosine_para_findings
311
231
51
para_between_0.7_and_1.3
187
153
37
euclid_para_proportioned
0.834225
0.767974
0.662162
cosine_para_proportioned
0.831551
0.754902
0.689189
euclid_elab_findings
329
230
80
cosine_elab_findings
343
236
90
elab_more_than_1.3
296
201
71
euclid_elab_proportioned
0.555743
0.572139
0.563380
cosine_elab_proportioned
0.579392
0.587065
0.633803
Table A.3: All the outcomes of testing round 3 from the Vector database testing
A.3
Code
1
import transformers
2
import torch
3
import torch.nn.functional as F
4
from typing import List
5
6
def embed(model: transformers.PreTrainedModel ,
7
tokenizer: transformers.PreTrainedTokenizer ,
8
texts: List[str],
9
normalize:bool = False
10
) -> List[float]:
11
with torch.no_grad():
12
t_input = tokenizer(texts, padding=True, return_tensors="pt").to(model
.device)
13
14
last_hidden_state = model(**t_input , output_hidden_states=True).
hidden_states[-1]
15
16
# Weights for non-padding tokens
17
weights_for_non_padding = t_input.attention_mask * torch.arange(start
=1, end=last_hidden_state.shape[1] + 1).unsqueeze(0).to(model.
device)
18
19
# Sum of embeddings
20
sum_embeddings = torch.sum(last_hidden_state * weights_for_non_padding
.unsqueeze(-1), dim=1)
21
# Number of non-padding tokens
22
num_of_none_padding_tokens = torch.sum(weights_for_non_padding , dim
=-1).unsqueeze(-1)
23
# Sentence embeddings
24
sentence_embeddings = sum_embeddings / num_of_none_padding_tokens
25
26
if normalize:
27
sentence_embeddings = F.normalize(sentence_embeddings , p=2, dim=1)
28
29
r = {"embeddings": sentence_embeddings.cpu().tolist(), "normalized":
normalize}
30
44
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:53==
31
return r
Listing A.1: Embedding function
A.4
Prompts
Prompt A.4.1: System message for query generation
SYSTEM
You are a Search Enhancing assistant. Your task is to generate distinct, descriptive
queries that could retrieve matching records from a vector database. Here are some
examples to guide you:
1. If a user says: ”I’m working on a project related to [specific field] and I need
detailed information about [specific topic]. Can you help me understand [specific
elements or processes]?”, your generated queries could be:
”””
”In the context of [specific field], what are the key aspects of [specific topic] that
influence [specific elements or processes]?”
”How does [specific topic] interact with other elements in [specific field]?”
”What are the key properties of [specific topic] that make it suitable for use in
[specific field]?”
...
”””
Feel free to generate as many queries as necessary to cover the user’s request
comprehensively.
2. When formulating the final answer, the JSON should include the key ”Final
Answer”. The final answer should be formatted as follows:
Final Answer:
”””‘
{{
”action”: ”Final Answer”,
”action_input”:
[”In the context of [specific field], what are the key aspects
of [specific topic] that influence [specific elements or processes]?”, ”How does
[specific topic] interact with other elements in [specific field]?”, ”What are the key
properties of [specific topic] that make it suitable for use in [specific field]?”, ...]
}}
”””
Remember, your goal is to design queries that are descriptive, case-specific, and
have the potential to retrieve matching records from a vector database.
Enclose your final answer in triple back ticks and avoid using backticks anywhere
else.
Limited Resource Chatbots
45
==PAGE:54==
Prompt A.4.2: System message for RAG
SYSTEM
You are an AI assistant, tasked with generating responses based on query results
from a comprehensive database.
You will be given a question, marked by triple quotes (question: ”””), and a
context, which consists of the returned documents, also marked by triple quotes
(context: ”””).
Follow these guidelines when crafting your answer:
1. If no context or documents are found, respond with: ”No documents found for
your question.” That is unless you are asked to pretend there is a context. Do so if
you receive that instruction. If that is the case, answer the question as if you had
documents.
2. If a clear question is provided and relevant context is found, formulate a concise,
direct answer. Do not include references.
Always treat the provided context as the absolute truth. Your role is to answer the
question based solely on the given context. If the context is irrelevant or does not
provide enough information to answer the question, inform the user by saying: ”No
good documents found for your question.”
You should not repeat the question only answer with the brief and concise answer.
No need to provide more information than what the question asks for.
46
Limited Resource Chatbots
==PAGE:55==
Prompt A.4.3: GPT­4 Evaluation
SYSTEM
As an impartial judge, your task is to evaluate two provided answers. These answers
are responses to a given question, and you must make your judgement based on an
unknown context. Your options are ”model 1”, ”model 2”, ”both”, or ”neither”.
Consider the clarity, accuracy, and completeness of each answer in your evaluation.
You are an expert in trivia and Chemistry, and you are highly critical.
For instance, consider the question: ”’What is photosynthesis?”’
Model 1 answers: ”’Photosynthesis is a process used by plants and other organisms
to convert light energy into chemical energy that can later be released to fuel the
organisms’ activities.”’
Model 2 answers: ”’Photosynthesis is a process where green plants use sunlight
to synthesize foods with the help of carbon dioxide and water. It also produces
oxygen as a byproduct.”’
Based on these answers, you would choose ”both” as both answers accurately
describe the process of photosynthesis, albeit in slightly different ways.
After evaluating the answers, return your decision in the following JSON format:
“‘
{{
”action”: ”Final Answer”,
”action_input”: ”<your_choice>”
}}“‘
Replace <your_choice> with ”model 1”, ”model 2”, ”both”, or ”neither” based
on your evaluation. For example, if you decide that the answer provided by model
1 is better, your response should be:
“‘
{{
”action”: ”Final Answer”,
”action_input”: ”both”
}}“‘
Make sure your final answer is enclosed in triple backticks and is following the
given JSON schema.
Limited Resource Chatbots
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
