==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
High quality dataset generation for 
data-driven security assessment of 
power systems: a toolbox
Lola Maud R Charles
DTU Wind-M-0838
July 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0838
July 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Spyros Chatzivasileiadis
Agnes Marjorie Nakiganda
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at he 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Lola Maud R Charles
Title:
High quality dataset generation for data-
driven security assessment of power 
systems: a toolbox
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This thesis marks the end of six years of study that began in Liège and concluded in Copenhagen,
a journey that has been profoundly enriching both intellectually and personally. I am deeply
grateful to those who have supported and guided me throughout this period.
First and foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors, Spyros
Chatzivasileiadis, Agnes Marjorie Nakiganda and Johanna Vorwerk.
Spyros, thank you for
the opportunity to work on such an intriguing topic and for your valuable general guidance.
Agnes and Johanna, your constant help, ideas, advice, and motivating comments have been
indispensable to my progress.
I am also deeply appreciative of my family and friends, who have provided unwavering support
during this challenging time.
Your encouragement and belief in me have been a source of
strength.
Lastly, a special thank you to Théo, whose extraordinary support, motivation, and precision
have been an inspiration and example for me. Your presence has been pivotal in my journey.
Thank you all for your contributions to this significant chapter of my life.
iv
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Context and motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Objectives and scope of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
AC-OPF Formulation
7
3
Small-signal stability
10
4
Dataset generation methodology
13
4.1
Objectives and method structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Input step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Load profiles generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Latin Hypercube sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.5
QC-AC-OPF Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.6
Possible operating space reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.7
AC Power Flows and Constraints checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.8
N-1 security criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.9
Small-signal Stability and Directed Walks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.10 Dataset creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Simulations and Results
26
5.1
Simulation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Load profiles selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Possible operating space volume reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
AC-OPF Feasibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
N-1 criterion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.6
Small-signal stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.7
Datasets creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Discussion
36
7
Conclusion
37
8
Future work
38
A Volume reduction
43
B Dynamic system parameters
44
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
ML Machine Learning
LHS Latin Hypercube Sampling
OPF Optimal Power Flow
PF Power Flow
AC Alternative Current
OBBT Optimization-based bound tightening
QC Quadratic Convex
QC-AC-OPF Quadratic Convex Alternative Current Optimal Power Flow
AC-OPF Alternative Current Optimal Power Flow
AC-PF Alternative Current Optimal Power Flow
DC-OPF Direct Current Optimal Power Flow
DW Directed walks
SSS Small-Signal Stability
OP Operating Point
POS Possible Operating Space
TSO Transmission System Operator
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
1
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Sets:
• 풩: Set of buses in the system.
• 풢: Subset of buses with controllable generator connected.
• ℒ: Set of branches in the system.
General notations:
• ℜ(·) : Real part of a complex number.
• ℑ(·) : Imaginary part of a complex number.
• (·)∗: Conjugate of a complew number.
• | · |, ∠· : Magnitude, angle of a complex number.
• ˘𝑥: Convex envelope of 𝑥.
• i : Imaginary number constant.
• 𝑥𝑙, 𝑥𝑢: Lower and upper bounds of 𝑥, respectively.
• ⟨𝑓(·)⟩: Set of contraints defining convex envelope.
• x : Operating point.
• b : Vector.
• A : Matrix.
• ®𝑛: Normal vector.
Parameters:
• vl
k, vu
k : Voltage magnitude limit at bus 𝑘.
• Sl
Gk, Su
Gk : Power generation limit at the genetaror 𝑘.
• Su
ij : Maximum power flow on branch 𝑖𝑗.
• 𝜃∆,l
ij , 𝜃∆,u
ij
: Phase angle difference limits on branch 𝑖𝑗.
• Yij = gij + ibij : Admittance on branch 𝑖𝑗.
• Zij = rij + ixij : Impedance on branch 𝑖𝑗.
• SDk = pDk + iqDk : Apparent power demand at bus 𝑘.
• c2k, c1k, c0k : Generation cost coeﬀicients of generator 𝑘.
Variables:
• 𝑉𝑘= 𝑣𝑘∠𝜃𝑘: Voltage at bus 𝑘.
• 𝑆𝐺𝑘= 𝑝𝐺𝑘+ i𝑞𝐺𝑘: Apparent power production at bus 𝑘.
• 𝑆𝑖𝑗= 𝑝𝑖𝑗+ i𝑞𝑖𝑗: Apparent power flow on branch 𝑖𝑗.
• 𝑊𝑖𝑗: Voltage product on branch 𝑖𝑗, i.e., 𝑉𝑖𝑉∗
𝑗.
2
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:9==
• 𝑙𝑖𝑗: Current magnitude squarred on branch 𝑖𝑗.
• 𝜃Δ
𝑖𝑗= ∠𝑉𝑖−∠𝑉𝑗: Phase angle difference on branch 𝑖𝑗.
Other notations:
• 𝜆: Eigenvalue
• 𝜁: Damping ratio
• V𝐵𝑇: Unclassified volume after the bound tightening step.
• V𝐻𝑃: Unclassified volume after the hyperplanes step.
• 풟𝐼𝑛: Input possible operating space
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
3
==PAGE:10==
4
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context and motivations
The energy transition is significantly transforming power systems worldwide. As distributed
renewable generators progressively replace large conventional generation units, the Transmission
System Operator (TSO)’s ability to control the grid diminishes. This shift, combined with the
inherent uncertainty from renewable generation, pushes the power system to be operated closer
to its operational limits [1]. This can have as consequence for the TSOs as like costly dispatch
measures to maintain the sytem security or, even in the worst cases, system failures and cascading
outages leading to blackouts.
To minimize those risks, TSOs conduct security analysis on numerous scenarios representing
potential future operating points to identify potential risks. These analysis consists in verifying
that a range of static and dynamic security criteria need are satisfied. Linear approximations of
network physics, typically used by grid operators to estimate power flows throughout the system,
are not suﬀicient for ensuring overall system reliability [2]. The “DC OPF” approximation, for
instance, is used by many system operators and has been shown to result in highly inaccurate es-
timates of power flows due to the non-consideration of the reactive power. As the power systems
are non-linear complex systems, solving Alternative Current Optimal Power Flow (AC-OPF) for
a wide range of operating points can be computationally intensive due to the high dimensionality
of the problem. There is a clear and growing need for higher-eﬀiciency methods to solve AC
OPF but also to ensures that the dynamic stability of the system is guaranteed.
The modifications that power systems have experienced in recent years in terms of the inclusion
of renewables energy sources and new types of interconnection have further increased more the
complexity of assessing their stability and security. Indeed, this transformation of the power
grid does imply that an increasing number of devices and operating states need to be considered.
Consequently, traditional methods cannot be used anymore, as they become intractable. Hence,
new procedures are being developed to assess feasibility and stability.
In response to this challenge, Machine Learning (ML) methods have been developed for power
systems applications [3]. ML techniques are black-box algorithms that provide faster computa-
tional characteristics as compared to traditional model-based methods. They, however, require
high-quality datasets to ensure proper training and generalization capabilities. A high-quality
dataset composed of a well-balanced representation of the various operating regions of the power
system are required for successful implementation of ML methods. Such datasets are not readily
available due to the low availability of measurement historical data does not usually describe
abnormal system conditions, and does not characterize the security boundary in detail, which
are prerequisites for a data-driven identification of potential failure risks. However, they can
be generated using several methods to represent the applicable security boundaries. A security
boundary can be defined as the limit or threshold beyond which a power system operates under
stable conditions. It delineates the boundary between safe and potentially insecure operating
states. An area of study utilizes historical data enriched through sampling methods like compos-
ite modeling approaches and vine-copulas [4, 5]. However, this approach may neglect portions of
the secure space or overlook abnormal operating regions. The work of Florian Thams et al. [6]
and Venzke et al. [7] develops methodologies that enable the eﬀicient and accurate identification
of security and stability boundaries of a power system and that can be applied to generate a
high-quality dataset used to train ML models.
In these methodologies, one of the central elements is the definition of infeasibility certificates.
Those can certify regions in which the non-convex AC-OPF problem under uncertainty is in-
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
5
==PAGE:12==
feasible a-priori. The definition of these certificates utilizes properties of the AC-OPF and its
convex relaxation developed in [8]. The tightness of the Quadratic Convex (QC) relaxation is
an important element in the method because the tighter it is, the more accurate the identified
secure zone. To improve it, bound tightening algorithms detailed in [9] and [10] were developped.
In addition to identifying the AC-OPF feasible operating point region, the goal is to also identify
secure operating region for other security criteria. The 𝑁−1 criterion, which is a widely used
criterion for static stability, is also considered.
The small-signal stability of the power system is also considered as a security boundary. In order
to describe the boundary of the operating space that is small-signal stable, an algorithm.
1.2
Objectives and scope of the thesis
This thesis will focus on the implementation of a toolbox enabling the generation of high-quality
datasets that can be used by Machine Learning models predicting N-1 constrained steady-state
power flow feasibility and small-signal stability. From the basic data defining the topology and
components of a power system, the aim is to create a balanced dataset between operating points
classified as secure or unsecure, so that a data-driven model, such as a neural network, can be
trained. The classification results obtained thereafter will be contrasted with outcomes derived
solely from datasets generated through sampling techniques.
To attain superior results, it’s
crucial to pinpoint and accurately depict security boundaries using diverse techniques in the
toolbox. This involves delving into theoretical frameworks of existing models to formulate AC-
OPF with N-1 safety criterion constraints, create infeasibility certificates, establish small-signal
stability criteria, and employ sampling techniques.
The toolbox is intended to be a high-performance, competitive tool compared with other state-
of-the-art tools, also in terms of computational resources and execution time. It must also be
as optimized and modular as possible, so that it can be supplemented by future contributors.
This report presents the methodology developed for generating the datasets.
In chapter 2,
the AC-OPF formulation and its QC relaxation, which are integral to the methodology, are
introduced and explained.
Additionally, the concept of small-signal stability is introduced.
chapter 4 outlines the structure and detailed steps of the method. chapter 6 provides a thorough
discussion of the results and highlights the key lessons learned from this work. Finally, chapter 7
summarizes the work conducted and suggests potential future research directions.
This report relates the work done to establish the methodology developed to generate the
datasets. In chapter 3, the AC-OPF formulation and its QC relaxation used in the methodology
are introduced and described. In, the introduction of the small-signal stability concept is done.
In chapter 4, the structure of the method and the details of the steps are outlined. chapter 6
provides a discussion of the results and presents the main lessons learned from this work. Fi-
nally, the concluding chapter 7 wraps up all the work carried out and introduces potential future
lines of research.
6
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:13==
2
AC-OPF Formulation
This section presents the mathematical formulation of the AC-OPF problem, which is at the
core of the dataset creation methodology. The AC-OPF is an optimization problem that aims
to minimize an objective function subject to the AC power flow equations and the operational
constraints of the power system. Various AC-OPF formulations have been developed, contingent
on the specific problem to be addressed. In this work, the formulation employed is in polar form
and derived from Coffrin et al. [11].
A power system is defined by its set 풩of buses. A subset of these buses, denoted by 풢, is
equipped with controllable generators. It is assumed that all buses in the power system are
interconnected by lines denoted by (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ, connecting bus 𝑖to bus 𝑗.
The optimization variables in the AC-OPF problem consist of the complex bus voltages 𝑉𝑘for
each bus 𝑘∈풩, and the complex power dispatch of generator 𝑆𝐺𝑘for each bus 𝑘∈풢. Here,
the superscript ∗denotes the complex conjugate. The formulation is articulated as follows :
min
Õ
𝑘∈풢
c2k(ℜ(𝑆𝐺𝑘))2 + c1kℜ(𝑆𝐺𝑘) + c0k
(2.1)
subject to :
𝑆𝑖𝑗=  Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑉𝑖(𝑉𝑖)∗− Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑉𝑖
 𝑉𝑗
∗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.2)
𝑆𝐺𝑘−SDk =
Õ
(𝑘,𝑗)∈ℒ
𝑆𝑘𝑗
∀𝑘∈풩
(2.3)

vl
k

≤|𝑉𝑘| ≤ vu
k

∀𝑘∈풩
(2.4)
SGk
𝑙≤𝑆𝐺𝑘≤Su
Gk
∀𝑘∈풢
(2.5)
𝑆𝑖𝑗
 ≤Su
ij
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.6)
𝜃∆,l
ij
≤∠

𝑉𝑖𝑉∗
𝑗

≤𝜃∆,u
ij
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.7)
∠𝑉𝑖= 0
if
𝑖= slack
(2.8)
For the sake of conciseness, the optimization problem is formulated using complex variables.
However, the inequality constraints are applied to the real and imaginary parts of these complex
variables.
The objective function (2.1) minimizes the active power generation cost, also called the generator
fuel cost minimization. The cost coeﬀicients c2k, c1k, c0k depends on the generators and systems
types. The apparent power flow 𝑆𝑖𝑗on the line from 𝑖to 𝑗is defined in (2.2). The term Y denotes
the admittance of the branch considered. The equality constraint (2.3) enforces the nodal power
balance. Those two constraints, (2.6) and (2.3), corresponds to the Alternative Current (AC)
power flow constraints. The bus voltage magnitudes are constrained in (2.4) by the lower and
upper limits vl
k and vu
k. Similarly, the generators’ complex power outputs are limited in (2.5)
by lower and upper bounds SGk
𝑙and SGk
𝑢. The apparent power flow 𝑆𝑖𝑗on the line from bus 𝑖
to bus 𝑗is upper bounded in (2.6) by Su
ij. The flow on the line from bus 𝑖to bus 𝑗is limited in
(2.7) by a lower and upper limit on angle differences 𝜃∆,l
ij
and 𝜃∆,u
ij , respectively. The constraints
(2.4)-(2.7) are the operational constraints of the problem. They impose bounds on the problem’s
optimization variables.
Due to the non-linear nature of the AC power flow equations (2.2), the AC-OPF problem is
non-convex and generally NP-hard [12]. The non-convexities emerge from the multiplication
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
7
==PAGE:14==
of the voltages variables (i.e., 𝑉𝑖𝑉∗
𝑗). They can be addressed by introducing new optimization
variables, denoted as 𝑊, to represent these voltage products.
𝑉𝑖𝑉∗
𝑗= 𝑊𝑖𝑗
∀𝑖, 𝑗∈풩
(2.9)
Subsequently, (2.2), (2.4) and (2.7) are reformulated as :

vl
k
2
≤𝑊𝑘𝑘≤ vu
k
2
∀𝑘∈풩
(2.10)
𝑆𝑖𝑗=  Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑊𝑖𝑖− Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑊𝑖𝑗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.11)
𝑆𝑗𝑖=  Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑊𝑗𝑗− Y𝑖𝑗
∗ 𝑊𝑖𝑗
∗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.12)
tan

𝜃∆,l
ij

≤
ℑ

𝑊𝑖𝑗
	
ℜ

𝑊𝑖𝑗
	 ≤tan

𝜃∆,u
ij

∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.13)
The only source of non-convexity in the AC-OPF problem arises now from the constraint (2.9).
Non-convexity poses significant challenges, making the AC-OPF problem diﬀicult to solve. So-
lutions obtained from non-convex local solvers are often only locally optimal, with no guarantee
of their proximity to the global optimum. Moreover, non-convex local solvers do not ensure
convergence and may fail to find feasible solutions even if they exist.
Given the diﬀiculty in ensuring both feasibility and global optimality for the non-convex AC-OPF
problem, extensive research efforts have been dedicated to devising convex relaxations of the AC-
OPF problem [13]. Convex relaxations expand the non-convex feasible regions defined by power
flow equations into a larger convex space. This enlargement facilitates the application of theories
and algorithms originally designed for convex optimization problems.
These relaxations not
only enhance computational eﬀiciency but also serve various purposes. They facilitate assessing
the quality of AC-OPF solutions from locally optimal methods, determining the existence or
absence of solutions for specific AC-OPF problems, and generating feasible solutions within the
original non-convex problem formulation, thereby guaranteeing global optimality. Through such
developments, researchers aim to overcome the challenges posed by non-convexity, facilitating
more robust and eﬀicient solutions in power system optimization.
2.0.1
Quadratic Convex (QC) Relaxation
Several types of AC-OPF convex relaxations have been developed, including the Semi-Definite
Programming (SDP) [14], the Second-Order Cone (SOC) [15] and the Quadratic Convex (QC)
relaxations. Coffrin et al. [11] provides a comprehensive evaluation of the QC relaxation method
in comparison to the SDP and SOC relaxations for solving power flows. The study evidences
that the QC relaxation represents a robust solution approach that effectively reconciles compu-
tational eﬀiciency with enhanced accuracy. This is why this relaxation technique was chosen for
the remainder of this work.
The QC relaxation was introduced to utilize the bounds on the variables 𝑣and 𝜃Δ, which are
ignored by the other relaxations. The voltages are represented in polar form (i.e., 𝑉= 𝑣∠𝜃) and
are linked to the 𝑊variables using the following equations:
𝑊𝑖𝑖= 𝑣2
𝑖
𝑖∈풩
(2.14)
ℜ 𝑊𝑖𝑗

= 𝑣𝑖𝑣𝑗cos  𝜃𝑖−𝜃𝑗

∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.15)
ℑ 𝑊𝑖𝑗

= 𝑣𝑖𝑣𝑗sin  𝜃𝑖−𝜃𝑗

∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.16)
The QC relaxation relaxes these equations by deriving tight convex envelopes of their nonlinear
terms, leveraging the operational limits for 𝑣𝑖, 𝑣𝑗, 𝜃𝑖−𝜃𝑗. The following convex envelopes for
8
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:15==
the squares and products of variables are utilized:

𝑥2𝑇≡

ˇ𝑥≥𝑥2
ˇ𝑥≤ x𝒖+ x𝒍
𝑥−x𝒖x𝒍
(2.17)
⟨𝑥𝑦⟩𝑀≡


ˇ𝑥𝑦≥x𝒍𝑦+ y𝒍𝑥−x𝒍y𝒍
ˇ𝑥𝑦≥x𝒖𝑦+ y𝒖𝑥−x𝒖y𝒖
ˇ𝑥𝑦≤x𝒍𝑦+ y𝒖𝑥−x𝒍y𝒖
ˇ𝑥𝑦≤x𝒖𝑦+ y𝒍𝑥−x𝒖y𝒍
(2.18)
Convex envelopes for sine (S-CONV) and cosine (C-CONV) are given by assuming the phase
angle bound satisfies 0 ≤𝜃Δ ≤𝜋
2 and is symmetric :
⟨sin(𝑥)⟩𝑆≡


ˇ𝑠𝑥≤cos(x𝒖
2 )(𝑥−x𝒖
2 ) + sin(x𝒖
2 )
ˇ𝑠𝑥≥cos(x𝒖
2 )(𝑥+ x𝒖
2 ) −sin(x𝒖
2 )
(2.19)
⟨cos(𝑥)⟩𝐶≡


ˇ𝑐𝑥≤1 −1−cos(x𝒖)
(x𝒖)2
𝑥2
ˇ𝑐𝑥≥cos(x𝒖)
(2.20)
The notation ⟨𝑓(·)⟩𝐶denotes the set of constraints that define the convex envelope of the func-
tion 𝑓(·). When employed within an equation, the specific constraints that determine this convex
envelope must be incorporated.
Convex envelopes for equations (2.14) - (2.16) can be obtained by composing the convex envelopes
of the functions for square, sine, cosine, and the product of two variables as follows :
𝑊𝑖𝑖= ⟨𝑣2
𝑖⟩𝑇
𝑖∈풩
(2.21)
ℜ 𝑊𝑖𝑗

= ⟨⟨𝑣𝑖𝑣𝑗⟩𝑀⟨cos  𝜃𝑖−𝜃𝑗

⟩𝐶⟩𝑀
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.22)
ℑ 𝑊𝑖𝑗

= ⟨⟨𝑣𝑖𝑣𝑗⟩𝑀⟨sin  𝜃𝑖−𝜃𝑗

⟩𝑆⟩𝑀
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.23)
The proposed QC relaxation aims to enhance the existing convex envelopes by incorporating a
second-order cone constraint that is based on the absolute square of line power flow, represented
by the equation 𝑆𝑖𝑗= 𝑉𝑖𝐼∗
𝑖𝑗. To achieve this, a new variable called 𝑙𝑖𝑗is introduced for each line
(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒthat measures the magnitude squared of the current flowing through that line. In order
to link these new variables with the existing model variables, the following set of constraints is
added :
𝑆𝑖𝑗+ 𝑆𝑗𝑖= 𝒁𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑖𝑗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.24)
𝑆𝑖𝑗
2 ≤𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(2.25)
The term Z𝑖𝑗denotes the line impedance.
The resulting QC relaxation of AC-OPF is a second-order cone program (SOCP) that minimizes
an objective function (2.1), subject to (2.5)–(2.3), (2.10)-(2.13) and (2.21)-(2.25).
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
9
==PAGE:16==
3
Small-signal stability
The small-signal stability notion is defined and explained in the following section.
Small-signal stability is defined as the ability of the power system to maintain synchronism when
subjected to small disturbances. A disturbance is considered small if the equations describing
the response of the system can be linearized for the purpose of the analysis. This makes it
possible to use linear techniques to describe the dynamic characteristics of the system, adding
substantial value to the stability analysis.
A power system is a non-linear system whose dynamics can be described mathematically by a
set f of 𝑛non-linear differential equations as follows:
¤x = f(x, u)
(3.1)
y = g(x, u)
(3.2)
where x =   𝑥1
. . .
𝑥𝑛
𝑇is the state variables vector, u =   𝑢1
. . .
𝑢𝑛
𝑇is the system in-
puts vector, y =   𝑦1
. . .
𝑦𝑛
𝑇is the outputs vector, and g is a vector of nonlinear functions
that relates the states and the input variables to output variables[16]. The sets of equations and
states variables differs depending on the type of dynamic elements used in the system.
As previously mentionned, the perturbations are supposed to be small and the non-linear equa-
tions describing the system can be linearized. These results are valid only within a limited range
around the operating conditions. Linearized systems are usually modeled with a state-space rep-
resentation as follows::
¤x = Ax + Bu
(3.3)
y = Cx + Du
(3.4)
where x is the state vector, u is the input vector, y is the output vector. Here, the notation ·x
corresponds to the derivative of x with respect to time.
A is the state matrix, B is the input matrix, C is the output matrix, and D is the feedforward
matrix.
Small-signal stability is determined by the eigenvalues of the state matrix A. Every 𝑁by 𝑁
matrix has 𝑁eigenvalues, 𝜆𝑖with 𝑖= (1, . . . , 𝑁) , associated with it. These eigenvalues are the
roots of the equation :
𝑑𝑒𝑡(A −𝜆I) = 0
(3.5)
where I is a 𝑁𝑥𝑁identity matrix and 𝑑𝑒𝑡is the determinant. The eigenvalues may be real or
complex, with complex eigenvalues occurring in complex conjugate pairs.
For each eigenvalue, 𝜆𝑖, there is at least one non-zero vector, 𝜙𝑖, which satisfies :
A𝜙𝑖= 𝜆𝜙𝑖
, ∀𝑖= 1, . . . , 𝑁
(3.6)
The eigenvector 𝜙𝑖is called right eigenvector and has 𝑁𝑥1 dimensions.
In the context of dynamic systems, a mode represents a specific pattern of behavior or response
that the system exhibits following a disturbance. Mathematically, modes are associated with
the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the system’s state matrix A. Each eigenvalue corresponds
10
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:17==
to a mode of the system. Real eigenvalues result in exponential modes, indicating that the
system’s response either grows or decays exponentially over time. Complex eigenvalues occur in
conjugate pairs and result in oscillatory modes, indicating that the system’s response oscillates
at a certain frequency with a specific rate of exponential growth or decay.
For oscillatory modes, the damping ratio 𝜁is a dimensionless measure that describes how oscil-
lations in the system decay over time. It is defined using the real part 𝜎and the imaginary part
𝜔of a complex eigenvalue 𝜆:
𝜆= 𝜎± 𝑗𝜔
(3.7)
The damping ratio 𝜁is given by:
𝜁=
−𝜎
√
𝜎2 + 𝜔2
(3.8)
where:
• 𝜎is the real part of the eigenvalue and represents the rate of exponential decay or growth.
• 𝜔is the imaginary part of the eigenvalue and represents the frequency of oscillation.
The value of the damping ratio indicates the nature of the oscillations:
• 𝜁> 1: Overdamped system, no oscillations, slow return to equilibrium.
• 𝜁= 1: Critically damped system, no oscillations, fastest return to equilibrium without
oscillating.
• 0 < 𝜁< 1: Underdamped system, oscillatory response with exponential decay.
• 𝜁= 0: Undamped system, sustained oscillations without decay.
Given all the previous definitions, if all eigenvalues of A have negative real parts, the system
is considered to be asymptotically small-signal stable. It means that the system returns to its
original state after the disturbance. Conversely, if any eigenvalue has a positive real part, the
system is small-signal unstable. If there are eigenvalues on the real axis with a real part equal to
zero and a non-zero imaginary part, the system is considered marginally stable. This condition
indicates a critical point that necessitates careful monitoring and potentially corrective actions
to maintain system stability and prevent any drift towards instability. This is summarized in
Figure 3.1.
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Stable Region
Unstable Region
Real Axis
Imaginary Axis
Asymptotically stable
Unstable
Marginally stable
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the small-signal stable and unstable regions for the system’s eigenval-
ues
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
11
==PAGE:18==
Small-signal stability assessment is standard practice for almost all power system operators. The
principles of small-signal stability are essential for large-scale power systems, especially those
incorporating renewable energy sources. With the increasing penetration of renewable energy,
power system dynamics are becoming more complex, requiring careful consideration of stability
aspects [17]. Small-signal stability analysis helps predict these systems’ dynamic behavior and
design appropriate control strategies to ensure stable operation.
In addition, the growth of
interconnected networks also requires small-signal stability assessment techniques. Small-signal
stability analysis provides a systematic approach to assessing stability margins and identifying
critical oscillation modes, thereby providing valuable information to network operators and
planners for decision-making on network operation and expansion.
For those reasons, it is
important to include this assessment in the dataset creation methodology.
12
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:19==
4
Dataset generation methodology
In this chapter, the complete methodology for creating high-quality datasets is outlined. First,
the objective of the methodology is detailed. Following this, a comprehensive overview of the
methodology and the organization of its various steps is provided. Then, the details of each step
are explored, covering everything from the inputs description to the operating space reduction
and security criteria evaluation.
4.1
Objectives and method structure
The goal of the following methodology is to create, for a specific power system, a dataset which
associates operating points to power system security classifications.
The dataset should be
balanced between secure and insecure samples and have a detailed description of the security
boundaries defined. In this work, a security boundary is defined as the limit between an infea-
sible or insecure operating zone and a feasible or secure zone, depending on the feasibility or
security criterion under consideration. The power system classifications considered through the
methodology are the following : AC-OPF feasibility, 𝑁−1 security and small-signal stability.
An Operating Point (OP) is defined by the vector 𝒙(4.1) which consists of some of the AC-OPF
problem’s optimization variables : the generators’ active power variables (except at the slack
bus) and the generators’ voltage magnitudes variables.
𝒙=

𝑥1
𝑥2
...
𝑥𝑑

=

𝑝𝐺𝑖
𝑣𝑗

,
∀𝑖∈풢\{ slack }, ∀𝑗∈풢
(4.1)
Using the input vector 𝒙, the non-linear AC power flow equations can determine all other vari-
ables of the AC-OPF problem. The variables constituting the vector 𝒙represent the degrees of
freedom of the problem. It means that the values of those variables will be adjusted to explore
the system possible operating space 풟.
Specifically, if the length of the vector 𝒙equals 𝑑,
the problem is characterized by 𝑑dimensions. The number of dimensions can quickly become
significant when considering large power systems. As a result, attempting to identify secure
operating points can become intractable if the approach is solely to sample points with a pre-
determined discretization interval along all dimensions. This highlights the necessity for a more
sophisticated approach.
The complete methodology developed and followed in this work as well as the connections
between its steps are detailed in Figure 4.1.
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
13
==PAGE:20==
Inputs : system data
1
LHS to select diﬀerent load proﬁles
2
QC-AC-OPF
3
Bound tightening
4
Load proﬁle ignored
Separating Hyperplanes
5
Internal sampling of the polytope
6
AC-PF + Constraints checks
7
Add to feasible set
Add to infeasible set
N-1 criterion
8
Add to the secure set
Add to the insecure set
N-1 secure
N-1 insecure
Small-signal assessment
9
Directed walks
10
Datasets creation
11
Enforce reactive limits
Feasible
풟𝐼𝑛: Possible operating space
Unfeasible
Feasible
Unfeasible
Unfeasible
Feasible
𝑁0 load proﬁles selected
𝑁1 hyperplanes drawn
𝑁𝐷𝑊steps
for each Directed walks (DW)
Updated bounds on variables : 𝜃∆,l, 𝜃∆,u, vl, vu
Possible operating space after bound thigtening : 풟𝐵𝑇
Polytope : A(𝑁1)x ≤b(𝑁1)
𝑁2 sampled OPs
𝑁3 OPs
Figure 4.1: Flow diagram of the data set creation methodology
14
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:21==
4.2
Input step
The initial step of the methodology consists in identifying and gathering the inputs to model the
power system studied. This encompasses all data characterizing the system’s topology, the types
of components it comprises—both for steady-state and dynamic modeling —and the parameters
associated with these components. Such comprehensive data collection is essential for precise
modeling of the power system studied, thereby ensuring the accuracy of the method’s outcomes.
A summary of the parameters needed for the steady-state modeling of the system’s fundamental
components is provided in Table 4.1.
Some of these input data represent the initial bounds on the decision variables of the AC-OPF
problem defined in chapter 2 , and consequently on the operating point vector 𝒙(see (2.4) and
(2.5)). Each degree of freedom of the operating point vector has specific limits that delineate
the input possible operating space 풟𝐼𝑛, encompassing the boundaries of all these degrees of
freedom. This input space 풟𝐼𝑛is defined as :
"
𝑝𝑙
𝐺𝑖
𝑣𝑙
𝑗
#
≤𝒙≤
 𝑝𝑢
𝐺𝑖
𝑣𝑢
𝑗

,
∀𝑖∈풢\{ slack }, ∀𝑗∈풢
(4.2)
The Julia package PowerModels [18] is employed throughout all the steps of the methodology.
This package facilitates the creation of various objects necessary for modeling the steady-state
components of the power system studied. To build these objects, the inputs data described be-
fore are needed. The package takes several types of system data input files including MATPOWER
files (.raw format), PSS(R)E v33 (.m format).
To model the dynamic components of the power system, the Julia packages PowerSystem [19]
and PowerSystemDymanics [20] are used. The data related to dynamic elements are gathered
in a PSS(R)E file ( .dyr format). Dynamic simulations can then be defined and applied to the
The choice of these file formats is influenced by their extensive adoption in academic research
and industry, as well as the abundance of power system test cases available in these formats.
Opting for these formats ensures a predefined data structure, eliminating the necessity for for-
mat conversion. Additionally, they facilitate utilization of numerous Julia packages specifically
designed for the study and analysis of power systems.
Bus
𝑉𝑢
𝑉𝑙
𝜃
𝑉
Bus index
Bus type
Generator
𝑃𝑢
𝑃𝑙
𝑄𝑢
𝑄𝑙
𝑃𝐺
[c2, 𝑐1, 𝑐0]
Bus index
Load
𝑄𝐷
𝑃𝐷
Bus index
Line
From bus
To bus
Resistance
Reactance
Susceptance
Line rating
𝜃Δ,𝑢
𝜃Δ,𝑙
Table 4.1: Summary of the parameters needed to model the bus, generator, load and line
components of the system
4.3
Load profiles generation
To ensure a comprehensive analysis of the system, the methodology considers multiple load
profiles. This allows for the examination of whether significant differences are observable between
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
15
==PAGE:22==
different system loading situations in terms of secure operating points identification. Starting
from the nominal load profile defined in the input data, 𝑁1 additional load profiles are generated.
These load profiles are created by multiplying each load of the initial load profile by a coeﬀicient
between 0.7 and 1.2, enabling the simulation of peak and off-peak load demand scenarios.
The coeﬀicient
4.4
Latin Hypercube sampling
This section introduces the sampling method employed repeatedly throughout the methodology.
The objective of this sampling is to encompass the widest possible range of operating points,
thereby providing a comprehensive representation of the potential operating region. An effective
sampling method must traverse all potential values within the operating area to avoid focusing
solely on clusters within the region.
The chosen sampling method is the Latin Hypercube
Sampling (LHS) method.
The LHS technique divides each dimension of the operating region into 𝑁equally sized intervals,
ensuring that the same value in a dimension can only occur once. As mentioned before, the
dimensions of the operating region are the elements constituting the OP vector 𝒙. However,
randomized LHS sampling plans can suffer from clustering, which may leave certain areas of the
operating region underexplored. To mitigate this issue, the separation between operating points
was enhanced by optimizing the LHS plan using the Audze–Eglais objective function to select
different samples:
min
𝑃
Õ
𝑝=1
𝑃
Õ
𝑞=𝑝+1
1
𝐿2
𝑝𝑞
(4.3)
where 𝑝and 𝑞are sample points, 𝑃is the total number of sample points and 𝐿𝑝𝑞is the distance
between two sample points.
The optimization of the LHS sampling plan is based on the work by Bates et al. [21], where the
sampling plan is improved by using the objective (4.3) to select the samples.
The Julia package LatinHyperCubeSampling is used to generate these samples. An illustration
of the sampling technique is demonstrated in Figure 4.2, depicting 75 samples that represent
the potential active power dispatch of a 3-generator power system.
16
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:23==
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
𝑝𝐺1 [MW]
𝑝𝐺2 [MW]
𝑝𝐺3 [MW]
Samples
Figure 4.2: Possible active power dispatch samples obtained with LHS technique
4.5
QC-AC-OPF Feasibility
For each load profile generated in section 4.3, a relaxed optimal power flow (Quadratic Convex
Alternative Current Optimal Power Flow (QC-AC-OPF)) is runned to check if a feasible solution
exists for the specified input load profile. The formulation of the QC-AC-OPF problem is detailed
in subsection 2.0.1.
The convex relaxations have an important property stating that if the relaxed optimization
problem is infeasible for a specific input load profile, then the AC-OPF problem is also infeasible
for the same load profile. This property provides a suﬀicient condition for the infeasibility of a
loading situation. Therefore, load profiles that result in infeasible solutions are excluded from
further consideration in the methodology.
4.6
Possible operating space reduction
In this section, the objective is to reduce the potential operating space by identifying regions
where the AC-OPF problem is infeasible. Two different approaches are employed for this pur-
pose: bound tightening and infeasibility certificates. These methods, described in this section
and applied sequentially, enable an effective reduction of the potential operating space.
4.6.1
Bound Tightening
Bound tightening is a process within optimization aimed at enhancing the quality of solutions
by narrowing the upper and lower bounds of variables or constraints in a given problem. In
the domain of power network optimization, applying bound tightening to QC relaxations offers
substantial enhancements in performance and precision [22]. By restricting the range within
which decision variables such as voltages 𝑣and angles 𝜃can operate, the feasible region of
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
17
==PAGE:24==
the QC relaxation is reduced, resulting in a more precise approximation of the original non-
convex problem. This refined operating region effectively reduces the discrepancy between the
relaxed solution and the actual global optimum. Moreover, this method fortifies optimization
against numerical instability and ill-conditioning, preventing exploration of extreme or improb-
able variable values. Bound tightening also diminishes the size of the feasible region that must
be explored by the solver, leading to notable reductions in computational time and resource
expenditure required for solving the problem.
In this methodology, the chosen technique for achieving bound tightening is Optimization-based
bound tightening (OBBT).
This approach, defined as an iterative method in mathematical
optimization, systematically refines bounds on decision variables by solving optimization prob-
lems iteratively. It is particularly effective for enhancing the precision of convex relaxations, as
elaborated in [22].
The approach adopted is designed to optimize and refine the bounds on the voltage magnitude
(𝑣𝑘) and phase angle difference (𝜃Δ
𝑖𝑗) variables of the convex relaxation. The algorithm proceeds
according to the steps outlined in Algorithm 1:
Let Ω represent the feasible set of the QC relaxation outlined in subsection 2.0.1. Two sep-
arate convex optimization problems are formulated and solved for each variable in the set
풱=
n
𝑣𝑖∀𝑖∈풩, 𝜃Δ
𝑖𝑗∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
o
, to determine the maximum and minimum values of the vari-
able, subject to the constraints in Ω.
By iteratively computing more refined bounds for every variable in 풱whenever any bound is
adjusted, a progressively tighter QC relaxation is achieved. This iterative procedure continues
until a fixed point is reached, where no further modifications to variable bounds occur between
successive iterations. A criterion defining a fixed number of iterations 𝑁𝐵𝑇can also be established
to ensure that the algorithm terminates even if a fixed point is not found within that specified
number of iterations. This algorithm was developed in the work of Kaarthik Sundar et al [22].
Algorithm 1 The OBBT Algorithm
Input: QC relaxation to construct Ω
Output: 𝒗𝒖
𝒊, 𝒗𝒍
𝒊, 𝜽𝚫,𝒖
𝒊𝒋, 𝜽𝚫,𝒍
𝒊𝒋
∀𝑖∈풩, (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
Set iteration count: 𝑘←0
repeat
𝒗𝒍0
𝒊, 𝒗𝒖0
𝒊, 𝜽𝚫,𝒍0
𝒊𝒋
, 𝜽𝚫,𝒖0
𝒊𝒋
←𝒗𝒍
𝒊, 𝒗𝒖
𝒊, 𝜽𝚫,𝒍
𝒊𝒋, 𝜽𝚫,𝒖
𝒊𝒋
Ω ←QC relaxation given 𝒗𝒍0
𝒊, 𝒗𝒖0
𝒊, 𝜽𝚫,𝒍0
𝒊𝒋
, 𝜽𝚫,𝒖0
𝒊𝒋
for all 𝑖∈풩do
𝒗𝒍
𝒊←min{𝑣𝑖: Ω}
𝒗𝒖
𝒊←max{𝑣𝑖: Ω}
end for
for all (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒdo
𝜽𝚫,𝒍
𝒊𝒋
←min{𝜃Δ
𝑖𝑗: Ω}
𝜽𝚫,𝒖
𝒊𝒋
←max{𝜃Δ
𝑖𝑗: Ω}
end for
𝑘←𝑘+ 1
until 𝒗𝒍0
𝒊, 𝒗𝒖0
𝒊, 𝜽𝒍0
𝒊𝒋, 𝜽𝒖0
𝒊𝒋= 𝒗𝒍
𝒊, 𝒗𝒖
𝒊, 𝜽𝒍
𝒊𝒋, 𝜽𝒖
𝒊𝒋or 𝑘= 𝑁𝐵𝑇
This procedure narrows the volume of the operating region explored in subsequent steps of
the method. Any operating point x falling outside the tightened minimum and maximum up-
18
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:25==
dated input bounds x𝐵𝑇,𝑙, x𝐵𝑇,𝑢is conclusively deemed infeasible with respect to the non-convex
AC-OPF problem.
To quantify the extent of this reduction, it is essential to compute the volume of this operating
region. Since the region is defined across multiple dimensions, the volume is calculated as the
product of the differences between the bounds of each dimension:
𝑉=
Ö
𝑘∈풳
(𝑥𝒖
𝑘−𝑥𝒍
𝑘)
(4.4)
The input set 풳is defined as 풳: {풢\{slack}, 풢}.
This volume definition allows for the comparison of the possible operating space volume at dif-
ferent steps of the methodology.
4.6.2
Infeasibility Certificates
The objective of this step is to propose infeasibility certificates capable of certifying regions in
which the non-convex AC-OPF problem is infeasible. This leverages a fundamental property of
convex relaxation: if a relaxation is infeasible for a given operating point, the original non-convex
problem is also guaranteed to be infeasible for that operating point. The infeasibility certificate
employed is based on separating hyperplanes and has been used by Venzke et al. in [7]. The
procedure to create those hyperplanes is detailed in following of this section and illustrated in
Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the infeasibility certiﬁcates creation step
Consider a random operating point ˆ𝒙that is infeasible with respect to the non-convex AC-OPF
problem. To compute the closest operating point, 𝒙∗, which is feasible with respect to the convex
QC relaxation, the following optimization problem is solved:
min
𝑥,𝑣,𝑆,𝑆𝐺,𝜃,𝑙,𝑊,𝑅𝑟
(4.5)
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
19
==PAGE:26==
subject to :
𝑆𝑖𝑗=  Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑉𝑖(𝑉𝑖)∗− Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑉𝑖
 𝑉𝑗
∗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.6)
𝑆𝐺𝑘−SDk =
Õ
(𝑘,𝑗)∈ℒ
𝑆𝑘𝑗
∀𝑘∈풩
(4.7)
SGk
𝑙≤𝑆𝐺𝑘≤Su
Gk
∀𝑘∈풢
(4.8)
𝑆𝑖𝑗
 ≤Su
ij
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.9)
∠𝑉𝑖= 0
if
𝑖= slack
(4.10)

vl
k
2
≤𝑊𝑘𝑘≤ vu
k
2
∀𝑘∈풩
(4.11)
𝑆𝑖𝑗=  Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑊𝑖𝑖− Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑊𝑖𝑗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.12)
𝑆𝑗𝑖=  Y𝑖𝑗
∗𝑊𝑗𝑗− Y𝑖𝑗
∗ 𝑊𝑖𝑗
∗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.13)
tan

𝜃∆,l
ij

≤
ℑ

𝑊𝑖𝑗
	
ℜ

𝑊𝑖𝑗
	 ≤tan

𝜃∆,u
ij

∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.14)
𝑊𝑖𝑖= ⟨𝑣2
𝑖⟩𝑇
𝑖∈풩
(4.15)
ℜ 𝑊𝑖𝑗

= ⟨⟨𝑣𝑖𝑣𝑗⟩𝑀⟨cos  𝜃𝑖−𝜃𝑗

⟩𝐶⟩𝑀
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.16)
ℑ 𝑊𝑖𝑗

= ⟨⟨𝑣𝑖𝑣𝑗⟩𝑀⟨sin  𝜃𝑖−𝜃𝑗

⟩𝑆⟩𝑀
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.17)
𝑆𝑖𝑗+ 𝑆𝑗𝑖= 𝒁𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑖𝑗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.18)
𝑆𝑖𝑗
2 ≤𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑗
∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ℒ
(4.19)
sÕ
𝑘∈풳
(𝑥𝑘−ˆ𝑥𝑘)2 ≤𝑟
(4.20)
This optimization problem integrates the formulation of the QC-AC-OPF described in chapter 2
with a modification of the objective function (4.5) to obtain the closest feasible operating point
(4.5). Additionally, the constraint (4.20) is added to ensure that the optimization variable 𝑟is less
or equal to the Euclidean distance between the parameter ˆ𝒙, representing a random operating
point, and the optimization variable 𝒙, representing an operating point vector. This constraint
defines a hypersphere with radius 𝑟and center ˆ𝒙.
If the obtained optimal radius 𝑟∗is greater than zero, i.e., the operating point ˆ𝒙is infeasible
with respect to the relaxation, no operating point 𝒙exists which is closer to ˆ𝒙than the obtained
optimal point 𝒙∗. In other words, it means that no feasible operating point is located in the
hypersphere of center ˆ𝒙and radius 𝑟. This property has been developed in [23]. Moreover, using
this property, Venzke et al. [7] prove that, all vectors 𝒙which fulfill the following criterion are
infeasible with respect to the AC-OPF constraints :
®𝑛𝑇(𝒙−𝒙∗) ≤0
(4.21)
The hyperplane’s normal vector is defined as ®𝑛= 𝒙∗−ˆ𝒙. 𝑇denotes the transpose operator.
An algorithm is developed to minimize the uncategorized input space using the definition of
these hyperplanes. It relies on the insight that subsequent hyperplanes, together with the input
space restriction performed by the OBBT step, form a convex polytope that can be expressed
as A𝒙≤b and constitutes a valid representation of the possible operating sapce. The row of the
matrix A and the corresponding entry in vector 𝑏can be expressed as A𝑘:= ®𝑛𝑇and bk := ®𝑛𝑇x∗,
in alignment with the hyperplane definition (4.21).
20
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:27==
Algorithm 2 outlines the steps to compute infeasibility certificates. Firstly, the convex polytope
is constructed using the tightened input bounds. Next, 𝑁1 operating points are sampled from
within the possible operating space updated by the OBBT step. The LHS technique, defined in
section 4.4, is used to generate the operating point samples. For infeasible points, hyperplanes
are created and the convex polytope is updated, which further restricts the possible operating
space. For feasible points, they are added to the set of operating points flagged as feasible. This
process continues until the 𝑁1 iteration limit is reached.
Algorithm 2 Infeasibility Certiﬁcate Algorithm
Input: 𝒙𝑩𝑻,𝒍, 𝒙𝑩𝑻,𝒖bounds obtained after running the bound tightening step
Output: Remaining unclassiﬁed volume A(𝑁1)x ≤b(𝑁1)
Set iteration count: 𝑘←0
Initialize unclassiﬁed region A(0)𝑥≤b(0):
A(0) := [I|𝑥|×|𝑥| −I|𝑥|×|𝑥|]𝑇
b(0) := [(x𝐵𝑇,𝑚𝑎𝑥)𝑇
(x𝐵𝑇,𝑚𝑖𝑛)𝑇]𝑇
Sample 𝑁1 OPs x from inside the region described by A(0)𝑥≤bk(0)
while 𝑘≤𝑁1 do
draw the next sample x(𝑘)
solve (4.5)-(4.20) with x := x(𝑘) and obtain x∗
if 𝑟> 0 then
A(𝑘+1) = [(A(𝑘))𝑇
®𝑛]𝑇
b(𝑘+1) = [(b(𝑘))𝑇
®𝑛x∗]𝑇
else
Feasible OPs set ←x∗
end if
𝑘←𝑘+ 1
end while
The convex polytope obtained at the end of this step provides a closer approximation to the
QC-AC-OPF relaxation feasible space compared to the initial bounds or those obtained after
OBBT.
4.7
AC Power Flows and Constraints checks
From within the convex polytope defined by the infeasibility certificate step, 𝑁2 OPs are sampled
using a uniform sampling technique. The ”Hit-and-Run” method is employed due to its eﬀiciency
in sampling from within convex polytopes and its favorable convergence properties [24]. This
method is a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling technique that iteratively generates
a sequence of points within a specified set by taking steps of random length in randomly selected
directions.
For each sampled operating point, an AC-OPF feasibility assessment is conducted. An Alternative
Current Optimal Power Flow (AC-PF) is performed, and the results are evaluated to ensure com-
pliance with operational constraints ((2.4)-(2.7)). The power flow algorithm uses fixed values for
the generator power dispatch and voltage magnitudes, while equations (2.2) and (2.3) determine
the values of remaining system variables.
If the constraints are met, the operating point is added to the feasible set. If constraints are
violated, additional AC power flows are performed to enforce the reactive power limits of the
generators. If a generator exceeds its reactive power limit, it is converted from a PV to a PQ bus
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
21
==PAGE:28==
in the power flow, acknowledging that reactive power limits are often the primary constraints
violated.
If the new power flow solution satisfies all constraints, the voltage-adjusted point
is added to the dataset as a feasible sample, with the generator voltage set-points updated
accordingly.
4.8
N-1 security criterion
Each operating point classified as feasible for the AC-OPF is evaluated against the N-1 security
criterion.
This criterion stipulates that the power system components remaining operational after a con-
tingency must adapt to the new operational conditions without violating the operational security
limits such as voltage magnitude, power generation, and line loading thresholds. The N-1 cri-
terion represents a fundamental reliability standard for power system operators, ensuring the
resilience and stability of the electrical grid. Maintaining uninterrupted service during equip-
ment failures is critical for preventing outages and and minimizing disruptions. The N-1 criterion
ensures the system’s capacity to withstand such events without triggering widespread blackouts.
It is for this reason that this criterion is considered in the methodology.
For each operating point, contingencies are sequentially applied to the system, an AC-PF is
runned for each contingency and the operational limits are checked for all the results. To apply
a contingency to the system, the outaged component is simply removed from the power system
topology.
To provide a more comprehensive assessment beyond simple feasibility or infeasibility, three
indices have been formulated. These indices provide detailed insights into the security boundary
defined by the N-1 criterion, thereby enhancing the binary classification of secure or insecure
conditions. Specifically, (4.22) identifies violations of line loading limits, while (4.23) and (4.24)
quantify deviations from voltage magnitude thresholds.
Index loading = 1
𝐿
Õ
𝑖,𝑗∈ℒ


(|𝑆𝑖,𝑗|−S∆
i,j)
S∆
i,j
· 100
if |𝑆𝑖,𝑗| > S∆
i,j
0
otherwise
(4.22)
Over voltage index = 1
𝑁
Õ
𝑘∈풩
(
(𝑣𝑘−vu
k)
if
𝑣𝑘> vu
k
0
otherwise
(4.23)
Under voltage index = 1
𝑁
Õ
𝑘∈풩
(
(vl
k −𝑣𝑘)
if
𝑣𝑘< vl
k
0
otherwise
(4.24)
The three indices previously defined are calculated for all the power flow results. An operating
point is considered 𝑁−1 secure if all three indices are zero. If any index is non-zero, the point
is not 𝑁−1 secure. However, the extent of insecurity can be characterized by the values of the
different indices.
The types of contingencies considered in this work are all line outages. However, in certain
power systems, specific contingencies result in violations of operating limits irrespective of the
operating point considered, and no corrective measures can resolve these issues. Such occurrences
would not manifest in a realistic operational scenario. To avoid an empty set of 𝑁−1 operating
points while still using the initial power system parameters, these outages are excluded from
consideration.
22
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:29==
4.9
Small-signal Stability and Directed Walks
In this step, the small-signal stability of all operating points considered in the method—whether
feasible or infeasible, N-1 secure or not—is evaluated to comprehensively characterize them. It
is important to note that a point that is not N-1 secure or not AC-OPF feasible can still be
small-signal stable. Hence, all the OPs are considered. The theoretical concept of small-signal
stability and its fundamental measures, as detailed earlier in chapter 3, are applied in this step.
To provide more nuanced information beyond a binary stable/unstable classification, a small-
signal stability index is defined to characterize the small-signal stability boundary. This index
is the damping ratio of the most critical mode for system stability, i.e., the smallest damping
ratio associated with one of the system’s modes.
As mentioned in chapter 3, the damping
ratio measures how much the oscillations of the associated system mode will be attenuated
over a certain number of periods. A high damping ratio indicates a more effective reduction
of oscillations. Conversely, a negative damping ratio signifies that the amplitude of oscillations
increases over time, indicating unstable behavior.
To compute this indicator for each OP, the dynamic model of the power system is constructed
using the system dynamic components parameters provided in the input data. The Small-Signal
Stability (SSS) depends on both the dynamic components of the system and the operating point.
The OP that are not small-signal stable, i.e., with a damping ratio smaller than 0, are added to
the dataset flagged as non-small-signal stable, while the others are flagged as small-signal stable.
Once the small-signal stability of all operating points has been evaluated, DW are initiated to
precisely characterize the stability boundary. In this work, the small-signal stability boundary
is defined as the limit where the stability index, i.e. the system critical mode’s damping ratio,
equals 0. This limit is chosen because it marks the precise boundary between stability and
instability.
While a common practice sets a threshold of 3% for the critical damping ratio,
indicating when special attention is needed for small-signal stability, no universal consensus
exists on this threshold. Therefore, the boundary where the damping ratio exactly equals 0 is
preferred as it represents the actual stability limit.
A DW consists of a steepest-descent based algorithm to explore the operating space and ac-
curately determine the stability boundary.
These directed walks are initiated from the 𝑁3
operating points closest to the stability boundary. The size and direction of the steps consti-
tuting these walks need to be defined. A variable step size, depending on the distance from
the stability boundary, is used in order to explore the operating space as eﬀiciently as possible
without missing the stability boundary during exploration. The closer we are to the stability
boundary, the smaller the steps. This method was developed by Thams et al. in [6].
The distance 𝑑(𝑂𝑃𝑘) of the operating point under investigation to the stability boundary is
defined as:
𝑑(𝑂𝑃𝑘) = |𝛾𝑘−𝛾| ,
where
𝛾𝑘= 𝑂𝑃𝑘
stability index value
𝛾= Stability boundary value
As, in this work, the stability boundary is defined as the limit where the stability index is equal
to 0, the distance is equal to the value of the 𝑂𝑃𝑘stability index.
The variable step size 𝛼𝑘is defined as follows:
𝛼𝑘=


𝜖1 · 𝑃max ,
if 𝑑(𝑂𝑃𝑘) > 𝑑1
𝜖2 · 𝑃max ,
if 𝑑1 ≥𝑑(𝑂𝑃𝑘) > 𝑑2
𝜖3 · 𝑃max ,
otherwise
,
where 𝑃max is the vector of the system’s generator maximum capacities, 𝜖1−3 are scalars, and
for distances 𝑑1−2 holds 𝑑1 > 𝑑2 > 𝑑3.
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
23
==PAGE:30==
The step sizes 𝛼𝑘and distance thresholds 𝑑𝑘are tuning parameters whose values are contingent
upon the specific characteristics of the power system and the desired speed and precision of the
DW. They are determined to map the space between the OPs initiating the DWs and the small-
signal stability boundary and therefore depends on the dynamic model of the power system.
The determination of their values is discussed more toroughly in section 5.6.
Once the step size has been determined, the direction of the step must be defined. The goal is
to navigate through the stable (or unstable) region as eﬀiciently as possible and to reach the
stability boundary. To achieve this, at each step, the algorithm follows the steepest descent of
the distance metric 𝑑(𝑂𝑃𝑘) and updates 𝑂𝑃𝑘accordingly, as described in (4.25):
𝑂𝑃𝑘+1 = 𝑂𝑃𝑘−𝛼𝑘· ∇𝑑(𝑂𝑃𝑘)
(4.25)
where 𝛼𝑘is the step size for 𝑂𝑃𝑘, defined earlier, and ∇𝑑(𝑂𝑃𝑘) is the gradient of 𝑑(𝑂𝑃𝑘).
The gradient is determined using a sensitivity measure of the stability index. More specifically,
the gradient calculation is based on how sensitive the damping ratio of the most critical mode in
the system is to changes in the system’s active power dispatch. This sensitivity determines the
direction of the step. To evaluate this sensitivity, small perturbations are applied to the active
power generation of each generator, both adding and subtracting from the original values. The
critical damping ratio is computed for each perturbation, and the gradient follows the direction
of the perturbation that results in the greatest decrease in damping ratio, guiding the subsequent
step.
This iterative process continues for a specified number of iterations denoted as 𝑁𝐷𝑊, serving as
a tuning parameter in the method. Some rules are made to avoid the directed walk to diverge
and consider unrealistic or uninteresting operating points. The first rule consists in, when the
generation profile is modified, checking if the modifications don’t go above or below the opera-
tional limits of the generators. If the modificated generation value is outside of the limits, the
value considered for the damping ratio evaluation is set the maximum or minimum operational
limit depending on the case. To avoid divergence, if a directed walk ends up considering an OP
that have a damping ratio higher than the damping ratio of the OP that initiated the directed
walk, this directed walk is stoped.
24
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:31==
𝛼1
𝛼2
𝛼3
𝑃𝐺1
𝑃𝐺2
dinit
dstep1
dstep2
𝛾= 0
ℜ{𝜆}
ℑ{𝜆}
OPinit
𝜆𝑚𝑖𝑛𝜁,𝑂𝑃𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡
OPstep1
𝜆𝑚𝑖𝑛𝜁,𝑂𝑃𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝1
OPstep2
𝜆𝑚𝑖𝑛𝜁,𝑂𝑃𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝2
OPstep3
𝜆𝑚𝑖𝑛𝜁,𝑂𝑃𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝3
Step size 𝛼
𝑑𝜆
𝑑𝑃𝑔𝑒𝑛1
𝑑𝜆
𝑑𝑃𝑔𝑒𝑛2
Figure 4.4: Illustration of the Directed Walk (DW) through a two dimensional space using
varying step sizes 𝛼𝑖, following the steepest descent of distance, d.
Following the directed walks, the operating points identified through this procedure are evaluated
to characterize them in terms of AC-OPF feasibility and N-1 security. These evaluations are
detailed in section 4.7 and section 4.8.
4.10
Dataset creation
This section presents the last step of the methodology. It consists in creating a representative
dataset. All the previous steps have reduced the operating space to the most valuable part and
have explored it. Numerous operating points included in this operating space have been assessed
and classified with respect with the classifications criteria defines before. From all those points,
the ones describing the best the stability or security criteria are selected. The dataset also needs
to be balanced correctly. To do this, we use a sampling technique.
Not finished
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
25
==PAGE:32==
5
Simulations and Results
The outcomes of the proposed methodology are analyzed in this section for a range of test
cases. First, we demonstrate the reduction of the possible operating space by the OBBT and
the infeasibility certificates. Then, we analyze the classification of feasible, 𝑁−1 secure and
small-signal stable operating points. Finally, the creation of the final dataset is explained.
5.1
Simulation Setup
The methodology is tested on test cases, all coming from PGlib-OPF (v23.07) [25]. This library
was created to evaluate AC-OPF formulations impact on the results. The parameters of the
test cases considered were not modified at all, as the goal of the methodology is to applicable
to power systems used in the academia and industry. The specific test cases considered in the
different steps of the methodology are listed here. It goes from 3 to 57 buses to demonstrate
that the the methodology is working for every power system size. For computation time reasons,
the results of all the steps of the methodology will not be showed for all the tests cases.
The Julia PowerModels [18] and PowerModelsSecurityConstrained package facilitates the in-
stantiation of the QC-AC-OPF and AC-PF optimization problems. Specifically, the solve_opf()
function is employed to run the optimal power flow, requiring the specification of the convex
relaxation model as an argument. For the power flow, the function solve_pf() is used. Certain
modifications to these functions have been implemented, specifically pertaining to the reactive
power limits enforcement and the switch between PV and PQ buses. The optimization modeling
layer JuMP.jl [26] was used.
The solver Ipopt [27] is used to solve the QC-AC-OPF problem as well as the AC-PF. This
solver has demonstrated good results in terms of accuracy when employed for those problems
[28]. Its tolerance argument is set to 10−6. To compute the volumes of the convex polytopes
describing the possible operating space, Volesti [29], a C++ volume approximation package
with a R interface, is used. The core idea behind this package is the use of random walks to
sample points from the interior of the convex body considered. These points are then used
to estimate the volume. The function volume() is used to compute an approximation of the
volume. The precision of this function can be set be its argument error. This argument is
adjusted depending on the convex body considered during the methodology.
All the simulations have been runned on a computer with an Intel CPU Core i5 @ 1.8 GHz and
8 GB RAM.
The code implemented the methodology as well as the datasets generated are available on this
Github.
5.2
Load profiles selection
5.3
Possible operating space volume reduction
5.3.1
Bound tightening
First, the impact of the bound tightening process on the system limits is analyzed. The eﬀicacy
of this step is demonstrated by the significant reduction in the bounds on voltage magnitudes
and angle differences across all test cases. As shown in Figure 5.1, the mean size of the voltage
magnitude bounds after OBBT is reduced to just over 60% of their initial size, with some bounds
decreasing to as low as 10%. However, it is important to note that not all voltage bounds are
26
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:33==
improved by OBBT, as evidenced by the third quartile of the plot reaching 100%. Therefore, a
global reduction of all initial voltage magnitude bounds is not advised.
The reduction in angle difference bounds is even more pronounced, with the mean size after
OBBT being less than 5% of the initial size, indicating a significant tightening of the bounds.
Typically, in the test cases studied, the angle difference bounds range from [−30°; 30°]. These
results suggest that tighter initial bounds could be set, as the bound sizes are reduced for all
branches and test cases. The substantial tightening of the bounds at this step often results in
the upper and lower bounds having the same sign, indicating that the bound tightening step
could provide insights into the direction of power flow in the system.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100

𝜃∆,l, 𝜃∆,u

vl, vu
Bounds range [%𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙]
Figure 5.1: Voltage magnitude and angle diﬀerence bounds range size after OBBT compared to
the initial bounds range size for all the PGlib-OPF test cases studied. The lower and upper ends
of the boxes reﬂect the ﬁrst and third quartiles, the lines inside the boxes denote the median,
and the circles are outliers.
With the significant impact of bound tightening on the system established, the next step is to
examine its effect on the reduction of the Possible Operating Space (POS) for each system. As
a reminder, the possible operating space 풟is defined in section 4.1, and its volume is computed
using (4.4). Figure Figure 5.2 compares the different test cases based on the reduction in the
volume of the operating space after the OBBT step. The results show considerable variation
among the test cases. For instance, in the 5-bus test case, the volume remains almost unchanged,
whereas in the 14-bus, 39-bus and 57-bus cases, the operating space after OBBT is reduced by
more than half.
3 bus
5 bus
14 bus
39 bus
57 bus
0
20
40
60
80
100
96.09
99.63
26.9
46.99
13.91
95.7
99.7
27.71
47.21
21.12
POS volume [%𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙]
Until ﬁxed point
3 Iterations
Figure 5.2: Comparison of the possible operating space volume after OBBT runned for the 3
iterations and until ﬁxed point scenarios, for all the PGlib-OPF test cases studied
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
27
==PAGE:34==
Given the observed impact of the bound tightening step on reducing the volume of the operating
space, a detailed examination of the algorithm is warranted.
As previously explained, the
algorithm terminates either upon reaching a fixed point or after a specified number of iterations.
Observations from various test cases indicate that the algorithm typically reaches a fixed point
after more than five iterations, as illustrated in Figure 5.3. However, a closer analysis of the
bounds’ evolution reveals a significant reduction within the first three iterations, followed by a
stabilization. Indeed, this trend is evident in Figure 5.5, graph showing the tightening of voltage
magnitude bounds of the 14-bus system. This trend is consistent across all test cases.
Considering the computational cost associated with this step and since it involves solving two
optimization problems per bus and per branch, it is proposed to limit the algorithm to three
iterations. Figure 5.2 shows that the volume reduction achieved with the full algorithm and
with only three iterations is nearly identical, except possibly for the 57-bus test case. Notably,
the computational time is linearly proportional to the number of iterations. Thus, capping the
iterations at three reduces the runtime by approximately half for all cases, which is a valuable
gain. This is depicted in Figure 5.4, where the runtime of the OBBT step for different test
systems is illustrated, comparing scenarios with 3 iterations and those reaching a fixed point.
Consequently, for the remainder of the methodology, the limit on OBBT iterations will be set
to 3.
3 bus
5 bus
14 bus
39 bus
57 bus
0
2
4
6
5
6
7
6
6
Iterations
Figure 5.3: Number of iterations needed by the OBBT algorithm to reach a ﬁxed point for each
test case
3 bus
5 bus
14 bus
39 bus
57 bus
0
200
400
600
2.34
7.56
32.96
307.96
712.34
1.47
3.4
18.87
140.97
349.96
Time [𝑠]
Until ﬁxed point
3 Iterations
Figure 5.4: Comparison of the OBBT step runtime for the 3 iterations and until ﬁxed point
scenarios, for all the PGlib-OPF test cases studied
28
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:35==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
Iteration Number
Voltage bounds [p.u.]
Upper bounds
Lower bounds
Figure 5.5: Evolution of the voltage magnitude bounds at each bus during the OBBT step for
the 14-bus test case
5.3.2
Hyperplanes
The reduction of the possible operating space 풟continues with the infeasibility certificates step.
The effect of hyperplane creation on the reduction of the possible operating region for various
test cases is depicted in Figure 5.6. The volumes of the operating space after the OBBT step
serve as the initial volumes for this phase. For clarity, these volumes have been standardized to
1, allowing for a clear comparison of the method’s eﬀiciency across different test cases.
The behavior of the POS volume is consistent across all test cases: there is a substantial reduction
during the initial iterations, corresponding to the creation of the first hyperplanes. This indicates
that the possible operating space considered, even after OBBT, remains much larger than the
actual feasible operating space. This initial reduction phase, which underscores the importance
of hyperplanes step, generally lasts until about ten hyperplanes are created. Following this phase,
the curves exhibit plateaus interspersed with additional phases of volume reduction, varying in
magnitude depending on the test case.
This pattern can be explained by the fact that the first hyperplanes significantly reduce the
possible operating space.
Subsequent hyperplanes may explore regions already excluded by
previous hyperplanes, leading to plateaus. However, some operating points samples drawn after
the creation of several hyperplanes can further refine the possible operating space by exploring
new regions, resulting in additional reductions. This is particularly noticeable in the 57-bus
test case after around 25 hyperplanes. Since the reduction and plateaus depend on the sampled
operating points, their behavior can vary between different runs of the methodology. However,
a consistent global trend is observed across all runs for each test case after reaching a certain
number of hyperplane iterations. This is why we analyze up to 50 hyperplanes in Figure 5.6.
The variations in the amplitude of volume reduction among the test cases are associated with the
number and types of dimensions that constitutes their possible operating space. As the dimen-
sions are defined in (4.1) and the volume in (4.4), larger POS dimensions provide more degrees of
freedom in the operating space, allowing for greater reduction in the bounds. Therefore, larger
test cases with higher-dimensional operating spaces experience more pronounced reductions.
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
29
==PAGE:36==
0
10
20
30
40
50
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Hyperplanes
POS volume
3 bus
5 bus
14 bus
39 bus
57 bus
Figure 5.6: Evolution of the standardized POS volume during the hyperplanes step, for all the
PGlib-OPF test cases studied
The volume reduction from 1 to 10−𝑦implies that, on average, 10𝑦are needed to identify at
least one feasible sample. This highlights the eﬀicacy of the methodology, particularly in systems
with higher dimensionality. For instance, in the 39-bus test case, it is expected that 105 samples
would be necessary to identify one feasible operating point.
Table 5.8 summarizes all the information concerning the volume reduction of the possible oper-
ating space after the OBBT and hyperplanes steps. For all the test cases examined, the initial
volume of the operating space was at least 25 times larger than the operating space obtained after
the OBBT and infeasibility certificate steps. This reduction in volume is even more substantial
for larger test cases. These findings aﬀirm the motivation behind the methodology, illustrating
that the feasible operating space is significantly smaller than the initial possible operating space
estimated by a convex relaxation.
Power system case
𝑑
𝑉𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡
𝑉𝐵𝑇
𝑉𝐻𝑃=50
Volume ratio [𝑉𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡/𝑉𝐻𝑃]
case3_lmbd
5
1.6e −1
1.53e −1
6.4e −3
25
case5_pjm
7
3.4e −2
3.37e −2
7.09e −4
48
case14_ieee
6
1.468e −5
3.939e −6
4.146e −9
3540
case39_epri
19
3.29e −2
1.38e −2
2.925e −7
112, 478
case57_ieee
10
1.286e −5
1.624e −06
2.091e −11
615, 016
Table 5.1: Problem dimensionality and possible operating space volumes at diﬀerent steps of
the methodology for selected PGLib-OPF systems
5.4
AC-OPF Feasibility
We proceeded to analyze the operating points sampled from the convex polytope defined in
the previous step.
Those points have been sampled with a ’Hit-and-run’ sampling method
implemented by the function sample_points of Volesti [29]. For each sample, we verify its AC-
OPF feasibility, ensuring that it respects the operational constraints of the system. As previously
explained in the methodology, the reactive power limits are considered in those operational
constraints. We ensure the enforcement of generator reactive power limits in the power flow
analysis by converting PV buses to PQ buses once the reactive power limits are reached. This
30
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:37==
prevents the occurrence of significant nonphysical overloading of the limits.
The number of samples, denoted as 𝑁2, is varied to observe any potential influence. The results
can be seen on Table 5.2.
Power system case
Feasible points [%]
𝑁2 = 1000
MVND
𝑁2 = 10.000
MVND
case3_lmbd
56.7
71.9
49.3
73.5
case5_pjm
56.9
52.85
case14_ieee
96.8
97.06
case39_epri
Table 5.2: Proportion of AC-OPF feasible OPs for the diﬀerent test cases.
Not all the test cases have the same pourcentage of feasible points. For the ones that have a
pourcentage lower than the average, a method can be found.
Same trends are observed for whatever the number of operating there are.
5.5
N-1 criterion
The AC-OPF feasible points are assessed for 𝑁−1 feasibility.
As mentionned earlier, the
contingencies considered are the line contingencies. However, some contingencies are leading
to AC-PF infeasibility or violations that cannot be resolved by the enforcement of the reactive
power limits. Those contingencies are not considered in the analysis and the list can be found
in Table 5.3.
Power system case
Contingency disregarded
case3_lmbd
Line 1-3
case5_pjm
Line 1-5, Line
case14_ieee
Line 1
case39_epri
19
Table 5.3: Contingencies disregarded for the N-1 criterion step.
In this table is considered, all the points that are N-1 secure.
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
31
==PAGE:38==
Power system case
N-1 Secure points [%]
𝑁2 = 1000
𝑁2 = 10.000
case3_lmbd
50.1
43.5
case5_pjm
56.9
52.85
case14_ieee
96.8
97.06
case39_epri
case57_ieee
Table 5.4: Proportion of 𝑁−1 secure OPs for the diﬀerent test cases.
5.6
Small-signal stability
The small-signal stability of all OPs considered previously in the methodology is assessed.
To perform the small-signal analysis, the test cases dynamic models need to be designed. A basic
dynamic design is made for all the test cases, composed of a fourth order synchronous machine
model with a turbine governor TGOV1 and an AVR of Type 1 is used in this study. This leads
to a state-space model of 11 ·𝑁𝐺states, with 𝑁𝐺representing the number of generators in the
system. The small signal models, the simulation initialization and small signal analysis were
carried out using PowerSystemsDynamics[16]. The details of the dynamic components designs
can be found in Appendix B.
For the different test cases, the results can be found in Table 5.5.
Power system case
Small-signal stable points [%]
𝑁2 = 1000
𝑁2 = 10.000
case3_lmbd
98.5
52.85
case5_pjm
98.5
52.85
Table 5.5: Proportion of small-signal stable OPs for the diﬀerent test cases.
Now, the 𝑁3 OPs closest to the stability boundary, i.e. those with damping ratios nearest to
zero, are selected to initiate the directed walks. A typical directed walk is illustrated in ??.
The goal of these directed walks is to approach the stability boundaries more closely, thereby
increasing the percentage of operating points in the datasets located near the boundary. The
step size is a crucial parameter that must be tuned according to the specific test case and its
dynamic model. ?? details the parameters used for the directed walk steps in the 5-bus test case.
These parameters are highly dependent on the dynamic model of the test case. Depending on
the distribution of critical damping ratios across the considered OPs, the parameters must be
adjusted to ensure the algorithm functions correctly.
For instance, if all the critical damping ratios are significantly higher than the initial distance
parameter 𝑑1, the step size 𝜖will remain the same across a larger portion of the space, potentially
leading to non-converging directed walks or to not approach the stability boundary close enough.
Similarly, if all critical damping ratios are low relative to the smallest distance parameter 𝑑3,
convergences issues to approach the stability boundary can occur. Hence, these parameters must
be appropriately calibrated depending on the space to be mapped.
32
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:39==
Parameters
𝜖1
𝜖2
𝜖3
𝜖4
𝑑1
𝑑2
𝑑3
𝑁𝐷𝑊
case5_pjm
0.4
0.2
0.05
0.01
0.045
0.02
0.01
15
Table 5.6: Parameters of the Directed Walk algorithm for the 5-bus test case
An example of a directed walk obtained with the 5-bus test case is shown in Figure 5.7. The op-
erating point (OP) that initiates the directed walk has a critical damping ratio of approximately
5%. The graph illustrates all critical eigenvalues, i.e. eigenvalues with the smallest damping
ratio, of the subsequent steps. It can be observed that the eigenvalues shift towards the right,
approaching the imaginary axis. The largest step occurs initially, as the step size is greater and
influences the changes more significantly. The size of the steps diminishes in importance there-
after. At steps 9 and 10, the stability limit is reached, as evidenced by the eigenvalues crossing
into the positive side of the real axis, indicating small signal instability. This demonstrates that
directed walks effectively explore the area from the initial OP to the stability boundary and
beyond, with more detailed attention to the zone close to the stability boundary. Three distinct
groups of eigenvalues can be observed, suggesting that the evolution of the damping ratio with
respect to changes in the active power generation profile is not linearly dependent.
−0.12
−0.1
−8 · 10−2 −6 · 10−2 −4 · 10−2 −2 · 10−2
0
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5% damping ratio
3% damping ratio
Step 1
Step 2,3,4,5
Step 6,7
Step 8,9,10
ℜ(𝜆)
ℑ(𝜆)
−0.1
0.4
0.9
1.4
1.9
2.4
2.9
3.4
3.9
4.4
4.9
𝜁[%]
Figure 5.7: Evolution of the critical eigenvalues position for each step of the DW algorithm
Examining all the operating points (OPs) obtained through directed walks (DWs), it can be
asserted that the use of DWs facilitates the inclusion of OPs located near the security boundary
within the dataset, as confirmed in Figure 5.8. Initially, the mean critical damping ratio of
the OPs considered in the methodology is around 5%. When DWs are applied, it is evident
that the mean damping ratio decreases, indicating closer proximity to the stability boundary.
Additionally, some values fall below the stability boundary, indicated by a critical damping ratio
below 0. The more DWs are initiated, the more comprehensively the space around the stability
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
33
==PAGE:40==
boundary is mapped. This can be observed by comparing the distribution of the damping ratios
for the scenario where 𝑁3 = 5% of the total OPs considered previously in the methodology with
the scenario where 𝑁3 = 10%.
Specifically, when 10% of the OPs initiate DWs, 10% of the new OPs obtained by the DWs have
a damping ratio within ±1%, of which 40% are stable and 60% are unstable. Approximately
20% of the new OPs fall within a ±2% damping ratio range, with an equal division between
stable and unstable states. Over 30% of the new OPs fall within a ±3% damping ratio range,
with one-third being unstable and two-thirds stable. Prior to the DWs, no OPs were within the
3% range.
The fact that the majority of the OPs obtained by the DWs are small-signal stable can be
attributed to the initial stability of all the OPs that initiate the directed walks. Consequently, the
region of the complex plane corresponding to small-signal stability is more thoroughly explored.
If more initiating OPs were small-signal unstable, a more balanced distribution on both sides of
the stability boundary would be expected.
−0.15
−0.1
−5 · 10−2
0
5 · 10−2
𝜁𝑂𝑃_𝐷𝑊10%
𝜁𝑂𝑃_𝐷𝑊_5%
𝜁𝑂𝑃_𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡
Damping ratio [-]
Figure 5.8: Distribution of the critical damping ratios of the OPs considered before the DWs,
after
The number of initiating OPs correlates with the runtime. Running directed walks requires time
because the dynamic model must be constructed, the system eignevalues computed and stability
assessed each time the operating point is modified. Specifically, for each step of the directed
walk, the dynamic model is constructed and assessed (2 · 𝑁𝐺+ 1) times. The extensive runtime
of this step imposes constraints on the selection of the 𝑁3 number of initiating points.
All the OPs found during the walks are estimated for AC-OPF feasibility and N-1 security
criterion. The resultats can be found in Table 5.7.
Power system case
AC-feasible points [%]
𝑁3 = 5% · 𝑁2
𝑁2 = 10% · 𝑁2
case5_pjm
10
52.85
Table 5.7: Proportion of AC-feasible OPs in the OPs obtained by the DW step.
34
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:41==
5.7
Datasets creation
The final repartition of the datasets generated by the methodology can be found on Table 5.8.
Power system case
AC-OPF Feasibility [%]
N-1 Secure [%]
Small-signal stable [%]
case3_lmbd
5
1.6e −1
1.53e −1
case5_pjm
7
3.4e −2
3.37e −2
case14_ieee
6
1.468e −5
3.939e −6
case39_epri
19
3.29e −2
1.38e −2
case57_ieee
10
1.286e −5
1.624e −06
Table 5.8: Final repartition of the datasets
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
35
==PAGE:42==
6
Discussion
To achieve a more comprehensive representation of the secure space, we fit a multivariate normal
distribution to the feasible points obtained. This involves estimating both the mean ￿and the
covariance matrix Σ from the feasible data points. To bias the sampling towards the interior of
the boundary, we scale down the magnitude of all entries in the covariance matrix by a constant
factor , resulting in ￿We then draw a large number,
This methodology was developed to train ML models to classify operating points. The diﬀicult
thing is to find feasible points in the whole operating space. In the section we will compare the
results obtained between the naive and the actual methodology.
Power system case
Feasible points [%]
Overall
Naive
case3_lmbd
56.3
case5_pjm
56.9
1.3
case14_ieee
96.8
case39_epri
Table 6.1: Comparison of the Datasets repartition details between feasible and infeasible oper-
ating points for the developed methodology and the naive method
It can be seen that the methodology creates dataset that are way more balanced that by using
a naive sampling technique.
The results obtained at the previous steps are quite variable, the values are therefore average
values. Indeed, there are a lot of sources of variability in the method : the sampled points from
which the hyperplanes are drawn, the sampled OPs inside the convex polytope, the . A way to
reduce this variability would maybe be to increase even more the number of hyperplanes that
constitues the convex polytope before sampling inside its limits or considering sampling more
OPs. Indeed, it is important to reduce this variability as we want a method that provides always
the same range of balance in the datasets it creates.
36
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:43==
7
Conclusion
This thesis provides a methodology to create balanced datasets made of points that are located
near the AC-OPF, N-1 criterion and small-signal boundaries stability boundaries.
The methodology allows first the reduce the input operating space to a reduced operating space,
more tight and close from the AC-OPF feasible space. This is possible by the combination of
the bound tightening step and the infeasibility certificates. Those two steps allows to focus the
research of operating point for the dataset on a space containing in proportion more feasible
operating points. The restriction of the operating space considered can go from to depending
on the test case considered.
Then, sampling with the ’Hit-and-run’ to the operating space obtained allows to identify in most
case a balanced proportion of feasible and infeasible OPs.
Each of this point is assessed for the 𝑁−1 security criterion and some indexes are defined in
order to have a more descriptive information about the non-feasible OPs.
This outperfoms from naively sampling around.
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
37
==PAGE:44==
8
Future work
It is possible to identify several areas of development for the continuation of the work begun
by this thesis. Two directions can be explored : improvement of the methodology and of the
computational eﬀiciency of the toolbox.
Concerning the methodology, the first one constists in the way the load profiles are chosen. As
explained in Load profile section, the load profile consists just in sampling a load distribution
around 70% and 120% of the nominal load profile of the test case considered. The issue with this
approach is that it can result in datasets that are only representative of only a small portion
of the feasible region in terms of load.
These methods can result in datasets that are only
representative of only a small portion of the feasible region, meaning models that are trained
on these datasets might only accurately predict values for loading near the nominal loading
scenario. To gain more confidence in using these models for real systems, the data that models
are trained and tested on needs to be more representative of the entire load feasible space. This is
done in OPF-Learn [30] an open-source framework that generates AC-OPF feasible load profiles.
The methodology used by this tool also exploits infeasibility certificates as in this work and its
utilization for the generation of the load profiles could be a way to map even more exhaustively
the operating space and to add value to the datasets created.
Another area of improvement is the runtime and the code structure. Several parts of the method-
ology can be parallelized. Indeed, some steps as the evaluation of the operationnal constraints
for all the OPs as well as the directed walks. There is no interactions between the procedures
run for each of the OPs in this case. Those two steps takes a certain amount of time in the
global procedure so it would be a great improvement to parallelize them. This would reduced
the runtime by a lot and be even more interesting for the methodology.
Another direction of improvement could be to build machine learning models used to test the
generated datasets and compare it with the results that we have when compared to . With the
classification being not only binary, this can give more valuable results. Some classification and
regression are possible as each OP has the attributes damping ration and overloading, under
voltage and over voltage that are continuous and not binary.
There are several avenues for further development in advancing the research initiated by this
thesis. Primarily, two key directions warrant exploration: enhancing methodological approaches
and improving the computational eﬀiciency of the toolbox utilized.
Regarding methodological enhancements, one critical aspect pertains to the selection of load
profiles. As detailed in the Load Profile section, the current methodology involves sampling
load distributions within a range of 70% and 120% of the nominal load profile of the test case
under consideration. However, a significant limitation of this approach is its potential to generate
datasets that only represent a narrow subset of the feasible load scenarios. Consequently, models
trained on such datasets may only accurately predict values for loading conditions proximal to
the nominal scenario. To bolster confidence in the applicability of these models to real-world
systems, it is imperative to expand the dataset’s coverage across the entire feasible load space.
This objective is addressed by OPF-Learn [30], an open-source framework that generates AC-
OPF feasible load profiles.
The methodological approach employed by this framework also
leverages infeasibility certificates, akin to those utilized in this study, which could significantly
enhance the exhaustive mapping of operational spaces and enhance the value of created datasets.
Another area ripe for improvement involves optimizing runtime and refining code structure.
Notably, several aspects of the methodology lend themselves to parallelization. For instance,
the evaluation of operational constraints across all operational points (OPs) and directed walks
38
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:45==
are inherently parallelizable tasks. Given that these procedures operate independently for each
OP, parallelization stands to substantially reduce overall runtime. This enhancement would
prove particularly advantageous in accelerating computational processes, thereby enhancing the
eﬀiciency of the methodology.
Additionally, a promising avenue for further advancement lies in employing machine learning
models to rigorously test the generated datasets and benchmark their performance against estab-
lished results. Beyond binary classification, this approach offers the potential for more nuanced
and insightful outcomes. Specifically, incorporating classification and regression tasks can effec-
tively utilize attributes such as damping ratio, overloading, under-voltage, and over-voltage, each
of which varies continuously across operational points (OPs). By harnessing these attributes,
comprehensive evaluations can be conducted, providing deeper insights into the predictive capa-
bilities and robustness of the developed models when compared against empirical benchmarks.
In summary, through methodological refinement, computational optimization, and the appli-
cation of advanced machine learning techniques, significant strides can be made in furthering
the impact and applicability of the research conducted in this thesis. These efforts not only
promise to enhance predictive accuracy and computational eﬀiciency but also to broaden the
scope of insights gleaned from operational datasets within the realm of power systems analysis
and optimization.
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
39
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
Patrick Panciatici, Gabriel Bareux, and Louis Wehenkel. “Operating in the Fog: Security
Management Under Uncertainty”. In: IEEE Power and Energy Magazine 10.5 (2012), pp. 40–
49. doi: 10.1109/MPE.2012.2205318.
[2]
Florin Capitanescu. “Critical review of recent advances and further developments needed
in AC optimal power ﬂow”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 136 (2016), pp. 57–68. issn:
0378-7796. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2016.02.008. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0378779616300141.
[3]
Alireza Mehrzad et al. “A Review on Data-Driven Security Assessment of Power Systems:
Trends and Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence”. In: IEEE Access PP (Jan. 2023), pp. 1–1.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3299208.
[4]
Mingyang Sun et al. “Evaluating composite approaches to modelling high-dimensional
stochastic variables in power systems”. In: 2016 Power Systems Computation Conference
(PSCC), Genoa. 2016, pp. 1–8. doi: 10.1109/PSCC.2016.7540837.
[5]
Ioannis Konstantelos et al. “Using Vine Copulas to Generate Representative System States
for Machine Learning”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 34.1 (2019), pp. 225–235.
doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2018.2859367.
[6]
Florian Thams et al. “Eﬃcient Database Generation for Data-driven Security Assessment
of Power Systems”. English. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 35.1 (2020), pp. 30–41.
issn: 0885-8950. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2018.2890769.
[7]
Andreas Venzke, Daniel K. Molzahn, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. “Eﬃcient creation of
datasets for data-driven power system applications”. In: Electric Power Systems Research
190 (2021), p. 106614. issn: 0378-7796. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2020.106614.
[8]
Carleton Coﬀrin, Hassan L. Hĳazi, and Pascal Van Hentenryck. “The QC Relaxation: A
Theoretical and Computational Study on Optimal Power Flow”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems 31.4 (2016), pp. 3008–3018. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2015.2463111.
[9]
Dmitry Shchetinin, Tomas Tinoco De Rubira, and Gabriela Hug. “Eﬃcient Bound Tighten-
ing Techniques for Convex Relaxations of AC Optimal Power Flow”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 34.5 (2019), pp. 3848–3857. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2019.2905232.
[10]
Kaarthik Sundar et al. “Optimization-Based Bound Tightening Using a Strengthened QC-
Relaxation of the Optimal Power Flow Problem”. In: 2023 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision
and Control (CDC), Singapore. 2023, pp. 4598–4605. doi: 10.1109/CDC49753.2023.10384116.
[11]
Carleton Coﬀrin, Hassan L. Hĳazi, and Pascal Van Hentenryck. “The QC Relaxation: A
Theoretical and Computational Study on Optimal Power Flow”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 31.4 (2016). Cited by: 220, pp. 3008–3018. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2015.
2463111.
[12]
Daniel Bienstock and Abhinav Verma. “Strong NP-hardness of AC power ﬂows feasibil-
ity”. In: Operations Research Letters 47 (Dec. 2015). doi: 10.1016/j.orl.2019.08.009.
40
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:47==
[13]
Daniel Molzahn and Ian Hiskens. “A Survey of Relaxations and Approximations of the
Power Flow Equations”. In: Foundations and Trendső in Electric Energy Systems 4 (Jan. 2019),
pp. 1–221. doi: 10.1561/3100000012.
[14]
Xiaoqing Bai et al. “Semideﬁnite programming for optimal power ﬂow problems”. In:
International Journal of Electrical Power Energy Systems 30 (July 2008), pp. 383–392. doi:
10.1016/j.ijepes.2007.12.003.
[15]
R.A. Jabr. “Radial distribution load ﬂow using conic programming”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 21.3 (2006), pp. 1458–1459. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2006.879234.
[16]
Jan Machowski, J.W. Bialek, and J.R. Bumby. “Power System Dynamics. Stability and
Control”. In: (Jan. 2012).
[17]
Marc Cheah-Mane et al. “Modeling and analysis approaches for smallsignal stability
assessment of powerelectronicdominated systems”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Energy and Environment 12 (June 2022). doi: 10.1002/wene.453.
[18]
Carleton Coﬀrin et al. “PowerModels.jl: An Open-Source Framework for Exploring Power
Flow Formulations”. In: 2018 Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC). June 2018,
pp. 1–8. doi: 10.23919/PSCC.2018.8442948.
[19]
José Daniel Lara et al. “PowerSystems.jl
A power system data management package
for large scale modeling”. In: SoftwareX 15 (2021), p. 100747. issn: 2352-7110. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2021.100747.
[20]
Jose Daniel Lara et al. “Revisiting Power Systems Time-domain Simulation Methods and
Models”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems (2023), pp. 1–16. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.
2023.3303291.
[21]
Stuart Bates, J. Sienz, and Vassili Toropov. “Formulation of the Optimal Latin Hypercube
Design of Experiments Using a Permutation Genetic Algorithm”. In: 2011 (Apr. 2004).
doi: 10.2514/6.2004-2011.
[22]
Kaarthik Sundar et al. Optimization-Based Bound Tightening using a Strengthened QC-
Relaxation of the Optimal Power Flow Problem. 2019. arXiv: 1809.04565 [math.OC].
[23]
D. K. Molzahn. “Computing the Feasible Spaces of Optimal Power Flow Problems”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 32.6 (Nov. 2017), pp. 4752–4763.
[24]
Steve Brooks et al. Handbook of Markov Chain Monte Carlo. Vol. 706. John Wiley and Sons,
2013.
[25]
IEEE PES Task Force on Benchmarks for Validation of Emerging Power System Algo-
rithms. The Power Grid Library for Benchmarking AC Optimal Power Flow Algorithms. Aug.
2019. url: https://github.com/power-grid-lib/pglib-opf.
[26]
Miles Lubin et al. “JuMP 1.0: Recent improvements to a modeling language for mathe-
matical optimization”. In: Mathematical Programming Computation 15 (2023), pp. 581–589.
doi: 10.1007/s12532-023-00239-3.
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
41
==PAGE:48==
[27]
Andreas Wächter and Lorenz Biegler. “On the Implementation of an Interior-Point Fil-
ter Line-Search Algorithm for Large-Scale Nonlinear Programming”. In: Mathematical
programming 106 (Mar. 2006), pp. 25–57. doi: 10.1007/s10107-004-0559-y.
[28]
Andreas Venzke, Spyros Chatzivasileiadis, and Daniel K. Molzahn. “Inexact convex relax-
ations for AC optimal power ﬂow: Towards AC feasibility”. In: Electric Power Systems Re-
search 187 (2020), p. 106480. issn: 0378-7796. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2020.106480.
[29]
Apostolos Chalkis and Vissarion Fisikopoulos. volesti: Volume Approximation and Sampling
for Convex Polytopes in R. July 2020.
[30]
Trager Joswig-Jones, Kyri Baker, and Ahmed S. Zamzam. “OPF-Learn: An Open-Source
Framework for Creating Representative AC Optimal Power Flow Datasets”. In: 2022 IEEE
Power Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference (ISGT). 2022, pp. 1–5.
doi: 10.1109/ISGT50606.2022.9817509.
42
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:49==
A
Volume reduction
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Bus Angles [radians]
Lines 1-4
Max Voltages
Min Voltages
Lines 5-8
Max Voltages
Min Voltages
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Bus Angles [radians]
Lines 9-12
Max Voltages
Min Voltages
Lines 13-16
Max Voltages
Min Voltages
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Iteration Number
Bus Angles [radians]
Lines 17-20
Max Voltages
Min Voltages
Figure A.1: Evolution of the bus angles diﬀerence for the OBBT iterations
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
43
==PAGE:50==
B
Dynamic system parameters
This appendix details the dynamic models used for the small-signal analysis in the thesis. They
are all implemented in the Julia package PowerSystemDynamics [16] and used for most of the
dynamic models of the test cases.
Name
Unit
Description
Values
𝑅
p.u.
Droop parameter
0.02
𝑇𝑠
s
Governor time constant
0.1
𝑇𝑐
s
Governor time constant
0.45
𝑇𝑐
s
Governor time constant
0.45
𝑇3
s
Transient gain time constant
0
𝑇4
s
Power fraction time constant
12
𝑇5
s
Reheat time constant
50
Table B.1: Notation and parameter values for the turbine governor Type 1 model.
Name
Unit
Description
Values
𝐾𝑎
p.u.
Ampliﬁer gain
20
𝐾𝑒
s
Field circuit integral deviation
0.01
𝐾𝑓
s
Stabilizer Gain
0.063
𝑇𝑎
s
Ampliﬁer Time Constant
0.2
𝑇𝑒
s
Field Circuit Time Constant
0.314
𝑇𝑓
s
Stabilizer Time Constant
0.35
𝑇𝑟
s
Voltage Measurement Time Constant
0.001
𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑚
p.u.
Limits for pi controler ‘(𝑉𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑉𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑥)‘
(-5,5)
𝐴𝑒
p.u.
First ceiling coeﬃcient
0.0039
𝐵𝑒
p.u.
Second ceiling coeﬃcient
1.555
Table B.2: Notation and typical parameter ranges for the AVR Type I model.
44
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
==PAGE:51==
Name
Unit
Description
Value
𝑅
p.u.
Resistance
0 p.u.
𝑋𝑑
p.u.
Reactance in d-axis
1.3125 p.u.
𝑋𝑞
p.u.
Reactance in q-axis
1.2578 p.u.
𝑋𝑑𝑝
p.u.
Transient reactance in d-axis
0.1813 p.u.
𝑋𝑞𝑝
p.u.
Transient reactance in q-axis
0.25 p.u.
𝑇𝑑0𝑝
s.
Time constant of transient d-axis voltage
5.89 s
𝑇𝑑0𝑝
p.u.
Time constant of transient d-axis voltage
0.6 s
𝐻
p.u.
Inertia
3.01
𝐷
p.u.
Damping
0
Table B.3: Notation and parameter values for the generator model.
High quality dataset generation for data-driven security assessment of power systems
45
==PAGE:52==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
