==PAGE:1==
Genomic background of resistance to critically-important
antibiotics in Campylobacter from broilers
Author
Lluis Garcia Torras - s220352
June 29, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Abstract
Fluoroquinolones are considered by WHO and by the World Health Organization for Animal Health
(WOAH) as "critically important" for human health and "very important" for animal health, meaning
that their use is highly restricted. Resistance to fluoroquinolones in Campylobacter spp. from broilers
in Denmark has been increasing over the last years despite the regulations regarding the prohibition
of use of this substance for broiler production in the country being put into effect by the Danish
government. Given the relevance of this antibiotic class, it is, therefore, crucial to analyse historical
data to disclose and understand the underlying reasons for this phenomenon.
For this project, two types of data were available, both containing samples from Danish and EU-
imported broiler meat. The first one consisted of phenotypic data containing Minimal Inhibitory
Concentration (MIC) results for Campylobacter coli and Campylobacter jejuni spanning from 2014
until 2023. The other dataset entailed the Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) information from iso-
lates collected from broilers by the Danish Veterinary and Food Administration (Fødevarestyrelsen)
spanning between 2019 and 2024. While the former was used to evaluate and confirm the increasing
trend for a longer period of time, the latter is the one that provided the genomic profiles behind the
fluoroquinolone resistance and showed how they have evolved over the years. The analysis of both
datasets combined statistical methods and bioinformatic tools.
The phenotypic analysis confirmed the existence of an increasing trend of resistant isolates in both
Danish and imported broiler meat, thus reassuring the relevance of the topic. The study of WGS
results revealed the presence and relatively recent appearance of specific clonal complexes (CC) that
have already been categorized by some authors as potentially concerning in the near future.
i
==PAGE:3==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Contents
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Foodborne diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Campylobacter spp. in broilers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Antimicrobial resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Countermeasures to AMR & the Danish model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Monitoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Bioinformatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.3
The possibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.4
Quinolones: ciprofloxacin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.4.1
Mechanism of action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.4.2
Mechanism of resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
Aim of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Methods
12
2.1
Selection of sequenced isolates: Macro
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Phenotypic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Error margin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Trend analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
Chi Square
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Sequencing data & High performance computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
MLST and Sequence Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
BURST analysis and Clonal Complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Results
18
3.1
Phenotypic data: ciprofloxacin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Genotypic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Resistant phenotype prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Point mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.3
Sequence Types and Clonal Complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Discussion
26
5
Conclusion
29
List of Figures
I
References
III
Appendix
IX
A Excel Macro
IX
A.1 Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
ii
==PAGE:4==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Contents
A.1.1
Run number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
A.1.2
Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
A.1.3
ID number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
A.1.4
Isolate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
A.1.5
ST type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
A.1.6
Sample origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
A.1.7
Sample type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
A.1.8
Quality Check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
A.1.9
Additional comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
A.2 VBA code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
B Cochran-Armitage Test
XII
C Computerome scripts
XII
C.1 ResFinder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIII
C.2 ResFinder Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIV
iii
==PAGE:5==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
1.1
Foodborne diseases
Gastrointestinal infections are among one of the most common human diseases and represent a major
burden for healthcare systems around the globe [1]. The cause of these diseases may have a viral or
a bacterial origin, and although most acute cases are due to viruses such as adenovirus, rotavirus or
norovirus, bacterial gastrointestinal infections present a very high incidence, especially for chronic
cases of diarrhea as well as for acute ones with very severe symptoms [2]. In some regions of the
planet, especially in developing countries, bacterial diarrhea is one of the leading causes of death in
children under five years old [2] mostly due to the massive loss of water and electrolytes. In other
regions of the planet with a more developed healthcare system, however, foodborne outbreaks caused
by viruses or bacteria pose a high burden [3].
There are only a few organisms that cause the majority of bacterial diarrhea cases. Well-known
microbes, such as Escherichia coli, Salmonella and Shigella are among the most common causative
agents of such infections. However, Campylobacter spp. is the most common bacterial agent of
foodborne diseases around the world [4]. This Gram-negative bacteria belongs to the Campylobac-
teriaceae family which is comprised of three genera: Campylobacter, Arcobacter and Helicobacter.
The Campylobacter genus includes a set of bacterial species which are closely related and that
mainly colonise the gastrointestinal tract of various animals [5]. This foodborne pathogen is mainly
associated with the consumption of poultry, raw milk and cattle [6], causing what is known as
campylobacteriosis, one of the main sources of gastroenteritis in humans [7].
There are various
pathogenic Campylobacter within the genus which comprises around a dozen well-categorised species
that are known to cause illness to humans and animals. Some of the best categorized are C. fetus,
C. coli and C. jejuni, the latter two being the leading cause of campylobacteriosis in humans. The
fact that its natural reservoir is in the intestines of both humans and other animals (wild and
domesticated) makes C. jejuni one of the single leading causes of foodborne diseases on the planet
[5, 8].
It is important to point out that regardless of the high numbers of gastroenteritis cases caused by
Campylobacter worldwide, the symptoms are usually self-resolved within a few days, meaning that
if the infected individuals do not experience severe effects they may not even reach out for medical
assistance, and therefore the case will not appear in any record, resulting in the underdiagnosis of
campylobacteriosis cases. This means that the number of infections that actually happen has to be
considered somewhat higher than the number of cases reported [9]. Regardless, the already reported
high incidence of campylobacteriosis makes it a popular target for prevention and control strategies
around the world. Due to the colonisation of Campylobacter of the gastrointestinal tract of food-
producing animals, their derived meat and meat products can become contaminated and represent a
hazard for consumers. Food-producing animals such as cattle, pigs and poultry are natural reservoirs
of Campylobacter.
Page 1 of 29
==PAGE:6==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
Birds in particular are considered to be a natural amplifying host due to their higher metabolic
temperature (42◦C) [10], therefore, the group that represents the single highest source of human
infection in high-income countries is poultry [11]. As an example, in the United Kingdom just a few
years back (2017) around 70% of the reported cases had their origin in poultry meat [12]. Denmark
is not an exception, with 5142 cases recorded in 2022, a year in which the Danish Central Outbreak
Management Group (DCUG) identified five outbreaks directly connected with chicken meat [13].
1.1.1
Campylobacter spp. in broilers
Poultry has been identified as the major source for Campylobacter infections for many decades [14],
and this is still a challenge that many EU countries face. In Denmark broilers are described as the
main cause of campylobacteriosis [11]. A genetic study helped track the outbreak source back to
certain Danish farms [15], achieving it by linking clinical and animal samples. However, it has also
been shown that not only the animals are susceptible to contamination by Campylobacter. All the
environment in the farm including water sources, surfaces, tools and humans working or visiting can
act as vectors.
The EU represents one of the largest producers and exporters of poultry meat worldwide [16]. It
is therefore understandable and expected that strong regulations are in place upon such a crucial
industry in order to both maintain acceptable levels of safety for the consumers and avoid outbreaks
that may pose major national and global health challenges.
Such measures include continuous inspections and monitoring of poultry farms and their products,
putting special emphasis on all steps of the production chain where cross-contamination has the
highest likelihood of occurring [17].
Due to its ubiquitous nature in food-producing animals, Campylobacter is often exposed to antimi-
crobials used at the farm level.
This exposure creates a selective pressure that can lead to the
development of resistance to several classes of antimicrobials.
This has become a serious public
health concern, as infections in humans show an increasing resistance to treatments. As a matter of
fact, most antibiotic-resistant human infections are caused by zoonotic isolates [18].
1.2
Antimicrobial resistance
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) can be categorized into two groups, intrinsic and extrinsic [19].
The first includes genes that are naturally present in a microorganism’s genome, being part of its
normal physiological functions which make them immune to certain chemicals (e.g. Bacillus sp. and
benzoates [19]). The latter, however, includes the acquisition of new genes that confer resistance.
This acquisition can happen via horizontal or vertical transmission.
Acquired resistance pose a higher threat to public health, as they generate antimicrobial resistance
in organisms that did not have it previously, making it difficult to predict their occurrence. This
phenomenon happens to be one of the major global health threats that humanity will face in the
coming decades [20].
The resistant genes exist within the cells in either the own genome of the organism, or in mobile
elements such as plasmids. Below, the list of the most common origins for AMR in an organism is
shown.
Page 2 of 29
==PAGE:7==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
• Horizontal transmission
– Conjugation
– Transformation
– Transduction
• Vertical transmission
– Mutation
Horizontal gene transfer is a whole complex and fascinating field on its own and it has been thor-
oughly studied for many decades for its role in evolution [21] and in bacterial antibiotic resistance
[22, 23]. This project, however, focuses on the occurrence of resistance to critically important an-
tibiotics in Campylobacter, specifically on resistance to quinolones (see more in section 1.3.4). While
Campylobacter presents acquired resistance due to both mutations and horizontal transmission, the
root cause for its quinolone resistance is a mutation in the organism’s chromosome.
1.2.1
Mutations
Mutations in the genome of a microorganism are a common cause for the appearance of AMRs,
which is both a blessing and a curse when it comes to identifying, tracking and fighting this threat.
Nevertheless, in order to study them it is important to first describe what mutations are.
Figure 1: The three different types of changes in a genomic sequence [24].
Genetic mutations are a natural occurrence and a part of life itself. Changes in the genomic sequence
of all living organisms and viruses occur constantly, sometimes spontaneously and sometimes as a
consequence of the action of an external factor. There are three ways in which a sequence can be
altered, namely through deleting, inserting or changing a base pair, as displayed in Figure 1. The
accumulation of multiple changes is what makes the difference in the long run. The ability of our
genomes to change is the driving factor behind evolution and the thriving of all living organisms on,
at least, this planet. There is a downside to this, i.e. the tremendous difference between the life cycle
of unicellular and multicellular beings (us, humans, in this case) which creates a clear evolutionary
contrast when it comes to adapting to new or rapidly changing environmental conditions.
Page 3 of 29
==PAGE:8==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
Compared to human beings, microorganisms present a short lifespan, lasting from minutes up to
several hours, and higher mutation rates. Such property gives them the ability to adapt to new
conditions promptly. A single change in one base pair can already make a remarkable difference. As
shown in Figure 2, one change can end up altering the function of a whole protein. Typical examples
of these fast-occurring changes are some bacteria which can rapidly adjust to environments with
higher salt concentrations (osmoadaptation) by developing mechanisms to prevent damage to their
membrane and other processes to keep the growth cycle [25].
Figure 2: Change of a single base pair at the DNA level can induce a change in one amino acid, which may
modify the secondary structure of the protein, changing its conformation and eventually interfering with the
overall function of the protein. (Own elaboration).
These adaptations are obviously not limited to salt. They also involve antibiotics - compounds that
are key driving factors in the natural world. These antimicrobial agents are part of the "chemical
warfare" between fungi and bacteria and between bacteria themselves [26]. A constant adaptation to
new antimicrobials secreted by other species is necessary for the organisms to keep thriving and not
lose the battle for resources and growth. We humans, however, have very recently (on a biological
scale) started using antibiotics and antimicrobial agents to fight off infections and increase our own
survivability - a strategy that proved extremely effective, but as it has been documented for many
years already, is losing efficiency. For the last decades, the ability of bacterial pathogens to resist
higher and higher concentrations of antimicrobials has been increasing at a great rate [27], thus
becoming a hazard for global human health and the economy in the near future. The widespread use
and misuse of antimicrobials on farm animals and among the human population for many decades
has created immense selective pressure towards the microorganisms, forcing them to quickly develop
resistance mechanisms. As the pace of resistance development is faster than the development of
new substances, the risk for the human population to be defenceless against certain infections is
concerningly high.
The bright side of mutations relies on the fact that computing capacity has skyrocketed in the
last couple of decades up to levels that were not imaginable only 30 years ago, thus enhancing our
capability for sequencing genomes of organisms. Nowadays, we are able to obtain entire genome
sequences by using Whole-Genome Sequencing (WGS) technology [28] and perform a plethora of
analyses with it - from identifying species to locating certain genes, or even telling small sequence
differences between two microorganisms from the same species (a technique called Single Nucleotide
Page 4 of 29
==PAGE:9==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
Polymorphism or SNP). As described previously, AMR can be acquired through specific changes in
the genome sequence, and thus thanks to SNP, we can detect a single base pair difference between
two isolates. This capability provides us with an immensely valuable tool to identify organisms that
developed resistance.
1.3
Countermeasures to AMR & the Danish model
In 2015 the World Health Organization (WHO) launched the first international surveillance pro-
gram destined to unify the monitoring strategies around the world, under the name of the Global
Antimicrobial Resistance and Use Surveillance System (GLASS) [29]. Its aim is to provide a global
standardised approach that allows for an easier interpretation of the results from different national
monitoring systems, hence providing a simpler way to have a global view of the AMR issue. GLASS
does not only focus on clinical epidemiological data, but it has progressively been incorporating data
from the usage of antimicrobials, and the presence of AMR in the environment as well as in the food
chain. A good overview of what GLASS includes can be seen in Figure 3 [29].
Figure 3: Different modules that are part of GLASS. AMR - Antimicrobial Resistance; AMC - Antimicrobial
Consumption; EAR - Emerging AMR Reporting; FUNGI - monitor of Candida spp infections; EGASP -
Gonnorrhea surveillance; One Health - Integrated surveillance; AMU - Antibiotic use in hospitals; BURDEN
- public health impact of AMR. Adapted from [29].
Precisely regarding the food chain, according to the 2022 Global Food Security Index, Denmark is
ranked within the top 15 Overall Score, mostly thanks to its excellent performance in Quality and
Safety, for which it is ranked second in the world [30]. The strong legislation in food safety has
allowed Denmark to become a reference country in surveillance of infectious diseases, including the
surveillance of antimicrobial resistance.
Page 5 of 29
==PAGE:10==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
1.3.1
Monitoring
Another remarkable project that the National Food Institute is a core member of is the "Danish
Integrated Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring and Research Programme", commonly known as
DANMAP [31], originally established in 1995 by the Danish Ministry of Food and the Danish Min-
istry of Health. The responsibility of analysing, reporting and disseminating the monitoring results
gathered in the framework of DANMAP lies with the Technical University of Denmark and the
Statens Serum Institut (SSI).
This program is a perfect example of the integration of different types of data that traditionally have
not been considered as a whole, a phenomenon that limited our overall epidemiological view in the
past. The main objective is to combine data from Antimicrobial Consumption and Antimicrobial
Resistance, originating both from animals and humans, in a single report, providing an ideal overall
summary of the state of AMR in the country. The source of the data from DANMAP is following:
• Antimicrobial consumption
– Data from Veterinary & Food Administration (VetStat database)
– Pharmacies and Hospital Pharmacies (MedStat database)
• Antimicrobial resistance
– Samples from farms and slaughterhouses
– Samples from Hospitals, General Practitioners and Healthcare (Departments of Clinical
Microbiology, MiBa and HAIBA databases)
This system aligns with the One Health approach strategy encouraged by the WHO for already some
years [32]. The One Health strategy is also part of the GLASS Surveillance system as can be seen in
Figure 3 [29]. The idea behind One Health and DANMAP can be summarized with this statement:
human health, animal health and the environment are related, therefore it is crucial to keep an eye on
their variations and to be able to combine various sources of data in order to protect public health,
the animal’s well-being and the environment.
1.3.2
Bioinformatics
At the National Food Institute a variety of bioinformatics tools are offered by the Genomic Epidemi-
ology research group through the so-called Center for Genomic Epidemiology (CGE). The tools are
publicly available and allow the detailed analysis of whole-genome sequences. Two of those tools are
ResFinder and Multi Locus Sequence Typing (MLST).
ResFinder, published in 2012 [33], is a tool that uses databases containing all known genes and
mutations that confer antimicrobial resistance in a variety of bacterial species. It uses BLAST to
compare whole-genome data sets with such databases and provides a very complete output that
includes an accurate prediction of the organism’s resistance phenotype.
Page 6 of 29
==PAGE:11==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
Regarding MLST, it is a powerful and ubiquitously used tool to identify subtypes from the same
bacterial species (also known as typing). It targets seven housekeeping genes, genes that are essential
and present in all members of a species. By establishing which allele of each of these seven genes is
present in the organism, it provides a specific allelic profile represented by a number, also known as
sequence type (ST). Anywhere in the world, a specific ST number is linked to a specific subtype of
a certain species. Subtyping is vital in phylogeny and epidemiological studies.
These and the rest of the offered services from CGE share the same principle of using worldwide
genomic databases as a reference against which input data is matched. Such process allows to obtain
information regarding the presence of target sequences encoding for resistance, virulence factors,
pathogenic bacteria, subtypes and much more. CGE tools are available for all and are currently used
by many companies and institutions worldwide [34].
1.3.3
The possibilities
The technology, tools and monitoring programs mentioned in the previous sections altogether provide
a way to obtain a better understanding of the status quo and better predictions for the future by
the analysis of past events. The majority of developed and developing countries have a register
of physically preserved isolates (from clinical cases, environmental samples, etc.) available to the
authorities. As mentioned in section 1.2, WGS allows us to obtain the entire genomic sequence of
an organism with extraordinary efficiency and accuracy, and thus to analyse the sequence however it
is desired. It is then interesting to apply these recent advances in sequencing and bioinformatics to
go through old isolates and analyse patterns from the past, a trend that has been very popular and
useful to track genomic changes in space and time, and potentially identify an origin, for instance as
it was done to track down the cause of a tuberculosis outbreak in rural China [35].
AMR is caused by genomic changes, therefore by retrospectively analysing old isolates collected
under a monitoring programme we can maybe identify phylogenetic lineages by checking the SNPs
mentioned in section 1.2. An example is the epidemiological study of multi-drug resistant (MDR)
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in samples collected for 15 years since 2005 [36].
As this method can be potentially applied to any known and well-categorised organism, it proves a
very good way to get a deeper look into Campylobacter’s antimicrobial resistance. Not only have
resistant strains been long proven to generate worse infections in humans than the sensitive strains
[37], but also shown an increased resistance to clinically relevant antibiotics [38]. For this project,
however, and as mentioned previously, the focus is one particular group of such relevant antibiotics
- quinolones.
1.3.4
Quinolones: ciprofloxacin
Quinolones are broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents with very effective bactericidal activity that are
widely used around the world for both humans and animals. Its origin goes back to the early 60s when
nalidixic acid was unexpectedly discovered while attempting to create chloroquine, an anti-malarian
compound [39]. Quinolones are therefore fully synthetic without an origin linked to a biological
source, and although originally such compounds should be labelled as antimicrobial, in recent years
the term "antibiotic" also includes synthetic compounds, therefore antibiotic and antimicrobial are
used interchangeably. Practically all modern quinolones in use today are fluoroquinolones, which as
the name indicates include a fluorine in their chemical structure.
Page 7 of 29
==PAGE:12==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
Figure 4: In chronological order of discovery; structure, classification and key aspects of the most relevant
quinolones. Featuring generation, usage, spectrum and potency [40].
Currently, there are four generations of quinolones, which have only been getting more effective since
the development of fluoroquinolones in the 70s and 80s, e.g. as Figure 4 demonstrates, the first
generation was only useful against Gram-negative, whilst modern fluoroquinolones work for Gram-
negative and Gram-positive. Nalidixic acid, the first narrow-spectrum quinolone discovered, has been
used for urinal tract infections (UTIs) for many decades, but it was eventually substituted in the
EU and US for other more effective and less harmful antibiotics in humans after an EMA report
back in 2018 [41], making its use practically non-existent in developed countries. Given the strength
and the potential side effects of some fluoroquinolones, they are labelled by WHO and the World
Health Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) as "critically important" for human health and
"very important" for animal health, meaning that their use is restricted to only specific cases and
situations and not administered under any circumstances as a first-choice treatment [42].
This project focuses on a specific quinolone, ciprofloxacin. Some studies place ciprofloxacin as the
most consumed antibiotic worldwide [43] in recent years, therefore despite the restrictions described
above, decades of abundant fluoroquinolone use and misuse have brought us to this point, where
there has been an increasing trend of fluoroquinolone-resistant (FQR) bacterial clinical isolates for
the past years [44]. A trend which is also visible in microorganisms isolated from farm animals
destined for human consumption. In order to understand and analyse these trends, it is necessary to
take a closer look at what makes fluoroquinolones so useful and what is the cause for fluoroquinolone
resistance at the molecular level.
Page 8 of 29
==PAGE:13==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
1.3.4.1
Mechanism of action
The mechanism of action (MoA) of all quinolones relies on a very basic principle, namely the bacterial
chromosome structure. Bacterial genomes consist of a double-stranded circular DNA, which is tightly
packed. Every time that this double strand has to be opened for transcription or for replication, it
generates a "super-twisting" effect in the areas close to the opening, as it can be seen in Figure 5.
This supercoiling needs to be compensated in order to release the physical stress of the chain and
maintain the structure. The enzymes responsible for this task are known as topoisomerases.
Figure 5: Representation of a transcribing polymerase generating a positive supercoiling ahead and a negative
supercoiling behind it. Adapted from [45].
Topoisomerases perform single and double-stranded nicks that help compensate for the torsional
stress and allow the structure to be maintained.
There have been four types of topoisomerases
identified in bacteria, named from I to IV, however, only two are relevant for Gram-negative bacteria.
The first one was described decades ago by Gellert et al. [46] and was named DNA gyrase (also known
as Topoisomerase II), which is mainly responsible for compensating supercoilings by being able to
introduce a double break in the chain, counter twist the chain to compensate torsion and seal the nick
created previously. Secondly comes the Topoisomerase IV, also able to perform double breaks in the
chain and is mainly responsible for the decatenation of two linked DNA molecules after replication.
A depiction of the main activities of these two enzymes can be seen in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Main activities of Topoisomerases II (DNA gyrase) and IV when interacting with certain DNA
topologies. Simplified scheme adapted from [47].
Page 9 of 29
==PAGE:14==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
The activity of these enzymes can be summed up as having two main tasks: cleave the DNA, and
ligate the DNA. This is a key factor given that Topoisomerases II and IV are the primary targets
for quinolones, which work by stabilizing the cleavage complexes between the enzyme and the DNA
and not allowing for later ligation. This alters the complete function of the topoisomerases, leading
to the excessive fragmentation of the whole chromosome, as the only activity that the enzymes can
do is to cut. DNA damage to such an extent can not be repaired by the microorganism, inevitably
leading to its death.
It is relevant to remark on the similarity in structure of such enzymes, as Topoisomerases II and IV
are both tetramers with two pairs of sub-units:
• DNA Gyrase (Topoisomerase II)
– Two A monomers: Gyr A
– Two B monomers: Gyr B
• Topoisomerase IV
– Two A monomers: Par C
– Two B monomers: Par E
In Campylobacter, however, it has been long proven that there is no Topoisomerase IV present
[48, 49], only DNA Gyrase which assumes both roles described in Figure 6. This is an important
fact to highlight that Par C and Par E mutations, despite being critical in other species [50], are not
relevant in this project as they have no role in Campylobacter fluoroquinolone resistance (CFR).
1.3.4.2
Mechanism of resistance
As we have seen, the action of quinolones on the target bacteria is fatal, and therefore the bacteria
must develop protection against it. As this project focuses on Campylobacter, the resistance mecha-
nism described here is the one that has been observed in this organism [51] and concerns DNA gyrase
only.
Figure 7: General mechanisms for antimicrobial resistance [52].
Page 10 of 29
==PAGE:15==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
1
Introduction
Out of the four general mechanisms for antimicrobial resistance (Figure 7), quinolone resistance
follows the target modification strategy seen on the bottom left affecting the structure of the DNA
Gyrase. As seen above, Gyrase has two subunits which are coded by two genes with the same names,
gyrA and gyrB, and it is in gene gyrA where the mutation that allows for the appearance of the
resistance occurs [53]. The most frequent mechanism observed in Campylobacter is a single point
mutation in position 257 of the gene gyrA, a change of cytosine for thymine (C257T), which leads
to the substitution of threonine by isoleucine in position 86 in the Gyr A subunit of the protein,
a mutation also called Thr-86-Ile. This changes the conformation of the whole enzyme making it
immune to the action of quinolones [53], a process similar to what is portrayed in Figure 2, and
allowing the microorganism to keep functioning normally.
1.4
Aim of the project
Given the increase in fluoroquinolone resistance observed in Campylobacter from broilers in Denmark,
despite the ban of fluoroquinolone use in broiler production, it is important to get a better insight
into the causes of this phenomenon. This project aims to provide some of that by analysing all
possible available data.
Phenotypic monitoring data from MIC tests spanning from 2014 until 2023 will be analysed in order
to compare different types of samples (Danish and foreign broiler meat) and to confirm, or not, the
existence of an increasing trend in quinolone resistant isolates over the last decade.
The main focus of the project is on genomic data.
Isolates that underwent WGS by the Føde-
varestyrelsen (FVST) were used.
The transfer of information regarding the metadata of the se-
quenced isolates between FVST and DTU is done using a file format that proves challenging to
navigate through. Therefore the first aim was to create an Excel Macro to simplify the listing and
visualisation of the metadata associated to the sequenced isolates, and thus to facilitate the selection
of isolates for the analysis. Subsequently, the following steps were taken regarding WGS analysis:
• Select relevant isolates and ask for data access
• ResFinder analysis
• Multi Locus Sequence Typing (MLST) analysis
The analysis of the WGS data and the genetic background of quinolone resistance gives details on
mutated genes, and MLST categorization provides an insight into what subtypes [54] of Campylobac-
ter are most prevalent in Danish and imported broiler meat, and in Danish broilers, and whether
they might represent a reason for concern or not.
Page 11 of 29
==PAGE:16==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2
Methods
2
Methods
For this project, two main sets of data spanning between different years were available. Phenotypic
resistance results (MIC) were available from 2014 until 2023, while whole-genome sequences were
from 2019 to 2024.
For the overlapping years, there was no match for isolate IDs between the
phenotypic and WGS data, meaning that the two datasets originated from different isolates, and
thus they were treated separately. More insights on this are displayed in Sections 3 and 4.
2.1
Selection of sequenced isolates: Macro
It is not uncommon for sequencing data to span over many years , amounting to a remarkable number
of sequencing runs to gather data from. In order to get a good overview of the metadata related
to each isolate sequence (e.g. isolate origin, quality score, sample type, etc.) in order to be able to
easily identify sequences that were interesting for the study, it was crucial to develop a simplified and
methodic way to navigate through metadata of isolates sequenced over a period of 6 years without
major challenges.
Given the complexity and non-uniformity of the format of the metadata, it was necessary to develop
a tool that modified those data into a format that facilitated the overview of the information relating
to each isolate, and thus the selection of isolates for the study. The data cleaning and visualization
were performed using an Excel Macro developed for the purpose, which also allows the resulting
processed data to be stored in a separate output file. The output file containing all the processed
data from a number of years can be stored and used when necessary for e.g. retrospective analysis.
Also, a VBA code was developed to allow for a fast copying of new data into the Macro, by using
a button, thus turning the tool into an asset for speeding the process of summarizing metadata for
future sequenced isolates.
The mentioned Macro was created to extract important information from the raw data file where all
sequencing runs are registered on an ongoing basis whenever FVST sends the information to DTU
Food. Using a series of functions and basic VBA code, all of which can be seen in the Appendix A,
a series of pivot tables were obtained, linked to a simplified data extraction table which allows for a
great overview of the metadata and identification of specific isolate IDs of interest for the project.
Since the data provided was not always in the same format or with the same structure, it was
necessary to create a specific Macro to deal with the Campylobacter isolates.
The Excel functions used allowed for the following metadata to be extracted for each isolate:
• Sequencing run number
• Year
• Isolate ID number
• Microorganism isolated (species or genus)
• Sequence type (ST)
• Animal species sampled
• Sample type
• ID of the sampling project
• Origin: Danish or imported
• Quality Check score
• SOFI ID for sample identification in the
WGS database
• Additional comments if applicable
Page 12 of 29
==PAGE:17==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2
Methods
Some VBA code was used for an automatic preliminary data cleaning when pasted in the Macro.
This included the elimination of spaces between commas and the replacement of the words "okse" and
"kylling" with "Kvæg" (cattle) and "Broiler" respectively. Besides this automation, some manual
manipulation was still required in order to fully homogenize the data, making it easier to obtain a
good metadata summary. All these features within the Macro helped generate pivot tables, allowing
proper filtering with focus on the relevant characteristics of the isolates to be selected for the study.
Once the sequences were selected, access to those was requested by referring to the SOFI IDs. Some
of the tables generated for the selection are shown below in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Two tables used for sequence selection, all samples counted were initially filtered by Quality Check
score. Left: count of samples per year and animal species. Right: count of type of samples per year and
animal species.
2.2
Phenotypic data
Phenotypic data was available and consisted of Minimal Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) results of
Campylobacter coli and Campylobacter jejuni spanning from 2014 until 2023 from broilers, mainly
from Denmark but also from other EU countries. The information provided included the variables
shown below:
• Year
• Sample ID
• Organism found
• Country
• Animal species sampled (Only broilers)
• Antibiotic
• Cutoff value (ECOFF)
• Result of the MIC test
Phenotypic data provides a good reference to compare to the genotypic data. Phenotypic resistance
in Campylobacter jejuni from Danish broilers was visualized in different graphs, which are portrayed
and analysed in the Results Section 3.1.
Page 13 of 29
==PAGE:18==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2
Methods
The method used for the phenotypic analysis, MIC, consists of a series of broth microdilutions by the
Sensititre System (Trek Diagnostic Systems Ltd.) as specified in the latest DANMAP 2022 [55], where
the lowest concentration at which growth is not shown is determined as the MIC. The determination
of an organism as sensitive or resistant is established by the epidemiological cutoff value (ECOFF)
established by the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) [56], and
varies for each combination of antibiotic and microorganism. When the MIC is above the ECOFF,
the isolate is considered resistant.
Regarding the antimicrobial agents considered for this project, since the focus is on resistance to
quinolones, as explained in Section 1.3.4, the substances to be considered were ciprofloxacin and
nalidixic acid. An important remark is that only ciprofloxacin was considered in the analyses, since
that in Campylobacter there is a high level of correlation between resistance to both substances,
given that they basically share the same mechanism of action. In other words, when an organism is
resistant to one, it is also resistant to the other. This is what made the EU food safety authority
(EFSA) advise to stop testing for nalidixic acid resistance in the EU harmonized monitoring of
AMR in Campylobacter from food-producing animals. This change in the antibiotic test panel for
Campylobacter was implemented at EU-level in 2021 according to Commission Implementing Decision
(EU) 2020/1729 [57]. Figure 10 clearly shows the similarity between resistance to both substances,
and that how nalidixic acid MIC tests stopped after 2020.
2.3
Statistics
2.3.1
Error margin
Given the variation in the number of isolates available each year and between different groups of
isolates, confidence intervals are shown whenever the percentage of occurrence of sensitivity or resis-
tance are shown. To obtain the confidence intervals, a margin of error (MOE) equation 1 was used
with a Z-score for 95% confidence.
MOEγ = zγ
r
σ2
n
(1)
where:
γ = percentage of confidence
z = Z-score
σ = standard deviation
n = sample size
Page 14 of 29
==PAGE:19==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2
Methods
2.3.2
Trend analysis
In order to test the statistical significance of a certain increasing or decreasing trend, the Cochran-
Armitage test was used in all data from the graphs provided in Section 3. This test can be used to
determine if there is a linear trend in the results considered, when results are binary, as is the case in
this study (either resistant or sensitive). The calculations were performed following the instructions
seen in reference [58]. Given its complexity, its mathematical background is displayed in Appendix B.
The alpha level for significance was 0.05. The Cochran-Armitage test indicates the existence of a
trend when p-value < α.
2.3.3
Chi Square
To determine if there was a statistical difference between the frequencies of the MLSTs detected, it
was decided to apply the Chi-Square test. The decision was made based on the size of the contingency
levels, as we deal with large and complex ones, Fisher’s test was not suitable. A chi-square test is
based on equation 2 and compares the obtained values with the statistically expected ones. It proves
a difference when χ2 < α.
χ2 =
X (Oi −Ei)2
Ei
(2)
where:
Oi = Observed value
Ei = Expected value
α = 0.05 for 95% confidence
2.4
Sequencing data & High performance computing
It was not possible to determine the direct correlation between the phenotypic results and the geno-
typic ones, as the Antimicrobial Susceptibility Test (AST) and WGS were not performed for the
same isolates. Only one isolate had been tested phenotypically and sequenced as well.
The sequenced isolates selected for analysis go from 2019 until 2024, amounting to a total of 1051,
all originating from broilers or broiler meat. The characteristics of the selected isolates, regarding
their type and origin are shown in Figure 9. Since for 2024, there were only seven samples available,
for analyses regarding yearly results only 1044 samples were considered, up to the year 2023. Other
results focusing solely on genetic characteristics do include all isolates selected, since the year is not
relevant for the comparison. Regarding isolates originating from imported broiler meat, there was
a great disparity in the number of isolates available from each country, with some countries only
having one isolate (Romania and The Netherlands). For this reason, any non-Danish broiler meat
isolates were labelled collectively as "EU".
Page 15 of 29
==PAGE:20==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2
Methods
Figure 9: A: Type of sample: from faeces or from retail meat. B: Origin: Danish vs imported. C: Species of
Campylobacter, "n/a" means species was not stated.
A variety of tools and scripts were used to process the sequencing data from the selected isolates.
High-performance computing (HPC) was required for this task, and for this purpose, we used DTU’s
access to the Danish HPC called Computerome, which happens to be also the largest in Scandinavia
[59]. There were different scripts created for the analysis of the data and the subsequent generation
of summary files so as to visualize the results properly. The versions of the tools used were ResFinder
4.5.0 and Python 3.12.
All the scripts used in this part of the project can be found in the Appendix C.
2.5
MLST and Sequence Type
All Sequence types were provided by the Fødevarestyrelsen (DVFA) which obtained them using the
standard MLST procedure, assessing the different alleles of the seven housekeeping genes aspA, glnA,
gltA, glyA, pgm, tkt, uncA.
For the 1051 WGS isolates selected, only 955 had an identified sequence type (ST). Given the large
variety of STs, when analysing ST frequency only the most common are considered.
There are
thousands of different STs for a given species, therefore, for such a large sample pool, the variety is
expected to be large. Detailing the whole variety of STs is not a goal for this project, therefore only
the most prevalent ones are portrayed and analysed.
Page 16 of 29
==PAGE:21==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
2
Methods
2.6
BURST analysis and Clonal Complexes
In order to simplify the high variety of Sequence Types obtained, clonal complexes (CC) were used
to cluster them. CCs group various STs based on their similarity to a main or central allelic profile.
BURST uses an algorithm to compare any given ST with the central ones and automatically assigns
them to certain clonal complexes [60]. The criteria followed is the matching of four or more of the
seven MLST loci.
The BURST analysis is an open tool available on the PubMLST site, widely used for phylogenetic
analysis of various microorganisms, including Campylobacter.
Page 17 of 29
==PAGE:22==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3
Results
3
Results
3.1
Phenotypic data: ciprofloxacin
Regarding the species of the isolates, almost all selected isolates are Campylobacter jejuni (1333),
with the exception of 56 isolates collected in 2022 belonging to the Campylobacter coli species.
Results for C. coli are not portrayed, as there were no remarkable differences.
Figure 10 justifies the exclusion from the study of the nalidixic acid phenotypic results, given their
similarity to the ciprofloxacin phenotypic results, as explained in section 2.2 and shown below.
Figure 10: Similarity between the occurrence of resistance to nalidixic acid and ciprofloxacin in C. jejuni
isolates. 95% confidence intervals for each percentage of resistants.
Next, the overall view of the number of isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin in Denmark is portrayed
in two graphs showing by year the number of resistant and sensitive isolates (Figure 11) and the
percentage of resistant isolates (Figure 12).
Figure 11: Number of C. jejuni isolates sensitive and resistant to ciprofloxacin per year with a linear regression
line for the resistants.
Page 18 of 29
==PAGE:23==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3
Results
Figure 12: Percentage of C. jejuni isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin per year. 95% confidence intervals for
each percentage of resistants.
In order to confirm the increasing trend that can be observed in Figure 11, the Cochran-Armitage
test described in section 2.3.2 was applied resulting in a p-value < 0.001, validating the existence of
an increasing trend in resistance to ciprofloxacin in C. jejuni isolates.
The isolates selected for the study were obtained from two types of samples, faeces and meat. There
was a big difference in the number of isolates available from both sample types, specifically 305 from
meat and 1069 from faeces (C. jejuni, Danish samples). There was a lack of isolates from meat
samples after 2019. The comparison between isolates from the two sample types was performed
based on the percentages of resistant isolates, which are presented in Figure 13.
Figure 13: Percentage of Danish C. jejuni isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin per sample type and year.
Numbers indicate the amount of isolates. 95% confidence intervals for each percentage of resistants.
Page 19 of 29
==PAGE:24==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3
Results
Results regarding the sample’s country of origin provide a source of interesting information, shown in
Figure 14. All isolates with import origin were from meat samples, hence they were only available, for
a four-year span up until 2018. Import broiler meat samples originated from other European countries
were grouped as "EU" and compared to Denmark for occurrence of resistance to ciprofloxacin.
Figure 14: Comparison of the percentage of ciprofloxacin-resistant C. jejuni isolates from Danish vs EU
broiler meat.
"EU" data results from the combination of data from meat isolates from four European
countries (France, Germany, Netherlands and Poland). The number is the amount of isolates. 95% confidence
intervals for each percentage of resistants.
3.2
Genotypic data
The output from ResFinder provided a detailed description of point mutations and a prediction
of resistance phenotypes for each of the 1051 input sequences. The results are presented in three
sections: resistance phenotype prediction, details on point mutations and sequence typing (MLST)
distribution. Only point mutation results are addressed, since ciprofloxacin resistance originates from
a mutation in the genome (section 1.3.4.2).
3.2.1
Resistant phenotype prediction
For the period between 2019 and 2023, a total of 364 isolates were predicted as quinolone-resistant;
the percentage of predicted quinolone-resistant isolates, with the total number of isolates considered
for each year are shown in Figure 15.
Page 20 of 29
==PAGE:25==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3
Results
Figure 15: Percentage of predicted ciprofloxacin-resistant C. jejuni isolates, according to the output from
ResFinder. In brackets the total number of isolates for each year. 2024 is excluded as it is still ongoing. 95%
confidence intervals for each percentage of resistants.
The Cochran-Armitage test (section 2.3.2) performed on this data resulted in a p-value > 0.05,
indicating the non-existence of any increasing or decreasing trend within the 5-year period considered.
3.2.2
Point mutations
There were 49 different gyrA mutations detected among the 1051 sequenced samples. However, only
three of these mutations were present in organisms predicted as resistant to quinolones. (Table 1).
p.K254R
p.S691N
p.Q863
p.E850K
p.A664T
p.N203S
p.R285K
p.H339Y
p.D660N
p.A664V
p.T692K
p.S547N
p.P603S
p.D205N
p.V690T
p.T86I
p.F663C
p.P104S
p.D608N
p.V690I
p.T692I
p.S22G
p.R237C
p.D680G
p.V636I
p.T804A
p.I545T
p.R563H
p.A206T
p.V700I
p.T86A
p.I742V
p.L197I
p.A279V
p.V259I
p.T269I
p.I752V
p.L684F
p.A446V
p.V149I
p.T665S
p.I106M
p.E393K
p.A206V
p.V812L
p.R454K
p.I211V
p.D849N
p.A40S
Table 1: All gyrA point mutations detected among C. jejuni isolates. Mutations detected in isolates predicted
as ciprofloxacin-resistant are highlighted in bold.
Page 21 of 29
==PAGE:26==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3
Results
Each mutation identified is named after the amino acid substitution that it generates and the po-
sition where the substitution occurs. Focusing on the three mutations highlighted above, the single
nucleotide changes that generate each substitution are detailed below, followed by the abundance of
each three of them (Figure 16).
• P104S ⇒CCA →TCA
• T86A ⇒ACA →GCA
• T86I ⇒ACA →ATA
Figure 16: Distribution of the mutations in gyrA occurring in ciprofloxacin-resistant C. jejuni isolates.
3.2.3
Sequence Types and Clonal Complexes
Only 955 isolates underwent MLST analysis by Fødevarestyrelsen, with the remaining having no ST
assigned. Among those 955 whole-genome sequences, there were 149 different STs identified. As
stated in Methods section 2.5, the occurrence of STs goes from a single appearance to over fifty.
Figure 17: Sankey chart portraying the process of sequence type (ST) and clonal complex (CC) determination.
"WT" are isolates not resistant to quinolones. The numbers indicate the amount of whole-genome sequences
with results available at each step, and the origin of the isolates (DK or EU) with full categorization. (Own
elaboration).
Page 22 of 29
==PAGE:27==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3
Results
The amount of whole-genome sequences with results available at each step of the sequence type
and clonal complex identification is shown in Figure 17, which allows for a quick understanding and
visualization of the categorization process.
Among the isolates with known sequence types, 329 presented mutations in the gyrA gene and were
predicted resistant to quinolones; those isolates belonged to 51 different STs. Figure 18 compares
the distribution of the 25 most prevalent STs among those 51, in organisms sensitive to quinolones
(WT gyrA), and in organisms with a mutation that confers resistance (gyrA+). The chi-square test
applied to the data showed statistical differences in the ST frequencies found between the two groups
with χ2 < 0.05.
Figure 18: Twenty-five most common sequence types (ST) distribution among Campylobacter spp., WGS
isolates. WT gyrA = wild-type non-resistant isolates. gyrA+ = resistant-predicted isolates.
After running BURST, the grouping of the 51 different STs resulted in 19 different clonal complexes
(CC). From these, 14 were found in Denmark, while five were present only in isolates from imported
EU broiler meat, as shown in Table 2. Figure 19 offers an overview of the number of isolates from
each CC considering the origin of the sample.
Page 23 of 29
==PAGE:28==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3
Results
ST-1034 complex
ST-353 complex
ST-460 complex
ST-574 complex
ST-206 complex
ST-354 complex
ST-464 complex
ST-607 complex
ST-21 complex
ST-42 complex
ST-48 complex
ST-658 complex
ST-22 complex
ST-443 complex
ST-49 complex
ST-692 complex
ST-257 complex
ST-45 complex
ST-52 complex
Table 2: The nineteen different clonal complexes (CC) identified among isolates predicted as quinolone-
resistant. Highlighted in bold are the CCs present only in isolates from EU imported meat, and not in
isolates from Denmark.
Figure 19: Number of Campylobacter spp.
isolates for each clonal complex in gyrA mutant, quinolone-
resistant-predicted isolates based on sample origin (DK or EU).
Lastly, an overview of the distribution of clonal complexes depending on the country of origin of the
sample. Regarding resistant mutants of Danish origin by year, Figure 20, shows the distribution of
the 14 clonal complexes detected among domestic isolates. As explained in Section 2.4, samples from
2024 are not considered.
Page 24 of 29
==PAGE:29==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
3
Results
Figure 20: Percentage of clonal complex abundance among resistant mutants from Denmark during 2019-
2023. Total amount of samples is written in parenthesis.
Regarding the comparison between domestic and imported isolates, Figure 21 illustrates the differ-
ences in distribution of the 19 clonal complexes in Danish and EU quinolone-resistant isolates. There
are no EU samples for the year 2019, therefore this year is also excluded.
Figure 21: Comparison of the percentage of clonal complex abundance among resistant mutants from Danish
and EU isolates during 2020-2023. Total amount of samples is written in parenthesis.
Page 25 of 29
==PAGE:30==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
4
Discussion
4
Discussion
Results obtained from the analysis of phenotypic AMR data showed that there is an increasing trend
in the occurrence of ciprofloxacin resistance in C. jejuni. Furthermore, when looking at C. jejuni
isolates from imported broiler meat, the percentage of ciprofloxacin resistance was significantly higher
when compared to that found in Danish broiler meat. It is known that in countries such as Spain and
France, there have been overall high levels of fluoroquinolone resistance in Campylobacter within the
last 10 years [61, 62], reaching percentages of over 60%. Such results do not come as a surprise, but
they show how different levels of resistance can occur even within a regulated union such as the EU.
Denmark however has stricter monitoring on farms regarding antimicrobial usage, therefore, while
the legislation is the same for all member states, it can be the implementation of it the possible
reason behind these differences.
Moreover, C. jejuni isolates from broiler meat were recovered in low numbers and no data was
available from 2019 onwards.
Given the increasing trend of ciprofloxacin resistance in C. jejuni
isolates from broiler meat, improving the AMR monitoring of Campylobacter from this matrix would
bring added value and help fill in knowledge gaps related to the origin and reason behind the high
levels of ciprofloxacin resistance found in C. jejuni. However, considering the need to allocate funds
efficiently, it would be pertinent to prioritize the increase in the sampling of imported broiler meat.
Regarding the WGS data, there are two major facts to be considered. Firstly, the number of genotypic
data available is much lower than the available phenotypic data and it goes back only until 2019
(contrary to phenotypic data that was recovered back until 2014), giving a more limited view of
resistance trends over time. Secondly, out of all sequenced isolates, there was only one that was
also phenotypically tested. This single isolate was determined as quinolone-resistant in both ways.
This can be taken as an example of the accuracy of the bioinformatic tools to predict resistance
phenotypes, however, it is of course not enough to extract any significant conclusions.
Having clarified these two points, the whole-genome sequences do not show an increasing trend of
quinolone resistance since 2019, as portrayed in Figure 15. The percentage of isolates predicted as
resistant seems to be stable at around 30-40% for the last four years.
The analysis of point mutations showed three main gyrA mutations in resistant isolates, identified
by the amino acid substitutions that they generate namely P104S, T84A and T86I (Figure 16). The
prevalence of these appears according to what is expected, i.e. T86I being the most predominant,
usually appearing in at least over 70% of the fluoroquinolone resistance cases [63, 64], and with
T84A and P104S having minor representation. The lower abundance of mutation T84A is justified
by the fact that it has been seen not to confer as strong resistance against quinolones as T86I does,
so it usually appears in lower frequencies [65]. As for P104S, the isolates that present it are double
mutants, also having T86I, which is the mutation that in fact confers the ciprofloxacin resistance.
P104S mutation on its own is long known not to confer resistance, as it has also been detected in
sensitive organisms [66].
Regarding the sequence types, Figure 18 shows a difference in the relative distribution of STs in
wild type gyrA and the mutants with predicted resistance. Together with the chi-square test result
(χ2 < 0.05), this indicates a tendency of certain STs to show a higher frequency of gyrA mutations
conferring quinolone resistance. Thanks to the BURST algorithm it was possible to cluster the 51
STs down to 19 clonal complexes (CC), offering an easier portrayal and analysis.
Page 26 of 29
==PAGE:31==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
4
Discussion
The CC distribution depending on the origin of the sample (Denmark or EU) reveals some interesting
facts. As portrayed in Table 2 as well, there are three CCs that do not appear in Danish samples.
From the CCs with a remarkable presence in both Denmark and the EU, some are known to be
associated with broilers and have been previously identified in human clinical cases [67], which is the
case for ST-257 and ST-354 complexes. However, it is the generalist ST-21 complex the one that
stands out in numbers. Besides being a generalist, it is very commonly associated with broilers as
well as also identified in clinical isolates [68]. It is estimated that 18% of the isolates registered in the
PubMLST database belong to the ST-21 complex [69], making it the most spread CC around the
world. It does not come as a surprise that it appears as the most predominant among the samples
analysed in this project.
As described by Veltcheva et al. in a study from Campylobacter jejuni UK isolates from human
clinical cases [70], the patterns within certain clonal complexes can change over time. In Figure 22,
extracted from that study, it can be seen how ST-464, ST-353 and ST-354 complexes have had or
have acquired very high levels of fluoroquinolone resistance over the last two decades.
Figure 22: Changes in patterns of fluoroquinolone resistance occurrence across clonal complexes, extracted
from [70].
ST-353 complex is the second most common among the isolates in this study. It is a CC highly
resistant to fluoroquinolones, and it is predicted to become the most resistant group within the next
decades [70]. Some studies have related them with chicken meat and human clinical isolates in Baltic
countries [71] (Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia). The relative proximity of Denmark to these countries
could contribute to the fact that ST-353 is the second most common among the isolates of Danish
origin. The occurrence of this CC in Danish broilers should also be further investigated down to the
farm level to see if there is any connection. Regardless of the origin, given the predicted increase in
resistance levels for this CC, it could be recommended to go through clinical samples in Denmark in
order to detect and monitor its presence and avoid outbreaks in the human population.
Page 27 of 29
==PAGE:32==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
4
Discussion
A minor anomaly observed in Figure 19 is the ST-42 complex, a cattle predominant group [72],
which explains why there is only one isolate belonging to this CC (originated from broiler meat from
Poland), it would be wise to re-test the isolate to confirm the result. In case it is confirmed, it could
be prudent to track down the sample in order to assess if it is a sub-type with new characteristics.
Focusing on isolates from Denmark, Figure 20 reveals the CC distribution of resistant clonal com-
plexes in the years when samples were collected. The occurrence of some clonal complexes appears as
expected, like for instance the ST-21 complex being seen every year. Others, on the contrary, seem to
appear or disappear from one year to another, such as the case of the occurrence of ST-49 complex in
2022, not being recorded prior to or after that year. This distribution reveals important information,
such as the non-detection of the ST-354 complex in 2023, a CC that presents high resistance levels
and is therefore relevant to monitor.
A better perspective on these distributions is given by Figure 21 where the comparison with EU
samples is shown. ST-49’s 2022 sudden appearance in Denmark is later reflected on some EU isolates
in 2023. On a similar note, besides the mentioned non-detection of the ST-354 complex in Denmark
for 2023, it is still present in EU isolates, suggesting that it is of upmost importance to monitor this
CC for the upcoming years.
On a more concerning side, according to Figure 22 some clonal complexes historically did not char-
acterise for presenting high levels of resistance. However, the present results show, especially among
isolates from 2023, an increased presence of ST-206, ST-22, ST-48 and ST-45 complexes in quinolone-
resistant isolates from Denmark. While it is true that some of them have more recently been referred
to as presenting high resistance (like ST-206 by Haldenby et al. [73]), it is still alarming that certain
CCs considered as presenting low resistance only a decade ago seem to increase their presence among
resistant isolates in Denmark. A thorough study and monitoring of such complexes is recommended
in order to assess their change in resistance pattern.
Despite the larger isolate pool, the results clearly show that five CCs (ST-1034, ST-42, ST- 460,
ST-658 and ST-692) are not present within Danish broiler samples. Even though there is still a lot
in common, this difference indicates that Denmark is relatively isolated from the influence of foreign
Campylobacter spp. sub-types. This is why it is important to highlight the case of the ST-257
complex, which has been described in foreign countries for many years, as Ghielmetti et al. did [74],
but not appearing in Danish samples until 2023 (Figure 20). Literature shows that there have been
cases in Denmark relating ST-257 from source isolates to human clinical cases in 2015 and 2016,
described by Joensen et al. [15]. This reinforces the idea that the clonal complex ST-257 detected
in 2023 should be further investigated with source-tracking and clinical case comparison, as there
might be some connection.
Overall, the distribution of CCs observed over a period of five years showed that its variability and the
frequency of individual CCs can change within one or few years, generating potential opportunities
for outbreaks caused by strains with unexpectedly high resistance to quinolones. This is but another
supporting argument for keeping track of the evolution of CCs with high resistances, such as ST-
353, and using well-updated databases in WGS analysis, as crucial requirements for the control and
monitoring of quinolone resistance in Campylobacter spp.
Page 28 of 29
==PAGE:33==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
5
Conclusion
5
Conclusion
Undoubtedly, there is an overall increasing trend of quinolone resistant Campylobacter spp. being
detected around the globe. This is also applicable in Denmark, and this project showed the existence
and prevalence of specific sub-types that present different levels of antibiotic resistance. Some con-
cerning results have been discussed, as the case of the not-expected occurrence of ST-257 complex
in 2023. The further analysis required for cases like the ST-257 (and others), implies the access to
clinical WGS isolates, with which the samples gathered in this project could be compared to. This
could give a whole new set of valuable information and portray the real impact that these results
have in public health.
Additionally, a more thorough CC clustering should be performed, especially for clonal complexes of
interest. Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) subtyping, a more complex and detailed method,
could provide further, more accurate results for certain CCs. Moreover, phylogeny provides a great
insight on the potential relations between different isolates, for example, it could reveal potential
relations between isolates from different Danish farms. A phylogenetic analysis requires of specific
characteristics regarding the quality of the WGS samples, and has to be assessed by an expert.
The results of this project can be further used adding clinical data from Danish hospitals, which could
reveal if there have been any links between certain broiler meat or farms and some campylobacteriosis
cases within the last years. Additionally, a more thorough phylogenetic analysis (using SNP) could
be performed on samples that this project deemed as relevant.
The situation with AMR may appear critical, but the plethora of tools available to us, and the con-
stant improvements in sequencing technology, computing and data management provide an invaluable
safeguard to protect societies against it.
Page 29 of 29
==PAGE:34==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
The three different types of changes in a genomic sequence [24].
. . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Change of a single base pair at the DNA level can induce a change in one amino acid,
which may modify the secondary structure of the protein, changing its conformation
and eventually interfering with the overall function of the protein. (Own elaboration).
4
3
Different modules that are part of GLASS. AMR - Antimicrobial Resistance; AMC -
Antimicrobial Consumption; EAR - Emerging AMR Reporting; FUNGI - monitor of
Candida spp infections; EGASP - Gonnorrhea surveillance; One Health - Integrated
surveillance; AMU - Antibiotic use in hospitals; BURDEN - public health impact of
AMR. Adapted from [29].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
In chronological order of discovery; structure, classification and key aspects of the
most relevant quinolones. Featuring generation, usage, spectrum and potency [40]. . .
8
5
Representation of a transcribing polymerase generating a positive supercoiling ahead
and a negative supercoiling behind it. Adapted from [45]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6
Main activities of Topoisomerases II (DNA gyrase) and IV when interacting with
certain DNA topologies. Simplified scheme adapted from [47].
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
7
General mechanisms for antimicrobial resistance [52]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
8
Two tables used for sequence selection, all samples counted were initially filtered by
Quality Check score. Left: count of samples per year and animal species. Right: count
of type of samples per year and animal species.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
9
A: Type of sample: from faeces or from retail meat. B: Origin: Danish vs imported.
C: Species of Campylobacter, "n/a" means species was not stated. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
10
Similarity between the occurrence of resistance to nalidixic acid and ciprofloxacin in
C. jejuni isolates. 95% confidence intervals for each percentage of resistants. . . . . .
18
11
Number of C. jejuni isolates sensitive and resistant to ciprofloxacin per year with a
linear regression line for the resistants.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
12
Percentage of C. jejuni isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin per year. 95% confidence
intervals for each percentage of resistants.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
13
Percentage of Danish C. jejuni isolates resistant to ciprofloxacin per sample type and
year. Numbers indicate the amount of isolates. 95% confidence intervals for each
percentage of resistants.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
14
Comparison of the percentage of ciprofloxacin-resistant C. jejuni isolates from Danish
vs EU broiler meat.
"EU" data results from the combination of data from meat
isolates from four European countries (France, Germany, Netherlands and Poland).
The number is the amount of isolates. 95% confidence intervals for each percentage of
resistants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
15
Percentage of predicted ciprofloxacin-resistant C. jejuni isolates, according to the out-
put from ResFinder. In brackets the total number of isolates for each year. 2024 is
excluded as it is still ongoing. 95% confidence intervals for each percentage of resistants. 21
16
Distribution of the mutations in gyrA occurring in ciprofloxacin-resistant C. jejuni
isolates.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
17
Sankey chart portraying the process of sequence type (ST) and clonal complex (CC)
determination. "WT" are isolates not resistant to quinolones. The numbers indicate
the amount of whole-genome sequences with results available at each step, and the
origin of the isolates (DK or EU) with full categorization. (Own elaboration).
. . . .
22
Page I of XIV
==PAGE:35==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
List of Figures
18
Twenty-five most common sequence types (ST) distribution among Campylobacter
spp., WGS isolates. WT gyrA = wild-type non-resistant isolates. gyrA+ = resistant-
predicted isolates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
19
Number of Campylobacter spp.
isolates for each clonal complex in gyrA mutant,
quinolone-resistant-predicted isolates based on sample origin (DK or EU). . . . . . . .
24
20
Percentage of clonal complex abundance among resistant mutants from Denmark dur-
ing 2019-2023. Total amount of samples is written in parenthesis.
. . . . . . . . . . .
25
21
Comparison of the percentage of clonal complex abundance among resistant mutants
from Danish and EU isolates during 2020-2023. Total amount of samples is written in
parenthesis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
22
Changes in patterns of fluoroquinolone resistance occurrence across clonal complexes,
extracted from [70]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Page II of XIV
==PAGE:36==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
References
References
[1] A. D. Sperber, S. I. Bangdiwala, D. A. Drossman, U. C. Ghoshal, M. Simren, J. Tack, et al.,
“Worldwide prevalence and burden of functional gastrointestinal disorders, results of Rome foun-
dation global study,” Gastroenterology, vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 99–114.e3, 2021.
[2] H. Akhondi and K. A. Simonsen, “Bacterial diarrhea,” 2023.
[3] E. Todd, “Food-borne disease prevention and risk assessment,” International journal of environ-
mental research and public health, vol. 17, no. 14, p. 5129, 2020.
[4] A. Facciolà, R. Riso, E. Avventuroso, G. Visalli, S. Delia, and P. Laganà, “Campylobacter: from
microbiology to prevention,” Journal of preventive medicine and hygiene, vol. 58, no. 2, p. E79,
2017.
[5] A. Igwaran and A. I. Okoh, “Human campylobacteriosis: A public health concern of global
importance,” Heliyon, vol. 5, no. 11, 2019.
[6] P. E. Fischer GH, Hashmi MF, “Campylobacter infection,” 2024.
[7] European
Centre
for
Disease
Prevention
and
Control,
“Campylobacteriosis.”
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/campylobacteriosis.
[8] J. C. Tenorio and V. I. Flores, “Campylobacter jejuni from farm to fork: Campylobacteriosis
and chicken meat,” vol. 11, pp. 457–467, 09 2021.
[9] F. Liu, S. A. Lee, J. Xue, S. M. Riordan, and L. Zhang, “Global epidemiology of campylobacte-
riosis and the impact of COVID-19,” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, vol. 12,
2022.
[10] B. Troxell, N. Petri, C. Daron, R. Pereira, M. Mendoza, H. M. Hassan, and M. D. Koci, “Poul-
try body temperature contributes to invasion control through reduced expression of Salmonella
pathogenicity island 1 genes in Salmonella enterica serovars typhimurium and enteritidis,” Ap-
plied and environmental microbiology, vol. 81, no. 23, pp. 8192–8201, 2015.
[11] L. Boysen, H. Rosenquist, J. T. Larsson, E. M. Nielsen, G. Sørensen, S. Nordentoft, and T. Hald,
“Source attribution of human campylobacteriosis in Denmark,” Epidemiology and Infection,
vol. 142, no. 8, pp. 1599-1608, 2014.
[12] K. Yahara, G. Méric, A. J. Taylor, S. P. de Vries, S. Murray, B. Pascoe, L. Mageiros, et al.,
“Genome-wide association of functional traits linked with Campylobacter jejuni survival from
farm to fork,” Environmental Microbiology, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 361–380, 2017.
[13] National Food Institute Technical University of Denmark, Statens Serum Institut, Dan-
ish Veterinary and Food Administration, “Annual Report on Zoonoses in Denmark 2022.”
https://www.food.dtu.dk/english/publications/disease-causing-microorganisms/zoonosis
annual-reports.
[14] M. Skirrow, “Campylobacter enteritis: a "new" disease.,” Br Med J, vol. 2, no. 6078, pp. 9–11,
1977.
Page III of XIV
==PAGE:37==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
References
[15] K. G. Joensen, K. Kiil, M. R. Gantzhorn, B. Nauerby, J. Engberg, et al., “Whole-genome
sequencing to detect numerous Campylobacter jejuni outbreaks and match patient isolates to
sources Denmark, 2015–2017,” Emerging infectious diseases, vol. 26, no. 3, p. 523, 2020.
[16] European
Comission:
Agriculture
and
rural
development.
https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/farming/animal-products/poultry_en.
[17] M. J. Hakeem and X. Lu, “Survival and control of Campylobacter in poultry production envi-
ronment,” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, vol. 10, p. 615049, 2021.
[18] EFSA. https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/743ac80421344798be7991112d5d6f51.
[19] V. Kakurinov, “Food Safety assurance systems: Cleaning and disinfection,” pp. 211–225, 2014.
[20] F. Akram, M. Imtiaz, and I. ul Haq, “Emergent crisis of antibiotic resistance: A silent pandemic
threat to 21st century,” Microbial Pathogenesis, vol. 174, p. 105923, 2023.
[21] L. Boto, “Horizontal gene transfer in evolution: facts and challenges,” Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 277, no. 1683, pp. 819–827, 2010.
[22] D. Sun, K. Jeannot, Y. Xiao, and C. W. Knapp, “Editorial: Horizontal gene transfer mediated
bacterial antibiotic resistance,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 10, 2019.
[23] C. Michaelis and E. Grohmann, “Horizontal gene transfer of antibiotic resistance genes in
biofilms,” Antibiotics, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 328, 2023.
[24] G. Frazier, “Defusing a ticking time bomb: The complicated considerations underlying cumpul-
sory human gene editing,” 05 2019.
[25] G. J. Gregory and E. F. Boyd, “Stressed out: Bacterial response to high salinity using com-
patible solute biosynthesis and uptake systems, lessons from Vibrionaceae,” Computational and
Structural Biotechnology Journal, vol. 19, pp. 1014–1027, 2021.
[26] J. M. Lucas, E. Gora, A. Salzberg, and M. Kaspari, “Antibiotics as chemical warfare across
multiple taxonomic domains and trophic levels in brown food webs,” Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 286, no. 1911, p. 20191536, 2019.
[27] World Health Organization, “Antimicrobial resistance, an overview and key facts 2023.”
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/antimicrobial-resistance.
[28] T. Hu, N. Chitnis, D. Monos, and A. Dinh, “Next-generation sequencing technologies: An
overview,” Human Immunology, vol. 82, no. 11, pp. 801–811, 2021.
[29] World Health Organization, “Global Antimicrobial Resistance and Use Surveillance System
(GLASS).” https://www.who.int/initiatives/glass.
[30] The Economist, “The Global Food Security Index.” https://impact.economist.com/sustainability
/project/food-security-index/explore-countries/denmark.
[31] National Food Institute Technical University of Denmark, Statens Serum Institut, “DANMAP.”
https://www.danmap.org/about-danmap.
Page IV of XIV
==PAGE:38==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
References
[32] World
Health
Organization,
“One
Health.”
https://www.who.int/health-topics/one-
healthtab=tab_1.
[33] E. Zankari, H. Hasman, M. Vestergaard, et al., “Identification of acquired antimicrobial resis-
tance genes,” Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy, vol. 67, no. 11, pp. 2640–2644, 2012.
[34] Center for Genomic Epidemiology, “CGE Services.” http://www.genomicepidemiology.org/services/.
[35] M. Li, Y. Qiu, M. Guo, S. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Xia, and Q. Gao, “Investigation on
the cause of recurrent tuberculosis in a rural area in China using whole-genome sequencing: A
retrospective cohort study,” Tuberculosis, vol. 133, p. 102174, 2022.
[36] M. Dohál, V. Dvořáková, M. Šperková, M. Pinková, A. Spitaleri, A. Norman, A. M. Cabibbe,
E. M. Rasmussen, I. Porvazník, M. Škereňová, et al., “Whole genome sequencing of multidrug-
resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates collected in the Czech Republic, 2005–2020,” Sci-
entific Reports, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 7149, 2022.
[37] J. E. Moore, M. D. Barton, I. S. Blair, D. Corcoran, J. S. Dooley, S. Fanning, I. Kempf,
A. J. Lastovica, C. J. Lowery, M. Matsuda, et al., “The epidemiology of antibiotic resistance in
Campylobacter,” Microbes and infection, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1955–1966, 2006.
[38] Z. Shen, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, and J. Shen, “Antimicrobial resistance in Campylobacter spp.,”
Microbiology Spectrum, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 10.1128/microbiolspec.arba–0013–2017, 2018.
[39] G. Y. Lesher, E. J. Froelich, M. D. Gruett, J. H. Bailey, and R. P. Brundage, “1, 8-naphthyridine
derivatives. a new class of chemotherapeutic agents,” Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 5,
no. 5, pp. 1063–1065, 1962.
[40] A. R. Millanao, A. Y. Mora, N. A. Villagra, S. A. Bucarey, and A. A. Hidalgo, “Biological
effects of quinolones: a family of broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents,” Molecules, vol. 26,
no. 23, p. 7153, 2021.
[41] European Medicines Agency. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/medicines/human/referrals/quinolone-
fluoroquinolone-containing-medicinal-products.
[42] B. Aslam, M. Khurshid, M. I. Arshad, S. Muzammil, M. Rasool, N. Yasmeen, T. Shah, T. H.
Chaudhry, M. H. Rasool, A. Shahid, et al., “Antibiotic resistance: one health one world outlook,”
Frontiers in cellular and infection microbiology, vol. 11, p. 771510, 2021.
[43] M. Sisay, F. Weldegebreal, T. Tesfa, Z. Ataro, D. Marami, H. Mitiku, B. Motbaynor, and Z. Tek-
lemariam, “Resistance profile of clinically relevant bacterial isolates against fluoroquinolone in
Ethiopia: a systematic review and meta-analysis,” BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology, vol. 19,
pp. 1–14, 2018.
[44] U. O. Kibwana, J. Manyahi, H. H. Sandnes, B. Blomberg, S. E. Mshana, N. Langeland, A. P.
Roberts, and S. J. Moyo, “Fluoroquinolone resistance among fecal extended spectrum βeta
lactamases positive Enterobacterales isolates from children in dar es salaam, tanzania,” BMC
Infectious Diseases, vol. 23, no. 1, p. 135, 2023.
[45] N. Gilbert and J. Allan, “Supercoiling in DNA and chromatin,” Current opinion in genetics
development, vol. 25C, pp. 15–21, 12 2013.
Page V of XIV
==PAGE:39==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
References
[46] M. Gellert, K. Mizuuchi, M. H. O’Dea, and H. A. Nash, “DNA gyrase: an enzyme that introduces
superhelical turns into DNA.,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 73, no. 11,
pp. 3872–3876, 1976.
[47] S. J. McKie, K. C. Neuman, and A. Maxwell, “DNA topoisomerases: Advances in understanding
of cellular roles and multi-protein complexes via structure-function analysis,” Bioessays, vol. 43,
no. 4, p. 2000286, 2021.
[48] A. D. Kinana, E. Cardinale, I. Bahsoun, F. Tall, J.-M. Sire, B. Garin, C. S.-B. Boye,
J.-A. Dromigny, and J.-D. Perrier-Gros-Claude, “Analysis of topoisomerase mutations in
fluoroquinolone-resistant and-susceptible campylobacter jejuni strains isolated in Senegal,” In-
ternational journal of antimicrobial agents, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 397–401, 2007.
[49] S. S. Shamsi, S. Algamody, and A. Elzen, “Antibiotic Resistance in Campylobacter: Mechanisms,
resistance emergence, therapy, and future perspective,” 2023.
[50] G. L. Murray, K. Bodiyabadu, J. Danielewski, S. M. Garland, D. A. Machalek, C. K. Fairley, J. S.
Jensen, D. A. Williamson, L. Y. Tan, E. Mokany, et al., “Moxifloxacin and sitafloxacin treatment
failure in Mycoplasma genitalium infection: association with parC mutation G248T(S83I) and
concurrent gyrA mutations,” The Journal of Infectious Diseases, vol. 221, no. 6, pp. 1017–1024,
2020.
[51] P. Leekitcharoenphon, C. Garcia-Graells, N. Botteldoorn, K. Dierick, I. Kempf, S. Olkkola,
M. Rossi, S. Nykäsenoja, B. Malorny, K. Stingl, et al., “Comparative genomics of quinolone-
resistant and susceptible Campylobacter jejuni of poultry origin from major poultry producing
European countries (GENCAMP),” EFSA Supporting Publications, vol. 15, no. 5, p. 1398E,
2018.
[52] W. C. Reygaert, “An overview of the antimicrobial resistance mechanisms of bacteria,” AIMS
microbiology, vol. 4, no. 3, p. 482, 2018.
[53] E. L. Sproston, H. M. Wimalarathna, and S. K. Sheppard, “Trends in fluoroquinolone resistance
in Campylobacter,” Microbial genomics, vol. 4, no. 8, p. e000198, 2018.
[54] T. J. Sandora, P. Gerner-Smidt, and A. J. McAdam, “What’s your subtype? The epidemiologic
utility of bacterial whole-genome sequencing,” Clinical chemistry, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 586–588,
2014.
[55] National Food Institute Technical University of Denmark, Statens Serum Institut, “DANMAP
2022.” https://www.danmap.org/reports/2022.
[56] European
Committee
on
Antimicrobial
Susceptibility
Testing,
“EUCAST.”
https://www.eucast.org/mic_and_zone_distributions_and_ecoffs.
[57] EUR-lex. European Union law. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/decimpl/2020/1729/oj.
[58] Real Statistics with Excel. https://real-statistics.com/chi-square-and-f distributions/cochran-
armitage-test/.
[59] Computerome, Technical University of Denmark. https://www.computerome.dk/.
Page VI of XIV
==PAGE:40==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
References
[60] PubMLST.
https://pubmlst.org/bigsdbdb=pubmlst_campylobacter_seqdefpage=plug-
inname=BURST.
[61] B. Bort, P. Marti, et al., “Prevalence and Antimicrobial Resistance of Campylobacter spp. iso-
lated from broilers throughout the supply chain in Valencia, Spain,” Foodborne Pathogens and
Disease, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 717–724, 2022. PMID: 36037011.
[62] A. Perrin-Guyomard, E. Jouy, et al., “Decrease in fluoroquinolone use in French poultry and pig
production and changes in resistance among E. coli and Campylobacter,” Veterinary Microbiol-
ogy, vol. 243, p. 108637, 2020.
[63] A. Garcia-Fernandez, A. Janowicz, F. Marotta, M. Napoleoni, S. Arena, S. Primavilla, M. Pitti,
R. Romantini, F. Tomei, G. Garofolo, et al., “Antibiotic resistance, plasmids, and virulence-
associated markers in human strains of Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli isolated
in Italy,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 14, p. 1293666, 2024.
[64] K. Mehla and J. Ramana, “Molecular Dynamics Simulations of quinolone resistance-associated
T86I and P104S mutations in Campylobacter jejuni gyrA: Unraveling structural repercussions,”
Microbial Drug Resistance, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 232–243, 2018.
[65] Y. Luo, W. Zhang, Y. Cheng, Q. Lu, Y. Guo, G. Wen, H. Shao, Z. Cheng, Q. Luo, and
T. Zhang, “Droplet Digital PCR-based detection and quantification of gyrA Thr-86-Ile mutation
based fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter jejuni,” Microbiology Spectrum, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. e02769–21, 2022.
[66] L. G. Dahl, K. G. Joensen, M. T. Østerlund, K. Kiil, and E. M. Nielsen, “Prediction of antimi-
crobial resistance in clinical Campylobacter jejuni isolates from whole-genome sequencing data,”
European Journal of Clinical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases, vol. 40, pp. 673–682, 2021.
[67] B. Truccollo, P. Whyte, C. Burgess, and D. Bolton, “Genetic characterisation of a subset of
Campylobacter jejuni isolates from clinical and poultry sources in Ireland,” PLoS One, vol. 16,
no. 3, p. e0246843, 2021.
[68] M. Mäesaar, K. Meremäe, M. Ivanova, and M. Roasto, “Antimicrobial resistance and multilocus
sequence types of Campylobacter jejuni isolated from Baltic broiler chicken meat and Estonian
human patients,” Poultry science, vol. 97, no. 10, pp. 3645–3651, 2018.
[69] F. Aydin, T. Kayman, S. Abay, H. Hizlisoy, İ. B. Saticioğlu, E. Karakaya, and O. Sahin, “MLST
genotypes and quinolone resistance profiles of Campylobacter jejuni isolates from various sources
in Turkey,” International Journal of Food Microbiology, vol. 391, p. 110137, 2023.
[70] D. Veltcheva, F. M. Colles, M. Varga, M. C. Maiden, and M. B. Bonsall, “Emerging patterns of
fluoroquinolone resistance in Campylobacter jejuni in the UK [1998–2018],” Microbial Genomics,
vol. 8, no. 9, p. 000875, 2022.
[71] T. Tedersoo, M. Roasto, M. Mäesaar, V. Kisand, M. Ivanova, and K. Meremäe, “The prevalence,
counts, and MLST genotypes of Campylobacter in poultry meat and genomic comparison with
clinical isolates,” Poultry Science, vol. 101, no. 4, p. 101703, 2022.
[72] A. Thépault, Guyard-Nicodème, et al., “A representative overview of the genetic diversity and
Page VII of XIV
==PAGE:41==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
References
lipooligosaccharide sialylation in Campylobacter jejuni along the broiler production chain in
France and its comparison with human isolates,” International journal of food microbiology,
vol. 274, pp. 20–30, 2018.
[73] S. Haldenby, Bronowski, et al., “Increasing prevalence of a fluoroquinolone resistance mutation
amongst Campylobacter jejuni isolates from four human infectious intestinal disease studies in
the United Kingdom,” PLoS One, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2020.
[74] G. Ghielmetti, Seth-Smith, et al., “Whole-genome-based characterization of Campylobacter je-
juni from human patients with gastroenteritis collected over an 18 year period reveals increasing
prevalence of antimicrobial resistance,” Microbial Genomics, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 000941, 2023.
[75] High
Performance
Computing,
Technical
University
of
Denmark.
https://www.computerome.dk/wiki/high-performance-computing-hpc/running-jobs.
Page VIII of XIV
==PAGE:42==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Appendix
A
Excel Macro
This section presents the functions and VBA code used in the Macro that deals with the main
sequencing data file from FVST. For reference, the Macro consists of four tabs, as seen in the
picture.
The code and functions presented make reference to specific cells in these worksheets, so their names
must be kept in mind while reading; the functions below are working in the "Data extraction" sheet.
A.1
Functions
Here are specified all the Excel functions used in the Macro and which information they extract.
A.1.1
Run number
=IF(LEFT(’Data input’!B7; 3)="run"; LEFT(’Data input’!B7; 7); D3)
Finds the cell starting with "run" and copies the first seven characters from the left, if it does not
find it, it copies the run number from the cell above it.
A.1.2
Year
=IF(ISNUMBER(VALUE(LEFT(’Data input’!B7; 3)));CONCAT("20";LEFT(D3;2));"")
This function is based on the first digits of the ID number, they indicate the year when the sample
was taken. It writes "20" and then the first two digits of the ID number. In case of acquiring samples
taken within the XX century this should be modified.
A.1.3
ID number
=IF(ISNUMBER(VALUE(LEFT(’Data input’!B7; 3))); LEFT(’Data input’!B7; 8); "
")
If it detects that the first three characters are numbers, it copies the first eight ones, which correspond
to the ID. If it finds nothing it writes a blank space.
A.1.4
Isolate
=IF(ISBLANK(’Data input’!C7);"";(’Data input’!C7))
In case the specific cell in the raw data is not empty, it copies the name of the isolate.
A.1.5
ST type
=IF(ISBLANK(’Data input’!F7);"";CONCAT("ST";(’Data input’!F7)))
If the raw data is not empty, it writes "ST" followed by the numbers stated in the specific column,
all together portrays the ST type.
Page IX of XIV
==PAGE:43==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Appendix
A.1.6
Sample origin
=IF(NOT(ISBLANK(’Data input’!D7));TEXTSPLIT(’Data input’!D7;",");"")
If the original data is not empty, it extracts the sample animal, the sample place (part of the body),
the project ID and the country of origin (if not stated, it is Denmark). This function requires for a
certain order to be maintained when writing down the data, as it splits it based on the commas.
A.1.7
Sample type
=IF(ISBLANK(H3);"";IF(OR(ISNUMBER(SEARCH("blindtarm";H3))
;ISNUMBER(SEARCH("kloaksvaber";H3)));"Faecal"; Meat"))
This function is based on the data extracted previously, more specifically the part of the body where
the sample was taken. It uses two categories, either "meat" or "faecal" depending of its origin. It
is necessary to know which danish terms correspond to faecal in order for this differentiation to be
correct, is necessary for a better overview.
A.1.8
Quality Check
=IF(LEN(’Data input’!H7)> 4;"data error";’Data input’!H7)
Quality check scores go from C to A+++, so if the length of the text detected is more than four, it
writes "data error", highlighting that something is wrong. If it is not it copies the original text. To
this column, an additional Conditional Formating was added, highliting the cells in different colors
depending on the QC score, being: C = yellow, B= light green, A/A+/A++/A+++ = green and
Error = red.
A.1.9
Additional comments
=IF(ISTEXT(’Data input’!I7);’Data input’!I7;"")
This function extracts any additional comments made by the responsible person at FVST, these
being e.g. some remarks regarding the QC scores or on the isolated microorganism.
A.2
VBA code
Here it is exposed an explained the simple code used in the Macro to treat the sequencing data.
Firstly the Macro includes two buttons to paste / clear the data shown in the following picture, the
code behind them is explained below.
"Clear Data" will erase all cells in the specified range. In case of larger data tables the lower number
must be modified.
1
Sub Cleardata()
2
Range("B6", "P3500").Clear
3
End Sub
Page X of XIV
==PAGE:44==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Appendix
The "Paste Data" button code includes few other functions that need to be further explained.
1
Sub Pastedata()
2
On Error GoTo E
3
Range("B6").PasteSpecial
4
Range("B6:G3500").Replace What:="kylling ,", Replacement:="Broiler,",
MatchCase:=True
5
Range("B6:G3500").Replace What:=" kylling", Replacement:="Broiler",
MatchCase:=True
6
Range("B6:G3500").Replace What:="Kylling", Replacement:="Broiler"
7
Range("B6:G3500").Replace What:="okse,", Replacement:="Kv\ae g,"
8
Range("B6:G3500").Replace What:=", ,", Replacement:=",,"
9
Done:
10
Exit Sub
11
E:
12
MsgBox "Data not copied, please Ctrl+C again"
13
End Sub
You must copy the whole data table of interest from the source excel being used.
Then upon
clicking, the code will first paste the data in cell B6. In case of some mistake, a customized message
box containing the message at the end of section E will pop up.
Secondly, this code will identify all the words "kylling" and "okse" in the specified range, and replace
them by "Broiler" and "Kvæg" respectively, this is done in order to group the animals sampled in
larger categories more similar to what it is done in the DANMAP report. Additionally, it also removes
common mistakes regarding spaces before or after words (e.g. "kylling ,") and empty spaces between
comas that affect the empty fields in the Data Extraction worksheet.
The last code used is regarding the overview of the data on the Table worksheet, which is filled with
Pivot Tables that can be modified by its filters in order to portray various insights depending on
the interests. These tables need to be updated every time there is new data pasted on the Macro.
However, given that all of them have the same source (our Data Extraction), it is only necessary to
"refresh" one of the tables for all to be updated, therefore the next code has been implemented in a
button, mentioning only Pivot Table 3:
1
Sub RefreshPivot()
2
Dim pt As PivotTable
3
Dim ws As Worksheet
4
Set ws = ThisWorkbook.ActiveSheet
5
Set pt = ws.PivotTables("PivotTable3")
6
pt.RefreshTable
7
End Sub
Page XI of XIV
==PAGE:45==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Appendix
B
Cochran-Armitage Test
The Cochran-Armitage Test consists of the equation 4, which was performed in excel by establishing a
table that calculated the required parameters, including z and the p-value, both of which established
if there is, or isn’t, a trend in the data based on p −value < α or on z ≤|z| Critical value.
The different parameters described as xj being the different years located in columns j(=1, 2...k), nj
being the number of elements in the jth column which in our case are either "sensitive" or "resistant",
and yj which is equivalent to the value in the cell in the first row and jth column being here the
number or "sensitive" isolates. Additionally we define pj = yj/nj being it the observed response
probability. With these the following parameters are described:
n =
k
X
j=1
p = 1
n
k
X
j=1
yj
q = 1 −p
x = 1
n
k
X
j=1
njxj
(3)
Defining then µj as the probability of the population belonging to pj, the two hypothesis are es-
tablished, which are the null hypothesis H0 : µ1 = µ2 = ... = µk and the alternative hypothesis
H1 : µ1 ≤µ2 ≤...µk. With this basis then the Cochran-Armitage test is applied:
z =
Pk
j=1 yj(xj −x) −c
q
pq Pk
j=1 nj(xj −x)2
∼N(0, 1)
(4)
The parameter c belongs to a correction factor that it is not applicable for this case, therefore it is
c = 0. As we are only using the one-sided version of the test, the null hypothesis has to be rejected
when z ≥zcrit, where zcrit is equivalent to the normal distribution of 1−α, being α = 0.05 for a 95%
confidence.
C
Computerome scripts
The main structure of the scripts used followed the general suggestions from Computerome’s website
[75] and were complemented with code that ran the tests that we were interested in. The summary
script used to obtain an Excel sheet from the ResFinder summary was ran in an interactive session
using the iqsub command.
Page XII of XIV
==PAGE:46==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Appendix
C.1
ResFinder
1
#!/bin/sh
2
### Note: No commands may be executed until after the #PBS lines
3
### Account information
4
#PBS −W group_list=<group_name> −A <group_name>
5
### Job name
6
#PBS −N <Job_Name>
7
### Output files
8
#PBS −e ErrorLog/test.err
9
#PBS −o ErrorLog/test.log
10
### Only send mail when job is aborted or terminates abnormally
11
#PBS −m n
12
### Number of nodes and CPUs
13
#PBS −l nodes=1:ppn=2
14
### Memory requested
15
#PBS −l mem=16gb
16
### Requesting time per sample −format is <days>:<hours>:<minutes>:<seconds>
17
#PBS −l walltime=0:15:00
18
### Add array of files to the job. 1051 files in total, process 200 at a time.
19
#PBS −t 0−1051%200
20
# Load all required modules
21
module load tools
22
module load java/1.8.0
23
module load anaconda3/4.4.0
24
pip install −−upgrade cgecore
25
26
# Go to the directory from where the job was submitted
27
export −p $PBS_O_WORKDIR="<directory_where_input_and_output_folders_are>"
28
cd $PBS_O_WORKDIR
29
i=$PBS_ARRAYID
30
p=`sed "${i}q;d" <reference.list>`
31
echo $p $i
32
33
### User commands:
34
# Define number of processors
35
NPROCS=`wc −l < $PBS_NODEFILE`
36
echo This job has allocated $NPROCS nodes
37
38
# The script that gets the work done
39
python3 <directory_for_resfinder>/run_resfinder.py −o <output_folder_name>/$p −
s "Campylobacter jejuni" −l 0.6 −t 0.8 −acq −c −ifq <input_directory>/$p*R1
*.fastq.gz /<the_input_directory>/$p*R2*.fastq.gz
Page XIII of XIV
==PAGE:47==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Appendix
C.2
ResFinder Summary
1
# Load the required tools in the interactive session
2
module load tools
3
module load java/1.8.0
4
module load anaconda3/4.4.0
5
# The summary script
6
python3 <directory_for_summary>/resfinder_summary_old.py −i <
resfinder_output_folders> −o <Output_name> −db all −−species "Campylobacter
jejuni" −−pointfinder_detailed −v
Page XIV of XIV
