==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Evolution of Gender Diversity
in Physics Conferences
Ellen Winther Mortensen (s184313)
==PAGE:2==
Evolution of Gender Diversity in Physics Conferences
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Ellen Winther Mortensen
Supervisors
Laura Alessandretti
Jonas Lybker Juul
Copyright
Any reproduction of this publication, in whole or in part, must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in partial fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The reader is assumed to have a basic knowledge of statistics and machine learning.
June 22, 2024
Ellen Winther Mortensen
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors for letting me undertake this project and for all of their
great support during this project. I also want to express my gratitude for everything I
have learned from them during this process.
Lastly, I would like to thank my friends and family for their support throughout my 6
years at DTU. I am extremely grateful for the support my family has given me over the
last 10 years, and it would truly not have been possible to get to this point without this
support.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Varying results have been reported for gender diversity in academia within STEM fields[1][2].
With respect to gender parity, females are underrepresented in STEM fields. Studies of
gender diversity at physics conferences are very limited, so the status of gender diversity
at physics conferences is not clear. This study aims to examine the evolution of gender
diversity at a scientific conference in physics and the impact of intervention. We inves-
tigate the evolution using data from the American Physics Society March Meeting from
2005 to 2023. Using permutation test we examine the difference between male and fe-
male invited speakers. We show that there is a significant difference. Using K-Nearest
Neighbors, we show that females, similar to males, have become more likely to be invited
over time. In recent years, females similar to males are more likely to be invited than the
males they are similar to. This applies to all seniority groups. The results reveal that
in recent years, females with high seniority have had better opportunities to get invited
than males with the same seniority. This was not expected since a lack of gender equality
within senior researchers has been reported[3]. We also show that the field is moving very
slowly toward gender parity and that increasing female visibility has not had an effect on
female representation in the field so far. The results are important in understanding the
lack of gender parity. It is essential to understand if increasing the visibility of females
has an effect on female representation in the field. This can help identify at which step in
academia an intervention should happen to achieve greater gender diversity in the field.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline of thesis . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
3
Data
6
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.1
Adding
Information
with API
. . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Field of Study . . . . .
8
3.1.3
Sponsoring units
. . .
9
3.1.4
Data
cleaning
and
data validation
. . . .
9
3.1.5
Representation of the
researchers . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Descriptive Analysis of Gen-
der Diversity . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Evolution of Gender
Gap
. . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Gender Gap within
Sponsoring Units . . .
15
3.2.3
Factors
impacting
gender diversity . . . .
19
3.2.4
Summary
. . . . . . .
26
4
Methods
27
4.1
Permutation Test . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Gender Bias in Invitations . .
29
4.2.1
K-Nearest Neighbors .
29
4.2.2
Relative Likelihood of
Similar
Invited
Re-
searchers . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.3
Parameters
. . . . . .
33
4.2.4
Male Likelihood . . . .
35
4.2.5
Filtering by Seniority .
35
4.2.6
Relative
Likelihood
for Sponsoring Units .
35
4.2.7
Impacting Factors . . .
35
4.3
Potential Speakers
. . . . . .
36
4.4
Impact of intervention
. . . .
37
5
Results
40
5.1
Differences between female
and male invited speakers
. .
40
5.1.1
Evolution
of
differ-
ences between female
and males over time
.
41
5.2
Analysis of Gender Bias in
Invitation of Speakers . . . . .
42
5.2.1
Choosing Parameters
for K-Nearest Neigh-
bors
. . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.2
Evolution of Gender
Equality for Invited
Speakers . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.3
Analysis
of
Gender
Equality
across
Se-
niority . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.4
Analysis
of
Gender
Equality across sub-
fields . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.5
Analysis of the Fac-
tors
Impacting
the
Likelihood . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Analysis of Females as Po-
tential Invited Speakers . . . .
50
5.3.1
Evolution
of
simi-
larity between males
and females . . . . . .
51
5.4
Analysis of Impact of Inter-
vention . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Conclusion
60
A Appendix
66
A.1 Github . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2 Additional plots . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:7==
1
1 Introduction
1
|
Introduction
In recent years, gender diversity has been discussed widely.
Many aspects of gender
diversity are discussed, such as gender diversity within companies, in the music industry,
in the film industry, in literature, and in academia. Research has shown that females
are underrepresented in many aspects and that many fields are affected by gender bias.
Females are underrepresented at boards[4], they are less likely to be promoted[5], they are
more likely to be hired in symphony orchestras when auditions are blinded[6], they are
underrepresented as main characters as well as speaking characters in movies[7], female
main characters are underrepresented in children’s books[8], and underrepresented as
professors[9]. This shows that there are plenty of reasons to study gender diversity.
Why is gender diversity important?
While there might be many reasons to this, we
here present three main reasons. 1) Human Rights, 2) Fairness, 3) Performance. The
first reason is due to the United Nations’ Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
states that everyone is entitled to the same right[10]. Therefore, we should strive to obtain
gender equality. The aspect of fairness is that it seems most fair that all genders have the
same opportunities and that one gender is not worse off than another. The last reason,
performance, comes from studies showing that diverse teams perform better.
Gender
parity is estimated to lead to economic growth[11]. Companies with higher female ratios
outperform those with lower female ratios[12]. An aspect of performance is also that by
not having gender parity, you might miss out on talented people, potentially leading to
missing out on discoveries, results, economic growth, etc.
Despite that studies have shown benefits of gender parity, females are still underrepre-
sented in many aspects. So why are females still underrepresented? This thesis seeks to
examine female representation in Physics conferences. We aim to examine the evolution of
gender diversity at the American Physical Society March Meeting, which is a large annual
conference within Physics. In 2024, more than 13,000 attended the March Meeting, and
more than 10,000 abstracts are submitted each year. Participants can join the meeting
physically as well as virtually[13].
Many concepts within gender diversity are discussed. Many notations are similar but
have important differences. So, let us first define the concepts we will use throughout this
project. We will mainly refer to gender equality and gender parity. Gender equality means
that all genders have the same rights, responsibilities, and opportunities[14], whereas
gender parity is equal representation of all genders[15].
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Scope
The purpose of this thesis is to study the evolution of gender diversity in physics con-
ferences. We study the American Physical Society March Meeting from 2005 to 2023 by
using information about invited speakers and authors of presented abstracts at the March
Meetings in this time period. The goal of this thesis is to answer these four questions:
1. Are there any differences between female and male invited speakers, and how has
the difference evolved with time?
2. How has the female representation evolved over time and across subfields?
3. How do selected factors impact the likelihood of a female being invited?
4. Does efforts towards higher female representation have an effect?
We assume only two genders, females and males, which is a simplification. We estimate
gender based on a researcher’s first name, so we do not consider how the researchers
identify themselves.
This is in no way to neglect the importance of how researchers
identify themselves, but in this project, a simplification is necessary. We also assume that
we can predict gender based on a first name, This is a limitation of the project. Another
limitation is that we only use data from one conference, the APS March Meeting, why we
do not study gender diversity within the entire field of physics.
1.2
Outline of thesis
This thesis consists of seven chapters and an appendix. Chapter 2 presents a literature
review of studies performed on gender equality within academia. Chapter 3 presents the
data, how it was collected, and a descriptive analysis of the data. Chapter 4 presents
the methods used for this thesis. This includes permutation test, method to examine
gender bias in invitations, method for identifying potential speakers, and lastly impact
of intervention. In Chapter 5, we present the results obtained. This includes an analysis
of the differences between female and male invited speakers, an analysis of gender bias
in invitation, an analysis of females as potential invited speakers, and an analysis of the
impact of intervention. Chapter 6 is a discussion where we discuss the work and possible
explanations for the results. We also discuss the limitations of the work and present ideas
for future work. Lastly, Chapter 7 is the conclusion of this thesis. At the end of this thesis
is the appendix, which contains a link to the Python code developed and additional plots.
==PAGE:9==
3
2 Literature Review
2
|
Literature Review
In this chapter, we review the literature on gender diversity in academia, describe the
methods and results of previous studies, and mention some of the limitations of the study
we identified or the authors of the papers identified.
We identified three primary resources used for researching gender equality in academia;
published papers, citations, and conferences. This is a non-exhaustive literature review,
so other resources have been studied as well.
Holter et al. (2022)[16] studied differences in productivity between females and males.
They found a gender gap in productivity. The difference is explained by differences in
working conditions and not gender. This is because males spend more time researching
than females.
King et al. (2017)[17] analyzed the citations of 1.5 million academic papers using hi-
erarchical classification. They found that males, on average, cite themselves 56% more
than females do. Previously, Fowler et al. (2007)[18] estimated that one self-citation cre-
ates more citations from others. In ten years, one self-citation generates additional 3.65
citations. These two results contribute to a gender gap in academia.
Kong et al. (2022)[1] studied gender equality within physics. They studied published
papers by creating a citation network, where they examined similar papers. They found
that papers written by females had lower visibility than papers by males. They found
one explanation to be due to the first-mover advantage. This is because of two similar
papers, the one published first tends to get more citations. Females came into the field of
physics later than males, and females join physics slower than males do.
Schroeder et al. (2013)[19] studied gender bias in the field of evolutionary biology at the
ESEB congress. They analyzed the female ratio of accepted invited speakers from 2001,
2003, 2005, 2007, 2008, and 2011. They compare the female ratio of invited speakers
in 2011 with the female ratio of a baseline population. They mention that the baseline
population should be the population that could be invited as speakers. As a baseline
population, they use the faculty members from the Evolutionary Biology departments at
the world’s top 10 universities for Life Sciences, from a University Ranking in 2010-2011.
They divide the faculty members into three stages depending on their career stage. They
also use the first and last authors in top-tier journals as another baseline population.
They find that the congresses were biased towards males, inviting a lower female ratio
than present in the baseline population. They also found that 50% of the invited female
speakers declined their invitations, while 26% of the invited males declined. They find
that this contributes to the gender bias they find. The female ratio of the initial invited
speakers was comparable to the one in the baseline population. They explain that their
analyses ideally would take age and seniority into account.
==PAGE:10==
4
2 Literature Review
Shishkova et al. (2017)[3] studied gender diversity at a conference for a STEM-related field
from 2011 to 2015. They compared the gender ratio of invited speakers and recipients
for peer-nominated awards to the gender ratio of the society. They also examined the
female ratio of recipients for peer-nominated awards for senior, mid-career, and young
investigators and compared it with the female ratio of the society. They found gender
equality for mid-career and young investigators but not for senior investigators.
Jones et al. (2014)[20] studied gender differences in conference presentations at the Aus-
tralasian Evolution Society (AES) conference in 2013. They found that fewer females
requested a long talk, as opposed to a short talk, than males. Females did, on average,
spend ≈20% less time presenting than the males. The preference for presentation might
be the reason for this. They suggested that one reason could be that males had higher
seniority than females, but they did not take this into account. They suggest that the lack
of gender equality might be due to the fact that females are unaware of the consequences
of under-promoting themselves.
Débarre et al. (2018)[2] studied the gender ratio at scientific events from 2016 to 2017
within evolutionary biology. They found that the representation of females is positively
correlated with the female ratio of organizers. They compared the gender ratio of invited
speakers with a baseline population, which is estimated using membership data from three
societies. They analyzed the proportion of female invited speakers using generalized linear
mixed models. They found that the female ratio of invited speakers is comparable to the
female ratio of the baseline population at conferences, assuming gender equality. At the
congress symposia, they found that the female ratio of invited speakers was significantly
higher than the female ratio of the baseline population.
Gerull et al. (2020)[21] studied the representation of females at annual surgical societies
in the USA in 2011 and 2016, examining two categories of invited speakers. Their study
is based on data from 21 conferences with 14 societies in total. They examined if the
female ratio of invited speakers differed from the female ratio of members. Females were
overrepresented in one society in 2016. Gender equality was observed for the other societies
since there was no significant difference between the female ratio of plenary speakers and
members.
Aspinall et al. (2023)[22] studied gender diversity at research-oriented chiropractic con-
ferences from 2010 to 2019. They analyzed the gender distribution of presenters using
linear regression. They found that 21% of the invited speakers were females. The female
ratio of invited speakers changed less than other groups of presenters, such as poster
presentations.
Pedersen (2023)[23] studied the evolution of gender diversity in Computer Science by
studying invited speakers and authors of proceedings at 17 different Computer Science
conferences from 2003 to 2022. She studied differences between genders. She found that
females, with time, are getting more likely to be invited. She showed an effort had been
made towards inviting more females.
==PAGE:11==
5
2 Literature Review
Many of the studies identify a difference between researchers with low seniority and senior
researchers. It seems that many females leave academics somewhere between their studies
and becoming senior researchers.
This phenomenon is often referred to as the ’leaky
pipeline’[24]. Kong et al. (2022)[1] report that a higher share of females than males leave
physics. This leads to losing potentially talented females, thus losing potential future
findings. This can explain the lack of gender parity in STEM fields within academia.
The literature we just reviewed has studied gender diversity within different fields, and
their results vary. In general, gender parity has not been obtained, but gender equality
has, according to some studies. Other studies did not find gender equality. Therefore,
there is a need to study gender diversity further and within other fields. Based on the
literature review, we identified gaps in the literature or aspects that should be studied
further.
We identified a need to study gender diversity in physics using data from conferences.
Many of the studies are based on data for either a few years or, at most, 10 years. We
identified a need for studying gender diversity over many years, to allow us to see the
evolution. We identified a gap in the literature since sub-fields have not been taken into
account when studying the likelihood of inviting females. We also identify a need for
newer studies to examine whether gender diversity has changed in academia.
==PAGE:12==
6
3 Data
3
|
Data
In the previous chapter, we presented relevant studies conducted before this thesis. This
chapter consists of two parts, data collection and descriptive analysis. In the data collec-
tion, we will explain how the data was collected and cleaned. We spent a considerable
amount of time cleaning and validating the data. This is to make sure the data is trust-
worthy, such that the results will be trustworthy as well. In the descriptive analysis, we
will describe and visualize the data. This chapter seeks to contribute essential insight into
the data.
3.1
Data Collection
We will now explain how we initially collected data about researchers and how we added
information about them to the dataset.
This also includes explaining the method of
finding a researcher’s first name. Finally, we explain how we cleaned and validated the
data.
The data contains information about researchers at the American Physics Society(APS)
March Meeting from 1996 to 2023. We distinguish between two types of researchers; au-
thors of presented abstracts and invited speakers. The March meeting is one of the largest
conferences in Physics. Most of the data collection was carried out in another project be-
fore starting this thesis[25]. That project should be viewed for detailed information about
the data collection. For the sake of simplicity, in the rest of this thesis, invited speakers
will refer to invited speakers who accepted their invitation, while attendees will refer to
the authors of the presented abstracts. The authors of abstracts presented by invited
speakers are neither part of the invited speakers nor the attendees.
The data collection is comprised of three steps. Web scraping, using API to get additional
information, and estimating gender. The web scraping is performed with the APS archive
as a starting point[26]. The data collected in this part is information about sessions,
which also includes information about the invited speaker or the authors of the presented
abstracts at the session.
Using an API, additional information about the researchers
is added to the data. Lastly, the gender is estimated using "The World Gender Name
Dictionary", WGND 2.0[27] from Harvard Dataverse. The gender estimation is solely
based on the first name. The first name used for the gender estimation is either the web
scraped name or the first name returned by the API. The initially collected data consists
of 2,418,837 data points regarding participation in the March meeting.
Table 3.1 shows an overview of the attributes of the initially collected dataset.
==PAGE:13==
7
3 Data
Attribute
Type
Description
Year
Integer
Year of conference
Name
String
Name of the researcher from the web scraping
Institution
String
Institution of researcher
Title
String
Title of abstract
SponsoringUnit
String
Specialized field (sponsoring unit [28])
SessionIndex
Integer
Unique ID of session
SessionType
String
Invited speaker or attendee
FileID
Integer
FileID for API file
API_Name
String
Name of researcher returned by the API
MaxPaperCount
Integer
Total number of published papers
Field
String
Field of study
FirstPaperYear
String
Year of the first published paper
ResearcherCount
Integer
Number of results from API
when searching on the researcher
FirstName
String
First name of the researcher
Seniority
Integer
Number of years in the field
at the time of the conference
CumulativePaperCount
Integer
Number of published papers
at the time of the conference
Productivity
Decimal
Productivity at the time of the conference
Gender
String
F for female and M for male
Table 3.1: Overview of attributes of the initial dataset
Due to the organization of the web pages web scraped, there was a clear difference between
data for 1996-2004 and data for 2005-2023. For viewing the plots of invited speakers and
attendees from 1996 to 2023, see figure A.1 and A.2 in appendix A.2.
To get more
consistent data it was chosen to use data from 2005 and onwards instead of using all data.
This gives us 19 years of data, which will enable us to investigate the evolution of gender
diversity over many years.
3.1.1
Adding Information with API
In the previous section, we established how the data were previously collected for this
project. When starting this project, we discovered some crucial problems with the data
due to the API used in the data collection. Therefore, we identified a need for using
another API. In this section, we explain information gathered through the API and how
the new API works.
As the new API, we chose to work with Semantic Scholar[29]. The API allows us to gain
information about researchers, either by getting it directly from the API or calculating
it from other information from the API. The seniority and productivity are calculated
based on information from the API. The seniority of researchers is calculated according
to equation 3.1. The productivity is calculated according to equation 3.2. As the name
indicates, the March Meeting takes place in March. Therefore, papers published in the
year of the conference are not part of the cumulative paper count. This is because the
meetings are early in the year, and researchers are applying or being invited a while before.
==PAGE:14==
8
3 Data
Seniority = Year of conference −Year of first published paper
(3.1)
Productivity = Cumulative Paper Count
Seniority
(3.2)
We use Semantic Scholar to add information about researchers. Researchers are found
by searching on their name. The API returns up to 1000 results[30] for a search. The
total number of researchers found in the search is returned by the API as well. The issue
with many results is that we do not know if the results are for the same researcher or
not. The number of results found by the API for each researcher is seen in figure A.3 in
appendix A.2. The number of results found differ between one and 908,320. If using all
results and assuming it is the same researchers, errors emerge since it is not always the
same researchers. This becomes clear when we try to use all results found by the API.
The seniority becomes very high because the API finds results for researchers not being
the same, which we assume are the same. That means the seniority is several hundred
years for some. It also means that around 25% of the researchers have more than 50 years
of seniority. Therefore, we choose to only use one result from the API for each researcher
instead of using all of them. Semantic Scholar returns results in ranked order with respect
to relevance[31], why we use the first result returned and assume that this is the correct
researcher. We check, in a few ways, if using only the first result seems correct. One way
is to check with a few researchers we know. We can see that sometimes even the first
result contains information about papers published by different researchers. We can also
see that sometimes the first result returned does not contain all the information about
the researcher. Sometimes, all found results are needed to capture all information about
the researcher and their published papers. This is to say that only using the first result
will result in errors and a lack of information. However, it seems to be the best method.
Lastly, the field of research is checked for all researchers. If we get the right results from
Semantic Scholar, we expect to get Physics as one of the top fields. The plot showing the
distribution of the field is shown in figure A.4 in appendix A.2. This shows that physics
is, in fact, the field most researchers have as their field. 27% of researchers have physics
as their field. It does, however, also show that medicine is the third most frequent field,
assigned to around 20% of the researchers. This is further investigated and explained in
section 3.1.2.
3.1.2
Field of Study
In the previous section, we explained how we gained information about researchers using
the Semantic Scholar API. We presented that many researchers were found to be medical
researchers. In this section, we explain how we assigned fields to the researchers and how
we validated the results of the field.
Semantic Scholar assigns a field for each paper. It has two ways of assigning a field. 1)
it gets the field from external sources, and 2) it uses a classification model using the title
and abstract of the paper to predict up to three fields[32]. Besides returning the assigned
field, Semantic Scholar also returns the field from external sources and the field from the
classification model.
==PAGE:15==
9
3 Data
The API does not assign a field to a researcher, so to determine the researchers’ fields, we
assigned a field based on the fields of the researchers’ papers. We assign the field occurring
in most of the researcher’s papers. It should be mentioned that the field is based on all
papers at the current time in 2024, and a field might be assigned to them even though
they had not done anything related to that field at the time of the conference.
Some of the researchers assigned to medicine are checked manually to see if it is valid.
We can see that many of the researchers with medicine as an assigned field are in a field
between medicine, biology, and physics. In appendix A.2 is shown the distribution of
the three types of fields, in figure A.4, A.5, A.6. The plots show that the classification
predicts more researchers to be within physics than external sources. We can also see that
when plotting the field from the classification model, it is only ≈11% of the researchers
that are within medicine, whereas it is ≈20% from external sources. This again indicates
that the researchers are between fields. ≈45% of the researchers are assigned different
fields from external sources and the classification model, which either indicates that the
sources do not agree or, maybe more realistically, that the researchers are between fields.
It is difficult to know which type of field is most reliable because we do not know anything
about the external sources. The model predicts the field based on the abstract and title,
which can make it quite reliable. However, it is impossible to know since we do not know
anything about the algorithm and how well it performs. Based on this analysis, we assume
that the data is correct and trustworthy with respect to the field, which was the aim of
this analysis.
3.1.3
Sponsoring units
Most sessions have a sponsoring unit associated with them. This marks which of APS’
divisions, forums, sections, and topical groups the session is within. A session can have
multiple sponsoring units. For each researcher, all sponsoring units associated with the
researcher’s session are added.
3.1.4
Data cleaning and data validation
In the previous sections, we explained how data were collected. At the start of the project,
it became clear that the data collection was not perfect, and data cleaning was crucial
before analyzing the data. In this section, we describe how we performed data cleaning
and checked for inconsistencies in the data. This is to validate the trustworthiness of the
data.
The first step in the data cleaning was performed before using Semantic Scholar. The
data were cleaned with respect to names since the data was not perfectly encoded from
the previous project[25]. This was done to ensure as many as possible of the researchers
could be found by the API.
After using the API, it was found that 13,010 of the web scraped researchers, ≈7% of
all researchers, could not be found by the API. These researchers are examined to ensure
that the remaining data are still trustworthy, even with 13,010 researchers removed.
==PAGE:16==
10
3 Data
The gender is estimated for the researchers, the API could not find. This is to check
how these researchers are distributed across years and genders. The gender could not be
estimated for all names, which suggests errors in the web scraping or on the web scraped
pages have occurred. We found that less than 4% of the invited speakers per year cannot
be found, as shown in figure A.7 in appendix A.2. Around 2-3% of the attendees can not be
found until 2020 when it starts increasing. In 2023, approximately 10.5% of the attendees
can not be found, as shown in figure A.8 in appendix A.2. This indicates that one of
the reasons that the API can not find all researchers is that some are junior researchers
and, therefore, too new to the field for the API to have information about them. All this
also indicates that the level of missing researchers is not extreme and that the data still
seems reliable. Additionally, we found that the gender ratio of the researchers not found
is very similar to the gender ratio of the researchers the API did find. The gender ratio
of the researchers not found by the API can be viewed in figure A.9. The gender ratio of
the researchers found by the API will be shown later in section 3.2, and can be viewed
in figure 3.2. This indicates that the data are still trustworthy, even with some of the
researchers deleted.
Only using the first result from the API for each researcher ensured that the seniority for
most researchers were reasonable, however it did not fix all of it. 1.2% of all researchers
had seniority higher than 75, why these researchers were removed, since it seemed unlikely.
8% of all researchers had negative seniority, meaning that they were authors of presented
abstracts or invited speakers before actually publishing any papers, or at least before it
is registered by the API. These researchers are removed as well.
The data were also checked regarding productivity. It was found that some researchers
were very productive. 0.2% of researchers in the data had productivity of 30 or more
papers. This is high but not impossible, especially when it is taken into account that this
number is not only for papers they are first authors on but also co-authors on. Therefore,
we did not use an upper limit for productivity, so researchers were not filtered based on
seniority. We did find that researchers with very high productivity tend to have many
different fields returned by the API. This suggests that the API returns results from
different researchers as the same, explaining why they publish a lot of papers.
With this, we end our section about data cleaning. We found that there is reason to
believe that even though errors have occurred, the data is still trustworthy. Why we have
reason to believe our results will be as well.
3.1.5
Representation of the researchers
The web scraping resulted in two types of datasets, one for analyzing the overall gender
diversity and another for analyzing the gender diversity within sponsoring units. A re-
searcher can be assigned to several sponsoring units, why we found it necessary to create
two types of datasets.
The first type contains unique researchers with respect to year and session type. We use
unique researchers because we want to investigate gender, and if we allow a researcher to
be in the dataset multiple times in the same year and within the same session type, it
will not represent the overall field. An example of this dataset is shown in table 3.2.
==PAGE:17==
11
3 Data
The second dataset contains unique researchers with respect to year, session type, and
sponsoring unit. Researchers with different sponsoring units can appear multiple times in
this dataset within the same year and session type. An example of this dataset is shown
in table 3.3. Comparing table 3.2 and 3.3 shows the differences between the two ways of
representing researchers.
Name
Year
SessionType
SponsoringUnit
Mark Hybertsen
2015
attendee
Materials Physics
Mark Hybertsen
2015
invited
Computational Physics
Mark Hybertsen
2016
attendee
Energy Research and Applications
Table 3.2: Example of the representation of a researcher in the dataset containing unique researchers
with respect to year and session type.
Name
Year
SessionType
SponsoringUnit
Mark Hybertsen
2015
attendee
Materials Physics
Mark Hybertsen
2015
attendee
Chemical Physics
Mark Hybertsen
2015
invited
Computational Physics
Mark Hybertsen
2016
attendee
Energy Research and Applications
Mark Hybertsen
2016
attendee
Industrial and Applied Physics
Table 3.3: Example of the representation of a researcher in the dataset containing unique researchers
with respect to year, session type, and sponsoring unit.
Some information has been changed in the initially collected dataset, and some informa-
tion has been added. This leaves us with the final dataset. An overview of the attributes
in the final data is shown in table 3.4.
==PAGE:18==
12
3 Data
Attribute
Type
Description
Year
Integer
Year of conference
Name
String
Name of the researcher from the web scraping
SearchName
String
Lowercase name of researchers used to search in API
Institution
String
Institution of researcher
Title
String
Title of abstract
SessionIndex
Integer
Unique ID of session
SessionType
String
Invited speaker or attendee
MaxPaperCount
Integer
Total number of published papers
API_Field
String
Field of study returned by the API
ExternalField
String
Field of study from external sources returned by API
ModelField
String
Field of study from model returned by API
API_FieldCount
Integer
Number of different fields assigned to the researcher
ExternalFieldCount
Integer
Number of different fields assigned from external sources
ModelFieldCount
Integer
Number of different fields assigned by model
FirstPaperYear
String
Year of the first published paper
ResearcherCount
Integer
Number of results from API
when searching on the researcher
FirstName
String
First name of the researcher
Seniority
Integer
Number of years in the field
at the time of the conference
CumulativePaperCount
Integer
Number of published papers
at the time of the conference
Productivity
Decimal
Productivity at the time of the conference
Gender
String
female or male
AuthorIndex
Integer
Order researcher is listed in
AssignedSponsoringUnit
String
Specialized field (sponsoring unit [28])
Table 3.4: Overview of attributes of the final dataset
3.2
Descriptive Analysis of Gender Diversity
We have now addressed how we collected and cleaned the data so it is trustworthy. In
the following section, analyze and visualize aspects of the data. This section aims to give
insight into the data and show differences between researchers. The dataset used for this
section is the dataset containing unique researchers with respect to year and session type,
as described in section 3.1.5 in the Data chapter.
3.2.1
Evolution of Gender Gap
This section examines the evolution of gender diversity in the last 19 years. As described
in the literature review in chapter 2, other studies used a baseline population to examine
gender equality. We are going to use the attendees as our baseline population. We assume
that our baseline population is representative of all researchers in the field of physics. We
define gender equality as the same gender ratio for attendees and invited speakers, and
gender parity is the same gender ratio for males and females.
We start by addressing the distribution of invited speakers and attendees. The number
of invited speakers and attendees is increasing with time, with some small exceptions.
==PAGE:19==
13
3 Data
The number of invited speakers is very high compared to many other conferences, which
denotes the size of the conference. The distribution of invited speakers and attendees per
year is shown in figure 3.1.
(a) Invited Speakers
(b) Attendees
Figure 3.1: Number of invited speakers and attendees per year. The number of invited speakers and
attendees is increasing over time, except for a few years. It should be noted that the attendees are all
authors of the presented abstracts, why it is expected that this can differ from year to year, since it is
not the actual attendees.
The female ratio of invited speakers and attendees is increasing with time, as shown in
figure 3.2 and 3.3. The female ratio of invited speakers is increasing more rapidly than
attendees. Slowly, with time, the field of physics is comprised of more females. The female
ratio of attendees only increases from 0.17 to 0.23 in 19 years. As shown in figure 3.3,
the female ratio of invited speakers and attendees intersect between 2015 and 2016. From
2016 and onwards, the female ratio of invited speakers is greater than the female ratio of
attendees. This indicates that not only is gender equality obtained, but that since 2016,
females have had better opportunities to be invited than males. This does essentially
mean, that the field of physics still does not have gender equality, but now in the opposite
direction.
==PAGE:20==
14
3 Data
Figure 3.2: Aggregated gender ratio of invited speakers and attendees shown per
year. The female ratio of invited speakers is increasing, and from 2016 and onwards,
the female ratio of invited speakers is higher than the female ratio of attendees. The
female ratio of attendees is slowly increasing. Gender equality was obtained in 2016,
but males now have worse conditions for being invited. Gender parity is not close
to being obtained.
Figure 3.3: Evolution of female ratio for invited speakers and attendees. The ratio
of attendees is slowly increasing. The ratio of invited speakers is also increasing
while still fluctuating, and from around 2015, is starting to increase a lot, especially
from 2018 to 2019. The ratios intersect between 2015 and 2016, so from 2016, the
female ratio of invited speakers is larger than the one for attendees, meaning that
gender equality was obtained.
==PAGE:21==
15
3 Data
We have examined the gender ratio of invited speakers and attendees, but we are also
interested in how the total number of invited speakers and attendees evolves with respect
to gender. We found that the number of invited speakers and attendees increases with
time for males as well as females, as shown in figure 3.4. This is expected since the total
number of invited speakers and attendees also increases with time. The number of male
attendees is increasing more rapidly than for female attendees. This shows that we are
getting further from obtaining gender parity.
(a) Invited speakers
(b) Attendees
Figure 3.4: Evolution of number of invited speakers and attendees for females and males from 2005
to 2023. The number of invited speakers and attendees is increasing for males as well as females. The
relative change for male and female attendees does, for the most part, follow each other. Gender parity
becomes further away for attendees.
3.2.2
Gender Gap within Sponsoring Units
The last section addressed the gender gap in physics across all sponsoring units. This
section examines the gender gap within the sponsoring units. We only deal with relevant
sponsoring units found on the APS Sponsoring Units page[28].
Each researcher can be assigned to several sponsoring units, and the size of the sponsoring
units varies greatly. Some sponsoring units are new, while others have been represented
at the March Meeting since 2005 or earlier. It is, therefore, natural that they vary in size.
For most sponsoring units, the number of attendees is higher than the number of invited
speakers. This does, however, not apply to the smaller sponsoring units. The distribution
of the invited speakers and attendees is shown for each sponsoring unit in figure 3.5
==PAGE:22==
16
3 Data
Figure 3.5: Total number of invited speakers and attendees from 2005 to 2023. The y-axis is
shown on log scale. The size of sponsoring units varies greatly in size. Note that some sponsoring
units do not have any attendees.
The sponsoring units vary in fields.
Some are more traditional fields within physics,
whereas others deal more with the society and education in physics. Therefore, it would
be natural if the gender ratio varies across the sponsoring units. As shown in figure 3.6
the gender ratio varies greatly for invited speakers as well as attendees across sponsoring
units. The sponsoring units are shown according to size, and the biggest units are in
the lower end of the female ratio. The biggest units are all close to gender equality, but
a long way to go to obtain gender parity. The gender ratio for many of the sponsoring
units is similar to the one observed across all sponsoring units, but some differ. Especially
sponsoring units regarding education and the society within physics have a higher female
ratio.
==PAGE:23==
17
3 Data
Figure 3.6: Aggregated gender ratio of the sponsoring units for 2005-2023. The sponsoring units
are shown according to the size of the sponsoring units calculated by the sum of the number of
invited speakers and attendees for that sponsoring unit. They are shown in decreasing order from
the left. A general trend is that the largest sponsoring units have lower female ratios than the
small units. Especially sponsoring units regarding education and the society within physics have a
higher female ratio than observed across all sponsoring units. The smallest sponsoring units show
interesting gender ratios, but they are too small to use for any conclusions.
We have now viewed gender equality across all 19 years. However, we know that gender
equality has evolved in those 19 years across all sponsoring units. To get a better under-
standing of the evolution of the gender gap for sponsoring units, we will now view the
female ratio for selected sponsoring units. The sponsoring units ’Atomic, Molecular &
Optical Physics,’ ’Polymer Physics’ and ’Computational Physics all have a slight increase
in the female ratio of attendees, as shown in figure 3.7.
==PAGE:24==
18
3 Data
(a) Atomic, Molecular & Optical Physics
(b) Polymer Physics
(c) Computational Physics
Figure 3.7: Evolution of female ratio of invited speakers and attendees within (a) Atomic, Molecular
& Optical Physics, (b) Polymer Physics, and (c) Computational Physics. The female ratio of attendees
increases slightly for all three sponsoring units. (a) The female ratio for invited speakers is above the one
for attendees already from 2007, which is much earlier than seen across all sponsoring units. The female
ratio indicates gender equality in most years. (b) In 2022, the female ratio of invited speakers is at 0.5,
which is close to twice as much as the ratio of attendees that year and indicates gender parity. In 2023, the
two ratios are, however, the same. Since 2014, females have had better or around the same opportunities
as males. (c) The female ratio of invited speakers is higher than the female ratio of attendees from 2009
and onwards, which is much earlier than observed across all sponsoring units. However, the female ratio
of attendees is also on the lower side compared to the ones seen across all sponsoring units.
The three sponsoring units are within the 11 largest sponsoring units and are chosen to
show different patterns. The female ratio of invited speakers is increasing within Polymer
Physics and Computational Physics but not within Atomic, Molecular & Optical Physics.
All three sponsoring units indicate gender equality in 2023, but in 2022, the female ratio
was a great deal higher for invited speakers than attendees within Polymer Physics and
Computational Physics. The last thing to note is that the female ratio varies between
the sponsoring units. The highest female ratio of invited speakers is 0.27 for Atomic,
Molecular & Optical Physics and 0.51 for Polymer Physics. This is especially interesting
in regards to gender parity since Polymer Physics has gender parity in 2022 with respect
to invited speakers but not attendees.
==PAGE:25==
19
3 Data
3.2.3
Factors impacting gender diversity
We now have an overview of the evolution of gender diversity in physics. We have es-
tablished that females have had worse opportunities to get invited than males and that
a gender gap still exists regarding gender parity. To better understand gender diversity
and its impacting factors, we will investigate some of the variables from the data that we
believe are a factor in gender equality and in selecting speakers to invite. The section
seeks to examine differences between males and females as well as invited speakers and
attendees. The aim is to get insights into reasons for the gender gap.
Seniority
The first variable we are examining is Seniority.
The average seniority is increasing with time for invited speakers, and especially for at-
tendees, as shown in figure 3.8. One reason seniority increases might be that researchers
stop later in their careers. It would be natural that seniority increases as life expectancy
increases[33].
Figure 3.8: Evolution of the average seniority. The average seniority increases with time for
attendees and invited speakers. The average seniority increases more for attendees than invited
speakers.
==PAGE:26==
20
3 Data
As a group, invited speakers have higher seniority than attendees overall and across
genders, and males tend to have higher seniority than females overall and within the
session types, as shown in figure 3.9. So, male invited speakers have higher seniority than
female invited speakers, and male attendees have higher seniority than female attendees.
More than that, male invited speakers have higher seniority than male attendees, and
female invited speakers have higher seniority than male attendees.
(a) Seniority of invited speakers and attendees
(b) Seniority of invited speakers grouped by gender
(c) Seniority of attendees grouped by gender
(d) Box plot of seniority without outliers, grouped by
session type and gender
Figure 3.9: Distribution of seniority. The histograms show the relative distribution of seniority within
their respective group. The box plot is shown without outliers. (a) Invited speakers have higher seniority
than attendees. (b) Male invited speakers generally have higher seniority than female invited speakers.
(c) Male attendees have higher seniority than female attendees. (d) All groups have researchers with
seniority 0 and 75, but seniority 75 is not plotted since these are viewed as outliers by seaborn. Invited
speakers have higher seniority than attendees compared with the same gender, and males have higher
seniority than females compared within the same session type.
==PAGE:27==
21
3 Data
Cumulative Paper Count
This section examines cumulative paper count, so the number of papers published at the
time of the meeting.
We start by addressing the evolution of the average number of published papers. The
average number of published papers increases with time for attendees as well as invited
speakers, as shown in figure 3.10. The average number of published papers fluctuates
more for invited speakers than for attendees. Since there are more attendees than invited
speakers, it seems natural that the average fluctuates less for attendees.
Figure 3.10: Evolution of the average number of published papers at the time of the conference.
The average paper count increases with time for attendees and invited speakers. The average paper
count fluctuates more for invited speakers than for attendees.
As a group, invited speakers publish more than attendees, which is expected since invited
speakers have higher seniority than attendees and, therefore, have had more years to
publish. However, the differences between invited speakers and attendees with respect to
paper count are mostly found for those with many publications, as seen in figure 3.11d.
The differences between females and males within the same session type are also primarily
found for those with many publications since the minimum, lower quartile, and median
are all close. Female invited speakers have a higher paper count than male attendees.
==PAGE:28==
22
3 Data
(a) Cumulative Paper Count for invited speakers and atten-
dees
(b) Cumulative Paper Count for invited speakers, grouped
by gender
(c) Cumulative Paper Count for attendees, grouped by gen-
der
(d) Box plot of cumulative paper count without outliers,
grouped by
session type and gender
Figure 3.11:
Distribution of publications at the time of the conference.
The histograms show the
relative distribution of publications within their respective group. All histograms are cut off at the x-axis
at the point where there are too few values to see them. The box plot is shown without outliers. (a)
Distribution of cumulative paper count showed with the average paper count for invited speakers and
attendees. Invited speakers publish more than attendees. (b) The cumulative paper cunt distribution is
similar for male and female invited speakers, but the invited speakers that publish most are males. (c)
The cumulative paper count distribution is similar for male and female attendees, but male attendees
tend to publish more. More female attendees than male attendees have no or only a few published papers
at the time of the conference. (d) Invited speakers publish more than attendees regardless of gender,
also when comparing female invited speakers with male attendees. The differences are primarily seen in
the upper quartile and maximum(without outliers). The cumulative paper count has a higher variability
for invited speakers than attendees. Female attendees have fewer publications than male attendees. The
upper quartile and maximum value(without outliers) are higher for male invited speakers than female
invited speakers.
==PAGE:29==
23
3 Data
Overall, the paper count increases with seniority for invited speakers as well as attendees,
as shown in figure 3.12. For invited speakers with a seniority of 6-25 years, the lower half
of females publish more papers than the lower half of the males, and the upper half of
males publish more than the upper half of females. For researchers with 0-25 years of
seniority, females have more published papers than males with lower seniority, meaning
that seniority has a bigger impact on the cumulative paper count than gender does.
Overall, we see some differences for researchers with less than 26 years of seniority and
researchers with at least 26 years of seniority. This could indicate that some researchers
stopped publishing, which explains why the median and lower quartile decrease, but the
upper quartile and maximum increase. It can also indicate a difference in generation or a
shift in the field of Physics.
(a) Invited speakers
(b) Attendees
Figure 3.12: Box plots of publications grouped by seniority for (a) invited speakers and (b) attendees.
The box plots are shown without outliers; each group does, however, have one or more researchers with
close to 500 publications. Publications increase with seniority, with a few exceptions in groups with high
seniority. Female attendees publish less than male attendees, whereas the lower half of female invited
speakers publish more than the lower half of male invited speakers for most seniority groups.
Productivity
We have now seen that invited speakers tend to have a higher number of publications and
higher seniority than attendees. Overall, males have higher seniority and publish more
papers than females when session type is not taken into account. The question is whether
invited speakers, and males have many publications because they have spent more time
researching than attendees and females or they are more productive, which this section
seeks to answer.
The average productivity increases with time for invited speakers as well as attendees,
which is shown in figure 3.13. The average productivity fluctuates more for invited speak-
ers than for attendees, which, as explained for the cumulative paper count, makes sense
since there are more attendees than invited speakers.
==PAGE:30==
24
3 Data
Figure 3.13: Evolution of the average productivity. The average productivity increases with time
for attendees and invited speakers. The average productivity fluctuates more for invited speakers
than for attendees.
Invited speakers have higher productivity than attendees, as shown in figure 3.14. They
also have higher seniority and cumulative paper count, so it is expected that the produc-
tivity is higher as well. The productivity varies more for male invited speakers than female
invited speakers. More male than female invited speakers have a very small productivity.
There are also more male than female invited speakers that have high productivity. The
most productive males are more productive than females for invited speakers as well as
attendees. The upper half of the invited females are, however, more productive than the
upper half of the male invited speakers.
==PAGE:31==
25
3 Data
(a) Productivity for invited speakers and attendees
(b) Productivity for invited speakers, grouped by gender
(c) Productivity for attendees, grouped by gender
(d) Box plot of productivity without outliers, grouped by
session type and gender
Figure 3.14: Distribution of productivity. The histograms show the relative distribution of productivity
within their respective group.
All histograms are cut off at the x-axis at the point where there are
too few values to see them. The boxplot is shown without outliers. (a) Invited speakers tend to be
more productive than attendees.
(b) More male invited speakers than female invited speakers have
low productivity and high productivity. (c) The most productive male attendees are more productive
than the most productive female attendees. (d) The most productive male invited speakers are more
productive than the most productive female invited speakers, and the most productive male attendees are
more productive than the most productive female attendees. Female invited speakers are more productive
than male attendees.
Productivity increases with seniority, more for invited speakers than attendees, as shown
in figure 3.15. The median is quite stable for attendees. When the seniority is high,
the productivity begins to decrease. We again see that males have more variability in
productivity. For invited speakers, males have lower values of lower quartile and median
but do also have higher upper quartile and maximum than females. These differences do,
however, seem to diminish with seniority. Overall, male attendees are more productive
than female attendees. At the beginning of the researcher’s career, seniority seems more
important than gender in terms of productivity because females are more productive than
males with lower seniority. This is seen for invited speakers in the first 15 years of their
careers and the first 10-15 years for attendees. When seniority increases, productivity
varies more. An interesting aspect is that for invited speakers, females are more productive
than males in the first five years of their careers.
==PAGE:32==
26
3 Data
(a) Invited speakers
(b) Attendees
Figure 3.15: Box plots of productivity grouped by seniority, shown for (a) invited speakers and (b)
attendees. The box plots are shown without outliers. Productivity increases with seniority, more for
invited speakers than attendees.
Productivity starts to decrease when seniority is high.
The most
productive male invited speakers are more productive than the most productive female invited speakers,
whereas the least productive female invited speakers are more productive than the least productive male
invited speakers. Male attendees are more productive than female attendees.
3.2.4
Summary
This section does not make us conclude anything. The data overall indicated .., and that
there are differences between males and females, and invited speakers and attendees. This
section helps to get insight into the data, so we now know what to investigate further.
This will also help us explain and understand later results since we now have a basic
understanding of the field of physics and the differences between males and females, as
well as invited speakers and attendees.
==PAGE:33==
27
4 Methods
4
|
Methods
The previous chapter addressed gender diversity, differences between females and males,
and differences between invited speakers and attendees. In this chapter, we describe the
methods applied in the rest of the project. In section 4.1, we explain the method to
determine if the differences between groups of researchers are significant. In section 4.2,
we describe the method we will use to analyze gender bias in invitations. We also describe
how it can be used to analyze gender bias across seniority and subfields. In section 4.3, we
describe the method to analyze potential speakers, which can be used to analyze females
as potential invited speakers.
In section 4.4, we describe the method to determine if
intervention toward higher female representation has an impact on the field.
4.1
Permutation Test
In the descriptive analysis in the last chapter, we analyzed differences between groups of
researchers. Some plots indicated a difference between males and females with respect to
seniority, cumulative paper count, and productivity. This section aims to explain methods
to extend that analysis. Using the permutation test, we can determine if the differences
between two groups are significant.
The permutation test is a distribution-free method[34], meaning that we do not need
to make any assumptions about the underlying distribution of the data. The method
can be used to test if there are significant differences between groups with respect to a
variable[35]. The groups are defined by some label. We will explain the method using
gender as the label, such that we compare males and females. We compare the groups
with respect to the variables Seniority, CumulativePaperCount, and Productivity.
We use the notation XF for the group of females and XM for the group of males. The
idea behind the permutation test is to shuffle the label, creating new random groups with
the same ratio of females and males. If there are no differences between females and
males, assigning new labels will not make any difference. This is repeated n times, and
for each time, we save a chosen test statistic, which will later be compared with the test
statistic for the true groups. The permutation test can be used with any measure as the
test statistic[36]. In this project, we use the mean as the test statistic. In the end, we
can calculate the probability of the differences being significant. It should be noted that
the permutation test is used to determine if there is a significant difference but cannot
be used to determine its size or explain its causality. Optimally, we would do all possi-
ble permutations of the label, but with the data in this project, it would take too long.
Therefore we chose to do n = 10, 000 permutations instead of all possible permutations.
The advantages of the permutation test are that it is a simple method and that it is a
distribution-free method, ensuring we can use the method regardless of the distribution
of the data. One limitation of the method is that it can easily take a long time to run the
code for the method, especially if we performed it with all possible permutations.
==PAGE:34==
28
4 Methods
The permutation test is performed using these 7 steps:
1. Compute the mean µF for females and µM for males
2. Calculate the difference of means(∆µ = µF −µM)
3. Shuffle the gender label randomly, keeping the same gender ratio
4. Compute the mean for the current permutation
5. Calculate difference of means for current permutation(∆¯X = ¯XF −¯XM)
6. Iterate over step 3-5 n = 10000 times
7. Calculate the p-value as the fraction of random groups with smaller differences than
the difference from the true groups
Our null hypothesis is that gender does not influence the variables Seniority,
CumulativePaperCount, and Productivity, giving us the following hypotheses:
H0 : XF = XM
H1 : XF ̸= XM
If the calculated p-value is smaller than α, then the real difference is smaller than by
chance. In that case we cannot reject that males have higher values than females for that
variable. If the p-value is larger than 1 −α, then the real difference is larger than by
chance. In that case, we cannot reject that female > male. If the p-value is between α
and 1−α, we cannot reject H0, meaning that we cannot reject that there is no significant
difference. This does not mean there is no difference, but we cannot prove it is significant.
α = 0.05 is often used as the significance level. However, this is a quite rigid cut-off to
determine significance. We aim to get insights into the differences between males and
females and not only to conclude whether the differences are significant. No matter which
significance level we choose, we cannot be sure of anything since the p-value is a probabil-
ity and not a certainty[37]. Therefore, we choose to use two significance levels, α = 0.05
and α = 0.01.
We have described the method using gender as the label, but the method is the same for
all labels. Besides performing the test with Gender as a label for invited speakers, the
permutation test was also performed with Gender for attendees and with SessionType
for all researchers and males and females separately. Results in the descriptive analysis in
section 3.2 showed a difference between females and males, as well as invited speakers and
attendees. To examine the significance of these differences, we performed permutation
tests using Gender and SessionType as labels. When performing a permutation test on
SessionType, the difference is calculated as ∆µ = µinv −µatt, which means that the
p-value needs to be above 1 −α for us to have significant reason to believe that invited
speakers have significantly higher values than attendees with respect to the particular
attribute.
==PAGE:35==
29
4 Methods
The last step of the permutation test is to examine the evolution of p-values. This will
show if the significance of the differences changes over time. This was done by filtering
the data by year and performing permutation test for each year. n = 10, 000 was still
used as the number of iterations.
4.2
Gender Bias in Invitations
The aim of this section is to describe methods used for examining gender bias in invita-
tions. The methods consist of two primary parts. 1) Finding similar researchers using
K-Nearest Neighbors, 2) Calculating the relative likelihood of invitation. The methods
will be explained for finding females similar to males and calculating the relative like-
lihood of females similar to males being invited. The dataset used in this method, is
the one containing unique researchers with respect to year, session type, and sponsoring
unit. View section 3.1.5 for details on this dataset. It means that we have a researcher
registered with all its sponsoring units.
4.2.1
K-Nearest Neighbors
We use K-Nearest Neighbors to find female researchers who are similar to male researchers.
In this section, we will explain how the algorithm works and later explain how it was
adapted to our problem.
K-Nearest Neighbors is a supervised machine-learning algorithm that can be used for
classification as well as regression. The algorithm predicts the target variable for a vector
X based on the predictor variables in X. When used for classification, the algorithm will
predict the target variable for X to be the same as the majority of its K neighbors for
that target variable. For regression, the algorithm will predict the target variable for X
to be the mean of the K neighbors target variable[38]. The algorithm can be adjusted to
work as an unsupervised method to find the K-nearest neighbors, which is how we use it
in this project.
We use K-Nearest Neighbors to find the K nearest female neighbors for each male. We
assume that the K nearest females to a male are the K most similar females to that male.
In that way, we find the females, that are most similar to males. The K-Nearest Neighbors
algorithm returns the K closest female researchers according to the chosen distance metric
and set of features. We use seniority, cumulative paper count, productivity and sponsoring
units as features for determining the K nearest neighbors. We implement the K-Nearest
Neighbors using scikit-learn and Brute Force as the algorithm. This is because we will
later perform K-Nearest Neighbors on data where only Brute Force is feasible. To be
able to compare our results from K-Nearest Neighbors and get the most trustworthy
comparisons, we use the same algorithm for K-Nearest Neighbors throughout the project.
Handling of Variables
The variables used for finding similar researchers are Seniority, CumulativePaperCount,
Productivity, and SponsoringUnit. Seniority, CumulativePaperCount, and Productivity
differ in scale. Therefore, these variables need to be transformed before performing K-
Nearest Neighbors. Furthermore, SponsoringUnit is a categorical variable, so this vari-
able needs to be transformed.
==PAGE:36==
30
4 Methods
We standardized seniority, cumulative paper count and productivity to make sure not
to introduce any more bias and to ensure all features are assumed of the same impor-
tance when performing K-Nearest Neighbors. The variables are standardized according
to equation 4.1.
z = x −µ
σ
,
(4.1)
where:
x: value to standardize
µ: average of variable
σ: standard deviation of the variable
To handle sponsoring units, this variable is one-hot encoded by having 1 in all of the
researchers’ sponsoring units in the particular session. This enables us to use all of the
sponsoring units instead of selecting to assign only one sponsoring unit. This was only
done for sponsoring units that were listed by APS on their site about sponsoring units[28].
The one-hot encoding resulted in 29 sponsoring unit variables.
Filtering by Year
When performing K-Nearest Neighbors, the data is filtered by year. So we find similar
researchers attending the conference in the same year. This is because we want to examine
invited speakers among researchers, and the qualifications for being invited might change
over time. Furthermore, we aim to understand how the field evolves, so it is important
only to find similar researchers within the same year.
Threshold
The distance to the K most similar females can vary greatly for different males. For
viewing some plots of the distances, see figure A.10 and A.11 in appendix A.2.
The
figures show the distances from each male to his 10 and 50 closest females. The distances
are shown for some of the years that differed most to show the differences. The distances
are shown with Manhattan distance as the distance metric. To take the varying distances
into account, we introduce a distance threshold. The threshold will be used to determine
how close researchers need to be in order for us to define them as similar. We interpret
a female as being similar to a male if the distance between them is less or equal to the
threshold. This is to avoid having a female similar to a male who, in reality, is not similar.
This threshold is the q quantile of all distances for the K most similar females for all males.
Figure A.10 and A.11 also show that the threshold differs.
The process of finding K females similar to each male is shown in figure 4.1. The figure
also shows how the threshold works. The figure is shown with K = 3. As shown, the same
female can be matched to different males. The figure also shows that some have all their
K matches within the threshold, and some do not have any matches within the threshold.
This shows the importance of the threshold since the similarity of a male and a similar
female would differ greatly without it.
==PAGE:37==
31
4 Methods
Figure 4.1: Process of finding K similar females to each male. The
dashed line is the threshold and shows how that works. As shown,
the same female can be matched to several males.
The figure is
shown for K = 3
The method described so far will result in a group of the K most similar females for all
males. The next step in the method is calculating the relative likelihood of invitation.
4.2.2
Relative Likelihood of Similar Invited Researchers
The aim of this second part of the method is to create matches of similar researchers.
From those matches, we can calculate the relative likelihood of invitation. The aim is to
be able to investigate how likely females that are similar to males, are to be invited. This
will be measured as the relative likelihood of similar females being invited. This sentence
will be used a lot in the following. What it means is that we only look at females who are
similar to males. So the likelihood is how likely a female with similar characteristics as
a male, is to be invited. The characteristics are similar values with respect to seniority,
cumulative paper count, productivity, and sponsoring units.
The likelihood is implemented with reference to a thesis investigating gender differences
in Computer Science[23]. It was important that the method of calculating the relative
likelihood was similar so the results could later be compared. The code is not copied but
relies on code from the thesis.
==PAGE:38==
32
4 Methods
We calculate the average relative likelihood for each year using these six steps:
1. For each male, randomly select a female of his K similar females. The male and the
selected female are referred to as a match.
2. If the distance between a match is larger than the threshold, the match will be
deleted in this iteration
3. The relative likelihood of a female similar to a male being invited is calculated
according to equation (4.2)
4. Iterate steps 1-3 n = 1, 000 times
5. Calculate the average of the n relative likelihoods and the standard error of the
mean
6. Complete steps 1-5 for each year
relative likelihood of similar females being invited = finv/n
minv/n,
(4.2)
where finv is the number of invited females, minv is the number of invited males, and n is
the number of matches within the threshold. When finding the number of invited females
and males, we only look at the matches within the threshold. So invited researchers who
were not matched or were a match outside the threshold are not part of the count.
Steps 1-3 in the method above are shown in figure 4.2. The figure shows the method
of matching a male with one of his K nearest females, removing matches outside the
threshold, and calculating the relative likelihood. As explained in the method above, this
process will be completed 1,000 times. Male 2 in the figure has no matches within the
threshold, so the male will be removed from the list of males when calculating likelihood.
The same goes for Male n, which is matched with a female that is not within the threshold,
so this male is removed as well. Note that this can still happen even though the male has
a potential match within the threshold.
Following the six steps will result in the average relative likelihood for each year and the
standard error of the mean. The relative likelihood is the relative likelihood of females
similar to males being invited as speakers. If the relative likelihood is 1, then females
similar to males are just as likely to be invited as the males they are similar to. If the
likelihood is above 1, then females similar to males are more likely to be invited than the
males they are similar to. If the likelihood is below 1, females similar to males are less likely
to be invited than the males they are similar to. Standard error of the mean will be used
to show how close our likelihood estimate is to the true mean. We are more interested in
how precise the average likelihood is, and not as much how much the individual likelihood
varies, why we show the average likelihood together with the standard error of the mean.
We define likelihood above 1 as gender equality. At this point, males and females have the
same opportunities to get invited. We define likelihood below 1 as males having better
opportunities than females, and likelihood above 1 as females having better opportunities
than males.
==PAGE:39==
33
4 Methods
(a) Creating matches
(b) Likelihood calculation
Figure 4.2: The figure shows (a) the process of matching a male with one of his K nearest females and
(b) how the relative likelihood is calculated. The dashed line in (a) is the threshold. As shown, a male
can be matched with a female outside the threshold, even when a match within the threshold is possible.
4.2.3
Parameters
We have now explained the method for finding similar researchers and calculating the
relative likelihood.
A couple of parameters can influence the result of finding similar
researchers and, therefore, the result of the relative likelihood.
We will now describe
these parameters and how we can choose values for the parameters.
Distance Metric
The first question we face when performing K-Nearest Neighbors is which distance metric
to use to find similar researchers.
We consider three distance metrics, Euclidean distance, Manhattan distance, and Minkowski
distance. Euclidean Euclidean distance is the distance between two points measured in
a straight line and is calculated according to equation 4.3. Manhattan distance is the
distance between two points using only horizontal or vertical lines and is calculated ac-
cording to equation 4.4. Minkowski distance is a generalization of Euclidean distance and
Manhattan distance[39] when 1 ≤p ≤2. Minkowski distance is calculated according to
equation 4.5.
d(x, y) =
p
(x1 −x2)2 + (y1 −y2)2
(4.3)
d(x, y) = |x1 −x2| + |y1 −y2|
(4.4)
d(x, y) =
pp
|x1 −x2|p + |y1 −y2|p
(4.5)
==PAGE:40==
34
4 Methods
Euclidean distance is a popular choice for distance metrics, but it does not handle one-
hot encoded variables very well[40]. In contrast, Manhattan distance does not handle
continuous variables and correlated variables well, so neither of these metrics seemed
great for our data.
Minkowski is the middle ground between Euclidean distance and
Manhattan distance. It is suitable for mixed data like the data we have. It can, however,
be difficult to choose a value for the parameter p, which controls the balance between
Euclidean and Manhattan distance. We want to test how the relative likelihood changes
for the three different distance metrics. This is to see how robust the relative likelihood
is towards the distance metric. We test the relative likelihood for Euclidean distance,
Manhattan distance, and Minkowski distance.
Before we perform K-Nearest Neighbors and calculate the relative likelihood, we need to
figure out how to handle the sponsoring unit variables. Due to the one-hot encoding, we
have 29 sponsoring unit variables. Besides that, we have three continuous variables. Be-
cause there are a lot more sponsoring unit variables than other variables, the sponsoring
units can become more important than we would like when performing K-Nearest Neigh-
bors. Therefore, we have implemented K-Nearest Neighbors with weights on the features.
Seniority, CumulativePaperCount, and Productivity each have the weight 1. The 29
sponsoring unit variables each have a weight of 1/29, such that the entire one-hot encoding
sums to 1. In this way, each of the four variables, Seniority, CumulativePaperCount,
Productivity, and SponsoringUnit, have the same weight. This is implemented us-
ing Scikit-learn[41][42]. Using Scikit-learn, it is possible to easily implement K-Nearest
Neighbors with weights using Minkowski distance. It means that we do not need to im-
plement it from scratch, and it allows us to utilize our time better and move forward with
the project. Since p controls the balance between Euclidean and Manhattan distance,
Minkowski distance can be adjusted to work as Euclidean distance by setting p = 2, as
Manhattan distance by setting p = 1, and a mix of the two distance metrics by setting
1 < p < 2. Therefore, we use Minkowski distance each time and only change p to change
the distance metric. When performing K-Nearest Neighbors with Minkowski distance,
we set p = 1.5 to get a mix of Euclidean and Manhattan distance. To choose the most
suitable distance metric, we will analyze the relative likelihood for these three distance
metrics.
Choosing K
The next parameter to find a value for is K. It is the number of neighbors we find using
K-Nearest Neighbors.
K is the number of nearest female neighbors we find for each male. We choose the value
for K by analyzing the relative likelihood for different values of K.
Choosing q
The last parameter to deal with is q. This is the quantile, which controls the distance
where researchers are defined as similar.
The method for choosing the quantile is similar to choosing a value for K. We will analyze
the relative likelihood for different values of q and, based on that, choose a value for q.
==PAGE:41==
35
4 Methods
4.2.4
Male Likelihood
We have now explained the method of calculating the relative likelihood of females similar
to males being invited. Analyzing the relative likelihood of invitations of males similar to
females can give valuable insights. It can help us determine whether females and males
are invited for the same reasons.
The method of calculating the relative likelihood of males similar to females being invited
is similar to the one already described. The only difference is that females and males
are now reversed. This means that we, for each female, find similar males. The relative
likelihood for different values of the parameters will be analyzed as well. This is to ensure
that we choose the right parameters, as other choices might be more suitable since there
are a much higher number of males than females.
4.2.5
Filtering by Seniority
So far, we have used seniority to measure similarity.
We have compared researchers
across all seniority. The aim of this section is to explain how we can examine female
representation across seniority.
To examine female representation across seniority, we filter the data by seniority. Since
seniority varies from 0 to 75 years, we filter on the following groups of seniority; 0-5, 6-10,
11-15, 16-20, 21-25, 26-30, and 30 years. K-Nearest Neighbors are performed on data
filtered by year and seniority. It means that we only compare researchers within the same
seniority group and year. Therefore, the relative likelihood indicates the likelihood of
being invited as a female compared to males with similar seniority. Since we are filtering
on seniority, each seniority group is naturally much smaller than the entire female group
per year. Therefore, we need to find a suitable value for K. We will do this by analyzing
the relative likelihood for varying values of the parameters.
4.2.6
Relative Likelihood for Sponsoring Units
We have described the general method of calculating the relative likelihood and how it can
be calculated across seniority. In this section, we explain the method of calculating the
relative likelihood of sponsoring units. The aim of this method is to study the evolution
of female representation across sponsoring units.
With this method, we focus on female representation, so the aim is to calculate the
relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited across different sponsoring
units. The method is similar to calculating the relative likelihood across seniority. The
data is filtered by year and sponsoring units, so we only compare researchers within
the same year and sponsoring unit. K-Nearest Neighbors is performed, and the relative
likelihood is calculated. The result will be the relative likelihood for each year for each
sponsoring unit.
4.2.7
Impacting Factors
This section aims to explain the methods for calculating how the relative likelihood differs
by varying the included variables. This can show how the variables influence the relative
likelihood.
==PAGE:42==
36
4 Methods
The method for this was to perform K-Nearest Neighbors and calculate the relative like-
lihood as described earlier. The only difference from the already described method is
that we vary the features used for the K-Nearest Neighbors. Earlier we used the fea-
tures Seniority, CumulativePaperCount, Productivity and SponsoringUnit, so now
we remove one of these features and perform K-Nearest Neighbors and calculate relative
likelihood with the three other features. We do this for all combinations, which results in
the relative likelihood for four different sets of variables.
4.3
Potential Speakers
We have addressed how we find similar males and females and how we calculate their like-
lihood of being invited. In this section, we describe the method of finding and examining
potential speakers.
We have previously defined gender equality as the point where the gender ratio of invited
speakers and attendees is equal.
With that, we assume that all attendees, in reality,
are potential speakers and, hence, have the potential to be invited. We did, however, in
section 3.2, show that there is a difference between invited speakers and attendees based
on seniority, cumulative paper count and productivity. We now want to find the attendees
most similar to the invited speakers. We call this group for potential speakers since if
invitations were only based on our selected variables, this group would be the attendees
with the most potential to be invited as speakers. In this section, we describe the method
of finding and examining potential speakers.
The potential speakers are the attendees most similar to the invited speakers. We find
these using K-Nearest Neighbors as described previously, where we find the K near-
est attendees for each invited speaker.
We use Seniority, CumulativePaperCount,
Productivity, and SponsoringUnit as attributes. Now, instead of matching an invited
speaker with a random attendee, as the method previously described, we make a match
between an invited speaker and all of the K nearest attendees within the threshold. If a
match is not within the threshold, the attendee is deleted. If an invited speaker has no
matches within the threshold, the invited speaker is also deleted.
The method described will result in two groups. The first being invited speakers who
have attendee matches within the threshold. The other being potential speakers. The
threshold is important to make sure that the potential speakers, in reality, are similar to
the invited speakers. Instead of calculating the relative likelihood as we have previously
done, we, in this method, calculate the true gender ratio of the invited speakers and the
gender ratio of the potential speakers. That is, for the matches within the threshold,
we calculate the true ratio of female invited speakers and the true ratio of male invited
speakers. For the potential speakers, we calculate the ratio of potential female invited
speakers and the ratio of potential male invited speakers. The ratios are normalized such
that the true gender ratios of invited speakers sum to 1, and the gender ratios of potential
speakers sum to 1.
==PAGE:43==
37
4 Methods
Gender relation
We have described the method for matching invited speakers with potential speakers. We
will now explain how we can examine the gender relation between the invited speakers
and potential speakers. The aim is to examine the gender of the invited speaker and the
gender of the potential speaker.
We do this by starting with the invited speakers and all the matched potential speakers
within the threshold. For each match between an invited speaker and a potential speaker,
we categorize the match as one of four types; Female invited speaker matched with female
potential speaker(FF), Female invited speaker matched with male potential speaker(FM),
male invited speaker matched with female potential speaker(MF) and male invited speaker
matched with male potential speaker(MM). Afterward, we calculate the ratio of each type
of match, where FF + FM = 1 and MM + MF = 1
4.4
Impact of intervention
The aim of studying the intervention’s impact is to determine whether efforts towards
higher female representation have an effect. The idea is to compare sponsoring units that
changed from low effort to high effort and then analyze that effect.
We define intervention as changing the strategy of inviting speakers, meaning changing
from low to high effort. We measure the effort as the relative likelihood of inviting females
similar to males. We define low effort as relative likelihood < 1 and high effort as relative
likelihood ≥1. To measure a change in their effort and to evaluate the effect, we divide
the study period into three periods, baseline period, intervention period, and evaluation
period.
The baseline period is the starting point and will be used for comparison to
measure the change in effort and the effect. The intervention period is the period where we
measure intervention. The evaluation period, is the period where we measure the effect. In
this method, we only use sponsoring units with available data for the entire study period.
One reason is that seeing an effect can, and probably will, take some time. Therefore, we
want to make sure that we have available data over a long period. Furthermore, finding
the similarity between two sponsoring units can become more unreliable if it is only based
on a few years. Using the relative likelihood of inviting females similar to males, ensure
that we find sponsoring units that invite females based on the same reasons they use for
inviting males. This ensures that we do not use sponsoring units that invite females only
for being females.
The method consists of three parts. 1) Creating pairs of similar low-effort sponsoring units
during the baseline period 2) Identifying pairs with different efforts during the intervention
period. 3) Evaluating if changing from low to high effort has any impact.
==PAGE:44==
38
4 Methods
Creating pairs of similar sponsoring units
The sponsoring units used for this method are sponsoring units with available data during
the entire study period and who have low effort in the baseline period.
Each sponsoring unit is paired with its similar sponsoring units. Similar sponsoring units
are found using K-Nearest Neighbors. The features used for K-Nearest Neighbors are 1)
the number of invited speakers, 2) the number of attendees, 3) the female ratio of invited
speakers, 4) the female ratio of attendees, and 5) the average relative likelihood of inviting
females similar to males. All features used are indicated by year. We use the total number
of invited speakers and attendees as variables for K-Nearest Neighbors, because we want
to compare sponsoring units similar in size. The reason is that small sponsoring units will
be more sensitive toward changes in the female ratio than larger sponsoring units are. We
use the female ratio of invited speakers and attendees to compare sponsoring units with
similar levels of gender equality. Lastly, we use the average relative likelihood of females
similar to males being invited. This is a relevant variable because it is an indication of
the level of gender equality in the sponsoring unit.
The pairs are created according to the steps below:
1. Find the distance between all sponsoring units per year in the baseline period using
K-Nearest Neighbors
2. Calculate the total distance between all sponsoring units as the sum of the distance
in the baseline period
3. Identify similar sponsoring units using the quantile q = 0.5 as a threshold of the
total distance to keep the 50% most similar units
4. Create pairs of similar units by matching each unit with its similar sponsoring units
Identifying pairs with different efforts
Identifying pairs with different efforts is simply done by finding pairs from the first step,
where one has changed from low to high effort, and the other has not. This change is from
the baseline period to the intervention period. This allows us to compare sponsoring units
that changed their strategy to sponsoring units that did not. We do only use sponsoring
units that started with low effort since we expect this to have a higher impact, than
sponsoring units that changed from high to even higher.
Evaluation the impact
In the evaluation period, we evaluate the effect. For that we need to calculate the effect
and the intervention. The effect is the difference in the relative change of the female ratio
of attendees between a pair of sponsoring units. The effect is measures as the difference
between the baseline period and evaluation period. The effect is calculated according to
equation 4.6
Effect = F E
atth −F B
atth
F B
atth
−F E
attl −F B
attl
F B
attl
,
(4.6)
where:
F E
att = female ratio of attendees in the evaluation period
F B
att = female ratio of attendees in the baseline period
h = sponsoring unit that changed from low to high effort
l = sponsoring unit that did not change the effort.
==PAGE:45==
39
4 Methods
The intervention is calculated as the difference in the relative change of the relative
likelihood between the pair of sponsoring units. The change is measured from the baseline
period to the intervention period. The intervention is calculated according to equation
4.7.
Intervention = LI
h −LB
h
LB
h
−LI
l −LB
l
LB
l
,
(4.7)
where:
LI = average relative likelihood in the intervention period
F B
att = average relative likelihood in the baseline period
h = sponsoring unit that changed from low to high effort
l = sponsoring unit that did not change the effort.
We evaluate the impact of intervention in two ways. The first is by calculating the number
of pairs where Effect ≥0. Using significance level α = 0.05, we conclude that intervention
has a significantly increasing impact if at least 95% of the pairs have an effect difference
at minimum 0.
The other method of evaluating the effect is using linear regression, in which the effect
is plotted as a function of the intervention. If the slope of the regression with its 95%
confidence interval does not include 0, then we will conclude that the effect is increasing
[43]. This evaluation method takes the size of the intervention into account. It allows us
to test if the effect increases proportionally with the intervention.
We have now described the methods for this thesis, which included the permutation
test, K-Nearest Neighbors, calculating likelihood for different groups, examining poten-
tial speakers and their gender relation with invited speakers, and lastly, the impact of
intervention.
==PAGE:46==
40
5 Results
5
|
Results
In the last chapter, we explained the applied methods. In this chapter, we present the
results obtained using the explained methods. In section 5.1, we show whether there
are any significant differences between male and female invited speakers and how the
difference has evolved over time. In section 5.2, we analyze the gender bias in invitation.
We analyze the gender bias across seniority and subfields. We will also analyze factors
impacting the likelihood of invitations. In section 5.3, we analyze the group of potential
speakers and how invited speakers and the most potential speakers have evolved with
respect to gender. In section 5.4, we analyze the impact of intervention, which will show
if giving females more visibility has any impact on the representation of female attendees
in the future.
5.1
Differences between female and male invited speak-
ers
We showed differences between female and male invited speakers in the Descriptive Analy-
sis of Gender Diversity, section 3.2. The aim of this section is to investigate whether there
are significant differences between female and male speakers and how those differences
have changed over time. We analyze the differences with respect to seniority, number of
published papers, and productivity by calculating the p-value of the permutation test.
The p-values are calculated for the entire period as well as for each year within our study
period. For details about the permutation test, view section 4.1 in the Methods. A p-value
close to zero indicates significantly higher values for males than females, while a p-value
close to 1 indicates significantly higher values for females than males.
To test for differences between female and male invited speakers, the permutation test
is performed by permutating gender for the invited speakers. This shows a difference
between female and male invited speakers with respect to seniority, cumulative paper
count, and productivity, as shown in figure 5.1. The difference between female and male
invited speakers is more negative than for all or most permutated groups. This is because
the true mean, the dashed line, is more to the left than all or most of the histogram. Due
to the negative difference, the plot signifies that males have higher seniority, publish more
papers, and are more productive than females.
We find significant differences between female and male invited speakers with respect to
seniority, published papers, and productivity. This is shown by our calculated p-values,
which are 0 for Seniority, 0 for CumulativePaperCount, and 0.0007 for Productivity.
These findings mean that, according to the permutation test, males have significantly
higher seniority, publish significantly more papers, and are significantly more produc-
tive than females. Our findings also reveal significant differences between females and
males, regardless of session type, and between invited speakers and attendees, regardless
of gender. The difference is towards males and invited speakers having higher values than
females and attendees. All results obtained in the permutation tests are shown in figure
A.12 and table A.1 in appendix A.2.
==PAGE:47==
41
5 Results
(a) Seniority
(b) Cumulative Paper Count
(c) Productivity
Figure 5.1: Permutation test for invited speakers. The green histograms show the difference between
females and males when gender is permutated. The dashed line shows the true difference between female
and male invited speakers. For Seniority and CumualtivePaperCount, the true groups’ differences are
more negative than the difference for all permutation groups. For Productivity, the difference for the
true groups is more negative than the differences for most of the permutation groups.
5.1.1
Evolution of differences between female and males over time
We have now seen that there is statistical reason to believe that males have higher se-
niority, publish more papers, and are more productive than females. However, we did not
distinguish between years. This section aims to investigate how the differences between
female and male invited speakers have changed with time. To achieve this, we calculate
the p-value of the permutation test for each year within our study period.
The permutation test is performed for invited speakers by permutating gender to see if
there are any differences between female and male invited speakers. The p-value is calcu-
lated for the variablesSeniority, CumulativePaperCount, and Productivity. For more
details, view section 4.1 in the Methods. A p-value close to zero indicates significantly
higher values for males than females, while a p-value close to 1 indicates significantly
higher values for females than males.
==PAGE:48==
42
5 Results
Our findings reveal that the p-values vary considerably across the years, as shown in
figure 5.2. While the p-values for productivity show no consistent trend, a clearer trend is
observed for the seniority and number of published papers. The p-values are not significant
for all years for any of the variables, regardless of the significance level. The p-values get
smaller with time for seniority and cumulative paper count.
Using α = 0.05 as the
significance level, the difference between female and male invited speakers is significant
from 2017 and onwards for the cumulative paper count. The difference is significant for
seniority from 2015 and onwards, with 2019 and 2023 as exceptions. The difference is only
towards males having higher values than females. The results show that the difference
between female and male invited speakers with respect to seniority and cumulative paper
count has gotten more significant with time.
Figure 5.2: Evolution of P-value for Seniority, CumulativePaperCount, and Productivity.
The P-values are shown with two significance levels; α = 0.05 and α = 0.01. The P-value fluctuates
a lot over the 19 years.
5.2
Analysis of Gender Bias in Invitation of Speakers
The last section showed that there are significant differences between female and male
invited speakers and that the significance varies over time. The aim of this section is
to analyze the representation of females as invited speakers and to investigate if there
is any gender bias in the selection of invited speakers. The analysis is based on similar
researchers, followed by calculating their relative likelihood of being invited. For details
about this method, view section 4.2 in the Methods. When dealing with females similar
to males, the relative likelihood deals with how likely females similar to males are to be
invited compared to males. If the relative likelihood is above 1, then similar females are
more likely to be invited than males.
==PAGE:49==
43
5 Results
5.2.1
Choosing Parameters for K-Nearest Neighbors
Before we start analyzing the invitations, we will analyze the relative likelihood with
respect to varying values of the parameters used for K-Nearest Neighbors. The aim of
this analysis is to check the robustness of the relative likelihood to ensure the validity
of the final results. The relative likelihood was calculated for different distance metrics,
different values of K, and different values of q.
As explained in section 4.2.3, we performed K-Nearest Neighbors with different distance
metrics, different values of K, and different values of q.
We found that the relative
likelihood is robust towards the distance metric because the relative likelihood is similar
regardless of the distance metric. This applies for the relative likelihood of females similar
to males being invited, as well as the relative likelihood of males similar to females being
invited. The plots for the relative likelihood of invitations for the three distance metrics
are shown in figure A.13 and A.14 in appendix A.2. We choose Manhattan distance for
simplicity, so we do not need to worry about finding a suitable value for p.
We found that the relative likelihood is quite robust towards K because it is similar for
most values of K.
The relative likelihood is shown in figure A.15 and figure A.16 in
appendix A.2. We choose to use K = 50. After choosing K, we again perform K-Nearest
Neighbors to find females similar to males with K = 50 while varying the distance metric
and calculating the relative likelihood. This is to ensure that the relative likelihood is still
robust with K = 50, which it was. The relative likelihood for females similar to males
with varying with K = 50 and varying distance metrics can be viewed in figure A.17 in
appendix A.2.
The likelihood is relatively robust towards q. The relative likelihood for different values
of q, is shown in figure A.18 and A.19 in appendix A.2. We choose q = 0.5 .
Based on the relative likelihood for different parameter values, we chose to use Manhattan
distance, K = 50, and q = 0.5. Unless otherwise stated, these parameter values will be
used when performing K-Nearest Neighbors and calculating the relative likelihood.
5.2.2
Evolution of Gender Equality for Invited Speakers
We have analyzed the relative likelihood for different parameter values and addressed
which values we chose to work with. We will now analyze the relative likelihood. The
primary likelihood we focus on is the relative likelihood of females similar to males being
invited. We also compare this with the relative likelihood of males similar to females
being invited. For details about the calculation and the meaning of the likelihood, view
section 4.2 in the Methods. When investigating females, a likelihood at 1 means, that
females similar to males are just as likely to be invited as males.
Our findings reveal that the relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited
has increased with time, as shown in figure 5.3a. Females, similar to males, have been
more likely to be invited than similar males since 2019 because the relative likelihood is
above 1 from 2019 and onwards.
==PAGE:50==
44
5 Results
We also find that with time, males, similar to females, are less likely to be invited, as
shown in figure 5.3b. Males, similar to females, are more likely to be invited than similar
females from 2005 to 2014, with 2010 and 2011 as exceptions. This is because the relative
likelihood is above 1. From 2021, the relative likelihood is increasing. It is interesting if
this is a new trend, but since we only have data for three years since 2021, we cannot say
if this is random or a change in the invitations.
The two plots of the relative likelihood for females and for males in figure 5.3 are not
opposite of each other. Meaning that the relative likelihood for females and males can
both be above 1. For a clearer visual of this fact, view figure A.20 in appendix A.2, where
the two plots of the relative likelihood are plotted in the same figure. It might seem
counterintuitive that males and females can both be more likely to be invited at the same
time. This is because the plots show the relative likelihood of similar researchers being
invited and not the overall likelihood of females and males being invited. The plots are
not opposite of each other because they do not contain the same researchers. Females
similar to males, are not the females males are similar to. The explanation for this is
found in the threshold, which can vary for males and females.
(a) Females similar to males
(b) Males similar to females
Figure 5.3: Relative likelihood of invitation of females similar to males and males similar to females.
The dashed line indicates the point where males and similar females are equally likely to be invited.
The plots are shown with the standard error of the mean as error bars. Since all standard errors of the
mean are small, the calculated average relative likelihood is likely to be close to the true average relative
likelihood. (a) Since 2019, females similar to males have been more likely to be invited than males. (b)
Males similar to females have been more likely to be invited than females from 2005 to 2014, with 2010
and 2011 as exceptions. The relative likelihood for males has been larger in the past than observed for
females.
Our results strongly indicate that females have been discriminated against in the past
because they were less likely to be invited than males with similar characteristics. The
results also indicate that males are discriminated against since they are less likely to be
invited than similar females. Females similar to males are 1.6 times more likely to be
invited than similar males in 2023.
==PAGE:51==
45
5 Results
5.2.3
Analysis of Gender Equality across Seniority
We have analyzed the relative likelihood for males and females without taking seniority
into account. As explained in the Literature Review in section 2, some studies have found
a lack of gender equality to especially apply to senior researchers. The aim of this section
is to analyze the relative likelihood for different seniority groups.
Choosing Parameters
Before analyzing gender equality across seniority, we again need to analyze the relative
likelihood for different parameter values. When analyzing gender equality across seniority,
the researchers are split into groups according to their seniority. These groups are much
smaller than the group with all females, so the same parameter values might not be
suitable for this analysis. For details about the parameters, view section 4.2.3 in the
Methods. The aim of this section is to analyze the relative likelihood across seniority
groups for different parameter values to find suitable values for the parameters.
The relative likelihood we are analyzing is the relative likelihood of females similar to
males. The likelihood is filtered by seniority, meaning that we only compare females and
males within the same group of seniority.
We find that it varies how robust the relative likelihood is toward K across years, but
generally, it is quite robust. The relative likelihood is shown for different seniority groups
and different values of K in figure A.21 in appendix A.2. The relative likelihood is shown
for four selected years. The size of groups varies greatly across the seniority and years,
so choosing an optimal K can be difficult since it will depend on the year and group of
seniority. We choose K = 25.
Our analysis shows that the relative likelihood does differ depending on the distance
metric. The relative likelihood for different distance metrics can be seen in figure A.22
in appendix A.2, where four selected years are shown. Overall, the relative likelihood is
quite robust towards distance metrics, so we keep working with Manhattan distance.
Our analysis of the relative likelihood for different values of q, shows that it is robust
towards some values. We keep working with q = 0.5 since this still seems like a reasonable
choice. Figure A.23 in appendix A.2 shows the relative likelihood for different values of
q. The relative likelihood is shown for four selected years.
Based on this analysis, we keep using Manhattan distance and q = 0.5, but change from
working with K = 50 to K = 25, due to the smaller size of groups.
==PAGE:52==
46
5 Results
Evolution of Gender Equality across Seniority
We can now move on to analyzing the evolution of gender equality across seniority. We
aim to study how gender equality has changed with time across seniority groups. The
relative likelihood used in this section is the likelihood of females similar to males being
invited.
Because we study gender equality across seniority, we only compare females
similar to males and, at the same time, within the same groups of seniority. A relative
likelihood of 1 indicates that they are equally likely to be invited. View section 4.2.5
in the Methods for details about the methods to calculate the relative likelihood across
seniority.
Our findings reveal that the relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited
has increased with time for all seniority groups, as shown in the heat map in figure 5.4. In
2005, only the similar females with seniority 21-25 and > 30 had a relative likelihood above
1, whereas all groups had seniority above 1 in 2023. It means that with time, females are
more likely to get invited than males with similar characteristics. Females with seniority
of 16-20 and 21-25 years have through years have the highest relative likelihood. It means
that females with a seniority of 16-25 years have the best opportunities to get invited
compared to males with similar characteristics. The results indicate that females have
better opportunities to get invited than males with similar characteristics, regardless of
seniority. Despite the trends, we do also notice that the relative likelihood varies quite a
bit from year to year.
Figure 5.4: Heat map of the relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited, grouped
by seniority. The darker the color is, the higher the relative likelihood.
==PAGE:53==
47
5 Results
5.2.4
Analysis of Gender Equality across subfields
In this section, we aim to analyze whether gender equality differs across subfields. We
analyze gender equality by examining the relative likelihood of females similar to males
being invited for different sponsoring units. To examine the relative likelihood, we first
perform K-Nearest Neighbors for all sponsoring units, followed by calculating the relative
likelihood for each year and each sponsoring unit. A relative likelihood of 1 indicates
gender equality. View section 4.2.6 in the methods for details. We first address the choice
of parameter values and, afterward, analyze gender equality across subfields.
The size of the sponsoring units varies greatly across sponsoring units and across years.
Therefore, choosing suitable parameters for the K-Nearest Neighbors can be difficult. We
previously found that the relative likelihood was quite robust toward distance metric, K,
and q. We have used Manhattan distance and q = 0.5 for all analyses using K-Nearest
Neighbors. Therefore, we keep using Manhattan distance and q = 0.5. The value for
K is more difficult to choose. If we choose a K higher than the number of researchers,
we cannot perform K-Nearest Neighbors because there are not enough researchers to find
K neighbors. If we choose a very small K, the results can be very noisy, especially for
sponsoring units with many researchers. To choose K, we group each sponsoring unit by
year and find the year with the fewest researchers. A sponsoring unit is only included in
the analysis if the year with the fewest researchers has more than 15 researchers. K is
chosen to be 1% of the size of the smallest group.
Our findings show that the relative likelihood varies considerably across the years for
most sponsoring units, as shown in figure 5.5, and in figure A.24 and figure A.25 in
appendix A.2. The sponsoring units shown in figure 5.5 are four selected sponsoring units
that show different and interesting trends. Most of the sponsoring units have evolved
to females, similar to males being more likely to be invited than males they are similar
to. For some sponsoring units, the changes in one year vary greatly, whereas others have
smaller changes. Two of the sponsoring units that do show a more consistent trend are
Magnetism and its Applications and Biological Physics, as shown in figure 5.5a and figure
5.5b. The relative likelihood for females similar to males is increasing for both sponsoring
units. Females, similar to males, are in 2023 more than twice as likely to be invited as
the males they are similar to. Chemical Physics and Energy Research and Applications
are examples of some of the sponsoring units with more varying relative likelihood. The
relative likelihood varies considerably for Chemical Physics. It does, however, show that
females similar to males in most years are either more likely to be invited or close to
just as likely to be invited. The relative likelihood in Energy Research and Applications
changes from 0 to above 3 in one year. This means that it changes from no females similar
to males being invited to females similar to males being more than three times as likely
to be invited. This is an extreme change.
With this analysis, we conclude that the relative likelihood varies considerably across the
years. We can also conclude that females, in general, are more likely to be invited across
subfields. Gender equality seems to have been obtained in all 15 analyzed sponsoring
units, but in eight of them, females now have better opportunities to get invited than
males.
==PAGE:54==
48
5 Results
(a) Magnetism and its Applications
(b) Biological Physics
(c) Chemical Physics
(d) Energy Research and Applications
Figure 5.5: The relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited, shown for four different
sponsoring units. The dashed line indicates the point where females similar to males are just as likely to
be invited as the males they are similar to. (a) The relative likelihood of Magnetism and its Application
is increasing with time. The likelihood evolves from being below 1 to above 1. It decreases to below 1
in 2022. Already the next year, the relative likelihood is again above 1. (b) The relative likelihood of
Biological Physics is increasing with time. The relative likelihood is above 1 from 2016 and onwards. (c)
The relative likelihood for Chemical Physics varies greatly, but the relative likelihood is either above 1
or close to 1 in most years. (d) The relative likelihood for Energy Research and Applications showed an
increasing trend from 2018. The relative likelihood varied greatly from 2015 to 2017. It changed from
likelihood 0, to above 3, to around 0.3
5.2.5
Analysis of the Factors Impacting the Likelihood
In the last sections, we analyzed the gender bias in invitation by analyzing the relative
likelihood. In this section, we aim to study the impact of factors on the relative likeli-
hood. The factors we are studying are the variables Seniority, CumulativePaperCount,
Productivity, and SponsoringUnit.
The idea is to see how the relative likelihood
changes when we change the included variables to find similar matches and calculate
the relative likelihood. For details about the methods of studying the impacting factors,
view section 4.2.7 in the Methods.
We first analyze the variables impact on the relative likelihood of females similar to males
being invited. Our findings reveal that the relative likelihood especially changes when we
do not include Seniority and SponsoringUnit, as shown in figure 5.6. It means that
seniority and the sponsoring unit have a distinct impact on the relative likelihood.
==PAGE:55==
49
5 Results
The relative likelihood is lower when we remove Seniority than the one with all four
variables included. It is because the similarity between females and males is now not
based on seniority.
Most likely, the difference in seniority between females similar to
males is now greater. As shown in section 3.2 in the Data chapter, invited speakers tend
to have higher seniority than attendees. Therefore it is natural that when females with
lower seniority are similar to males, then they will be less likely to be invited.
When we remove SponsoringUnit, the relative likelihood is less stable than the relative
likelihood with all four variables included. This is because there is a higher probability
that females similar to males do not have the same sponsoring units.
Therefore, we
are comparing invited speakers across sponsoring units, where the relative likelihood of
inviting females differs.
The relative likelihood without CumulativePaperCount and the relative likelihood with-
out Productivity are very close to the relative likelihood with all four variables included.
So, these variables do not seem to have a very big impact on the relative likelihood. In
section 3.2, we showed that invited speakers tend to have higher productivity and publish
more papers than attendees. Therefore, it is surprising that the relative likelihood does
not change when removing those variables. There can be several reasons for this. One is
that these variables do not influence the relative likelihood. Another is that when remov-
ing one of the variables, we essentially still have the information because both variables
have information about publications and have a high correlation. Lastly, the difference
between invited speakers and attendees for CumulativePaperCount and Productivity
was not as clear as for Seniority.
(a) Relative likelihood with variables removed
(b) Relative likelihood with seniority and sponsoring units
removed
Figure 5.6: The relative likelihood of invitations of females similar to males. The removed variable
is indicated in the legend.
The one with ’None’ is the relative likelihood with all four variables in-
cluded. Seniority and SponsoringUnit have a distinct impact on the relative likelihood. The relative
likelihood is lower when Seniority is removed. The relative likelihood fluctuates more when removing
SponsoringUnit
==PAGE:56==
50
5 Results
In the second part of the analysis, we analyze the variables impact on the relative likeli-
hood of males similar to females being invited. Our findings show the relative likelihood
primarily changes when the variable SponsoringUnit is not included, as shown in figure
5.7. In most years, the relative likelihood is higher than when including all variables.
Generally, the relative likelihood varies more when removing the sponsoring units than
when all variables are included. The explanation is most likely the same as for females
similar to males; the similar researchers have different sponsoring units, and the relative
likelihood, therefore, varies more. It was expected not to see a big change when removing
Seniority. This is because males tend to have higher seniority than females, so not
matching researchers on seniority will most likely still match males with high seniority.
Hence, the relative likelihood will not change a lot. Note that the relative likelihood with
Seniority, CumualtivePaperCount, or Productivity removed generally differs more
from the relative likelihood without any variables removed than we observed for females
similar to males when we removed CumualtivePaperCount, or Productivity.
(a) Relative likelihood with variables removed
(b) Relative likelihood with sponsoring units removed
Figure 5.7: The relative likelihood of invitations of males similar to females. The removed variable is
indicated in the legend. SponsoringUnit seems to have a distinct impact on the relative likelihood. The
relative likelihood varies more when SponsoringUnit is removed.
We have analyzed the relative likelihood with varying included variables. The key take-
away is that the analysis confirmed that seniority is an important characteristic of invited
speakers. This is because the relative likelihood of females is lower when seniority is not
taken into account. However, this does not mean that speakers are invited because of
their seniority.
5.3
Analysis of Females as Potential Invited Speakers
We have now analyzed female representation in general, across seniority, and across sub-
fields. We previously used attendees as the baseline population to compare the gender
ratio of invited speakers. In this section, we question that assumption. The aim of this
section is to analyze the representation of females as invited speakers and to study the
gender relation between invited speakers and the most potential speakers. For details
about the method, view section 4.3 in the Methods.
==PAGE:57==
51
5 Results
Our findings reveal that the representation of females has changed from females being
underrepresented to now not being underrepresented, as seen in figure 5.8. The represen-
tation of females is in this section based on the female ratio of invited speakers compared
to the female ratio of the most potential speakers. The true ratio of female invited speak-
ers is lower than the female ratio of potential speakers from 2005 to 2015. From 2019
and onwards, the true ratio of invited speakers is higher than the ratio of potential fe-
male invited speakers. In 2016-2018, the female ratio for invited speakers and potential
speakers are similar, which indicates gender equality in this period. The plot also shows
that the female ratio of invited speakers increased more than the female ratio of potential
speakers.
So what does this mean? This plot is a new way to understand gender equality at the
conferences. We have previously used the gender ratio of attendees to measure gender
equality, but this enables us to compare the gender ratio of the most potential speakers
and the gender ratio of the invited speakers. The ratio of potential female speakers is
close to the ratio of female attendees. Based on this, females did not have the same
opportunities as males before 2016, but after 2018, it seems that females have better
opportunities to get invited as speakers.
Figure 5.8: Ratio of potential female invited speakers and the
true ratio of female invited speakers. The true ratio of female
invited speakers is lower than that of potential female invited
speakers until 2015. From 2019 and onwards, the true ratio
of female invited speakers is higher than the ratio of potential
female invited speakers.
5.3.1
Evolution of similarity between males and females
We have, through the thesis, shown that the female ratio of invited speakers is increasing.
The increase could be due to an increased focus on gender parity, but it could also be
a change in the field of physics, such as more females having the qualifications to be
invited.
While we cannot study the qualifications, we can study attendees similar to
invited speakers. This section aims to study the evolution of similarity between females
and males for invited and potential speakers. We do this by comparing the gender of
invited speakers and the most potential speakers. For details about the method of finding
potential speakers, and analyzing their gender relation, view section 4.3 in the Methods.
==PAGE:58==
52
5 Results
Our findings reveal that the ratio of female-male matches decreases with time, as shown
in figure 5.9a, and that the male-female matches increase with time, as shown in figure
5.9b.
It means that, with time, female attendees begin to be more similar to female as well
as male invited speakers. This shows that females have, with time, more females have
evolved to have the potential to be invited based on invited speakers’ characteristics.
However, in 18 years, the ratio only decreases from 0.81 to 0.73, so the change is less
than 0.1. This also means that there are fewer male-male matches since M-M + M-F =
1. One possible explanation for this is that more females are entering the field of Physics,
measured by the female ratio.
The results correspond to the analysis of the gender ratio of invited speakers and attendees.
The average female ratio of attendees is 0.21, and the average male ratio is 0.79. This
analysis also shows that attendees are just as reasonable a baseline population as the
potential speakers since we get similar results regardless of the baseline population.
(a) Female invited speaker with similar male attendees
(b) Male invited speaker with similar female attendees
Figure 5.9: Ratio of (a) Female-Male and (b) Male-Female relations in the relation between invited
speakers and potential invited speakers.
Female-male matches are decreasing, whereas Male-Female
matches are increasing. More females are being similar to males as well as females. Female-Male +
Female-Female = 1, and Male-Female + Male-Male = 1. The two plots are not normalized to 1, even
though it looks like it.
This analysis showed that, with time, more females have characteristics similar to those
of invited speakers. While this is a step towards gender parity, the change is happening
very slowly. In 2023, most of the potential speakers are still males.
==PAGE:59==
53
5 Results
5.4
Analysis of Impact of Intervention
So far, we have analyzed the differences between female and male invited speakers, and the
gender bias in invitations. In this section, we aim to analyze the impact of intervention.
We want to analyze whether an intervention toward higher female representation impacts
the surrounding field in the form of more female attendees. Female representation will be
analyzed through invited speakers. A significant effect is found if 95% of the sponsoring
units that changed from low to high effort have a positive effect. A significant effect is
found using linear regression if the slope with the 95% confidence interval does not contain
0. For details on the method, view section 4.4 in the Methods. We show our results for
two iterations to show how stable the results are. The iterations are the results, which are
based on two different runs of calculating the relative likelihood across sponsoring units.
As explained in the methods, in section 4.4, we use three periods for analyzing the impact
of intervention. Our choice of periods is based on the evolution of the relative likelihood.
Figure A.26 in appendix A.2 shows the relative likelihood of females similar to males being
invited. This is shown together with a piecewise function. Based on this, we choose the
periods. The first period is 2005-2012, which is the first part of the piecewise function. At
this part, the relative likelihood is nearly constant. The intervention period is 2013-2020,
where the relative likelihood is increasing. The evaluation period is 2021-2023.
(a) Iteration 1
(b) Iteration 2
Figure 5.10: Histogram of the effect for sponsoring units that changed from low effort in the baseline
period to high effort in the intervention period, with respect to female visibility. The figure shows two
plots of the effect, which is based on two different calculations of relative likelihood across sponsoring
units. They differ because performing K-Nearest Neighbors is based on randomness. (a) Histogram
shows a significant negative effect of the intervention. (b) Histogram does not show any significant effect
==PAGE:60==
54
5 Results
Our findings reveal that intervention has no significant effect, as shown in figure 5.10
and 5.11. Of the sponsoring units that changed from low to high effort toward female
representation, we find that 0% and 37.5% of the sponsoring units have effect. The results
are, therefore, conflicting since iteration 1 reveals that there is a significant negative effect
of the intervention, whereas iteration 2 reveals no significant effect. Taking the size of the
intervention, we find that the intervention has no significant effect, as shown in figure 5.11.
This conclusion is based on the slope and its 95% confidence interval. The slope and 95%
confidence interval for iteration 1 is 0.019 ± 0.21 and −0.094 ± 0.13 for iteration 2. Since
the confidence interval contains 0 for both results, we conclude that the intervention has
no significant results. The female ratio of attendees is shown for the five sponsoring unit
pairs from iteration 1 in figure A.27 in appendix A.2. These results support our conclusion
since no considerable differences are seen in the evaluation period for sponsoring units with
different interventions in the intervention period.
(a) Iteration 1
(b) Iteration 2
Figure 5.11: Histogram of the effect for sponsoring units that changed from low effort in the baseline
period to high effort in the intervention period, with respect to female visibility. The figure shows two
plots of the effect, which is based on two different calculations of relative likelihood across sponsoring
units. They differ because performing K-Nearest Neighbors is based on randomness. (a) Histogram
shows a significant negative effect of the intervention. (b) Histogram does not show any significant effect
The results do all together mean that there is no significant effect from intervention.
==PAGE:61==
55
6 Discussion
6
|
Discussion
In this chapter, we discuss our key results and compare them with previous research. We
also discuss some of this project’s limitations. Lastly, we present aspects that should be
further studied or ideas for expanding this project.
Differences between Females and Males
We found that males have significantly higher seniority, publish significantly more papers,
and are significantly more productive than females. We also found that the differences
between males and females, with respect to some variables, changed with time. Some
evolved from not being significant to being significant or close to significant.
Why are there differences between female and male invited speakers? And why have dif-
ferences changed with time? First, we should keep in mind that we, with the permutation
test, tested the difference between the mean of female and male invited speakers, which
does not exclude the possibility of some females having higher values for the three vari-
ables. Stevens et al.[44] report that males have higher variability with respect to abilities,
interests, and personality traits. This corresponds to what we found in the descriptive
analysis since we often observed that the least productive females were more productive
than the least productive males, and the most productive females were less productive
than the least productive males. This was observed for the cumulative paper count as
well. Stevens et al. does report that the variability has decreased with time, which does
not correspond to our results. Another reason for the differences is the leaky pipeline. Be-
cause more females leave physics before reaching the level of senior researchers, the end of
the leaky pipeline, it is natural that males have higher seniority and have published more
papers since those variables are dependent on their time as researchers. The explanation
for the differences getting significant with time could be due to females joining physics at
a slower rate than females[1]. The combination of the leaky pipeline and females joining
physics slower can explain the evolution of the difference. The consequence of females
joining slower, together with the leaky pipeline, is that the probability of females reaching
the end of the pipeline is lower than that of males. Therefore, it is natural that males as
a group have higher seniority, which makes it natural that their cumulative paper count
is higher because they have had more time to publish.
Female representation
We found that females seem to have better opportunities to get invited when we focus on
gender equality. However, we also found that females are underrepresented with respect
to gender parity.
Our results show that gender parity has not been obtained since this would require that
males and females are equally represented, which we do not observe. However, many
of our results suggest that gender equality has been obtained. Our results suggest that
gender equality has been obtained during the last 19 years. More than that, females
do now have better opportunities than males do, which is why gender equality is still a
problem but now in the opposite direction. These results leave us with the impression
that females are not ignored by the organizer of the March meeting but have been in the
past.
==PAGE:62==
56
6 Discussion
Female researchers are overrepresented when comparing the invited speakers to the base-
line populations. This is in contrast to many other studies. However, many of these
studies were performed years ago, which might explain the differences in results. As-
pinall et al.[22] found that the female ratio of invited speakers on average was 21.4% at
chiropractic research conferences. We get a similar result, but when the female ratio of
invited speakers is at its maximum, it is 32.2%. Using our results for the period Aspinall
et al. studied, we find that the average female ratio of invited speakers is 20.1%. This
is very similar to the one within chiropractic. One main difference is that we estimate
the female ratio in the baseline population to be around 20%, whereas the Aspinall et al.
report from 32% and up to 60% females in chiropractic. This means that even though
the gender parity is comparable, the gender equality is not. We find that gender equality
has been reached, while this can not be concluded in the studied performed by Aspinall
et al.
Sjørslev[23] found that the relative likelihood of invitations of similar females has been
above one in computer science in most years from 2003 to 2021. This is in contrast to our
results, where this did not happen until 2019. Sjørslev found that the relative likelihood
increased with time, which we also found.
We found that with time, more female attendees have become similar to invited speakers.
In the data analysis, in section 3.2, we saw that with time, the female ratio for attendees
increased as well, so it seems that more females are entering the field or fewer are leaving
it. Females might adapt more to the game of research than previously, or females might
experience more inclusion. These are all possible explanations. While it is interesting that
more females are similar to males, it should be noted that the ratio of male-female matches
only changes from ≈0.19 to ≈0.25 in 19 years. Similar results were obtained within
computer science[23], where the ratio of male-female matches increased even less. With
this rate, obtaining gender parity would take a long time, in physics as well as computer
science. Holman et al.[45] also found that obtaining gender parity within physics will take
a long time without intervention. They predicted in 2018 that it would take 258 years
before the gender ratio of senior researchers reaches within 5% of gender parity.
Why are females underrepresented with respect to gender parity? While we cannot reject
that fewer females than males are invited, we need to take other factors into account.
Schroeder et al. (2013)[19] found that more females than males declined their invitation.
This might also be the case at the March Meeting and can explain the underrepresentation.
It can also explain the evolution of more gender diversity within the invited speakers if
females accept more invitations than they did in the past. Another explanation for fewer
female invited speakers might be that females under-promote themselves. Fowler et al.[18]
found that men self-cite more than females do. Jones et al.[20] found that fewer females
than males requested a long talk, resulting in less presenting time for females.
They
suggest that females are not aware of the consequences of under-promoting themselves.
==PAGE:63==
57
6 Discussion
Impacting Factors
Are seniority, cumulative paper count, productivity, and sponsoring units fair to use to
analyze invitations?
We have investigated invitations with respect to several factors. However, inviting re-
searchers is most likely not chosen on seniority, paper count, and productivity. Hopefully,
invitations are based on the quality of the research. Quality is difficult to measure quan-
titatively, but one way is the number of citations. We were, however, not able to get the
number of citations at the time of the conference. It is important that we get the number
at the time of the conference since we want to know the measures of the researchers at the
time of the conference since speakers are invited based on where they are when invited
speakers are selected. Our chosen variables are a way to estimate the work produced by
the researchers. Studies have found a strong correlation between the number of citations
and productivity or number of published papers[46][47]. This shows that productivity and
paper count can be a good indicator of quality. Besides that, citations come with a lot of
bias, why citations might not be a great way to measure quality either. One reason is that
men tend to self-cite more than females, which leads to others citing these researchers
more as well. This leads to lower reliability for citations as a measure of quality[18].
Impact of Intervention
We did not find that intervention had a significant impact. Why does increased female
visibility not affect the representation of female attendees?
While one explanation is
that intervention has no impact, another is found in the data used for the analysis. The
number of sponsoring units we analyzed is quite low. This meant that all sponsoring unit
pairs needed to have an effect in order for us to conclude that the intervention had a
significant effect. This is not a great foundation for studying whether intervention has
a significant impact. Additionally, defining high intervention was difficult. The relative
likelihood of the intervention was very close for all sponsoring units. It should also be
taken into account that enough time might not have passed for us to see an effect. It
could also be that the intervention has not been large enough to see an effect. Lastly, we
need to take COVID-19 into account as well. Most likely, COVID-19 will have had an
impact in 2020, 2021, and 2022. In some years, the conference will have been held online,
which could mean that some were more likely to accept an invitation, because they did
not need to travel. In the later part of COVID-19, some people might have been less
likely to accept an invitation if they did not want to travel due to COVID-19. This was,
however, a condition for all sponsoring units, so the effect will probably be limited.
==PAGE:64==
58
6 Discussion
6.1
Limitations
In this section, we discuss some of this thesis’s limitations. When reviewing the conclu-
sions, these limitations should be considered.
The analyses are based on data from one conference from 2005-2023. It is a large confer-
ence, but since it is only conference, we cannot assume that the results are representative
for the entire field of physics. The quality of the data should also be taken into account.
The data were cleaned to the extent the time limit allowed us. During the data cleaning
we became aware of errors in the web scraping, but also errors on the web-scraped pages.
One of the issues that can have an impact on the results is that the same researchers are
in the data multiple times within the same year. For example, if their names are written
in different ways. Another issue is that we removed researchers when the API could not
find the person, which also has an impact on the results. Another aspect is that gender
plays a crucial role in the analyses. Gender was based on only first name. The gender of
a first name can be dependent on the person’s nationality.
Another limitation is that we only studied the invited speakers who accepted their invi-
tation. As already mentioned, it has been shown within another field that more females
decline their invitation than males. Our conclusions are limited in the sense that we can
conclude less about the field and the process of inviting speakers. The lack of gender
parity for invited speakers can, therefore, be explained by fewer females being invited and
fewer females accepting their invitations since we have no data from all invited speakers.
The last limitation we will mention is the data used for the impact of intervention analysis.
Using very few sponsoring units made it difficult to generalize. The fact that we used the
average relative likelihood for sponsoring units with very fluctuating relative likelihood
made it difficult to distinguish between interventions.
6.2
Future Work
In this last section of the discussion, we present ideas for improving and extending the
work. We first suggest improvements regarding the limitations we mentioned in the last
section and then present suggestions for extending the work.
The first suggestion for improvement of the work is improving the data quality. Some of
the researchers not found by the API were due to details, such as small errors in the way
the names were spelled, due to errors on the web-scraped pages. Other times, the API
cannot find the researcher with a middle name but only without it. Many of these errors
can be solved by heuristics. Therefore, we suggest solving these problems to be able to
use more of the web-scraped data.
More conferences should be investigated to get closer to examining gender diversity in
physics overall. This could be done by analyzing data from other APS conferences. It
is likely that some or a lot of the developed code will be easy to adjust for web-scraping
other APS conferences.
To study gender bias in invitation of speakers, we suggest getting data for all invited
speakers and getting access to those who declined their invitations. This is, of course, if
it is possible to get access to it.
==PAGE:65==
59
6 Discussion
For a more reliable study of the intervention’s impact, we suggest including more spon-
soring units. This could be done by including sponsoring units with available data for
only some of the study period. An important aspect of this study is to allow some time
to pass and analyze how the effect will be in the next couple of years.
As an extension of the work, it would also be interesting to examine the evolution of gender
equality over more years. This would be a natural extension since the data collected for
this project contains data from 1996[25]. This data also contains information about the
chair index and the people chairing the session. It would, therefore, also be natural to
extend this project by examining gender equality for this group.
Previous studies have shown that females are underrepresented in academia, especially in
senior roles. However, we only used estimated seniority and not their academic role. To
address gender diversity within different positions, we suggest adding the academic role
of researchers to the data and studying how gender diversity differs across positions.
The relative likelihood seems to be sensitive to including sponsoring units and which
sponsoring units are included. Therefore, it is worth investigating the sponsoring units
more to see if we can find any differences in gender equality and how they deal with gender
equality or the lack thereof.
==PAGE:66==
60
7 Conclusion
7
|
Conclusion
In the last chapter, we discussed the results and limitations of this project. In this chapter,
we summarize our findings and how they answer our research questions from the scope in
section 1.1.
In the first part of the project, we cleaned the 2,418,837 data points thoroughly in order
to ensure valid results of the analyses. We also added additional data to the already
existing dataset.
Parameter settings were thoroughly analyzed to ensure the robustness and validity of the
results.
In the descriptive analysis, we saw differences between invited speakers and attendees,
as well as male and female speakers.
This addresses differences between gender and
session type, which was our first research question. It also addressed the evaluation of
female representation, which was our second research question. We saw that females have
been underrepresented, but with respect to invited speakers and our baseline population,
females are no longer underrepresented with respect to equality.
The differences between researchers with different genders and session types were further
examined using permutation tests. They showed significant differences between males
and females, regardless of session type, and invited speakers and attendees, regardless
of gender. This was concluded with respect to seniority, cumulative paper count, and
productivity.
We further investigated the representation of females. We showed that females similar
to males have been less likely to be invited than males. We also showed that this has
evolved, such that these females are now more likely to be invited than males.
The representation of females was again addressed when we compared the invited speakers
with the most potential speakers. This did, like the rest of the results, show that females
have been underrepresented, but they are no longer underrepresented with respect to
gender equality. The gender relation of invited speakers and the most potential speakers
shows an increase in females similar to males.
The analysis of the impact of intervention answers our last research question, which
was whether efforts toward higher female representation have an effect. We found that
increasing efforts towards inviting more females has no significant impact on female rep-
resentation in the field.
While the results are promising with respect to gender equality for females, it should
be kept in mind that this gender equality has the effect that males now have worse
opportunities than females. At the same time, the results show that there is a long way
until gender parity is obtained, and if the evolution keeps at the same rate, it will take
a very long time before gender parity is obtained. At the same time, we did not find
intervention to have an impact. Therefore, we have no suggestions on how to speed up
the process of getting gender parity. As mentioned in the introduction, gender diversity
is important for several reasons. One is fairness, and that part has been fulfilled with
==PAGE:67==
61
7 Conclusion
respect to females, but less for males now. However, it will also be difficult to get a
constant level of gender quality. Most likely, this will fluctuate. The other reason was due
to performance, where the goal should be gender parity.
==PAGE:68==
62
7 Conclusion
Bibliography
[1] Hyunsik Kong, Samuel Martin-Gutierrez, and Fariba Karimi. Influence of the first-
mover advantage on the gender disparities in physics citations.
Communications
Physics, 5(1):243, 2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0166149.
[2] Florence et al. Débarre. Gender equity at scientific events. Evolution Letters, 2(3):
148–158, 2018. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/evl3.49.
[3] Evgenia et al. Shishkova. Gender diversity in a stem subfield–analysis of a large
scientific society and its annual conferences.
Journal of The American Society
for Mass Spectrometry, 28(12):2523–2531, 2017.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13361-017-1803-z.
[4] OECD Dashboard on Gender Gaps.
URL https://oecd.org/stories/gender/
dashboard.
[5] Women in the Workplace. URL https://wiw-report.s3.amazonaws.com/Women_
in_the_Workplace_2021.pdf.
[6] Claudia Goldin and Cecilia Rouse. Orchestrating impartiality: The impact of “blind”
auditions on female musicians. American economic review, 90(4):715–741, 2000. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.90.4.715.
[7] Martha
M
Lauzen.
It’s
a
Man’s
(Celluloid)
World:
Portrayals
of
Fe-
male
Characters
in
the
Top
Grossing
U.S.
Films
of
2023.
2024.
URL
https://womenintvfilm.sdsu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/
2023-Its-a-Mans-Celluloid-World-Report.pdf.
[8] Kennedy et al. Casey. Sixty years of gender representation in children’s books: Con-
ditions associated with overrepresentation of male versus female protagonists. PLoS
One, 16(12):e0260566, 2021. doi: https://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0260566.
[9] Staff statistical report 2021.
URL https://s3.eu-west-2.amazonaws.com/
assets.creode.advancehe-document-manager/documents/advance-he/AdvHE_
Equality%20in%20higher%20education_Saff_stats_2021_1635342217.pdf.
[10] Universal Declaration of Human Rights. URL https://www.un.org/en/about-us/
universal-declaration-of-human-rights.
[11] Lifting
global
growth
by
investing
in
women.
URL
https:
//www.blackrock.com/corporate/literature/whitepaper/
lifting-global-growth-by-investing-in-women.pdf.
[12] Diversity
wins:
How
inclusion
matters.
URL
https://www.
mckinsey.com/featured-insights/diversity-and-inclusion/
diversity-wins-how-inclusion-matters.
[13] About March Meeting 2024. URL https://march.aps.org/about.
==PAGE:69==
63
7 Conclusion
[14] gender equality, .
URL https://eige.europa.eu/publications-resources/
thesaurus/terms/1059?language_content_entity=en.
[15] gender equality, .
URL https://eige.europa.eu/publications-resources/
thesaurus/terms/1258?language_content_entity=en.
[16] Øystein et al. Holter. Who Is Publishing What? How Gender Influences Publication
Rates, pages 107–128. 01 2022. ISBN 9788202793142. doi: https://doi.org/10.23865/
noasp.179.
[17] Molly M et al. King. Men set their own cites high: Gender and self-citation across
fields and over time. Socius, 3:2378023117738903, 2017. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1177/2378023117738903.
[18] James Fowler and Dag Aksnes. Does self-citation pay? Scientometrics, 72(3):427–
437, 2007. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-007-1777-2.
[19] J. Schroeder et al. Fewer invited talks by women in evolutionary biology symposia.
Journal of evolutionary biology, 26(9):2063–2069, 2013. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/
jeb.12198.
[20] Therésa M et al. Jones. Gender differences in conference presentations: a consequence
of self-selection? PeerJ, 2:e627, 2014. doi: https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.627.
[21] Katherine M et al. Gerull. Representation of women in speaking roles at surgical
conferences.
The American Journal of Surgery, 220(1):20–26, 2020.
doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2019.09.004.
[22] Sasha L Aspinall et al. Presenters at chiropractic research conferences 2010–2019:
is there a gender equity problem? Chiropractic & manual therapies, 31(1):28, 2023.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12998-023-00498-w.
[23] Marie Sjørslev Pedersen.
Evolution of gender diversity in academia,
2023.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/64a36387f28d42915221587f.
[24] Joe Alper. The pipeline is leaking women all the way along. Science, 260(5106):
409–411, 1993. doi: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.260.5106.409.
[25] Ellen
Winther
Mortensen.
Building
a
multi-year
gendered
dataset
on
attendance
at
physics
scientific
conferences,
2023.
github:
https://github.com/EllenWM/Evolution-of-Gender-Diversity-in-Physics-
Conferences.git.
[26] "Archives of the Bulletin of the American Physical Society (BAPS)", . URL https:
//www.aps.org/meetings/baps/index.cfm.
[27] WGND 2.0 - World Gender Name Dictionary, . URL https://dataverse.harvard.
edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/MSEGSJ.
[28] Aps units, . URL https://www.aps.org/membership/units/index.cfm.
[29] Semantic
Scholar
|
AI-Powered
Research
Tool,
.
URL
https://www.
semanticscholar.org.
==PAGE:70==
64
7 Conclusion
[30] Search for authors by name, . URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/api-docs/
#tag/Author-Data/operation/get_graph_get_author_search.
[31] Semantic
Scholar
|
Frequently
Asked
Questions,
.
URL
https://www.
semanticscholar.org/faq#ranking-function.
[32] Semantic
Scholar
|
Frequently
Asked
Questions,
.
URL
https://www.
semanticscholar.org/faq#ranking-function.
[33] Saloni Dattani, Lucas Rodés-Guirao, Hannah Ritchie, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and
Max Roser.
Life expectancy.
Our World in Data, 2023.
URL https://
ourworldindata.org/life-expectancy.
[34] Rand R Wilcox. Introduction to robust estimation and hypothesis testing. 2012. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/C2010-0-67044-1. pp. 176–177.
[35] Ronald A Fisher. "the coefficient of racial likeness" and the future of craniometry.
The Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 66:
57–63, 1936. doi: https://doi.org/10.2307/2844116.
[36] Rand R Wilcox. Applying Contemporary Statistical Techniques. 2003. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-751541-0.X5021-4. pp. 249–251.
[37] Chittaranjan Andrade. The p value and statistical significance: Misunderstandings,
explanations, challenges, and alternatives. Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine,
41(3):210–215, 2019. doi: https://doi.org/10.4103/IJPSYM.IJPSYM_193_19.
[38] Oliver Kramer.
Dimensionality reduction with unsupervised nearest neighbors.
Springer, 2013. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38652-7. pp. 13–16.
[39] Aye Thant and Soe Aye. Euclidean, manhattan and minkowski distance methods
for clustering algorithms. International Journal of Scientific Research in Science,
Engineering and Technology, pages 553–559, 06 2020. doi: https://doi.org/10.32628/
IJSRSET2073118.
[40] Shraddha Pandit and Suchita Gupta. A comparative study on distance measuring
approaches for clustering. International Journal of Research in Computer Science,
2:29, 12 2011. doi: https://doi.org/10.7815/ijorcs.21.2011.011.
[41] Nearest
Neighbors,
.
URL
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
neighbors.html.
[42] KNeighborsClassifier,
.
URL
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier.html.
[43] Petter Laake and Morten Wang Fagerland. Statistical inference. Research in Med-
ical and Biological Sciences: From Planning and Preparation To Grant Application
and Publication, page 382, 2015. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-799943-2.
00011-2.
[44] Sean Stevens and Jonathan Haidt. The greater male variability hypothesis—an ad-
dendum to our post on the google memo. Heterodox Academy, 2017. URL https:
//heterodoxacademy.org/blog/the-greater-male-variability-hypothesis/.
==PAGE:71==
65
Conclusion
[45] Luke et al. Holman. The gender gap in science: How long until women are equally
represented?
PLoS biology, 16(4):e2004956, 2018.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.2004956.
[46] Ulf Sandström and Peter Van den Besselaar. Quantity and/or quality? the impor-
tance of publishing many papers. PLoS One, 11(11):e0166149, 2016.
[47] Matthew RE et.al Symonds. Gender differences in publication output: towards an
unbiased metric of research performance. PloS one, 1(1):e127, 2006. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0000127.
[48] Evolution-of-Gender-Diversity-in-Physics-Conferences. URL https://github.com/
EllenWM/Evolution-of-Gender-Diversity-in-Physics-Conferences.git.
==PAGE:72==
66
A Appendix
A
|
Appendix
A.1
Github
All code for this project is created in Python, and is available on GitHub: The code for
this project is performed in Python, and is available on Github[48].
A.2
Additional plots
Figure A.1:
Invited speakers from 1996 to 2023.
It is seen that there is very few invited in 1996
indicating an error in the web scraping. Besides that is seen a shift between 2004 to 2005 due to the way
the data were organized and collected
==PAGE:73==
67
A Appendix
Figure A.2: Attendees from 1996 to 2023. There are very few attendees in 1996, indicating an error
in the web scraping. There are very high number of attendees in 2003 indicating an error in the web
scraping here as well. There is an shift in number of attendees between 2004 to 2005 due to the way the
pages were organized, and the way the data were collected.
Figure A.3: Number of results found by Semantic Scholar for each researcher. The number of results
is plotted on logarithmic scale. It shows that around 20% of the researchers have one result, but many
have more than 1, and some really have a lot of results.
==PAGE:74==
68
A Appendix
Figure A.4: Distribution of fields.
Figure A.5: Distribution of fields based on external sources. 27% of the researchers have physics as
their field.
==PAGE:75==
69
A Appendix
Figure A.6: Distribution of fields predicted by Semantic Scholars classification model.
40% of the
researchers have physics as their field.
Figure A.7: Percent invited speakers that could not be found by API of all of the invited speakers.
This is only the researchers where their gender could be estimated as female, male or ?. In 2022 3.3%
of the invited speakers can not be found, which is the highest percent of all years. It is quite few of the
invited speakers that can not be found.
==PAGE:76==
70
A Appendix
Figure A.8: Percent attendees that could not be found by API of all attendees. The attendees shown is
only the one where gender were estimated to either female, male or ?. Most years the percent of missing
attendees is 2-3%. From 2019 it is 3.5%, where it starts to increase and end at 10.5% in 2023. This
indicates that one reason that not all researchers can be found, are if they are young researchers, that do
not have a lot of data registered on them yet.
==PAGE:77==
71
A Appendix
Figure A.9: Gender ratio of the researchers that could not be found by the API, but who we were able
to estimate the gender of. The gender ratio of the invited speakers differ quite a bit, probably because
there were quite few invited speakers that could not be found. The gender ratio is quite consistent over
all years, which is important, to make sure that this data removed, is representative of the data.
==PAGE:78==
72
A Appendix
(a) 2005
(b) 2006
(c) 2013
(d) 2023
Figure A.10: Distance from each male to all of their K = 10 closest females. The distance metric used
is Manhattan distance, and q = 0.5 is used for the threshold. The plots are shown on a log-log scale.
The chosen years are some of those years that varied the most. All distance plots are really similar.
Seniority
Cumualtive Paper Count
Productivity
Gender(invited)
0
0
0.0007
Gender(attendee)
0
0
0
Session Type
1
1
1
Session Type(males)
1
1
1
Session Type(females)
1
1
1
Table A.1: p-values of the permutation test performed. They are shown for each permutated label and
for each of the three examined variables. The first row is for the testing differences between female and
male invited speakers, the second row is for testing differences between female and male attendees, the
third row is for testing differences between invited speakers and attendees, the fourth row is for testing
differences between male invited speakers and male attendees, and, the fifth row is for testing differences
between female invited speakers and female attendees. The p-values show significant differences for all
groups.
==PAGE:79==
73
A Appendix
(a) 2005
(b) 2010
(c) 2016
(d) 2023
Figure A.11: Distance from each male to all of their K = 50 closest females. The distance metric used
is Manhattan distance, and q = 0.5 is used for the threshold. The plots are shown on a log-log scale.
The chosen years are some of those years that varied the most. The plots show that the distances look
different than for K = 10. We see more variance in the plots for K = 50 than with K = 10, especially
since the plot for 2005 looks different than the rest of the plots. At the same time, the plots for K = 50
still look quite similar.
==PAGE:80==
74
A Appendix
(a) Seniority
(b) Cumulative Paper Count
(c) Productivity
Figure
A.12:
Violin
plots
for
different
permutation
tests
for
the
attributes
Seniority,
CumulativePaperCount and Productivity. The y-axis is the test performed, named by the label per-
mutated. The labels permutated were Gender for invited speakers, Gender for attendees, SessionType
for all researchers, SessionType for males, and SessionType for females. Note that most permutation
tests resulted in the mean from the permutated values not being close to the true mean, meaning that
there is a difference between all groups examined
==PAGE:81==
75
A Appendix
Figure A.13: The relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited for Euclidean, Manhattan,
and Minkowski distance performed with K = 10 and q = 0.5. The dashed line indicates the point where
males and similar females are equally likely to be invited. The likelihood is robust towards the distance
metric since the likelihood is very similar for the 3 likelihoods.
Figure A.14: Relative likelihood of males similar to females being invited with Euclidean, manhattan,
and Minkowski distance. The relative likelihood is quite robust towards distance metric, but Manhattan
and Minkowski’s distance are closer to each other than Euclidean.
==PAGE:82==
76
A Appendix
Figure A.15: The relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited for different K and q =
0.5. The dashed line indicates the point where males and similar females are equally likely to be invited.
The relative likelihood for K = 2 and 5 has more noise than for other values of K. Likelihood for K > 5
is quite stable.
Figure A.16: Relative likelihood of males similar to females being invited with K varied. The dashed
line indicates where females and similar males are equally likely to be invited. The relative likelihood has
more noise with K < 20, but is quite stable towards K when K > 10, why K should be chosen to be at
least 20.
==PAGE:83==
77
A Appendix
Figure A.17: The relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited for Euclidean, Manhattan,
and Minkowski distance performed with K = 50 and q = 0.5. The dashed line indicates the point where
males and similar females are equally likely to be invited. The likelihood is also robust towards the
distance metric with K = 50.
Figure A.18: The relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited for K = 50 and different
values of q. The dashed line indicates the point where males and similar females are equally likely to
be invited. q = 0.1 and 0.2 have more noise than the other values of q. The relative likelihood is quite
robust towards q for q ≥0.4.
==PAGE:84==
78
A Appendix
Figure A.19: Relative likelihood of males similar to females being invited with q varied. q = 0.1 was not
possible to plot since this resulted in cases with no invited males or females. q = 0.2 has more noise than
the other quantiles. Besides that, the relative likelihood is quite robust towards the quantile. However,
we do see some differences in the likelihood, especially from 2007 to 2009, where q = 0.8 and q = 0.9 have
similar values, which are lower than the values for q = 0.4, q = 0.5, and q = 0.6. However, they all show
the same pattern, so q ≥0.4 seems like a reasonable choice for q.
==PAGE:85==
79
A Appendix
Figure A.20: Relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited and males similar to females
being invited. The dashed line indicate the point where males and similar females are equally likely to
be invited and where females and similar males are equally likely to be invited, respectively. The two
plots are not opposite of each other.
==PAGE:86==
80
A Appendix
(a) 2006
(b) 2009
(c) 2015
(d) 2018
Figure A.21: Relative likelihood for females similar to males for each seniority group, shown for 2006,
2009, 2015, and 2018. The relative likelihood is shown for different K for the K-nearest Neighbors to
check for robustness towards K. The years shown are some of the years that showed the most different
results. Some years are very robust towards the K, whereas others are quite robust, but where K = 5,
and 10 have more noise than the rest of the K’s.
==PAGE:87==
81
A Appendix
(a) 2005
(b) 2015
(c) 2018
(d) 2020
Figure A.22: Relative likelihood for females similar to males for each seniority group, shown for 2005,
2015, 2018, and 2023. The relative likelihood is shown for different distance metrics in the K-nearest
Neighbors to check for robustness towards the distance metric. The years shown are some of the years
that showed the most different results. Some years are very robust towards the distance metrics, whereas
others vary more. In general, the relative likelihood is quite robust towards the distance metric.
==PAGE:88==
82
A Appendix
(a) 2008
(b) 2012
(c) 2014
(d) 2018
Figure A.23: Relative likelihood for females similar to males for each seniority group, shown for 2008,
2012, 2014, and 2018. The relative likelihood is shown for different quantiles for the thresholds in the
K-nearest Neighbors to check for robustness towards the quantile. The years shown are some of the years
that showed the most different results. Some years are very robust towards the quantile, whereas others
vary more. In general, the relative likelihood is quite robust towards the quantile. The relative likelihood
has more noise for q = 0.2, and at times, the relative likelihood for q = 0.8 and 0.9 is more different than
the rest of the quantiles.
==PAGE:89==
83
A Appendix
(a) Condensed Matter Physics
(b) Materials Physics
(c) Statistical and Nonlinear Physics
(d) Atomic, Molecular & Optical Physics
(e) Computational Physics
(f) Data Science
Figure A.24: Relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited shown for different sponsoring
units. The dashed line indicates the point where females similar to males are just as likely to be invited
as the males they are similar to. Most of the sponsoring units have a relative likelihood that varies across
the years. Most of these sponsoring units vary around 1, indicating gender equality. All these sponsoring
units have evolved to either have better opportunities for females or close to equal opportunities.
==PAGE:90==
84
A Appendix
(a) Fluid Dynamics
(b) Industrial and Applied Physics
(c) Polymer Physics
(d) Quantum Information
(e) Soft Matter
Figure A.25: Relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited shown for different sponsoring
units. The dashed line indicates the point where females similar to males are just as likely to be invited
as the males they are similar to. The relative likelihood for Fluid Dynamics in (a) varies greatly. In
only a few years, it varies between 0 and above 4. Meaning that in some years, no females similar to
males are invited, while in other years, females similar to males are more than four times as likely to
be invited. (b) and (c) show a relative likelihood that varies around 1, indicating gender equality. (d)
and (e) show relative likelihood above 1 for all shown years, which are three and two years, respectively.
All shown sponsoring units have evolved to either have better opportunities for females or close to equal
opportunities.
==PAGE:91==
85
A Appendix
Figure A.26: Relative likelihood of females similar to males being invited shown together with a
piecewise function. The first part is the part that same relative constant, while the second part is
the part where the relative likelihood is increasing. This plot is used to decide on periods for the
analysis of the impact of intervention.
==PAGE:92==
86
A Appendix
(a) Industrial and Applied Physics, and Condensed Matter
Physics
(b) Magnetism and its Applications, and Atomic, Molecular
& Optical Physics
(c) Magnetism and its Application, and Condensed Matter
Physics
(d) Materials Physics, and Condensed Matter Physics
(e) Statistical and Nonlinear Physics, and Atomic, Molecular
& Optical Physics
Figure A.27: Female ratio of attendees for five pairs of sponsoring units. The dashed line indicates
the cutoff for the periods. Both sponsoring units in the pair had a relative likelihood below one in the
baseline period. The sponsoring unit indicated with blue had relative likelihood ≥in the intervention
period. The legend indicates the sponsoring units and their average likelihood in the intervention period.
The pair of sponsoring units all have a similar female ratio of attendees in 2023. All pairs of sponsoring
units also have very similar slopes.
