==PAGE:1==
Automated characterization and analysis
of next-generation solar cell materials
by
Malthe Emil Skytte (s183749)
Rasmus Thorup Danielsen (s183792)
Supervisors:
Master Thesis
Andrea Crovetto
Technical University of Denmark
Lena Mittmann
27th of June, 2024
Eugen Stamate
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the people who have supported us during the project and helped us
complete our thesis, and we would like to extend our thanks.
• Lena Mittmann - Huge thanks for your gracious effort in providing advice,
feedback, and guidance on our thesis. Also thanks for assistance and guidance
during weekly meetings and training for characterization tool usage.
• Andrea Crovetto - Thanks for guiding us and lifting our spirits during our
weekly meetings.
• Evgeniy Shkondin - Thanks for instructing us in tool usage in the cleanroom,
and answering any questions we had.
• Berit Wenzell - Thank you for teaching us how to use the SEM and LayerProbe.
==PAGE:3==
Workload distribution
This thesis was a product of two students, and as such some parts of the thesis have
been worked on to a greater degree by only one person. An overview of these parts is
given here. If a part is not mentioned, it can be assumed that the workload was split
evenly.
– Python code –
Fitting functions for XPS, UPS, XRD, REELS, and Raman spectroscopy
Done entirely by Malthe.
Import functions for all characterization data
Done entirely by Rasmus. The multiindex datastructure format was devised together
with Malthe.
Remaining functions, including other data treatment and visualization
Split workload.
– Characterization work –
Split workload.
– Thesis writing –
1: Introduction and motivation, 2: State of the Art
Done entirely by Rasmus.
3 to 3.2.4: High-throughput analysis
Done entirely by Malthe.
3.3: Data management and analysis using Python
Split workload.
4.1: 2θ/ω XRD offset test
Done by Rasmus, XRD offset graphs by Malthe.
4.2: ZrTiO, 4.3: CuPS 400°C, 4.4, CuPS 250°C
Results sections were primarily split workload. Only Malthe described UPS spectra.
General proofreading
Split workload.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Discovery of new materials requires examining a large quantity of potential candidates.
This endeavor can be supported by simulations, but should also be supported by high-
throughput characterization and analysis of real materials. In this thesis, a high through-
put characterization and analysis of sputtered thin film phosphosulfide libraries was
demonstrated. A Python script capable of handling, analyzing and visualizing data was
developed. The script was made to handle importing data from different characteriza-
tion tools and their associated software. This included tools for Energy Dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), Ultraviolet Photoelec-
tron Spectroscopy (UPS), Raman spectroscopy, X-ray Diffraction (XRD), ellipsometry
and Reflection Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (REELS). It was also made to be able
to fit, and extract the useful properties of, XRD, UPS, Raman, and REELS spectra.
The script was tested on three different samples, each containing a library of materi-
als. As a high-throughput approach, a grid of points was defined across each material
library, thus defining a grid of unique materials. The samples were produced by our
supervisors in a custom sputtering setup. This setup was only just nearing completion
and needed testing of its functionality. The first sample consisted of ZrTiO, sputtered
with a Zr/Ti gradient and a perpendicular O gradient. Both of these gradients were
successfully found through characterization over the grid and visualized through the
script. The two next samples were copper phosphosulfide (CuPS) samples, produced
to demonstrate the capability of the setup to produce a sample with these elements.
Through the characterization processes, C, P, and S were all successfully detected in the
samples.
The Python script was demonstrated to enable high-throughput analysis of material
libraries, and showed to be useful for analysis of future samples produced by the setup.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction and motivation
1
2
State of the Art
2
2.1
Choice of solar material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Phosphosulfides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
High-throughput analysis
5
3.1
Sample structure and fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.1
Composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.2
Crystal structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2.3
Optical properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2.4
Electronic band structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Data management and analysis using Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.1
Data loading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.2
Data visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.3
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.4
Data interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Results
13
4.1
2θ/ω XRD offset test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
ZrTiO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.1
XPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.2
EDX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.3
Ellipsometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2.4
UPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.5
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
CuPS 400°C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.1
XPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.2
Ellipsometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.3
UPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
==PAGE:6==
4.3.4
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
CuPS 250°C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.1
XPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4.2
EDX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.3
Ellipsometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4.4
UPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4.5
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4.6
Raman spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Conclusion and outlook
40
References
44
Appendix
44
A Appendix
45
A.1 ZrTiO additional material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.1.1
ZrTiO - XPS including outliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.1.2
ZrTiO - EDX including outliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.1.3
ZrTiO - ellipsometry including outliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.1.4
ZrTiO - UPS full spectra and outliers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.2 CuPS 400C additional material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2.1
CuPS 400C - XPS including outliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2.2
CuPS 400C - EDX data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.2.3
CuPS 400C - Ellipsometry including outliers
. . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.2.4
CuPS 400C - UPS full spectra
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2.5
CuPS 400C - XRD 53.8° peak data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.3 CuPS 250C additional material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.3.1
CuPS 250C - EDX CuPS model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.3.2
CuPS 250C - EDX CuPS-CO model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.3.3
CuPS 250C - Ellipsometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.3.4
CuPS 250C - XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.3.5
CuPS 250C - UPS full spectra
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
==PAGE:7==
A.4 Readme file and Python package list for data management script . . . .
61
6
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction and motivation
Modern materials design is supported by high-throughput computational analysis. By
organizing simulated material properties in a database, this information can later be
intelligently probed for specific wanted properties. This allows for easy reuse of the
data as input for new simulations.1 However, the theoretical results are dubious if they
cannot be backed up by experimental characterization data. Physically accurate simu-
lations for certain materials might also be too computationally expensive to calculate.2
On the other hand, synthesis and characterization of a single material at a time is also
too time consuming and expensive. Modern materials design therefore needs similarly
high-throughput synthesis and experimental characterization methods.
Synthesis of
combinatorial libraries (samples with material gradients) can speed up new material re-
search considerably. Automatically analyzing these libraries through mapping functions
available on some characterization equipment is likewise high-throughput. Furthermore,
integrating not only simulated but also experimental characterization data in a globally
accessible material database allows for an improved research and discovery pipeline. The
data will then align with the FAIR data concept (findable, accessible, interoperable and
reusable), easing and accelerating any future work on the data and supporting auto-
mated AI analysis.3
A particular material field that would benefit from implementation of high-throughput
characterization is photovoltaic (PV) research, where a vast quantity of possible mate-
rial candidates exist.1 We analyze one such candidate material space: phosphosulphide
thin film libraries, demonstrating a high-throughput analysis approach. From initial
research, phosphosulfides show promise as PV cell materials,4–6 as they span a vast ma-
terial space which contains semiconductors with promising band gaps, effective carrier
masses, and carrier lifetimes. They are also difficult to computationally model without
neglecting effects like defect clusters, grain boundaries, and cell heating, necessitating
experimental analysis.6 Uniquely, as phosphorus can assume a wide range of oxidation
states (from -3 to +5),6 phosphosulfides can also be designed by altering the amounts
of phosphorous compared to sulfur. However, for a phosphorous to sulfur ratio above
1, the crystal structure is only known for a select few materials,7 increasing difficulties
in computational first-principles density functional theory simulations that needs this
information as input.6 Finally, not only are phosphosulfides as a whole not thoroughly
researched materials, but their application for thin film PV technologies is also a novel
concept with little research done in the area. As an almost unexplored, vast material
space with promising early results for PV applications, this leads to thin film phospho-
sulfides being ideal candidates for an automated high-throughput analysis.
Our work is based on a thin film libraries deposited by a new, custom sputtering setup
developed by our supervisors. We characterize a grid of points across each thin film
using six different characterization tools, including Energy Dispersive X- ray spec-
troscopy (EDX), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), Ultraviolet Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (UPS), Raman spectroscopy, X-ray Diffraction (XRD), and ellipsometry.
We then develop a Python script to automatically aggregate and analyze the character-
ization data, enabling and demonstrating a high-throughput material analysis.
1
==PAGE:9==
2
State of the Art
Given the growing worldwide energy demand, it is no wonder that frequent research
in energy generating technologies is ongoing. According to the International Energy
Agency, the combined renewable energy capacity is expected to surpass coal as the
largest source of electricity generation in 2025.8 Among these renewables, solar PVs are
the fastest growing power source. In 2022 a new 228 GW of PV electricity was added,
surpassing the growth of wind power and accounting for over 66% of new renewables.8
This growth is expected to more than double, with a forecast of a new 540 GW solar
PV added in 2028, where PVs would then account for almost 13% of total electricity
generation worldwide.8
The growth of PVs stem from them being the least costly
electricity generation options in many countries, particularly China. PV cells are thus
a key component of a green energy future. Among them, silicon semiconductors remain
the most widely used absorber material, and have in the period from 1999 to 2010
accounted for between 80% and 90% of used PV absorber materials.9 The popularity
of silicon is due to its abundance, non-toxicity, longevity, and high efficiency. However,
research into multi-junction solar cells utilizing a silicon bottom layer could improve the
efficiency further.10 To achieve this, a new material with a fitting band gap and similar
low cost, longevity, and non-toxicity as silicon is needed.
2.1
Choice of solar material
The efficiency of a single-layer solar cell can be modeled through the Shockley-Queisser
model, which describes the absorption process of a photon in a PV absorber.11 Figure 1
illustrates this process and the power extraction as a function of the band gap Eg that
result from this model. In figure 1a, the band structure of an absorber is shown. An
impinging photon with sufficient energy to overcome Eg excites an electron from the
valence band EV to the conduction band EC, creating an electron-hole pair (point A).
Any excess photon energy above Eg will be lost as the electron-hole pair relaxes to a
thermal equilibrium with the cell (point B). This extra energy is lost as heat, and this
mechanism is thus called thermalization loss. The electron-hole pair can now be picked
up by contacts on the cell, but this includes another loss as the potential of the carriers
is reduced from Eg to the potential of the contact circuit qV (point C). This is called
the isothermal loss, as both the electron and hole do not change temperature from this
loss. Not illustrated is the recombination process: As there is a finite possibility for
recombination, the carrier lifetime is not infinite. There is thus a final possible loss from
recombination between electron-hole pairs, re-emitting a photon that could potentially
undergo another absorption still inside the cell. Figure 1b illustrates the balance between
these three loss types, as well as the loss from non-absorption due to low photon energy.
The efficiency is shown for a 5800 K black-body spectrum across a range of absorber
band gaps. For a single-junction PV cell, the maximum possible power extraction is
fundamentally limited by these loss types. In a real cell, the losses might be higher,
as non-absorption could be affected by a low absorption coefficient, low carrier lifetime
could increase recombination, and misaligned contacts could increase isothermal losses.
2
==PAGE:10==
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Illustrations of (a), excitation in solar cell leading to electron-hole pair (shown
in blue and red respectively) and (b), power loss sources in an ideal single-layer solar
cell over material band gap based on the Shockley-Queisser model. White: Power out.
Green: Non-absorption losses. Yellow: Thermalization losses. Blue: Recombination
losses. Red: Isothermal losses. The major losses stem from failure to absorb photons
below the band gap, balanced with thermalization losses from absorbing photons with
energies higher than the band gap. Additional losses from photon emissions through re-
combinations and isothermal losses from electron/hole collection also influence efficiency.
Illustrations by Guillemoles et al.11
As shown in figure 1b, the optimal single layer band gap lies around the 1.1 eV mark,
with an efficiency of 30%.11
For a more accurate solar irradiation model, the ideal
band gap is closer to 1.34 eV with an efficiency of 33.2%.12 The most commonly used
solar cell material is silicon, which has a band gap of around 1.1 eV,13 leading to an
maximum efficiency of around 32%. This efficiency is only 1.2% below the maximum.
Additionally, silicon is abundant, cheap, and well integrated into current manufacturing
processes.9 It can thus be concluded that a good single-material replacement for silicon
would be difficult to find. Instead, multi-junction solar cells can be applied to mitigate
thermalization and non-absorption losses. If another material with a higher than 1.1 eV
band gap is stacked on top of silicon, high-energy photons will be absorbed with lower
thermalization losses, and the material will remain transparent for low-energy photons,
allowing silicon to still absorb those.
As of June 2024, the most efficient solar cell
produced is a four-junction concentrator photovoltaic cell with an efficiency of 47.6% at
a concentration of 665 suns by Fraunhofer ISE.14 The maximum theoretical efficiency
for infinite junctions under normal sunlight is 68.7%.15 High efficiency concentrator PV
cells are of interest for uses such as spaceflight,16 but if the commercial silicon solar cell
should be improved, a material with low cost and ease of implementation into established
manufacturing processes is necessary. Given the aforementioned expected growth in the
worldwide solar power capacity, frequent research is ongoing for new materials such as
perovskites. Our project focuses on phosphosulfides and their use for solar technologies.
3
==PAGE:11==
2.2
Phosphosulfides
Phosphosulfides (PSs) are materials containing phosphorous, sulfur, and one or more
metals. Phosphides and sulfides on their own have been well studied, with materials
like InGaP already being widely used in efficient multi-junction solar cells.17 Sulfides
such as Cu2S, Ag2S, PbS, and SnS among others have undergone research as possible
cheaper replacements for silicon in heterojunction solar cells, although they face issues
regarding low efficiencies around only 5%.18 Despite this interest in seemingly similar
materials, few studies on the optoelectronic properties of PSs exist, and many of these
are theoretical analyses based on density functional theory (DFT) simulations. The PS
design space is vast, owing not only to the choice of metal and the amount of metals
to use, but also the ratio between phosphorous and sulfide. Phosphorous can assume
a wide range of oxidation states, resulting in bonds to one or multiple types of atoms.
Based on the Materials Project database, most PSs have P/S ratios of 1/1, 1/3, 2/7,
or 1/4, and are of ternary or quaternary systems (respectively 3 or 4 different elements
total).6 Tuning the P/S ratio, the stoichiometry, or the structure can alter the band
gap, although the exact effect depends on the structure as well as metals chosen for the
PS.
Perhaps the most comprehensive theoretical investigation into PSs is a DFT screening
by Han D. and Ebert H. They examined a group of 18 ternary 1/3, 2/7, and 1/4 P/S
ratio PSs, also called thiophosphates due to their similarity to their oxide-based coun-
terparts, phosphates.6 They included metals Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Cu, Ag, B, Al, Ga,
In, Sb, and Bi, with structures M1PS3, M1PS4, and M3PS4 (M = metal).4 They found
band gaps ranging from 1.66 to 4.11 eV, a range suggesting many possible materials
for optoelectronic applications. They conclude that Ag3PS4, with a calculated band
gap of 2.21 eV, is a possible candidate for a multi-junction solar material. Ag3PS4 has
a direct band gap, low effective carrier masses, and high optical absorption, although
it also possesses a forbidden optical transition which could reduce efficiencies in thin
films when absorbing photons close to the band gap. They additionally concluded that
the material also shows promise as a water splitting photocatalyst. Other low carrier
mass materials they found included InPS4, Na3PS4, and Cu3PS4. These three materials
all had indirect band gaps, however. This requires light absorption to be assisted by
a crystallographic defect, or by emission or absorption of a phonon.19 Indirect band
gap photon absorptions are less likely to occur, requiring thicker materials to absorb
light effectively.19 It should be mentioned that Si has found success in PV technologies
despite it also having an indirect band gap.
Some studies on synthesized PSs have also been performed. One study is by Itthiben-
chapong et al. on Cu3PS4−xSex powders for PV applications. The band gap was found
to vary between 1.35 eV for Cu3PSe4 to 2.36 eV for Cu3PS4, showing promise for PV
use.5 Many other studies on PSs typically report results for a singular material only.
The experimental data on varying metals and P/S ratios is lacking, and in fact mate-
rials with a P/S ratio above 1 have never been synthesized.6 Studying a wide range of
phosphosulfides could therefore reveal useful new materials for solar applications.
4
==PAGE:12==
3
High-throughput analysis
High-throughput analysis is a highly appealing method for exploring the potential of
phosphosulfide materials. To make this feasible, specially designed samples with material
gradients were characterized with a number of different characterization methods. This
created a large amount of data requiring management through Python.
3.1
Sample structure and fabrication
The samples consist of a metal phosposulfide thin film on top a silicon substrate. A
scheme of the ideal thin film structure is shown in figure 2a. The scheme has been
designed to have gradients in the elemental composition across two perpendicular di-
rections: A gradient from a sulfur rich region to a phosphor rich region in the vertical
direction, and a gradient from metal 1 (M1) to metal 2 (M2) in the horizontal direction.
For our project, we looked at samples with a P to S gradient, and only one metal. A
grid of measurement point was then defined to cover the entire surface, with each point
considered a unique material. This allows for characterization on a scale of around a
hundred unique materials in a few tens of hours of measurement time.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: (a): Scheme of the ideal sample showing the gradients, sulfur in red to
phosphor in green, and from metal 1 (M1) in blue to metal 2 (M2) in yellow. Black
dots shows a 9x9 grid of the used characterization points. Recreated from (Mittmann,
2024).6 (b): Illustration showing the sputtering setup. Metal is deposited from two
sputter targets from two different angles underneath the sample. Phosphor is supplied
through a gas inlet at the top. Sulfur is deposited from a sulfur cracker, underneath the
sample and from a different angle to the metal targets. Source: (Mittmann, 2024)6
The sample was manufactured by combinatorial reactive sputtering in a custom setup,
a scheme of this is shown in figure 2b. It consists of two directional sources for M1
and M2, a sulfur cracker for depositing sulfur, and a non-directional source of phosphor.
The material gradients are determined by the physical location of these sources. The
fabrication was done in an oxygen free environment to avoid incorporating it into the
material. The sample structure as well as the custom fabrication setup was devised by
our supervisors.6 Throughout this project, we have focused on the characterization and
5
==PAGE:13==
data management aspects, while they were responsible for fabricating the samples. The
sputtering setup was undergoing completion during the duration of the project. For
this reason, the sulfur cracker was not readied in time to be used for the character-
ized samples. Sulfur was instead supplied through a non-directional source, similar to
phosphor.
3.2
Characterization
The thin film libraries were characterized with six methods: Energy Dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), Ultraviolet Photoelec-
tron Spectroscopy (UPS), Raman spectroscopy, X-ray Diffraction (XRD), and ellipsom-
etry. Reflection Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (REELS) was also tested, but was
found to not be useful for the samples used. Each of the characterization techniques
yields their own information on the libraries, and are briefly described in this section.
3.2.1
Composition
We mainly use two complementary methods for composition analysis: XPS and EDX.
They are both techniques that are commonly used and well known.20,21
XPS is used for surface analysis. The sample is illuminated with X-rays, causing the
release of photoelectrons. The binding energy of these electrons can be found from their
kinetic energy and the incident X-ray energy. From the binding energy, we get informa-
tion about the composition as well as the chemical state of the constituent elements.22
The penetration depth of XPS is 10 nm,23 which makes this technique highly surface
sensitive. Due to this sensitivity, it is important to reduce surface contamination. Ion
beam etching can be used to remove contaminated surface layers before measurements.24
In our project, we instead limited air exposure by moving the sample to the XPS using a
vacuum transfer stage. When scanning the binding energy spectrum, the XPS machine
can do a broad sweep over a wide range (around 0 to 1350 eV binding energy), as well
as more narrow sweeps centered on a specific binding energy (around ±10 eV). For this
project, the wide sweeps will be referred to as survey scans, and the narrow sweeps as
core scans.
EDX is used for bulk analysis. Here, the sample is instead affected by an electron beam.
The electron beam can eject electrons from the inner shell of an atom, creating an elec-
tron hole. An electron from an outer shell can then relax to fill this hole, emitting light
with energy given by the difference in shell energies. This light can be an X-ray, and
will be identifying to that material composition. The electron beam has a large interac-
tion volume that can vary between 100 nm to 1 µm based on material and acceleration
voltage.25 This is large enough to extend beyond the thin film sample material into the
silicon substrate.22 This can make it difficult to properly analyze the thin film since the
compositional data is contaminated by the substrate material. In order to circumvent
this issue we use the AZtec LayerProbe software developed by Oxford Instruments.26
This lets us define the layered structure of the sample so that the data can be isolated
from each other, making the thin film composition clear.
6
==PAGE:14==
Raman spectroscopy is also used for composition analysis. The sample is probed with
photons, and through interactions with vibrational modes in the material a small fraction
of these are scattered inelastically, their energy either increasing or decreasing.27 These
energy offsets, called Raman shifts, are characteristic to the chemical structure and can
be used to identify the material.22 As the scattering is dependent on vibrational modes,
the phase, intrinsic stress or strain, or impurities in the material, which influence the
modes, can also be investigated with Raman spectroscopy.28 Due to time constraints,
only one of our samples was characterized with Raman spectroscopy.
3.2.2
Crystal structure
XRD is used to analyze the crystal structure. In this method, incident X-rays scatter
from different crystal planes within the crystal structure of the sample. The distance
between these layers causes a phase shift that creates a pattern of constructive and
destructive interference. The constructive interference results in peaks that are unique
to the material.22 Through comparisons to a reference spectrum, the peak positions
can be used to identify the composition. The relative peak intensity shows the sample
texturing. The peak profile will be shaped by broadening caused by the grain size as
well as microstrain, giving it a Lorentzian or Gaussian shape respectively.29
3.2.3
Optical properties
Ellipsometry provides information about the optical properties of the sample. It does so
by measuring the changes in polarization state of light reflected from the surface of the
sample. The polarization state change is represented by Ψ, a parameter related to the
amplitude ratio, and the relative phase difference ∆. They are measured across a range
of wavelengths. An optical model is then constructed and fitted to the measurement
data. The fit can be used to calculate the refractive index and extinction coefficient,
associated with absorption, as well as the thin film layer thickness.30
3.2.4
Electronic band structure
The electronic band structure is vital to understanding the viability of the solar cell ab-
sorber material. The band gap is measured primarily using REELS. This is a technique
that illuminates a sample with electrons, these electrons will scatter from the material
and the reflection is detected. The energy loss associated with this reflection details the
band structure of the material and highlights the band gap.31 This method is limited
to materials with band gaps above 3 eV.32 This limitation was found to prevent REELS
from providing useful information on our samples.
The valence band structure can be determined using XPS, however UPS provides a more
detailed picture. It operates on the same principle as XPS, using ultraviolet photons
instead of X-rays. The lower energy of UV light results in the excitation being limited
to the valence electrons due to their low binding energy. This offers a higher resolution
look at the valence band structure of the material compared to XPS.33
7
==PAGE:15==
3.3
Data management and analysis using Python
To facilitate high-throughput data management, a Python script was developed. The
script supports loading of data from various characterization software (SmartLab Stu-
dio II, CompleteEASE, AZtec LayerProbe, and Avantage) and organizes it into a uni-
form data format. Treatment of the data can be performed, supporting math between
datatypes, interpolation of data, and data fitting. The data can be visualized through
a heatmap, plot or scatter plot with support for excluding outliers. Most figures in this
report were created through the script. An overview of functionalities is described in
this section. A readme file and a list of used Python modules is included in appendix
section A.4.
3.3.1
Data loading
As every characterization software exports the data in their own unique format, spe-
cialized data loading functions for each method were developed. The formats include
Microsoft Excel files and comma-separated files or similar, with unique structuring of
the data for each export type. To load the data, a user defined grid of coordinates must
first be created. Loaded data is then aligned to this grid. This unifies the coordinates
output from different measurement software, as there can be small variations in the ex-
act coordinates. An extreme example of this is shown in figure 3. The user defined grid
is marked with black points, and the coordinates measured by characterization equip-
ment are marked with green points. These are corrected to match the closest grid point,
shown by a set of red points. The x- and y-axis display distances across the sample
in mm. This alignment method allows for the same grid to be used across different
measurements, allowing comparisons between datasets.
Figure 3: An example of a custom user defined grid, correcting the coordinates output
from the measurement software. The user defined grid is marked with black points, the
measurement software output is marked with green points, and the corrected points are
marked with red. The x- and y-axis denote distance in mm across the sample.
The loaded data is formatted in a pandas dataframe using a multiindex structure.34 An
example is shown in figure 4. The data is loaded from an ellipsometry measurement,
8
==PAGE:16==
where coordinates are stored in the top level index, while the data type is stored in the
lower level index. This structure allows every coordinate point to have its own list of
data types, and each of these data types contain a column of data. This allows the data
to be easily filtered to see all the data associated with one point or one data type. The
format also minimizes data storage space.
Figure 4: Dataframe example, showing loaded ellipsometry data. Data is formatted in a
multiindex structure, coordinates being the top layer index while data type is the lowest
level index. For every coordinate point there is thus a list of data types, and each of
these data types contain a column of data.
It is possible to merge the data from multiple dataframes into a single, large frame.
This allows for comparisons and visualizations of data from different characterization
methods. If a sample consists of several sections that should be analyzed as a whole, it is
also possible to translate the coordinates of a measurement set. This way, a dataset cov-
ering a large area can be created from several smaller area measurements. Finally, math
can be performed between columns of data. There is support for addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division of data.
3.3.2
Data visualization
Data can be selected and visualized through either a heatmap, plot, or scatter plot.
When plotting a heatmap, outlier values can be excluded through setting a minimum
to maximum data range, as well as through selecting specific coordinates. Excluded
values are shown in black. An example of such a heatmap is shown in figure 5a, where a
single point has been excluded. A regular plot can also be produced, as shown in figure
5b. This plot can be also be a scatter plot. A legend can be added, and the y-axis
scale can be changed between linear or logarithmic. Finally, for some data such as the
ellipsometry data presented in figure 4, n and k are each given for a certain energy. This
energy can be selected when creating a heatmap or plot.
9
==PAGE:17==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Examples of plots produced with the script.
(a): An example heatmap.
Outliers can be chosen to be excluded based on coordinates or min-max values. A point
has been excluded, and is shown in black. (b): An example data plot of data Y over
data X. A legend can also be shown.
3.3.3
Data analysis
The native software for some characterization techniques does not support batch pro-
cessing, making the analysis of hundreds of points a tedious task. To alleviate this, the
software features a custom fitting function tailored to XRD, Raman, UPS, and REELS.
XRD and Raman fitting are both done in two stages, the first is to automatically detect
peaks, as shown in figure 6a. The data is filtered using a Savitzky-Golay filter, which
is often used in spectroscopy data analysis.35 This helps avoid false peak detection by
smoothing the curve. This process is the same for both XRD and Raman data. In figure
6, there is an example of a spectrum fit on the same data. For XRD, the background
is fit using a 1D cubic spline model. The peaks are fitted using a Pseudo-Voigt func-
tion, due to the broadening effects of microstrain being Gaussian, and grain size being
Lorentzian. This is a standard procedure for XRD fitting,29 and allows for the analysis
of the grain size and microstrain prevalence in the sample, as well as being necessary to
accurately fit the peak. Raman uses the same spline model to fit the background. The
peak is fitted using a Gaussian function, as is appropriate for solids.36
In the analysis of the UPS spectrum, the interesting parameter is the onset of the valence
band. This is found in the intersection of a linear background fit and a linear valence
fit. Examples of these are shown in figure 7. The beginning point of the background
is found by looking at the slope, the point is chosen where this slope is significantly
above 0. The end point is found similarly, and the data between these points are then
fitted using a linear fit. The valence band start and end are found based on the slope
of the background, as there is an increase in the slope after the background ends. The
data between the valence points are also fitted, and the valence band onset is found by
looking at intersection of these fits.
10
==PAGE:18==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Examples of fitting XRD data using the script. First, the peaks are automat-
ically located by filtering and fitting the spectrum. Then, the locations are used to fit
the raw spectrum. (a): An example of peak fitting on filtered XRD data. The filtered
spectrum is shown in blue. The locations of the peaks are indicated by orange crosses,
and are used when fitting the raw spectrum. (b): An example of fitting an unfiltered
XRD spectrum. The raw spectrum is shown in blue. The fit is shown in orange.
Figure 7: Example of UPS fitting, the background start, in purple, and end point, in
brown, are automatically found based on the slop and fitted using a linear fit, in pink.
The valence band start, in green, and end, in red, and the fit, in orange, are found in a
similar way.
Finally, an example of fitting a REELS spectrum is shown in figure 8. The band gap is
found by looking at the distance between the peak of the elastic scattering peak, marked
with an orange point, and the onset of the energy loss, marked with a green point. The
peak is found using the same peak fitting as was done on the XRD and Raman spectra,
however here the intensity of the peak is discarded as only the position is important.
The onset of the energy loss is found by looking at the slope, when moving from the
peak position towards the left on the diagram, similarly to the UPS fitting.
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 8: Example of REELS fitting, the elastic scattering peak, orange, and the onset
of the energy loss, green, are marked. The band gap is equal to the distance between
these two points.
3.3.4
Data interpolation
Data can be interpolated over the user defined grid. Bicubic interpolation is used.37 This
can reduce measurement time for samples where an approximation of a value across the
sample is sufficient. An example of a dataset with only four data points, one in each
corner of the sample, is shown in figure 9a. The white parts indicate no data. Figure
9b displays this same data after it has been interpolated across the grid.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: Example of interpolation from few data points over a user defined grid. Bicubic
interpolation is used. (a): A dataset with only four data points measured. The white
section contains no data. (b): The same dataset after interpolation over the user defined
grid.
12
==PAGE:20==
4
Results
4.1
2θ/ω XRD offset test
The thin films were deposited on silicon substrates, and had thicknesses between 60 and
500 nm. The X-rays from the XRD have a penetration depth in the 1-100 µm range,29
meaning the X-rays will reach the substrate and undergo scattering there, which leads
to silicon peaks on the XRD spectrum. As the silicon substrate is a slice from a single
crystal, the X-rays will have a mostly unidirectional scattering, and the peaks will thus
be of high intensity and sharpness. The Si (400) is especially intensive, which can drown
out other signals close to it, and cause difficulties for automatic peak fitting programs.
Since the deposited thin films are expected to have more randomly oriented grains,
this problem can be mitigated by introducing a 2θ angle offset on the detector when
performing a 2θ/ω scan. Illustrated in figure 10, the X-rays, scattered from crystal planes
in the grains of the thin film will be reflected in some range of angles due to variations in
their orientation, while the X-rays scattered in Si are expected to be unidirectional. The
utilized 1D detector is able to obtain signal from a range of angles, useful for measuring
much higher signal intensities, allowing for shorter measurement times while maintaining
appropriate signal-to-noise ratio. However, if the 1D detector is offset with respect to
the symmetrical geometry, the X-rays scattered in Si will now miss the detector, while
the X-rays scattered from the randomly oriented thin film grains will remain visible.
Figure 10: Model of 2θ/ω XRD offset test. An X-ray from a source (orange) hits the
thin film sample and undergoes scattering, reflecting towards a detector. The interac-
tion volume in the sample is large enough that scattering occurs both in the thin film
and substrate, creating peaks for both on the XRD spectrum. Due to the uniformity of
the substrate crystal, the X-rays scattered in the substrate (blue) will be mostly unidi-
rectional, while the thin film scattering (green) will depend on the orientations of the
thin film crystal grains. The detector angle 2θ can be adjusted to alter which reflection
angles are detected.
However, depending on the crystal uniformity of the thin film, a large offset might also
diminish the wanted signals, and a range of offsets has been examined to ascertain if
this is a problem. Figure 11a displays spectra from XRD measurements performed on a
ZnO thin film on a Si substrate for different offset angles. The measured peaks at 31.88,
34.42, and 57.70 degrees 2θ corresponded with identifying ZnO peaks for (100) at 31.88,
13
==PAGE:21==
(002) at 34.44, and (110) at 56.79.38 The identifying Si (400) peak is at 69.21 degrees
2θ.38 The three remaining visible peaks stem from other crystal planes in Si.
As the offset increases, it is clear that the silicon peaks diminish, with the three smaller
peaks disappearing completely for offsets 3 degrees or higher. Figure 11b displays inten-
sities over offsets for the three identified Zn peaks and the Si (400) peak. The Si (400)
peak continues to decrease in intensity for higher offsets. Meanwhile, the ZnO peaks
remain of almost constant intensity, so the thin film must contain randomly oriented
grains.
The exact angular coverage of the used 1D detector was 7 degrees. Assuming the X-
rays scattered in Si were centered on the detector, an offset of 3.5 degrees or greater
should thus be effective in removing the Si signal. This fits the measured data well, as
the decrease in Si (400) intensity starts to diminish after this value. For the purposes
of highlighting the ZnO peaks and easing the peak fitting processes, this offset of 3.5
degrees is sufficient in this case. Choosing a low offset also increases the chance that
other samples can be measured with the same offset without diminishing their respective
peaks, even if their grains might not be randomly oriented to this degree.
(a)
(b)
Figure 11: (a): Stacked XRD spectra for a ZnO thin film at 2θ offset angles increasing
from 0 degrees to 20 degrees.
The ZnO peaks and the Si (400) peak are marked.
Unmarked peaks are also from Si. As the offset increases, the Si peak intensities decrease,
and all but the Si (400) peak disappear at an offset of 3 degrees. (b): The peak intensities
of the four marked peaks (Zn (100), (002), (110) and Si (400)) for increasing offset angles.
Si (400) decreases as the offset increases, it is entirely gone at offset 20. The ZnO peaks
show no clear downward trend.
14
==PAGE:22==
4.2
ZrTiO
An initial ZrTiO thin film on Si substrate was produced as a proof of concept, showing
that the setup is able to produce a gradient of materials. The thin film was produced
at room temperature. An image of the sample is shown in figure 12. Four 4x4 cm
samples were mounted for deposition.
The size of the samples were limited by the
characterization devices, and only the lower right section was used for measurements.
During the deposition, the Zr source was pointing towards the upper right of the four
sections, and the Ti source at the lower right.
Oxygen was supplied as a gas and
assumed non-directional across the chamber. This resulted in a vertical metal gradient
resulting from the proximity to each source, and a horizontal oxygen gradient. The
oxygen gradient is a result of lack of oxygen to oxidize all supplied metals near the
sources, preventing all the metals from fully reacting with oxygen. The oxygen gradient
is visible to the naked eye as a rainbow of colors, stemming from the changing refractive
index. The metal gradient is not visible, as both Zr and Ti have a similar gray color.
After synthesis, the sample was sealed in the vacuum transfer stage to minimize air
exposure before measuring with XPS.
Figure 12: Image of the ZrTiO sample. The Zr source (orange) is pointing towards the
top right of the sample. The Ti source (green) is pointing to the lower right. The sample
is still mounted on the holder for the deposition setup. Only the lower right section was
used for measurements. The horizontal rainbow color gradient of the thin film stems
from the oxygen gradient, and the resulting changing refractive index.
4.2.1
XPS
To examine the composition, core scan data for each of the elements in the thin film (Zr,
Ti, O) were acquired with XPS. A core scan of carbon was also performed, as even with
the minimal air exposure, carbon contamination was still measured due to the surface
sensitivity of XPS. Measurements were performed on a 9x9 grid across the thin film,
with 2 mm edge spacing and 4.5 mm point spacing. For each point, the XPS peaks of
each element were fitted with the Thermo Fisher Avantage software.39
15
==PAGE:23==
Heatmaps of the compositions are shown in figure 13. A number of points have been
excluded: 10 points in the lower right were covered by the clamp holding the sample
in place during synthesis as shown in figure 12, and thus contained only the bare Si
substrate. As seen in the sample image, the right side of the sample was cut at a slight
angle, and the used 2 mm edge spacing was not enough to account for this, resulting
in some measurement points being outside the physical sample. A column of 5 points
along the right edge was therefore also excluded. Finally, a single point in the lower left
corner was excluded here. Excluded data can be found in appendix section A.1.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 13: Zr atomic % , Ti atomic %, O atomic % and C atomic % calculated from
fitting the respective XPS core level scans of the ZrTiO thin film. Black points are
excluded. The figures were produced through the Python script. (a): Zr atomic %.
(b): Ti atomic %. (c): O atomic %. (d): C atomic %.
Figure 13a shows Zr atomic %. It ranges from 7.5% to 11.5%, increasing towards the
top of the sample. Figure 13b shows Ti atomic %. It ranges from 11% to 15%, increas-
ing towards the bottom of the sample. The amount of Ti was higher than Zr, with an
equal Zr/Ti ratio near the top of the sample. The metals together account for around
22 atomic % of the material in the thin film. The oxygen atomic %, shown in figure
13c, does not make the oxygen gradient clear. Figure 13d displays carbon atomic %. A
16
==PAGE:24==
significant amount of carbon contamination was measured on the sample.
From the figures, it is clear that a Zr/Ti gradient was successfully achieved. Since the
sample was the lower right section of the four diced sections, it was closer to the Ti
source than the Zr source, and higher amount of Ti is expected. Even with the use of
the vacuum transfer stage, the surface carbon contamination is significant.
An investigation of the oxygen bonds was also performed. Figure 14 shows an oxy-
gen core scan spectrum from the middle of the sample. Two peaks were fitted using
Avantage, located at 531.0 and 532.6 eV, shown with gray lines. The peak locations
are representative of the entire sample. The figure also shows regions with typical peak
locations for organic C-O and C=O, shown in orange, and typical peak locations for
metal oxides, shown in blue.40
There is no overlap between the fitted peaks and the regions for metal oxides, nor C-
O and C=O. Comparing to other literature, Lijie Zhu et al. measured a TiO2 XPS
spectrum and found O1s peaks at 531.0 and 532.0 eV, and attributed them to Ti-O and
H-O respectively.41 Jiangwei Liu et al. measured a ZrO2 XPS spectrum and found O1s
peaks at 530.4 and 532.2 eV.42 These values are in good agreement with the measured
peak positions. This could indicate that the 531.0 eV peak is correlated to ZrO2 or
TiO2, and possibly that the 532.6 eV peak is caused by humidity on the sample.
Figure 14: Oxygen XPS core spectrum acquired from the middle of the sample. Two
peaks were fitted using Avantage, at locations 531.0 and 532.6 eV, shown by dotted gray
lines. Regions with typical peak locations for organic C-O and C=O are indicated in
orange. A region with typical peak locations for metal oxides is shown in blue. There
is no overlap between the regions and the fitted peak locations.
17
==PAGE:25==
4.2.2
EDX
To examine the bulk composition of the thin film and compare composition data with
XPS, EDX measurements were performed and analyzed through the AZtec LayerProbe
software.26 To enable comparison, the closest allowed grid in LayerProbe was chosen.
It is a 10x8 grid with an edge spacing of 4 mm, and resulting point spacings of 3.6
mm horizontally, and 4.6 mm vertically. The only excluded points are the lower right
points covered by the clamp. The thin film was modeled via LayerProbe as a single layer
containing Zr, Ti, and O. This results in assumed equal distribution of each material
vertically through the thin film, and no inclusion of C. Calculated compositions as well
as thin film thickness are shown in figure 15. Excluded data can be found in appendix
section A.1.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 15: Zr atomic % , Ti atomic %, O atomic % and film thickness (nm) from EDX
scans of the ZrTiO thin film modeled through LayerProbe. Black points are excluded.
The figures were produced through the Python script. (a): Zr atomic %. (b): Ti atomic
%. (c): O atomic %. (D): Thin film thickness.
Figures 15a shows the Zr atomic %. It ranges from 11% to 17%, increasing towards
the top of the sample. Figure 15b shows the Ti atomic %. It ranges from 18% to 23%,
increasing towards the bottom of the sample. There is also a slight Zr/Ti gradient along
18
==PAGE:26==
the horizontal direction, with more Ti being present near the right side of the sample.
The metals account for around 35% of the material in the thin film. The oxygen atomic
% shown in figure 15c contains a gradient as well, going from around 65% on the right
side of the thin film to 66% at the left, with a single point containing 66.5 atomic % O.
The Zr/Ti ratio and gradient of the measured bulk composition were consistent with
XPS. The metal concentration was higher, likely stemming from the lower carbon signal
inside the bulk, as no carbon contamination should be found here. Contrary to XPS, the
oxygen gradient is visible from the EDX data. The amount of oxygen is approximately
two thirds of the total material, and the sum of Zr and Ti amounts to approximately
one third, suggesting almost the entirety of the thin film must be ZrxTi1−xO2.
LayerProbe is also able to fit a thin film thickness. The thickness is shown in figure
15d. This thickness is calculated from the spectrum, considering a provided material
density. As almost the entirety of the thin film appeared to be ZrxTi1−xO2, the density
of the thin film was determined by a linear interpolation between ZrO2 and TiO2 (ZrO2
= 5.68 g/cm3, TiO2 = 4.23 g/cm3),43,44 with the Zr/Ti ratio determining the density of
each point. There is a thickness gradient from 326 to 491 nm from left to right, which
is expected as the Zr and Ti sources are pointed at the right edge, and should therefore
deposit more material there.
4.2.3
Ellipsometry
Ellipsometry was performed on the thin film using the 9x9 grid, with 2 mm edge spacing
and 4.5 mm grid spacing. The data was fitted using the J.A. Woollam CompleteEASE
software.30 The measured thickness is shown in figure 16. The same bottom right points
and edge points are excluded. There is also a single point near the middle of the thin
film which is an outlier, possibly from a piece of dust or similar. A thickness ranging
from 348 to 478 nm was measured, increasing towards the right edge of the sample. As
the metal sources are pointed at the right edge, more material is expected to be found
here. The thicknesses are in good agreement with the EDX results.
Figure 16: Calculated thin film thickness from fitted ellipsometry scans of the ZrTiO
thin film.
Black points are excluded.
A single outlier is also present, likely from a
contamination on the sample. The figure was produced through the Python script.
19
==PAGE:27==
In addition to the thickness data, the refractive index n and absorption coefficient k were
also calculated from the fit. These values over a representative vertical and horizontal
range of points and photon energies are shown in figure 17.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 17: Refractive index n and absorption coefficient k, calculated from fitted data,
over photon energy for ellipsometry measurements of the ZrTiO thin film. Each plot
is shown for a range of five representative points across the sample. The figures were
produced through the Python script. (a): n along the selected vertical line. (b): n
along the selected horizontal line. (c): k along the selected vertical line. (d): k along
the selected horizontal line.
Figures 17a and c display the change in n and k when moving from the top to the
bottom of the sample. This direction corresponds to an increase in Ti. Both n and k
increase for increasing Ti concentrations. Figures 17b and d display the change in n and
k when moving from the left to the right of the sample. This direction corresponds to
a decrease in O, and corresponding higher fraction of Zr and Ti. Both n and k increase
for low energies (around <3.5 eV for n, <4.2 eV for k) for lower O concentrations. For
high energies (around >3.5 eV for n, >4.2 eV for k) they instead both decrease.
A set of literature values of n and k for Zr, Ti, ZrO2 and TiO2 for energies 2.39 and
4.42 eV are tabulated in table 1. Comparing n for both the energy of 2.39 and 4.42
eV, the ellipsometry measurements are within the ranges provided in the table for ZrO2
20
==PAGE:28==
and TiO2. For k the values are also in agreement, although the expected k of 0.00 for
2.39 eV is instead measured as around 0.06 to 0.11. This higher k could be the result
of a Zr or Ti signal instead of pure ZrO2 or TiO2. When moving towards the right edge
of the sample, a higher concentration of Zr and Ti compared to ZrO2 and TiO2 should
be found. According to table 1, for both low and high energies, this should increase k
while lowering n. A reason for the different measured behavior could be that the oxygen
gradient found through EDX was small, and the increase in n could stem from the slight
horizontal increase of TiO2 compared to ZrO2 instead.
Energy
Zr45
Ti46
ZrO247
TiO248
2.39 eV
n = 2.32
k = 1.48
n = 1.81
k = 2.00
n = 2.21
k = 0.00
n = 2.46
k = 0.00
4.42 eV
n = 2.18
k = 1.32
n = 1.20
k = 1.35
n = 2.52
k = 0.00
n = 2.94
k = 1.40
Table 1: Previously measured refractive index n and absorption coefficient k for Zr, Ti,
ZrO2 and TiO2 for two photon energies.
Another visualization between the refractive index and the composition is shown in fig-
ure 18. The two graphs display the O atomic % plotted against the Zr/Ti ratio, with a
color map that shows n for a photon energy of 4.42 eV. The plots are shown for EDX
and XPS composition data respectively. A point has been excluded, and is shown in
appendix section A.1.3. In figure 18a, the EDX composition data shows that an increase
in oxygen concentration causes n to decrease, while changes in the Zr/Ti ratio have no
impact. In figure 18b, the XPS composition data shows the refractive index decreases
as the Zr/Ti ratio increases. Here, the refractive index remains constant across changes
in the oxygen concentration.
(a)
(b)
Figure 18: The oxygen atomic % plotted against the Zr/Ti ratio, with a color map
showing the change in n. Measured by both EDX and XPS. An outlier has been removed
and is shown in appendix section A.1.3. The figures were produced through the Python
script. (a): n over EDX composition at 4.42 eV. (b): n over XPS composition at 4.42
eV.
21
==PAGE:29==
4.2.4
UPS
For UPS measurements the 9x9 grid with 2 mm edge spacing and 4.5 grid spacing was
used. Spectra from a horizontal and vertical range of representative points are shown in
figure 19. The spectra are shown for a range between -1 and 5 eV. The full spectra are
available in appendix section A.1.4. The important region of interest is the valence band
onset, located around 3 to 4 eV binding energy, where the slope increases noticeably.
The Fermi level is at 0 binding energy. Looking at figure 19a, the oxygen concentration
decrease that occurs horizontally towards the right results in in a onset at higher binding
energies. Looking at figure 19b, the change in the Zr/Ti ratio does not have an impact on
the valence band onset. It remains stable at the same binding energy level except for one
point, (-13.5,-18) shown in blue. Without a clear pattern, this could be a measurement
artifact.
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: UPS spectra measured on the ZrTiO thin film. Spectra for a representative
selection of five points along the horizontal and vertical directions are shown.
The
spectra are shown for -1 to 5 eV binding energy. The figures were produced through the
Python script. (a): Along the selected horizontal line. (b): Along the selected vertical
line.
The valence band onsets were found using a custom-made fitting software written in
Python and are shown in figure 20. The same outliers covered by the clamp and outside
the sample have been removed. There are two more outliers, valued at (13.5,13.5) =
5.1 eV and (9,18) = 41 eV. They are clear outliers, which could be a result of errors in
the fitting software. Looking at the rest of the map, valence band onsets values ranging
from a minimum of 3.1 eV to a maximum of 3.8 eV are seen. Following the decrease in
oxygen concentration towards the right of the sample, the valence band onset to Fermi
energy distance increases from around 3.2 eV to 3.3 eV. There is no such gradient in the
vertical direction, meaning the Zr/Ti ratio has little to no impact on the valence band
onset in this composition range.
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 20: UPS spectra valence band onset binding energy in eV. Found from the
intersection between a fitting of the background and a fitting of the valence band onset.
Black points are excluded. Full data shown in appendix section A.1.4. The figure was
produced through the Python script.
4.2.5
XRD
XRD measurements were acquired for the ZrTiO sample on the 9x9 grid with 2 mm
spacing. Figure 21 shows an XRD spectrum of a single point at the center of the sample.
This spectrum is representative of the spectra across the entire sample. A few 2θ offsets
were tested, including no offset, but as is apparent from the figure, no XRD peaks aside
from the Si (400) peak were found in the sample. The data is shown for an offset of
3 degrees to remain consistent with other XRD measurements. As the thin film was
produced at room temperature, it was expected to be amorphous, so the results are
expected.
Figure 21: XRD spectra of the ZrTiO sample shown for a single point. The sample
was amorphous, and no peaks besides the Si (400) peak were measured. The point is
representative of the entire sample. Measured with a 2θ offset of 3 degrees. The figure
was produced through the Python script.
23
==PAGE:31==
4.3
CuPS 400°C
After successfully achieving a Zr/Ti and O gradient, the setup was readied for producing
a CuPS sample. Only a single metal was used, as there was a larger focus on successfully
achieving a thin film containing a metal, phosphor and sulfur. The sample was produced
at 400 °C. An image of the sample is shown in figure 22. The clamp setup was improved
so that there is no longer a large obscured area. The Cu source was pointed towards the
lower middle of the upper right sample. P as S were supplied through non-directional
gasses. Similarly to the previous sample, deposition took place on four 4x4 cm samples.
However, to expedite characterization further on this early test sample, each sample was
used simultaneously for its own characterization method. The samples were: LL (lower
left) for XPS, UPS and EDX, UL (upper left) for ellipsometry and LR (lower right) for
XRD. The UR (upper right) section was not used. All characterization methods this
time utilized the same grid of 9x9 points, 4 mm edge spacing and 4 mm point spacing.
Figure 22: Image of the four CuPS 400°C sections. The samples were LL (lower left)
for XPS, UPS and EDX, UL (upper left) for ellipsometry and LR (lower right). The
Cu source was pointed at the lower middle of the UR sample, as indicated by the red
Cu target circle. All four sections have the same metallic appearance across their entire
surface.
4.3.1
XPS
To examine surface composition, the LL sample was moved to XPS via the vacuum
transfer stage. Core scans of each element (Cu, P, S) as well as carbon and oxygen
were intended to be acquired, but due to a mistake they were instead acquired for the
24
==PAGE:32==
wrong elements. The following data is therefore based on a survey scan of the entire
spectrum, which leads to lower accuracy. Figure 23 shows fitted heatmaps for Cu, P, S,
and O. Figure 24 shows a fitted heatmap for C. Two outliers in each figure have been
excluded and are shown in black. Excluded data can be found in appendix section A.2.1.
Figure 23a and b display the P and S concentrations. The amount of phosphor (14% to
18%) is around 2 to 4 times greater than the amount of sulfur (4% to 7%). There is no
clear pattern to the data. Figure 23c shows the Cu concentration. It ranges from 48%
to 53%, with more Cu measured near the top side of the sample. Figure 23d displays O
concentration, ranging from 6% to 14%, with more O near the bottom of the sample.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 23: P atomic %, S atomic %, Cu atomic %, and O atomic % calculated from
fitting an XPS survey scan of the LL CuPS 400°C thin film. Due to a mistake, the
data had to be based on a less accurate survey scan of the spectrum. Black points are
excluded. The figures were produced through the Python script. (a): P atomic %. (b):
S atomic %. (c): Cu atomic %. (d): O atomic %.
Given the non-directional deposition of P and S, the uniform distribution of these ma-
terials across the thin film is expected. The noisy nature of the results likely stems
from the use of an inaccurate survey scan instead of a core scan for each element. The
25
==PAGE:33==
sulfur amount is lower than expected, but the future addition of the sulfur cracker to
the sputtering setup could increase the sulfur concentration. For Cu, the slightly higher
concentration near the top side of the sample is expected, as the Cu source was pointing
to the upper right of this sample. The attempt to avoid O incorporation in the film
was unsuccessful here, as this concentration is quite high. Even though the sample was
moved to the XPS machine via the vacuum transfer stage, a significant amount of O
is present. The lower O atomic % near the top side of the sample is likely a result of
higher concentrations of other materials in the same region.
Figure 24: C atomic % calculated from fitting an XPS survey scan of the LL CuPS
400°C thin film. Due to a mistake, the data had to be based on a less accurate survey
scan of the spectrum. Black points are excluded. The figure was produced through the
Python script.
Figure 24 shows the C concentration of the CuPS 400°C sample. It is evenly distributed,
ranging from 16% to 21%. Similar to O, given the limited air exposure, it was similarly
unexpected to find a large concentration of C.
EDX measurements of the CuPS 400°C sample showed similar results to the XPS data.
For the sake of brevity, EDX data is shown in appendix section A.2.2. Given the low S
atomic % compared to P atomic %, a new thin film deposition was planned, with the
goal of increasing the sulfur concentration. The remaining characterizations of CuPS
400°C were still completed for the sake of comparison.
4.3.2
Ellipsometry
The UL sample was measured with ellipsometry to examine thickness, n, and k. Results
of thicknesses fitted with CompleteEASE are shown in figure 25. The thickness ranges
from 66 nm to 78 nm and increases towards the bottom right. Three outliers have been
excluded and are shown in black. Excluded data is shown in appendix section A.2.3.
26
==PAGE:34==
The acquired ellipsometry data was found to be very difficult to fit with CompleteEASE,
and the exact values for the thickness could be altered based on small changes to the
fitting parameters. This could be due to the sample being metallic, preventing the ellip-
someter from measuring light transmitted through the thin film and reflected from the
thin film/substrate interface. Even so, the gradient does appear to align with expecta-
tions. The increase in the thickness at the bottom right of this sample is consistent with
the Cu source being located to the right of the sample.
Figure 25: Calculated thin film thickness for fitted ellipsometry scans of the UL CuPS
400°C thin film. The data was difficult to fit, possibly because the thin film was metal-
lic. The shown thickness is therefore likely to be imprecise. Three outliers have been
excluded, and are shown in black. The figure was produced through the Python script.
Figure 26 shows n and k, calculated from fitted data. The values are shown for five
representative points across the sample over a range of photon energies. Even with the
fitting problems, the data still produced a consistent pattern that is interesting to dis-
cuss. In figure 26a, n increases at lower energies when moving down the vertical, while
staying constant at higher energies. Figure 26b shows a similar increase moving right
horizontally. In figure 26c, k decreases when moving down the vertical for low energies
(<1.6 eV), and increases for high energies (>1.6 eV). Looking at the horizontal in figure
26d, a similar pattern is seen when moving right horizontally.
There is no composition data available for this sample to compare against. However,
given the UL location of the sample, more Cu should be deposited towards the lower right
corner of the sample. The pattern in both refractive index and absorption coefficient
also suggests a composition gradient across the surface. If Cu increases towards the
bottom right, then in general, n increases for higher Cu concentrations, and k decreases
for higher Cu concentrations at low energies, and increases at high energies.
27
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 26: Fitted refractive index n and absorption coefficient k over photon energy for
ellipsometry measurements of the UL CuPS 400°C thin film. Each plot is shown for a
range of five points across the center of the sample. Due to issues with fitting, the actual
n and k values are untrustworthy, but the changes when moving across the sample are
still of interest. The figures were produced through the Python script. (a): n along the
selected vertical line. (b): n along the selected horizontal line. (c): k along the selected
vertical line. (d): k along the selected horizontal line.
4.3.3
UPS
UPS was measured on the LL sample to investigate changes in the valence band onset.
Measured spectra are shown in figure 27. The spectra are shown for a range between -2
and 5 eV. The full spectra are shown in appendix section A.2.4. A selection of measure-
ments across a vertical line are shown in figure 27a. The valence band onset was fitted
to around 2.3 eV. There is a significant background signal starting before the onset. The
measured intensity decreases when moving from the top of the sample to the bottom.
The shape of the spectrum and thus the valence band onset stays the same. The se-
lection of horizontal measurements in figure 27b has the same background and valence
onset at around the same point of 2.3 eV. The change in intensity is significantly less
prevalent here. Given that there are no changes in valence band onset, there is possibly
no composition gradient on the LL sample. Alternatively, the valence band onset is not
measurably affected by the composition gradient.
28
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
Figure 27: UPS spectra of the LL CuPS 400°C thin film. Each plot is shown for a range
of five points across the center of the sample. The figures were produced through the
Python script. (a): along vertical line. (b): along horizontal line.
Figure 28, shows fitted valence band onsets across the entire sample. The valence band
onset ranges from 2.26 eV to 2.34 eV. There is no visible gradient in the onset across
the sample. This supports the raw spectra from figure 27.
Figure 28: valence band onsets of the CuPS 400°C sample, based a fit of the UPS
valence band measurements. There is little variation in the onset across the sample,
and no gradient. The figure was produced through the Python script.
4.3.4
XRD
The LR sample was used for XRD to examine the crystal structure. Preliminary mea-
surements of a single point revealed two distinct peaks not belonging to the silicon
substrate.
This means that some kind of crystal structure had been achieved.
The
offset test was repeated for this sample. Results are displayed in figure 29. The CuPS
peaks are located around 46.5° and 53.8°, the silicon peaks are the same as shown earlier,
29
==PAGE:37==
with the Si (400) peak having the highest intensity. Looking at figure 29a at an offset of
3.5° most of the silicon peaks have entirely disappeared while the Si (400) intensity has
greatly diminished. The CuPS peaks remain present even at the highest tested offset of
15°. Figure 29b shows the intensity of the two CuPS peaks and the Si (400) peak across
a range of offsets. The CuPS peaks remain unaffected by the offset test, preserving their
intensity, while the Si (400) peak decreases.
(a)
(b)
Figure 29: XRD spectra for the 2θ offset test, with offsets of 0°, 2°, 3.5°, and 15°, for
the LR CuPS 400°C sample. (a): Stacked filtered XRD spectra for increasing 2θ offset
angles. (b): Intensities for the two CuPS peaks at 46.5°and 53.8°and the Si(400) peak,
for increasing offset angles.
Figure 30: Measured XRD spectrum for the center of the LR CuPS 400°C sample. The
data was fitted using our custom Python script. The two CuPS peaks were identified
around 46.5° and 53.8°. The point is representative for the entire sample.
30
==PAGE:38==
Similar to the ZrTiO sample, an offset of 3.5° was sufficient to remove the Si peaks,
while not diminishing the interesting CuPS peaks. The entire sample was mapped using
this offset. An example spectrum is shown in figure 30. The 46.5° peak is clearly visible.
The 53.8° has a lower intensity and is barely visible, it is more visible after filtering as
seen in figure 29a.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 31: Information on the 47.5° XRD peak of the LR CuPS 400°C sample. The
fitting was done using the custom Python script. (a): Peak position in degrees. (b):
Peak intensity. (c): Peak FWHM. (d): Peak Lorentzian/Gaussian ratio.
The measured XRD data was fitted through the custom Python script, so that data
on the two peaks could be extracted. Figure 31 shows fitted peak information for the
46.5° peak across the sample. Figure 31a shows the peak position in degrees. There
is a gradient in the position of around 46.4 to 46.6 from the top of the sample to the
bottom. Figure 31b shows the peak intensity. It has a gradient from top left to bottom
right, increasing from around 200 to around 700 counts. Figure 31c shows FWHM of the
peak increasing from around 0.3° in the bottom right to 0.5° in the top right. Finally,
figure 31d shows the Lorentz/Gaussian ratio for the peak. This ratio ranges between
the extremes of 0 and 1, with the peak being more Gaussian near the bottom of the
sample, and more Lorentzian near the top.
31
==PAGE:39==
Peak intensity is affected by the thickness of the sample. It is possible that the thickness
increase when moving towards the bottom right. Based on the previously measured XPS
data for the LL sample, it is difficult to identify a relation to the sample composition. As
the XRD measurements were performed on the LR sample instead of LL, no conclusions
can be drawn between the intensity and composition. Likewise, for the FWHM, a larger
grain size or strain increases this value, but as the composition is unknown the cause
of the FWHM gradient cannot be concluded. For the Lorentz/Gauss ratio, the peak
becomes more Lorentzian for increasing grain sizes, and more Gaussian for increasing
strain. Given the large change in ratio when moving vertically across the sample, either
or both of these parameters could change, but the cause cannot be concluded.
The fitted information on the 53.8° peak was also gathered. Due to the peak being
less intense, it was more difficult to see patterns in the data. Additionally, the fitting
program could not identify the low intensity peak for four of the points on the sample.
Results for this peak are shown in appendix section A.2.5.
32
==PAGE:40==
4.4
CuPS 250°C
Due to the low sulfur contents in the previous sample, the temperature was lowered to
250C. This was intended to increase the sulfur content, at the cost of potentially losing
the crystallinity of the previous sample. Every measurement on the CuPS 250°C sample
was performed on the same 4x4 cm upper right (UR) section to make comparisons easier.
The measurement grid was 9x9 points, 4 mm edge spacing, 4 mm point spacing. An
image of the sample is shown in figure 32. The image is taken after air exposure. The
sample has a color gradient towards the bottom right, turning from a reflective surface to
a metallic gray. The improved clamp setup for holding samples in place during sputtering
only obscured a small region in the upper right and bottom left corners. An uneven cut
is seen along the right edge of the sample. The 4 mm edge spacing is sufficient to avoid
directly measuring the clamp and uneven edge cut regions. During sputtering, the Cu
source was pointed towards the bottom middle of this section, indicated by a red Cu
target circle.
Figure 32: Image of the CuPS 250°C UR sample after air exposure. The Cu source
(brown) was pointed towards the bottom middle of this section, as indicated by the red
Cu target circle. The lower right section of the sample is a more metallic color. The top
right and bottom left contain small regions obscured by clamps during sputtering.
33
==PAGE:41==
4.4.1
XPS
The sample was transferred to the XPS machine using the vacuum transfer stage. Core
scans of the elements Cu, S, P, O, and C, were performed. Heat maps of the surface
level composition of the sample are shown in figure 33. In figure 33a, the phosphor
concentration shows a gradient, ranging from around 48% in the bottom right to 54%
in the top left, with a maximum of 55% in the top middle. In figure 33b, the sulfur
gradient has a diagonal gradient from top left to bottom right, ranging from about 5%
to 9%. The copper concentration shown in figure 33c, has a gradient from 24% to 27%.
The carbon concentration, in figure 33d, has a gradient from the edges of the sample
towards the middle, from 22% to 10 %. The oxygen concentration is shown in figure 34.
There is barely any oxygen present in the thin film, the concentration being less than
1% on the majority of the surface.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 33: P atomic %, S atomic %, Cu atomic %, and C atomic % calculated from
fitting XPS core level scans for each element of the CuPS 250°C thin film. The figures
were produced through the Python script. (a): P atomic %. (b): S atomic %. (c): Cu
atomic %. (d): O atomic %.
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 34: O atomic % calculated from fitting an XPS core level scan of the CuPS 250°C
thin film. The figure was produced through the Python script.
The phosphor, copper, and carbon concentrations all share the same pattern across the
surface. The carbon concentration appears inversely related to both the copper and
phosphor concentration. The sulfur has a clear gradient that is independent of the rest
of the elements. This was unexpected since the copper was the only element with a
directional target. Since both phosphor and sulfur were uniformly distributed, the gra-
dient was expected to dependent on copper. Sulfur also had a much lower concentration
than both phosphor and copper. This could possibly be due to sulfur being less favored
when reacting with copper compared to phosphor. The oxygen concentration was low,
showing the attempt to avoid oxygen contaminating the sample was successful, both
during the fabrication and the transport to the XPS.
35
==PAGE:43==
4.4.2
EDX
The bulk composition was measured through EDX and analyzed with LayerProbe. The
closest allowed grid was a 8x11 with an edge spacing of 4 mm, and point spacings of 4.6
mm horizontally, and 3.2 mm vertically. The thin film was modeled in LayerProbe as a
single layer containing Cu, P, S, and O (CuPSO model). Two additional models were
also tested: A model of a single layer of Cu, P, S (CuPS model), and a model with a
bottom layer of Cu, P, S and a top layer of C, O (CuPS-CO). The CuPSO model was
chosen to compare O concentration with XPS. The CuPS and CuPS-CO model results
are shown in appendix sections A.3.1 and A.3.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 35: P atomic %, S atomic %, Cu atomic %, and O atomic % from EDX scans of
the CuPS 250°C thin film modeled through LayerProbe. The sample was modeled as a
single layer containing Cu, P, S, and O. The figures were produced through the Python
script. (a): P atomic %. (b): S atomic %. (c): Cu atomic %. (d): O atomic %
Figure 35a and b display the P and S atomic %. Both P and S increase in concentration
towards the bottom right of the sample. The amount of S (2% to 8%) in the sample is
much lower than the amount of P (35% to 46%). A gradient of P/S is present, as the
P/S ratio goes from around 16 in the top left corner to around 6 in the bottom right.
36
==PAGE:44==
From figure 35c, the Cu distribution had a slight increasing gradient towards the bottom
right, ranging from 28% to around 40%, with a single point in the lower left at 43%.
The O % is shown in figure 35d. The amount of O ranges from 9% to 30%. The dis-
tribution is mostly even, although the lower right region contains noticeably less oxygen.
The presence of a P and S gradient in the thin film is unexpected, as both P and S were
deposited through non-directional gasses. The reason the concentrations are higher near
the bottom right is unknown. The lower O concentration in the bottom right could be
explained by the comparatively higher P and S concentrations, as the oxygen in that
region makes up less of the total material in the sample. The O amount is much higher
than what was measured through XPS, possibly because the sample had been exposed
to air before EDX measurements. Both the EDX and XPS data show that the S atomic
% of the 250 CuPS°C was not significantly higher than the 400 CuPS°C.
Figure 36 shows the CuPSO model thin film thickness modeled through LayerProbe.
LayerProbe determines the thickness based on a given material density. Based on inter-
nal simulation data performed by our supervisors, an estimated material density of 5.00
g/cm3 was selected. Given this density, the thickness ranges between 71 nm to 179 nm.
The thickness increases towards the bottom right.
The thickness of the CuPS 250°C thin film was higher than the previous CuPS 400°C
thin film. As Cu is the dominant element, the increase in thickness towards the bottom
right is assumed to stem from the increasing Cu amount.
Figure 36: Thickness of the CuPS 250°C thin film as modeled through LayerProbe. The
film was defined as a single layer containing Cu, P, S, and O. The figure was produced
through the Python script.
37
==PAGE:45==
4.4.3
Ellipsometry
The CuPS 250°C sample was measured with ellipsometry, but similar to the previous
sample, it was difficult to fit the data with CompleteEASE. No clear patterns in thickness
or n and k could be discerned for the CuPS 250°C sample with ellipsometry. The results
are shown in appendix section A.3.3. Similar to the 400C sample, the difficulties in
fitting could stem from the sample being too metallic to be measured with ellipsometry.
4.4.4
UPS
A selection of UPS measurements over a representative range of points across the sample
can be found in figure 37. The spectra are shown for a range between -1 and 5 eV. The
full spectra are available in appendix section A.3.5. All the spectra show a significant
background before the actual valence onset, found around 2.7 eV. Figure 37a shows a
range of horizontal points across the sample. The spectra here all have the same shape,
with little variation in onset point. There is a difference in the measured intensity, de-
creasing when moving right on the sample. A range of vertical measurements are shown
in figure 37b. The intensity and shape are very similar for all but one measurement,
as a lower intensity was measured at the top point. There is no clear gradient in any
direction on the sample when looking at these points.
(a)
(b)
Figure 37: UPS spectra of the CuPS 250°C sample over a range of points on the sample.
The spectra are shown in an energy range from -1 to 5 eV. The figures were produced
through the Python script. (a): Across the horizontal center. (b): Across the vertical
center.
A map of the valence band onsets across the entire surface is shown in figure 38. It
shows no clear gradient. Most of the surface has a valence band onset ranging from
2.5 eV to 2.8 eV. This agrees with the individual measurements in figure 37, showing
they are representative for the entire sample. Compared to the previous measurements
from CuPS 400°C in figure 28, the valence band onset is generally higher. As the CuPS
250°C had a different composition than the previous CuPS 400°C sample (e.g. 250°C
contained more P than 400°C), this could affect the valence band onset. Since neither
sample contained clear material gradients, the relationship is difficult to determine.
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 38: Map showing the valence band onsets based on the fit of a UPS measurements.
Shows no clear gradient in the data, ranging from 2.5 eV to 2.7 eV. The figure was
produced through the Python script.
4.4.5
XRD
The CuPS 250°C sample was examined with XRD. While the previous 400C CuPS
sample did show visible XRD peaks, this was no longer the case for 250C, and the
sample was considered amorphous. A representative measured spectrum is shown in
appendix section A.3.4.
4.4.6
Raman spectroscopy
The CuPS 250°C sample had previously been determined to be amorphous from the
XRD measurements. Raman spectra measurements were acquired to examine if the
sample allowed for Raman peaks. To save time, a grid with fewer points (5x5 points,
4 mm edge spacing, 8 mm point spacing) was used for the measurements. A selection
of measured Raman spectra are shown in figure 39a across the horizontal direction.
All of the measured spectra are very similar.
Only a single point showed a slightly
higher intensity around the 0 to 1000 cm−1 range. The spectra feature two low intensity
peaks, one around a shift of 2300 cm−1, and one with lower intensity, around a shift
of 1500 cm−1. A small reference Cu3PS4 sample, provided by our supervisors, was also
measured. Only a single point on this reference sample was measured. The Raman
spectrum of this sample is shown in figure 39b. It features a single peak around 390
cm−1.
Tripathy D. and Sampath S. measured a Cu3PS4 Raman spectrum and also
found only a single peak at around 380 to 390 cm−1.49 The disagreement in Raman
peak locations between CuPS 250°C and the reference and Tripathy et al.
is large.
While the CuPS 250°C sample composition is different, containing about equal atomic
% Cu and P, and very little S, this is possibly not enough to explain the difference.
However, it shows that is could be possible to measure Raman peaks for CuPS samples
even with low crystallinity.
39
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
Figure 39: Measured Raman spectra for the CuPS 250°C sample as well as a reference
Cu3PS4 sample. The spectra were acquired across a range of horizontal points for CuPS
250°C, and a single central point on the reference sample. The figures were produced
through the Python script.
(a): CuPS 250°C spectra along horizontal center.
(b):
Measured reference Cu3PS4 spectrum.
5
Conclusion and outlook
Three distinct thin film libraries were characterized and analyzed: A ZrTiO sample, a
CuPS sample deposited at 400°C and a CuPS sample deposited at 250°C. For each sam-
ple and characterization method, the developed Python script was utilized to organize,
compare, and visualize the data. The script was demonstrated to be useful for analysis
of data maps for future samples.
The ZrTiO demonstrated the capability of the sputtering setup to produce a gradient
of materials. Gradients in atomic % of Zr and Ti were found through XPS and EDX,
and an O gradient was visible through EDX. The refractive index was measured with
ellipsometry. Comparing this with the composition data from XPS, the refractive index
was found to decrease with increasing Zr atomic %. Comparing with composition data
from EDX, the refractive index was found to decrease with increasing O atomic %. From
UPS data, the valence band onset was found to vary between 3.20 eV to 3.30 eV binding
energy along the O gradient. No identifying ZrTiO XRD peaks could be measured, as
the sample was amorphous.
The 400°C CuPS sample demonstrated sputtering of a sample containing Cu, P, and S,
with no gradient. Through XPS, the Cu atomic % on the sample surface was found to
vary between 48% to 53%, the P atomic % from 14% to 18% and the S atomic % from
4% to 7%. EDX measurements showed similar results. Ellipsometry data on the sample
was difficult to fit, possibly because the sample was too metallic. From UPS data, the
valence band onset varied between 2.26 to 2.34 eV. Identifying CuPS XRD peaks were
found at 46.5°and 53.8°.
The 250°C CuPS sample attempted sputtering of a sample with a larger S atomic %.
From XPS data, the Cu atomic % on the sample surface was found to vary between 24%
40
==PAGE:48==
to 27%, the P atomic % from 48% to 54% and the S atomic % from 5% to 9%. EDX
data showed a bulk Cu atomic % between 28% to 40%, the P atomic % from 35% to 46%
and the S atomic % from 2% to 8%. Ellipsometry data on the sample was difficult to
fit, similarly possibly because the sample was too metallic. From UPS data, the valence
band onset varied between 2.50 to 2.80 eV. No identifying ZrTiO XRD peaks could be
measured. Raman spectra from this sample showed peaks at 1500 cm−1 and 2300 cm−1.
A comparison between a measured reference Cu3PS4 spectrum and a literature value
suggested a peak should be found around 390 cm−1 instead.
The sputtering setup has been shown to be capable of producing thin film containing
gradients, as well as thin films containing Cu, P, and S. Future tests could focus on
creating a CuPS sample with a gradient between two metals.
In addition, the low
measured S atomic % could be improved by the addition of the sulfur cracker to the
sputtering setup. This would also allow for directional deposition of S, creating a P/S
gradient.
41
==PAGE:49==
References
[1] Stefano Curtarolo, Gus L. W. Hart, Marco Buongiorno Nardelli, Natalio Mingo,
Stefano Sanvito, and Ohad Levy. The high-throughput highway to computational
materials design. NATURE MATERIALS, 2013.
[2] Sunghyun Kim, Jos´e A. M´arquez, Thomas Unold, and Aron Walsh. Upper limit
to the photovoltaic efficiency of imperfect crystals from first principles. The Royal
Society of Chemistry, 2020.
[3] Matthias Scheffler, Martin Aeschlimann, Martin Albrecht, and Tristan Bereau et al.
Fair data enabling new horizons for materials research. Nature Vol 604, 2022.
[4] Dan Han and Hubert Ebert. Identification of potential optoelectronic applications
for metal thiophosphates. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2021 13 (3), 3836-
3844, 2021.
[5] Vorranutch Itthibenchapong, Robert S. Kokenyesi, and Andrew J. Ritenour et al.
Earth-abundant cu-based chalcogenide semiconductors as photovoltaic absorbers.
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 1, 657, 2023.
[6] Lena A. Mittmann and Andrea Crovetto. Phosphosulfide semiconductors for opto-
electronics and solar energy conversion. ChemRxiv, 2024.
[7] Maximilian Amsler, Logan Ward, and Vinay I. Hegde et al. Ternary mixed-anion
semiconductors with tunable band gaps from machine-learning and crystal structure
prediction. Physical Review Materials 3, 2019.
[8] International Energy Agency. iea.org, 2024-05-16.
[9] SW Glunz, R Preu, and D Biro. Crystalline silicon solar cells: State-of-the-art and
future developments. Comprehensive Renewable Energy vol 1, 2012.
[10] Ibraheem Al Mansouri, Stephen Bremner, and Anita Ho-Baillie et al. Design of
bottom silicon solar cell for multijunction devices. 9th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists
Conference, PVSC 2013, 2013.
[11] Jean-Francois Guillemoles, Thomas Kirchartz, David Cahen, and Uwe Rau. Guide
for the perplexed to the shockley–queisser model for solar cells. Nature Photonics
(2019) 13:501-508, 2019.
[12] Sven R¨uhle. Tabulated values of the shockley–queisser limit for single junction solar
cells. Solar Energy 130, 139-147, 2016.
[13] Jeremy J. Low and Michael L. Kreider et al. Band gap energy in silicon. American
Journal of Undergraduate Research, 2007.
[14] Patrick
Schygulla
and
Paul
Beutel
et
al.
Quadruple
junction
so-
lar
cell
with
47.6
%
conversion
efficiency
under
concentration.
publica.fraunhofer.de/entities/publication/e2ce1921-d7b8-41df-a037-
2d82e399d015/details, 2024.
42
==PAGE:50==
[15] A. De Vos and H. Pauwels. On the thermodynamic limit of photovoltaic energy
conversion. Applied Physics (1981), Volume 25, Issue 2, pp. 119-125, 1981.
[16] Anderson Bermudez-Garcia, Philippe Voarino, and Olivier Raccurt. Environments,
needs and opportunities for future space photovoltaic power generation: A review.
Applied Energy 290, 2021.
[17] Tatsuya Takamoto, Minoru Kaneiwa, Mitsuru Imaizumi, and Masafumi Yamaguchi.
Ingap/gaas-based multijunction solar cells. Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl. 13, 495-
511, 2005.
[18] Dong Gwon Moon and Shanza Rehan et al.
A review on binary metal sulfide
heterojunction solar cells. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 200, 2019.
[19] Tom Markvart and Luis Casta˜ner. Solar Cells: Materials, Manufacture and Oper-
ation. Elsevier Science, 2005.
[20] D. Shindo and T. Oikawa. Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy. Spinger-Verlag
Tokyo, 2002.
[21] Michelangelo Scopelliti.
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy.
Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2016.
[22] Liping Zhang, Jingrun Ran, Shi-Zhang Qiao, and Mietek Jaroniec. Characterization
of semiconductor photocatalysts. Chemical Society Reviews, 2019.
[23] Christopher. Deeks and Robert. D. Blackledge. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy.
Wiley, 2022.
[24] Dongying Li and Yangfei Chen et al. Xps depth profiling of functional materials:
applications of ion beam etching techniques. Materials Chemistry, 2023.
[25] Vasile-Dan Hodoroaba. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Elsevier, 2019.
[26] Oxford Instruments. AZtec LayerProbe User Guide. Oxford Instruments, 2024.
[27] E.J. Samuelsen. Raman spectroscopy. Wiley Blackwell, 2007.
[28] R.P. Van Duyne and C.L. Haynes. Raman Spectroscopy. Elsevier Science, 2003.
[29] George F. Harrington and Jos´e Santiso. Back-to-basics tutorial: X-ray diffraction
of thin films. Journal of Electroceramics (2021) 47:141–163, 2021.
[30] J.A. Woollam. What is Spectroscopic Ellipsometry? CompleteEASE, 2020.
[31] R F Egerton. Electron energy-loss spectroscopy in the tem. Rep. Prog. Phys. 72,
2009.
[32] PennState
Materials
Research
Institute.
Reflection
electron
energy
loss
spectroscopy.
www.mri.psu.edu/materials-characterization-lab/characterization-
techniques/reflection-electron-energy-loss, 2024-05-07.
[33] Kenichi Ozawa. Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Springer Singapore, 2018.
43
==PAGE:51==
[34] NumFOCUS. Pandas documumentation. pandas.pydata.org/docs/, 2024.
[35] Neal Gallagher. Savitzky-golay smoothing and differentiation filter. Eigenvector
Research Incorporated, 2020.
[36] Michael Bradley. Curve fitting in raman and ir spectroscopy: Basic theory of line
shapes and applications. Spectroscopy, 2015.
[37] The
SciPy
community.
Scipy
interpolate
grid
data.
docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.griddata.html,
2024.
[38] Nick Day. Crystallography open database. www.crystallography.net/cod/, 2024.
[39] Thermo Fisher Scientific. Avantage data analysis manual version 6, 2023.
[40] Thermo
Fisher
Scientific.
Avantage
xps
knowledge.
www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/materials-science/learning-center/periodic-
table/non-metal/oxygen, 2024.
[41] Lijie Zhu and Qipeng Lu et al. Ligand-free rutile and anatase tio2 nanocrystals as
electron extraction layers for high performance inverted polymer solar cells. RSC
Advances, 2017.
[42] Jiangwei Liu and Meiyong Liao et al. Low on-resistance diamond field effect tran-
sistor with high-k zro2 as dielectric. Scientific Reports, 2014.
[43] MatWeb Material Property Data. Zirconium dioxide. www.matweb.com, 2023.
[44] MatWeb Material Property Data. Titanium dioxide. www.matweb.com, 2023.
[45] Refractive Index Database. Zirconium. refractiveindex.info, 1988.
[46] Refractive Index Database. Titanium. refractiveindex.info, 2018.
[47] Filmetrics.
Zirconium
dioxide.
www.filmetrics.com/refractive-index-
database/ZrO2/Zirconium-Dioxide, 2024.
[48] Refractive Index Database. Titanium dioxide. refractiveindex.info, 2015.
[49] Tripathy D. and Sampath S. Electrochemical performance of copper phosphosulfide
(cu3ps4) towards magnesium ion storage. Electrochimica Acta, 2023.
44
==PAGE:52==
A
Appendix
A.1
ZrTiO additional material
A.1.1
ZrTiO - XPS including outliers
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 40: Zr atomic % , Ti atomic %, O atomic % and C atomic % calculated from
fitting the respective XPS core level scans of the ZrTiO thin film. (a): Zr atomic %.
(b): Ti atomic %. (c): O atomic %. (d): C atomic %.
45
==PAGE:53==
A.1.2
ZrTiO - EDX including outliers
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 41: Zr atomic % , Ti atomic %, O atomic % and film thickness (nm) from EDX
scans of the ZrTiO thin film modeled through LayerProbe. (a): Zr atomic %. (b): Ti
atomic %. (c): O atomic %. (D): Thin film thickness.
46
==PAGE:54==
A.1.3
ZrTiO - ellipsometry including outliers
(a)
(b)
Figure 42: The oxygen atomic % plotted against the Zr/Ti ratio, with a color map
showing the change in n. Measured by both XPS and EDX. (a): n over EDX composition
at 4.42 eV. (b): n over XPS composition at 4.42 eV.
47
==PAGE:55==
A.1.4
ZrTiO - UPS full spectra and outliers
(a)
(b)
Figure 43: Full UPS spectra measured on the ZrTiO thin film. Spectra for a representa-
tive selection of five points along the horizontal and vertical directions are shown. (a):
Along the selected horizontal line. (b): Along the selected vertical line.
Figure 44: Heatmap of UPS spectra valence band maxima binding energy in eV. Found
from the intersection between a fitting of the background and a fitting of the valence
band onset.
48
==PAGE:56==
A.2
CuPS 400C additional material
A.2.1
CuPS 400C - XPS including outliers
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 45: CuPS 400C LL sampleP %, S %, Cu %, and O % calculated from fitting an
XPS survey scan of the LL CuPS 400C thin film. Due to a mistake, the data had to be
based on a less accurate survey scan of the spectrum. (a): P atomic %. (b): S atomic
%. (c): Cu atomic %. (d): C atomic %.
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 46: C % calculated from fitting an XPS survey scan of the LL CuPS 400C thin
film. Due to a mistake, the data had to be based on a less accurate survey scan of the
spectrum.
50
==PAGE:58==
A.2.2
CuPS 400C - EDX data
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 47: EDX scans of the CuPS 400C LL thin film modeled through LayerProbe.
(a): P atomic %. (b): S atomic %. (c):CuO atomic %. (D): P/S ratio.
51
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
Figure 48: EDX scans of the CuPS 400C LL thin film modeled through LayerProbe.
(a): O atomic %. (b): Thickness.
A.2.3
CuPS 400C - Ellipsometry including outliers
Figure 49: Calculated thin film thickness for fitted ellipsometry scans of the UL CuPS
400C thin film. The data was difficult to fit, possibly because the thin film was too
metallic. The shown thickness is therefore likely to be imprecise.
52
==PAGE:60==
A.2.4
CuPS 400C - UPS full spectra
(a)
(b)
Figure 50: Full UPS spectra of the LL CuPS 400C thin film. Each plot is shown for a
range of five points across the center of the sample. (a): Along vertical line. (b): Along
horizontal line.
53
==PAGE:61==
A.2.5
CuPS 400C - XRD 53.8° peak data
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 51: Information on the fitted 53.8° XRD peak of the CuPS 400C sample. The
fitting was done using the custom Python script. Four points had peaks that were too
faint to be identified by the script, and have thus been excluded and colored black.
(a): Peak position in degrees.
(b): Peak intensity.
(c): Peak FWHM. (d): Peak
Lorentzian/Gaussian ratio.
54
==PAGE:62==
A.3
CuPS 250C additional material
A.3.1
CuPS 250C - EDX CuPS model
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 52: P %, S %, and Cu % from EDX scans of the 250C CuPS thin film modeled
through LayerProbe. The sample was modeled as a single layer containing Cu, P, and
S. (a): P atomic %. (b): S atomic %. (c): Cu atomic %.
55
==PAGE:63==
A.3.2
CuPS 250C - EDX CuPS-CO model
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 53: P %, S %, Cu %, and O % from EDX scans of the 250C CuPS thin film
modeled through LayerProbe. The sample was modeled as a bottom layer containing
Cu, P and S, and a top layer containing C and O. Concentrations are shown in fractions
within the layer the material is placed in. (a): P atomic %. (b): S atomic %. (c): Cu
atomic %. (d): O atomic %
56
==PAGE:64==
A.3.3
CuPS 250C - Ellipsometry
Figure 54: Fitted thicknesses for ellipsometry measurements of the 250C CuPS sample.
57
==PAGE:65==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 55: Refractive index n and absorption coefficient k, calculated from fitted data,
over photon energy for ellipsometry measurements of the 250C CuPS thin film. Each
plot is shown for a range of five representative points across the sample. (a): n along the
selected horizontal line. (b): n along the selected vertical line. (c): k along the selected
horizontal line. (d): k along the selected vertical line.
58
==PAGE:66==
A.3.4
CuPS 250C - XRD
Figure 56: XRD spectra of the 250C CuPS sample shown for a single point. The sample
was amorphous, and no peaks besides the Si (400) peak were measured. The point is
representative of the entire sample. Measured with a 2θ offset of 3 degrees.
59
==PAGE:67==
A.3.5
CuPS 250C - UPS full spectra
(a)
(b)
Figure 57: Full UPS spectra of the CuPS 250°C thin film. Each plot is shown for a
range of five points across the center of the sample. (a): Along vertical line. (b): Along
horizontal line.
60
==PAGE:68==
A.4
Readme file and Python package list for data management script
The following Python packages were used in this thesis:
numpy - numpy.org
matplotlib - matplotlib.org
pandas - pandas.pydata.org
re (Regular Expressions) - docs.python.org/3/library/re
scipy - scipy.org
seaborn - seaborn.pydata.org
lmfit - lmfit.github.io/lmfit-py
61
==PAGE:69==
Data management software for characterization measurements 
This Python script allows for data management for measurements performed with XRD, 
ellipsometry, SEM/EDX, XPS, UPS, REELS, and Raman spectroscopy. Features include: 
• Loading multiple datasets into one data frame. 
• Aligning measurements to a custom grid, even if measurement coordinates differ from 
said grid. 
• Selecting specific datatypes at specific coordinates. 
• Plotting data. 
• Peak fitting for XRD and Raman data. 
• Finding valence band onset for UPS data. 
• Peak and onset fitting for REELS data. 
• Data interpolation. 
• Saving / loading data frames. 
The script requires data provided through CSV or Excel files exported from associated 
characterization measurement software. Exact data export procedures are explained at the 
end of this readme. 
XRD: SmartLab Studio II (CSV) 
Ellipsometry: CompleteEASE (CSV) 
SEM: AZtec LayerProbe and large area mapping (Excel) 
XPS, UPS, and Raman Spectroscopy: Avantage (CSV and Excel) 
 
Usage – Loading Data 
The script is operated with functions through a Python interface. Create a new Python file in the 
same folder as the “functions” file, and load the functions as follows: 
from functions import * 
 
To begin assigning data, a measurement grid must be defined with the measurement_grid 
function. The options define number of columns, number of rows, length (x) and height (y) of 
grid in mm, and the coordinate of the lower-left grid corner. 
grid = measurement_grid(ncolumns, nrows, gridlength, gridheight, startx, starty) 
 
 
Data can now be loaded. This is done with read_[datatype], where [datatype] is either 
ellipsometry_thickness, ellipsometry_nk, XRD, XPS, UPS, raman or layerprobe. The function 
defines both data and coordinates of the measurements. The parameters are the file name (or 
file path if working in a different directory), and the defined grid. The coordinates are extracted 
==PAGE:70==
from the provided datafile and are then aligned to the closest grid coordinate point. Ensure that 
your sample has consistent rotation between different measurements, as there is no way for 
the program to correct the rotation of coordinates. If any grid coordinate does not have any 
associated data, it will simply be skipped. 
As an example, here we load some ellipsometry thickness data: 
data, coords = read_ellipsometry_thickness("ellipsometry_thickness.txt", grid) 
 
 
You can visualize the grid, measurement coordinates, and corrected measurement 
coordinates with the plot_grid function. Shown below is a 11 by 11 grid, 40 by 40 mm 
dimensions, -20, -20 mm start point with some data that does not quite fit the grid. If you made 
a mistake when defining the grid, you can simply redefine it and read the data again with the 
new grid. 
plot_grid(coords, grid) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If multiple separate samples should be made part of one large grid, the coordinates of a 
dataset can be offset with translate_data: 
data, coords = translate_data(data, x, y) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
Usage – Handling Data 
The data from read_[datatype] is saved as a data frame. Multiple data frames can be combined 
with combine_data. If you would like to treatment on data, you should do so before combining 
data frames.  
datalist = [XRD_data, ellipsometry_data, layerprobe_data, XPS_data] 
dataframe = combine_data(datalist) 
 
 
The data can be read with get_data. Options define which type of data to read from the frame, 
and the coordinates (x, y) of the data. Leave type as ‘all’ to select all types. Leave coordinates 
as ‘all’ to select all coordinates. These options are also default options if they are left blank. 
get_data(dataframe, 'datatype', x, y) 
# Print entire dataframe 
get_data(dataframe) 
# Print all data at a coordinate 
get_data(dataframe, 'all', -20, -20) 
# Print all heights 
get_data(dataframe, 'Z (nm)') 
# Print only height at a coordinate 
get_data(dataframe, 'Z (nm)', -20, -20) 
 
 
The data can be saved and loaded with save_data and load_data. 
save_data(dataframe, "saved_data.txt") 
dataframe = load_data("saved_data.txt") 
 
 
Usage – Visualization 
You can plot two types of data against each other with the plot_data function. You must 
specify a datatype for both the x and y axis, as well as any amount of plotting options you 
would like. A full selection of available options as well as an example are shown on the next 
page. The ordering of provided options is not important if you input “option = value”. If an 
option is left blank, the default value is selected, as shown by an underline. 
plot_data(data, 'datatype_x', 'datatype_y', options…) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
A list of options is shown below. For the x, y, and datatype_select_value options, the selected 
values do not need to be exact; the closest value is automatically chosen. 
x = 'all' / [coordinate_list] # Provide a list of x- and y-coordinates to limit-
points to plot. You must provide a list for each of equal length. 
y = 'all' / [coordinate_list] 
datatype_select = None / 'datatype' # For data with multiple values (e.g. ellipsom-
etry n is given for a certain energy), select the column name (e.g. "Energy (eV)") 
here. 
datatype_select_value = None / [value] # Provide the row value of the 
"datatype_select" column (e.g. 4.2 to select 4.2 eV). 
legend = True / False # Display legend 
scatter_plot = True / False # Display scatter plot instead of line plot 
plotscale = 'linear' / 'log' # Choose linear or log y-axis scale 
title = 'auto' / 'Custom Title' / None # Choose title 
 
 
Example options for a plot of refractive index n over a ratio of Zr/Ti is shown below. The 
produced plot is shown on the next page. 
# We have some XPS and ellipsometry nk data 
datalist = [ZrTiO_XPS_data, ZrTiO_ellipsometry_nk_data] 
dataframe = combine_data(datalist) 
# Example of selected options: 
# datatype_x = 'Zr Total / Ti Total' 
# datatype_y = 'n' 
# datatype_select = 'Energy (eV)' 
# datatype_select_value = 4.323 
# scatter_plot = True 
# title = 'n over Zr/Ti ratio' 
 
# Plot data 
plot_data(dataframe, datatype_x = 'Zr Total / Ti Total', datatype_y = 'n', 
datatype_select = 'Energy (eV)', datatype_select_value = 4.323, scatter_plot = 
True, title = 'n over Zr/Ti ratio) 
 
 
 
If we wanted to only plot a few coordinates instead of the default “all”, e.g. points [-4,0], [0,0], 
and [4,0], we could have added: 
# Coordinate examples 
# x = [-4, 0, 4] 
# y = [0, 0, 0] 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
You can also produce a heatmap of a dataset with the heatmap function. You must specify 
the type of data to plot, and optionally give your plot a title. 
# Produce a heatmap of selected data 
heatmap(data, 'datatype', options…) 
 
 
A list of options is shown below. For the datatype_select_value, excluded_x, and excluded_y 
options, the selected values do not need to be exact; the closest value is automatically 
chosen. 
datatype_select = None / 'datatype' # For data with multiple values (e.g. 
ellipsometry n is given for a certain energy), select the column name (e.g. "Energy 
(eV)") here. 
datatype_select_value = None / [value] # Provide the row value of the 
"datatype_select" column. (e.g. 4.2 to select 4.2 eV). 
excluded_x = 'all' / [coordinate_list] # Provide a list of x- and y-coordinates to 
exclude from the dataset. You must provide a list for each of equal length. 
excluded_y = 'all' / [coordinate_list] 
min_limit = None / number # Exclude data below the limit 
max_limit = None / number # Exclude data above the limit 
title = "Custom Title" / None # Choose title 
 
 
Example heatmap with two points excluded. Note the coordinates do not have to be exact. 
# Example of selected options 
# datatype = 'Layer 1 Thickness (nm)' 
# title = 'Thickness (nm)' 
# excluded_x = [2, 2] 
# excluded_y = [-12, -10] 
 
heatmap(data, datatype = 'Layer 1 Thickness (nm)', title = 'Thickness (nm)', 
excluded_x = [2, 2], excluded_y = [-12, -10]) 
 
 
The two plots produced by the examples: 
 
==PAGE:74==
You can also plot a scatter plot with a colormap using the plot_scatter_colormap function. It 
functions in the same way the regular plot_data functions, except for also having to define a 
datatype_z as the basis for the colormap. 
plot_scatter_colormap(data, datatype_x, datatype_y, datatype_z, x = "all", y = 
"all", datatype_select = None, datatype_select_value = None, min_limit = None, 
max_limit = None, plotscale = "linear", title = "auto"): 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
Usage – Additional Functions 
Data interpolation 
All datatypes can be interpolated using bicubic interpolation. This is useful if you want to 
reduce the number of measurements for slow characterization equipment. The data is 
interpolated over a grid defined with measurement_grid. If the provided grid spans a larger area 
than the original data, the region completely outside the original data is left blank, as no 
interpolation can be done there. Consider if your interpolated data is physically accurate and 
interpolatable when using this function. 
interpolated_data = interpolate_grid(data, grid) 
 
 
Math between columns of data 
The function math_on_columns can find the results of an operation between two columns of 
your choice. The types provided must be column names. You can specify the type of operation 
(“+”, “-“, “*”, “/”) to add, subtract, multiply, or divide columns. The result is added as a new 
column at the end of each coordinate point. This operation must be performed before 
combining datasets. 
 
An example below shows a use case for finding the ratio between elements P and S for a 
LayerProbe dataset. 
# We have some “layerprobe_data”, and we want to find ratio between P and S. 
type1 = "Layer 1 P Atomic %" 
type2 = "Layer 1 S Atomic %" 
layerprobe_data = math_on_columns(layerprobe_data, type1, type2, "/") 
 
 
Convert ellipsometry wavelength column to eV 
If ellipsometry n/k data is exported in wavelengths, it can be converted to an eV scale instead. 
𝐸= ℎ𝑐
𝜆, ℎ= 4.135 ⋅10−15 eV
Hz , 𝑐= 3 ⋅108 m
s  
ellipsometry_nk_data = convert_to_eV(ellipsometry_nk_data) 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
XRD peak fitting 
XRD analysis is done in two stages. First, the initial_peaks function detects peak center 
locations and amplitudes. Input is data frame from read_XRD. The data is filtered to avoid false 
peaks. A data range can be specified to only fit part of the measurement, this must be provided 
as the index of the data. 
 
Filter strength is adjusted with filterstrength. Peak detection sensitivity can be adjusted based 
on how much the peak stands out from the surrounding signal with peakprominence and based 
on the width of the peaks with peakwidth. For these three options, you can provide either a list 
of [minimum, maximum] or a single value, interpreted as minimum. 
 
Plots can be toggled on or off using withplots.  
Peaks, XRD_data_fit = initial_peaks(data, dataRangeMin, dataRangeMax, 
filterstrength, peakprominence, peakwidth, withplots = True, plotscale = 'log') 
 
If plots are toggled on, they will be output for every point as code is running. 
 
1 Example plot output, filterstrength = 30, peakwidth = 1, peakprominence = 350. Unfiltered data can be seen later 
under XRD fit. 
==PAGE:77==
The function outputs a data frame with peak locations and intensity and a data frame with the 
range limited unfiltered data. 
 
 
 
 
The second step is the xrd_fit function, it fits the data based on Peaks output from initial_peaks. 
Input the data from read_XRD and Peaks from xrd_initial_peaks. xrd_fit constructs a model with 
pseudo-Voigt peaks and a spline background, number of knots adjusted with knots. Plots can 
also be toggled here. The data range that is fitted can be limited using dataRangeMin and 
dataRangeMax. Background can be removed from the fit using the remove_background_fit 
modifier.  
xrd_output = xrd_fit(data, Peaks, knots, dataRangeMin, dataRangeMax, withplots = 
True, plotscale = 'log', remove_background_fit = False) 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
If withplots is toggled on, a plot will be output for every point as the function runs: 
 
2 example with knots = 11 
Final output is a data frame with measurements, fit, and peak locations, intensity, FWHM, and 
Lorentzian/Gaussian fraction for every point. 
==PAGE:79==
Raman fitting 
Raman fitting is done in two stages. The first stage is to find initial peak location and 
amplitude data. This is done using initial_peaks, as described in the XRD fitting section. The 
data is fitted using the raman_fit function. This function takes the Peaks output from 
initial_peaks and the data frame output from read_raman. The background is fitted using a 
spline function, the number of points used for this is adjusted using knots. The peaks are 
fitted using a Gaussian function. The data range that is fitted can be limited using 
dataRangeMin and dataRangeMax. Background can be removed from the fit using the 
remove_background_fit modifier. 
raman_output = raman_fit(data,Peaks,dataRangeMin, dataRangeMax, knots, withplots = 
True, plotscale = 'log', remove_background_fit = False) 
 
 
If plots are toggled on, one will be output for every point while the function is running. An 
example of such a plot is shown below: 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
Final output is a data frame with the measurement data, fit, and peak locations, intensity and 
FWHM for every point.  
 
UPS fitting 
UPS fitting is done to find the valence band onset. Input data frame from read_UPS. It 
automatically finds and performs a linear fit on the background as well as the valence band 
onset. Outputs the intercept between the fits as well as the background intercept with the x-
axis, for every point in a data frame. Data analysis starting point can be chosen with startvalue. 
Plots toggled with withplots, if plots are toggled on it will output a plot for every point as the 
code is running. The y-axis scale can be chosen with plotscale. 
UPS_output = UPS_fit(data, startvalue, withplots = True, plotscale = 'linear') 
 
 
It will automatically identify the start and end point of the background and valence band for 
fitting, based on the slope.  
==PAGE:81==
 
REELS fitting 
REELS fitting is done to find the band gap.  Input data frame from read_REELS. It automatically 
finds the elastic scattering peak and onset of energy loss. Outputs the binding energy (BE) 
difference between peak and onset, for every point in a data frame. Plots toggled with withplots, 
scale chosen with plotscale. 
REELS_output = REELS_fit(data, withplots = True,plotscale = 'linear') 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Data Export Guide from Associated Software 
XRD data export 
Select the “Powder XRD” tab and load all your data from the “Load Data” button.  
Under “Dataset:” select “All”. 
Right click the graph and select “Export” -> “Export data…”. 
 
 
 
Ellipsometry data export 
You must display a graph of the data you want to export. For thickness data, click on thickness 
in the Fit window. For n and k data, right click the Fit window, select “Graph OCs Vs. Position”, 
and then select “n & k”. 
On the displayed graph, right click and select “Copy Data to Clipboard”. You might need to click 
a bit outside the graph to get the option to show up. Paste the data into an empty notepad file. 
==PAGE:83==
SEM LayerProbe data export 
On the “Calculate Layers” tab, click “Full Results Table” (Multiple Spectra). On the right panel, 
now click through each of your measurements and add them via “Add Selected Acquisitions” 
one by one to the Quant Results View. It can be a good idea to manually rename the 
measurements to keep the entries sorted. Press the “Edit Columns…” and tick the X- and Y-axis 
options, alongside any other parameters you would like to export. Finally, click the table of 
Quant Results, CTRL+A to select all values, then CTRL+C and CTRL+V the table into an Excel 
sheet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even though LayerProbe should already know the coordinates of the measurements, there is 
unfortunately no way to export them automatically. You therefore as a last step need to 
manually add the coordinates of your measurements to the Excel sheet. 
 
==PAGE:84==
XPS, UPS, REELS, and Raman data export 
Avantage unfortunately has poor support for exporting mapping data as CSV. Follow these 
steps for exporting to CSV for XPS, and an Excel file for UPS, REELS, and Raman. 
XPS data 
Select your data and do right-click -> Display Modes -> Energy Spectrum. You should have a set 
of graphs with a Survey measurement and a set with some Core Scans. For the Survey 
spectrum, select it and automatically ID the peaks: 
 
 
For the Core Scans, select one and manually iteratively add peaks: 
 
 
After you have added all peaks for one spectrum, press the Fit All Levels button. Repeat these 
steps for all your Core Scans. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Select your Survey spectra and press the Create Profile button: 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
You must select these exact options. Repeat for the Core Scan 
spectra. 
Finally select the newly created map, go to utilities, and export 
to text file.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
UPS, REELS, and Raman data 
The export process is identical for UPS, REELS, and Raman. Go to “Reporting” and change 
export type to “Survey”. Then click the Excel button and open “Report Options”. 
In the options, ensure the following options are ticked: 
To speed up the export, right click the shown graph and set display mode to “2D Chart”. If the 
units make no sense, change to “Energy Spectrum”, then back to “2D Chart”. Your plot should 
look as follows: 
Now create a blank Excel file in the same folder your Avantage file is opened from. Open the 
Excel file. Now select your graph, click the Excel button under the reporting tab, and “Report to 
Open File”. This will export a single row of measurements to the Excel file. 
In order to export the entire map, you must manually change the selected coordinate row as 
highlighted above. Each time you change the coordinate, press the “Report to Open File” button 
again. Do not touch the Excel file while you are exporting! Additionally, Avantage takes a 
==PAGE:87==
couple seconds to export the data each time, and if you change the coordinates before it is 
done exporting there is a likelyhood the program will crash. Make sure the program is idle before 
changing coordinates. 
 
