==PAGE:1==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation
Comparative Analysis of Ventilation Systems
Mikkel Nikita Christiansen
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation: Comparative Analysis of
Ventilation Systems
This thesis investigates thermal comfort and heat demand through practical measure­
ments and simulations in two offices and one apartment in CPH Village, Vesterbro, each
room using different ventilation systems.
Master’s Thesis
22nd of June, 2024
Author:
Mikkel Nikita Christiansen
s183613
Supervisor:
Kristoffer Negendahl, DTU
Cosupervisor:
Carlo Volf, Architect and developer of NoTech
==PAGE:3==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to all those who assisted me throughout this
project. Firstly, I would like to thank my thesis supervisor, Kristoffer Negendahl, for his
guidance and accomodating nature. His support was key in connecting me with Carlo
Volf, the creator of the NoTech system, whose dedication and ambition for pushing inno­
vative and sustainable solutions to the industry I greatly admire. I am grateful to Carlo for
his assistance and advice during this project. Lastly, I thank the management of CPH
Village for their patience and for allowing me to conduct experiments in their rooms. Spe­
cial thanks go to Luca, a resident of the CPH Village community, for letting me use his
room for the experiment.
i
==PAGE:4==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Abstract
Abstract
The indoor climate of buildings is a significant contributor to the well being of people, given
that people spend about 90 % of their time indoors. Simultaneously, buildings in the EU
account for about 40 % of the energy use, thus being a great potential for energy savings.
This study investigates NoTech, an innovative natural ventilation system, with the aims
of optimizing parameters for indoor environment quality (IEQ) and energy efficiency. The
performance of the NoTech system is compared to a natural ventilation system called
Ventilationsvinduet and a mechanical ventilation system, specifically regarding indicators
such as thermal comfort, draught, air exchange rate, and heat demand. Optimizing the
indoor climate is to walk a tightrope, as improving one performance indicator can be at
the expense of others. Mechanical ventilation is a widely used measure of controlling
the indoor environment because of its IEQ and energy effectiveness, although it can be
costly and intensive to implement and maintain. Alternatively, natural ventilation offers
cost effective solutions, but often struggle with energy efficiency and keeping a consistent
IEQ. The NoTech system aims to overcome the typical challenges of natural ventilation.
Through experiments and simulations a comparative analysis between a NoTech office,
a Ventilationsvinduet office and a Student apartment with mechanical ventilation system
drives the evaluation of performance of IEQ parameters and heat demand. Key findings
suggest that the NoTech system provides a high level of thermal comfort for most of the
time, however still outperformed by the two other ventilation systems. Additionally, the
results also suggest that the NoTech system provides the same or lower level of draught
compared to the Ventilationsvinduet system. The results also indicate that the NoTech
office provides a higher average air exchange rate throughout the measurement period
compared to the other rooms. Additionally, air exchange results for the NoTech office
indicate a higher rate compared to Ventilationsvinduet when coupled with mechanical
ventilation enabling effective cross ventilation. However, the results suggest that the heat
demand of the NoTech office is higher than the Ventilationsvinduet office and the Student
apartment using mechanical ventilation. The results indicate certain promising situations
where the NoTech system can provide a good indoor climate, but more investigations
must be done to validate findings, to minimize errors, and to fully grasp the potential of the
innovative NoTech system, especially towards minimzing heat demand and maximizing
the IEQ.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Contents
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
2
2
Methods
4
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Results
17
3.1
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.4
Draught & Air Exchange Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.5
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4
Discussion
38
4.1
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.2
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.3
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.4
Draught Rate & Air Exchange Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.5
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.6
Overall Indications of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5
Conclusion
49
References
50
A Appendix
52
A.1 Site Pictures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.2 Long Term Measurements of Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A.3 Long Term Measurements of Humidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.4 Adaptive Comfort Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.5 CO2 Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.6 Wind Speeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.7 Simulation of Indoor Temperature and Schedule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
1
==PAGE:6==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 1. Introduction
1
Introduction
A good indoor climate in buildings is a key influencer to the well being of people. On av­
erage, people spend about 90 % of their time indoors where about 70 % of the time is at
home, thus making the indoor environment a obvious place to influence people’s health
for the better [1]. A supposed quote from Winston Churchill about the House of Com­
mons during reconstruction after being destroyed in a bombing during WWII: ”We shape
our buildings, and afterwards our buildings shape us”. This quote trandsends the idea that
people are in charge of changing our physical surroundings, but they affect us reversely.
This imposes a responsibility for creators of the built environment, and stresses the im­
portance that creation of indoor environments must support the well being and forming
of people and to mitigate the adverse effects these environments may have. However,
this poses a great challenge for those whom we call creators, who may take the form as
architects, engineers, or others. Because finding the perfect conditions for a great indoor
environment that suits all, is akin to tracing a drop of water in an ocean.
In todays paradigme in the building industry, energy efficiency (and thus economic
savings) is a main focus. Buildings in the EU takes up about 40 % of energy use, thus
potentially making the building industry a place for massive energy savings [2]. However,
this is not acquired by just lowering the ventilation rate, because the indoor environment
quality is then at risk [3]. Studies show that low ventilation rates are associated with
worsening in health problems or perceived air quality [4]. Health problems includes sick
building syndrome, inflammation, respiratory infections, asthma symptoms, and other [5].
On the other hand, increasing ventilation rates is suggested to decrease the risk of sick
building syndrome [5] and increased work performance [6]. Therefore, the main focus is
to create the desired conditions for a good indoor climate that are rooted in a minimum
expenditure of energy.
Mechanical ventilation systems are most prevalent when building new. Especially
in office buildings, mechanical ventilation is preferred. It is known for being well at main­
taining a good indoor climate in terms of providing sufficient ventilation and keeping high
thermal comfort, and at the same time optimize the heat demand, especially during win­
ter [3]. However, mechanical ventilation systems are usually expensive and demands a
higher use of electrical energy, more maintenance, and can be less intuitive to control.
Long before the invention of mechanical ventilation systems, natural ventilation sys­
tems provided fresh air to indoor environments. These systems come in many forms,
however they all use the same principals for exchanging air. Natural ventilation makes
use of passive measures such as temperature and pressure differences to exchange air
in rooms. It is a solution that optimize the use of space, is often aesthetic, and intuitive
to use than complicated mechanical ventilation systems. An openable window is an ex­
2
==PAGE:7==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 1. Introduction
ample of one of the most common forms of natural ventilation. However, the openable
window is not a stand alone solution to indoor climate control, and is usually seen in sys­
tems with other natural ventilation measures or mechanical ventilation systems. The use
of passive ventilation is challenging, although intuitive to use, it is difficult to control the
indoor climate. Poorly designed indoor climates that are controlled through natural ven­
tilation may use minimum electricity and are cost efficient, but compensate in increased
heat demand and risk people’s health because of poor indoor environment quality.
NoTech is a natural ventilation system tested in this project. The system is installed
as a part of the building facade. It imitates the properties of a well insulated venting hatch
that filters the incoming air in which the air flow is determined by the opening of the hatch
that is controlled by a small motor. The NoTech system is an innovative solution utilizing
the simple principles of passive ventilation to provide fresh air to buildings.
Ventilationsvinduet is another natural ventilation system that is tested in this project.
It is a window with valves that lets air in between the glass panes and allows it to be
warmed up by the room and the sun to let warm fresh air into the room. A built in wax
motor closes in hot weather and lets warm outside air bypass and flow into the building.
Ventilationsvinduet ideally replaces the whole ventilation system and is therefore cheaper
than mechanical ventilation systems, however the system best secures continuous air
exchange with mechanical ventilation [7].
The project is seeking to answer the following hypothesis with the aim of testing the
NoTech ventilation system against another natural ventilation system, the Ventilationsvin­
duet, and a mechanical ventilation system:
The NoTech system provides a more efficient indoor climate regarding IAQ,
thermal comfort, and heat demand compared to conventional ventilation systems
The project seeks to answer following research questions:
• Does NoTech provide better thermal comfort compared to Ventilationsvinduet or
mechanical ventilation?
• Does NoTech result in less draught compared to Ventilationsvinduet?
• Does NoTech result in better air exchange compared to other ventilation systems?
• Does NoTech result in a higher heat demand?
The study finds that NoTech results in high thermal comfort most of the time, although
performing slightly worse than the two other systems. However, uncertainties such as
building orientation and outdoor temperatures among other seem to influence the results.
Additionally, NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet both have a low level of draught. The air
exchange rate for the NoTech system tends to be effective in a cross ventilation situation
with mechanical ventilation. However, in one sided ventilation situations, the NoTech
office results in low ventilation rates compared to Ventilationsvinduet. The results also
suggests that the heat demand of NoTech is higher compared to Ventilationsvinduet and
mechanical ventilation.
3
==PAGE:8==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
2
Methods
The overall design of the research is quantitative. The study is longitudinal and therefore
examines changes in variables over time. The studied variables dictate the sensation of
indoor climate, specifically thermal comfort, which is the main independent variable in this
study. The method section furthermore provides details about the background and theory
about the method used in this study, where details about the location of measurements
are also provided. The method section provides the framework of the study, in which
the thermal comfort, draught, air exchange rate, and heat demand investigations will be
discussed.
2.1
Background
2.1.1
Thermal Comfort
Thermal comfort is the condition of a person that is satisfied in a given thermal envi­
ronment. When a person is in a state of thermal discomfort, the causes of this can be
unwanted cooling or heating of the body, or just particular parts of the body [8].
Thermal comfort is among other factors affected by operative temperature, which is
a mean of the air temperature and the mean radiant temperature. Other factors include rel­
ative humidity, air velocity, clothing insulation, and metabolic rate. The clothing insulation
represents the estimated amount of clothing that a person has on them is specified in clo
where 1 clo = 0.155m2·K
W
[8]. Assuming that the users in the study are wearing daily wear
clothing consisting of underwear, pants, shirt, sweatshirt, socks, and shoes, the clothing
insulation used in this study is 1 clo. The metabolic rate is closely connected to the phys­
ical activity level of a person is specified in met, where 1 met = 58.2 W
m2 . Thus, a higher
activity level is represented in calculation with higher metabolic rates. The metabolic rate
for this study is assumed to be 1.2 met = 69.8 W
m2 , which represents sedentary activity, for
example a person sitting at a table and doing light work such as office work [9].
The code for Indoor Thermal Climate DS 474 specifies the optimal operative tem­
perature. Assuming that the clothing insulation is 1 clo and that the metabolic rate is
1.2 met, an optimal operative temperature range can be found. At these conditions, the
optimal operative temperature range is estimated to be 21◦C ± 2.5◦C as seen in Figure
2.1. The shaded and not shaded areas on the figure indicates the acceptable temper­
ature variation for when maximum 10 % of a large group of people are expected to be
dissatisfied with the thermal environment.
4
==PAGE:9==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
Figure 2.1: Optimal operative temperature as a function of clothing insulation (beklæd­
ning) and metabolic rate (aktivitet).
2.1.2
Predicted Mean Vote
The predicted mean vote, usually referred to as PMV, is a way of estimating thermal
comfort in an indoor environment. It is an index that predicts the mean value of vote of
a large group of people exposed to certain thermal conditions. Developed by Fanger in
the 1970s, the model considers a range of parameters such as air temperature, mean
radiant temperature, humidity, clothing insulation, and metabolic rate. The votes ranges
on a 7 point scale from ­3 (cold) to +3 (hot). A PMV of 0 corresponds to a person feeling
a thermally neutral sensation, thus being thermally comfortable, see Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: 7 Point Thermal Sensation Scale.
+ 3
Hot
+ 2
Warm
+1
Slightly Warm
0
Neutral
­ 1
Slightly Cool
­ 2
Cool
­ 3
Cold
The calculation of PMV is complicated but can be solved with calculation tools, such as
the online thermal comfort tool provided by the Center of the Built Environment at the Uni­
versity of California, Berkeley. However, the contributers of this tool have also published
Python packages for investigating thermal comfort [10]. These packages enable swift
calculation of thousands of thermal conditions measured. This is crucial for investigating
the thermal environment in rooms across longer periods of time.
5
==PAGE:10==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
2.1.3
Predicted Percentage Dissatisfied
The predicted percentage dissatisfied, usually referred to as PPD, is a quantitative mea­
sure of thermally dissatisfied people in a given thermal environment. In simpler terms,
PPD estimates the percentage of a large group of people that are dissatisfied with their
thermal conditions in a room. According to ISO 7730, when PMV is determined, the PPD
can be calculated by Equation 2.1.
PPD = 100 −95 · exp(−0.03353 · PMV 4 −0.2179 · PMV 2)
(2.1)
The PPD predicts that there will always be at least 5 % thermally dissatisfied people within
a large group testing thermal conditions as seen in Figure 2.2. The figure also shows that
the PPD distribution is numerically equal for intervals of PMV in the ­2 to 2 range. This
means the model predicts that the same number of people will be unsatisfied at same
PMV values, e.g., when the PMV is ­0.5 or 0.5, the PPD is about 10 %. At higher thermal
discomfort, such as when PMV is ­2 or 2, then the PPD is about 70 %.
Figure 2.2: PPD [%] as a function of PMV.
Thermal comfort requirements regarding PMV and PPD are given in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: PMV requirements regarding EN­16798
Category
Thermal state of the body as a whole
PPD [%]
PMV [ ]
Category I
< 6
­0.2 < PMV < +0.2
Category II
< 10
­0.5 < PMV < +0.5
Category III
< 15
­0.7 < PMV < +0.7
Category IV
< 20
­1.0 < PMV < +1.0
6
==PAGE:11==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
2.1.4
Adaptive Comfort
While the PMV is a great tool for handling controlled environments, the adaptive comfort
offers a way to nuance the understanding of thermal environments. It assumes that people
respond to the thermal conditions of their surroundings and utilize the ability to adjust
their clothing and/or activity level to reach thermal comfort. Thus, the model predicts that
people adapt easier to thermal environments, where temperatures fluctuate more such as
in rooms with no mechanical ventilation in use. The adaptive comfort model can therefore
be useful in indoor environments where mechanical ventilation is limited and the user is
under liberal clothing policies at work or at home.
Standard EN 16798­1 proposes default acceptable indoor temperatures for build­
ings without mechanical cooling systems, which are shown in Figure 2.3 [11]. Ranges
apply for 10◦C < Θm < 30◦C, and proposed between 0◦C and 10◦C.
Figure 2.3: Design values for indoor operative temperature for adaptive comfort.
These ranges are calculated firstly by using Equation 2.2 to approximate the outdoor
running mean temperature.
Θm = Θed−1 + 0.8Θed−2 + 0.6Θed−3 + 0.5Θed−4 + 0.4Θed−5 + 0.3Θed−6 + 0.2Θed−7
3.8
(2.2)
Where Θed−1 is the daily mean outdoor air temperature for the previous day. Secondly,
the optimal operative temperature can be found by inserting the known outdoor running
mean temperature using Equation 2.3.
ΘC = 0.33Θm + 18.8
(2.3)
7
==PAGE:12==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
When the optimal operative temperature is found, then upper and lower limits can be found
for categories I, II, and III using Table 2.3, where ΘO is the indoor operative temperature.
Table 2.3: Optimal operative temperature calculation limits.
Category I
upper limit
ΘO = ΘC + 2
lower limit
ΘO = ΘC −3
Category II
upper limit
ΘO = ΘC + 3
lower limit
ΘO = ΘC −4
Category III
upper limit
ΘO = ΘC + 4
lower limit
ΘO = ΘC −5
2.1.5
Local Discomfort
Local discomfort refers to particular parts of the body, where a person feels thermal dis­
comfort. The most common source of local discomfort is draught, and people at sedentary
activity are mainly more sensitive to local discomfort than people at higher activity levels
[8]. The draught rate also noted as DR is calculated by Equation 2.4.
The calculation of DR mainly applies for people at sedentary activity and for predic­
tion of draught at head level. At arms and feet level the calculation may overestimate the
DR. Additionally, it is important to note that sensation of draught is lower at activity levels
higher than 1.2 met. The local air temperature is assumed to be 22◦C.
DR = (34 −ta,l)(va,l −0.05)0.62(0.37 · va,l · Tu + 3.14)
(2.4)
Where:
ta,l is the local air temperature, in degrees Celsius, 20◦C to 26◦C;
va,l is the local mean air velocity, in metres per second;
Tu is the local turbulence intensity, in percent, 10 % to 60 % (if unknown, 40 % may be
used).
Additionally, for air velocity of 0.05 m/s is used for measurements of air velocity below
0.05 m/s, and turbulence intensity 100 % is used for TU > 100 %. Measurement po­
sitions recommended by ISO 7726 represents sensor locations at ankle, abdomen, and
neck height for sitting and standing persons, respectively [12]. See Table 2.4 for these
positions.
2.1.6
Requirements to local discomfort
Figure 2.4 shows the maximum allowable mean air velocity as a function of the local air
temperature and turbulence intensity. It shows three diagrams for category A, B, and C.
For A the DR is maximum 10 %, for B it is maximum 20 %, and for C it is maximum 30 %
[8].
8
==PAGE:13==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
Table 2.4: Recommended Measurement Heights for Physical Quantities of an Environ­
ment
Sensor Location
Recommended Heights
Sitting
Standing
Head Level
1.1 m
1.7 m
Abdomen Level
0.6 m
1.1 m
Ankle Level
0.1 m
0.1 m
Figure 2.4: Maximum allowable mean air velocity as a function of the local air temperature
and turbulence intensity.
2.1.7
CO2 Concentration & Air Exchange Rate
Oxygen is an important element for humans to exist. It takes part in the respiratory system,
in which oxygen is used in chemical processes in the body to produce energy. CO2 is a
product of the respiration process, thus connecting the body’s production of energy and
exhalation of CO2.
Among other things, the body produces energy for physical activity. The energy
consumption of the body while doing physical activity is assumed to be equal to the heat
production. Therefore, the metabolic rate is assumed equal to the heat production [9].
Naturally, the higher the physical activity level that is required for the body, the more CO2
is exhaled through breath.
It is assumed that the users of the investigated indoor environments are the only
source of increased CO2 levels above outdoor CO2 concentrations. Therefore, mea­
surement of the CO2 concentration in rooms is used as an indirect method for indicating
when the room is occupied or not.
2.1.8
CO2 Concentration Build Up
The build up of CO2 concentration in ppm in a room is given by Equation 2.5.
C(t) = G
nV (1 −e−nt)
(2.5)
9
==PAGE:14==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
Where G is the emission rate in ml/h, n is the air exchange rate in h−1, V is the volume
of the room in m3, and t is the time in hours.
The air exchange rate is usually noted as n, and is given by Equation 2.6
n = Qv/V
(2.6)
Where Qv is the volume flow in l
s or m3
h .
2.1.9
CO2 Concentration Decay
The decay of CO2 concentration in a room can be found using Equation 2.7.
C(t) = C0 · e−nt
(2.7)
Where C0 is the concentration at the start of the decay in ppm. By taking the natural
logarithm of the decay Equation 2.7, linearity in measurements are achieved, assuming
that the air exchange rate in this period is constant. The decay can therefore be described
by a linear function, where the numeric value of the slope is the air exchange rate n.
ln(C) = ln(C0) −n · t
(2.8)
2.2
Method
2.2.1
Equipment
The equipment and software used for the experiments conducted in this investigation are
listed in this section.
• HOBO logger with temperature, humidity, and CO2 sensors.
• PC with HOBOware.
• B&K Indoor Climate Analyzer with an air velocity sensor and a stand to mount the
sensor.
• Ruler to measure room dimensions and sensor placements.
• Compass application on Iphone to capture room orientation.
• CO2 tank for air exchange rate measurements.
• API key to access DMI Open Data API for weather data and meteorological obser­
vation data from DMI (Danish Meteorological Institute) [13].
• Rhino 8’s Grasshopper application with plugins ”Ladybug” and ”Dragonfly” for up­
dating weather files.
• IDA ICE 5.0 simulation software.
10
==PAGE:15==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
2.2.2
Measurements & Test Locations
The chosen location to conduct measurements is at CPH Village, at Vesterbro in Copen­
hagen. The village is mostly composed of student apartments, accompanied by a cafete­
ria and two offices. Figure 2.5 shows the location of rooms subject to the study: 1) Office
with NoTech system, 2) office with ventilation window system, and 3) student apartment
with mechanical ventilation. The rooms will throughout the report be mentioned as 1)
NoTech, 2) Ventilationsvinduet, and 3) Student, respectively. All rooms have the same
interior dimensions [width;depth;height]=[2.4 m;4.3 m;2.7 m], roughly 10 m2 and are sit­
uated on the ground floor of the village complex. The rooms are each in a house block
which consists of 8 rooms in total, and the blocks are elevated 0.5 m above ground.
The rooms are connected in pairs with a hallway inbetween, including a bathroom, and
technical closet.
The NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet offices are paired rooms that in the same build­
ing (number 143), where NoTech is oriented towards a parking lot with a large view out.
Building 143 is seen in see Figure 2.6 with the orange window panel (the orange window
panel is the NoTech system). The ventilation window is oriented towards the yard of CPH
Village, with the view slightly constricted by a neighbouring house block as seen in Figure
A.1a in appendix. The student apartment is situated in house block number 127 in the
southwest part of CPH Village. The view from the student apartment is constricted by
bushes and trees elevated on a small hill as seen in Figure A.1b in appendix.
2.2.3
Long Term Measurements
Long term measurements of indoor environment parameters including temperature, hu­
midity, and CO2 concentration are conducted in the three rooms using a HOBO logger
with temperature, humidity, and CO2 sensors. The values are recorded in 5 minute inter­
vals syncronized with the top of the hour, such that all data points are saved at the same
time from the start of each hour (e.g., at 12:00, 12:05, ... 13:00, 13:05, ...). Hoboware is
the software used to extract data from the Hobo logger. Data from long term measure­
ments is used for calculations of thermal comfort and comparing with simulated data
Figure 2.5: CPH Village seen from above (Source: Google Maps, 2024).
11
==PAGE:16==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
;
Figure 2.6: Building 143 and adjacent house blocks.
2.2.4
NoTech Office
The NoTech office faces outwards from the yard in the village complex, approximately
66◦northeast, see Figure 2.7. The room is mostly used for storage. At Position 1 on the
figure, the Hobo Logger is placed at a height of 1 m, assuming this position captures the
mixed air, where the average air temperature, humidity, and CO2 concentration appears.
Air velocity measurements are conducted on the ”Draught” position on the figure. The
NoTech panel is placed in continuation of a pair 2­layer windows, where one window is
openable. A Duka device, a decentralized mechanical ventilation system, is installed by
the entrance to the left, close to the ceiling. The device runs on four modes: I, II, III,
and standby. The volume flow on the modes are 4.2 l/s for mode I, 7.8 l/s for mode II,
13.9 l/s for mode III according to manufacturer [14]. The volume flow for standby mode is
unknown. See Figure A.2 in appendix for detailed images of the NoTech system.
2.2.5
Ventilationsvinduet Office
The Ventilationsvinduet office faces towards the yard in CPH Village, approximately 246◦
southwest, see Figure 2.8. The room is furbished with some chairs and one table. The
window section in the office consists of the ventilation window which takes up most of
the space, where a smaller part is a 3­layer openable window. At Position 1 the Hobo
Logger is placed assuming it captures the mixed air conditions in the room. Air velocity
measurements are conducted on the ”Draught” position on the figure. A Duka device is
also installed close to the ceiling by the entrance to the right. Furthermore, there is a
kitchen including an exhaust kitchen hood to the left by the entrance.
12
==PAGE:17==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
2.2.6
Student Apartment
The student apartment faces outwards from the yard in CPH Village, approximately 139◦
southwest, see Figure 2.9. The room is fully furbished including a kitchen with exhaust
hood, table, chairs, a piano, a loft bed, and more, see Figure A.1 for images of the room.
Moreover, the 3­layer window section consists of a larger fixed window panel, and a
smaller part being openable. A Duka ventilation is also installed in the room close the
ceiling by the right side of the entrance.
Figure 2.7: Plan of NoTech office and HOBO Logger position.
Figure 2.8: Plan of Ventilationsvinduet office and HOBO Logger position.
13
==PAGE:18==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
Figure 2.9: Plan of student apartment and HOBO Logger position.
2.2.7
Draught Experiment
Draught Experiment is conducted by using a B&K Indoor Climate Analyzer with air veloc­
ity sensor. By measuring the air velocity, the draught rate can be calculated, see Section
2.1.5. The experiment is conducted in the rooms, NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet. Mea­
surement positions named ”Draught” are seen in Figure 2.7 and Figure 2.8, where the
equipment is placed 0.3 m from the window and 0.5 m from the adjacent wall. Sensor
height placements are given in Table 2.4.
2.2.8
Short Term Measurement of CO2 Concentration
Measurements of CO2 decay are conducted in long term measurements as described in
Section 2.2.3, but additional short term experiments investigating the rate of decay in the
rooms NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet are made. The procedure is to increase the CO2
concentration to about 2500­3500 ppm in a room using a CO2 cylinder and capture the
decay using the mentioned Hobo logger at intervals of 30 seconds until the concentration
is levelled.
This method is used to simulate the decay of CO2 levels in from extreme CO2 levels
in a room to lower CO2 levels. More importantly, this method is used to precisely capture
specific room conditions to monitor the effectiveness of different ventilation strategies.
The ventilation strategies can be one sided ventilation with or without infiltration (e.g.,
through door leaks and infiltration holes).
2.2.9
Measurement Period
The long term measurements studies changes in parameters mainly concerning the NoTech
office, as the opening of the NoTech panel is tested to investigate how thermal comfort
responds to these changes. Moreover, opening the door creating free access between
the Ventilationsvinduet office and the NoTech office is also tested to test cross ventilation.
14
==PAGE:19==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
The length of the experiment with long time measurements stretches from 6th of March
to 3rd of April with exemption of 25th to 27th of April due to battery change, as shown in
Figure 2.10. The main parts of the experiments are leg 1, leg 2, and leg 3 as shown in the
figure. Leg 1 extends from 6th of March 12:00 to the 18th of March 12:00. Leg 2 extends
from 18th of March 12:00 to 24th of March 12:00, where leg 3 extends from 27th of March
12:00 to 3rd of April 12:00.
Throughout the experiment, it is assumed that users of the investigated rooms oc­
casionally occupy the rooms, which will be registered through CO2 measurements as
mentioned. Therefore, it will be possible to know when the rooms are with and without
users.
Figure 2.10: Timeline of measurements.
2.2.10
Comparing Measurements to Simulation Models
In real life situation where buildings already have finished installing technical systems
such as water radiators, it is a challenge to measure the heat demand. That is, if appro­
priate systems have not already been installed. However, simulation software enables
calculation of heat demand for digital models imitating real life conditions. IDA ICE 5.0 is
used to model the building from CPH Village to simulate the conditions in the investigated
rooms; the NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet offices, and the Student apartment. This is
done with the aim of reaching similar results between calculated indoor temperatures for
the digital model and for the measurements at CPH Village. Achieving the aim enables
the extraction of heat demand of the investigated rooms, thus enabling the comparison of
heat demand between them.
2.2.11
Weather Files for Simulation
An important step when simulating buildings is to reenact the same weather and meteo­
rological conditions. Thus, weather files containing this information for given periods are
indeed useful. However, the common standard weather file for simulation of buildings in
Denmark is based on decade old data from the ”Danish Design Reference Year”, which
can also mentioned as DRY. It can therefore be a challenge to compare simulated data
using decade old information with relatively recent data from measurements. Additionally,
it is also a challenge to create weather files from scratch.
15
==PAGE:20==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 2. Methods
To accomodate the challenges, Rhino 8’s Grasshopper application is used to update the
DRY weather file with recent weather and meteorological data from a weather station close
to CPH Village. The chosen weather station is ”Københavns Lufthavn”, Kastrup airport in
Copenhagen, including the station id 6180. This station is chosen as it covers most of the
data available from DMI’s OpenData platform to update the weather file. The parameters
include dry bulb temperature, dew point temperature, wind speed, wind direction, total
sky cover, and atmospheric pressure. However, data for radiance and illuminance among
other is not updated in the weather file.
2.2.12
Mean Squared Error
Digital building models are tweaked to reach indoor temperature calculations close to
measured data. The performance of the digital models are shown by the size of the mean
squared error, which is found by Equation 2.9. It is a measure of the discrepancy between
predicted and true data. Therefore, the equation is a crucial for evaluating how well the
digital models predict the measurements, thus an important tool for this study.
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Yi −ˆY i)2
(2.9)
Where Yi is the measured air temperature at the ith hour and ˆYi is the simulated air tem­
perature at the ith hour for an n number of total hours.
Taking the square root of the MSE gives the RMSE, the root mean squared error, shown
in Equation 2.10. This value helps interpret results easier, as the RMSE is a measure of
how different in degrees celsius (◦C) on average that the simulated temperature is from
the measured temperature.
RMSE =
√
MSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Yi −ˆY i)2
(2.10)
In conclusion, the methods chapter outlines key elements of this study’s framework to
investigate the performance of different ventilation systems placed in rooms located in
CPH Village, Vesterbro. The systems are evaluated on the performance regarding ther­
mal comfort, draught, air exchange rate, and heat demand.
16
==PAGE:21==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
3
Results
The results chapter contains the results from experiments and simulations. The thermal
comfort results are divided in three sections based on the different legs of the experiment.
Later in the chapter results for draught, air exchange rate, and simulation of heat demand
are displayed.
3.1
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 1
This section delves into the thermal comfort results from Leg 1 of the experiment, derived
from long term measurements. Leg 1 is a total of 288 hours and begins from March 6th
12:00 to March 18th 12:00, as shown in Figure 2.10 in Section 2.2.9.
3.1.1
Long Term Measurements
Temperature data for long time measurements for Leg 1 of the experiment is displayed in
Figure 3.1, also seen in A.3 in appendix. For the NoTech office, about 50 % of the time is
spent in the 20­21◦C range, and about 45 % of the time is within the 19­20◦C and 21­22◦C
ranges. The temperatures vary between 18◦C and 24◦C. For Ventilationsvinduet, about
60 % of the time is within the 19­20◦C range, where 25 % of the time is within the 20­21◦C
range, about 12 % of the time is within 18­19◦C. The temperatures are spread between
18◦C and 22◦C.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure 3.1: Percentage hours spent in temperature ranges for NoTech office (red), Venti­
lationsvinduet office (blue), and Student apartment (yellow) for Leg 1 of the experiment.
17
==PAGE:22==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
For the Student apartment most hours at about 50 % of the time is spent within 21­22◦C,
and about 25 % of the time is spent within 20­21◦C. The data is spread between 0◦C and
26◦C, however the temperature never went below 13◦C during measurements. Data from
long term measurements of relative humidity is found in Figure A.6 and the distribution of
relative humidity measurements for Leg 1 is found in Figure A.7.
3.1.2
PMV & PPD
This section contains results from calculations of PMV (Predicted Mean Vote) and PPD
(Predicted Percentage Dissatisfied) for Leg 1 of the experiment.
PMV
PMV results for Leg 1 of the experiment are displayed in Figure 3.2. The results show
the percentage of time the PMV is within requirements according to EN 16798­1 given in
Table 2.2 in Section 2.1.3.
The results show that NoTech fulfills Category I 20 % of the time. Therefore, the
PMV for NoTech is between ­0.2 and +0.2 for 20 % of the time in Leg 1 of the experiment.
Ventilationsvinduet and Student spends 2% and 59 % of the time in Category I, respec­
tively. This suggests that the Student apartment tends to reach the highest PMV category
for longet time than for NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet, where NoTech seems to be the
second best in performance in Category I.
Moreover, NoTech has the most percentage of hours in Category II with 62 %, where
Ventilationsvinduet and Student has 45 % and 28 %, respectively. This indicates, that the
slightly broader range in Category II fits the NoTech office better. This is also the case for
Ventilationsvinduet, as the fulfillment of the criteria increases with 43 % as seen in Figure
3.2b.
Category III is the category that Ventilationsvinduet spends the most time in with 46
% of the time in this category. The NoTech office and Student apartment has 18 % and 4
% in this category, respectively.
When inspecting what room best complies with both Category I and Category II, it
is seen that the Student apartment spends a total 87 % of the time in these categories,
where NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet has a total time in these categories of 82 % and 47
%, respectively. Thus, only a 5 % difference between the NoTech office and the Student
apartment is seen, where Ventilationsvinduet has a difference of at least 35 % to the other
rooms.
The room that has the most time within the three best categories is the NoTech office
with 100 % of the time in these categories, where Ventilationsvinduet and Student has 93
% and 91 % of the time in this range, respectively. The Student apartment has the lowest
percentage here, which is caused by widely spread temperatures in measurements as
seen in Figure 3.1c. These conditions tends to result in extreme PMV values, resulting in
4 % of the time being outside acceptable criteria.
18
==PAGE:23==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure 3.2: Percentage time spent in PMV categories according to EN 16798­1 for NoTech
office (red), Ventilationsvinduet office (blue), and Student apartment (yellow) for Leg 1 of
the experiment.
PPD
PPD results for Leg 1 of the experiment are displayed in Figure 3.3. The figure shows
the percentage of time that NoTech (red), Ventilationsvinduet (blue), and Student (yellow)
stays within or equal to a criteria for PPD. The higher the percentage of time at lower
upper limits for criteria the better.
The results show that the Student apartment has the highest percentage of time of
about 63 % within or equal to the 6 % criteria. It can therefore be expected, that for Leg 1
of the experiment, the predicted percentage people of a large group that are dissatisfied
is 6 % or less for 63 % of the time. For NoTech it is 22 % of the time and for Ventila­
tionsvinduet it is 2 % of the time. For Student, the curve for the percentage of time within
or equal to criteria tends to smoothen at the 7­8 % criterion from about 81 % of the time
to 92 % of the time at the 20 % criterion. The last 8 % of the time are slowly obtained
up to the 65 % criteria, but this is not shown in the figure. However, the results show
that the Student apartment tends to have a large amount of hours with very few predicted
percentage dissatisfied compared to NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet.
19
==PAGE:24==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
The percentage of time vs. criteria for the NoTech office increases slower than the Student
apartment, however faster than Ventilationsvinduet, reaching 80 % of time within or equal
to 10 PPD. The Ventilationsvinduet office reaches the 80 % of time at about 13.2 PPD,
therefore a slight increase compared to the NoTech office. The NoTech office surpasses
the Student apartment for percentage of time within the PPD criteria at about 11 %. The
NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet offices both have equal to or less than 20 % predicted
dissatisfied in 100 % of the time during measurements. This shows that more people
tend to be satisfied with the indoor thermal conditions in the NoTech office in more time
than the Ventilationsvinduet office. However, the Student apartment is predicted to have
fewer dissatisfied at the lowest criteria at about 11 % and below for longest total time.
Figure 3.3: Percentage of time within or equal to PPD criteria for the three investigated
rooms for Leg 1 of the experiment.
3.1.3
Adaptive Comfort
Adaptive comfort results for the NoTech office, Ventilationsvinduet office, and the Student
apartment are shown in Table 3.1 for Leg 1 of the experiment. It is seen that the indoor
temperature for NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet stays within Category I for 99 % and 100
% of the time, respectively. However, the indoor temperature for the Student apartment
stays within Category I for 90 % of the time, roughly 20­25 hours less than NoTech and
Ventilationsvinduet. The NoTech office spends the rest 1 % of the time in the measure­
ment period within Category II, where the Student apartment stays in this category 7 %
of the measured time. Only the Student apartment has indoor temperatures in Category
III (1 %) and outside the categories (2 %).
20
==PAGE:25==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
Overall, the results indicate that the three rooms stay well within Category I, where Venti­
lationsvinduet performs the best, where NoTech is only 1 % off from performing as good
as Ventilationsvinduet regarding adaptive comfort. Moreover, the results also indicate
that the Student apartment has a larger spread of temperatures, shown in the distribu­
tion of hours in different categories of indoor temperature categories. However, most of
the spread is within Category I and II, thus indications are that the indoor temperatures
in Category III and outside the Categories can be neglected. This spread is mostly due
to opening the window and/or the door to the outside for prolonged times. This affects
the indoor temperatures, especially at winter when running mean outdoor temperatures
reach about 3­5 ◦C, see Figure A.12 in appendix. Additionally, it is seen for the Student
apartment, that even on cold days, it is still possible to reach higher indoor temperatures
about 23­26 ◦C.
For Leg 1 of the experiment, the NoTech office shows adequate thermal comfort
according to the adaptive categories. The indications of the experiment is that opened
doors between NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet allows free access and passage for air,
thus allowing dispose of excess heat. An additional indication of Leg 1 of the experiment
is that the maximum opening of the NoTech panel helps more heat to be removed. The
indications are that these conditions allow both the NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet offices
to perform better than the Student apartment regarding adaptive comfort.
Table 3.1: Leg 1 hours and percentage of time in adaptive comfort categories for NoTech,
Ventilationsvinduet, and Student.
21
==PAGE:26==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
3.2
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 2
Thermal comfort results from long time measurements of Leg 2 of the experiment are
handled in this section. Leg 2 is a total of 144 hours and begins from March 18th 12:00 to
March 24th 12:00.
3.2.1
Long Term Measurements
Temperature data for long time measurements for Leg 2 of the experiment is displayed in
Figure 3.4, also seen in A.4 in appendix. For the NoTech office, about 50 % of the time
is spent in the 20­21◦C range, and about 40 % of the time is spent within 19­20◦C and
21­22◦C. The temperatures vary between 19◦C and 25◦C, with about 10 % of the time
within 22­25◦C.
For Ventilationsvinduet, about 51 % of the time is within the 21­22◦C range, where
about 32 % of the time is within the 20­21◦C range, and about 13 % of the time is within
22­23◦C. The temperatures are spread between 19◦C and 24◦C.
For the Student apartment about 65 % of the time is spent within 21­22◦C, and about
25 % of the time is spent within 20­21◦C. About 8 % of the time is witin 22­23◦C The data
is spread between 20◦C and 24◦C.
Data from long term measurements of relative humidity is found in Figure A.6 and
the distribution of relative humidity measurements for Leg 2 is found in Figure A.8.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure 3.4: Percentage hours spent in temperature ranges for NoTech office (red), Venti­
lationsvinduet office (blue), and Student apartment (yellow) for Leg 2 of the experiment.
22
==PAGE:27==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
3.2.2
PMV & PPD
This sections displays the results from calculations of PMV and PPD for Leg 2 of the
experiment.
PMV
PMV results for Leg 2 of the experiment are displayed in Figure 3.5. The results show
the percentage of time the PMV is within requirements according to EN 167981­1 given
in Table 2.2 in Section 2.1.3.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure 3.5: Percentage time spent in PMV categories according to EN 16798­1 for NoTech
office (red), Ventilationsvinduet office (blue), and Student apartment (yellow) for Leg 2 of
the experiment.
The results show that the NoTech office fulfills Category I 24 % of the time, where Venti­
lationsvinduet and Student fulfills Category I for 57 % and 61 % of the time, respectively.
The Ventilationsvinduet office and Student apartment are similar here, only a difference
of 4 % is seen, where NoTech has less than half of the time spent in Category I compared
to the other rooms.
Next, NoTech fulfills PMV requirement in Category II 68 % of the time in the mea­
sured period. This is followed by Ventilationsvinduet with 43 % of the time in Category II,
and Student with 39 % of the time in Category II. In total, NoTech is 92 % of the time in
Category I and II, where Ventilationsvinduet and the Student apartment both are in these
categories 100 % of the time. NoTech spends the last 8 % of the time in Category III.
23
==PAGE:28==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
The results indicate that for Leg 2 of the experiment, the thermal comfort according to
PMV in the Student apartment is high, and that the comfort is also similar in the Ventila­
tionsvinduet office. Thus, the two rooms tend to be more balanced around thermal neu­
trality according to PMV in this time period. However, the NoTech office tends to allow
more varied indoor air temperatures in this period, which explains the majority time within
Category II. As seen in Figure 3.4a, the NoTech have more hours within temperatures
23­25◦C, which explains the hours within Category III.
PPD
PPD results for Leg 2 of the experiment are shown in Figure 3.6, where the percentage
of time within or equal to a PPD criteria is shown.
Figure 3.6: Percentage of time within or equal to PPD criteria for the three investigated
rooms for Leg 2 of the experiment.
As explained in the previous section, the thermal comfort Student apartment and Ventila­
tionsvinduet office tend to be more balanced in this time period, which is also displayed
in Figure 3.6. Here, it is seen that for 80 % of the time there would be equal to 6 % or
less predicted dissatisfied with the thermal environment in the Student apartment. It is
also seen that the Ventilationsvinduet office has just over 60 % of the time below or equal
to this criteria, where NoTech has about 30 % of the time below or equal to the 6 PPD
criteria. At the criteria of 7 % dissatisfied, the time being in the percentage of time within
or equal to criteria almost doubles for the NoTech office to about 58 % of the time, where
it is about 95 % and 100 % of the time for Ventilationsvinduet and Student, respectively.
The slope for the NoTech office decreases after the 7 % criteria, and steady reaches 100
% of the time within or equal to the 11 % criteria.
24
==PAGE:29==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
All rooms display an improvement from Leg 1 of the experiment, meaning that less people
are expected to be dissatisfied with the thermal conditions in the rooms. Most notably, the
results indicate that the Ventilationsvinduet office has improved significantly compared to
the NoTech office.
3.2.3
Adaptive Comfort
Adaptive comfort results for the NoTech office, Ventilationsvinduet office, and the Student
apartment are displayed in Table 3.2 for Leg 2 of the experiment. It is seen that all the
rooms stay within Category I at least 93 % of the time, where the Student apartment stays
mostly within this category for 98 % of the time, where the last 2 % of the time the Student
apartment stays within Category II. Ventilationsvinduet stays within Category I 96 % of
the time, where the last 4 % of the time is within Category II. For the NoTech office, the
indoor temperature stays within Category II and III for 3 % of the time each, where 1 % of
the time is outside the categories.
Generally, the results indicate that all the three rooms keep acceptable indoor tem­
peratures in Category I for at least 93 % of the time, where Ventilationsvinduet and Student
both stay within Category I and II for 100 % of the measured period. The results show that
the NoTech office has times in this period where indoor temperatures are more spread,
thus more time within the less acceptable ranges. This is mostly due to the northeast­
ern orientation of the windows in the NoTech office and the less obstruction of view from
the office. The results indicate that the consequences of the orientation and little to no
obstruction of view (especially from clouds) allows a generous amount of sunlight into
the room, thus increasing indoor temperatures, most notably in the morning, even when
outdoor temperatures are lower than 10◦C.
Leg 2 of the experiment is different from Leg 1 since the doors between the NoTech
and Ventilationsvinduet offices are closed. Similarly, the NoTech is maximum opened in
both legs of the experiment. These conditions indicate, that due to closing the doors be­
tween the offices, the passage of air is restricted for the NoTech office, thus minimizing the
effective disposal of excess heat. Indications are therefore also, that the maximum open­
ing of the NoTech alone may not be enough for the ultimate condition for ideal adaptive
comfort.
Table 3.2: Leg 2 hours and percentage of time in adaptive comfort categories for NoTech,
Ventilationsvinduet, and Student.
25
==PAGE:30==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
3.3
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 3
Thermal comfort results from Leg 3 long time measurements are handled in this section.
This period is a total of 168 hours and begins from March 27th 12:00 to April 3rd 12:00.
3.3.1
Long Term Measurements
Temperature data for long time measurements for Leg 3 of the experiment is displayed in
Figure 3.7, also seen in A.5 in appendix. For the NoTech office, about 40 % of the time
is spent in the 20­21◦C range, and about 35 % of the time is within 21­22◦C. About 10 %
of the time is within the 22­23◦C range. The temperatures vary between 19◦C and 28◦C,
however never reaching above 27.5◦C. For Ventilationsvinduet, about 49 % of the time is
within the 21­22◦C range, where about 44 % of the time is within the 22­23◦C range, and
the rest of the time, approximately 7 % of the time is 23­24◦C. For the Student apartment
most hours at about 78 % of the time is spent within 21­22◦C, and about 12 % of the time
is spent within 20­21◦C. The data is spread between 20◦C and 26◦C, with about 6 % of
the time within the 22­23◦C range, and about 4 % of the time within 23­24◦C range.
Data from long term measurements of relative humidity is found in Figure A.6 and
the distribution of relative humidity measurements for Leg 3 is found in Figure A.9.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure 3.7: Percentage hours spent in temperature ranges for NoTech office (red), Venti­
lationsvinduet office (blue), and Student apartment (yellow) for Leg 3 of the experiment.
26
==PAGE:31==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
3.3.2
PMV & PPD
This sections displays the results from calculations of PMV and PPD for Leg 3 of the
experiment.
PMV
PMV results for Leg 3 of the experiment are displayed in Figure 3.8. The results show
the percentage of time the PMV is within requirements according to EN 167981­1 given
in Table 2.2 in Section 2.1.3.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure 3.8: Percentage time spent in PMV categories according to EN 16798­1 for NoTech
office (red), Ventilationsvinduet office (blue), and Student apartment (yellow) for Leg 3 of
the experiment.
The results show that the Ventilationsvinduet office has most hours with 91 % of the time
being within Category I, where the Student apartment and the NoTech office has 83 %
and 40 % of the time in this category, respectively. The results therefore show that the
NoTech office spends less than half of the time in this period in Category I compared to the
two other rooms. However, NoTech spends 54 % of the time in Category II, resulting in 94
% of the time in total in both Category I and II. The Ventilationsvinduet office and Student
apartment spends 9 % and 17 % of the time recorded within Category II, respectively.
For the NoTech office, the 6 % of the time are distributed between Category III
and IV, where 2 % of them are outside acceptable PMV ranges. The indications of the
27
==PAGE:32==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
experiment are that sunlight is the biggest contributor to the relatively high temperatures
of the indoor air, which explains the temperature extremes which are also seen in Figure
3.7a. Here, temperatures are seen to go range between 19◦C and 28◦C, however indoor
air temperatures were not captured to rise above 27.5◦C.
PPD
PDD results for Leg 3 of the experiment are displayed in Figure 3.9. The results show
that Ventilationsvinduet has the least predicted percentage dissatisfied for most of the time
compared to the other rooms. At 6 % predicted dissatisfied, Ventilationsvinduet complies
with this criterion for about 96 % of the time, where the Student apartment and NoTech
office complies with this criterion for about 87 % and 43 % of the time, respectively.
The student apartment reaches 100 % of the time equal to or less than 9 % predicted
dissatisfied. Ventilationsvinduet spends 100 % of the time equal to or less than 7 %
predicted dissatisfied, where Student and NoTech spends 96 % and 74 % of the time at
this criterion, respectively. At this criterion, the slope for NoTech decrease as the criteria
increases. The NoTech office spends 100 % of the time below 35 % predicted dissatisfied.
The PPD results indicate that the indoor environments of Ventilationsvinduet and
Student create balanced thermal environment leading to very few people expected to
be dissatisfied with the thermal environment. The results indicate that the NoTech office
despite some hours with high indoor temperatures as seen in Figure 3.7a, that NoTech
for the majority of the time create acceptable indoor thermal conditions with few expected
to be dissatisfied.
Figure 3.9: Percentage of time within or equal to PPD criteria for the three investigated
rooms for Leg 3 of the experiment.
28
==PAGE:33==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
3.3.3
Adaptive Comfort
Adaptive comfort results for the NoTech office, Ventilationsvinduet office, and the Student
apartment for Leg 3 of the experiment are displayed in Table 3.3. The results show that
the Ventilationsvinduet office and Student apartment has 95 % and 96 % of the time in
category I, respectively. NoTech has 89 % of the time in category I, about 10 hours less
than for the other rooms. NoTech has a larger spread of indoor temperatures in different
categories, hereby 4 % in category II. NoTech is the only room investigated in Leg 3 with
temperatures in category III and outside the acceptable adaptive comfort categories, with
3 % in category III, and 5 % outside the acceptable categories. The Ventilationsvinduet
office and Student apartment has 5 % and 4 % in category II, respectively.
The results show that all rooms have most hours in Category I, with Ventilationsvin­
duet and Student having a 1 % difference. NoTech has less hours in Category I, and
more in other categories, with 7 hours falling outside acceptable ranges of adaptive com­
fort. The overtemperatures in NoTech happened most notably during the 29th March,
with indoor temperatures reaching almost 28◦C. The temperatures in the room seemed
to decrease too slow during the day, therefore still heading towards a balanced level of
temperature in the evening of 29th March. This indicates, that the NoTech room in this
condition in Leg 3 of the experiment, where doors where closed and the NoTech was
at minimum opening, has trouble with disposing excessive heat. This tends to happens
when skies are clear from the view out in the NoTech office letting in lots of sunlight and
increasing indoor temperatures, although outdoor running mean temperatures are low.
Other indications of Leg 3 experiment are that due to the orientation and restric­
tions of view out of the Ventilationsvinduet office (other buildings) and Student apartment
(vegetation). These conditions tends to provide adequate sunlight to the rooms during
afternoon hours, and heating up indoor air to withstand colder temperatures at night. This
explains why more hours are seen for the two rooms in adaptive comfort categories I and
II compared to the NoTech office. The NoTech office has hours with high indoor temper­
atures exceeding the adaptive comfort categories. However, due to the orientiation of
NoTech, the room heated less in afternoon hours, indicating that the conditions allows
the room to be heated less compared to the other rooms, and therefore more hours in
Category II are recorded for NoTech.
Table 3.3: Leg 3 hours and percentage of time in adaptive comfort categories for NoTech,
Ventilationsvinduet, and Student.
29
==PAGE:34==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
3.4
Draught & Air Exchange Rate
This section dives into the results from measurements of air velocity and CO2 concentra­
tion. These measurements are crucial in calculating levels of draught and air exchange
rate. The air velocity is used to calculate the draught rate at specific measurement po­
sitions for different scenarios for the NoTech office, and for one scenario for the Ventila­
tionsvinduet office. CO2 concentration measurements have been conducted for both long
and short periods, respectively expressing the average air exchange rate throughout the
whole measured period and at specific scenarios, providing important information about
the performance of the ventilation systems.
3.4.1
NoTech Minimum Opening Air Velocity Measurements
Measurements of air velocity at measurement heights 0.1 m, 0.6 m, 1.1 m, and 1.7 have
been conducted in the office with the NoTech system at the least possible opening. Ad­
ditionally, air velocity at same measurement heights excluding at 1.7 m have been con­
ducted in the office with Ventilationsvinduet. The results are displayed in Figure 3.10.
Note the purple line in the figure, that some of the standard deviations include a range of
air velocity somewhat below 0 m/s, but does not mean that the air velocity can be lower
than 0 m/s.
Figure 3.10: Air velocity measurements with NoTech on minimum opening mode.
The results show that the air velocity is overall low (below 0.09 m/s) for every condition with
Ventilationsvinduet having the largest air velocity at 0.08 m/s ± 0.04 m/s at measurement
height 0.6 m. Next highest measured air velocity is 0.06 m/s is captured for NoTech at
infiltration mode at 0.1 m and when doors are openend at 0.6 m, standard deviation 0.04
m/s and 0.05 m/s, respectively.
Generally, the results indicate that the air velocity for NoTech increases as the height
decreases. This is explained by the mechanism of the NoTech panel. Other indications
are that outside air is brought into the room through the bottom of the panel, where the air is
more still at mid heights about 1.1 m to 1.7 m. Therefore, the air velocity will rise just below
30
==PAGE:35==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
the ceiling, as the indoor air is usually warmer than the outdoor air, thus creating more air
movement, but that is not captured in measurements. However, this also indicates that it
will be different in a situation where outdoor air is warmer than the indoor air; the indoor
air will flow out from the bottom of the panel and the outdoor air will flow in from the top
of the panel.
The three conditions tested for the NoTech office indicates a significant difference
at 0.6 m between infiltration and open doors. The same difference is also seen at 0.6 m
at no infiltration and open doors. This indicates higher air velocities at 0.6 m when having
significant cross ventilation.
3.4.2
NoTech Maximum Opening Mode Air Velocity Measurements
Measurements of air velocity at measurement heights 0.1 m, 0.6 m, 1.1 m, and 1.7 have
been conducted in the office with the NoTech system at the biggest possible opening.
Results are seen in Figure 3.11. Additionally are the same measurements from the Ven­
tilationsvinduet office from Section 3.4.1.
Figure 3.11: Air velocity measurements with NoTech on maximum opening mode.
The results show that the air velocity is overall low (below 0.09 m/s) for every condition with
Ventilationsvinduet having the largest air velocity at 0.08 m/s ± 0.04 m/s at measurement
height 0.6 m. The next highest measured air velocity is found for NoTech with infiltration
and without infiltration at 0.6 m, where the air velocity is measured to 0.05 m/s, standard
deviation 0.05 m/s and 0.04 m/s, respectively. Closely following is the air velocity at 0.04
m/s ± 0.03 m/s for Ventilationsvinduet at 0.1 m. Similar air speeds for NoTech with open
doors at 0.6 m with 0.03 m/s ± 0.04 m/s and for infiltration mode at 1.7 m with 0.03 m/s ±
0.03 m/s.
The results indicate at fully opened NoTech panel, the air speed increased at infil­
tration mode at 0.6 m and 1.7 m. It is expected at these heights as outdoor air is brought
inside at about 0.6 m around the bottom of the NoTech panel. This additionally indicates
that the indoor air flows out at increased heights.
31
==PAGE:36==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
In general, the results indicate the air speed is highest at 0.6 m, which is due to the inflow
of new air is expected to come through at this height, which is at the bottom of the NoTech
panel. Additionally, the results indicate that the air speeds are slower for the NoTech office
measurements compared to the measurements done for the Ventilationsvinduet office at
same positions and at heights 0.1 m, 0.6 m, and 1.1 m.
3.4.3
Draught Rate
This section handles the results from air velocity measurements and draught rate cal­
culations. The air temperature in draught rate calculations is assumed to be 22◦C for
all measurement heights. The draught rate is calculated for the NoTech panel at different
conditions and measurement heights according to Section 2.1.5, and results are displayed
in Table 3.4. 1st column displays the measurement height, 2nd displays the condition
tested where different setups have been tested in ”MIN” and ”MAX” modes, referring to
the minimal and maximum opening of the NoTech panel. 3rd and 4th column represent
the measured air velocity and standard deviation, respectively. 5th column is the turbu­
lence intensity, TU, and lastly the 6th column is the calculated draught rate. The colors
help distinct between measurement height and the color grading helps distinct between
the conditions tested.
Table 3.4: Draught rate for different conditions and measurement heights.
32
==PAGE:37==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
It is seen that for all but two conditions tested that the draught rate is 0 %. The two other
conditions, 1) infiltration mode at minimal opening of the NoTech panel at measurement
height 0.1 m and 2) open door mode plus infiltration at minimal opening of the NoTech
panel at measurement height 0.6 m has a draught rate of 2.2 %. The results indicate that
low draught conditions are experienced for all the conditions at the different measurement
heights at the worst presumable position in the room (just in front of the NoTech panel).
Note, that the local discomfort measurement was conducted on a day with low to medium
outdoor wind speeds conditions ranging from light to fresh wind (wind speeds at about
5­9 m/s according to weather data from DMI).
The draught rate at different measurement heights for Ventilationsvinduet is dis­
played in Table 3.5 at a similar room location as the NoTech air velocity measurements.
Additionally, the Duka system was off but not blocked, doors opened, and kitchen hood
off but also not blocked.
Table 3.5: Draught rate at different measurement heights for Ventilationsvinduet.
The results show that the draught rate at 0.1 m and at 1.1 m is 0 %. However, at 0.6
m the draught rate is 4.3 %, nearly double the highest recorded draught rates from the
results from the NoTech measurements. The results indicate, that at 0.6 m, the sensation
of draught is larger when positioned close to the Ventilationsvindue system than when
positioned close to the NoTech system at the conditions that are tested in Table 3.4. Re­
garding DS/EN ISO 7730 results for the NoTech office and the Ventilationsvinduet office
indicate that all the conditions lie within category A for draught rates at maximum 10 %.
3.4.4
Air Exchange Rate
This section handles results from CO2 measurements and air exchange rate calculations.
Raw CO2 concentration measurements are displayed in Appendix A.5.
The average air exchange rate n for the measurement period (Leg1+Leg2+Leg3)
for the three rooms are found in Figure A.22 in appendix. Here, the average air exchange
rate for NoTech is found to be 0.378 h−1, for Ventilationsvinduet it is 0.214 h−1, and for
Student it is 0.273 h−1. It is seen that on average, the air exchange rate for NoTech
is about 1.8 times higher than Ventilationsvinduet, and about 1.4 times higher than the
Student apartment.
33
==PAGE:38==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure 3.12: ln(CO2) over time for all three rooms.
Table 3.6 displays results from the average of the total measurement period for all three
rooms. Moreover, it shows the results from two experiments each for NoTech and Ventila­
tionsvinduet (four in total), investigating the air exchange rate of one sided ventilation with
and without infiltration. The one sided experiments were conducted on the 14th of April, a
day with stronger winds than usual, see Figure A.23 in appendix. During measurements
on the 14th of April, the NoTech system was configured to the least possible opening. Ad­
ditionally, results from one experiment exploring the effect of cross ventilation using the
NoTech system with maximum opening with mechanical ventilation, which in this case is
the Duka device on mode II with the assumed volume flow of 7.8 L/s [14]. The cross ven­
tilation experiment was conducted the 24th of April, a day noted with usual wind speeds of
4.2 m/s on average, which is less than half the average wind speeds recorded April 14th.
Table 3.6: Air exchange rate n in h−1 for different experiment settings for NoTech and
Ventilationsvinduet.
NoTech
Ventilationsvinduet
Student
One sided ventilation
0.13
0.99
­
One sided ventilation w/ infiltration
0.15
0.53
­
Cross ventilation with MV (Duka mode II)
1
­
­
Average of total measurement period
0.378
0.214
0.273
34
==PAGE:39==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
The results from Table 3.6 shows that the air exchange rates for the one sided ventilation
experiments are low compared to the averages of the total measurement period for the
NoTech office. Additionally, one sided ventilation without infiltration for Ventilationsvinduet
displays higher air exchange rates compared to the average of total measurement periods
of the Ventilationsvinduet office.
Based on the northeastern orientation of the NoTech office and that the winds in CPH
Village usually comes from west, the results indicate that for the one sided ventilation with
and without infiltration for the NoTech office, that the air exchange rate is affected by wind
pressure conditions. Despite windy conditions, the NoTech room has a low air exchange
rate for both the one sided ventilation measurements conducted the 14th of April. The
results indicate that the effectiveness of one sided ventilation using the NoTech system
is very limited. However, the low air exchange rate may indeed also be affected by the
small of opening of the NoTech system, indicating that had the opening of the NoTech
been larger, the air exchange rate would have been higher.
Additionally, the average of total measurement period for the NoTech office show
signs of effective ventilation ­ possibly from creating a cross flow through opening a door
to other zones in the building that also have openings to the outside, thus replacing stale
air with fresh air. The air exchange rate for NoTech during the average period equals an
air flow of 0.3 L/s/m2. The experiment with NoTech and mechanical ventilation on shows
that the air exchange rate was 1 h−1, which indicate that when effective cross ventilation
solutions are implemented, sufficient air exchange can be obtained for the NoTech office.
This results in an air flow of 0.8 L/s/m2. The experiment indicates that higher air exchange
rates can be reached with cross effective ventilation measures. Optimal conditions may
be obtained with solutions with the NoTech panel and another system that enables ef­
fective cross ventilation either mechanically or naturally. Results indicate that increasing
the opening of the hatch in the NoTech system and an oppositely placed mechanical (or
maybe natural) ventilation measure will make ventilation effective to provide the zone with
fresh air. Indications are that this solution must balance openings of natural ventilation
and the degree of aiding mechanical or natural cross ventilation measures, such that too
low or too high volume flow is avoided.
The Ventilationsvinduet office shows about five the air exchange rate for one sided
ventilation without infiltration compared to the average of the total measurement period.
Between the cases for one sided ventilation for the Ventilationsvinduet office, the one
sided ventilation case with infiltration is half the one sided ventilation case without infiltra­
tion. One would expect a higher exchange rate with infiltration. This is due to the kitchen
exhaust hood filter not being installed when measuring without infiltration, but the filter
was installed when measuring the air exchange rate with infiltration. The results therefore
indicate, that a significant degree of cross ventilation between Ventilationsvinduet and the
kitchen exhaust hood happened during measurements.
35
==PAGE:40==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
The NoTech system tends to perform worse regarding air exchange rate than the Ven­
tilationsvinduet system on the condition that there is no effective cross ventilation in the
NoTech office. The air exchange rate in this experiment tends to be influenced by outdoor
wind speed and direction, temperature differences, panel openings (e.g. the opening of
the NoTech system) other exhaust measures such as infiltration and kitchen exhausts
with or without filter installation.
3.5
Simulation
Table 3.7 shows the results for room unit heat simulations and the root mean squared
error (RMSE) for the different rooms in two scenarios from 6th March to 24th March and
from 8th March to 24th March. Heat balance diagrams for the rooms are shown in Figures
A.24, A.25, and A.26 in appendix.
BIM models are constructed in IDA ICE 5.0 where simulated indoor temperatures
are compared to the indoor temperatures measured on site in CPH Village. To reach
the desired indoor temperatures in simulations, various implementations to the models
have been made. These include occupancy schedules, setpoints for heating and cooling
(cooling through opening windows), overhangs to imitate nearby shadowing buildings,
window properties (g­value, U­value, direct solar transmittance, and light transmittance),
equipment gain with ’realistic load’ schedules. The ’realistic load’ schedule also known
as the ’duck profile’ is shown in figure A.27 in appendix.
The differences between the measured and simulated indoor temperatures based
on the implementations for each room are shown as the mean square error. Simulated
and measured indoor temperatures from March 6th to 24th of March for all the rooms are
shown in Figures A.28, A.29, and A.30 in appendix.
Table 3.7: Room unit heat and RMSE for the three rooms.
6th March to 24th March
Room Unit Heat [kWh]
RMSE [◦C]
NoTech
72.5
0.48
Ventilationsvinduet
39.9
0.49
Student
30.5
0.69
8th March to 24th March
Room Unit Heat [kWh]
RMSE [◦C]
NoTech
63.6
0.50
Ventilationsvinduet
34.7
0.50
Student
24.4
0.46
For the 6th to 24th March scenario it is seen that the NoTech office uses the most zone
heating at 72.5 kWh compared to the Ventilationsvinduet office at 39.9 kWh the NoTech
office uses about 1.8 times more energy on heating. Compared to the Student apartment
at 30.5 kWh the NoTech office uses about 2.4 times more energy on heating. Between
36
==PAGE:41==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 3. Results
the Ventilationsvinduet office and the Student apartment there is a 9.4 kWh difference,
which means the Ventilationsvinduet office uses about 1.3 times more energy on heating
than the Student apartment.
Additionally, for the 6th to 24th March scenario, the RMSE is about 0.5◦C for both the
NoTech office and the Ventilationsvinduet office, where the NoTech office has an RMSE
of 0.48◦C, 0.01◦C less than the Ventilationsvinduet office. This means that the simulated
indoor temperatures in these two rooms differ about 0.5◦C on average from the true mea­
sured value. The Student apartment has an RMSE of 0.69◦C meaning that the average
difference between simulated and measured difference is 0.69◦C, which is about 0.2◦C
more than for the NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet offices.
For the 8th to 24th of March scenario the results show that the NoTech office uses
the most zone heating at 63.6 kWh, and when compared to the Ventilationsvinduet office
at 34.7 kWh, the NoTech office again uses about 1.8 times more energy on heating. Com­
pared to the Student apartment at 24.4 kWh the NoTech office uses about 2.6 times more
energy on heating, which is slightly more than the 6th to 24th March scenario. There is
a 10.3 kWh difference between the Ventilationsvinduet office and the Student apartment,
meaning the Ventilationsvinduet office uses about 1.4 times more energy on heating than
the Student apartment, which is also slightly more than the 6th to 24th March scenario.
Additionally, for the 8th to 24th of March scenario, the RMSE is 0.5◦C for both the
NoTech office and the Ventilationsvinduet office. Meaning that the difference between
the simulated indoor temperatures and the measured indoor temperature is 0.5◦C. This
value is slightly higher than the 6th to 24th of March scenario for both offices. The Student
apartment has an RMSE of 0.46◦C meaning that the average difference between simu­
lated and measured difference is 0.46◦C, which is 0.4◦C less than for the NoTech and
Ventilationsvinduet offices, but also an improvement from the 6th to 24th March scenario.
The results show that the simulated indoor temperature from 6th to 24th March sce­
nario tends to fit better for the NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet offices compared to the 8th
to 24th March scenario. However, the Student apartment tends to have a better fit with the
8th to 24th of March scenario, leading to a difference in RMSE of 0.23◦C. Therefore, the
results show that including 6th and 7th of March leads to increased differences between
simulated and measured data for the Student apartment. Figure A.3 in appendix shows
the measured indoor temperature for the Student apartment during 6th and 7th of March,
where the temperature reached about 13◦C at one point and up to about 26◦C at another
point in time. The results therefore indicate that there are factors that influence the indoor
temperature during measurements that are not predicted by the simulation model. These
factors are explained by users opening doors and windows for extended periods to create
cross ventilation, direct sunlight, activity level, and general measurement uncertainty.
37
==PAGE:42==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
4
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results obtained in the previous chapter. The discussion re­
lates findings back to the hypothesis ”The NoTech system provides an efficient indoor cli­
mate regarding IAQ and thermal comfort compared to conventional ventilation systems”,
and circles around the research questions stated in introduction chapter 1:
• Does NoTech provide better thermal comfort compared to Ventilationsvinduet or
mechanical ventilation?
• Does NoTech result in less draught compared to Ventilationsvinduet?
• Does NoTech result in better air exchange compared to other ventilation systems?
• Does NoTech result in a higher heat demand?
4.1
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 1
Comparing the rooms regarding temperatures from 6th of March to 18th of March, the
NoTech office seems to be more in comfortable ranges around 20­21◦C, where the Ven­
tilationsvinduet office is slightly lower, and where the Student apartment has more hours
between 21­22◦C, though has a large span of temperatures. The large span of temper­
atures in the Student apartment happened during the first three days of experiment from
March 6th to 8th. It tends to come from overventilating by opening doors and windows
for prolonged periods with cold winter air flowing in. Reversely, high temperatures are
seen, which seems to come from keeping windows and doors closed as well as an un­
certain heat source. The uncertain heat source could be users, cooking activity, or from
the sun. Another explanation (possibly the best) is the placement of the HOBO logger,
as in the first few days it was placed close to the openable window so there was a risk of
not capturing mixed air conditions, and there was a risk of direct sunlight on the device.
These considerations must be in mind, when interpreting the results from Leg 1 of the
experiment.
These considerations are also seen in the results for PMV, where the Student apart­
ment has most hours in Category I and II, but has few hours in the lowest categories, III, IV,
and outside the categories. The NoTech office seems to be doing better regarding PMV,
as it has no hours in Category IV or worse. However, this may very well be caused by
the orientation of the office. When inspecting the temperatures in Figure A.3 in appendix,
the temperatures in NoTech seems to lie higher than Ventilationsvinduet, and this is most
likely cause by a higher intake of sunlight, which enabled the room to stay within more
comfortable temperatures. Therefore, the results indicate that it would be expected for
the Ventilationsvinduet office to have similar temperatures with the NoTech office if they
had the same orientation. Nevertheless, after the 8th of March, the indoor air temperature
in Student apartment generally seems to lie a bit higher than the two offices. Therefore,
38
==PAGE:43==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
when not considering the measurements from 6th to 8th of March, the Student apartment
is expected to perform better. However, if the Student apartment had the same orientation
as the NoTech office, even higher temperatures would likely be seen, but it is uncertain
whether these temperatures would stay within comfort categories for PMV.
This is also visible in the PPD results from Figure 3.3 that the Student apartment
is expected to have very few dissatisfied for most of the time, but there are still some of
the time with considerably many dissatisfied (more than 20 % predicted). This tends to
confirm the results that the Student apartment is the most comfortable room according to
PMV and PPD, however when considering the differences between the rooms such as
orientation, it is uncertain whether the Student apartment would perform worse if oriented
similar to the NoTech or Ventilationsvinduet offices.
With the previous considerations in mind, the adaptive comfort results show similar
results for the Student apartment with the PMV. Here, the time spent in the best adaptive
comfort categories for the Student apartment is less than the two offices, who both have
almost 100 % of the time within Category I. This tends to verify the adaptive comfort model,
that it suits natural ventilation better, also as the model does not assume specific clothing
insulations or metabolic rates, which is already hard to estimate in practice, especially in
environments where workplaces are not strict about what kind of clothing workers must
wear. Therefore, in this case, the results indicate that it is easier for people to adjust to
the indoor environment in the two offices rather than in the Student apartment. However,
previous considerations about the difference in orientation of the rooms and thus the dif­
ference in incoming sunlight, and the temperature extremes in the Student apartment in
the first three days of Leg 1 must be in mind when interpreting the results.
Results are subject to errors in the experiment. Firstly, one of the errors is the
equipment. The equipment was calibrated before use; however, the precision of the de­
vice may decrease over time, thus affecting the results and showing other values than the
true ones. Secondly, the handling of the equipment has influenced the experiment in ways
that may have affected the results. The long term measurement equipment (the HOBO
logger) had been unplugged several times, thus not being able to measure for periods of
time. For Leg 1 of the experiment from 6th of March to 18th of March, 267 hours out of
288 hours has been considered true measurements. It is uncertain how the unrecorded
hours would have affected results and must therefore be considered when interpreting
the results.
4.2
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 2
Comparing the rooms regarding temperatures from 18th of March 12:00 to 24th of March
12:00 it is seen that throughout March the indoor temperature rose in all rooms compared
to Leg 1 of the experiment. The Student apartment showed less extreme temperatures
compared to Leg 1, however the NoTech office showed a few higher temperatures. When
39
==PAGE:44==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
looking at the results from temperature measurements from Leg 2 of the experiment in Fig­
ure A.4 in appendix, the NoTech office seems to rise in temperature on the 23rd of March
due to direct sunlight. Also, for the Ventilationsvinduet office, where the temperatures
tend to rise in the afternoon, where the sun has better access to that room. Therefore,
the orientation of the rooms tends to influence the indoor temperatures to a greater extent.
Considering this, the indoor temperature would be expected to limit high temperatures if
the NoTech office was oriented with the same limited view out as the other offices. How­
ever, in Leg 2 of the experiment, the temperatures generally are lower for the NoTech
office compared to the other two rooms. Therefore, the results indicate that if the NoTech
office had the same orientation as the other two rooms, the temperatures would generally
be much lower, thus posing the risk of reaching too low temperatures. On the other hand,
had the Ventilationsvinduet office and the Student apartment the same northeastern ori­
entation and view out as the NoTech office, then the temperatures would also be expected
to rise, thus posing a risk for the rooms to reach uncomfortably high temperatures.
Regarding PMV, the NoTech office seems to perform better than during the Leg
1 of the experiment. That is shown by fewer hours in Category III and more in Cate­
gory I and II. During the month, warmer outdoor temperatures seem to have increased
the general indoor temperatures, thus increasing thermal comfort, and the time with high
temperatures most likely due to direct sunlight is limited. The PMV results for the Ventila­
tionsvinduet office and the Student apartment are almost identical and only spends time
within Category I and II, thus being more balanced towards thermal neutral compared to
the NoTech office. Compared to Leg 1 of the experiment, the doors between the Venti­
lationsvinduet and NoTech offices are closed, thus limiting the exchange in temperatures
between the rooms. The results indicate, that when the temperature exchange between
the rooms is limited, the higher temperatures reached in the NoTech office in the morning
or midday are more slowly shared to the Ventilationsvinduet, then reversely gets warmed
up during the afternoon. The results indicate, that in this situation the Ventilationsvinduet
office can better keep the PMV at neutral since the afternoon heat balances cold night
temperatures. This is a challenge for the NoTech office, as higher temperatures can be
experienced at morning or lunch time, but the temperature also decreases more during
night. Therefore, the results indicate that the general temperatures in the NoTech would
be expected to be lower if the orientation was similar to the Ventilationsvinduet office or
the Student apartment, thus less time in thermal neutral would be expected, however the
temperatures will be more balanced.
When inspecting the PPD results, the same indications for the PMV results are
shown. With the indications from the results discussed, had the NoTech the same ori­
entation as the Ventilationsvinduet office or the Student apartment, one would expect
the indoor temperature in the NoTech office to decrease. However, as more time will be
spent at lower temperatures that are more balanced, it could be alleviated by increasing
40
==PAGE:45==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
heating. Nevertheless, keeping the northeastern orientation and view out for the NoTech
office, increased comfort regarding PMV can be obtained by limiting excessive sunlight
through e.g., exterior shading, and/or through measures that limits heat loss during the
night or early morning in seasons with cold outdoor temperatures. However, this should
be obtained without compromising the air quality and increasing energy use.
Considering the indications of adaptive comfort results for Leg 2 of the experiment,
the Student apartment seems to perform better than the NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet
offices. However, the results show that more satisfied with the thermal conditions are
reached compared to the PMV method. The indications of the results are that in this
period of the experiment, the indoor temperatures in the Student apartment are more bal­
anced and within limits where people can adjust clothing and activity rate to accommodate
the thermal environment. This is also seen for the Ventilationsvinduet office, where the
NoTech office seem to have a high degree of thermal comfort regarding adaptive comfort
limits, however a seemingly negligible small percentage of time is uncomfortable. Ideally,
the conditions would be tested throughout the whole year to create a better image of the
thermal conditions not just for the NoTech office, but also for the two other rooms.
The results are additionally subject to errors in the experiment, as explained pre­
viously. For the long term measurements in Leg 2, 133 hours out of 144 hours of mea­
surement are considered valid. 11 hours of measurements has therefore been failed to
be collected. The impact of these have not been included in the results for Leg 2 of the
long term measurement experiment, and this uncertainty therefore be considered when
interpreting the results.
4.3
Thermal Comfort ­ Leg 3
When investigating the temperatures from measurements during Leg 3 of the experiment
from March 27th 12:00 to April 3rd 12:00, it is seen that for the NoTech office, similar
temperatures are seen for Leg 2, however with some hours in Leg 3 with very high tem­
peratures, reaching about 27◦C. This indicates that the NoTech office shows similar tem­
peratures between the conditions of having a NoTech panel at maximum opening versus
minimum opening. However, the NoTech office tends to have troubles keeping cool. This
is most likely caused by the northeastern orientation and unconstricted view out, which
enabled extensive sun light to enter the room, thus at specific points in time, such as mid­
day on March 29th as seen in Figure 3.7, where lots of sunlight enabled the increasing of
temperatures. On the contrary, on days after the 29th of March, the indoor temperatures
are higher in the Ventilationsvinduet office than the NoTech office. This indicates that
the increased outdoor temperatures and sunlight on the Ventilationsvinduet office, even
with the constricted view out towards the yard in CPH Village, the indoor temperatures
increase. The Student apartment seems to be very balanced between 21­22◦C, as the
indoor temperature is steadily in this range for almost 80 % of the time.
41
==PAGE:46==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
The PMV results for Leg 3 of the experiment show that the Student apartment and the
Ventilationsvinduet office has a high thermal comfort, with much of the time being in Cat­
egory I. These two rooms exhibit balanced temperatures throughout the days. However,
the orientation and constricted view tends to limit exposure to much of direct sunlight on
days where with little to no clouds. This is seemingly opposite for the NoTech office, which
tends to be in higher risk of receiving more sunlight, thus receptive to surplus energy from
the sun, consequently increasing indoor temperatures to levels outside comfort accord­
ing to PMV categories. Nevertheless, the NoTech office spends 94 % of the time in the
measured period within Category I and II, indicating the room can keep within comfortable
thermal conditions regarding PMV for most of the time. However, this must be tested for
longer periods of time to fully establish the overview of how the thermal comfort reacts
regarding PMV.
The previously discussed trends for PMV are also seen in PPD. Here, the Student
apartment and Ventilationsvinduet office tends to reach very few dissatisfied for most of
the time in this condition. Where the NoTech, although showing few hours within less
comfortable thermal comfort categories regarding PMV, the results indicate that 10% or
less dissatisfied of a large group of people can be expected for more than 90 % of the time
measured. Nevertheless, these results must be interpreted with the short measurement
period in mind, and much longer measurement periods must be considered, if one would
want to investigate the thermal comfort throughout e.g. different seasons.
The result for adaptive comfort shows that the Ventilationsvinduet office and Stu­
dent apartment shows most thermal comfort, where NoTech office has about 10 hours
less than the other rooms in Category I. The 10 hours are mostly caused by the high in­
door temperatures on the 29th of March, which tends to be caused by the aforementioned
reasons, extensive direct and unconstructed sunlight. Would this be the reason, then it
could easily be solved by simple exterior shading measures such as overhangs. Addi­
tional indications of the results for adaptive comfort of the NoTech office is that even when
people are expected to adjust clothing and activity level, the are still not expected to be
able to adjust for the few hours of extreme temperatures on March 29th. This indicates
from Leg 3 measurements that the NoTech office at the condition with closed doors and
the NoTech panel on minimum opening struggles with getting rid of overtemperatures.
However, this must be verified in further investigation over longer periods of time. More­
over, the adaptive comfort results indicate that the Ventilationsvinduet office and Student
apartment is reaching thermal comfort more easier compared to the NoTech office. How­
ever, results indicate that orientation and shading helps keeping balanced levels for the
Ventilationsvinduet office and the Student apartment. Overall, the results also indicate
that adequate ventilation is provided in the latter rooms.
42
==PAGE:47==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
For the long term measurements in Leg 3, 156 hours out of 168 hours of measurement are
considered valid. 12 hours of measurements has therefore not been collected. The impact
of these have not been included in the results for Leg 3 of the long term measurement
experiment, and this uncertainty of these indications may therefore be considered when
interpreting the results.
Generally, regarding the long term measurements, the Student apartment performs
the best according to PMV requirements, as the room lies mostly within Category I for
most of the time, and has most time in these categories for two out of the legs of the mea­
surement periods. In one of the periods, the Ventilationsvinduet office has most hours in
Category I in Leg 3 of the experiment. The results indicate that the Student apartment
and Ventilationsvinduet office perform best in thermal comfort regarding PMV criteria. This
seems to be mostly based on the ability to balance temperature at ranges that provides
the most comfort. However, this abiltiy may be caused by several factors, that enabled
high thermal comfort. These factors are orientation and cover from buildings and vegeta­
tion against direct sunlight. Optimizing these factors may be the reason that the Student
apartment and Ventilationsvinduet office perform better. Regarding thermal comfort by
PMV and PPD, the NoTech office also seem to perform well, mostly lying within Category
II. Generally, the NoTech office seem to be more prone to outdoor influences such as sun­
light and outdoor temperatures. Here, the northeastern orientation and limited view out
allows direct sunlight into the room at midday, where cold outdoor temperatures at night
seem to result in cooling too much. Overall, the orientation and shading are seemingly
factors that significantly affects the performance regarding thermal comfort of the rooms,
and more testing would be required to fully comprehend the indications of these factors.
The previous observations are also relevant when interpreting the adaptive comfort
results. However, a generally higher level of comfort is seen, as the rooms are within
Category I for at least 89 % of the time. The adaptive comfort therefore seems to be more
inclusive, however still penalizing for temperatures that lie seemingly out of comfortable
temperature ranges.
4.4
Draught Rate & Air Exchange Rate
The air velocity results are low with the mean of the measurements never exceeding
0.9 m/s. Draught rate is 0 % for all but two conditions tested in the experiment. The
draught rate for two other conditions are both 2.2 % for NoTech at minimal opening at
1) infiltration mode equal at 0.1 m, and 2) open doors and infiltration at 0.6 m, which is
still very low. The local air temperature was not measured, therefore the same local air
temperature was assumed 22◦C for consistency in calculations. However, variations in
temperate could still affect the results, thus increasing uncertainty in calculations. The
local temperature is a part of calculating the draught, albeit it does not greatly affect the
results of this experiment, but shall still be considered in the interpretation of the results.
43
==PAGE:48==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
Limitations of the equation for calculating draught in ISO standard 7730 are that the equa­
tion only takes into account turbulence intencities (TU) between 10 % and 60 %. The
calculated TU exceeds this range for most of the measured locations. However, at such
low air speeds, the TU is naturally high because of the relatively large standard deviation,
which is most likely because of the accuracy of the B&K Indoor Climate Analyzer. Most
of the air velocities are below 0.05 m/s, and are therefore corrected to 0.05 m/s as the
standard describes. ISO 7730 describes the model to apply for people at mainly seden­
tary activity at thermal neutral for prediction of draught at neck level (neck height while
seated at 1.1 m and neck heigh while standing at 1.7 m). It also states that the model
could overestimate the predicted draught rate at level of arms and feet (here assumed
to be at ankle height 0.1 m and arms height about 0.6 m). Therefore, calculated draught
rates at ankle height may therefore be higher than it would be felt in reality.
Regarding draught, the standard additionally states that the sensation of draught is
lower at higher activity levels, and it is assumed that the sensation of draught is higher
at lower activity levels. The human body is not always in a thermal neutral in a realistic
setting, however it is an assumption in the draught rate model. Moreover, people feel
more thermal discomfort at higher air velocities at lower temperatures. Relating this un­
derstanding to the experiment with the NoTech panel, it is seen that very low air velocities
are recorded (less than 0.07 m/s on average), therefore requirements of maximum allow­
able mean air velocities are met. However, at lower temperature at about 20◦C, more
precaution must be taken to prevent uncomfortable draught for persons at thermal neu­
tral. It is assumed, that for people who are not at thermal neutral, mostly those who feel
more cold, the discomfort from draught can be felt even higher, but this is not foreseen by
the model.
As the model predictions are limited, it can therefore only be assumed how discom­
fort from air velocities at lower temperatures would be. The yellow rectangle in Figure
4.1 shows a proposed uncertainty area for maximum allowable air velocities for draught
rates at 10 %, where the air speeds can be uncomfortable at lower temperatures, even
though air speeds are very low. At higher temperatures the discomfort would most likely
be lower, though model predicitons of turbulence intensity is also limited. This means
that even though draught may not seem like a large problem at warmer temperatures,
fluctuating air speeds may influence the thermal comfort greatly.
44
==PAGE:49==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
Figure 4.1: Maximum allowed air velocity vs. local air temperature and turbulence inten­
sity.
Overall, the results indicate that the tested conditions of the NoTech system all showed
very little to no sensation of draught. Only at measurement heights 0.1 m and 0.6 m was
found some air movement, which was also seen for the Ventilationsvinduet measurement
at 0.6 m. This slight increase in draught may be caused by a water radiator right next to the
measurements could have affected the air velocity at these heights, and must therefore
be considered when interpreting the results. Larger air velocities were expected for the
measurements, especially when opening the doors between the Ventilationsvinduet and
NoTech offices, and when the NoTech panel was at maximum opening.
The results therefore indicate that these conditions have little to no effect on draught.
This indication is good, as draught is significant when interpreting thermal comfort. How­
ever, results from air velocity measurements and air exchange rate calculations also in­
dicate that the level of ventilation may be too low regarding air quality. Energy savings
merely on reducing ventilation rates risks compromising the air and health quality.
The air exchange rate calculations touch upon into the mentioned risk of lower air
and health quality. The average air exchange rates for NoTech was the highest compared
to Ventilationsvinduet and Student. For most of the period, the doors were opened be­
tween the Ventilationsvinduet and NoTech offices, which indicates that the effect of cross
ventilation between the rooms is very limited. This condition imitated the normal use of
the offices, where the users used their options to control their environment. The results
indicates that opening the doors between the offices may have a positive effect on how
much fresh air is supplied to the rooms. Potential errors may however have affected the
results. These errors may have been caused by not having the doors to the bathroom
(which had an electrical fan) closed at all times, or people opening windows for brief ven­
tilation, which have not been possible to fully monitor and shall therefore be considered
when interpreting the results.
45
==PAGE:50==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
The results of air exchange rate on the windy day April 14th were low for the NoTech office.
The results indicate that the efficiency of one sided ventilation for the NoTech system at
minimum opening is very limited, and the effect of infiltration is small. However, the results
indicate that other factors such as high wind pressure and temperature differences effects
the air exchange rate.
However, the experiment with Ventilationsvinduet with one sided ventilation without
infiltration resultet in a higher air exchange rate than with one sided ventilation with infil­
tration. The experiment with infiltration was expected to result in a higher air exchange,
since it would increase the air flow through additional leaks through doors among other.
However, the error in experiment is most likely due to the kitchen hood, as the filter was
installed during the one sided ventilation experiment with infiltration, but was removed
during the experiment without infiltration, where the filter was removed and a piece of
plastic was inserted to cover the exhaust from the hood. The plastic most likely did not
entirely cover the exhaust, which caused an additional air leak, indicated in the increase
air exchange rate in the results.
Overall, the results indicates for the NoTech office that one sided ventilation is in­
effective in supplying air from the outside and reversely, ineffective in removing stale air
from the inside. However, on April 24th, cross ventilation with the NoTech system with
the Duka ventilation on mode II was tested, and showed a much higher air exchange
rate at 1 h−1. The result indicates that cross ventilation can be highly effective, however
high air exchange rate poses a risk for energy loss. Therefore, the results indicate the
effectiveness of cross ventilation with the NoTech system, however solutions that use less
mechanical energy for this case should be tested to find the condition of which both the
ventilation and energy use is adequately optimized.
4.5
Simulation
Simulated indoor temperatures in all rooms were compared to measurements. The av­
erage temperature differences (RMSE) for most rooms was found to be 0.5◦C or lower,
however the RMSE for the Student apartment is 0.69◦C in the March 6th to 24th case.
This difference tends to be high and therefore troublesome when trying to imitate the long
term measurements. This was most likely caused by a disturbance in measurements,
which has several explanations. One being the location of the measurement equipment
in the Student apartment. In the first couple of days of measurement, the HOBO logger
was placed closer to the window compared to the final position. This placement most
likely caused the equipment to be exposed to direct sunlight, which explains the higher
recorded temperatures. Moreover, the lower temperatures was also most likely caused
by the close position to the window, the equipment captured the air temperature when
briefly ventilating through opening the windows, thus capturing colder temperatures from
the outside air and not the mixed air conditions that was assumed in measurements.
46
==PAGE:51==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
The simulated indoor temperatures are recorded in mixed air conditions. However, the
measurements were measured locally in the room, therefore posing the risk of not cap­
turing the mixed air conditions perfectly. It would therefore be expected, that the average
difference between calculated and measured indoor temperatures (the RMSE) would de­
crease if the simulated temperature would be captured at the exact same spots as the
physical experiment.
The results of the heat demand of the different room points that the NoTech office
has a higher energy expenditure on heating compared to the Ventilationsvinduet office
and the Student apartment, in both cases when and when not including March 6th and 7th
in measurements. Although heat demand for this period has not been recorded, it seems
to be rather high. When inspecting the heat balance schedules in Figures A.24, A.25,
and A.26, the heat balance mainly concerns gains from heating units (radiators), the sun,
and from walls and floors (other rooms). Additionally, the heat balance also concerns the
losses from mainly air flows (ventilation) and windows. The heat balance in the simulated
models therefore displays an inbalance between gains and losses of heat in the building.
This may not be the case, and the heat demand would therefore be expected to be lower
in reality.
Moreover, the solar gain is simulated using parts of the weather data, that were not
updated to the measurement period. This adds an uncertainty to the true solar gain in
the models to predict the expected indoor temperatures in simulations in the recorded
timeframe from 6th or 8th of March. Updating the weather file with the solar data from
the measurement period would increase precision of the model and therefore decrease
the difference between simulated and measured indoor temperatures. However, this re­
quires finding a weather station nearby that provides the data regarding radiance and
illuminance, which are the most important weather data concerning solar gains. More­
over, the weather data used in the study was collected from the weather station 6180
at Kastrup airport in Copenhagen. The weather station is located about 8 km from CPH
Village, which may cause a discrepancy in the local weather between these locations.
Another uncertainty that explains the differences between the simulated and mea­
sured indoor temperatures are the general measurement uncertainty such as systematic
errors coming from the HOBO logger. The accuracy of the equipment decreases over
time, and the device must therefore be continuously calibrated. Other uncertainties that
may explain the differences in results are user behaviour and control of opening or closing
doors and windows.
47
==PAGE:52==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 4. Discussion
4.6
Overall Indications of Results
The sensation of thermal comfort varies slightly throughout the experiment. Results sug­
gest that NoTech performs well regarding thermal comfort in Leg 1. However in Leg 2 and
3, where outdoor temperatures were rising and as direct sunlight occasionally shined into
the room, indoor temperatures increased reaching overtemperatures, which decreased
the level of thermal comfort. This is seen in Leg 3, where the NoTech office struggles
to comply with adaptive comfort requirements but not for long periods. However, this re­
quires more measurements to test the true adaptiveness of the NoTech office. The find­
ings suggest that Ventilationsvinduet and Student performs best according to the thermal
comfort parameters. The rooms tend to stay balanced regarding the indoor temperature,
even when the indoor temperatures in the Student apartment varied greatly for two days
in the beginning of Leg 1. However, it is expected that measurements over longer time
will show the insignificance of these two days.
Indications from air velocity results show that the NoTech panel and Ventilationsvin­
duet provides a low level of draught. The results also show that the air exchange rate
on average for the whole measurement period is low in all rooms. However, much of
the time the rooms are unoccupied, and the air exchange rates may therefore be sat­
isfying. Nevertheless, in situations where the rooms are occupied, sufficient ventilation
must be provided. In one test case with cross ventilation between the fully opened hatch
in the NoTech panel and the mechanical ventilation device Duka on mode II, the results
suggests that efficient ventilation can be achieved. However, the results suggest testing
cases with cross ventilation pairing the NoTech panel with other measures that enable
appropriate air flows and are more energy saving regarding electrical energy and heat
demand. The NoTech office struggles in one sided ventilation situations, but the Ventila­
tionsvinduet results in higher air exchange rate. However, the kitchen hood exhaust in the
Ventilationsvinudet office is most likely the cause of increase air exchange rate, because
it enabled cross ventilation and channeled an increase in air flow. Moreover, factors such
as high winds outside and temperature differences may have influenced the results but
their effect is uncertain.
Simulations indicate that the heat demand in the NoTech office is greater than the
Ventilationsvinduet office and the Student apartment. However, the findings suggest that
orientation and exterior shading determines the amount of solar gain and thus the add to
differences in heat balance between the rooms. Experimenting the models with similar
orientation and exterior shading would clarify these differences. Moreover, updating the
weather file with local radiance and illuminance data should increase the precision of the
model. Additionally, the assumption of mixed air conditions in indoor temperature mea­
surements may not be fulfilled, possibly causing a discrepancy between measurements
and simulations. Most importantly, the heat balance results suggests updating schedules
for heating (radiator) and cooling (air flow) to avoid simultaneous heating and cooling.
48
==PAGE:53==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Chapter 5. Conclusion
5
Conclusion
The suggestions and tendencies of the results obtained in this project must be studied
considering the errors and uncertainty in measurements in the experiments. Therefore,
the results only suggest weak indications, which requires more and broader measure­
ments and simulations to strengthen the findings of this report.
Common for the NoTech office, the Ventilationsvinduet office, and the Student apart­
ment is that they all show a high level of thermal comfort regarding PMV and adaptive
comfort. Only at few periods the NoTech office and Student apartment exhibit a signif­
icant deviation from high thermal comfort. Generally, the NoTech office performs well
regarding thermal comfort, however performing slightly less when comparing with the
Ventilationsvinduet office and the Student apartment.
The results for draught rates show that the NoTech and Ventilationsvinduet offices
have 0 % draught rate at most measurement heights when located close to the NoTech
panel or the Ventilationsvindue. At 0.6 m the draught rate for Ventilationsvinduet is 4.3 %,
where the NoTech panel show lower draught rates with 0 % in most recorded cases. At
two cases the draught rate is 2.2 % and therefore still less than results for Ventilationsvin­
duet. Case 1) with infiltration and minimum opening of the NoTech panel at measurement
height 0.1 m, and 2) infiltration mode with doors open between the NoTech office and
the Ventilationsvinduet office and minimum opening of the NoTech panel at measurement
height 0.6 m, which are also lower than the Ventilationsvinduet results.
The air exchange rate results suggest that the NoTech office on average over the
whole measurement period has a higher air exchange rate compared to the Ventila­
tionsvinduet office and the Student apartment. However, the NoTech has a low air ex­
change rate in one sided ventilation situations compared to Ventilationsvinduet. Although,
at one case testing cross ventilation, the NoTech panel was coupled with the mechanical
ventilation device and proved effective, and a similar air exchange rate to Ventilationsvin­
duet was recorded. Regarding heat demand in the rooms, the results suggest that the
energy use concerning heat is higher in the NoTech office than in the Ventilationsvinduet
office and the Student apartment.
The findings of the report suggest that the NoTech office provides a more efficient
indoor climate regarding the average air exchange rate over the whole measurement
period. The NoTech office performs close to the same level of thermal comfort as the
Ventilationsvinduet office and the Student apartment, although the thermal comfort in the
NoTech office is netural for most of the time. The results also suggest that the heat de­
mand of the NoTech office is higher compared to the Ventilationsvinduet office and the
Student apartment. However, limited data and errors in experiments suggest that further
and broader investigation is required to confirm the indications of this research.
49
==PAGE:54==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | References
References
[1]
Neil Klepeis et al. “The National Human Activity Pattern Survey (NHAPS): A Re­
source for Assessing Exposure to Environmental Pollutants”. In: (2001). URL: https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/252988142_The_National_Human_Activity_
Pattern_Survey_NHAPS_A_Resource_for_Assessing_Exposure_to_Environmental_
Pollutants.
[2]
Laverge et al. “Energy saving potential and repercussions on indoor air quality of
demand controlled residential ventilation strategies, Building and Environment”. In:
46, Issue 7 (2011), pp. 1497–1503. ISSN: 0360­1323. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.buildenv.2011.01.023%20(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360132311000333).
[3]
Velux. 2.5 Ventilation of different building types. URL: https://www.velux.com/what-
we- do/research- and- knowledge/deic- basic- book/ventilation/building- types- and-
climate?fbclid=IwAR2UZhy- Ont9PRrkrooI7kcKRCIs4_DT- m2BYlTtuJZy3qjBsmq-
DCG65agA.
[4]
OA Seppänen, WJ Fisk, and MJ Mendell. “Association of Ventilation Rates and CO2
Concentrations with Health andOther Responses in Commercial and Institutional
Buildings”. In: 9 (1999), pp. 226–252. ISSN: 0905­6947. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.buildenv.2011.01.023%20(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360132311000333).
[5]
J Sundell et al. “Ventilation rates and health: multidisciplinary review of the scientific
literature”. In: (2010). URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2010.00703.x.
[6]
Olli Seppänen, William Fisk, and QH Lei. “Ventilation and Work Performance in
Office Work”. In: (2005). URL: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2374990t.
[7]
Livingbetter. Ventilationsvinduet. URL: https://livingbetter.dk/ventilationsvinduet/.
[8]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN ISO 7730 ­ Ergonomics of the thermal evaluation ­ Ana­
lytical determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the
PMV and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria, 2nd edition. p. 6, 10, and
16. 2006.
[9]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN ISO 8996 ­ Ergonomics of the thermal environment ­ De­
termination of metabolic heat production, 1st edition. p. 1, 15, and 16. 2004.
[10]
Federico Tartarini and Stefano Schiavon. “pythermalcomfort: A Python package for
thermal comfort research”. In: SoftwareX 12 (July 2020), p. 100578. ISSN: 23527110.
DOI: 10.1016/j.softx.2020.100578. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2020.
100578%20https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2352711020302910.
[11]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 16798­1 ­ Energy performance of buildings ­ Ventilation
for buildings ­ Part 1: Indoor environmental input parameters for design and as­
50
==PAGE:55==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | References
sessment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal
environment, lighting and acoustics ­ Module M1­6. p. 15. 2019.
[12]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN ISO 7726 ­ Ergonomics of the thermal evaluation ­ Instru­
ments for measuring physical quantities, 1st edition. Table 5, p. 11. 2001.
[13]
DMI. DMI Open Data API Portal. Subscription page for DMI’s Open Data API’s.
URL: https://dmiapi.govcloud.dk/#!/apis.
[14]
Duka Ventilation. DUKA ONE S6 PLUS Wi­Fi ­ Effektiv og energibevidst 1­rums ven­
tilationsløsning. Product Sheet Duka Ventilation. 2021. URL: https://res.cloudinary.
com/evoleska/image/upload/v1644215753/mtuvdoreapvxtqs9xnhq.pdf.
51
==PAGE:56==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
A
Appendix
A.1
Site Pictures
Figure A.1 shows images from the Ventilationsvinduet office and Student apartment. Im­
ages of NoTech are shown in Figure A.2.
(a) Ventilationsvinduet room and view out.
(b) View out from Student.
(c) Image of kitchen in the Ventilationsvinduet
office ­ the Student apartment has a similar
kitchen.
(d) Image of Duka ventilation in the NoTech of­
fice viewed from indoors.
Figure A.1: Site images of the investigated rooms in CPH Village.
52
==PAGE:57==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
(a) NoTech room and view out.
(b) NoTech panel front lamel and filter.
(c) Inside the NoTech panel showing the hatch
and the mechanical system that opens/closes
the hatch.
(d) Inside the NoTech panel showing the timer
and open/close system.
Figure A.2: Site images of NoTech office and NoTech panel in CPH Village.
53
==PAGE:58==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
A.2
Long Term Measurements of Temperature
Long term measurements of temperature in NoTech and Ventilation offices and Student
apartment are shown for Leg 1 in Figure A.3, for Leg 2 in Figure A.4, and lastly for Leg 3
in Figure A.5. Additionally, the assumed occupancy is shown in the top of the figures as
boxes, red for NoTech, blue for Ventilationsvinduet, and yellow for Student.
54
==PAGE:59==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.3: Temperature measurements for Leg 1 of the experiment.
55
==PAGE:60==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.4: Temperature measurements for Leg 2 of the experiment.
56
==PAGE:61==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.5: Temperature measurements for Leg 3 of the experiment.
57
==PAGE:62==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
A.3
Long Term Measurements of Humidity
Long term measurements of humidity in NoTech and Ventilation offices and Student apart­
ment are shown the whole measurement period in Figure A.6.
58
==PAGE:63==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
59
==PAGE:64==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.6: Relative Humidity measurements.
60
==PAGE:65==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure A.7: Relative humidity measurements Leg 1.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure A.8: Relative humidity measurements Leg 2.
61
==PAGE:66==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure A.9: Relative humidity measurements Leg 3.
A.4
Adaptive Comfort Diagrams
Figures A.10, A.11, and A.12 show indoor temperature to the running mean outdoor tem­
perature for Leg 1 of the experiment. Adaptive comfort diagrams for Leg 2 are shown in
Figures A.13, A.14, and A.15, and Leg 3 adaptive comfort diagrams are shown in Figures
A.16, A.17, and A.18.
Figure A.10: Leg 1 indoor temperature in NoTech office vs. acceptance categories based
on running mean outdoor temperature.
62
==PAGE:67==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.11: Leg 1 indoor temperature in Ventilationsvinduet office vs. acceptance cate­
gories based on running mean outdoor temperature.
Figure A.12: Leg 1 indoor temperature in Student apartment vs. acceptance categories
based on running mean outdoor temperature.
Figure A.13: Leg 2 indoor temperature in NoTech office vs. acceptance categories based
on running mean outdoor temperature.
63
==PAGE:68==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.14: Leg 2 indoor temperature in Ventilationsvinduet office vs. acceptance cate­
gories based on running mean outdoor temperature.
Figure A.15: Leg 2 indoor temperature in Student apartment vs. acceptance categories
based on running mean outdoor temperature.
Figure A.16: Leg 3 indoor temperature in NoTech office vs. acceptance categories based
on running mean outdoor temperature.
64
==PAGE:69==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.17: Leg 3 indoor temperature in Ventilationsvinduet office vs. acceptance cate­
gories based on running mean outdoor temperature.
Figure A.18: Leg 3 indoor temperature in Student apartment vs. acceptance categories
based on running mean outdoor temperature.
65
==PAGE:70==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
A.5
CO2 Measurements
CO2 Measurements for Leg 1 of the experiment is displayed in Figure A.19, Leg 2 in
Figure A.20, and Leg 3 in Figure A.21.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure A.19: CO2 Measurements Leg 1.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure A.20: CO2 Measurements Leg 2.
66
==PAGE:71==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure A.21: CO2 Measurements Leg 3.
(a) NoTech.
(b) Ventilationsvinduet.
(c) Student.
Figure A.22: Average CO2 decrease over time for all three rooms.
67
==PAGE:72==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
A.6
Wind Speeds
Figure A.23: Wind speeds at given days at Kastrup airport.
A.7
Simulation of Indoor Temperature and Schedule
Heat balance diagrams for NoTech, Ventilationsvinduet, and Student are shown in Figures
A.24, A.25, and A.26.
Figure A.24: Heat balance simulation of NoTech.
68
==PAGE:73==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Figure A.25: Heat balance simulation of Ventilationsvinduet.
Figure A.26: Heat balance simulation of Student.
The realistic equipment load schedule AKA duck profile is shown in Figure A.27.
Figure A.27: Duck profile.
69
==PAGE:74==
Natural vs. Mechanical Ventilation | Appendix A. Appendix
Diagrams of the simulated indoor temperatures in IDA ICE 5.0 and the measured indoor
temperatures from March 6th to March 24th are displayed in Figures A.28, A.29, and A.30.
Figure A.28: Indoor temperature calculation and measurements for NoTech from March
6th to March 24th.
Figure A.29: Indoor temperature calculation and measurements for Ventilationsvinduet
from March 6th to March 24th.
Figure A.30: Indoor temperature calculation and measurements for Student from March
6th to March 24th.
70
==PAGE:75==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
