==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Improved modeling of TCR-pHLA
interactions by a combination of 2D
CNN interactions models and
conventional 1D CNN feature
extraction models
Author
Carlos de Santiago León - s222766
Supervisor
Morten Nielsen
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technology
Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning
June 14, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Predicting T-cell receptors (TCR) and peptide major histocompatibility complex (pMHC)
interactions is raising significant interest in immunology research due to their potential
applications
in
immunotherapy,
personalized
medicine,
and
vaccine
development.
Experimentally determining these interactions has proven to be expensive and incapable of
generating
high-throughput
data,
resulting in only a limited number of pMHC-TCR
interactions being accurately studied.
The computational development of TCR-epitope specificity predictors has emerged to learn
patterns from analyzed pMHC-TCR, aiming to create novel and cost-effective methodologies
capable of accurately predicting the binding of new, unseen epitopes to TCR molecules. The
main challenges arise from the limited available data to train the predictor models, leading to
poor predictions for unseen and underrepresented peptides. Therefore, new strategies must
be implemented to address the lack of data required to build these predictors, given the
complex interactions defined by the hypervariability of TCR and pMHC molecules.
Here, we studied a novel feature representation introduced by Moris et al. (2022) in their
ImRex model based on 2D interaction maps computed from the pairwise absolute difference
of distinct amino acid physicochemical properties in each possible CDR sequence compared
to the peptide sequence. Different deep learning architectures based on 2D convolutional
neural networks (CNN) were analyzed to boost the performance of conventional predictor
models based on 1D-CNN architectures and protein BLOSUM embedding representations.
This novel feature representation implemented in the final 2D-CNN sequential proposed
architecture enhances TCR-epitope prediction accuracy when included in an ensemble
methodology with conventional 1D-CNN architectures. Additionally, we demonstrated that
using these 2D interaction maps alongside all CDR sequences can improve the robustness
of predictions of under-represented peptides. This showcases the importance of appropriate
feature representation to deal with the challenges of the scarce available data.
Ⅰ
==PAGE:3==
Abbreviation List
ANN
Artificial Neural Networks
APC
Antigen-Presenting Cells
AUC
Area Under the Curve
AUC 0.1
Area Under the Curve integrated up to a False Positive Rate of 10%
BCR
B-Cell Receptor
BLOSUM
BLOcks SUbstitution Matrix
CDR
Complementary Determining Regions
CNN
Convolutional Neural Networks
FPR
False Positive Rate
IEDB
Immune Epitope Database
MHC
Major Histocompatibility Complex
MLP
Multilayer Perceptron
pMHC
Peptide Major Histocompatibility Complex
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
ROC
Receiver Operating Characteristic
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
TCR
T-Cell Receptor
TPR
True Positive Rate
II
==PAGE:4==
Table of contents
Abstract
I
Abbreviation List
II
Table of contents
III
1. Introduction and objectives
1
1.1. Adaptive immunity
1
1.2. T cell-mediated immune response and the TCR structure
1
1.3. TCR specificity and its clinical relevance
2
1.3.1. TCR specificity methodologies
2
1.3.2. Current challenges in TCR specificity predictions
3
1.4. Aim of the project and objectives
5
2. Material and methods
6
2.1. Data
6
2.1.1. Data preparation
6
2.1.2. Data partition and augmentation
6
2.2. Data preprocessing
7
2.2.1. Embedding of amino acid sequences
8
2.2.2. 2D interaction maps
8
2.3. Artificial Neural Networks
10
2.3.1. Feed-Forward Neural Network
10
2.3.2. Activation functions
12
2.3.3. Loss functions
14
2.3.4. Optimization algorithms
14
2.3.5. Backpropagation algorithm
16
2.4. Convolutional Neural Networks
16
2.4.1. Overall architecture
17
2.4.2. 1D Convolutional layers and convolution operation
18
2.4.3. Pooling layers and operation
19
2.4.4. Fully-connected layers
20
2.4.5. 2D Convolutional layers
20
III
==PAGE:5==
2.5. Model architectures
21
2.5.1. 1D-CNN Baseline architecture
22
2.5.2. 2D-CNN individual architecture adaption (individual maps)
23
2.5.3. 2D-CNN stacked architecture adaption (joint maps)
25
2.5.4. 2D-CNN new sequential proposed architecture
26
2.6. Training and evaluation
27
2.6.1. Nested cross-validation
27
2.6.2. Training parameters
29
2.6.3. Performance evaluation
30
3. Results and Discussion
31
3.1. 1D-CNN baseline architecture performance
31
3.1.1. Analysis of the inclusion of CDR1 and CDR2 sequences
32
3.1.2. Analysis of the effect of the weighted loss
34
3.2. 2D-CNN individual and stacked architectures performance
37
3.2.1. Comparison of the 2D-CNN individual model to the 1D-CNN baseline
37
3.2.2. Comparison of the 2D-CNN stacked model to the 1D-CNN baseline
40
3.2.3. Performance summary of both 2D-CNN architectures
43
3.3. New 2D-CNN sequential architecture performance
45
3.3.1. Comparison of the new 2D-CNN sequential model performance
46
3.3.2. Downsampling analysis
49
3.3.3. Individual property maps analysis
51
3.4. Ensemble analysis performance
54
3.4.1. 1D and 2D mix-scores ensemble
54
3.4.2. Random seeds ensemble of the new 2D-CNN sequential model
57
3.5. Performance analysis on a new training/test dataset
60
4. Conclusions
63
5. References
66
6. Appendix
69
6.1. Data repository
69
6.2. Supplementary figures
70
IV
==PAGE:6==
1. Introduction and objectives
1.1. Adaptive immunity
The host immune system reacts to external pathogens through innate and adaptive immune
responses. The innate response provides initial, non-specific actions to rapidly address any
kind of pathogen, while the adaptive response is slower and involves generating specific
agents that seek to neutralize the pathogen and maintain long-term immunological memory
(Netea et al., 2019).
The adaptive response is mediated by various immunological cells that can generate specific
cellular or humoral-mediated immune responses. T lymphocytes, or T-cells, recognize small
peptide fragments from external pathogens presented on the surface of cells by the MHC
molecules, activating gene-expression effectors (signals) that initiate a cascade of immune
responses that aims to destroy the infected cells. B lymphocytes, or B-cells, recognize
pathogen peptides through their B-cell receptors (BCRs), which define their antigen
specificity. This antigen recognition leads to the activation, differentiation, and proliferation of
B-cells. Activated B-cells can proliferate into plasma cells, which originate antibodies against
the antigens, and memory B-cells, which can respond quickly to subsequent exposures of
the recognized antigen (Rastogi et al., 2022).
In this master thesis project, we focused on the immune process related to the recognition of
presented peptides in MHC molecules (pMHC) by the TCR molecules of human T-cells. In
the following sections of the introduction chapter, we will briefly detail the T cell-mediated
immune response and the TCR structure.
1.2. T cell-mediated immune response and the TCR structure
The T cell-mediated immune response begins when naive T-cells from the thymus encounter
antigens presented by APCs, resulting in the expression of cytokines that promote the
proliferation and differentiation of effector cells, which migrate to the infected tissues for
pathogen clearance (Kumar et al., 2018). A key process during T-cell differentiation is the
TCR assembly, where the T-cell receptor is set up to recognize specific antigens bound to
MHC molecules on APCs.
The T-cell receptor molecule is established through genomic rearrangements of different
gene segments that encode the 𝛼and 𝛽, or the 𝛾and 𝛿chains of the TCR protein molecule.
1
==PAGE:7==
Consequently, TCRs are heterodimers (𝛼𝛽, or 𝛾𝛿) composed of different protein domains,
including an immunoglobulin (Ig)-like extracellular variable (V) domain, responsible for the
assembly of the complementary determining regions (CDRs) from the TCRs (Mariuzza et al.,
2020).
This
variable
domain
enhances
TCR
diversity
through the random genetic
rearrangement of the V(D)J gene segments, which are vital for the recognition of pMHC
ligands as MHCs are highly polymorphic and recognize a large repertoire of peptides.
The regions of variability in a TCR molecule, commonly known as the complementary
determining regions (CDRs), include three CDRs (CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3) that constitute
the
antigen-binding
interacting
site with the pMHC. CDR1 and CDR2 regions are
germline-encoded by the V gene segment, while CDR3 contains most of the hyper-variability
through random nucleotide modifications that join the V(D)J segments (Szeto et al., 2020).
These random rearrangements can result in a diversity of 1015-1020 T-cell clonotypes, that
gets reduced to 2.5·107 by the clonal selection of T-cells in the thymus (Szeto et al., 2020). It
is widely accepted that the CDR1 and CDR2 loops are basically in charge of recognizing the
MHC molecule, while the hypervariable CDR3 loop is mainly responsible for recognizing and
binding the peptide bound to the MHC molecule (Szeto et al., 2020).
1.3. TCR specificity and its clinical relevance
In recent years, studies on the prediction of TCR specificity have gained significant attention
due to relevant implications regarding the design of new personalized therapies and
vaccines, and in enhancing the understanding of infectious disease progression (Hudson et
al., 2023). Some applications focus on oncology research to develop personalized cancer
vaccines and immunotherapies while minimizing cross-reactivity responses. Besides cancer
research, accurate TCR prediction tools can have significant implications for improving
infectious disease surveillance and researching new solutions for autoimmune diseases
(Hudson et al., 2023).
1.3.1. TCR specificity methodologies
Experimental methods are used to identify and describe TCR-epitope pairs. However, the
main problem in this field is the high cost of technologies that can successfully provide
detailed information on the chain-paired profiles of TCR molecules while generating
high-throughput data. Furthermore, only a limited fraction of TCR-antigen pairs has been
validated experimentally, restricting the range of diverse TCR-antigen pairs available in
public databases (Hudson et al., 2023). Computational methods have emerged to address
2
==PAGE:8==
these challenges, serving as a powerful tool that could learn patterns and relationships from
the well-studied TCR-epitope pairs to predict new TCR-epitope unseen observations.
Different approaches have been investigated to develop accurate TCR specificity predictors
(Jensen & Nielsen, 2024; Meysman et al., 2023). Similarity-based methods are one of the
simplest approaches, emerging from the hypothesis that similar TCRs will bind to the same
profile of epitopes. TCRbase (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/TCRbase-1.0/) is an
example of those methods, which compute a single distance metric to calculate the similarity
between unseen TCRs and seen TCRs, and if there is a similarity score close enough to a
TCR from the training dataset, then it is assumed that the unseen TCR binds the same pool
of epitopes. Similarly, unsupervised machine learning models have also been proposed as
methods to cluster TCR or antigens according to their similarities and deal with unlabelled
data (Hudson et al., 2023). Although similarity-based methods can perform accurately close
to machine learning approaches, they depend on the similarity of the datasets and,
therefore, can underperform in cases when evaluation datasets differ from the training
observations (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024).
Most recent studies investigate feature-based methods, as described by Meysman et al.
(2023), which are defined as those that try to identify common patterns underlying the
training set TCRs that bind a given epitope. These feature-based methods are commonly
associated with machine learning algorithms, which can be developed in an epitope- or
pan-specific manner. Epitope-specific focuses on training and predicting binding TCRs to a
unique epitope, while pan-specific tries to generalize to a pool of multiple epitopes.
Epitope-specific models can show a better performance for the studied epitope compared to
pan-specific models. However, the main disadvantage of epitope-specific methods is that a
separate model has to be trained for one unique epitope, while pan-specific methods can
train a model simultaneously for several epitopes.
Most models used in those feature-based methods are based on machine or deep learning
algorithms like convolutional neural networks (CNNs) such as NetTCR (Jensen & Nielsen,
2024), auto-encoder models such as DeepTCR (Sidhom et al., 2021), decision-tree models
such as SETE (Tong et al., 2020), or Gaussian process models such as TCRGP (Jokinen et
al., 2021).
1.3.2. Current challenges in TCR specificity predictions
The desired goal to achieve from these TCR specificity predictors is to develop a
pan-specific methodology that could perform accurately to new unseen TCR from untrained
3
==PAGE:9==
epitope sequences. Current tools can perform accurately when predicting the binding of
unseen TCRs to peptides with known well-described TCRs, but the main challenge
encountered with these pan-specific models is that they have not been able to extrapolate to
new unseen peptides due to the scarcity of available data for training robustly enough
machine learning models. The poor availability of high-quality and complete TCR and
antigen data remains the most significant limitation to model development (Hudson et al.,
2023). Furthermore, the over-representation of a few well-studied antigens setups is an
added problem when dealing with available public data, as many under-represented
antigens do not have enough quality data recorded to accurately benefit from them in TCR
specificity predictors (Hudson et al., 2023; Moris et al., 2021).
Researchers have suggested different approaches to improve the overall accuracy of these
TCR specificity predictors when working with unbalanced and scarce datasets. One of the
most significant ones has been the inclusion of additional information apart from the CDR3
sequence, which is the region from the TCR that is most relevant for the interaction with the
peptide. Most of the initially developed TCR specificity predictor models focused on single
chain data from CDR3𝛽, since it is the most abundant data available in public databases
(Jensen & Nielsen, 2024). Nowadays, the available public paired-chain data (both 𝛼- and
𝛽-chains corresponding to a TCR molecule) is increasing thanks to the rise of single-cell
sequencing experiments.
Recent studies have demonstrated that including the rest of the CDR paired-chain
sequences (CDR1 and CDR2 𝛼+𝛽-chains), either as amino acid sequences or through the
annotated V- and J-genes, can further boost the performance of TCR predictor models
(Meysman et al., 2023). Even though this emergence of single-cell sequencing techniques is
improving the quality and availability of paired-chain data repositories, the limited available
paired-chain data is still a relevant problem for TCR specificity predictors.
These challenges originate from the biological background of the TCR specificity problem,
as TCR molecules are hypervariable sequences that originate from random processes to
create a whole spectrum of TCRs that could face the enormous peptides that can arise from
pathogen infections. Analyzing the binding motifs and rules that define how a TCR can
interact with a presented antigen in an MHC molecule is still a huge problem, as TCRs can
display cross-reactivity against multiple epitopes, and an epitope can interact with different
TCRs (Moris et al., 2021).
4
==PAGE:10==
1.4. Aim of the project and objectives
Current studies have proposed novel feature representations as an alternative to tackle
some of the explained challenges that arise from imbalanced and scarce working datasets.
Predictive models can work with different sequencing encoding strategies as one-hot
encoding of the 20 classical amino acids, embedding layers, or BLOSUM-encodings. A
recent new encoding methodology proposed by Moris et al. (2021) is based on using
different physicochemical characteristics described for each amino acid and representing the
pairwise absolute difference between the residues of two sequences of interest as a 2D
matrix. The authors of this novel feature representation, referred to as 2D interaction maps,
state that this encoding can boost the performance of TCR predictor models when
extrapolating them into different unseen epitopes (Moris et al., 2021).
Based on this novel feature representation, this project aims to study the effectiveness of the
2D interaction maps representation in comparison to the conventional BLOSUM-encoding
embeddings of the amino acid sequences from the TCRs and epitopes as a feature of
predictor tools such as NetTCR 2.2 (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024). To evaluate this novel feature
representation,
we
decided
to
work
with
2D
convolutional
neural
network
(CNN)
architectures, which is the modeling approach proposed by the original authors in their
ImRex architecture (Moris et al., 2021). Furthermore, we investigate the performance
differences and gains of this 2D-CNN to the 1D-CNN architecture proposed for NetTCR 2.2
when working with the BLOSUM-encoding embeddings, especially when dealing with
imbalanced datasets. Additionally, we proposed some different ensemble strategies that
could benefit from both methodologies.
To conclude this study, we also wanted to analyze the performance of this novel feature
representation and 2D-CNN architectures in two different TCR specificity datasets. The
global research of this project has been carried out with the NetTCR 2.2 available dataset. In
addition, we tested our proposed 2D-CNN architecture with the 2D interaction maps in a
different dataset collected from the ImmRep 2022 benchmark, which is a competition related
to evaluating different TCR-epitope specificity models (Meysman et al., 2023).
5
==PAGE:11==
2. Material and methods
2.1. Data
The principal data used in this project (except for the last Results section) was provided by
Morten Nielsen and is sourced from the NetTCR 2.2 project (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024). The
following subsections briefly summarize the steps taken to prepare the dataset. For more
detailed information, refer to the NetTCR 2.2 article (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024).
2.1.1. Data preparation
The initial raw data was acquired from the Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) (Vita et al.,
2019) and VDJdb (Goncharov et al., 2022) on the 23th and 24th of August 2022, respectively.
Only assays from positive T-cell assays for MHC class I and human cells were selected, and
only paired-chain (both 𝛼- and 𝛽-chains) data was collected from that initial query.
The paired-chain data obtained was filtered in order to exclude data that originated from 10X
sequencing analysis and to include observations with annotated V and J genes and the
complete MHC alleles. Additional steps were taken for correcting incomplete V and J allele
annotations and CDR3 sequence nomenclatures (starting the sequence with a cysteine and
ending it with a phenylalanine), and for dropping duplicate entries.
Furthermore, a supplementary dataset from a 10x sequencing study (10x Genomics, 2020)
was denoised and included in our dataset. Finally, annotation of all CDR fragments from the
TCRs was completed using Stitchr (Heather et al., 2022) and redundancy reduction steps
were included to end up with the final version of the dataset used in this project. The
reduction was carried out using the Hobohm 1 algorithm using a 0.95 kernel similarity
threshold in two steps. The first reduction allowed to keep only peptides with at least 30
unique TCRs, and the second reduction across all peptides and observations removed 68
redundant observations.
2.1.2. Data partition and augmentation
The final dataset includes a total of 6,353 binder (positive) observations across 26 different
peptides. To prepare the data for model training and evaluation, the dataset was splitted into
5 partition folds and negative observations were generated by swapping the TCRs for a
given peptide with TCRs binding to other peptides. The generation of negatives was done
separately for each partition. To reduce possible false negatives generation, TCRs were only
6
==PAGE:12==
sampled from peptides which had a Levenshtein distance greater than 3. A ratio of 5
swapped negatives for each positive observation was established to ensure enough number
of negative observations.
Figure 1 represents the number of binding peptides to TCRs (positive observations) in the
final dataset, according to each of the 5 data partitions. We can observe that most of the
positive observations come from the peptides ‘GILGFVFTL’, ‘RAKFKQLL’, ‘KLGGALQAK’,
and ‘AVFDRKSDAK’. Moreover, there are 12 peptides with over 100 positive observations
and 14 peptides with under 100 positive observations. Finally, all observations for each
peptide are equally distributed along the 5 data partitions to ensure robust model training
and evaluation. Further explanation on the training and evaluation strategy of the deep
learning models will be covered in subsequent sections of the Material and methods chapter.
Figure 1. Overview of the distribution of positive peptide observations (binding peptides to TCRs) in the
dataset. The number of observations per peptide in each data partition is illustrated according to the different
colors detailed in the figure legend.
2.2. Data preprocessing
As the information from our dataset consists of amino acid sequences of CDR fragments
and peptides, the data had to be processed for developing neural network classifiers. This
section outlines the techniques employed for feature processing.
7
==PAGE:13==
2.2.1. Embedding of amino acid sequences
The input of the different models developed in this project consist of the amino acid
sequences of the CDRs from the T-Cell receptor molecules (CDR1𝛼, CDR2𝛼, CDR3𝛼,
CDR1𝛽, CDR2𝛽, and CDR3𝛽) and the peptide sequence. These string-type data can be
numerically represented using BLOSUM matrices, which are substitution matrices that
represent the log-odds for each of the possible substitution pairs of the 20 standard amino
acids. These BLOSUM matrices are commonly used for protein alignment studies to analyze
the similarity between different protein sequences (Trivedi & Nagarajaram, 2020).
Following NetTCR 2.2 strategy, each amino acid sequence described was represented using
a BLOSUM50-embedding (including a normalization factor of 5) and right-padded with zero
values to the maximum length observed for that feature in the dataset (Jensen & Nielsen,
2024). For reference, the maximum lengths observed were 7, 8, 22, 6, 7, 23, and 12
residues for the CDR1𝛼, CDR2𝛼, CDR3𝛼, CDR1𝛽, CDR2𝛽, CDR3𝛽, and peptide amino acid
sequences, respectively. Therefore, the amino acid sequences are represented numerically
as 2D-input matrices, where each matrix has dimensions determined by the maximum length
of the specific sequence type and the 20 embedding dimensions corresponding to the 20
different amino acids.
2.2.2. 2D interaction maps
Sequence interaction maps are a novel feature representation introduced by Moris et al.
(2021), based on representing the interaction between two amino acid sequences according
to their molecular physicochemical properties. Instead of representing the amino acid
sequences individually as a BLOSUM embedding, the sequences are represented in pairs to
compare them according to different biochemical properties.
In the context of our study, interaction maps were constructed by comparing a CDR
sequence to the peptide sequence, allowing us to analyze the similarities between the
residues of the CDR sequences and the binding peptide. The process of creating these
maps involves converting the residues from each amino acid sequence into a numerical
property vector. Then, the interaction map is built as a 2D matrix, whose elements are
defined by the pairwise absolute differences between all possible pairs of combinations from
the two sequence-property vectors to compare. As explained by the original authors, the
pairwise absolute difference is chosen as the operator to combine and compare two
sequences because it represents the biochemical relationships between two residues that
interact, in this case, the residues of the TCR and peptide. Residues with similar property
8
==PAGE:14==
values will have a low score, while residues with different property values will have a higher
score in the map.
The
physicochemical
properties
analyzed
include
amino
acid mass, hydrophobicity,
hydrophilicity, and isoelectric point, as suggested by Moris et al. (2021). Property vectors
were computed according to the values from the Python library ‘Biopython’ (Cock et al.,
2009). In addition, we defined a new extra property based on the BLOSUM-50 embeddings.
This
new
interaction map was constructed by representing both residues as their
BLOSUM-50 embedding matrix (as detailed in Section 2.2.1.) and calculating the cosine
similarity between the two embedding matrices. The cosine similarity resembles the idea of
the pairwise absolute difference, as it computes similarity as the normalized dot product of
two matrices (Equation 1). In our case, the matrix ‘A’ is the BLOSUM embedding of one of
the CDRs, and the matrix ‘B’ is the BLOSUM embedding of the peptide.
𝑐𝑜𝑠(θ) =  
𝐴·𝐵
𝐴
| |
|
|· 𝐵
| |
|
| =
𝑖=1
𝑛
∑𝐴𝑖𝐵𝑖
𝑖=1
𝑛
∑𝐴𝑖
2
𝑖=1
𝑛
∑𝐵𝑖
2
(1)
To ensure equal feature importance during the training of the neural network, all interaction
maps were scaled between 0 and 1 according to the minimum and maximum possible
pairwise absolute difference values of each property (except for the BLOSUM-50 interaction
map, as is already normalized according to the cosine similarity formula). Finally, all
interaction matrices were zero-padded on both ends to match the maximum length values
for the sequences analyzed in their corresponding 2D map.
Figure 2 illustrates interaction maps between an epitope (GILGFVFTL) and its binding
CDR3𝛽sequence, according to the five physicochemical properties explained. Zero
paddings were omitted in the figure for clarity. The isoelectric point map appears less
distinct, reflecting the similarity in isoelectric points among most amino acids due to their
uncharged nature. All maps are scaled between 0 and 1 except for the BLOSUM50 matrix,
which spans from 1 to -1 due to possible negative embedding values. However, this small
scale difference does not impact the neural network's training procedure, given the
insignificant effect compared to the 1-unit scale of other properties.
The five 2D matrices corresponding to the defined properties constitute the interaction maps
of the observations from our dataset. These interaction maps can be combined into a
three-dimensional tensor, where the length and width correspond to the maximum lengths of
the two interacting sequences and the depth (channels) to the physicochemical properties.
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2. Example of the interaction maps of an epitope and its binding CDR3𝛽sequence, encoded by four
physicochemical properties (Mass, Isoelectric Point, Hydrophobicity, and Hydrophilicity) using the absolute
difference as the pairwise operator. An additional fifth property is included based on the cosine similarity of the
BLOSUM-50 embeddings of both sequences. The 5 maps are introduced into the neural network as a
three-dimensional tensor.
2.3. Artificial Neural Networks
The main objective of this project concentrates on developing a model that accurately
predicts whether a peptide can bind to a specific TCR molecule. Given the complexity of
pMHC interactions with TCRs, computational methods are essential for this task. For our
project, we have chosen to work with neural networks, aligning with the current focus of
research studies (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024; Moris et al., 2021).
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) are machine learning algorithms inspired by biological
neurons, which receive information from preceding neurons, process it, and transmit it to
subsequent neurons upon activation of the final signal. Therefore, ANNs are defined as
functions that process inputs through linear transformations, typically represented as
weighted sums, followed by the application of a possibly nonlinear activation function. In the
following subsections, we will briefly introduce how feed-forward networks work, as these
were used to define the model’s architectures.
2.3.1. Feed-Forward Neural Network
Artificial Neural Networks consist of interconnected information processing units known as
neurons, which are linked by weighted connections. These neurons are typically organized
into layers and process information sequentially by feeding the information from one neuron
to the next one. The flow and processing of the information through the neurons are defined
as the forward pass, where the input 𝑥is presented into the input layer and then is
propagated to the hidden layers and the final output layer. The information is transformed
according to each neuron’s weighted connections and then passed through nonlinear
10
==PAGE:16==
activation functions. The archetypal neural network architecture built upon this principle of
stacking layers of neurons is known as multilayer perceptron (MLP) (Roberts et al., 2022).
The basic operations performed in these ANNs are based on linear transformations (linear
weighted sums) followed by a nonlinear thresholding function known as activation function.
Firstly, a neuron is preactivated (zi) according to this linear aggregation of incoming inputs or
signals xj where each signal is weighted by Wij and biased by an independent term bi.
for
𝑧𝑖(𝑥) = 𝑏𝑖+
𝑗=𝑖
𝑛𝑖𝑛
∑𝑊𝑖𝑗·𝑥𝑗
𝑖= 1,  ...,  𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑡
(2)
Then, each neuron transfers the value of the preactivation through an activation function
𝜎(z). The activation function is usually chosen to be nonlinear to increase the expressivity of
the neural-network function (Roberts et al., 2022). Consequently, each neuron transmits the
processed information to the next neuron based on the threshold defined by this activation
function (Eq. 3). The bias term used in the pre-activation step serves as an additional
parameter that allows the model to capture more complex relationships within the data by
shifting the activation function.
σ𝑖≡σ(𝑧𝑖)
(3)
Therefore, the MLP architecture is recursively defined by iterating these two equations
according to the defined number of layers (L), with each layer l composed of nl neurons.
The number of layers determines the depth of the network, while the varying number of
neurons in each layer establishes the widths of the layers. Together, these components
constitute some of the model's hyperparameters.
The first layer of the model is termed the input layer, as it receives the initial, unprocessed
input x. The intermediate layers, excluding the final layer (L-1), are known as dense or
hidden layers since the pre-activations and activations of these neurons are not the final
network’s output. The final layer (L) in the neural network is known as the output layer,
responsible for producing the last value of the network. In classification tasks, this value
typically represents a categorical label, expressed as an integer. In regression tasks,
however, the output is a continuous numerical value, typically represented as a float. An
example of a neural network architecture including different hidden layers and the operations
described in the previous equations is illustrated in Figure 3.
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3. Example of a neural network architecture composed of 2 hidden layers (h1, h2). The input x is on the
left and it has 3 initial neurons or features. The hidden layers, h1 and h2, are in the center of the representation
and each of them has 4 and 2 hidden neurons, respectively. Each neuron of the hidden layers receives
information from each of the previous neurons, including the bias vector terms represented as b, which is
represented as the connecting lines from one neuron to the other. These lines also illustrate the parameters of
the model, where the blue lines are the weights for each connection and the orange lines are the bias weights.
Each neuron in the hidden and output layers present different bias specific values. Every neuron processes its
specific inputs according to the formulas in the figure. The activation functions of each intermediate and output
layer are represented as σ. The final output layer, y, is represented on the right and processes the output from
the results of the last hidden layer (h2).
2.3.2. Activation functions
As described in the previous sections, activation functions play an important role in neural
networks by introducing non-linearity to the network’s output. This added non-linearity
enables the model to generalize and learn complex relationships within the variability in the
input data (Sharma et al., 2020). The binary step function is the simplest activation function,
operating like a yes-or-no threshold by sending the information to the next neuron whenever
the output is greater than 0 (Eq. 4).
σ(𝑧) =  
0,      𝑧 < 0
1,      𝑧 ≥ 0   
{
}
(4)
12
==PAGE:18==
Different activation functions can be found in literature, maintaining the basic concept of
non-linearity. Choosing the right activation function for your neural network layers is another
hyperparameter influencing your model's architecture. This decision is usually based on
factors like the characteristics of your input and output data, as well as the goals you aim to
achieve with your model. For this project, we have worked with two commonly used
activation functions: Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) and Sigmoid (Figure 4).
The ReLU function prevents the simultaneous activation of all neurons by setting a
threshold, where only neurons with values greater than 0 are activated and transmit their
output unaltered (Eq. 5). The main advantage of ReLU is that it contributes to the stability
and efficiency of training due to only inputting inputs greater than zero. However, one of the
main disadvantages is that it does not process negative inputs, which could be inefficient if
your dataset is composed mostly of negative examples.
σ(𝑧) =  
0,      𝑧 < 0
𝑧,      𝑧 ≥ 0   
{
}
(5)
The sigmoid function is a logistic function that converts the output of the neurons in the
range 0 to 1 (Eq. 6). This activation function is frequently employed in binary classification
tasks, where the transformed outputs can be interpreted as probability values representing
the likelihood of an input belonging to a specific class. Consequently, the sigmoid function is
commonly used in the output layer of binary classification models.
σ(𝑧) =  
1
1 + 𝑒
−𝑧
(6)
Figure 4. Activation functions. (a) ReLU activation function. Output values of the ReLU activation function
for a range of input values. (b) Sigmoid activation function. Output values of the sigmoid activation function
for a range of input values.
13
==PAGE:19==
2.3.3. Loss functions
The purpose behind constructing these neural networks is to create a model capable of
predicting an output (y) based on input values (x) once the model has been trained on a
training dataset. A loss or cost function, E(ϕ), is implemented as a metric to measure the
accuracy of the model by quantifying the mismatch or error between the model predictions
and their corresponding original output values. During the training of the neural network, the
parameters ϕ (weights and biases) are updated to minimize the loss and improve the overall
mapping of the training inputs to their corresponding outputs (f[x,ϕ]).
Similarly to activation functions, there are multiple loss functions suitable for the specific
problem that your network is designed to tackle. For example, in regression tasks the loss
functions tend to be related to reducing the sum of the least squares errors between the
predictions and the original outputs (Eq. 7). During the training of the network, several
epochs are defined to let the model correct the parameter’s estimates by minimizing the
negative log-likelihood loss function (Eq. 8).
𝐸(ϕ) =  
𝑖=1
𝑛
∑
𝑦𝑖−𝑓𝑥𝑖, ϕ
[
]
(
)
2
(7)
(8)
Here, we are tasked with a binary classification objective: predicting whether a peptide binds
to a TCR molecule (y=1) or not (y=0). Given this specific task, the most appropriate loss
function to implement is binary cross-entropy (Eq. 9). This loss function, derived from the
Bernoulli
probability
distribution,
fits appropriately with the binary classification task
described, as it operates within the domain of probabilities [0,1].
𝐸(ϕ) =  
𝑖=1
𝑛
∑−1 −𝑦𝑖
(
) · 𝑙𝑜𝑔1 −𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑓𝑥𝑖, ϕ
[
]
[
]
(
) −𝑦𝑖 · 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑓𝑥𝑖, ϕ
[
]
[
]
(9)
2.3.4. Optimization algorithms
In the previous section, we introduced the loss function as the metric to measure the
differences between the model predictions and the original output values. In this section, we
will briefly explain how the model uses this loss metric to learn and update the parameters of
the neural network. This process is known as model training or fitting, during which the
14
==PAGE:20==
model initializes the parameter values randomly and then adjusts them based on the
derivatives (gradients) of the loss function, aiming to minimize the overall loss of the model.
Fitting a model involves updating the model parameters according to the training set formed
of input (x) and output (y) pairs, so the model predictions are as accurate as possible. Most
optimization algorithms work iteratively by updating the parameters in such a way that the
loss decreases. The simplest optimization algorithm is the gradient descent, which compute
the derivatives of the loss with respect each parameter and update the parameters
according to a positive scalar 𝛼called learning rate (Prince, 2023). The final goal is to end up
with the loss function reaching a minimum, where the gradient magnitude becomes too small
(close to zero) and the parameters do not change more.
One of the main disadvantages of the initial gradient descent algorithms lies in the difficulty
of finding a global minimum due to the high number of parameters a neural network can
have. Additionally, gradient descent is influenced by the starting point, as the gradient is
typically randomly initialized. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods aim to improve
convergence by introducing noise to the gradient at each optimization step. This noise is
introduced by the random reordering of the training data points in each optimization step. In
addition, working on subsets of the training data, defined by the batch size hyperparameter,
assists the algorithm in escaping local minima and prevents the gradient from becoming
stuck in a 'valley' of the loss function (Prince, 2023). This approach improves the
computational efficiency of the algorithm, by enhancing a faster convergence by computing
gradient derivatives on smaller data portions.
In our project, we have worked with the Adam (Adaptive moment estimation) optimization
algorithm (Kingma & Ba, 2014), which is based on stochastic gradient descent. The Adam
algorithm adds new terms apart from the basics of SGD described in the previous paragraph
like momentum and gradient normalization. The momentum helps to smooth the gradient
updates and improve the convergence by changing the learning rate influence according to
the previous gradients, so the effective learning rate increases in zones where the gradient
does not change much because of local minima to help the algorithm overcome these areas.
Additionally, gradient normalization is incorporated to further improve learning rate changes
by reducing the impact of varying gradient scales, promoting more stable and balanced
updates across all parameters. Overall, the Adam algorithm is a computationally efficient
stochastic algorithm for gradient-based optimization suitable for machine learning problems
with large datasets and/or high-dimensional parameter spaces (Kingma & Ba, 2014).
15
==PAGE:21==
2.3.5. Backpropagation algorithm
The backpropagation computes the gradients (derivatives) of the loss function concerning
the neural network parameters (weights and biases). These gradients quantify the sensitivity
of the loss function to changes in the network's parameters and guide the optimization
algorithm process towards minimizing the loss (Prince, 2023).
The backpropagation algorithm operates in two main phases: the forward pass and the
backward pass. During the forward pass, the input data is propagated sequentially through
the whole neural network. Therefore, all the values from every intermediate neuron involved
in the architecture are calculated until the final output, including the values of each layer
before and after applying the activation function. This phase is essential for computing the
network's predictions and measuring the cost or loss in each training step.
In the backward pass, the gradients of the loss function are computed according to the
network's output. As the network output depends on the values of the previous layers, the
chain rule is applied to calculate the derivatives of the loss function. This procedure can be
visualized as going backward through the network, layer by layer, to compute the gradients
concerning the parameters of each layer. This process efficiently calculates how small
parameter changes affect the overall loss. The computed gradients during the backward
pass are subsequently used by the optimization algorithm to update the parameters in a
direction that minimizes the loss.
Every neural network developed in this project was constructed using Keras and TensorFlow
Python libraries (Chollet et al., 2015; Abadi et al., 2015). Therefore, the backpropagation
algorithm is implemented within the fitting method included in these packages.
2.4. Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a type of deep neural network architecture based
on the ANNs, maintaining the idea of neurons optimized during training. This neural network
type is popular for image analysis and pattern recognition tasks due to its incorporation of
convolution layers, suitable for feature extraction by learning spatial hierarchies from 2D
matrix inputs and reducing the number of parameters needed. Traditional ANNs are not
well-suited for such tasks, as they require high computational expenditure for learning
patterns solely through hidden layers (O’Shea & Nash, 2015).
As we introduced a 2D novel feature representation of protein sequences based on their
physicochemical properties (Section 2.2.2), 2D-CNN layers were implemented in our project
16
==PAGE:22==
to complete our goal of predicting pMHC binding to TCR molecules. Additionally, 1D-CNN
layers can be also implemented for processing 1D inputs. These 1D-CNN layers have been
used previously for the same task but working with the peptide sequence embeddings as
input data described in Section 2.2.1 (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024).
In this section, we will dive into the basics of convolutional networks, describing the new
layers and operations that differ from the traditional ANNs.
2.4.1. Overall architecture
CNNs are typically structured with three types of layers: convolutional layers, pooling layers,
and fully-connected layers. Convolutional layers process the initial data from the input layer
by calculating the scalar product between filter weights and local regions determined by the
kernel size. Pooling layers perform downsampling along the spatial dimensionality of the
output from the convolutional layers, helping to emphasize the most significant features from
the signal and consequently reducing computational complexity. Lastly, the outputs from the
pooling layers are flattened and concatenated to resemble 1D features that could be
processed into standard ANNs, describing the last section of the CNN architecture named
fully-connected layers. An example of a basic CNN architecture as the one explained is
illustrated in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Example of a simple CNN architecture comprising the input, the convolution, the MaxPooling, the
fully-connected, and the output layers.
In the following subsections, we will investigate the operations through the different CNN
layers. For a better understanding, we will initially explain how these CNN operations work
with 1D inputs, and then we will point out the additional annotations when dealing with 2D
inputs.
17
==PAGE:23==
2.4.2. 1D Convolutional layers and convolution operation
Convolutional layers are network layers based on the convolution operation, which
transforms the input vector x according to the weighted sum of nearby inputs determined by
the convolution kernel or filter. These learnable filters slide over input regions, computing dot
products between the filter’s weights and the input values from that local region. The kernel
size determines the size of the considered input region. The weights from the convolution
filter remain constant across all the inputs, allowing the network to learn spatial hierarchies
and define a new set of features before sending them into traditional ANNs. For example,
the 1D convolution operation for a kernel size of three is represented in Equation 10. As
traditional ANNs, CNNs include bias terms (b) and activation functions (σ) to process their
hidden unit’s outputs.
𝑧𝑖= ℎ𝑖= σ β + 𝑤1𝑥𝑖−1 + 𝑤2𝑥𝑖+ 𝑤3𝑥𝑖+1
[
]
(10)
The stride, dilation, padding, or filter size are other hyperparameters that can be used to
tune these convolutional layers. The stride defines the size step of the sliding through the
input, so it controls the depth around the spatial dimensionality. The dilation can be used to
allow the filters to take information of close inputs that are not the closest neighbors. These
two parameters, alongside with the kernel size, can be visualized in the example shown in
Figure 6.
Figure 6. 1D Convolution operations with different kernel size, stride, and dilation values. Figures a) and b)
represent the convolution operation for a kernel size of 3 and a stride of 2, showing a first processed output z1
computed from the weighted sum centered on x1 and zero-padding, and a second processed output z2
computed from the weighted sum centered on x3. Figure c) illustrates the convolution operation for a kernel
size of 5 with 0 dilation, and Figure d) illustrates the convolution operation for a kernel size of 3 with 1 dilation.
Reprinted from Understanding Deep Learning (p. 164), by S. J.D. Prince, 2023, The MIT Press.
18
==PAGE:24==
The padding is a simple process to deal with the input borders, which can be useful if we do
not want to reduce the original dimensionality of the input through the convolutional layers.
Zero-padding is the simplest approach, which involves adding zeros around the border of the
input data. In Keras, which is the Python library used in this project for developing the neural
networks, we can tune this option by setting the value of the padding parameter to ‘same’.
The other possible approach is to set the parameter to ‘valid’, which discards the output
positions where the kernel exceeds the range of input positions, which results in a reduced
dimensionality in comparison to the original input.
Additionally, you can tune the number of filters in your convolution layer. Therefore, you can
create different filters that learn separate and independent weights, leading to learning
different patterns from the input data. This is why CNNs are powerful when dealing with 2D
inputs like images, as they can create different filters that learn unique characteristics from
pictures such as shadows, shapes, and other types of patterns.
2.4.3. Pooling layers and operation
Pooling layers get added after convolutional layers for down-sampling the dimensionality of
their convolution outputs to reduce computational complexity and noise from the data by
lowering the number of parameters. The pooling operation does not affect the number of
filters since it only operates according to the activation map from each processed input after
a convolution layer.
The most used pooling method is the max-pooling one, which returns the maximum value
inside a specific size region from the activation map. Typically, this pooling or window size to
perform the downsample is set to 2 (or 2x2 for 2D-CNNs) due to the destructive nature of
pooling layers, which means that pooling sizes over 2 could lead to poor performance of the
model (O’Shea & Nash, 2015). Therefore, the max-pooling layer slides across the spatial
dimensions of the processed input with a pooling size of 2 and a stride typically set to the
same size as the pooling.
The global max-pooling operation, which was included in the models developed for this
project, is another pooling operation that can be implemented. This pooling layer takes the
maximum value from the complete activation map, resulting in a reduction of dimensionality
to a single unique value. Despite that this operation can decrease the model performance,
considering our objective and simple inputs based on amino acid sequences of short length,
this operation may still be valuable to reduce overfitting into well-studied TCR-pMHC
interactions and improve the generalization to unseen TCRs.
19
==PAGE:25==
2.4.4. Fully-connected layers
The fully-connected layer is the last part of a CNN architecture, where the neurons are
arranged as traditional ANNs. Therefore, the input variables fed to this fully-connected layer
must be concatenated into a 1D format (flattened) in case the last pooled layers come from
2D-CNN activation maps.
As these last layers have to process the pooled convolution outputs in conventional hidden
layers, the primary computation complexity resides in this last part of the architecture due to
the high amount of parameters needed (Albawi et al., 2017). Therefore, it is common to use
dropout before inputting the pooled outputs into the fully-connected layer to reduce the
computational complexity. Indeed, this also allows our models to reduce overfitting and
improve generalization.
2.4.5. 2D Convolutional layers
Convolutional layers can be applied for 2-dimensional data, such as image data,
a field
where CNNs are most commonly employed. The convolutional layer is now defined by a 2D
kernel that defines the spatial local regions of the 2D input where the kernel will slide
through. The same hyperparameters seen for the 1D-CNN layers can still be applied in
2D-CNNs, like the stride, kernel size, number of filters, padding, and dilation. Some of them
now are defined by 2 dimensions, like the kernel size, the strides, or the dilation.
A similar example as the one shown in Equation 10, but now as a 2D convolution operation
defined by a kernel size of 3x3 applied to a 2D input is presented in Equation 11. The output
of each neuron from the 2D-CNN, hij, is computed according to the sum of the bias and the
dot product of the weights, wmn, and the corresponding individual input neuron from the input
local region defined by the kernel.
ℎ𝑖𝑗= σ β +
𝑚=1
3
∑
𝑛=1
3
∑𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑖+𝑚−2, 𝑗+𝑛−2
⎡⎢⎢⎣
⎤⎥⎥⎦
(11)
The kernel slides both dimensions, horizontally and vertically, across the 2D input, creating
the output for each local region defined by the kernel size, as represented in Figure 7. In
image processing, the input is typically defined by three initial dimensions, with the RGB
colors treated as the third dimension, thereby representing the initial channels or number of
filters in the data. To process this 3D input in a 2D-CNN layer, the kernel includes a new third
dimension, defining the weights for the height and width spatial dimensions of each initial
20
==PAGE:26==
input channel or filter (depth). The output for each hidden unit will be calculated as the sum
of the bias and each dot product from the kernel weights and input region of each initial
channel. This computation results in a 2D layer of hidden units for each filter defined in the
2D-CNNs, creating three total output dimensions according to the height and width of the
activated maps and the number of filters defined in the 2D-CNN layer.
Figure 7. 2D Convolution operations according to different positions in the 2D input space, where each output
hij computes a weighted sum of the 3×3 nearest inputs, adds a bias, and passes the result through an
activation function. a) The output h23 (shaded output) comes from the weighted sum of the nine inputs from x12
to x34 (shaded 3x3 square in the input). b) Different output example (h35) after sliding the kernel size across the
2D input grid. c-d) Different output examples in regions where the zero-padding is applied. Reprinted from
Understanding Deep Learning (p. 171), by S. J.D. Prince, 2023, The MIT Press.
These 2D-CNN layers are normally followed by pooling layers, such as with 1D-CNN layers.
Complex architectures can arise by concatenating different convolution and pooling layers,
creating a sequential model that processes the original inputs into a new-reduced feature
space suitable for the fully-connected final layers. In our project, we used these 2D-CNN
layers for processing the 2D interaction maps input described in Section 2.2.2.
2.5. Model architectures
In this section, we will detail each model used for our study based on the neural network
architectures explained in previous sections (Section 2.3 and Section 2.4). One of the
models consists of 1D-CNN layers, which resembles the same architecture as the
21
==PAGE:27==
pan-specific method presented in the NetTCR2.2 model (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024). This
model serves as the baseline for comparison to the rest of the architectures, which are
based on 2D-CNNs as they analyze the 2D interaction maps as input, instead of working
with the sequence embeddings. All models were built using Keras and TensorFlow open
libraries for Python (Chollet et al., 2015; Abadi et al., 2015).
2.5.1. 1D-CNN Baseline architecture
The 1D-CNN baseline architecture consists of different sets of 1D-convolutional layers for
each input feature, which are the different CDR (CDR1𝛼, CDR2𝛼, CDR3𝛼, CDR1𝛽, CDR2𝛽,
and CDR3𝛽) and peptide embedding sequences. For each of the seven input features, we
defined five individual 1D-CNN layers with different kernel sizes (1, 3, 5, 7, and 9),
zero-padding to maintain the original dimensionality of the input and 16 filters as the depth.
The activation function used for all convolutional layers was ReLU. Following the activation
of the convolutions, each layer was globally max-pooled, concatenated, and introduced into
traditional ANNs with an initial dropout of 0.6 rate. The dropout was required to reduce
possible overfitting and the number of training parameters for the fully-connected section of
the architecture.
The traditional ANNs are constructed with Keras dense layers, defining a first dense layer of
64 hidden units and a second of 32 hidden units, each activated with a sigmoid function. The
final output layer returns a unique value according to its sigmoid activation function,
representing the final prediction score. As explained in Section 2.2.1., the sequences are
imputed into the convolutional layers as embeddings created from the BLOSUM50
substitution matrix. Therefore, the embedded sequences are now 2D matrices. Despite this,
the 1D-CNN layers can still receive the input data by treating the second dimension as the
initial filter size.
The overall 1D-CNN baseline architecture is illustrated in Figure 8. Each of the inputs were
represented as individual orange boxes on top of the figure, where the CDR3𝛼, the CDR3𝛽,
and the peptide ones have been colored with a darker tone to represent that this architecture
was separately trained and evaluated when only introducing the CDR3 fragments to the
network. With this, we can measure the relevance of including the rest of the CDR fragments
(CDR1 and CDR2) despite not being the most relevant ones in the binding-interaction
between TCR and pMHC molecules.
22
==PAGE:28==
Figure 8. Architecture of the 1D-CNN baseline model. Each row represents the different sequential layers in
the model, starting with the input on top of the figure (orange boxes). For each input, 5 different convolution
and global max-pooling layers were defined according to different kernel sizes (1, 3, 5, 7, and 9). After the
activation of the CNN layers, all variables were concatenated and went through a dropout of 0.6 before
feeding them into the last dense layers that end up in the output layer, which returns the prediction score.
2.5.2. 2D-CNN individual architecture adaption (individual maps)
The initial idea proposed was to replicate the 1D-CNN baseline architecture, now with 2D
convolution layers that process the new 2D interaction maps as input features instead of the
embedded sequences. As detailed in Section 2.2.2, we have developed five different 2D
interaction maps between each CDR sequence and the binding peptide sequence according
to individual amino acid physicochemical properties (mass, isoelectric point, hydrophobicity,
hydrophilicity, and BLOSUM values). Each data point is now defined by 5 property maps for
the 6 possible comparisons between CDRs and their binding peptide.
One hypothesis that we wanted to study is whether we should present these property maps
individually to the convolution layers or if we should include them in the same convolution by
defining 5 initial channels. Therefore, we could analyze whether it is better to let the network
learn correlations between the different properties or to force the network to process the
properties independently. Consequently, we developed two different initial 2D-CNN models
that resemble the 1D baseline architecture but assume independence or dependence of the
property maps by feeding them separately or together with a third dimension (depth) of 5
channels into 2D-CNN layers, respectively.
For the 2D-CNN independent architecture, we defined a total of 30 separate input blocks
based on the 6 possible sequence comparisons between each CDRs to peptides sequences
and on the 5 different physicochemical properties measured. Each input block is fed into
23
==PAGE:29==
different 2D convolutional layers of 32 filters according to separate kernel sizes. We
increased the filter size in the 2D-CNN architecture due to the increased amount of
information from these 2D interaction maps. The kernel sizes for the 2D-CNN models are
defined in two dimensions, maintaining equal sizes for both dimensions. We realize that we
could remove some of the kernel sizes implemented in the 1D-CNN baseline model without
affecting the overall performance of the model. For example, the kernel sizes of (7,7) and
(9,9) are not going to be useful for the maps including the CDR1 or CDR2 fragments, as the
maximum observed lengths in our dataset for those sequences are between 6 and 9.
This 2D-CNN architecture tries to resemble the structure of the 1D baseline, having
independent CNN layers with different kernel sizes for each input block. Then, each CNN
output is activated with the ReLU function and applied a global max-pooling. These activated
processed maps are introduced in the final two dense, now activated with the ReLU function,
and output layers as explained in the 1D-baseline architecture, by applying a 0.6 dropout
before feeding all variables to the first dense layer. A visual representation of this 2D-CNN
independent architecture is shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Architecture of the 2D-CNN independent architecture adapted from the 1D-CNN baseline. Each row
represents the different sequential layers in the model, starting with the input on top of the figure (orange
boxes). Each CDR-peptide input combination is split into the 5 possible individual property maps (mass,
isoelectric point or IP, hydrophobicity or HPHO, hydrophilicity or HPHI, and BLOSUM or BLOS). Each property
map from each CDR-peptide input block is introduced in 2D-CNN layers of different kernel sizes, batch
normalization (BN) layers, and activated through the ReLU function and global max-pooled (GMP). Finally,
everything is flattened and concatenated to successfully present it to the final two dense and output layers.
In comparison to the 1D baseline, we included batch normalization layers after the
convolution operations and l2 regularization of 0.001 in the first dense layer. Both techniques
resulted in a slight improvement in the overall performance of the model, allowing us to
24
==PAGE:30==
reduce the overfitting of these 2D models that require more parameters than the previous 1D
baseline. L2 regularization adds a penalty 𝜆value to the loss function to help reduce the
weight values during training, preventing them from fitting the training data perfectly.
2.5.3. 2D-CNN stacked architecture adaption (joint maps)
The other adaption of the 1D-CNN baseline architecture in a 2D convolution format assumes
that the interaction maps can be introduced into the CNN layers altogether by defining a third
dimension specifying the initial depth or filters of the input. Therefore, the input feature
blocks consist of each of the six possible CDR sequences compared to their peptide binding
sequence, including the five property maps as the depth. The three dimensions of these
inputs are the maximum observed lengths of the specific CDR and the peptide, plus the
number of interaction maps (5) created according to the physicochemical properties.
This model copies the same architecture explained in the previous section but with fewer
convolution layers defined as we have fewer separate input blocks. Instead of working with
30 different input blocks, we process 6 input blocks according to each possible CDR-peptide
sequence comparison. The inputs are processed through different 2D-CNN layers with the
same kernel sizes as in the 2D-CNN individual architecture, followed by the same rest layers
and hyperparameters as the ones described in Section 2.5.2 (batch normalization, global
max-pooling, two dense and final output layers). An overall illustration of this 2D-CNN
stacked architecture is presented in Figure 10.
Figure 10. Architecture of the 2D-CNN joint architecture adapted from the 1D-CNN baseline. Each row
represents the different sequential layers in the model, starting with the input on top of the figure (orange
boxes). Each CDR-peptide input includes all 5 possible individual property maps as the third dimension, and
they are introduced in 2D-CNN layers of different kernel sizes, batch normalization (BN) layers, and activated
through the ReLU function and global max-pooled (GMP). Finally, everything is flattened and concatenated to
successfully present it to the final two dense and output layers.
25
==PAGE:31==
2.5.4. 2D-CNN new sequential proposed architecture
Given the new input represented as 2D interaction maps based on physicochemical amino
acid properties, we wanted to develop a new 2D-CNN architecture capable of fully
leveraging the potential of this novel feature representation. These maps resemble the input
nature of images, having five initial channels for the different properties, which could be
similar to the three initial channels regarding the RGB colors in image analysis. Therefore,
an updated architecture including several sequential CNN layers should be tested to verify if
the 1D-CNN architecture style does not perfectly fit these novel maps.
Our new 2D-CNN sequential architecture was initially inspired by the ImRex architecture,
which is the model presented by Moris et al. (2021) in their work with these 2D interaction
maps. Nevertheless, we discussed the high complexity of their model, having a total of four
convolution layers with an excessive number of filters for the simplicity of the dataset, which
in our case is just 26 different peptides and a total of 6,353 binders (positive observations).
In addition, we wanted to keep the idea of different kernel-sizes convolutions as used in the
NetTCR method, as it correlates with the biological concept that the local environment close
to the principal peptide positions involved in the binding to the TCRs is also relevant for
prediction tasks.
Therefore, this new 2D-CNN architecture consists of two sequential 2D-CNN layers, with a
batch-normalization and max-pooling layer of stride (2,2) between them. The number of
filters in the first convolution layer is 8, and the number for the second convolution layers
increases to 32. The initial convolutional layer will expand from the original five channels
derived from the analyzed physicochemical properties. We hypothesize that this setup,
involving a gradual expansion with a batch normalization and max-pooling layers in between,
will reduce noise from the data while preserving essential feature relations between input
maps, as the max-pooling layer is going to reduce the original dimensionality (length and
width) of the input maps. With the reduced maps, we can proceed with a second convolution
of a higher number of filters, letting the network learn more specific relations from the
introduced activated maps from the previous convolution. This second convolution is
activated
according
to
a
global
max-pooling,
similar
to
the 1D-CNN baseline. By
incorporating global max-pooling, our goal is to reduce the number of parameters needed for
the fully-connected dense layers and enhance the network's interpretability. Figure 11
illustrates the visual architecture of this new proposed 2D-CNN sequential model.
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 11. Architecture of the novel proposed 2D-CNN sequential architecture. Each row represents the
different sequential layers in the model, starting with the input on top of the figure (orange boxes). Each
CDR-peptide input includes all 5 possible individual property maps as the third dimension, and they are
introduced in an initial set of 2D-CNN layers (Conv2D) of different kernel sizes, followed by a batch
normalization (BatchNorm) and max-pooling (MaxPool) layer of stride (2,2). Sequentially, the first activated
convolutions are introduced in a second set of 2D-CNN and global max-pooling layers. Finally, everything is
flattened and concatenated to successfully present it to the final two dense and output layers.
2.6. Training and evaluation
Having the deep learning models defined, we need to settle down the training parameters
and the appropriate strategies for a robust evaluation of the models for the aim of this
project, which is predicting binding peptides to different human TCRs. In this section, we will
briefly present the implementation of nested cross-validation for efficient training and
evaluation of the models without data leakage, as well as the training parameters defined for
the fitting of the neural networks. In addition, we detailed the evaluation metrics used for
measuring the overall performance of the trained models.
2.6.1. Nested cross-validation
As introduced in Section 2.1.2, the data was randomly split into five partitions. As
redundancy steps were carried out in the dataset, we can run this random splitting afterward
without generating unbalanced partitions. The negative observations were created by
swapping TCRs for a given peptide, ensuring that TCRs were swapped from peptides that
had low similarity (Levenshtein distance greater than 3, according to Jensen and Nielsen
27
==PAGE:33==
(2024)). All swapped negatives were generated separately within each partition to reduce
data leakage.
With the data accurately prepared, we can implement a nested cross-validation strategy for
robustly tuning models and training hyperparameters while ensuring a non-biased evaluation
of the trained models. For a nested cross-validation setup, we defined an inner and outer
loop. The inner loop consists of four folds, where three partitions are used for training the
model and the fourth one is used for validation. The outer loop defines the initial test
partition, which is left out of the inner loop and used as an unseen group of observations to
evaluate the performance of the models trained in the inner loop. The four trained models in
an inner loop are used to compute the mean prediction scores from the corresponding test
set of that outer fold. The overall test performance is later calculated from the concatenation
of the predictions of all test partitions generated in each inner-outer fold round. A visual
summary of the nested cross-validation methodology is illustrated in Figure 12.
Figure 12. Nested cross-validation representation for a dataset with 5 partitions. The outer loop designates
one partition as the test set, which is excluded from the inner loop. The remaining four partitions are used
within the inner loop, where each partition is sequentially used as a validation set while the other three are
used for training Therefore, four different trained models are created for each inner loop, resulting in a total of
20 trained models according to the 5 outer loops in total. Each partition serves as a test, validation, and
training set at different stages of the nested cross-validation process.
28
==PAGE:34==
2.6.2. Training parameters
All architectures described in Section 2.5 were trained under the nested cross-validation
strategy explained in the previous section. As explained in the chapter related to the theory
of neural networks, all CNN models used Binary Cross Entropy as the loss function due to
the purpose of the project, which is predicting the binding (y=1) or not (y=0) of peptides to
TCR molecules. We implemented the Adam optimizer for computing the gradient and
updating the weights during training. To mitigate model overfitting, a learning rate of 0.0005
was employed, with a fixed batch size of 64. Smaller batch sizes can help introduce some
noise during the model training, improving generalization to unseen points.
Following NetTCR 2.2 model, we included the same weighted loss for all the architectures
created for this project. The weighted loss is applied to give a higher weight to the
observations with the less number of peptides in our dataset, allowing the model to increase
the learning on those observations. Therefore, the binary cross entropy loss function was
weighted according to the formula in Equation 12. Ntotal refers to the number of total
observations in the dataset, and Npeptide refers to the number of observations for a given
peptide. The term c is a constant used to scale the loss according to the normalized relation
between the number of total observations and the number of observations per unique
peptide. The value of c was set to 3.8, as defined in the NetTCR 2.2 project (Jensen &
Nielsen, 2024).
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡=
𝑙𝑜𝑔2
𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
𝑁𝑝𝑒𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑑𝑒
(
)
𝑐
(12)
Early stopping was implemented to select the best-performing model in the evaluated
validation fold before the trained network overfits to the training data. 200 training epochs
were defined with patience of 100 or 20 for the 1D-CNN and the 2D-CNN models,
respectively. We maintain the 100 epochs patience for the 1D-CNN baseline model as
suggested by the original authors of the architecture (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024) while
reducing that patience to 20 in the 2D-CNN architectures, as we observed that these 2D
architectures
show
a
stronger
overfitting
when
evaluating
the
loss
curves
(see
Supplementary Figures 1 and 2).
The evaluation criterion for early stopping was the maximum validation AUC 0.1 value. AUC
0.1 refers to the ROC-AUC value when the false positive rate is constricted to a maximum of
0.1. Further explanations on the ROC-AUC metric are detailed in the following subsection.
29
==PAGE:35==
Therefore, the trained model for each inner cross-validation loop was saved according to the
best validation AUC 0.1 value. We generated and saved the loss and evaluation curve plots
for training and validation partitions for every trained model.
2.6.3. Performance evaluation
The metric used to assess the performance of the trained models on the validation and test
sets was the ROC-AUC score. ROC-AUC is a metric that measures the model’s ability to
distinguish between positive and negative classes by plotting the true positive rate (TPR)
against the false positive rate (FPR) at different probability thresholds and calculating the
area under the resulting curve. The ROC-AUC score ranges from 0.0 to 1.0, where higher
values indicate better model performance. Additionally, we analyzed the AUC 0.1 metric,
which measures model performance while limiting the maximum false positive rate to 0.1.
The performance was evaluated according to the AUC and AUC 0.1 metrics on a
per-peptide peptide basis, computing these metrics across the predictions from each
peptide. Furthermore, this performance evaluation is carried out along the concatenated five
generated test partitions. The accuracy for each test partition is computed as the mean
prediction scores from the four training models generated from the inner loops inside each
outer loop from the nested cross-validation set-up. Then, the mean prediction scores from
each test partition are concatenated into one unique file for assessing the final performance
evaluation according to the explained accuracy metrics (AUC and AUC 0.1).
Finally, we also computed the overall AUC and AUC 0.1 across all peptides from the
concatenated predictions of the five test partitions. In addition, the mean AUC and AUC 0.1
are alternative scores to the overall AUC and AUC 0.1 ones, which refers to the mean
accuracy scores estimated from the per-peptide performances. The overall AUC and AUC
0.1 scores are driven by the peptides with more observations in the dataset, while the mean
AUC and AUC 0.1 scores give the same importance to the individual performance of each
peptide.
Paired T-tests were computed to statistically compare the performance differences between
two specific architectures. This statistical test was always calculated from the AUC
performances for each binder, resulting in a paired T-test comparison of 26 different AUC
per-peptide values.
30
==PAGE:36==
3. Results and Discussion
In this work, we have investigated how different methodologies could improve the state of
the art in TCR-epitope specificity computational-based predictor models.
In the first section of this chapter, we will study the relevance of already-known techniques
that have been shown to improve the overall performance of TCR-epitope specificity
predictors when dealing with the main challenge related to imbalanced datasets. In the
second and third sections of the Results and Discussion chapter, we will dive deeply into
different 2D-CNN architectures that process the novel feature representation based on 2D
interaction maps computed from the pairwise absolute difference of each CDR sequence
against their binding epitope according to different physicochemical properties. In addition,
we run a downsampling analysis in our highest-performance 2D-CNN architecture to test the
potential of this novel feature representation when dealing with unseen or under-represented
epitopes. Lastly, we checked some ensemble methodologies based on averaging the scores
of 1D-CNN and 2D-CNN models. Finally, we tested our final models in a new external
training and test dataset from the ImmRep 2022 benchmark.
3.1. 1D-CNN baseline architecture performance
Initially, we describe the performance of the 1D baseline architecture, which resembles the
NetTCR 2.2 pan-specific method. We will discuss how including the CDR1 and CDR2
paired-chain data can improve the overall model performance, and how the weighted loss
affects the individual peptide performance.
For this section of the Results and Discussion chapter, we present the results of the 1D-CNN
baseline architecture (presented in Section 2.5.1) when trained under the dataset obtained
from the NetTCR 2.2 study (see Section 2.1 for a detailed explanation of the dataset). The
training and evaluation of the models were carried out under a fixed random seed according
to the nested cross-validation setup explained in Sections 2.6.1 and 2.6.3, where 20 models
were trained and validated in different data partitions and lately tested on their corresponding
left-out test partitions. The performance was evaluated according to the AUC and AUC 0.1
metrics on a per-peptide peptide basis, as well to the overall AUC and AUC 0.1 computed
across all peptides from the concatenated predictions of the five test partitions generated
during the nested cross-validation training setup.
31
==PAGE:37==
3.1.1. Analysis of the inclusion of CDR1 and CDR2 sequences
In this first subsection of the results, we wanted to check the performance boost of including
the paired-chain data from all CDR fragments in our models. Therefore, we compared the
performance of our 1D-CNN baseline pan-specific method when including or not the CDR1
and CDR2 𝛼+𝛽-chains embedded sequences as input features to the network.
Both types of architectures, including or not all the CDR paired-chain features, have been
trained and evaluated under the same conditions, so we can fairly compare the performance
differences. In Figure 13, we included the AUC (a) and AUC 0.1 (b) per-peptide
performances of both 1D-CNN baseline models, reflecting a performance boost in almost all
binders when including all CDR sequences. The overall AUC computed from all of the
predictions from the test folds was 0.857 and 0.823 for the 1D-CNN baseline that includes all
the CDR paired-chain fragments and for the one with only the paired-chain data of the CDR3
sequence, respectively. The difference in performance was significantly statistical, with a
p-value of 7.14·10-4 when computing a paired T-test according to the per-peptide AUC scores
of both architectures. This showcase the importance of including CDR1 and CDR2
𝛼+𝛽-chains sequence information for improving the performance of predicting binding
peptides to TCR molecules in a pan-specific model.
In terms of AUC 0.1, we also observed this significant difference in performance when
including all the CDR paired-chain data information into the neural network architecture. The
overall AUC 0.1 computed from all of the predictions from the test folds was 0.720 and 0.693
for the 1D-CNN baseline when including all the CDR sequences or just the CDR3
paired-chain data, respectively. The p-value when computing the paired T-test between their
AUC performance per binder was 3.08·10-4. This result proves that the CDR1 and CDR2
paired-chain sequence information not only helps to improve the overall accuracy of the
model, but also increases the precision when reducing the rate of false positive predictions.
Moreover, the peptides with the highest AUC and AUC 0.1 performances were GILGFVFTL,
RAKFKQLL, and ELAGIGILTV, which are the first, second, and fifth most abundant peptides
in our dataset, respectively. These peptides have shown an AUC performance higher than
0.88 and an AUC 0.1 over 0.83. On the other hand, the peptide with the lowest AUC and
AUC 0.1 (slightly higher than 0.5) is SLFNTVATLY, which only has 38 positive observations
in the complete dataset, reflecting the main drawback of pan-specific methodologies where
these models show poor performance in the lower representative binders in the dataset.
32
==PAGE:38==
Figure 13. Per peptide performance of the 1D-CNN baseline models in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1,
when using all the CDR fragments or only the CDR3 paired-chain data. The models were trained on the
nested cross-validation dataset and evaluated on the test folds. The peptides are sorted according to the
number of observations registered for each unique binder in the complete dataset. The number of
observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the overall
AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of all test folds (‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC/AUC 0.1
computed from the observed mean according to the 26 individual values computed per binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
Initial
studies
that
developed
pan-specific
predictors,
which
only
included
CDR3𝛽
information, described that 150 positive observations were required to ensure an accurate
performance (Montemurro et al., 2021). In our work, thanks to the added CDR sequences as
33
==PAGE:39==
input features, we can observe performances in the test sets above 0.75 for all peptides over
50
observations
(excluding
peptide
AVFDRKSDAK). However, the AUC 0.1 seems
consistent only for the peptides over 100 observations, showing an average AUC 0.1 above
0.65 (excluding peptides KLGGALQAK, AVFDRKSDAK, and NLVPMVATV). These results
suggest that a threshold of at least 100 positive observations is appropriate for observing a
more
accurate
and
non-random
performance in the 1D-CNN baseline architecture.
Nevertheless, we can observe that some of the peptides with the highest number of positive
observations do not perform as optimally as expected. Looking at the data distribution, we
observed that the positive observations from the peptides KLGGALQAK and AVFDRKSDAK
come only from the supplementary 10x sequencing dataset. Previous studies have
suggested that a 10x sequence is a platform that can generate a high proportion of false
annotations (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024), which could explain why these samples could not
showcase the importance of reaching a high number of positive observations to ensure an
accurate prediction. Regardless of this observation, 10x sequencing data can still add
valuable information to other samples that have observations from IEDB and VDJ
databases. Peptides like ‘RAKFKQLL’, whose 934 observations came from the 10x
sequencing dataset, achieved an accurate performance over 0.8 in both AUC and AUC 0.1.
3.1.2. Analysis of the effect of the weighted loss
As we described in Section 2.1.2, we are working with an unbalanced dataset with 12
peptides sharing over 100 positive observations and 14 peptides with under 100 positive
observations. This imbalance causes the network to focus on the peptides with more data
points, often leading to poor or random performance for those with fewer observations. A
solution to tackle it is to add a weighted loss (see Section 2.6.2) that gives a higher weight to
the
under-representative
samples
without
worsening
the
performance
of
the
high-representative peptides. In this subsection, we investigate the impact on performance
when including such weighted loss into the 1D-CNN baseline architecture.
Looking at the individual peptide AUC and ΔAUC performances in Figure 14, we can check
that, in general, the weighting improves the performance of the low-representative peptides,
with 9 out of the 14 peptides under 100 positive observations gaining accuracy. On the other
hand, the performance of the peptides over 100 positive observations fluctuates more but on
a lower scale, without even affecting their original AUC scores. The difference in
performance between these conditions has shown to be significant (p-value of 0.0464),
which indicates that the weighted loss is a relevant addition to improve the overall accuracy.
34
==PAGE:40==
Figure 14. Per peptide performance of the 1D-CNN baseline models in terms of AUC when using all the CDR
paired-chain data and including or not the weighted-loss function. Figure a) represents the overall AUC
values, while Figure b) shows the difference in AUC (ΔAUC) between including or not the weighted-loss
function in the 1D-CNN baseline model. The models were trained on the nested cross-validation dataset and
evaluated on the test folds. The peptides are sorted according to the number of observations registered for
each unique binder in the complete dataset. The number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis
labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the overall AUC computed from the predictions of all test folds
(‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC computed from the observed mean according to the 26 individual AUC
values computed per binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
Similar behavior is observed when analyzing the per-peptide AUC 0.1 and ΔAUC 0.1 scores
illustrated in Figure 15, 13 out of the 14 AUC 0.1 per-peptide scores under 100 positive
observations have risen in a bigger scale than the one observed in Figure 14b, while the
values from the peptides over 100 positive observations remain practically constant. Adding
35
==PAGE:41==
the weighted-loss is also statistically significant (p-value of 0.036) for the AUC 0.1 metric.
These AUC and AUC 0.1 results showcase the importance of the weighted-loss to boost the
performance of low-representative peptides without influencing the high-representative ones.
Figure 15. Per peptide performance of the 1D-CNN baseline models in terms of AUC 0.1 when using all the
CDR paired-chain data and including or not the weighted-loss function. Figure a) represents the overall AUC
0.1 values, while Figure b) shows the difference in AUC 0.1 (ΔAUC 0.1) between including or not the
weighted-loss function in the 1D-CNN baseline model. The models were trained on the nested cross-validation
dataset and evaluated on the test folds. The peptides are sorted according to the number of observations
registered for each unique binder in the complete dataset. The number of observations per peptide is specified
in the X-axis labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the overall AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of
all test folds (‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC 0.1 computed from the observed mean according to the 26
individual AUC 0.1 values computed per binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
36
==PAGE:42==
3.2. 2D-CNN individual and stacked architectures performance
After defining and analyzing our baseline architecture, we proceed to study how the novel
feature representation as 2D physicochemical-property interaction maps performs on
different 2D-CNN architectures. Initially, we developed two architectures that resemble the
structure of the 1D baseline, with different approaches on how to treat the initial filters or
channel dimensions from the input. The 2D-CNN individual model treats each property map
for each CDR-peptide sequence comparison as a unique channel dimension, while the
2D-CNN stacked model clusters the five property maps for each CDR-peptide sequence
comparison as the initial third dimension of the input (initial number of channels or filters fed
into the 2D convolutional layers).
In the following section, we will compare the test and validation prediction accuracy of the
two 2D-CNN architectures to the 1D-CNN baseline performance. In addition, we will discuss
if there is any significant difference in the execution of these 2D-CNN models when
assuming the independence or correlation of the initial input feature maps. As in the previous
section, the training and evaluation of the models were carried out under a fixed random
seed according to the nested cross-validation setup for the NetTCR dataset, computing the
AUC and AUC 0.1 metrics on a per-peptide basis.
3.2.1. Comparison of the 2D-CNN individual model to the 1D-CNN baseline
The initial idea behind this approach is to assume that the physicochemical properties
should not be correlated in any form, as some properties can be considered independent.
For example, the mass of an amino acid does not share any quality with its hydrophobicity
value. Therefore, we initially tested how a 2D-CNN architecture treating each property map
in different convolutional layers performs in comparison to the 1D-CNN baseline.
Inspecting the per peptide AUC performance in Figure 16a, we distinguish a constant
behavior in which the AUC values from the peptides over 100 observations of the 2D-CNN
individual model tend to slightly decrease in comparison to the 1D baseline, while the
opposite occurs for the peptides under 100 observations. This explains why the overall AUC
in this 2D architecture has declined to 0.8433, as the high-representative peptides
predominantly drive the overall performance of the network. Despite this, the difference in
the AUC performances did not show statistical significance (p-value of 0.6712), suggesting
that this 2D-CNN individual architecture is a valid alternative that performs at a similar level
as the 1D baseline for the working dataset.
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 16. Per peptide test performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline and 2D-CNN individual models in
terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models were trained on the nested cross-validation dataset and
evaluated on the test folds. The peptides are sorted according to the number of observations registered for
each unique binder in the complete dataset. The number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis
labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the overall AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of all test
folds (‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the observed mean according to the 26
individual AUC 0.1 values computed per binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
Despite the behavior analyzed in the AUC metric, the 2D-CNN individual architecture has
slightly improved the AUC 0.1 performance, as illustrated in Figure 16b. Similarly as with the
AUC scores, the AUC 0.1 values from the high-representative binders tend to drop, while the
38
==PAGE:44==
AUC 0.1 values from the low-representative binders tend to rise when comparing the two
model’s performances. This difference is more representative for the peptides with fewer
observations, which explains why the mean AUC 0.1 significantly grows in the 2D-CNN
individual architecture compared to the 1D-CNN baseline (p-value of 0.0110).
As we generated 20 trained models that can be evaluated in 20 different validation folds, we
can also compare the performance of the architectures on the validation partitions, where we
expect to see the same results as the ones analyzed for the test partitions. In Figure 17, we
included the boxplots of the AUC and AUC 0.1 scores from the predictions of the 20 possible
validation partitions. As observed in the test results, the 2D-CNN individual architecture
shows an increased performance in the low-representative peptides in terms of AUC (Figure
17a) and a more constant growth in most of the peptides in terms of AUC 0.1 (Figure 17b).
Investigating the number of times the 2D-CNN individual model outperformed the 1D
baseline in terms of the per-peptide AUC scores shown in Figure 17a, we observe that for
the 12 peptides with over 100 positive observations, both the 1D baseline and the 2D-CNN
individual models each perform better than the other in 6 cases. For the peptides under 100
positive observations, the 2D-CNN individual model performs better than the 1D baseline in
8 of the 14 peptides, correlating with the results indicated for the test partitions in which both
models are closely related in their prediction performances. If we compare now the
frequency for the AUC 0.1 scores shown in Figure 17b, the 2D-CNN individual model
outperforms the 1D baseline in 10 out of the 12 peptides over 100 positive observations and
12 out of the 14 peptides under 100 positive observations. Once again, we spot the same
behavior as in the test partition, where the AUC 0.1 improves in the 2D-CNN individual
architecture compared to the 1D baseline.
Overall, we can confirm that this new 2D-CNN individual model, which resembles the same
architecture of the 1D-CNN baseline, has some advantages compared to the conventional
1D model. Despite the AUC performances of both models seeming similar, there is a gain in
the AUC 0.1 performance of the 2D-CNN individual network and, therefore, an improvement
in the prediction of binding peptides to TCR molecules.
39
==PAGE:45==
Figure 17. Boxplots of the per peptide validation performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline and 2D-CNN
individual models in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models were trained on the nested cross-validation
dataset, generating a total of 20 trained models and 20 validation folds to assess the AUC and AUC 0.1
performances. The peptides are sorted according to the number of observations registered for each unique
binder in the complete dataset. The boxplot representations were separated into two horizontal subplots
according to the threshold based on the number of positive observations. The number of observations per
peptide is specified in the X-axis labels.
3.2.2. Comparison of the 2D-CNN stacked model to the 1D-CNN baseline
The other hypothesis for reconstructing the 1D-CNN baseline into a 2D-CNN architecture is
to assume that all the property interaction maps can be stacked under the same third
dimension in the input, which corresponds to the initial number of filters or channels that will
be later expanded during the convolution layers. Therefore, the main difference between the
40
==PAGE:46==
stacked and individual 2D models is that this one puts all maps together into the third
dimension instead of developing individual convolution layers.
The results of the 2D-CNN stacked architecture compared to the previous architectures are
represented in Figure 18. For this stacked architecture, we also observed practically identical
mean AUC values comparing it to the other two models, and the same trend as for the
2D-CNN individual model where the AUC performance of the peptides under 100
observations tends to be better than the 1D baseline while reducing a bit the AUC scores of
the peptides over 100 observations. This behavior can be checked in Figure 18a, where we
included the results of the 1D-CNN and 2D-CNN individual models for a clear visual
comparison. Finally, this 2D stacked model also showed no significant difference from the
1D-CNN model (p-value of 0.6012).
Regarding the AUC 0.1, we have observed a similar behavior as the one described for the
2D-CNN individual model in Section 3.2.1, where we noted the trend of a rise in the AUC
0.1, especially for the peptides under 100 observations. However, for this network, the AUC
0.1 scores from the high-representative peptides did not lower as much as observed with the
2D-CNN individual architecture, as illustrated in Figure 18b. The overall AUC 0.1 achieved
was 0.7255, slightly higher than the overall AUC 0.1 scored from the other architectures. The
mean AUC 0.1 of the 2D-CNN stacked model also showed a significant difference from the
1D-CNN baseline (p-value of 0.0279).
Furthermore, we included the AUC and AUC 0.1 validation scores per peptide as boxplot
representations in Figure 19, where we can also check the same results and tendencies as
the ones described for the test results. We also included the validation scores of the
2D-CNN individual model into the boxplot representations for a fair comparison of both
2D-CNN architectures between them and the 1D-CNN baseline.
If we check the number of times each model has the highest AUC performance through all
the peptides in Figure 19a, we still observe the 1D baseline winning over the 2D-CNN
models for the peptides over 100 observations while being more equally distributed across
the three models for the peptides under 100 observations. However, regarding the AUC 0.1
in Figure 19b, the 1D baseline rarely performs better than the other 2D models, with only 2
out of the 12 high-representative peptides and 1 out of the 14 low-representative models.
Moreover, the 2D-CNN stacked model has the best AUC 0.1 performance in 5 out of the 12
high-representative peptides and 6 out of the 14 low-representative peptides, showcasing
similar performance behavior in both 2D-CNN architectures.
41
==PAGE:47==
Figure 18. Per peptide test performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (yellow), 2D-CNN individual (blue)
and 2D-CNN stacked (red) models in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models were trained on the
nested cross-validation dataset and evaluated on the test folds. The peptides are sorted according to the
number of observations registered for each unique binder in the complete dataset. The number of
observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the overall
AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of all test folds (‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC/AUC 0.1
computed from the observed mean according to the 26 individual AUC 0.1 values computed per binder
(‘Mean_AUC’).
42
==PAGE:48==
Figure 19. Boxplots of the per peptide validation performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (yellow),
2D-CNN individual (blue) and 2D-CNN stacked (red) models in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models
were trained on the nested cross-validation dataset, generating a total of 20 trained models and 20 validation
folds to assess the AUC and AUC 0.1 performances. The peptides are sorted according to the number of
observations registered for each unique binder in the complete dataset. The boxplot representations were
separated into two horizontal subplots according to the threshold based on the number of positive
observations. The number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels.
3.2.3. Performance summary of both 2D-CNN architectures
In this last subsection, we will briefly summarize the difference in performances between the
2D-CNN individual and stacked architectures without looking at the 1D-CNN baseline, as we
have determined that both 2D models perform similarly to the 1D-CNN baseline with a slight
boost of the AUC 0.1 accuracy.
43
==PAGE:49==
Figure 20 represents the difference in AUC (ΔAUC) and AUC 0.1 (ΔAUC 0.1) between the
2D-CNN individual and stacked architectures. Both models perform practically similarly,
especially for the peptides over 100 positive observations where the ΔAUC and ΔAUC 0.1
results never reach a value higher than ±0.02. This showcases the robustness of both
architectures, as the predictions of these peptides are trustful enough to make statements
due to the high amount of positive observations they possess. On the other hand, the ΔAUC
and ΔAUC 0.1 results show higher fluctuations between the two models for the peptides
under 100 observations. However, these differences could be caused by the low number of
positive observations or other factors such as the random initialization of the network, which
are not related to the input approach of stacking or individualizing the 2D features.
Figure 20. Per peptide difference performance in a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1 of the 2D-CNN individual and
stacked architectures. The models were trained on the nested cross-validation dataset and evaluated on the
test folds. The peptides are sorted according to the number of observations registered for each unique binder
in the complete dataset. The number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels. The first
X-axis labels correspond to the overall AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of all test folds (‘Overall_AUC’)
and the mean AUC 0.1 computed from the observed mean according to the 26 individual AUC 0.1 values
computed per binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
44
==PAGE:50==
To sum up, both 2D-CNN models that resemble the 1D-CNN baseline architecture perform
equally, without a significant difference to state if any of them is better than the other one.
This results confirms us that considering the initial correlation of the feature maps can be
correctly assumed when incorporating them into the same initial dimension that defines the
channels or filters of the convolutional layers. This is beneficial as the computational
expenses are reduced if we stacked all the maps into the same initial third dimension of the
input, as we would develop less amount of convolution layers.
When comparing the performance of the 2D-CNN models to the 1D-CNN baseline, there is
no significant difference in AUC but a significant difference in AUC 0.1. This result could be
enough to state that these 2D-CNN architectures are better than the 1D-CNN baseline, as
they improve one of the two evaluation metrics we are considering in this project. Despite
that, we thought that this performance could get better with a new 2D architecture that tries
to maximize the processing of the novel feature representation. In the following section, we
will analyze the performance of the new proposed 2D-CNN sequential architecture.
3.3. New 2D-CNN sequential architecture performance
After analyzing the results from the 2D-CNN models willing to resemble the 1D-CNN
baseline architecture, we wanted to try a novel architecture that still kept the essence of the
baseline architecture with the different kernel sizes and the global max-pooled layers but
with added sequential convolutional layers that allow to process way deeper the feature
maps before ending in the global max-pooling layers. By adopting this new architecture, we
aim to take advantage of the convolutional operations in a similar way that is popularly and
effectively used for image analysis but now applied with amino acid properties and residues
similarities to study deeper the binding relationships between TCRs and pMHCs. This
architecture still works with all the CDR sequences, stacking all the CDR-sequence property
maps into the third dimension of the input as the number of filters processed in the CNNs.
In this section of the results, we will go through the results from the training and evaluation of
the new 2D-CNN sequential architecture (see Section 2.5.4) through the NetTCR dataset.
As in the previous sections, we train and evaluate under a nested cross-validation setup
from the five partitions of the NetTCR dataset, and then analyze the accuracy performance
of this architecture on a per-peptide basis and compare it to the previous results.
Furthermore, we will investigate new aspects related to the power of this new architecture
when working with low-representative samples in a downsample analysis and the effect of
the feature importance of the different amino acid properties assessed in this study to build
the 2D interaction maps.
45
==PAGE:51==
3.3.1. Comparison of the new 2D-CNN sequential model performance
The detailed AUC and AUC 0.1 per-peptide performance comparison of the new 2D-CNN
sequential architecture to the rest of the models is shown in Figure 21, reflecting a constant
prediction accuracy gain in the high-representative peptides of the dataset for the 2D-CNN
sequential model compared to the other two 2D-CNN models. Even compared to the
1D-CNN baseline, the sequential 2D model has slightly improved the AUC performance of
peptides like GILGFVFTL and RAKFKQLL, which are the two peptides with the most positive
observations and with accuracy AUC records close to 0.9 in all the evaluated architectures.
Moreover, the AUC 0.1 results in Figure 21b reveal that the 2D sequential model notably
outperforms the other three models. This is particularly evident when contrasting it to the
1D-CNN baseline, where 22 of the 26 peptides in the dataset record higher AUC 0.1
performance with the novel 2D sequential model. When compared to the other two 2D-CNN
architectures, the new sequential model consistently scores higher AUC 0.1 performances
for the peptides over 100 positive observations while is more diverse for the peptides under
100 observations, which can be due to the difficulty of learning from that limited data points
and other random factors rather than the different nature of the network architectures.
The overall AUC score of the new 2D-CNN sequential model computed from all of the
predictions from the test folds was 0.8535, which is moderately higher than the values
observed from the previous 2D-CNN models (around 1.04% better) and practically equal to
the performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (0.35% different). These results
demonstrate that the new 2D-CNN sequential model closely approximates the 1D-CNN
CDR123 baseline regarding the AUC accuracy metric. Furthermore, the new 2D-CNN
sequential architecture did show a statistically significant difference compared to the AUC
performance of the 2D-CNN stacked model (p-value of 0.031), but not for the 2D-CNN
individual model (p-value of 0.065).
Relating to AUC 0.1 performance, the overall AUC 0.1 of the new 2D-CNN sequential model
from the test folds was 0.7394, which is considerably higher than the values from the
1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (1.92% increased) and from the previous 2D-CNN models
(around 1.5% different). In addition, the novel 2D model performs significantly differently
from the 1D baseline (p-value of 0.003) and the 2D-CNN stacked (p-value of 0.018) models
while not showing enough significance compared to the 2D-CNN individual model (p-value of
0.149). These results, combined with the AUC ones, lead us to the idea that this novel 2D
sequential structure seems to be the most robust one compared to the rest of the
architectures developed in this study.
46
==PAGE:52==
Figure 21. Per peptide test performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (yellow), 2D-CNN individual (blue),
2D-CNN stacked (red), and new 2D-CNN sequential (green) models in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The
models were trained on the nested cross-validation dataset and evaluated on the test folds. The peptides are
sorted according to the number of observations registered for each unique binder in the complete dataset. The
number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the
overall AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of all test folds (‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC/AUC
0.1 computed from the observed mean according to the 26 individual AUC 0.1 values computed per binder
(‘Mean_AUC’).
We included the validation AUC and AUC 0.1 results from the four trained architectures as
boxplot representations in Figure 22 to validate the observed performance comparisons in
the test partitions. As detailed when analyzing the test AUC scores, the 1D-CNN baseline
usually performs better in the validation partitions, especially for the peptides over 100
47
==PAGE:53==
observations. Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that the times we see the 1D-CNN
baseline considerably outperform the rest of the architectures in the subplot for the ‘Peptides
over 100 observations’ in Figure 22a correspond to the peptides which most observations
come from the 10x dataset, which can contain poor quality data with false generated
positives as already discussed in Section 3.1.1. Other peptides with over 100 positive
observations, like GILGFVFTL and RAKFKQLL, registered similar AUC scores for the
1D-CNN and the 2D-CNN sequential models, which was already observed in the test AUC
per-peptide results analyzed previously in Figure 21a.
Figure 22. Boxplots of the per peptide validation performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (yellow),
2D-CNN individual (blue), 2D-CNN stacked (red), and new 2D-CNN sequential (green) models in terms of a)
AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models were trained on the nested cross-validation dataset, generating a total of 20
trained models and 20 validation folds to assess the AUC and AUC 0.1 performances. The peptides are sorted
according to the number of observations registered for each unique binder in the complete dataset. The
boxplot representations were separated into two horizontal subplots according to the threshold based on the
number of positive observations. The number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels.
48
==PAGE:54==
However, when examining the frequency of the 1D-CNN baseline outperforming the different
2D-CNN architectures in the per-peptide AUC 0.1 validation scores shown in Figure 22b, the
baseline network only performs better for 2 out of 12 peptides with over 100 observations,
and for 1 out of 14 peptides with under 100 observations. This showcases the reduced
accuracy of the 1D convolution network when delimiting a low false positive ratio, while the
novel 2D-CNN sequential model seems to outperform the rest of the models in 7 out of the
12 peptides over 100 observations. This gain in the AUC 0.1 performance without negatively
affecting the AUC per-peptide scores leads us to the statement that this novel feature
representation and 2D-CNN sequential type of architecture can enhance a better prediction
of binding peptides to TCR molecules in a pan-specific manner.
3.3.2. Downsampling analysis
One of the main conclusions in the work by Moris et al. (2021) is that the use of the 2D
interaction maps allows the model to identify molecular TCR-epitope patterns that can
improve the generalization of the predictor model to unseen epitopes or with scarce
available data. To investigate this, we conducted a downsampling analysis where the
number of positive observations used to train the models was decreased while keeping the
test data set complete. This downsampling analysis was performed on the 1D-CNN baseline
and new 2D-CNN sequential architectures to compare their ability to learn from small
datasets and achieve an accurate performance. In addition, we trained and evaluated both
architectures when including only the CDR3 or all CDR123 fragments for analyzing the
relevance of including all CDRs as input.
For this analysis, we train the models on reduced subsets of the original NetTCR dataset,
keeping only the peptides with at least 100 observations and an AUC 0.1 performance over
0.65. We did this to ensure robustness in our downsampling analysis when assessing the
model’s capabilities to learn from smaller datasets. Therefore, the peptides used for training
the models in a limited dataset setup were GILGFVFTL, RAKFKQLL, ELAGIGILTV,
IVTDFSVIK, LLWNGPMAV, CINGVCWTV, GLCTLVAML, SPRWYFYYL, and ATDALMTGF.
Consequently, different increasing training datasets were constructed by subsampling 5, 10,
15, 20, 25, 50, and 100 positive observations per peptide. Maintaining the nested
cross-validation setup, we kept an equal ratio of positive observations per partition. For
example, for the first training reduced dataset of 5 positive observations per peptide, one
positive observation of each peptide was selected per partition, resulting in a total of 5
positives if we join the five partitions. Hence, the number of positive observations of each
peptide selected per partition were 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, and 20, respectively, for the seven
49
==PAGE:55==
increasingly reduced datasets (5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 50 positives-training datasets). All
trained models were evaluated on their corresponding test partition from the complete
NetTCR dataset, excluding all of the peptides left out for the downsampling analysis
(peptides under 100 observations or with an AUC 0.1 score under 0.65).
As shown in Figure 23, the baseline models strongly underperform when trained with such a
low number of observations, whereas the 2D-CNN models can linearly increase the
performance according to the rise of positive observations during their training. This probably
is because the 1D-CNN baseline architecture has a high dropout rate before the processing
of the global max-pooled outputs into the dense layers, which can be effective in reducing
overfitting when we are working with the complete dataset but too strong when working
below 100 positive observations. The only instance where one of the baseline models,
concretely the 1D-CNN baseline including all CDR123 fragments, achieves similar accuracy
performances to the 2D model's is when it has been trained with the highest downsampled
dataset composed of 100 positive observations per peptide.
On the other hand, both 2D-CNN models demonstrate more robust architectures when
training with these reduced datasets with a low number of positives. They both keep
increasing their accuracy performances in both metrics in correlation to the rise of positive
observations in the dataset. The growth seems linear until reaching 50 positive observations,
as the increase in performance from 50 to 100 positive observations is not as pronounced.
It is worth highlighting the relevance of including the CDR123 paired-chain data in the
predictor models. Regarding the AUC, the 1D-CNN baseline can reach similar performance
scores
as
the
2D-CNN models when trained under the 100 positive observations
downsampled training dataset thanks to the addition of the CDR1 and CDR2 paired-chain
sequences. Regarding the AUC 0.1, the 1D baseline that included all the CDR fragments
could reach the same AUC 0.1 performance as the new 2D-CNN sequential model trained
only on the CDR3 paired-chain input. This showcases the importance of the CDR1 and
CDR2 paired-chain data into the input of the networks, particularly to improve the AUC 0.1
and, therefore, to enhance accurate predictions when a low false positive rate is imposed. In
addition, these results also reveal that the novel features and the sequential 2D-CNN
architecture proposed further enhance this AUC 0.1 performance, without affecting the AUC.
50
==PAGE:56==
Figure 23. Boxplots of the test performance in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1 of different architectures
trained on increasing amounts of data. The training and test datasets preserved the five partitions from the
nested cross-validation setup. The models were trained on the peptides GILGFVFTL, RAKFKQLL,
ELAGIGILTV, IVTDFSVIK, LLWNGPMAV, CINGVCWTV, GLCTLVAML, SPRWYFYYL, and ATDALMTGF. The
X-axis labels represent the increasing number of positives in the training datasets. The models were evaluated
on a test dataset derived from the full dataset, but only including the peptides used for training. Each trained
model was assessed on its corresponding test partition, which was excluded from the training process.
3.3.3. Individual property maps analysis
Previous result sections have concentrated on the robustness and performance of various
2D convolutional network architectures, but the individual relevance of the feature maps has
yet to be specifically examined. Hence, in this subsection, we will train and evaluate the new
2D-CNN sequential architecture according to the generated feature maps for all input
sequences but solely for one physicochemical property (mass, isoelectric point, hydrophobic,
hydrophilicity, and BLOSUM matrices values) at a time.
As shown in Figure 24a, the model trained under all five property-type maps significantly
outperforms, in terms of AUC, the rest of the models trained individually for each
property-type feature map. Moreover, the feature maps that registered the highest AUC
scores when assessed individually were the mass and BLOSUM properties. We expected
this behavior as these two properties have a wide range of different unique values for each
type of residue, which is not as common for other properties. For example, 12 of the 20
amino acids are non-charged, resembling similar values for some of the analyzed properties
as the isoelectric point. Indeed, the isoelectric point is the property that shows less AUC
relevance, which was expected due to this low variability in the defined values per amino
51
==PAGE:57==
acid. Nevertheless, it can still perform accurately with the developed 2D-CNN sequential
architecture, reaching an overall AUC in the test partitions of 0.8251.
Figure 24. Per peptide test performances of the new 2D-CNN sequential architecture when trained and
evaluated under all 5 property maps (-), or individually to the mass, isoelectric point, hydrophobicity,
hydrophilicity, or BLOSUM substitution matrix property. The test performances are represented in terms of a)
AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models were trained on the nested cross-validation dataset and evaluated on the
test folds. The peptides are sorted according to the number of observations registered for each unique binder
in the complete dataset. The number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels. The first
X-axis labels correspond to the overall AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of all test folds
(‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the observed mean according to the 26 individual
AUC/AUC 0.1 values computed per binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
52
==PAGE:58==
For the AUC 0.1 performance of the models represented in Figure 24b, we observed similar
results as previously for the AUC, where the model trained under all five properties still
outperforms the rest of the models trained individually for each property. However, the
difference in performance of the model trained under all properties to the models trained for
the
mass
and
BLOSUM
properties
individually
is
not
statistically
significant.
This
demonstrates that the mass and BLOSUM property maps are the most informative ones
from the studied properties in both accuracy metrics assessments (AUC and AUC 0.1). The
isoelectric point is still the property that showed the worst overall AUC 0.1 performance.
The detailed performance results in terms of AUC and AUC 0.1 for each model trained in
this subsection, alongside with the significance analysis results when comparing the
per-peptide performances of each model with a paired T-test to the model trained with all five
properties are included in Table 1. Surprisingly, the mass and BLOSUM individually trained
models recorded AUC 0.1 overall scores greater than the observed one for the 1D-CNN
baseline trained under all CDR fragments, which was 0.6872. Once again, this reflects the
robustness of the 2D-CNN sequential architecture in enabling more precise predictions while
maintaining a low ratio of false positives.
Table 1. Summary table of the AUC and AUC 0.1 performance from the property maps relevance analysis.
The first row is for the '2D-CNN sequential (5 properties)' model, which recorded the highest accuracy values.
This model is used to compare it significantly to the rest of the models trained for each property individually
(MASS, IP or isoelectric point, HPHO or hydrophobicity, HPHI or hydrophilicity, and BLOSUM). Paired T-test
p-values comparing the best model to each of the other models are included for both accuracy metrics,
'P-value (AUC)' and 'P-value (AUC 0.1)'.
Model
Overall
AUC
Mean AUC
P-value
(AUC)
Overall
AUC 0.1
Mean
AUC 0.1
P-value
(AUC 0.1)
2D-CNN
sequential (5
properties)
0.8535
0.8159
-
0.7394
0.7107
-
MASS 2D-CNN
sequential
0.8463
0.8041
0.037
0.7357
0.7085
0.70
IP 2D-CNN
sequential
0.8251
0.7875
1.52·10-4
0.7093
0.6767
8.67·10-5
HPHO
2D-CNN
sequential
0.8371
0.7909
3.57·10-7
0.7283
0.6967
5.53·10-3
HPHI 2D-CNN
sequential
0.8411
0.7990
2.27·10-4
0.7303
0.7011
0.036
BLOSUM
2D-CNN
sequential
0.8477
0.8040
0.039
0.7355
0.7099
0.829
53
==PAGE:59==
In this analysis, we showed that the mass and BLOSUM property maps are the most
significant ones for an accurate prediction of binding peptides to TCR molecules. This could
suggest that properties with the lowest performances could be removed from the model to
reduce the computational expenses of the network without significantly reducing the overall
performance. However, for the sake of this project, we wanted to keep working with all the
properties to see all the potential of this novel feature representation. In addition, we
observed for some peptides that one specific property can perform considerably better than
the best-performing properties, especially for the low-representative peptides in imbalance
datasets. For example, this is illustrated in Figure 24 for peptides like ‘YLQPRTFLL’,
‘RFPLTFGWCF’, or ‘RLPGVLPRA’ where properties such as the hydrophilicity or isoelectric
point recorded the best performance scores.
3.4. Ensemble analysis performance
Ensemble methodologies are a powerful approach that can potentially improve the task of
TCR-peptide specificity prediction models by enhancing the prediction of poor-quality
observations and low-representative peptides in the dataset without decreasing the
performance of well-described peptides (Jensen & Nielsen, 2024; Kim et al., 2023). In our
study, we have proposed two different ensemble approaches: the first one averages the
prediction scores of the 1D-CNN baseline and the new 2D-CNN sequential model, both
trained using all of the CDR paired-chain sequences, and the second one trains different
models under distinct random seeds.
In this section of the results, we will analyze the performance changes when implementing
these two different ensemble methodologies trained and evaluated under the nested
cross-validation setup from the NetTCR dataset and analyze the accuracy performance of
this architecture on a per-peptide basis.
3.4.1. 1D and 2D mix-scores ensemble
One of the initial proposed objectives from this project was to develop a combined method
that could potentially benefit from both 1D- and 2D-CNN models, as they differ in the input
information they work with (embedded sequences or interaction maps). We thought about
combining both structures into one mixed architecture network that processes both outputs
in different convolution layers as developed in the 1D baseline and the sequential 2D
network, and later concatenating everything for obtaining the final output through the dense
54
==PAGE:60==
layers. However, this mixed architecture did not show an improvement in the performance,
and generated more computational resources and time to train and evaluate the models.
The other alternative proposed was to sum the separated prediction scores of the 1D-CNN
baseline and the new 2D-CNN sequential models. To do so, we defined a new prediction
mixed score shown in Equation 13, which computes an average prediction, Pmix, according to
the sum of the individual predictions from the same test observations of the 1D baseline, P1D,
and the new 2D sequential network, P2D. This was correctly achieved as both architectures
were trained and evaluated under the same train/validation/test partitions and random seed.
𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑥= 0. 5·𝑃1𝐷+ 0. 5·𝑃2𝐷
(13)
Additionally, we also applied this ensemble based on averaging the scores of the 1D and 2D
approaches to the other 2D-CNN architectures developed (individual and stacked ones) to
compare if there are differences between the ensembles when using each 2D-CNN model.
All ensemble architectures (mixed 1D+2D individual maps model, mixed 1D+2D stacked
maps model, and mixed 1D+2D sequential model) demonstrated an improvement in both
AUC and AUC 0.1 compared to the 1D-CNN baseline, as illustrated in Figure 25. The
highest overall AUC and AUC 0.1 computed from all of the predictions from the test folds
were recorded for the ensemble model containing the new 2D-CNN sequential proposed
architecture, which were 0.8693 and 0.7424, respectively. This reflects an upgrade of about
1.23% in the overall AUC score and 2.22% in the overall AUC 0.1 when comparing it to the
performance of the 1D-CNN baseline.
By analyzing the per-peptide accuracy results in Figure 25, we can check that the ensemble
methods help to consistently boost the AUC and AUC 0.1 scores of the peptides over 100
observations, with the ensemble consisting of the 1D and 2D-CNN sequential scores
recording the highest improvements. For the peptides under 100 observations, the ensemble
models tend to average the extreme performance differences between the individual scores
from the 1D baseline and the 2D-CNN architecture. Therefore, ensemble models sometimes
do not register the best accuracy value for low-representative peptides. Despite that, they
could be more robust if we assume that the fluctuations between having a higher or lower
score in those peptides can be, in fact, due to non-robust factors such as the random
initialization of the weights or just because of the difficulty from learning patterns when
having that low number of positive observations.
55
==PAGE:61==
Figure 25. Per peptide test performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (yellow), 2D-CNN sequential (blue),
1D+2D-sequential
mix-scores
ensemble
(red),
1D+2D-individual
mix-scores
ensemble
(purple),
and
1D+2D-stacked mix-scores ensemble (green) models in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models were
trained on the nested cross-validation dataset and evaluated on the test folds. The peptides are sorted
according to the number of observations registered for each unique binder in the complete dataset. The
number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the
overall AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of all test folds (‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC/AUC
0.1 computed from the observed mean according to the 26 individual AUC/AUC 0.1 values computed per
binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
56
==PAGE:62==
To sum up, the ensemble model containing the new 2D-CNN sequential architecture
significantly outperforms all the rest of the architectures and mix-scores ensembles
regarding the AUC accuracy metric. In the case of the AUC 0.1, this ensemble model also
significantly outperforms the rest of CNN architectures and mix-scores ensembles except for
the ensemble composed by the 2D-CNN individual maps architecture. All the overall and
mean AUC and AUC 0.1 performances for each analyzed model and mix-scores ensembles,
including their significant difference compared to the best ensemble (calculated as a paired
T-test comparing their per-peptide scores), are recorded in Table 2.
Table 2. Summary table of the AUC and AUC 0.1 performance from all the different trained models. The first
row is for the '1D+2D sequential ensemble' model, which recorded the highest accuracy values. This model is
used to compare it significantly to the rest of the models. Paired T-test p-values comparing the best model to
each of the other models are included for both accuracy metrics, 'P-value (AUC)' and 'P-value (AUC 0.1)'.
Model
Overall
AUC
Mean AUC
P-value
(AUC)
Overall
AUC 0.1
Mean
AUC 0.1
P-value
(AUC 0.1)
1D+2D
sequential
ensemble
0.8693
0.8287
-
0.7424
0.7180
-
1D-CNN
baseline
0.8570
0.8120
4.23·10-5
0.7202
0.6872
1.60·10-6
2D-CNN
individual
maps
0.8433
0.8089
4.25·10-4
0.7230
0.7029
5.76·10-4
2D-CNN
stacked maps
0.8429
0.8076
1.42·10-3
0.7255
0.7020
6.40·10-5
2D-CNN
sequential
0.8535
0.8159
0.044
0.7394
0.7107
0.029
1D+2D
individual
ensemble
0.8623
0.8245
0.018
0.7326
0.7143
0.33
1D+2D
stacked
ensemble
0.8622
0.8226
4.77·10-3
0.7334
0.7107
6.10·10-3
3.4.2. Random seeds ensemble of the new 2D-CNN sequential model
In addition, we wanted to assess if the overall and per-peptide prediction accuracies could
be enhanced by simply training several models of the same architecture under different
random seeds, which involve different random weight initializations and dropouts. In this
case, we wanted to focus solely on the novel 2D-CNN sequential architecture, as a way to
57
==PAGE:63==
analyze alternatives to deal with peptide imbalance in the dataset, which is a problem for
TCR-epitope specificity predictors due to the scarcity of public data.
In Figure 26, we included the AUC and AUC 0.1 performances of the new ensemble model
based on the five different random seeds trained 2D-CNN sequential models and the
previous mix-scores ensemble from the 1D-CNN baseline and the 2D-CNN sequential
architectures described in Section 3.4.1. We will refer to these two ensemble models as the
‘random-seeds ensemble’ and ‘mix 1D+2D-sequential ensemble’, respectively. In addition,
we included a fifth model based on a ‘double ensemble’ constituted of the average from the
scores of the 1D-CNN baseline and the new ensemble model formed by the five different
random seeds trained 2D-CNN sequential models. The results from this extra ‘double
ensemble’ are represented by green under the label ‘Mix 1D + ensemble 2D’ in Figure 26.
The ensemble, consisting of five 2D-CNN sequential models trained under different random
seeds, showed an improvement in both overall AUC and AUC 0.1, compared to the same
architecture trained only under one random seed. In particular, the overall AUC of the
random-seeds ensemble architecture was 0.8625, which was statistically significant in
comparison to the unique 2D-CNN sequential model (p-value of 3.66·10-4). However, this
ensemble model still does not outperform significantly the 1D-CNN baseline model (p-value
of 0.094), which it was with the ensemble model of the previous subsection based on the
mix-scores from the 1D-CNN baseline and one unique 2D-CNN sequential models.
Regarding the overall AUC 0.1 performance, the random-seeds ensemble architecture
performance was also boosted to 0.7450, which was again statistically significant to the
unique 2D-CNN sequential model (p-value of 4.06·10-5).
Despite seeing this enhancement of the random-seeds ensemble, the overall AUC
performance is a bit lower than the one observed from the mixed 1D+2D-sequential model,
formed by the combination of the predictions from two trained models instead of five trained
models as the case for the random-ensemble model. Furthermore, the performance in terms
of AUC 0.1 is practically equal for both ensemble models. This suggests that for our task and
dataset, the mixed 1D+2D-sequential ensemble is more efficient than the random-seeds
one, as it requires less trained models and, therefore, fewer computational resources.
To conclude this analysis, we created an additional ensemble based on mixing the scores of
the 1D-CNN baseline and the ensemble constituted with the five random-seeds trained
2D-CNN sequential models. This ‘double ensemble’ model achieved an overall enhanced
AUC performance of 0.8712, maintaining a fixed overall AUC 0.1 of 0.7441, which proves the
58
==PAGE:64==
easy enhancement that ensemble methodologies can contribute to the overall accuracy of
the architectures when working with these imbalanced datasets.
Figure 26. Per peptide test performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (yellow), 2D-CNN sequential (blue),
five 2D-CNN sequential models trained on different random seeds ensemble (purple), 1D+2D-sequential
mix-scores ensemble (red), and the mix-scores ensemble of the 1D-CNN predictions with the five random
seeds 2D-CNN ensemble predictions (green) models in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models were
trained on the nested cross-validation dataset and evaluated on the test folds. The peptides are sorted
according to the number of observations registered for each unique binder in the complete dataset. The
number of observations per peptide is specified in the X-axis labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the
overall AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the predictions of all test folds (‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean AUC/AUC
0.1 computed from the observed mean according to the 26 individual AUC/AUC 0.1 values computed per
binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
59
==PAGE:65==
3.5. Performance analysis on a new training/test dataset
Finally, we wanted to try the newly developed 2D-CNN sequential architecture into different
training and evaluation datasets. For this purpose, we worked with the ImmRep 2022
workshop dataset (Meysman et al., 2022). The ImmRep workshop is a competition for
scientists and researchers interested in the TCR-epitope specificity problem, in which they
are invited to evaluate and compare their predictor tools through the proposed training and
test datasets (Meysman et al., 2023). The uploaded data contains paired-chain information
of the CDR fragments and VDJ genes, collected from 10x genomics sequencing or other
single-cell sequencing protocols. There are 17 unique peptides in these new training and
test datasets, with a total of 2445 and 619 positive observations, respectively.
For this analysis, we used the redundancy-reduced dataset uploaded by Jensen and Nielsen
(2024), created from the original ImmRep 2022 dataset following the same redundancy
strategy explained for the NetTCR dataset (see Section 2.1.1). This dataset aims to reduce
overfitting to similar observations and improve the model's generalization for unseen
epitopes. The total amount of positive observations resulting from the reduction steps was
1960, maintaining the number of unique peptides. In addition, the creation of swapped
negatives for this reduced dataset was done differently than in the original ImmRep dataset,
by randomly sampling TCRs to other peptides with a Levenshtein distance of at least three
and followed by a redundancy reduction at a 95% similarity threshold and random
partitioning.
Models were trained on the reduced dataset in a five cross-validation setup, where the
dataset was partitioned into five folds, using four partitions for training a model and the fifth
left-out used as a validation partition to define the best early-stopping criteria. The
performance was evaluated on a per-peptide basis on the independent test dataset by
computing the average prediction score of the individual predictions from the five trained
models on the reduced training dataset. Apart from the 2D-CNN architecture, we also
evaluated the performance of the 1D-CNN baseline and their ensemble based on the
mix-scores (averaging both architecture predictions).
The individual AUC and AUC 0.1 per-peptide scores registered for the ImmRep test dataset
are shown in Figure 27. For this ImmRep dataset, we observed that the 2D-CNN sequential
architecture outperforms the 1D-CNN baseline in the low-representative peptides more often
than in the high-representative peptides. In the case of the NetTCR dataset, the 2D-CNN
sequential architecture performance improvement for the low-representative peptides was
not as constant. Following the downsampling analysis results, we can double-check the
60
==PAGE:66==
enhancement
this
2D-CNN
sequential
model
can
offer
to
peptides
that
are
not
overrepresented in the dataset but have enough observations for the model to learn and
robustly improve their prediction accuracy. Furthermore, when combining their prediction
scores with the 1D-CNN baseline into a mix-score ensemble, we can still maintain good
performance on the low-representative peptides while robustly improving the performance
on the high-representative ones. This mix-scores 1D+2D sequential ensemble model
registered the highest performance values, with an overall AUC of 0.8666 and an overall
AUC 0.1 of 0.7835. Surprisingly, these scores from the mix-scores ensemble are similar to
the ones observed for the same ensemble trained and evaluated on the NetTCR dataset.
Figure 27. Per peptide test performance of the 1D-CNN CDR123 baseline (yellow), 2D-CNN sequential (blue),
and 1D+2D-sequential mix-scores ensemble (red) models in terms of a) AUC and b) AUC 0.1. The models
were trained on the reduced ImmRep training dataset in a five cross-validation setup, and evaluated on the
independent test partition. The peptides are sorted according to the number of observations registered for
each unique binder in the complete dataset. The number of observations per peptide in the reduced training
dataset is specified in the X-axis labels. The first X-axis labels correspond to the overall AUC/AUC 0.1
computed from the average test predictions from all five trained models (‘Overall_AUC’) and the mean
AUC/AUC 0.1 computed from the observed mean according to the 17 individual AUC/AUC 0.1 values
computed per binder (‘Mean_AUC’).
In addition, the overall AUC performance recorded for our best-tried model, which was the
mix-scores 1D+2D sequential ensemble, demonstrated to be also the best model accuracy
performance when comparing it to the uploaded AUC performances of the models submitted
for the ImmRep 2022 competition, as registered in Figure 28. This result highlights the
significant potential of these novel feature representations to robustly enhance the prediction
of binding peptides to TCR molecules in imbalanced datasets, provided that an appropriate
model architecture is effectively developed.
61
==PAGE:67==
Figure 28. Average (overall) AUC performances of the different methods trained and evaluated in the ImmRep
2022 benchmark, ranked from the highest to the lowest achieved accuracy scores. The highest AUC score is
registered for our proposed mix-score ensemble model composed of the 1D-CNN baseline and 2D-CNN
sequential architectures (‘Mix_1D+2D_seq’). The AUC performances for the remaining models were retrieved
from
the
public
repository
on
GitHub
for
the
ImmRep
2022
TCR-specificity
benchmark:
https://github.com/viragbioinfo/IMMREP_2022_TCRSpecificity/blob/main/evaluation/microaucs.csv.
62
==PAGE:68==
4. Conclusions
In this master thesis project, we have demonstrated how novel feature representations and
deep learning architectures could help resolve the challenges associated with imbalance and
scarcity of
TCR-epitope datasets and result in an overall improved performance of TCR
specificity pan-specific predictors. Compared to our initial baseline based on 1D-CNN layers
which process BLOSUM-encoding embedded sequences from paired-chain data of CDRs
and epitopes, we improved the overall AUC accuracy from 0.8570 to 0.8712 (1.42%
increased) when including the 1D-CNN baseline scores into an ensemble methodology with
five unique 2D-CNN architecture scores trained under different random seeds. This
improvement was also observed in the AUC 0.1 overall score, which increased from 0.7202
in the 1D-CNN baseline model to 0.7441 in this ensemble methodology (2.40% higher).
Moreover, we checked the relevance of including all paired-chain information from the CDR
fragments of a TCR molecule (CDR1𝛼𝛽, CDR2𝛼𝛽, CDR3𝛼𝛽) for improving the overall AUC
and AUC 0.1 significantly in comparison to the same predictor model trained and evaluated
only with the CDR3𝛽information from the TCR molecule. This added information as input for
the network with other methodologies like the weighted loss can improve the performance of
predictors trained under imbalanced datasets.
We have also proved that the novel feature representation as 2D interaction maps computed
from physicochemical properties needs a proper architecture to process accurately the
information from those maps. Initially, we developed two 2D-CNN architectures that
resemble the original 1D-baseline architecture. These models were not improving the
performance concerning the AUC or AUC 0.1 metrics compared to the 1D-CNN baseline.
However, the new proposed architecture based on two sequential convolutional layers (new
2D-CNN sequential architecture) could significantly improve the overall AUC 0.1 while
maintaining a similar overall AUC performance as the 1D-CNN baseline. This new proposed
architecture resembles the architecture style proposed by Moris et al. (2021) in their ImRex
model, which is based on several convolutional and max-pooling operations. However, we
believe that their proposed model is too complex, considering the problem of imbalanced
datasets and the idea of ensuring that the model is not notably overfitting to the training data
observations. Hopefully, in a future scenario with more balanced and diverse training
datasets, we could improve the complexity of our model by increasing the number of filters
or convolutional layers.
The original authors of the ImRex architecture and the 2D interaction map representation
claimed
that
their
proposed
model
and
feature
representation
could
improve
the
63
==PAGE:69==
performance of unseen epitopes but with the cost of reducing the overall performance in the
training and validation datasets. In our study, we have demonstrated the potential of our
proposed sequential 2D-CNN architecture when dealing with small training datasets in our
downsample analysis, showing AUC and AUC 0.1 performances of over 0.80 and 0.65,
respectively, when training the model with datasets with only 10 positive observations for
each of the 9 peptides assessed while evaluating in the complete dataset collection for those
studied peptides. This showcases the potential of this novel feature representation and
appropriate 2D-CNN architectures for unseen or under-represented peptides, as stated by
Moris et al. (2021) in their study. Furthermore, we could minimize the reduction of
performance observed by the authors in their ImRex architecture and perform practically
identically as our 1D-CNN baseline. Therefore, we can conclude that this 2D-CNN
sequential architecture that processes information from 2D interaction maps is a more
accurate TCR predictor than conventional 1D-CNN architectures that process the amino acid
sequences as BLOSUM embeddings.
Furthermore, we showed that we could enhance the overall AUC and AUC 0.1 performances
by joining the scores of the 2D-CNN sequential model with the 1D-CNN baseline one in an
ensemble methodology. This ensemble methodology of computing the mix-average score
from those two different architectures can also be implemented into an ensemble based on
the same architecture trained under different random seeds. The peak in performance for
both accuracy metrics for the NetTCR training and evaluation dataset was shown for the
ensemble that combines the scores from the 1D-CNN baseline and the ensemble based on
2D-CNN sequential models trained under five different random seeds. These results
highlight the relevance of ensemble methodologies for enhancing accurate and robust TCR
specificity predictions by combining prediction performances of distinct deep learning
algorithms and models. This is a powerful tool for dealing with the main challenges of
imbalanced datasets and unseen epitopes, as different models based on diverse feature
representations can benefit from each other in a joint final prediction score.
These results were tested on new redundant-reduced training and independent test datasets
from the ImmRep 2022 benchmark. Again, we confirmed the potential of the novel 2D
interaction maps and our proposed new 2D-CNN sequential architecture for boosting the
overall AUC and AUC 0.1 performances. Additionally, we observed that our ensemble
methodology based on averaging the scores from the predictions of the 1D-CNN baseline
and the new 2D-CNN sequential models registered the highest AUC performance compared
to the other predictor models that participated in the ImmRep 2022 challenge. Our final AUC
registered performance was 0.8666, which is quite high considering that we did not work with
the complete ImmRep training dataset by removing some redundant observations. Curiously,
64
==PAGE:70==
when checking the performances of the predictors proposed for the ImmRep 2022
benchmark, we observed that the models with higher accurate performances came from the
ones that work with paired-chain information from all CDR fragments or with the VDJ gene
information alongside the CDR3 sequence. Once again, this validates the statement that all
CDR fragments contribute to accurately predicting TCR specificity for a peptide.
In this project, we confirmed the relevance of feature representation as an alternative to
tackle some of the observed challenges related to imbalanced and scarce datasets for
TCR-epitope specificity predictions. Novel feature characterization, like the 2D interaction
maps, can robustly improve the performance of machine and deep learning predictor models
for TCR-epitope specificity goals, especially for unseen or under-represented peptides.
Further research into the properties included in these 2D interaction maps could even
enhance a higher predictive performance. In our study, we included a new property based on
the BLOSUM-50 substitution values, and it proved to be one of the most informative maps
when assessing all the properties individually. Nevertheless, proper modeling design has to
be in sync with the corresponding feature representation. In our case, several 2D-CNN and
max-pooling layers in a sequential deposition showed to be a proper way to study the
interaction and binding contexts of the TCRs and their binding pMHC. Other types of
architectures,
despite
convolutional
networks,
could
be
tested
for
these
2D
property-interaction maps.
65
==PAGE:71==
5. References
10x Genomics. (2020, March 25). A new way of exploring immunity - linking highly
multiplexed antigen recognition to immune Repertoire and Phenotype. Technology
Networks.
https://www.technologynetworks.com/immunology/application-notes/a-new-way-of-explo
ring-immunity-linking-highly-multiplexed-antigen-recognition-to-immune-repertoire-33255
4
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., Brevdo, E., Chen, Z., Citro, C., Corrado, G. S., Davis, A.,
Dean, J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Goodfellow, I., Harp, A., Irving, G., Isard, M., Jia, Y.,
Jozefowicz, R., Kaiser, L., Kudlur, M., Levenberg, J., Mané, D., Monga, R., Moore, S.,
Murray, D., Olah, C., Schuster, M., Shlens, J., Steiner, B., Sutskever, I., Talwar, K.,
Tucker, P., Vanhoucke, V., Vasudevan, V., Viégas, F., Vinyals, O., Warden, P.,
Wattenberg, M., Wicke, M., Yu, Y., & Zheng, X. (2015). TensorFlow: Large-Scale
Machine
Learning
on
Heterogeneous
Systems.
Software
available
from
https://www.tensorflow.org/
Albawi, S., Mohammed, T. A., & Al-Zawi, S. (2017). Understanding of a convolutional neural
network. 2017 International Conference on Engineering and Technology (ICET), 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEngTechnol.2017.8308186
Chollet, F., & others. (2015). Keras. https://keras.io
Cock, P. J. A., Antao, T., Chang, J. T., Chapman, B. A., Cox, C. J., Dalke, A., Friedberg, I.,
Hamelryck, T., Kauff, F., Wilczynski, B., & De Hoon, M. J. L. (2009). Biopython: freely
available
Python
tools
for
computational
molecular
biology
and
bioinformatics.
Bioinformatics, 25(11), 1422–1423. https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTP163
Goncharov, M., Bagaev, D., Shcherbinin, D., Zvyagin, I., Bolotin, D., Thomas, P. G.,
Minervina, A. A., Pogorelyy, M. V, Ladell, K., McLaren, J. E., Price, D. A., Nguyen, T. H.
O., Rowntree, L. C., Clemens, E. B., Kedzierska, K., Dolton, G., Rius, C. R., Sewell, A.,
Samir, J., … Shugay, M. (2022). VDJdb in the pandemic era: a compendium of T cell
receptors
specific
for
SARS-CoV-2.
Nature
Methods,
19(9),
1017–1019.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01578-0
Heather, J. M., Spindler, M. J., Alonso, M. H., Shui, Y. I., Millar, D. G., Johnson, D. S.,
Cobbold, M., & Hata, A. N. (2022). Stitchr: stitching coding TCR nucleotide sequences
from
V/J/CDR3
information.
Nucleic
Acids
Research,
50(12),
e68–e68.
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac190
Hudson, D., Fernandes, R. A., Basham, M., Ogg, G., & Koohy, H.. (2023). Can we predict T
cell specificity with digital biology and machine learning?. Nature Reviews Immunology,
23(8), 511–521. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-023-00835-3
Jensen, M. F., & Nielsen, M. (2024). Enhancing TCR specificity predictions by combined
pan- and peptide-specific training, loss-scaling, and sequence similarity integration.
ELife, 12, RP93934. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.93934
66
==PAGE:72==
Jokinen, E., Huuhtanen, J., Mustjoki, S., Heinonen, M., & Lähdesmäki, H.. (2021). Predicting
recognition between T cell receptors and epitopes with TCRGP. PLOS Computational
Biology, 17(3), e1008814. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008814
Kim, H. Y., Kim, S., Park, W.-Y., & Kim, D. (2023). TSpred: a robust prediction framework for
TCR-epitope interactions based on an ensemble deep learning approach using paired
chain TCR sequence data. BioRxiv, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.12.04.570002
Kingma,
D.
P.,
&
Ba,
J.
(2014).
Adam:
A
method
for
stochastic
optimization.
arXiv:1412.6980v9. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980
Kumar, B. V., Connors, T. J., & Farber, D. L.. (2018). Human T Cell Development,
Localization,
and
Function
throughout
Life.
Immunity,
48(2),
202–213.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2018.01.007
Meysman,
P.,
Barton,
J.,
Bravi,
B.,
Cohen-Lavi,
L., Karnaukhov, V., Lilleskov, E.,
Montemurro, A., Nielsen, M., Mora, T., Pereira, P., Postovskaya, A., Martínez, M. R.,
Fernandez-de-Cossio-Diaz, J., Vujkovic, A., Walczak, A. M., Weber, A., Yin, R., Eugster,
A., & Sharma, V. (2023). Benchmarking solutions to the T-cell receptor epitope
prediction
problem: IMMREP22 workshop report. ImmunoInformatics, 9, 100024.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IMMUNO.2023.100024
Mariuzza, R. A., Agnihotri, P., & Orban, J.. (2020). The structural basis of T-cell receptor
(TCR) activation: An enduring enigma. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 295(4), 914–925.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.rev119.009411
Montemurro, A., Schuster, V., Povlsen, H. R., Bentzen, A. K., Jurtz, V., Chronister, W. D.,
Crinklaw, A., Hadrup, S. R., Winther, O., Peters, B., Jessen, L. E., & Nielsen, M. (2021).
NetTCR-2.0 enables accurate prediction of TCR-peptide binding by using paired TCRα
and
β
sequence
data.
Communications
Biology,
4(1).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02610-3
Moris, P., De Pauw, J., Postovskaya, A., Gielis, S., De Neuter, N., Bittremieux, W., Ogunjimi,
B., Laukens, K., & Meysman, P. (2021). Current challenges for unseen-epitope TCR
interaction prediction and a new perspective derived from image classification. Briefings
in Bioinformatics, 22(4), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1093/BIB/BBAA318
Netea, M. G., Schlitzer, A., Placek, K., Joosten, L. A. B., & Schultze, J. L. (2019). Innate and
Adaptive Immune Memory: an Evolutionary Continuum in the Host's Response to
Pathogens.
Cell
host
&
microbe,
25(1),
13–26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2018.12.006
O’Shea, K., & Nash, R. (2015). An Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks.
International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology,
10(12), 943–947. https://doi.org/10.22214/ijraset.2022.47789
Prince, S. J. D. (2023). Understanding Deep Learning. MIT Press. http://udlbook.com
Rastogi, I., Jeon, D., Moseman, J. E., Muralidhar, A., Potluri, H. K., & McNeel, D. G. (2022).
Role of B cells as antigen presenting cells. Frontiers in immunology, 13, 954936.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.954936
67
==PAGE:73==
Roberts, D. A., Yaida, S., & Hanin, B. (2022). Frontmatter. In The Principles of Deep
Learning Theory: An Effective Theory Approach to Understanding Neural Networks (pp.
i–iv).
frontmatter,
Cambridge:
Cambridge
University
Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009023405
Sharma, S., Sharma, S., & Athaiya, A. (2020). Activation functions in neural networks.
International Journal of Engineering Applied Sciences and Technology, 04(12), 310–316.
https://doi.org/10.33564/IJEAST.2020.V04I12.054
Sidhom, J. W., Larman, H. B., Pardoll, D. M., & Baras, A. S. (2021). DeepTCR is a deep
learning framework for revealing sequence concepts within T-cell repertoires. Nature
Communications, 12(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21879-w
Szeto, C., Lobos, C. A., Nguyen, A. T., & Gras, S.. (2020). TCR Recognition of
Peptide–MHC-I:
Rule
Makers
and
Breakers.
International
Journal
of
Molecular
Sciences, 22(1), 68. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22010068
Trivedi, R., & Nagarajaram, H. A. (2020). Substitution scoring matrices for proteins - An
overview. Protein Science, 29(11), 2150–2163. https://doi.org/10.1002/PRO.3954
Tong, Y., Wang, J., Zheng, T., Zhang, X., Xiao, X., Zhu, X., Lai, X., & Liu, X. (2020). SETE:
Sequence-based Ensemble learning approach for TCR Epitope binding prediction.
Computational
biology
and
chemistry,
87,
107281.
Advance
online
publication.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2020.107281
viragbioinfo,
pmeysman,
&
liel-cohen.
(2022).
Immrep_2022_Tcrspecificity.
GitHub.
Retrieved from https://github.com/viragbioinfo/IMMREP_2022_TCRSpecificity
Vita, R., Mahajan, S., Overton, J. A., Dhanda, S. K., Martini, S., Cantrell, J. R., Wheeler, D.
K., Sette, A., & Peters, B. (2019). The Immune Epitope Database (IEDB): 2018 update.
Nucleic acids research, 47(D1), D339–D343. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1006
68
==PAGE:74==
6. Appendix
6.1. Data repository
The
code
developed
for
this
master
thesis
project
is
uploaded
on
GitHub
at
https://github.com/mnielLab/NetTCR-2Dmaps. In this repository, you can find the datasets
used for the completed analyses of this project, the code for the different deep learning
architectures tested, the resulting trained models, and the prediction result files. In addition,
we included some of the training plots generated for the models tested and some of the code
developed to evaluate and compare the prediction results of the different architectures.
The training and evaluation of the deep learning algorithms were run in Computerome,
High-Performance Computing server from the Technical University of Denmark. Therefore,
all
code
and
prediction
results
can
be
accessed
in
the
following
path
‘/home/projects/vaccine/people/cadsal/MasterThesis’ for Computerome users. The results
analysis and plot generation for the final result were run locally in a Windows operating
system. Therefore, some of the code from the results section, which was uploaded in the
GitHub repository, may include local directories that must be changed to rerun the programs
on another computer.
69
==PAGE:75==
6.2. Supplementary figures
Supplementary Figure 1. Training and validation loss (upper panel) and AUC 0.1 (lower panel) values across
the training epochs of the 1D-CNN baseline architecture, using all CDR fragments as input. The model was
trained on partitions 2, 3, and 4, and validated on partition 1. 200 training epochs were defined, with early
stopping applied after 100 epochs of no improvement in the maximum recorded AUC 0.1 value. The final
stored model was the one with the highest AUC 0.1 observed, not the last model obtained after training. No
overfitting was observed, as the validation loss did not suddenly grow while training epochs increased.
70
==PAGE:76==
Supplementary Figure 2. Training and validation loss (upper panel) and AUC 0.1 (lower panel) values across
the training epochs of the new 2D-CNN sequential architecture, using all CDR fragments as input. The model
was trained on partitions 2, 3, and 4, and validated on partition 1. 200 training epochs were defined, with early
stopping applied after 20 epochs of no improvement in the maximum recorded AUC 0.1 value. The final stored
model was the one with the highest AUC 0.1 observed, not the last model obtained after training. For this
architecture, overfitting was observed as the validation loss started to rise while the training loss rapidly
decreased.
71
