==PAGE:1==
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image
Detection
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Ramlah Sara Rehman
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathemat­
ics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and the German
National Research Center for Applied Cybersecurity (ATHENE), in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng in Human­Centered Artificial Intelli­
gence.
It was supervised by Associate Prof. Christian D Jensen (DTU Compute), Prof. Christoph
Busch (da/sec ATHENE), Prof. Christian Rathgeb (da/sec ATHENE) and Mathias Ibsen
(da/sec ATHENE).
Ramlah Sara Rehman ­ s226002
Signature
Date
ii
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
02.07.2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Advancements in generative models for image synthesis have revolutionised the field of
computer vision and artificial intelligence. In recent years, generative models have be­
come capable of producing hyper­realistic synthetic images. These synthetic images can
be used for nefarious purposes and the prevalence of these images in digital media can
have large scale negative implications for individuals and governments. The increased
frequency of synthetic content appearing in digital media raises the concern of whether
authentic content can be distinguished from the synthetic.
This thesis addresses human detection capabilities in distinguishing authentic face im­
ages from the synthetic. To test these capabilities, two perceptual experiments are de­
signed and carried out based on principles from experimental psychology and optimal ex­
perimental design. Participants are randomly assigned to either the experimental group
or the control group. The experimental group receives training halfway through the ex­
periment, while the control group instead receives a coffee break. In one trial of the
experiment, participants are presented with a face image, and are then tasked with clas­
sifying it as either ’Real’ or ’Synthetic’. Each experiment consists of 32 trials, where face
images are presented to participants in a random order. Participants in the experimental
group are provided with a training session. This training session is developed based on
face perception theories and professional face identification training material. The training
session consists of systematic analysis providing participants with a visual face identifi­
cation strategy. It also includes providing participants with example images where visual
artefacts, a consequence of the generation process, appear in synthetic images.
Results from the perceptual experiments depict that the experimental group has an im­
proved accuracy of 3.6% after training, compared to 0.2% in the control group. This proves
that training resulted in slightly improved accuracy scores, but statistical analysis shows
that there is no statistically significant improvement. A discussion of the results explores
the limitations of human perception and detection capabilities, particularly in reference to
synthetic faces. Future work highlights the continued importance of determining human
capability to detect synthetic content in different contexts.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Christian D. Jensen, Christoph Busch, Christian
Rathgeb and Mathias Ibsen for their supervision, kindness and support throughout the
duration of my thesis. I would like to thank Christoph Busch and the da­sec group at the
Hoschule Darmstadt for the opportunity to write my thesis with the group. I am also very
grateful for the opportunity to visit the group in Darmstadt and for the scholarship which
sponsored my stay.
I especially want to sincerely thank Christian and Mathias for their supervision on all parts
of the project and for their detailed feedback during the project. I also want to thank Math­
ias for the daily supervision, continued support and for addressing the many questions
that I had during the project.
Finally, I want to thank my fiancé, my dearest family and my closest friends for their con­
tinued love, encouragement and support during not only the past six months as I wrote
this thesis, but also the entire duration of my studies at university.
iv
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Implications for Digital Media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Implications for Human Cognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Advancements in Synthetic Image Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Synthetic Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Facial Features for Morphological Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Face Perception Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Face Identification Ability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Related Work
11
3.1
Human Perception of Synthetic Faces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Development of Training Material
15
4.1
Welcome Screen: Face Classification Training Session
. . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Systematic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Artefacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Example images: Multiple Artefacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Experimental Design
25
5.1
Experimental and Control Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Selection of Experimental Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Visual Stimuli: Real and Synthetic Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
Sample Size and Power Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.5
Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.6
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.7
Basis for Experimental Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.8
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Experimental Results
41
6.1
Participant Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Participant Demographics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.3
Accuracy Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.4
Image Classification Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.5
Total Correct Classifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
v
==PAGE:8==
7
Discussion
63
7.1
Remark on demographics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.3
Limitations of Human Detection Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
8
Conclusion
67
8.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Bibliography
71
A Supplementary material
75
B Remaining Results
77
vi
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) incorporated technologies have emerged in recent years ­ a cul­
mination of decades of technological advancements. Regarded as a paradigm­changing
technology in [1], AI and its sub­field Deep Learning (DL) carry capabilities to revolutionise
domains on a global scale. Notably, these emerging technologies have a profound impact
and implications on the realm of digital media.
1.1
Implications for Digital Media
Digital media has evolved rapidly in recent decades, revolutionising the creation and dis­
semination of information on a global scale. Alongside this, social media networks like
Facebook, X, Instagram and TikTok have become easily accessible to most of the world­
wide population, becoming a primary source of information sharing. As of April 2024,
social media networks concern 5.07 billion people worldwide, amounting to about 62.6
percent of the world’s population [2]. While fake content has always existed in some form,
it has through social media become exceptionally easy for even non­experts to create and
disseminate it. The prevalence of fake content on widely used social media platforms can
have serious implications for individuals and governments. It can be used to spread mis­
information, influence public perception and opinion, and become a threat to local and
national security [3].
Synthetic images, which look authentic, can be used to facilitate malicious or fraudulent
schemes [4]. Fabricated identities that have utilised easily accessible synthetic images
have had significant implications. Amongst these are the campaign of a fictitious congress
candidate in the 2020 US elections1 and the dissemination of false information to influ­
ence election outcomes as mentioned in [5]. Advancements in generative technology
poses growing concerns in political contexts. Synthetic or manipulated images could be
exploited to drive disinformation campaigns ahead of 2024 elections in different countries,
resulting in potential large scale social and global implications [6].
Amongst the dangers of image manipulation are the creation of synthetic non­consensual
images of celebrities and their subsequent rapid circulation online, an example of which
is described in a CNN news article [6]. The article mentions growing concerns over the
dissemination of non­consensual images, even as social media platform X’s policies, ban
synthetic and manipulated content which could potentially deceive, confuse or harm peo­
ple. The prevalence of non­consensual content online, particularly of celebrities, calls into
attention the need for legislation [6].
1.2
Implications for Human Cognition
The accessibility of advanced technology for image synthesis brings many opportunities
in science, education and research as well as creative expression and art. Alongside this,
there are ample opportunities for this technology to be used for nefarious purposes and
harmful intents [4]. The use of fake visual imagery for malicious purposes relies on the
general population’s ability to differentiate between real and synthetic content. Essentially,
if people cannot effectively tell the difference, the potential for harm increases. A number
of studies carried out have highlighted that people are frequently unable to determine
1https://edition.cnn.com/2020/02/28/tech/fake-twitter-candidate-2020/index.html
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
1
==PAGE:10==
whether images are real or synthetic, and are subsequently unaware of their capabilities
in the task [4].
Evidence from over 20 years of empirical research detailed in [4] states that the consump­
tion of fake media can have powerful detrimental effects on human memory, cognition and
behaviour. Manipulated images can influence the public recollection of certain events,
particularly in political contexts. This change in public memory can have a significant im­
pact on behaviour and opinions. An example described in [4] detailed that an image of a
peaceful protest was doctored to include police officers wearing riot gear and aggressive­
looking demonstrators. A subsequent memory test revealed that participants who viewed
the doctored image were less likely to participate in future protests as compared to those
who viewed the original images. Synthetic images can thus be used to influence individ­
uals and societies to promote biased or inaccurate perspectives of historical and global
events.
On a larger scale, they can be used to influence human cognition for a range of poten­
tial motives, including in misrepresenting societies and cultures. The use of manipulated
and synthetic images can also cause psychological harm to observers by creating unre­
alistic and unattainable beauty standards [4]. Research depicted in [4] has shown that
observers are unable to disregard manipulated images even when a disclaimer is added
to the image. In some cases, this leads to an adverse effect where observers pay more
attention to the manipulated images.
In order to aid individuals in the detection of fake imagery, it is proposed in [4] to encourage
individuals to observe the images for traces of visual artefacts left behind by the image
generation process. With early image generation models, this approach was deemed
more effective. However, with newer models producing more realistic images with less
visual artefacts present, human detection capabilities may be challenged.
1.3
Advancements in Synthetic Image Generation
A range of tools for fake image generation exist online, such as [7] and [8], that allow
users to select features and generate images based on these, and [9], which generates
images based on a description. To illustrate the level of realism of generated images, and
provide a comparison against real images, example images are displayed in Figure 1.1.
The left column depicts real images, the middle column depicts images generated using
StyleGAN2, and the right column depicts images generated using stable diffusion.
With the advancement in image generation models, there is a parallel emergence of au­
tomated detection algorithms within forensics. Detection algorithms may outperform hu­
mans; however, humans may still increasingly encounter synthetic images online. To this
end, it is crucial to understand human ability to detect these images as they become more
prevalent in digital media. Enhancing human detection abilities is crucial for ensuring peo­
ple can confidently navigate and verify the authenticity of digital content.
This project focuses on testing humans synthetic face image detection capabilities. The
proposed solution consists of two experiments that each consist of a series of visual clas­
sification tasks presenting real (authentic) and synthetic (AI generated) face images. One
experiment (the experimental group) consists of a training session, with the aim of im­
proving detection skills, while the other serves as a control group. The performance of
both groups is compared and evaluated, with a focus on assessing whether the training
session had an impact on the performance. Finally, an analysis of the results evaluates
performance across demographic distributions and various deep learning frameworks.
2
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:11==
(a) Real
(b) StyleGAN2
(c) Stable Diffusion
(d) Real
(e) StyleGAN2
(f) Stable Diffusion
Figure 1.1: Example images: the left column (subfigure a) and d)) consists of real images,
the second column (subfigure b) and e)) consists of images generated using StyleGAN2
and the third row (subfigure c) and f)) consists of images generated using Stable Diffusion
1.4
Research Questions
Based on the motivation, background and considerations made in the above sections, the
following research questions have been established:
1. For human observers, what are the key visual artefacts that differentiate AI­generated
synthetic face images from authentic images?
2. How can a perceptual experiment be designed to effectively investigate the impact
of training on individuals’ abilities to detect synthetic face images?
3. To what extent does providing specific training to individuals affect their ability to
distinguish between synthetic and authentic face images?
4. Are differences observed in human synthetic face detection performance across
various generative models?
1.5
Thesis Organisation
This thesis is organised into the following chapters:
• Chapter 2 provides relevant background information on image synthesis and theo­
retical frameworks within the domain of face perception
• Chapter 3 provides an overview of the related work in perceptual experiments and
human perception of synthetic faces
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
3
==PAGE:12==
• Chapter 4 provides a detailed overview of the development of the training material
• Chapter 5 provides the experimental design and considerations, as well as a run­
through of the experiment
• Chapter 6 presents the experimental results from the experiment
• Chapter 7 discusses, analyses and provides context for the results of the experiment
• Chapter 8 concludes the thesis and mentions potential for future work
4
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This section delves into the architectures used for synthetic image generation and details
face perception theories.
2.1
Synthetic Images
For the purpose of this study, the scope was narrowed to focus on two architectures that
are used to generate fully synthetic images, namely Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) and Stable Diffusion (SD) models. These are described in detail in the subsec­
tions below.
2.1.1
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
Generative adversarial networks are described in detail in [10] and reiterated in this sec­
tion. Explained in the sense of game theory, generative adversarial networks are machine
learning models typically implemented using neural networks.
GANs consist of two main parts: the generator and the discriminator. The generator
creates images by transforming random noise into realistic samples. It uses a simple
random input, like a Gaussian distribution, and learns to convert this noise into images that
look real. The discriminator determines whether the images it receives are real (from the
actual training data) or fake (produced by the generator). It tries to correctly identify which
images are authentic and which are generated. The generator aims to improve its output
to trick the discriminator, while the discriminator continually gets better at spotting fake
images. This helps both networks improve over time. If regarded as a game, each player
attempts to minimize its own cost. The discriminator’s cost encourages it to correctly
classify data as real or fake, while the generator’s cost encourages it to generate samples
that the discriminator incorrectly identifies as real [10].
Mentioned in [11], a GAN offers a way to learn a mapping that transforms a known, usually
simple (e.g., Gaussian) distribution into a more complex target distribution that represents
a given domain of patterns, for example, images of human faces. This mapping or gen­
erative model can be learned using a sufficiently large training set of samples from the
desired target distribution. Once the model has been learned, new samples can be gener­
ated by simply feeding the model with random inputs from the simple distribution that was
used during training. A generative model studies a collection of training examples and is
able to learn the probability distribution that generates them. It is then able to generate
more examples from the estimated probability distribution. GANs are therefore able to
generate high­resolution realistic images [10].
2.1.2
Stable Diffusion
Recent advancements in image synthesis have given rise to methods based on diffusion
models (DM). The information presented in this paragraph is referenced from [12]. Diffu­
sion models are probabilistic models that aim to learn the distribution of data by progres­
sively removing noise from a normally distributed variable. This process involves learning
to reverse a predetermined sequence of steps, called a fixed Markov Chain, that adds
noise over a series of steps. In simpler terms, diffusion models learn to clean up noise
that is added to data through a specific sequence of steps. These models are essentially
trained to minimise the difference between actual and predicted noise, averaged over a
series of examples and differing noise levels. In the context of image generation, the
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
5
==PAGE:14==
most effective diffusion models use a version of the variational lower bound, an approach
similiar to denoising score­matching, which focuses on learning how to denoise data.
The increasing popularity of diffusion models in image generation is attributed to them
attaining unprecedented results on image synthesis data [12]. This is done by breaking
down the image creation process into a series of denoising autoencoder applications. In
[12], a novel approach characterised by introducing cross­attention layers into the model
architecture is presented. This enables diffusion models to become generators for inputs
like text or bounding boxes, and synthesis of high­resolution images becomes possible
in a convolutional manner. The latent diffusion models (LDMs) provide competitive per­
formance on tasks including text­to­image synthesis, unconditional image generation and
super­resolution [12].
Diverging from typical image synthesis, DM provide novel ways to generate images. They
can be guided by both descriptions and sketches to generate images. This allows for a
nearly limitless number of categories for image generation. While this creates oppor­
tunities within creativity for different domains, it also opens avenues for malicious intent.
Global semantic inconsistencies in lighting, asymmetries in shadows and reflected images
are some of the more obvious indicators of synthetic images [13]. Regarding detection
of synthetic images, most state­of­the­art detectors rely on these visible artefacts. How­
ever, for images where artefacts are not evident or do not exist, detectors rely on residual
traces from the generation process. Image generation architectures are characterised by
distinct residual traces in the images, which allow for source attribution [13].
2.2
Facial Features for Morphological Analysis
A standard guide from the Facial Identification Scientific Working Group (FISWG) entitled
’Facial Image Comparison Feature List for Morphological Analysis’ [14][15] is referenced
in this section. The standard guide defines a set of facial components, characteristics,
and descriptors that are to be considered when conducting a morphological facial com­
parison. These are used when comparing between face images and can also be used for
examination of whether an image matches an individual. The guide provides a standard
set of facial components, characteristics, and descriptors that can be used as a frame­
work along with a systematic method of analysis for facial image comparison. It is used for
different levels of facial comparisons, and the list of features aids a practitioner to conduct
a systematic comparison of each feature [16].
The guide states that the following features should be considered when conducting facial
comparison analysis: Skin, Face/Head Outline, Face/Head Composition, Hair, Forehead,
Eyebrows, Eyes, Cheeks, Nose, Ears, Mouth, Chin/Jawline, Neck, Facial Hair, Facial
Lines, Scars, Facial Marks, Alterations and Other. Each of the facial components is then
divided into two levels of detail with a set of component characteristics and associated
characteristic descriptors [14].
2.3
Face Perception Theories
To gain an understanding of human perception of faces, different theoretical frameworks
within experimental psychology were explored. Exploring different theoretical frameworks
allowed for the selection of an appropriate framework for the training session. This section
references the face perception theories that were adapted to the training session. Namely,
holistic and feature­based processing theory. Face identification theory is also explored
in detail, laying the groundwork for the training session described in the next chapter.
6
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:15==
2.3.1
Holistic Processing Theory
An overview of holistic processing is provided to enhance the understanding of face per­
ception theories for the purpose of the experiment. Holistic processing is a fundamental
concept in face recognition research. As mentioned in [17], holistic processing refers to
the idea that faces are processed holistically ­ as unified wholes while other objects are
processed in a more analytical, part­ or feature­ based manner. In this context, it can be
understood as faces are identified at the individual level in reference to a specific per­
son, compared to objects which are instead identified at a categorical level. It is believed
that holistic processing helps distinguish visually similar objects because faces share the
same types of traits (eyes, nose, mouth, chin) arranged in a consistent pattern (eyes are
above the nose, mouth is below the nose).
Holistic processing is explained by the ’template hypothesis’, which suggests that the brain
encodes (or stores) a face as a complete image or whole unit that fits into a ’face template’.
This is due to faces having a consistent arrangement of traits which allow the brain to
recognize them quickly. Computer vision algorithms also use this holistic approach to
detect faces, applying simple filters to check for the typical arrangement of facial traits,
effectively ruling out non­face images. Algorithms, similar to the brain, rely on overlapping
traits to ensure the correct arrangement of a face [17]. Alternatively, holistic processing
is also explained by an attentional strategy where there is an obligatory encoding of all
object parts, essentially that the brain processes the face as a whole rather than in parts.
To assess holistic processing, several measures have been used. Of these is the compos­
ite task, which indexes the extent to which participants can ignore irrelevant information
in a face, perceiving faces as wholes means that participants cannot selectively perceive
face parts. In contrast to this, a part­whole task measures an advantage for the whole
over individual parts, indicating that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts [17].
2.3.2
Feature­Based Processing Theory
An overview of feature­based processing is provided here, with a focus on its relevance
to the experiment. Feature­based processing theory refers to the ability to identify and
recognize faces by focusing on individual facial traits such as the eyes, nose, and mouth.
Research on the developmental trajectory of featural processing abilities amongst hu­
mans is presented in [18]. The research indicates that children show sensitivity to both
holistic and feature­based processing, but find it easier to process individual traits. New­
borns and young infants focus more on outer traits of faces, such as the hairline and facial
contour, whereas infants begin to redirect their attention towards internal facial properties
such as the eyes, nose, and mouth.
While adults can process faces featurally, they typically balance this with holistic pro­
cessing. Adults adapt their face processing abilities to different contexts such that they
recognize faces both by individual traits and by the overall configuration of those traits
[18]. The study also highlights that adults featural processing in face identification is in­
fluenced by the familiarity of the face. When identifying familiar faces, adults rely on a
combination of featural and holistic information. For unfamiliar faces, they initially utilise
more featural information to build a recognition template. Adults also integrate both inner
and outer traits for both familiar and unfamiliar.
2.4
Face Identification Ability
Identity verification is crucial to many security procedures, to maintain law and order and
to protect national security. Amongst the common methods of identity verification is to
compare images of a person’s face, for example when a person’s face is compared to
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
7
==PAGE:16==
their passport photo, or when a mugshot is compared to CCTV camera footage [19].
Recent years have seen more reliance on steadily improving automated facial recognition
technology. This is widely used in police investigations and at national borders for identity
verification. However, humans are still an important part of face recognition systems. In
uses of face recognition software, a degree of human involvement is still necessary. An
example of this is use of query image to search a large database of faces. Investigators
are responsible for examining the images that the software returns and confirming the
identity of a potential suspect [19]. According to [20], professional staff using this software
are highly error­prone, identifying the wrong face from the returned images on 40% of
trials. To improve practitioners ability to identify faces, professional organisations provide
training courses. The effectiveness of training and the inherent possibility to train face
identification ability is further explored in [19].
In relation to face identification training, a clinical setting ­ to treat prosopagnosia1 pa­
tients ­ is explored by psychologists. Two kinds of prosopagnosia is discussed in this
section [19][21]: 1) Acquired prosopagnosia where patients acquire it as a result of a
brain injury, and 2) Developemental prosopagnosia where patients fail to develop nor­
mal face processing abilities despite otherwise normal functioning. Research on face
perception training in prosopagnosia patients resulted in two significant findings that are
relevant to the current project. Regarding holistic processing, it was found that training
in patients with acquired prosopagnosia was unsuccessful and in patients with develop­
mental prosopagnosia was successful to an extent. Regarding feature­based processing,
it was found that training was relatively successful for both acquired and developmental
prosopagnosia patients. This finding is confirmed in [22], where is it stated that prosopag­
nosia patients percieve the face in traits and not holistically. A distinction to make in this
regard is that training programs for prosopagnosia patients are focused on improving their
ability to recognise familiar faces, to facilitate an improvement in their daily functioning.
Training programs in forensic settings involve unfamiliar people, resulting in a qualitatively
different cognitive task. It is noteworthy that the task is further complicated when applied
to the detection of synthetic face images as is the case in this study. This is due to the
faces presented being both unfamiliar and synthetic.
For face identification training to be more applicable in different contexts, such as in a syn­
thetic face perception study. The benefits must be able to generalize to unfamiliar faces
or synthetic faces. However, literature where training interventions have been employed
on new unfamiliar faces show an improvement in only individuals who were previously
poor at the task, and results are inconsistent. Only a specific group of facial image prac­
titioners depict that face identification ability can be trained. These practitioners utilise a
slow and systematic analysis of facial properties to reach decisions [23].
In [23], it is shown that a systematic, feature­based comparison strategy results in the
highest face detection accuracy. Notably, this is used by facial examiners rather than
more unsystematic or instinctive approaches. A relevant distinction pertains to the fact
that examiners achieve high levels of accuracy using a different strategy to both novices
and super­recognisers. Super­recognisers refer to individuals who naturally have excep­
tionally good face recognition abilities [24]. The study mentions that super­recognisers
encounter larger effects from when faces are presented in an inverted (turned upside
down) manner when compared to novices, while facial examiners experience smaller ef­
fects.
1Prosopagnosia is a condition where patients have a significantly deficient ability to recognise faces. Pa­
tients in severe cases are unable to recognise their family, friends, colleagues and even themselves [19][21]
8
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:17==
It is found that face inversion disrupts holistic processing capabilities, and since examin­
ers’ performance is least impacted, their expertise relies on feature­based processes [23].
It is thus reinforced that examiners rely on feature­based based processing to achieve
high levels of accuracy within face identification. It is also reinforced that training can
improve face identification capabilities. It must be noted that the training paradox exists
here, feature­based processing improves face identification accuracy, yet professional
training courses that promote this strategy are regarded to be ineffective. This indicates
that other factors, such as experience within facial recognition and mentoring in addition to
feature­based strategies also contribute to examiners high accuracy and improved skills
[23].
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:19==
3
Related Work
This chapter provides the related work by introducing the performance of human partici­
pants in detecting synthetic faces. It also summarises human performance across differ­
ent models and deepfakes, with intermediate feedback and other related factors such as
AI hyperrealism and AI in digital media.
3.1
Human Perception of Synthetic Faces
The performance of human participants in detecting synthetic face images has been in­
vestigated by several authors.
A perceptual experiment is designed and conducted in [5], where a wide range of volun­
teers have been exposed to synthetic face images produced by state­of­the­art GANS (i.e,
PGGAN, StyleGAN and StyleGAN2). The experiment revealed that human viewers had
82% accuracy when detecting synthetic images using AI­17. However, the realism rate
for subsequent models was reported to be around 53% for StyleGAN, 68% for StyleGAN2
and only 52% for real images. This reveals that participants questioned the authenticity of
real images more than the recent GAN­generated images. Analysis of realism rates depict
that some real images were never classified as real, but that all the images in StyleGAN2
were classified as real at least 40% of the time. In general, the authors found that synthetic
faces produced by StyleGAN2 were classified as being real more often than the actual
real faces. The results also convey a clear decrease in the accuracy rates for newer GAN
models. In terms of response quality, the study revealed that participants accelerated
their decision­making as the experiment progressed, without experiencing a loss or gain
in accuracy levels. Regarding participants previous knowledge in the domain, those with
more knowledge on the appearance of synthetic media classified images more accurately
compared to those who were not. However, it was noted that participant knowledge did
not correlate with more confident responses. Regarding participant detection strategies,
visual artefacts appeared in 80% of participant responses.
In [25], human performance is determined under an approximation of real­world condi­
tions. This refers to scenarios where an image has both an unknown source and has
possibly undergone forms of post­processing. These scenarios include forensic exami­
nation to determine whether images are authentic or images encountered on social media
pages. To replicate such scenarios, the study examines the following real­life scenarios
that could have an impact on the performance. 1) image resolution, 2) participant training
through receiving intermediate feedback and 3) AI­experience measured with a question
after completion of the survey. The study presents images no visible alterations that could
impact their credibility of authenticity. The study assumes that in such scenarios, humans
are untrained and have a limited ability to detect synthetic images. The study randomly
assigns participants to either a feedback group which receives intermediate feedback after
each classified image or a control group. The results depict an overall accuracy of 70.1%
with a 65.3% accuracy for fake (StyleGAN) images and 74.8% for real images, indicating
that humans have a limited ability to determine fake images. For the feedback group, the
overall accuracy was 72.9%, with 74.9% for real images and 70.9% for synthetic images.
For the control group, the overall accuracy was 67.6%, with 74.8% for real images and
60.4% for synthetic images. Results showed that large differences were observed with
regards to real­world scenarios, namely AI­experience, image resolution, and feedback,
further emphasizing that these factors have a significant impact on human performance.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
11
==PAGE:20==
The study additionally compares human and algorithmic performance, concluding that hu­
mans perform better. However, it is noted that algorithms can likely outperform humans
once they are trained adequately and employed strategically.
A series of perceptual studies to assess human ability to distinguish between GAN syn­
thesized faces and real faces were carried out in [26], resulting in similar findings. Bench­
marked against previous research in the domain, these studies included a greater diversity
of race and gender. Results indicated that synthetically generated faces were photore­
alistic, nearly indistinguishable from real faces and judged as more trustworthy. Results
depicted that participants had 48.2% average accuracy ­ a close to chance performance.
It is worth noting that in one of these studies where participants received training and trial­
by­trial feedback, the average accuracy improved to 59.0%. However, it is noted that the
impact of feedback is limited due to lack of improvement over time, perhaps due to some
synthetic faces not containing perceptually detectable artifacts [26].
The rising phenomenon of AI hyperrealism, where AI faces are judged as human more
often than actual human faces, is explored in [27]. The study applied a Brunswikian lens
model to analyze how 14 attributes contributed to faces being misjudged as human. This
approach allowed the distinction between cue validity (differences in the visual attributes
of human and AI faces), and cue utlization (the extent to which each attribute affects
the judgement of faces as human). Analysis revealed that AI faces were perceived as
more human than actual human faces. AI faces were more average (explained as less
distinct), familiar, attractive, and less memorable than human faces. Cumulative effects of
certain attributes, such as facial proportions, familiarity, and memorability, contributed to
misjudging AI faces as human. Other attributes, like facial attractiveness, symmetry, and
congruent lighting/shadows, also played a role but in the correct direction. Some valid
cues, such as facial averageness/distinctiveness, image quality, and expressivity, were
not utilized by participants.
Notably, the study highlights how GANs are biased towards the statistical regularities of
their most common inputs, which leads to AI hyperrealism. The study also indicates that
there is evidence of white racial bias in algorithmic training, which leads to racial disparities
in the perception of AI hyperrealism.
Different news media have also explored the extent of human detection capabilities of
synthetic faces. In a 2020 article published in the New York Times [28], authors have pro­
posed tools that allow fake face generation by manipulating features such as age, gender,
race and ethnicity as well as perspective and mood. The article also includes an inter­
active guide on mistakes and patterns that appeared when generating synthetic images,
that would allow readers to identify synthetic content. In another article published online
in December 2023, an interactive quiz was proposed with the aim of assessing whether
the average user could identify between real people photographed by photographers and
synthetic images generated using Stable Diffusion [29].
A survey is conducted in [30] that tests participants ability to distinguish images of real peo­
ple from fake. Results depicted that the presence of heterochromia, white pixels around
the eyes and generally more unrealistic eyes and teeth are amongst the most common
indicators of synthetic images. It was found that Stable Diffusion produced more realis­
tic images than DALL­E 2. Images with flaws such as skin imperfections were found to
be an indicator of real images as reflected by participant results. Participant responses
also reflected that the task was inherently found difficult, and that many eventually re­
sorted to guessing images randomly. This is a relevant finding in the context of designing
the perceptual experiment as it signifies the need to provide a strategy for synthetic face
12
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:21==
detection such that participants do not merely guess.
Notably, it is theorized in [30] that a classification accuracy of over 85% would indicate
that humans are more advanced than AI. The survey results showed an average clas­
sification accuracy of 61%, suggesting that humans are unable to stay current with AI
developments, specifically in the context of image classification.
Deepfakes, a type of synthetic media where one person’s face is digitally swapped with an­
other’s is also discussed in [30]. The term emerged in 2017 when it was used to generate
synthetic explicit content of celebrities. This incident was amongst the first to generate dis­
cussion, highlighting the potential nefarious applications of image synthesis technology.
In [30], Semantic Scholar’s keyword search engine was used to search for the number
of ’deepfake’ paper publications in recent years. The number of deepfake paper publica­
tions published per year and the number of citations of ’Generative Adversarial Nets’ per
year depict an increasing trend in the number of publications relating to deepfakes and
GANs. In [31] and [32] a range of potential consequences of deepfake technology in so­
ciety are discussed, with researchers believing that the negative consequences outweigh
the benefits.
In [33], a behavioural experiment is carried out adding to the research on deepfake videos.
Key results from the experiment showed that people are unable to detect deepfakes reli­
ably, over estimate their own detection capabilities and are actually biased towards mis­
taking deepfakes as authentic videos. In [34], the authors raise awareness about the
dangers of manipulated videos. An investigative user study is carried out along with an
analysis of existing algorithms for the detection of deepfakes. A training program is de­
signed in order to improve detection abilties in a treatment group of low­literate population,
a group that is particularly vulnerable to deepfakes. Results depict that deepfakes are
becoming more realistic and thus more difficult to detect, but that raising awareness and
training can improve detection. In [35], human ability to differentiate between real images
and deepfakes is explored. It is found that training slightly detection abilities. It is thus
hypothesized that human accuracy can be improved with thorough training on deepfake
detection.
In another experimental study detailed in [36], participants were tasked with classifying 10
real and 10 deepfake videos. Participants were assigned to either a group which received
a list of strategies relating to visual cues or to a control group. Results depicted that both
groups performed similarly with similar confidence levels, indicating that the training did
not impact the detection accuracy.
With regards to all the above findings, specifically the experiment with training and trial­
by­trial feedback carried out in [26], there is limited research on human performance of
detecting synthetic facial images when they have received specialised training based on
face perception strategies and professional face classification courses to recognize phys­
iological artifacts that may be present in the images. The aim of the project is therefore
to assess human performance in detecting synthetic facial images, with a focus on train­
ing. The outcome of the project can contribute to the research on human ability to detect
synthetic facial images, and provide crucial insights on the possible associated risks and
regulations in the future.
3.2
Summary
This chapter presents the related work on the performance of human participants in de­
tecting synthetic face images. It details relevant experiments and summarises detection
performance and results that were obtained from the experiments. Related topics such
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
13
==PAGE:22==
as AI hyperrealism and AI in digital media are also explored as they aid in interpreting the
results. A discussion on deepfakes is also included. The chapter ends with a note on the
contribution of this thesis in the domain of synthetic face image detection.
14
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:23==
4
Development of Training Material
This chapter describes the development of the training session. In the experimental group,
participants were provided with a training session halfway through the experiment ­ after
they had classified 16 images out of a total of 32 images. An overview of the structure of
the training session is provided in Figure 4.1 below.
Figure 4.1: A diagram depicting the face classification training session
The next sections describe each part of the training session.
4.1
Welcome Screen: Face Classification Training Session
Participants were first introduced to the training session through a welcome screen. It was
crucial for participants to gain an overview of the contents of the training session. This
was kept brief and only included the necessary information to ensure that participants
would remain attentive. Participants were informed that the goal of the training session
was to improve their synthetic face detection capabilities. Participants were then provided
with information regarding the generation of synthetic faces. They were informed that two
image generation architectures, namely StyleGAN2 and a Stable Diffusion Model were
used to generate images in the experiment. They were also informed that a consequence
of the generation process was the presence of visual artefacts in the images. Participants
were then informed that the presence of visual artefacts was more or less pronounced in
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
15
==PAGE:24==
different images, and that there was the possibility that an image contained no artefacts or
multiple. It was mentioned that the goal of the training was to provide them with strategies
for the detection process, aiming to improve their detection capabilities. An aim of the
training process was for participants to have an increased awareness and skepticism for
content appearing online, specifically AI­generated face images. The welcome screen
shown to participants is depicted in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The welcome screen for the training session shown to participants
4.2
Systematic Analysis
This section describes an approach to face identification with a focus on feature­based
identification. This approach laid the groundwork for the systematic analysis part of the
training session.
A novel approach is detailed in [37] where feature­based face processing is encouraged,
with a focus on specifying which facial properties trainees should prioritize. Two experi­
ments were carried out where novices were trained to focus on the facial traits that were
identified by facial examiners as most indicative of identity. The face detection accuracy
was then measured before and after the training. In both of the experiments, the effects
of the diagnostic training were compared to an experimental group (where participants
were trained to rely on facial traits that were the least indicative of identity) and a control
group. Regarding the content of the training courses, the trainees were instructed to avoid
perceiving the internal region of the face and instead focus their perception on breaking
down individual components of the face and comparing these individually. The trainees
were also informed that certain facial properties were more useful to perceive than others.
The training also described the different sub­parts and characteristics of each useful trait
based on professional training courses.
The systematic analysis component of the training session was designed based on the
16
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:25==
feature­based approach described in the previous paragraph. A graph ranking a selection
of facial traits from most to least useful is depicted as Figure 1 in [37]. Based on the
aforementioned description and the graph, five facial traits were selected for systematic
analysis. These were the following:
1. Ears
2. Eyes
3. Lower Face
4. Forehead and Face Shape
5. Hair
Participants were then provided with example images for visual guidance, with the facial
components highlighted, as depicted in Figure 4.3.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) Ears
(b) Eyes
(c) Lower Face
(d) Forehead and Face Shape
(e) Hair
Figure 4.3: Image by drobotdean on Freepik [38]. The image was modified to add the
highlighted sections and used in the systematic analysis section of the training session.
18
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:27==
Participants were encouraged to identify synthetic images by focusing systematically on
the properties. A description of potential properties that may contain artefacts was in­
cluded, listed in Table 4.1.
Property
Potential Artefacts
Ears
Examine the ears and earlobes carefully, observing their size,
shape, and structure relative to the face. Also, evaluate sym­
metry and appearance for any discrepancies.
Eyes
Examine the eyebrows, observing their shape, thickness, and
arch.
Also, assess the shape, size, and dimensions of the
eyes, ensuring they are evenly positioned. Consider that the
eyes may appear either hyper­focused or completely unfo­
cused. Evaluate the presence and depth of lines around the
eyes, and observe the shape and size of the iris. Look for any
discrepancies in corneal reflections between the eyes.
Lower Face
Observe the shape and width of the mouth, including the ap­
pearance and depth of lines around the mouth. Examine the
appearance, placement, size, and color of the teeth.
Forehead
and
Face Shape
Carefully analyze the shape and size of the face relative to the
background. Note the size and proportion of the forehead (and
hairline), as well as the appearance of wrinkles and lines on the
forehead.
Hair
Assess the placement and shape of the hairline, relative to the
face and facial properties. Examine the appearance, place­
ment, color, and texture of the hair.
Table 4.1: A table summarizing the potential artefacts for various facial properties
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
19
==PAGE:28==
4.3
Artefacts
For the third part of the training session, participants were provided with artefacts that may
exist in synthetic images. The potential artefacts appearing in different kinds of synthetic
images were collected from a comprehensive review of research material including [39],
[40], [41], [42] and [43]. They were then grouped into five separate categories listed in
Table 4.2, accompanied by a description of the potential artefacts. Participants were also
provided with an example image for each of the categories, where one of the potential
artefacts in the category was present in the image and highlighted as shown in Figure
4.4.
Category
Description
Skin Texture
Observe that areas of the face or background may appear
more or less textured. This means that the skin may appear
unnaturally smooth with fine details being lost; it may also in­
clude that the entire image has a smooth/blurred effect. The
skin may also appear more textured, irregular, or inconsistent.
Facial Symmetry
and Proportions
Note that the right and left halves of the face may appear asym­
metrical or disproportionate.
Facial Properties
Consider that the appearance, placement, ratios, or propor­
tions of facial properties may appear inconsistent, distorted, or
unrealistic.
Makeup and Ac­
cessories
The appearance of makeup or accessories may be distorted
or asymmetrical. For makeup, the appearance of lipstick, eye­
liner, and eyelashes may be distorted or misplaced. For ac­
cessories, hats, glasses, and earrings appear frequently. Hats
may appear disproportionate, blurry, or morphed into the face,
skin, or background. The frames of glasses may be partially or
completely morphed into the area around the eyes, such that
they are indistinguishable. The narrow portion of the glasses
frame may be morphed into the ear or the hair. The appear­
ance, shape, size, and symmetry of both earrings may be in­
consistent.
Visible
Objects
and Distortions
Note the appearance of unnatural objects or artifacts that may
appear on the face or background in varying shapes, sizes,
and locations.
Table 4.2: A table listing the categories of artefacts, and a short description for each of
them.
20
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:29==
(a) Skin Texture
(b) Facial Symmetry and Proportions
(c) Facial Properties
(d) Makeup and Accessories
(e) Visible Objects and Distortions
Figure 4.4: Example images used in the artefacts section of the training session. En­
larged portions with accompanying text provide descriptions of the artefacts that exist in
the image. The images presented are all synthetic.
4.4
Example images: Multiple Artefacts
In the final part of the training session, participants were presented with examples of
images that included several artefacts as shown in Figure 4.5. These were intended to
show participants that multiple categories of artefacts could exist in one image, and to
provide more examples of what synthetic images might look like.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) Example Image 1
(b) Example Image 2
(c) Example Image 3
(d) Example Image 4
(e) Example Image 5
(f) Example Image 6
(g) Example Image 7
Figure 4.5: Example images used in the multiple artefacts section of the training session.
Enlarged portions with accompanying text provide descriptions of the artefacts that exist
in the image. The images presented are all synthetic
4.5
Summary
This chapter details the development of the training session that is provided to the ex­
perimental group. A diagram of the structure of the face classification training session
is also provided. The main components include a welcome screen, systematic analysis,
22
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:31==
presentation of artefacts and example images of multiple artefacts.
Participants are introduced to the training session through a welcome screen. They are
provided with relevant information on face image generation models, specifically the ones
that are used in the experiment. They are also informed of the presence of visual artefacts
in images. Images may contain several artefacts or no visible ones, indicating that some
images may be easier to detect than other ones.
Participants are then provided with a systematic analysis based on face perception strate­
gies. The systematic analysis consists of the following facial traits that participant should
focus on when identifying faces: the ears, eyes, lower face, forehead, face shape and
hair. Participants are also provided with example images for visual guidance where the
focus areas are highlighted. For each of these, a list of potential artefacts are included
such that participants know what to look for.
Participants are then provided with five categories of visual artefacts: Skin Texture, Fa­
cial Symmetry and Proportions, Facial Properties, Makeup and Accessories and Visible
Objects and Distortions. A description was included for each of these categories along
with an example image of the kind of artefact that could exist in that category.
The last part of the training session included examples of images with multiple artefacts.
This provided participants with more examples of what synthetic images with multiple
artefacts could look like.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:33==
5
Experimental Design
This chapter outlines the experimental design in a methodological manner. Individual
sections are dedicated to key parts of the experimental setup and the considerations made
are discussed in detail.
5.1
Experimental and Control Groups
When designing the experiment, it was crucial to structure the perceptual experiment
such that participants’ synthetic face detection skills could be investigated. To evaluate
the impact of training on participant classification skills, two perceptual experiments were
designed:
The Experimental Group consisted of an experiment where participants received train­
ing halfway through the experiment.
The Control Group consisted of an experiment where participants received a 5­minute
coffee break halfway through the experiment.
For both experiments, all stimuli and experimental factors were kept the same, with the
only difference being that one group received training and the other did not. Structuring the
experiments in this way allowed for two points of comparison: The first point of comparison
included comparing participant accuracy scores before and after they had received the
training. The second point of comparison was made between the experimental and control
group. In this way, the effects of training could be measured both within subjects and
between subjects [44].
5.2
Selection of Experimental Software
A low fidelity prototype of the experiment was first created to conceptualise the interface
of the experiment in [45]. Several iterations of prototyping lead to the final experiment
design. A range of platforms were then considered for the experiment. These included
PsyToolkit, Unclassifyed, Qualtrics, Gorilla and Inquisit Web shown in Table 5.1. The
main requirements for the tool for the experiment were: image presentation, survey de­
sign capabilities, level of customisation and user­friendly design. Three of the platforms
Qualtrics, Gorilla and Inquisit Web, require licenses for use and for advanced features
such as scaleability.
Tool
Image
presentation
Survey
design
capabilities
Level of
customis­
ation
User
friendly
design
Source
PsyToolkit
yes
yes
high
yes
[46]
Unclassifyd
yes
yes
high
­
[47]
Qualtrics
yes
yes, but it is limited
low
yes
[48]
Gorilla
yes
yes
low
yes
[49]
Inquisit Web
yes
yes, but it is limited
yes
yes
[50]
Table 5.1: Comparison of tools for image presentation, survey design capabilities, cus­
tomisation, and user­friendliness.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
25
==PAGE:34==
The platform that met the requirements and was suitable for the experimental design was
PsyToolkit, so it was selected for use in the project. Below is a description of the platform
highlighting some of its advantages and disadvantages:
PsyToolkit 1 is an online platform designed for conducting psychological experiments
and surveys. It offers a high degree of customisation through a survey language and
a scripting language. This makes it suitable for conducting surveys and experiments
of varying degrees of complexity. It is free to use for non­commercial purposes and
fulfills most requirements for psychological studies. However, it does not offer full
customisation, and also lacks certain features that are commonly used in experiment
design. For increased customization and to make use of the full features, familiarity
and knowledge of the software is required [51] [46].
5.3
Visual Stimuli: Real and Synthetic Images
The experiment intended to create a scenario where images could be used by non­
experts. The images that were used were from online tools that are easily accessible.
This approach aims to simulate real­world conditions where individuals without special­
ized knowledge or access to professional image databases would source their images
from common, publicly available websites. There were two types of synthetic images that
were used in the experiment, the StyleGAN2 images were retrieved from thispersondoes­
notexist 2 [7] and the Stable Diffusion images were retrieved from Dezgo3 [52]. The real
images were retrieved for the FFHQ dataset [53].
Considering the ideal length of the experiment, the amount of images chosen to be pre­
sented in the experiment were 32. The images were selected to ensure that there was
a diverse and equal representation of different genders, age groups and ethnicities. The
full breakdown of the stimuli is presented in Figure 5.1.
1https://www.psytoolkit.org
2https://thispersondoesnotexist.com
3https://dezgo.com/text2image/sdxl
26
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.1: A diagram depicting the breakdown of stimuli images in the experiment
5.4
Sample Size and Power Analysis
To ensure consistency with existing research in the domain and determine an ideal sample
size for the experiment, a power analysis was carried out using G*Power 3.14 [54] [55].
The sample size calculation was conducted using a t­test to compare the means of two
independent groups, with the aim of detecting a difference between experimental group
participants and control group participants in their ability to identify synthetic faces. The
parameters included a one­tailed test, an effect size (d) of 0.5, an alpha error probability
(α) of 0.05, and a power (1 −β) of 0.95, with an allocation ratio of 1:1. The calculation de­
termined that each group should consist of 88 participants, resulting in a total sample size
of 176. The calculation was based on the expectation that training participants with visual
artefacts would improve their detection capabilities, as suggested by previous research,
and assumed a medium effect size with equal sample sizes in both groups.
A full overview of the parameters that were plotted into the software are provided in A.1.
5.5
Ethical Considerations
To participate in the experiment, participants must first provide their consent. Participants
are required to read the participant information sheet and consent form.
In the participant information sheet, participants were provided with relevant information
regarding the experiment, their rights as participants and the information that would be
collected. Participants were informed that the experiment consisted of a series of visual
classification tasks that would test their synthetic face image detection capabilities. They
4https://www.psychologie.hhu.de/arbeitsgruppen/allgemeine­psychologie­und­
arbeitspsychologie/gpower
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
27
==PAGE:36==
were also informed that participation in the experiment was voluntary, and that they could
withdraw from the experiment at any point in time if they wished to do so without explana­
tion. They would be provided with an Anonymised Code at the end of the experiment. If
they wished to withdraw their data from the experiment up to one month after completion
of the experiment, they were requested to reach out and provide their Anonymised Code.
Participants were also briefed about the structure of the experiment. They would be re­
quired to answer some demographic questions, followed by a classification of 32 face
images. The estimated duration of the experiment was 15­20 minutes, with small breaks
included to mitigate cognitive load and eye strain. Participant data, including demographic
information and classification responses, would be treated confidentially and psuedo­
anonymously, stored on password­protected PCs. The data would be processed in ac­
cordance with data protection legislation (GDPR), ensuring that it contained no personally
identifiable information. For any questions or concerns, participants were encouraged to
contact the researchers.
In the consent form, participants were required to confirm that they had read and under­
stood the content of the participant information sheet and how their information would be
stored. Participants are then required to provide consent for the following two statements
before they could participant in the experiment:
1. I understand and agree with the contents of the participant information sheet and
consent form.
2. I consent to being a participant in this experiment.
5.6
Experimental Procedure
The experimental procedure was designed to align with research goals and ensure par­
ticipant engagement. This section details each step of the experiment, depicted in Figure
5.2.
28
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.2: A flow chart depicting a breakdown of the face classification experiment for
Group 1 (Experimental) and Group 2 (Control.)
5.6.1
Welcome Screen
Once participants had consented to take part in the experiments, a welcome screen was
displayed to them as depicted in Figure 5.3. A short paragraph explained the primary ob­
jective of the experiment and what was expected of them. The participants were thanked
for their time, effort and willingness to participate in the experiment. It was noted that
their contribution was crucial in advancing the current understanding of face classifica­
tion capabilities. As described in [56], it is imperative to state the purpose and relevance
of the experiment in a concise manner to reduce inattentiveness. It is also stated that
participants perform better if the task is perceived as meaningful. The language used in
the experiment is thus generally concise, with enough descriptive elements to convey the
meaningfulness of the overall classification task. The complexity of language and written
instructions was adjusted to be comprehensible by a large segment of the population,
including segments of the population who may not be native English speakers. It was an
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
29
==PAGE:38==
aim in the study to recruit a diverse sample of the population to be reflective of the general
population.
Participants are also provided with some practical instructions before starting the classi­
fication part of the experiment. This includes viewing the experiment in full­screen mode,
adjusting their computer settings such that they are comfortable viewing and classifying
the images, ensuring sufficient time to complete the experiment and minimizing potential
distractions. The participants are reminded that the purpose of the study is to classify the
images carefully, and that their personal perception is valuable.
Figure 5.3: The welcome screen that participants were shown in the experiment
5.6.2
Demographic Questions
Before starting the classification part of the experiment, participants were required to an­
swer a few demographic questions. They were required to select their age, sex and
ethnicity as shown in Table 5.2. The demographic questions were selected specifically to
align with research goals and to sample the general population, and questions such as
professional experience and technological proficiency were thus omitted.
30
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:39==
Category
Options
Age Groups
18 to 24
25 to 34
35 to 44
45 to 54
55 to 64
65+
I prefer not to answer
Sex
Female
Male
Non­Binary
I prefer not to answer
Ethnicity
American Indian or Alaska Native
Asian
Black or African American
Hispanic or Latino
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
White
Other
I prefer not to answer
Table 5.2: Options for age groups, sex, and ethnicity
The ’I prefer not to answer’ option was included to preserve the anonymity of participants
provided they wished to keep their information confidential.
Figure 5.4: The screen where participants were required to answer demographic ques­
tions
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
31
==PAGE:40==
5.6.3
Instructions
Participants were then presented with instructions which they were prompted to read care­
fully before proceeding. They were provided with definitions of what real and synthetic
faces were referred to. The classification task was then described clearly and in adequate
detail for the participants to proceed swiftly. Participants were reminded of the task, that
they had to classify human face images as either ’real’ or ’synthetic’ based on their obser­
vations. One trial of the experiment consisted of participants viewing one face image for a
maximum of 15 seconds and then selecting whether the image was real or synthetic. Par­
ticipants are informed that the timer provides a maximum time of 15 seconds for viewing,
but participants are free to continue before the timer has elapsed. For context, participants
are provided with an estimated time that it could take them to complete the experiment
and that they are required to classify a total of 32 images. Participants are also informed
that they are provided with a 30­second optional break after classifying every 8 images.
This is to prevent participants from experiencing fatigue from viewing face images on their
screen for prolonged intervals of time. It also provides checkpoints for participants to note
their progress in the experiment, aiding in retaining their attentiveness. The instruction
screen viewed by participants in the control group is depicted in Figure 5.5.
Experimental Group
For the experimental group, the participants are at this point in the experiment informed
that they will receive training after they have classified the first 16 images. When they
have completed the training, they will proceed to classify the remaining 16 images.
Control Group
For the control group, participants are instead informed that they will receive a 5­minute
coffee break after they have classified the first 16 images. After the coffee break, they are
required to classify the remaining 16 images.
Both groups are then informed that the button for marking a selection is green for both
correct as well as incorrect choices. Participants are also informed that they will receive
their classification performance at the end of the experiment. The image below is an
example of the instructions for the control group.
32
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5: The screen depicting the instructions for the control group in the experiment
5.6.4
Trials
Participants then proceeded to the first trial, as depicted in Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.7.
Participants are presented with a face image centered on their screen with a continue
button on the bottom left. There is a 15 second countdown which does not appear on the
screen.
Once the timer has elapsed or participants have clicked continue, they are presented
with the classification task. They are prompted to answer the question that appears on
the screen. The question states ’Was the image real or synthetic?’. Participants are
then required to mark their selection by clicking on the buttons marked either ’Real’ or
’Synthetic’. Once participants have marked their selection, the previously greyed continue
button becomes clickable, and they proceed to the next trial. There are 32 trials in total.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.6: The first screen in one trial of the experiment. Participants are presented with
one image for 15 seconds.
Figure 5.7: The second screen in one trial of the experiment. Participants are required to
make their selection by clicking on the appropriate box
5.6.5
Breaks
Once participants have classified 8 and 24 images, they are prompted to take an optional
30 second break as depicted in Figure 5.8 and 5.9. They are encouraged to look away
from the computer screen and at a distant object to reduce eye strain. The breaks are
included to provide a comfortable experience for participants and are adapted from [57].
34
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.8: The screen depicting the 30 second optional break within the experiment
placed after 8 images
Figure 5.9: The screen depicting the 30 second optional break within the experiment
placed after 24 images
Once participants have classified the first 16 images, they have reached the midpoint of
the experiment.
The experimental group are shown the Face Classification Training Session.
The control group are shown a 5 minute coffee break.
5.6.6
Classification Performance
Once participants have classified all 32 images, they are shown their classification per­
formance.
The experimental group are shown their total accuracy score, their score before training
and their score after training.
The control group are shown their total accuracy score, as shown in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: The screen where participants are presented with their classification scores
after they have classified 32 images
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
35
==PAGE:44==
5.6.7
End Screen
Once participants have viewed their classification performance, they have reached the
end of the experiment. Participants are thanked for their participation and are assured
that their time and contribution to the research is value. They are prompted to continue
to complete the last step to ensure that their responses are accurately recorded. They
are reminded that they will receive their Anonymised Code and are requested to note
this down. Contact information is provided in case participants want to reach out with
questions or concerns regarding the experiment. This is depicted in Figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: The end screen of the experiment
5.6.8
Anonymous Code
The participants are provided with the anonymised code in a yellow box. They are prompted
to note this down. Once participants have reached this page, the experiment has been
completed and their data has been recorded. However, a link is provided that redirect
participants to a search engine should they wish to use it. The screen participants are
shown is depicted in 5.12.
Figure 5.12: The screen showing the Anonymised code to participants
5.7
Basis for Experimental Framework
The following subsections describe the considerations that were made for the basis of the
experimental framework.
36
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:45==
5.7.1
Duration of Experiment
The duration of an experiment is a crucial component of the experiment design. To de­
termine an ideal experiment length, two factors were taken into account. These are cat­
egorised as Experiment Design and Cognitive Load, and are discussed in detail below:
1. Experiment Design: When designing the experiment, concepts and recommenda­
tions from psychological research were reviewed to ensure an ideal experimental
design and validity of results. The research goals of the experimental study neces­
sitated an experimental design with several specific design choices. These choices
included the collection of a relatively large sample size from a diverse sample of par­
ticipants. It also included convenience as well as accessibility for participants. Both
of the aforementioned are advantages of conducting experiments online. In [58],
the authors discussed the different advantages and disadvantages of conducting
experiments with human participants in a lab setting versus online.
The disadvantages of lab­based studies include higher rates of participant dropout,
risk of self­selection bias and lack of control over experimental conditions includ­
ing compliance with experimental procedures. Recommendations for conducting
experiments online from [58] were taken into account during designing of the exper­
iment to mitigate the disadvantages as well as to determine the ideal duration of the
experiment. To ensure that participant dropout was minimized, the experiment was
designed to be shorter in length, no longer than 30­45 minutes and the complexity of
instructions and tasks were minimized. To reduce the risk of self­selection bias, the
experiment was shared in a wide variety of online spaces and with different potential
audiences.
2. Cognitive Load: To determine an ideal experiment length, the amount of cognitive
load and the consequential participant fatigue was taken into account. As discussed
in [56], there is a comparably indirect interaction between researcher and participant
in online experiments. This may result in potential inattentiveness due to a lack of
inclination to help researchers, and the relevance of the research should thus be
mentioned explicitly. It is also mentioned that participants perform better when the
task is perceived as meaningful. In addition to this, the presence of a progress bar
lead to less dropouts and gamification of the study yielded better results.
In [56], 103 Germans through a survey were asked when they would abort an on­
line experiment. In the experiment, participants were offered minimum wage. The
results depicted that 44% would after 15 minutes, 35% would after 30 minutes, 10%
would after 45 minutes and 12% would after 60 min or never. With reference to
these results, the experiment was designed to be completed within 15­20 minutes.
5.7.2
Placement of Stimuli
The placement of the stimuli in the experimental setting has an impact on the partici­
pants’ responses and the consequential validity of the study. This section delves into the
considerations involved in the spatial distribution and temporal sequence of the stimuli
mentioned below:
1. Spatial distribution of stimuli: Two main stimuli placements were considered:
• The placement of two facial images together on a screen where one is real and
the other is synthetic.
• The placement of a singular facial image on one screen where it is either real
or synthetic.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
37
==PAGE:46==
Considering the presence of visual artefacts in the synthetic images, presenting two
facial images to participants could potentially aid their selection by comparison. To
prevent participants from being able to compare images, it was decided to present
only a singular facial image. Thus, results were obtained specifically for participants’
observation of a singular image at a time. It was also intended to simulate the situ­
ation where a person might encounter a single face image online which they do not
know is synthetic or real. Additionally, presenting stimuli singularly allowed partici­
pants to form an opinion of one facial image without having a comparable reference.
The facial image was presented in the center of the screen to minimise clutter and
allow participants to centre their attention on the task. The spatial arrangement of
a singular facial image was consistent across all trials of the experiment, reducing
cognitive load and ensuring data quality.
2. Temporal sequence of stimuli: Several considerations were made for the order
of the stimuli. The facial image was presented to participants for 15 seconds. This
number was chosen to ensure that participants had sufficient time to process and
analyse the facial image without causing fatigue. Due to the limit, all participants
spent an equal amount of time on each image, allowing consistency and compa­
rability in the results. The limit also served to ensure that the overall length of the
experiment did not exceed the 15­20 minutes mentioned in the previous section. Af­
ter viewing the image for 15 seconds, participants were presented with two buttons
labelled ’Real’ and ’Synthetic’ of which they had to select one in order to proceed.
There was no time limit on this screen, ensuring participants based their selection on
their 15­second viewing of the facial image. The remaining parts of the experiment
were self­paced.
5.7.3
Counterbalancing and Randomization
Counterbalancing was used in the experiment to ensure that there were an equal amount
of participants in both groups. Upon clicking the invitation link, participants were chosen
randomly as a part of either the Experimental Group or the Control Group. The experi­
mental software allowed for participants to be redirected to either one of the two groups
depending on the amount of participants that were present in the other group. Participants
were intentionally not informed that the research consisted of two experiments, one for
the experimental group and the other for the control group. Additionally, participants were
not informed of which group they were in.
The placement of stimuli in the experiment was a crucial component of experimental de­
sign. The experiment was designed to assess the impact of training that was placed
halfway through the experiment for the experimental group. Images were placed to en­
sure that there was an equal representation of age, gender, ethnicity and image type
(StyleGAN2, Stable Diffusion and Real) in the experiment before and after the training.
Keeping these factors balanced, the order of images was randomised. The order and
type of the images is listed in the Table A.2.
5.8
Summary
This chapter details the experimental design in a methodological manner. The chapter
begins with descriptions of the two distinct groups for which perceptual experiments are
designed. The experimental group which receives training halfway through the experi­
ment, and the control group which instead receives a break. A discussion of experimental
software is presented, and PsyToolkit is selected for use in the experiment.
The visual stimuli that are used in the experiment are also presented, 32 face images, 16
38
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:47==
of which are real and 16 of which are synthetic. A diagram provides an overview of the
images and the associated demographic labels. These are selected to ensure that there
is diversity in the stimuli, but that they are still balanced in both the real and synthetic
images. Then, a power analysis is carried out, the results of which indicate that the total
sample size of participants for statistically significant results is 176. The chapter also
describes ethical considerations for the experiment.
The chapter provides a diagram with an overview of the structure of both experiments.
The experiment flow and each component of the experiment is then discussed in detail
with accompanying images from the experiment. The last part of this chapter discusses
in detail the considerations that were made for the decisions made in the experiment.
Considerations from experimental design and psychological principles are drawn from
and referenced where appropriate.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:49==
6
Experimental Results
This chapter presents detailed results and analysis from the experiment.
6.1
Participant Overview
The experiment was accessible through a link to the website. Upon clicking, participants
were brought to the front page where they were invited to start the experiment. The
experiment was disseminated primarily online.
The data was collected between the 23rd of April and the 5th of June 2024. Participants
were recruited through different sources, summarised in the list below:
• Social Media Platforms: LinkedIn and student groups on Facebook
• Newsletters: European Association for Biometrics (EAB) newsletter
• Denmarks Technical University (DTU): DTU Inside bulletin and in­person on campus
• Email invitations to research groups, B&O marketing department and student groups
The experiment was designed to be accessible to different segments of the population. It
was therefore an aim to recruit a diverse audience, with a focus on different age groups
and a wide ethnicity distribution. The goal of this was for the collected data to be reflective
of the general population, and to ensure that results could generalise.
In order for the data to be included in the research, the following inclusion criteria had to
be met:
• Participants had to read the participant information letter and consent form
• Participants had to agree with the contents of the aforementioned and consent to
participation in the experiment
• Participants had to be over the age of 18
• Participants had to partake in the experiment, to the end
Data from participants was excluded if:
• They did not complete the experiment, either by closing the tab/window during the
experiment or before the end of the experiment had been reached.
• They provided their Anonymous Code through an email to the researchers, and
requested the deletion of their data after the experiment.
A total of 529 people visited the welcome screen, of which 254 participated in the ex­
periment, and 184 completed the experiment. Of the people who visited the welcome
screen, a total of 48.0% people participated in the experiment and only 34.7% completed
the experiment. There were 184 participants who completed the experiment, with 95 par­
ticipants in the experimental group and 89 in the control group. An overview of the data
is provided in Table 6.1:
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
41
==PAGE:50==
Participant overview
Total
Total visitors to welcome screen
529
Completed surveys
184
Uncompleted surveys
70
Total surveys (complete or incomplete)
254
Experimental Group
95
Control Group
89
Table 6.1: An overview of the participant data for the experiment.
6.2
Participant Demographics
The demographic information for the participants was visualised simultaneously for the
Experimental and Control Group in figure 6.1. The demographic distributions for both
groups were similar with very small differences observed. The predominant age groups
were 18 to 24 and 25 to 34 in both groups, accounting for a total of over 70% of total par­
ticipants. The sex distribution depicted that there were more males than females who took
part in the experiment in both groups. The ethnicity distribution depicted there were most
white participants, followed by asian participants. White and asian participants together
accounted for over 80% of the total participants.
6.3
Accuracy Distribution
The accuracy distribution for the Experimental and Control Group is depicted in Table 6.2.
The mean accuracy score of the Experimental Group is 69.5% and the Control Group is
68.2%, indicating only a 1.3% improvement in the Experimental Group. Observing the
breakdown of the accuracy scores before and after training in the Experimental Group,
it can be observed that the mean accuracy score is 67.7% before training and 71.3%
after training. This shows that there is an improvement of 3.6% after the training session,
indicating that the training has improved the detection accuracy. For the Control Group,
the improvement in accuracy score is 0.2% after the coffee break. This indicates that the
improvement is 3.4% more for the experimental group compared to the control group.
42
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.1: The demographic distribution for the participants in the experiment split by
experimental and control group
To obtain a visual overview of the accuracy scores, raincloud plots of accuracy scores
for both groups are depicted in figure 6.2. For the experimental group, there is a greater
variation in the data distribution as compared to the control group. The experimental
group also has a larger interquartile range as compared to the control group, indicating a
larger spread of data. Additionally, the control group contains more outlier data points as
compared to the experimental group. Since there is a more varied distribution of data in
the experimental group, it is likely an effect of the training session.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
43
==PAGE:52==
Mean
Median
Standard Deviation
Minimum
Maximum
Experimental Group
69.5
69.0
8.8
50.0
91.0
Before Training
67.7
69.0
10.7
44.0
100.0
After Training
71.3
75.0
11.8
44.0
94.0
Control Group
68.2
69.0
8.7
44.0
91.0
Before Break
68.1
68.7
11.2
43.7
100.0
After Break
68.3
68.7
9.6
43.7
87.5
Table 6.2: A summary of the resulting accuracy scores in (%) obtained from the experi­
ment
Figure 6.2: Raincloud plots depicting the distribution of accuracy scores for the experi­
mental and control group
To obtain a more detailed overview of the results, the accuracy scores are depicted by
age group, sex and ethnicity for both the experimental and control groups. The accuracy
scores by 1) age group are depicted in figure 6.3, 2) sex are depicted in figure 6.4 and 3)
ethnicity are depicted in figure 6.5. It should be noted that since there not equal amounts
of participants in the different segments, it is more challenging to compare the results.
44
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.3: Histograms depicting the distribution of accuracy scores by age group for the
experimental and control group.
Since 18 to 24 year olds and 25 to 34 year olds constitute over 70% of the participants
in both the experimental and control groups, a comparison can be drawn between them.
As is depicted in Figure 6.3, 18 to 24 year in the experimental group have an accuracy
of 70.7%, while in the control group, it is 68.1%. Amongst 25 to 34 year olds in the
experimental group, there is an accuracy of 72.0%, while in the control group, it is 68.4%.
This indicates that the experimental group has a higher accuracy, likely attributed to the
effectiveness of the training.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.4: Histograms depicting the distribution of accuracy scores by sex for the exper­
imental and control group.
With regards to sex depicted in Figure 6.4, the females in the experimental and control
groups both have an accuracy of 68.8%. Males have an accuracy of 70.5% in the exper­
imental group compared to 68.6% in the control group. This indicates that males have a
slightly higher accuracy in the experimental group compared to the control group.
46
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.5: Histograms depicting the distribution of accuracy scores by ethnicity for the
experimental and control group
Both white and asian participants constitute over 80% of the participants in both the exper­
imental and control groups, a comparison is therefore drawn between them. With regards
to ethnicity depicted in 6.5, white participants have an accuracy of 71.2% in the exper­
imental group and 67.8% in the control group. Asian participants have an accuracy of
67.5% in the experimental group and 68.6% in the control group.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
47
==PAGE:56==
6.4
Image Classification Performance
The image classification performance of participants in the Experimental and Control
Group is visualised in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Count of right and wrong classification answers per image for the experi­
mental and control group. The vertical grey dotted line indicates the midpoint where the
experimental group gets training and the control group has a coffee break
48
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:57==
In the graphs, the green bars represent the right answers and the red bars represent the
wrong answers. The darker green and red represent the synthetic images and the lighter
green and red represent the real images. The vertical grey dotted line appearing at the
midpoint represents the training for the experimental group and the coffee break for the
control group. From image 19 to 24, there are fewer right answers in the experimental
group when compared to the control group. From image 25 to 32, there are more right
answers when compared to the control group. Thus, it is notable to observe that the
number of right answers for the experimental group when classifying real images are low,
and when classifying synthetic images are high. This trend is reversed in the control
group, where the number of right answers for the real images is higher and for synthetic
images is lower. This suggests that the training improves the ability to detect synthetic
images while having an adverse effect on the ability to identify real images.
This is further visible when the mean accuracy scores over time are plotted for the 32
images in Figure 6.7. The blue line depicting the Experimental Group and the red line
depicting the Control Group. It is observed that the mean accuracy score is relatively
similar for both groups until the midpoint (training / coffee break) after 16 images. The
change in classification patterns is then observed for both groups.
Figure 6.7: Line chart depicting accuracy scores per image for the experimental and con­
trol group
To provide additional context to the results, the 4 most­ and least­ accurately classified real
and synthetic images are provided in Figures 6.8, 6.10, 6.9 and 6.11 for the experimental
and control groups.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) Image 4:
A caucasian female
aged 50+
(b) Image 15:
A black female
aged between 26­35
(c) Image 13:
A caucasian male
aged between 26­35
(d) Image 20:
A caucasian female
aged between 26­35
(e) Image 23:
A black male
aged between 26­35
(f) Image 24:
An asian male
aged between 19­25
(g) Image 29:
A hispanic male
aged between 36­49
(h) Image 32:
A caucasian male
aged 50+
Figure 6.8: Experimental group: The subfigures a) to d) depict the four most accurately
classified real images. The subfigures e) to h) depict the four least accurately classified
real images
50
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:59==
(a) Image 15:
A black female
aged between 26­35
(b) Image 22:
A black female
aged 50+
(c) Image 4:
A caucasian female
aged 50+
(d) Image 13:
A caucasian male
aged between 26­35
(e) Image 8:
A hispanic female
aged between 36­49
(f) Image 14:
An asian male
aged between 36­49
(g) Image 24:
An asian male
aged between 19­25
(h) Image 32:
A caucasian male
aged 50+
Figure 6.9: Control group: The subfigures a) to d) depict the four most accurately clas­
sified real images. The subfigures e) to h) depict the four least accurately classified real
images
In Figure 6.8, it can be observed that 3/4 of the most accurately classified images are
those of females while all of the least accurately classified images are those of males.
Regarding ethnicity, 3/4 of the most accurately classified images are those of caucasians.
There seem to be age or ethnicity patterns in the least accurately classified images.
In Figure 6.9, it can also be observed that 3/4 of the most accurately classified images are
those of females, and 3 of the images reappear amongst the most accurately classified
when comparing to the experimental group. Regarding the least accurately classified,
3/4 are of males, and two reappear from the experimental group. There are no age or
ethnicity patterns in the least accurately classified images.
The results depict that images of real females are more accurately classified compared
to males. There are no significant age or ethnicity trends.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) Image 25:
A caucasian male
aged between 36­49
(b) Image 17:
A black female
aged between 19­25
(c) Image 27:
A hispanic male
aged between 19­25
(d) Image 10:
A black male
aged between 26­35
(e) Image 1:
An asian female
aged between 19­25
(f) Image 6:
A caucasian male
aged between 19­25
(g) Image 11:
A hispanic male
aged between 36­49
(h) Image 16:
A black female
aged between 36­49
Figure 6.10: Experimental group: The subfigures a) to d) depict the four most accurately
classified synthetic images. The subfigures e) to h) depict the four least accurately clas­
sified synthetic images
52
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:61==
(a) Image 2:
An asian male
aged 50+
(b) Image 12:
A caucasian female
aged 50+
(c) Image 18:
An asian female
aged between 36­49
(d) Image 27:
A hispanic male
aged between 19­25
(e) Image 31:
A black male
aged 50+
(f) Image 16:
A black female
aged 36­49
(g) Image 26:
A hispanic female
aged 50+
(h) Image 11:
A hispanic male
aged between 36­49
Figure 6.11: Control group: The subfigures a) to d) depict the four most accurately clas­
sified synthetic images. The subfigures e) to h) depict the four least accurately classified
synthetic images
In both Figure 6.10 and 6.11, it can be observed that all of most accurately classified
images are generated using stable diffusion, while all of the least accurately classified
images are generated using StyleGAN2.
It can be observed that of the most accurately classified, 3/4 are males in the experimental
group while the split is even in the control group. Only 1/4 image is classified most accu­
rately by both of the groups while 2/4 appear in the least accurately classified for both of
the groups.
The results depict that images generated using stable diffusion are consistently classified
accurately compared to StyleGAN2 which are consistently classified the least accurately.
Males are classified more accurately in the experimental group. There are no significant
age or ethnicity trends.
Observing the results for each image depicted in Table 6.6, it was noted that four synthetic
images had the most wrong answer counts in the control group after the coffee break.
These four images are presented in Figure 6.12.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
53
==PAGE:62==
Image 26:
A hispanic female
aged 50+
Image 28:
A caucasian female
aged between 26­35
Image 30:
An asian male
aged 26­35
Image 31:
A black male
aged 50+
Figure 6.12: The subfigures a) to d) depict the four least accurately classified synthetic
images in the control group after the coffee break. The images are all generated using
StyleGAN2.
It is noteworthy in this context that all the images depicted in Figure 6.12 are generated
using StyleGAN2. In each of the images, it can be observed that there are visible artefacts,
such as the ones that are included in the example images of artefacts depicted in Figure
4.4 which are a part of the training session. The obvious visual artefacts in the images
are described below:
• Image 26 contains an unnatural figure appearing in the background on the top right
of the image. Mismatched and slightly distorted earrings are also visible in the im­
age.
54
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:63==
• Image 28 contains blurring and distortion of the hair in different places and artefacts
appearing on the cheek.
• Image 30 contains distortion of the shirt appearing on the shoulder on the bottom
right of the image.
• Image 31 contains an asymmetrical appearance of both ears and unnatural appear­
ance of the earlobe. There also appear to be smaller inconsistencies and blurring
in the image particularly around the eyes.
The performance of the control group was significantly poorer in the above images as
compared to the experimental group. This suggests that participants in the experimental
group were able to apply their learning from the training session to identify the visual
artefacts. Since the control group did not receive training, they were unable to identify the
artefacts. Since there is a notable difference in the performance of both groups, it can
be concluded that the training session managed to improve detection capabilities in the
experimental group for StyleGAN2 images with relatively noticeable visual artefacts.
6.5
Total Correct Classifications
Experimental Group
Control Group
Real
1072 / 1520 (70.53%)
1118 / 1424 (78.51%)
StyleGAN2
336 / 760 (44.21%)
173 / 712 (24.30%)
Stable diffusion
698 / 760 (91.84%)
652 / 712 (91.57%)
Female
1114 / 1520 (73.29%)
1002 / 1424 (70.37%)
Male
992 / 1520 (65.26%)
941 / 1424 (66.08%)
Asian
492 / 760 (64.74%)
491 / 712 (68.96%)
Hispanic
504 / 760 (66.32%)
449 / 712 (63.06%)
Caucasian
563 / 760 (74.08%)
516 / 712 (72.47%)
Black
547 / 760 (71.97%)
487 / 712 (68.40%)
19­25
483 / 760 (63.55%)
475 / 712 (66.71%)
26­35
564 / 760 (74.21%)
503 / 712 (70.65%)
36­49
470 / 760 (61.84%)
462 / 712 (64.89%)
50+
589 / 760 (77.50%)
503 / 712 (70.65%)
Table 6.3: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group
In Table 6.3, the total correct classifications have been depicted for the experimental and
control groups. Overall, the control group outperformed the experimental group in classi­
fying real images, achieving an accuracy of 78.51% compared to the experimental group’s
70.53%. However, the experimental group demonstrated a higher accuracy in classify­
ing StyleGAN2 images, with 44.21% accuracy versus 24.30% for the control group. Both
groups performed similarly well in classifying SD images, with accuracy rates exceeding
91%. Gender­wise, female participants in the experimental group were more accurately
classified (73.29%) than those in the control group (70.37%), while male participants were
comparable across both groups (65.26% experimental, 66.08% control). In terms of race,
Caucasian faces were the most accurately classified in both groups, followed by Black,
Hispanic, and Asian faces. Age­wise, the 50+ age group had the highest accuracy in both
the experimental (77.50%) and control (70.65%) groups, while the 36­49 age group had
the lowest accuracy in both groups.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
55
==PAGE:64==
6.5.1
Sex Distribution
The total classification counts are then split by sex depicted in Table 6.4 and 6.5.
Female
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
440 / 656 (67.07%)
502 / 640 (78.44%)
StyleGAN2
155 / 328 (47.26%)
76 / 320 (23.75%)
Stable diffusion
301 / 328 (91.77%)
290 / 320 (90.62%)
Female
484 / 656 (73.78%)
448 / 640 (70.00%)
Male
412 / 656 (62.80%)
420 / 640 (65.62%)
Asian
216 / 328 (65.85%)
220 / 320 (68.75%)
Hispanic
215 / 328 (65.55%)
198 / 320 (61.88%)
Caucasian
237 / 328 (72.26%)
231 / 320 (72.19%)
Black
228 / 328 (69.51%)
219 / 320 (68.44%)
19­25
204 / 328 (62.20%)
207 / 320 (64.69%)
26­35
240 / 328 (73.17%)
232 / 320 (72.50%)
36­49
204 / 328 (62.20%)
202 / 320 (63.12%)
50+
248 / 328 (75.61%)
227 / 320 (70.94%)
Table 6.4: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group made by females
For female participants, the control group outperformed the experimental group in classi­
fying real images, with accuracy rates of 78.44% and 67.07%, respectively. Conversely,
the experimental group excelled in classifying StyleGAN2 images, achieving 47.26% ac­
curacy compared to the control group’s 23.75%. Both groups demonstrated high accuracy
in classifying SD images, with the experimental group slightly ahead at 91.77% compared
to the control group’s 90.62%. Females in the experimental group were more accurate
in identifying their own gender (73.78%) than males (62.80%), while in the control group,
females’ accuracy was slightly lower (70.00%) compared to males (65.62%). Regarding
race, Caucasian faces were the most accurately classified in both groups (72.26% exper­
imental, 72.19% control), while Hispanic faces showed a drop in accuracy in the control
group (61.88% vs. 65.55% experimental). Age­wise, the oldest group (50+) had the high­
est accuracy in both groups (75.61% experimental, 70.94% control), with the 36­49 age
group being the least accurate (62.20% experimental, 63.12% control).
For male participants, the control group also performed better in classifying real images,
with an accuracy rate of 78.65% compared to the experimental group’s 73.53%. The ex­
perimental group showed better performance in classifying StyleGAN2 images, achieving
41.91% accuracy against the control group’s 24.48%. For SD images, both groups per­
formed very well with near­identical accuracy rates (92.16% experimental, 92.19% con­
trol). Males in the experimental group were slightly less accurate in identifying their own
gender (67.52%) compared to females (73.04%), while in the control group, male per­
formance was similar to that of females (66.54% males, 70.44% females). Race­wise,
Caucasian faces were the most accurately classified in both groups (75.49% experimen­
tal, 72.40% control), and there was a significant difference in accuracy for Black faces
between the experimental (74.02%) and control groups (67.97%). Age­wise, the old­
est group (50+) again had the highest accuracy in both groups (78.68% experimental,
70.05% control), with the 36­49 age group being the least accurate in the experimental
56
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:65==
Male
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
600 / 816 (73.53%)
604 / 768 (78.65%)
StyleGAN2
171 / 408 (41.91%)
94 / 384 (24.48%)
Stable diffusion
376 / 408 (92.16%)
354 / 384 (92.19%)
Female
596 / 816 (73.04%)
541 / 768 (70.44%)
Male
551 / 816 (67.52%)
511 / 768 (66.54%)
Asian
261 / 408 (63.97%)
268 / 384 (69.79%)
Hispanic
276 / 408 (67.65%)
245 / 384 (63.80%)
Caucasian
308 / 408 (75.49%)
278 / 384 (72.40%)
Black
302 / 408 (74.02%)
261 / 384 (67.97%)
19­25
266 / 408 (65.20%)
263 / 384 (68.49%)
26­35
307 / 408 (75.25%)
265 / 384 (69.01%)
36­49
253 / 408 (62.01%)
255 / 384 (66.41%)
50+
321 / 408 (78.68%)
269 / 384 (70.05%)
Table 6.5: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group made by males
group (62.01%) and the 19­25 age group the least accurate in the control group (66.41%).
Across both female and male participants, the experimental group generally outperformed
the control group in classifying synthetic images, particularly StyleGAN2 images. Real
images, however, were more accurately classified by the control group. Classification ac­
curacy for Synthetic2 images was very high and comparable across both groups. Gender­
based performance showed that participants were generally more accurate in identifying
females than males. In terms of race, Caucasian faces were the most accurately clas­
sified across both groups and genders, with notable variability in the accuracy of other
races. Age­wise, the oldest age group (50+) consistently had the highest accuracy in
both groups, indicating a trend where older faces were more easily classified correctly.
6.5.2
Age Distribution
The total classification counts are then split by age depicted in Table 6.6 and 6.7. In this
section, results from the 18 to 24 year olds and 25 to 34 year olds are presented since
most participants fall into these categories. Results for the remaining age groups are
available in the appendix.
Overall, 18 to 24 year olds in both groups showed high proficiency in identifying SD im­
ages, with accuracies above 90%. The experimental group performed better in classifying
StyleGAN2 images compared to the control group (44.21% vs. 24.22%). Females were
classified correctly more than males in both groups. In terms of ethnicity, the performance
varied, with Hispanic and Black participants in the experimental group being classified
more accurately compared to the control group. Participants in both groups classified the
oldest participants (50+) more correctly, whereas the 36­49 age group consistently had
less accuracy.
In the 25 to 34 age group, both groups demonstrated high accuracy in identifying SD
images, with a score above 91%. The experimental group had a higher accuracy for
StyleGAN2 images compared to the control group (47.73% vs. 20.71%). emale par­
ticipants generally outperformed male participants in both groups. In terms of ethnicity,
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
57
==PAGE:66==
18 to 24 years
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
470 / 656 (71.65%)
391 / 512 (76.37%)
StyleGAN2
145 / 328 (44.21%)
62 / 256 (24.22%)
Stable diffusion
310 / 328 (94.51%)
240 / 256 (93.75%)
Female
493 / 656 (75.15%)
362 / 512 (70.70%)
Male
432 / 656 (65.85%)
331 / 512 (64.65%)
Asian
216 / 328 (65.85%)
179 / 256 (69.92%)
Hispanic
228 / 328 (69.51%)
160 / 256 (62.50%)
Caucasian
237 / 328 (72.26%)
182 / 256 (71.09%)
Black
244 / 328 (74.39%)
172 / 256 (67.19%)
19­25
215 / 328 (65.55%)
178 / 256 (69.53%)
26­35
237 / 328 (72.26%)
179 / 256 (69.92%)
36­49
210 / 328 (64.02%)
160 / 256 (62.50%)
50+
263 / 328 (80.18%)
176 / 256 (68.75%)
Table 6.6: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group for the age group 18 to 24 years
25 to 34 years
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
383 / 528 (72.54%)
451 / 560 (80.54%)
StyleGAN2
126 / 264 (47.73%)
58 / 280 (20.71%)
Stable diffusion
250 / 264 (94.70%)
256 / 280 (91.43%)
Female
401 / 528 (75.95%)
391 / 560 (69.82%)
Male
358 / 528 (67.80%)
374 / 560 (66.79%)
Asian
180 / 264 (68.18%)
194 / 280 (69.29%)
Hispanic
182 / 264 (68.94%)
177 / 280 (63.21%)
Caucasian
205 / 264 (77.65%)
206 / 280 (73.57%)
Black
192 / 264 (72.73%)
188 / 280 (67.14%)
19­25
173 / 264 (65.53%)
185 / 280 (66.07%)
26­35
211 / 264 (79.92%)
193 / 280 (68.93%)
36­49
164 / 264 (62.12%)
190 / 280 (67.86%)
50+
211 / 264 (79.92%)
197 / 280 (70.36%)
Table 6.7: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group for the age group 25 to 34 years
58
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:67==
Caucasians and Asians generally were classified correctly more often when compared
to other ethnicities. Across age subcategories, participants aged 26­35 and 50+ were
classified correctly more often, whereas the 36­49 age group were classified correctly the
least.
6.5.3
Ethnicity Distribution
The total classification counts are then split by ethnicity depicted in Table 6.9 and 6.8. In
this section, results from white and asian participants are presented since most partici­
pants fall into these categories. Results for the remaining ethnicities are available in the
appendix.
White
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
666 / 944 (70.55%)
630 / 800 (78.75%)
StyleGAN2
234 / 472 (49.58%)
73 / 400 (18.25%)
Stable diffusion
437 / 472 (92.58%)
373 / 400 (93.25%)
Female
714 / 944 (75.64%)
557 / 800 (69.62%)
Male
623 / 944 (66.00%)
519 / 800 (64.88%)
Asian
308 / 472 (65.25%)
267 / 400 (66.75%)
Hispanic
319 / 472 (67.58%)
241 / 400 (60.25%)
Caucasian
363 / 472 (76.91%)
294 / 400 (73.50%)
Black
347 / 472 (73.52%)
274 / 400 (68.50%)
19­25
298 / 472 (63.14%)
263 / 400 (65.75%)
26­35
369 / 472 (78.18%)
286 / 400 (71.50%)
36­49
297 / 472 (62.92%)
249 / 400 (62.25%)
50+
373 / 472 (79.03%)
278 / 400 (69.50%)
Table 6.8: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group for White participants
White participants in both groups demonstrated high accuracy in identifying Synthetic2
images, with both groups scoring above 92%. The experimental group showed signif­
icantly higher accuracy for StyleGAN2 images compared to the control group (49.58%
vs. 18.25%). Female participants generally were classified correctly more often than
male participants in both groups. In terms of ethnicity, caucasians were classified correlty
more often than other ethnicities. Across age subcategories, the 26­35 and 50+ groups
were classified correctly most often, whereas the 36­49 age group was classified correctly
the least.
In terms of asian participants, both groups demonstrated high accuracy in identifying SD
images, with the experimental group scoring 94.74% and the control group 87.50%. The
accuracy for StyleGAN2 images was comparable between the groups, with the exper­
imental group slightly outperforming the control group (36.84% vs. 34.78%). Female
participants were classified correctly more often than male participants in the experimen­
tal group, while the reverse was observed in the control group. In terms of ethnicity, black
participants in the experimental group and Asian participants in the control group were
classified correctly most often. Across age subcategories, participants aged 50+ were
classified correctly most often in both groups, while the 36­49 age group showed lower
performance in the experimental group.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
59
==PAGE:68==
Asian
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
209 / 304 (68.75%)
277 / 368 (75.27%)
StyleGAN2
56 / 152 (36.84%)
64 / 184 (34.78%)
Stable diffusion
144 / 152 (94.74%)
161 / 184 (87.50%)
Female
214 / 304 (70.39%)
257 / 368 (69.84%)
Male
195 / 304 (64.14%)
245 / 368 (66.58%)
Asian
94 / 152 (61.84%)
132 / 184 (71.74%)
Hispanic
100 / 152 (65.79%)
123 / 184 (66.85%)
Caucasian
104 / 152 (68.42%)
128 / 184 (69.57%)
Black
111 / 152 (73.03%)
119 / 184 (64.67%)
19­25
96 / 152 (63.16%)
126 / 184 (68.48%)
26­35
107 / 152 (70.39%)
122 / 184 (66.30%)
36­49
89 / 152 (58.55%)
125 / 184 (67.93%)
50+
117 / 152 (76.97%)
129 / 184 (70.11%)
Table 6.9: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group for Asians
6.5.4
Statistical Analysis
The ideal sample size for results to be statistically significant was reached in this thesis.
Thus, statistical analysis on the data was carried out, and is described below.
A Shapiro­Wilk test [59] for normality was carried out to determine whether the data was
normally distributed. Normality of the data distribution for both groups is an assumption
for the Independent Samples t Test to be carried out. The Independent Sample t Test
is used to compare the means of two groups that are independent in order to determine
whether statistical evidence exists to signify that the means are significantly different as
mentioned in [60].
Results depicted a p­value of 0.071 for the experimental group and 0.004 for the control
group. A p value of greater than 0.05 indicates that the data is normally distributed. Since
the p value for the control group is less than 0.05, control group’s data is not normally
distributed and the t test could not be carried out. As described in [61], a Mann­Whitney
U Test was then carried out as a non­parametric alternative to the Independent Samples
t Test.
The Mann Whitney U Test is used to compare and test sample means from two groups that
come from the same population, and tests whether they are equal or not. Assumptions of
the Mann Whitney U Test include that the samples from the population must be random,
independent of one another and that the data is ordinal [61]. To check the variance in the
groups, Levene’s test [62] was carried out. The resulting p value of 0.455 which is greater
than 0.05, depicted that the variances of the two groups were similar.
Results from the Mann Whitney U Test indicated a p­value of 0.539. Since this was more
than the alpha of 0.05, there is no statistically significant difference in the central tendency
of the data between both groups.
Based on the statistical tests performed on the data, results do not suggest that the training
provided to the experimental group was effective in producing a statistically significant
60
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:69==
change in the accuracy scores as compared to the control group.
6.6
Summary
This chapter presents the results from the experiment. The chapter begins with an overview
of the participants, and indicates that a total of 184 participants have completed the survey.
It outlines factors related to the dissemination of the experiment, and relevant inclusion
and exclusion criteria for the participant data.
Participant demographic data is then visualised for both groups, and results are described.
Accuracy distribution results depict that the experimental group has an accuracy score of
69.5% and the control group has an accuracy score of 68.2%. The experimental group
experiences an increase of 3.6% in accuracy after training, while the control group expe­
riences a 0.2% increase.
Results related to the best and worst classified images as well as accuracy distributions
for age, gender and ethnicity splits are presented in detail where relevant. Correct clas­
sification results are also provided and discussed in detail providing a full overview of the
experimental results. Statistical analysis shows that there is no significant difference in
the training group after training. A discussion is provided for the obtained results in the
next chapter.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:71==
7
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results, benchmarks them against existing results and provides
context for analysis and interpretation.
7.1
Remark on demographics
An aim of the data collection process included collecting a diverse sample of participants,
intending to replicate the general population. The results convey an over representation
of the 18 to 24 (43.2% experimental, 39.3% control) and 25 to 34 (34.7% experimental,
36.0% control) age groups, and more male (53.7% experimental, 53.9% control) partici­
pants than female (43.2% experimental, 44.9% control). This is attributed to the approach
to data collection, which occurred largely in university student groups and on campus at
the university. Although not entirely avoidable, this resulted in uneven amounts of data in
the different demographic splits. It is thus more complicated to compare accuracy scores
with regards to age, gender and ethnicity in a manner where the results are relative and
can generalise to the general population.
Taking the uneven amounts of participants in different population segments into consider­
ation, results for the most prevalent groups were included, and the remaining were placed
into the Appendix. The most prevalent age groups were: 18 to 24 and 25 to 34, and the
ethnicity groups were: white and asian participants. Results depicted that for both the
age groups, classification accuracy was slightly higher in the experimental group. For
the gender split, classification accuracy was slightly higher in males in the experimental
group. For the ethnicity split, accuracy was higher in the white participants in the exper­
imental group, while amongst asian participants, the accuracy was higher in the control
group.
This signifies that the training was effective for younger participants, males and white par­
ticipants in the experimental group. However, the overall difference between age groups
and ethnicities is not by a large margin. For a more detailed comparison on the different
age and ethnic groups, a larger sample size would be required.
7.2
Results
The overall detection performance and detection performance for different groups is de­
tailed in this section.
7.2.1
Overall Detection Performance
When comparing the accuracy scores of the experimental group, there is a 3.6% increase
in accuracy after training. In the control group, there is a 0.2% increase in accuracy. This
indicates that there has been a small improvement in the accuracy of the experimental
group after training. Since experimental conditions were nearly identical for both groups,
this improvement can be attributed to the effectiveness of the training session.
In the experimental group, 48.4% of participants demonstrated improved accuracy follow­
ing training, 28.4% experienced a decrease in accuracy, and 23.1% showed no change.
The results also show that participants in the experimental group experienced a decrease
in accuracy while classifying real images after training, compared to the control group.
Several psychological factors may explain why participants experienced a decrease in
accuracy after training. An explanation for this could be found in the belief disconfirmation
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
63
==PAGE:72==
paradigm from cognitive dissonance research in [63]. The belief disconfirmation paradigm
states that when people are exposed to information that contradicts their beliefs, they ex­
perience dissonance. If this dissonance is not resolved by changing their beliefs, it can
result in misinterpretation of the information presented to them [63]. Participants might
have experienced cognitive dissonance if the training session for them introduced new
information that conflicted with their prior strategy for classifying faces. This dissonance
might increase confusion and impact their performance as they attempt to reconcile this
information with their existing classification strategy.
Another possible explanation for the participants experiencing a decrease in accuracy
scores after training could be that the training session, perhaps its language, style or
placement in the experiment causes participants to misunderstand its intent. Participants
may feel that they have partaken in a psychological experiment or that they are being
evaluated in some manner other than what is disclosed. The content of the training may
be a factor in limiting its effectiveness to improve participants’ ability to detect synthetic
faces. This might be true for certain individuals with different learning styles, or for whom
the experiment did not provide relevant new information.
7.2.2
Performance on Real and Synthetic Images
For real images, the control group significantly outperformed the experimental group, with
an accuracy of 78.51% compared to 70.53%. This suggests that training has had an ad­
verse effect on the classification of real images. This can be explained by AI hyperrealism
as mentioned in [27].
For StyleGAN2 generated images, the experimental group showed an accuracy of 44.21%
compared to the control group 24.30%. This indicates that the training improved the ex­
perimental group’s ability to detect synthetic images. It also supports the idea that it is
possible to improve human capabilities in identifying synthetic images through training.
Both groups had high accuracy rates for SD images, with the experimental group at
91.84% and the control group at 91.57%, indicating that the methods used were equally
effective for this type of synthetic image across both of the groups. This indicates that
SD images were easiest for participants to identify. It can be concluded from the results
of this study that SD still produces images that are unrealistic enough to consistently be
identifiable as synthetic by human observers. It is however entirely possible that the re­
sults received from the specific SD images used in this experiment do not generalise to
other SD or image generation methods.
7.2.3
Performance across Age Groups
Participants found it easier to correctly classify images of older individuals. It was found
that the accuracy for classifying the 50+ age group was the highest in both the exper­
imental (77.50%) and control (70.65%) groups. This was followed by the accuracy for
the 26­35 age group, which was higher in the experimental group (74.21%) compared to
the control group (70.65%). The accuracy for the 19­25 and 36­49 age groups was the
lowest.
7.2.4
Performance across Gender
Participants found it easier to classify female participants in the experimental group with
a higher accuracy (73.29%) compared to the control group (70.37%), while male partici­
pants were classified similarly in both groups, with the experimental group at 65.26% and
the control group at 66.08%. This suggests that the training session had a bigger impact
on the number of correct female image classifications as compared to male classification.
64
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:73==
7.3
Limitations of Human Detection Capabilities
Statistical results depict that the training has not had a statistically significant impact on the
accuracy scores. However, a 3.6% increase in accuracy is observed in the experimental
group after training, compared to a 0.2% increase in the control group. This indicates
that performance can be improved to an extent, but is still low overall. Notably, there
are no comparable studies that have utilised a similar training structure for a perceptual
experiment. The results of this study reveal that the effects of the training session may
be limited.
Understanding why training may have limited effects often starts with the overall inherent
limitations of human perception. Humans may have a limited ability to detect synthetic
content. To address this, the literature on the limitations of human perception can be ex­
plored [4]. Research in cognitive science highlights that humans have a finite capacity to
perceive the visual world, with studies revealing that humans are unable to notice highly
conspicuous events that may be occurring in front of them. In digital media where large
amounts of information exists, distinguishing between authentic and manipulated content
poses increased challenges. Human perceptual limits may lead people to overlook types
of evidence in content that would indicate that it is synthetic. This is likely due to evolu­
tionary reasons, as humans have developed cognitive heuristics that allow them to focus
on information that is worth their attention and that they align with [4].
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:75==
8
Conclusion
The growing frequency of synthetic content in digital media in recent years has given
rise to the challenge of distinguishing authentic content from synthetic. The development
of AI technology for image synthesis has progressed rapidly, and synthetic face images
produced have become largely indistinguishable from authentic face portraits. Alongside
image synthesis models, ML based methods in forensics are used to address the chal­
lenge of determining synthetic media. The progression of realistic appearing synthetic
content is a growing concern when used for deceptive or nefarious purposes. It can have
large scale consequences for individuals, societies and governments. The development
of more realistic synthetic content can pose more threats in the future, as the distinction
between real and synthetic diminishes. This project focuses on human capabilities to de­
tect synthetic face images. Two perceptual studies are designed in this project, with the
aim of assessing and aiming to improve humans detection capabilities.
In Section 1.4, four research questions were proposed, and in this section, they will be
answered.
1. For human observers, what are the key visual artefacts that differentiate AI­generated
synthetic face images from authentic images?
Key visual artefacts appearing in synthetic face images are a consequence of the
generative process that they are generated with. Artefacts in images produced in
generative processes are specific to the generative models. These visual artefacts
can thus be used to identify synthetic images from authentic ones. A literature review
of the domain was conducted in order to collect and compile a list of artefacts that
could potentially exist in StyleGAN2 and SD images.
These were then grouped into the following five categories:
• Skin Texture
• Facial Symmetry and Proportions
• Facial Properties
• Makeup and Accessories
• Visible Objects and Distortions
For each of these categories, descriptions of potential artefacts were summarised
and listed into Table 4.4. These artefacts were used as a part of the training session
of the face classification experiment.
2. How can a perceptual experiment be designed to effectively investigate the impact
of training on individuals’ abilities to detect synthetic face images?
To investigate the impact of training on individuals’ abilities to detect synthetic face
images, a face classification experiment with principles from face perception theo­
ries was designed, implemented and carried out. A complete overview of the struc­
ture of the perceptual experiment is depicted in Figure 5.2. The structure and key
elements of the experiment are described below:
Two variations of the perceptual experiment are designed, one for the experimental
group and the other for the control group. The experimental group receives training
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
67
==PAGE:76==
halfway through the experiment, while the control group receives a 5­minute coffee
break at the same point. By structuring the experiment in this manner, there are two
points of comparison. Before and after the training in the experimental group, and
between the experimental and control group. This allows for a detailed comparison
of the performance in relation to the training.
Before starting the experiment, participants are provided with a participant informa­
tion sheet and consent form. These provide them with information regarding the
experiment, their rights as participants and how their data is collected and stored.
When participants have consented to participation, they begin the experiment.
Participants are provided with a welcome screen, instructions and demographic
questions. They then proceed with the trials of the experiment. One trial consists
of the participant being shown a face image for 15 seconds, and then two selection
buttons labelled ’Real’ and ’Synthetic’. A trial is completed once the participant has
made their selection. The experiment consists of 32 trials, one for each face image,
and apart from the 15 second image viewing screen, the experiment is self­paced.
The experiment consists of 32 face images, where 16 images are real and 16 are
synthetic. The age, gender and ethnicity for both the real and synthetic images
are balanced before and after training/coffee break in both of the experiments. A
detailed breakdown of the images is provided in Figure 5.1. Participants view the
images in a randomized order in the experiment. There are two breaks in the exper­
iment, placed strategically after the participant has classified 8 images, and again
after they have classified 24 images. These breaks allow participants to rest their
eyes and reduce cognitive strain. Once the participant has classified all the images,
they are shown their classification performance and their Anonymised Code. The
participant has then completed the experiment.
The experimental group are provided with a training session, the full overview of
which is provided in Figure 4.1. Participants are first provided with a welcome screen
and an overview of relevant information related to the training. They are then pro­
vided with a systematic analysis based on holistic and featural face processing the­
ory. Five components of the face were highlighted in a systematic order providing
a visual guide for participants depicted in Figure 4.3, these are listed below:
• Ears
• Eyes
• Lower Face
• Forehead and Face Shape
• Hair
For each of these categories, a detailed list of artefacts that may be found in them
was provided in Table 4.1. Then participants were provided with example images of
key visual artefacts as depicted in 4.2 and 4.4. Finally, participants were provided
with example images of multiple artefacts that could potentially exist in images, as
depicted in Figure 4.5.
3. To what extent does providing specific training to individuals affect their ability to
distinguish between synthetic and authentic face images?
The outcome of the experimental results depicted that providing specific training to
individuals improves their ability to detect synthetic face images. Mean accuracy
68
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:77==
scores from the experimental group of participants who received training during the
experiment depict an overall accuracy of 69.5%, with 67.7% before training and
71.3% after training. The control group of participants who received a break de­
picted an overall accuracy of 68.2%, with 68.1% before and 68.3% after the break.
This indicates that there was a 3.6% higher accuracy in the experimental group,
compared to a 0.2% improvement in the control group. Thus, the results depict that
there is a slight improvement in the group that receives training.
The extent of improvement in detection ability is explored by analysing results from
the experimental group. Results show that 48.4% of participants showed improved
accuracy after training, while 28,4% experienced a decrease in accuracy and 23.1%
showed no change. This indicates that while improved accuracy was observed in
a segment of participants, in over half of the participants, the training either had an
adverse effect or no effect on their detection performance. This can be attributed to
several reasons relating to the training session or psychological factors.
An additional finding was that for classifying real images, the control group (78.51%)
performed better than the experimental group (70.53%). This suggested that the
training had an adverse effect on the classification of real images. This may poten­
tially be attributed to the structure or content of the training session.
4. Are differences observed in human synthetic face detection performance across
various generative models?
Results from the experiment depicted that StyleGAN2 images were significantly
more difficult for participants to identify in both experimental and control groups. The
average accuracy perceived was 44.21% in the experimental group and 24.30% in
the control group. Stable diffusion images were comparatively significantly easier
to identify as seen in high accuracy scores. The experimental group received an
accuracy of 91.84% and the control group received an accuracy of 91.57%.
Overall, this indicates that SD images were more difficult for participants to identify
as compared to StyleGAN2 images.
8.1
Future Work
This section outlines suggestions for future work related to this thesis.
8.1.1
Demographic Analysis
This thesis presented synthetic face detection performance results for different demo­
graphic groups. However, there were different amounts of participants in each of the
age groups. There is scope for further research into different demographic groups and a
more detailed comparison, with a larger sample size of participants. A larger sample size
of participants may provide different results with regards to statistical significance than
what was obtained in this thesis.
8.1.2
Approaches to Synthetic Face Detection Training
The outcome of this thesis has shown that humans can be trained to perform slightly better
at identifying synthetic face images, specifically those produced by StyleGAN2 and SD.
Different approaches to designing training methods can thus still be explored, particularly
with regards to research within face identification.
8.1.3
Human Detection Capabilities
Synthetic images that are generated using newer models will likely become more realistic,
and the task of distinguishing between real and synthetic images becomes even more
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
69
==PAGE:78==
complex. This would mean that the appearance of artefacts in images becomes more
subtle, which would make them harder to detect.
With this increasing level of realism in synthetic images, it is interesting to further explore
human detection abilities. Human detection capabilities on face images from different
generative models can also be explored. This would provide more insights on the status
of generative models and the images they produce. There is also scope for research
within similar perceptual experiments for deepfake detection.
The results of this study also point towards the importance of research into alternative
methods to detect synthetic content and faces. Alternative approaches are needed to
maintain a distinction between real and synthetic content online.
70
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
Stamatis Karnouskos. “Artificial Intelligence in Digital Media: The Era of Deepfakes”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society (2020), pp. 138–147.
[2]
Number of internet and social media users worldwide as of April 2024. 2024. URL:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/617136/digital- population- worldwide/#:~:
text=As%20of%20April%202024%2C%20there,population%2C%20were%20social%
20media%20users. (visited on 05/18/2024).
[3]
Dilip Kumar Sharma et al. “A Survey of Detection and Mitigation for Fake Images
on Social Media Platforms”. In: Applied Sciences (2023).
[4]
Sophie J. Nightingale and Kimberley A. Wade. “Identifying and minimising the im­
pact of fake visual media: Current and future directions”. In: Memory, Mind & Media
(2022).
[5]
Federica Lago et al. “More Real Than Real: A Study on Human Visual Perception of
Synthetic Faces [Applications Corner]”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 39.1
(2022), pp. 109–116. DOI: 10.1109/MSP.2021.3120982.
[6]
Explicit, AI­generated Taylor Swift images spread quickly on social media. 2024.
URL: https://edition.cnn.com/2024/01/25/tech/taylor-swift-ai-generated-images/
index.html (visited on 01/26/2024).
[7]
thispersondoesnotexist. 2019. URL: https://thispersondoesnotexist.com (visited on
01/24/2024).
[8]
Face Studio. 2023. URL: https://facestudio.app (visited on 01/25/2024).
[9]
Deep Dream Generator. 2024. URL: https://deepdreamgenerator.com (visited on
01/25/2024).
[10]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative adversarial networks”. In: Commun. ACM 63.11
(Oct. 2020), pp. 139–144. ISSN: 0001­0782. DOI: 10.1145/3422622. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3422622.
[11]
Andrew Melnik et al. “Face Generation and Editing with StyleGAN: A Survey”. In:
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence PP (Jan. 2024).
DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3350004.
[12]
Robin Rombach et al. “High­Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Mod­
els”. In: 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) (2021), pp. 10674–10685. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
245335280.
[13]
Riccardo Corvi et al. “On The Detection of Synthetic Images Generated by Diffu­
sion Models”. In: ICASSP 2023 ­ 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2023, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP49357.
2023.10095167.
[14]
Facial Image Comparison Feature List for Morphological Analysis. 2018. URL: https:
//fiswg.org/FISWG_Morph_Analysis_Feature_List_v2.0_20180911.pdf (visited on
07/01/2024).
[15]
Facial Image Comparison Feature List for Morphological Analysis. 2018. URL: https:
//www.fiswg.org/documents.html (visited on 07/01/2024).
[16]
FACTSHEET FOR ANSI/ASTM STANDARD GUIDE E3149­18. URL: https://www.
aafs . org / sites / default / files / media / documents / FacialID % 20ANSI % 20ASTM %
20E3149-18.pdf (visited on 07/01/2024).
[17]
Jennifer Richler and Isabel Gauthier. “A Meta­Analysis and Review of Holistic Face
Processing”. In: Psychological bulletin (2014).
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
71
==PAGE:80==
[18]
Olivier Pascalis et al. “Development of Face Processing”. In: Wiley interdisciplinary
reviews. Cognitive science 2 (Nov. 2011), pp. 666–675. DOI: 10.1002/wcs.146.
[19]
Alice Towler, David White, and Richard Kemp. Can face identification ability be
trained? Evidence for two routes to expertise. Aug. 2020. DOI: 10.31234/osf.io/
g7qfd.
[20]
David White et al. “Error Rates in Users of Automatic Face Recognition Software”.
In: PLoS ONE 10 (2015). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13920347.
[21]
Marlene Behrmann et al. “Congenital and Acquired Prosopagnosia: Flip Sides of
the Same Coin?” In: Perceptual Expertise: Bridging Brain and Behavior (Jan. 2010).
DOI: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195309607.003.0007.
[22]
Federica Biotti, Katie Gray, and Richard Cook. “Impaired body perception in devel­
opmental prosopagnosia”. In: Cortex 93 (June 2017), pp. 41–49. DOI: 10.1016/j.
cortex.2017.05.006.
[23]
Alice Towler, David White, and Richard Kemp. “Evaluating the Feature Comparison
Strategy for Forensic Face Identification”. In: Journal of Experimental Psychology
Applied 23 (Jan. 2017), pp. 47–58. DOI: 10.1037/xap0000108.
[24]
Richard Russell, Brad Duchaine, and Ken Nakayama. “Super­recognizers: People
with extraordinary face recognition ability”. In: Psychonomic bulletin review 16 (May
2009), pp. 252–7. DOI: 10.3758/PBR.16.2.252.
[25]
Nils Hulzebosch, Sarah Ibrahimi, and Marcel Worring. “Detecting CNN­Generated
Facial Images in Real­World Scenarios”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer­
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops (2020).
[26]
Sophie Nightingale and Hany Farid. “AI­synthesized faces are indistinguishable
from real faces and more trustworthy”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences (2022).
[27]
Elizabeth J. Miller et al. “AI Hyperrealism: Why AI Faces Are Perceived as More
Real Than Human Ones”. English. In: Psychological Science 34.12 (Dec. 2023). Ac­
knowledgment We thank Sophie J. Nightingale and Hany Farid for providing open
access to their stimuli and data. Funding This research is supported by the Aus­
tralian Government through the Australian Research Council’s Discovery Projects
funding scheme (Project No. DP220101026), a TRANSFORM Career Development
Fellowship to A. Dawel from the Australian National University College of Health and
Medicine, and an Experimental Psychology Society Small Grant to C. A. M. Suther­
land. The funders had no role in developing or conducting this research., pp. 1390–
1403. ISSN: 0956­7976. DOI: 10.1177/09567976231207095.
[28]
Designed to Deceive: Do These People Look Real to You? 2020. URL: https://
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/11/21/science/artificial-intelligence-fake-people-
faces.html (visited on 01/26/2024).
[29]
People Can’t Identify Fake AI Faces From Real Headshots. 2023. URL: https://
fstoppers.com/artificial-intelligence/people-cant-identify-fake-ai-faces-real-headshots-
652150 (visited on 01/26/2024).
[30]
Andreea Pocol et al. “Seeing is No Longer Believing: A Survey on the State of
Deepfakes, AI­Generated Humans, and Other Nonveridical Media”. In: Dec. 2023,
pp. 427–440. ISBN: 978­3­031­50071­8. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-50072-5_34.
[31]
Yisroel Mirsky and Wenke Lee. “The Creation and Detection of Deepfakes: A Sur­
vey”. In: ACM Computing Surveys 54 (Jan. 2021), pp. 1–41. DOI: 10.1145/3425780.
[32]
Mika Westerlund. “The Emergence of Deepfake Technology: A Review”. In: Tech­
nology Innovation Management Review (2019). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:214014129.
72
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:81==
[33]
Nils Kobis, Barbora Doležalová, and Ivan Soraperra. “Fooled twice ­ People cannot
detect deepfakes but think they can”. In: iScience 24 (Oct. 2021), p. 103364. DOI:
10.1016/j.isci.2021.103364.
[34]
Rashid Tahir et al. “Seeing is Believing: Exploring Perceptual Differences in Deep­
Fake Videos”. In: Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. CHI ’21. Yokohama, Japan: Association for Computing Ma­
chinery, 2021. ISBN: 9781450380966. DOI: 10.1145/3411764.3445699. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445699.
[35]
Nadia Belghazi Mohamed, Georgiana Bogdanel, and Hilario Gómez Moreno. “Is
Training Useful to Detect Deepfakes? : A Preliminary Study.” In: 2023 18th Iberian
Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI). 2023, pp. 1–5. DOI:
10.23919/CISTI58278.2023.10211622.
[36]
Klaire Somoray and Dan Miller. “Providing detection strategies to improve human
detection of deepfakes: An experimental study”. In: Computers in Human Behavior
149 (Aug. 2023). DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2023.107917.
[37]
Alice Towler et al. “Diagnostic Feature Training Improves Face Matching Accuracy”.
In: Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 47 (Apr.
2021). DOI: 10.1037/xlm0000972.
[38]
Freepik. 2024. URL: https://www.freepik.com/free-photo/confident-beautiful-lady-
looking-camera-isolated-grey_6782441.htm#fromView=search&page=1&position=
16&uuid=2c808b10-ba7c-4652-a15a-7ee9d082cc3d (visited on 07/01/2024).
[39]
Kejun Zhang et al. “No One Can Escape: A General Approach to Detect Tampered
and Generated Image”. In: IEEE Access PP (Sept. 2019), pp. 1–1. DOI: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2019.2939812.
[40]
Hany Farid. “Creating, Using, Misusing, and Detecting Deep Fakes”. In: Journal of
Online Trust and Safety 1 (Sept. 2022). DOI: 10.54501/jots.v1i4.56.
[41]
Shivansh Mundra et al. “Exposing GAN­Generated Profile Photos from Compact
Embeddings”. In: June 2023, pp. 884–892. DOI: 10.1109/CVPRW59228.2023.00095.
[42]
Christian Rathgeb et al. Handbook of Digital Face Manipulation and Detection: From
DeepFakes to Morphing Attacks. Feb. 2022. ISBN: 978­3­030­87663­0. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-030-87664-7.
[43]
Diego Gragnaniello, Francesco Marra, and Luisa Verdoliva. “Detection of AI­Generated
Synthetic Faces”. In: Jan. 2022, pp. 191–212. ISBN: 978­3­030­87663­0. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-030-87664-7_9.
[44]
Gary Charness, Uri Gneezy, and Michael Kuhn. “Experimental Methods: Between­
subject and Within­subject Design”. In: Journal of Economic Behavior Organization
81 (Jan. 2012), pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1016/j.jebo.2011.08.009.
[45]
What is prototyping. 2024. URL: https://www.figma.com/resource-library/what-is-
prototyping/#low-fidelity-prototypes (visited on 07/01/2024).
[46]
Gijsbert Stoet. “PsyToolkit: A Novel Web­Based Method for Running Online Ques­
tionnaires and Reaction­Time Experiments”. In: Teaching of Psychology 44 (Nov.
2016). DOI: 10.1177/0098628316677643.
[47]
Unclassifyd. 2022. URL: https://unclassifyd.dasec.h-da.de (visited on 07/01/2024).
[48]
Qualtrics. 2024. URL: https://www.qualtrics.com/ (visited on 07/01/2024).
[49]
Gorilla. 2024. URL: https://gorilla.sc (visited on 07/01/2024).
[50]
Inquisit Web. 2024. URL: https://www.millisecond.com/products/web (visited on
07/01/2024).
[51]
Gijsbert Stoet. “PsyToolkit: A software package for programming psychological ex­
periments using Linux”. In: Behavior Research Methods 42 (2010), pp. 1096–1104.
URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:40935642.
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
73
==PAGE:82==
[52]
Dezgo. 2024. URL: https://dezgo.com/text2image/sdxl (visited on 06/18/2024).
[53]
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. “A Style­Based Generator Architecture
for Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2018), pp. 4396–4405. URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:54482423.
[54]
Franz Faul et al. “G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the
social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences”. In: Behavior Research Methods 39
(2007), pp. 175–191. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6962472.
[55]
Franz Faul et al. “Statistical Power Analyses Using G*Power 3.1: Tests for Corre­
lation and Regression Analyses”. In: Behavior research methods 41 (Nov. 2009),
pp. 1149–60. DOI: 10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149.
[56]
Marian Sauter, Dejan Draschkow, and Wolfgang Mack. “Building, Hosting and Re­
cruiting: A Brief Introduction to Running Behavioral Experiments Online”. In: Brain
Sciences 10 (2020). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:216646496.
[57]
Kamlesh Menaria et al. “Digital eye strain: prevention is the logical option”. In: Inter­
national Journal of Nursing and Medical Investigation 3.2 (Mar. 2024), pp. 45–48.
URL: https://innovationaljournals.com/index.php/ijnmi/article/view/503.
[58]
Anna Finley and Suzanna Penningroth. “Online versus In­lab: Pros and Cons of an
Online Prospective Memory Experiment”. In: Jan. 2015, pp. 135–161. ISBN: 978­
1­63483­879­5.
[59]
SPSS Shapiro­Wilk Test – Quick Tutorial with Example. 2024. URL: https://www.
spss-tutorials.com/spss-shapiro-wilk-test-for-normality/ (visited on 07/01/2024).
[60]
Kent State University Libraries. SPSS Tutorials: Independent Samples T Test. 2021.
URL: https://libguides.library.kent.edu/SPSS/IndependentTTest (visited on 06/30/2024).
[61]
Mann­Whitney U Test. 2024. URL: https://www.statisticssolutions.com/free-resources/
directory-of-statistical-analyses/mann-whitney-u-test/ (visited on 07/01/2024).
[62]
Levene Test. 2024. URL: https : / / datatab . net / tutorial / levene - test (visited on
07/01/2024).
[63]
Eddie Harmon­Jones and Judson Mills. “An introduction to cognitive dissonance
theory and an overview of current perspectives on the theory”. In: (Jan. 1999). DOI:
10.1037/10318-001.
74
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:83==
A
Supplementary material
Randomized order of images before training / coffee break
Synthetic1_Female_Asian_19_25.jpg
Synthetic2_Male_Asian_50plus.jpg
Real_Male_Hispanic_19_25.jpg
Real_Female_Caucasian_50plus.png
Synthetic2_Female_Hispanic_26_35.jpg
Synthetic1_Male_Caucasian_19_25.jpg
Real_Female_Asian_19_25.png
Real_Female_Hispanic_36_49.png
Real_Male_Black_50plus.jpg
Synthetic2_Male_Black_26_35.jpg
Synthetic1_Male_Hispanic_36_49.jpg
Synthetic2_Female_Caucasian_50plus.jpg
Real_Male_Caucasian_26_35.png
Real_Male_Asian_36_49.jpg
Real_Female_Black_26_35.png
Synthetic1_Female_Black_36_49.jpg
Randomized order of images after training / coffee break
Synthetic2_Female_Black_19_25.jpg
Synthetic2_Female_Asian_36_49.jpg
Real_Female_Hispanic_19_25.png
Real_Female_Caucasian_26_35.png
Real_Female_Asian_36_49.png
Real_Female_Black_50plus.png
Real_Male_Black_26_35.png
Real_Male_Asian_19_25.png
Synthetic2_Male_Caucasian_36_49.jpg
Synthetic1_Female_Hispanic_50plus.jpg
Synthetic2_Male_Hispanic_19_25.jpg
Synthetic1_Female_Caucasian_26_35.jpg
Real_Male_Hispanic_36_49.png
Synthetic1_Male_Asian_26_35.jpg
Synthetic1_Male_Black_50plus.jpg
Real_Male_Caucasian_50plus.png
Table A.2: A table depicting the labels and ordering of stimuli used in the experiment
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
75
==PAGE:84==
Input
Notes
Test Family
t tests
Comparison of two groups
Statistical Test
Means: Difference two
independent means (two groups)
Input Parameters:
Tail(s)
One
Expecting that training
participants with visual artefacts
will improve their detection
capabilities based on [25]
Effect size d
0,5
Medium effect size
α error prob
0,05
Power (1 −β err prob)
0,95
Allocation ratio N2/N1
1
Equal sample sizes in both groups
Sample size group 1
88
Sample size group 2
88
Total sample size
176
Table A.1: A table summarising the input parameters for G*Power analysis to calculate
the ideal sample size for the experiment
76
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:85==
B
Remaining Results
35 to 44
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
74 / 112 (66.07%)
150 / 176 (85.23%)
StyleGAN2
17 / 56 (30.36%)
16 / 88 (18.18%)
Stable diffusion
47 / 56 (83.93%)
82 / 88 (93.18%)
Female
75 / 112 (66.96%)
126 / 176 (71.59%)
Male
63 / 112 (56.25%)
122 / 176 (69.32%)
Asian
33 / 56 (58.93%)
62 / 88 (70.45%)
Hispanic
30 / 56 (53.57%)
54 / 88 (61.36%)
Caucasian
40 / 56 (71.43%)
65 / 88 (73.86%)
Black
35 / 56 (62.50%)
67 / 88 (76.14%)
19_25
27 / 56 (48.21%)
57 / 88 (64.77%)
26_35
41 / 56 (73.21%)
71 / 88 (80.68%)
36_49
32 / 56 (57.14%)
58 / 88 (65.91%)
50plus
38 / 56 (67.86%)
62 / 88 (70.45%)
Table B.1: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group for the age group 35 to 44
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
77
==PAGE:86==
45 to 54
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
48 / 80 (60.00%)
63 / 80 (78.75%)
StyleGAN2
20 / 40 (50.00%)
14 / 40 (35.00%)
Stable diffusion
34 / 40 (85.00%)
37 / 40 (92.50%)
Female
55 / 80 (68.75%)
59 / 80 (73.75%)
Male
47 / 80 (58.75%)
55 / 80 (68.75%)
Asian
22 / 40 (55.00%)
28 / 40 (70.00%)
Hispanic
22 / 40 (55.00%)
29 / 40 (72.50%)
Caucasian
30 / 40 (75.00%)
30 / 40 (75.00%)
Black
28 / 40 (70.00%)
27 / 40 (67.50%)
19_25
21 / 40 (52.50%)
27 / 40 (67.50%)
26_35
28 / 40 (70.00%)
26 / 40 (65.00%)
36_49
26 / 40 (65.00%)
30 / 40 (75.00%)
50plus
27 / 40 (67.50%)
31 / 40 (77.50%)
Table B.2: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group for the age group 45 to 54
55 to 64
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
56 / 80 (70.00%)
51 / 80 (63.75%)
StyleGAN2
16 / 40 (40.00%)
20 / 40 (50.00%)
Stable diffusion
32 / 40 (80.00%)
29 / 40 (72.50%)
Female
51 / 80 (63.75%)
51 / 80 (63.75%)
Male
53 / 80 (66.25%)
49 / 80 (61.25%)
Asian
21 / 40 (52.50%)
25 / 40 (62.50%)
Hispanic
27 / 40 (67.50%)
23 / 40 (57.50%)
Caucasian
28 / 40 (70.00%)
26 / 40 (65.00%)
Black
28 / 40 (70.00%)
26 / 40 (65.00%)
19_25
29 / 40 (72.50%)
23 / 40 (57.50%)
26_35
27 / 40 (67.50%)
28 / 40 (70.00%)
36_49
22 / 40 (55.00%)
19 / 40 (47.50%)
50plus
26 / 40 (65.00%)
30 / 40 (75.00%)
Table B.3: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group for the age group 55 to 64
78
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:87==
65+
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
22 / 32 (68.75%)
­
StyleGAN2
6 / 16 (37.50%)
­
Stable diffusion
11 / 16 (68.75%)
­
Female
19 / 32 (59.38%)
­
Male
20 / 32 (62.50%)
­
Asian
11 / 16 (68.75%)
­
Hispanic
8 / 16 (50.00%)
­
Caucasian
12 / 16 (75.00%)
­
Black
8 / 16 (50.00%)
­
19_25
10 / 16 (62.50%)
­
26_35
9 / 16 (56.25%)
­
36_49
8 / 16 (50.00%)
­
50plus
12 / 16 (75.00%)
­
Table B.4: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental group for
the age group 65+
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
79
==PAGE:88==
Black
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
­
38 / 48 (79.17%)
StyleGAN2
­
12 / 24 (50.00%)
Stable diffusion
­
19 / 24 (79.17%)
Female
­
37 / 48 (77.08%)
Male
­
32 / 48 (66.67%)
Asian
­
18 / 24 (75.00%)
Hispanic
­
18 / 24 (75.00%)
Caucasian
­
17 / 24 (70.83%)
Black
­
16 / 24 (66.67%)
19_25
­
17 / 24 (70.83%)
26_35
­
17 / 24 (70.83%)
36_49
­
16 / 24 (66.67%)
50plus
­
19 / 24 (79.17%)
Table B.5: An overview of the total correct classifications for the control group for Black
or African American participants
Hispanic
Experiment Group
Control Group
Real
69 / 96 (71.88%)
85 / 96 (88.54%)
StyleGAN2
17 / 48 (35.42%)
9 / 48 (18.75%)
Stable diffusion
43 / 48 (89.58%)
45 / 48 (93.75%)
Female
64 / 96 (66.67%)
71 / 96 (73.96%)
Male
65 / 96 (67.71%)
68 / 96 (70.83%)
Asian
33 / 48 (68.75%)
39 / 48 (81.25%)
Hispanic
29 / 48 (60.42%)
29 / 48 (60.42%)
Caucasian
36 / 48 (75.00%)
35 / 48 (72.92%)
Black
31 / 48 (64.58%)
36 / 48 (75.00%)
19_25
33 / 48 (68.75%)
33 / 48 (68.75%)
26_35
31 / 48 (64.58%)
38 / 48 (79.17%)
36_49
31 / 48 (64.58%)
32 / 48 (66.67%)
50plus
34 / 48 (70.83%)
36 / 48 (75.00%)
Table B.6: An overview of the total correct classifications for the experimental and control
group for Hispanic or Latino participants
80
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
==PAGE:89==
Training Humans for Synthetic Face Image Detection
81
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
