==PAGE:1==
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal
control of fuel cells and batteries powered air­
crafts
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries pow­
ered aircrafts
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Yashwanth Kutti Pochareddy
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Fysikvej, Building
310, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Low Temperature Elec­
trochemistry, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Yashwanth Kutti Pochareddy ­ s212570
Signature
Date
Under the Supervision of:
Johan Hjelm, Jinhyun Chang, Antariksh Chandrasekhar Dicholkar, Rujie Zhu
ii
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Seven years back, I did a course called Energy Systems Optimization at TU Delft. A
course that I repeatedly failed. Every time I had to retake it, I learned a lot more and over
time, this developed into one of my interests. Thank you, Zofia Lukszo, for making the
exams fun and also teaching so well that I now look at life as an optimization problem.
I would also like to thank a couple of friends who couldn’t help me with Carbon Capture
and Multidisciplinary Design Optimization due to life situations. Because you couldn’t, I
got the chance to learn these amazing topics by myself.
During my time at DTU, I had the opportunity to take some wonderful courses. One of
them was the 47302 Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Chemistry ­ Experimental Course. I would
like to thank all my teachers (Erik, David, Lars, Chao, Larissa, and Li) in that course,
and especially Li. Li, thank you very much for never hesitating to discuss random car­
bon capture papers whenever I knocked on your office door, and also for answering all
questions so patiently during both the experimental and theory courses. Thank you for
letting our team ruin the sample test cell with extra tests on methanol reforming. I also
want to thank Carlos and Olmo, who were great teammates in the experimental course.
You made the course more fun with all the banter and fights. I would also like to thank my
teachers ­ Peter, Nini, and Vincenzo (from Functional Materials), Ming (from Research
Immersion in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells), Christos (from Advanced Electrochemistry), Yang
(Electrochemistry), and Lena (from Feasibility Studies of Energy Projects) for the amazing
courses.
Another amazing course that I took at DTU was Electrochemistry. A course that I wanted
to take so badly, and when I did, it essentially changed how I view life and the course
of my life. Johan, thank you for making such an amazing electrochemistry course, and
for being such a great teacher and person. Thank you for being so encouraging when I
wanted to learn Python and also for giving me the opportunity to develop some electro­
chemistry apps. If you hadn’t been so encouraging, I would not have learned Python, and
would not be doing this thesis now. I would also like to thank Paolo and Iulian for mak­
ing all electrochemistry labs and assignments fun. I would also like to thank Pradip for
making hanging out at DTU Energy fun, being a nice friend, and also helping me during
the advanced electrochemistry course. Thank you, Paolo and Oliver, for also being great
friends throughout my time at DTU. There are also many other friends I made while living
at my dorm in Kagsakollegiet. I thank all of them.
A great source of inspiration throughout these three years has been some amazing sci­fi
movies and TV shows ­ Star Trek (NXG, Voyager, and TOS), Dune, Foundation, Devs,
etc. A small piece of narration that has kept me going is: “Space: the final frontier. These
are the voyages of the starship Enterprise. Its continuing mission: to explore strange
new worlds; to seek out new life and new civilizations; to boldly go where no one has
gone before!” I would like to thank all these great authors, movie makers, and more,
especially Gene Roddenberry for creating this amazing TV show called Star trek NXG,
which inspires me and many more people like me to look to the stars, keep an open mind,
keep moving forward in the hope that one day (within my generation) all the groundwork
leads to human space exploration, beyond our solar system and to find new materials and
new life. I would also like to thank some of my favorite bands ­ TOOL, Gojira, The Ocean,
Black Sabbath, Tides from Nebula, etc. for making some amazing songs which kept me
motivated through tough times. I would also like to thank Rob Falck, Justin Gray, John
Jasa, Joaquim Martins, and many more involved in the effort of OpenMDAO, Dymos,
and Aviary for creating theory and such amazing Python packages and research. You
made learning optimization really fun. I would also like to thank Henning, Alexander, and
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
iii
==PAGE:6==
Peter for encouraging me when I came to SKYLAB with ideas. I would also like to thank
my friends Syed, Vamsi, and Marcin for believing in my idea and signing up for the CO2
Onboard project to decarbonise the aviation and shipping industries.
I would also like to thank Antariksh, Rujie, and Jin for helping me with the thesis by offering
valuable advice. Thank you, Antariksh, for also pushing me to make the report better.
Thank you, Rujie, for giving me an introduction to HyDesign. It helped me formulate my
problem better. Sorry, Jin, that I couldn’t do the global optimization in this thesis, but I will
definitely explore this in the future.
I would also like to thank my parents. Thank you, Dad, for all the blood, sweat, and tears
to make mine and Mom’s life better, and thank you, Mom, for supporting us (me and Dad).
Without both of your support, I would not have been able to do this second master’s and
take risks.
I would also like to thank DTU for letting me into their masters program and giving me
the opportunity to learn more. Last but not least, I would like to thank Styrelsen for In­
ternational Rekruttering og Integration (SIRI) for giving me a chance and letting me into
Denmark to study.
iv
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Together, the aviation and shipping sectors account for nearly 2 billion tons of CO2 and
non­CO2 emissions and are projected to emit more in 2050. There is an urgent need
to decarbonise these transportation sectors. They can be decarbonised either by using
biofuels/carbon­free fuels or alternative propulsion technologies. Some alternative propul­
sion technologies include batteries and fuel cells. The integration of these technologies
into transport vehicles requires careful sizing and optimal control of the systems to min­
imise their mass, volume, or cost. Currently, there are limited open source tools with the
ability to work with multi­discipline powertrain systems and optimise them. In this thesis,
a sizing and optimal control tool, using Dymos and OpenMDAO, is developed to size the
standalone battery, the standalone fuel cell, and the integrated fuel cell battery systems.
The tool is tested with propulsion power time series of an Airbus A320 aircraft for two
ranges, 300 and 900 nautical miles at different gravimetric efficiencies of the hydrogen
storage tank, different specific powers of the fuel cell stack, and different energy densities
of the battery system. The integrated fuel cell­battery powertrain system equipped with a
battery of 2.5 kWh/kg performs better than the standalone fuel cell or the standalone bat­
tery system and can carry between 60 and 140 passengers of the intended 150 passenger
carrying capacity for a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
activefc,n−1
Number of active n −1 fuel cell system modules
c
Speed of light in a vacuum
Cbatsys−1
Constraint 1 of the standalone battery system
Cfcsys−1
Constraint 1 of the standalone fuel cell system
Cfcsys−2
Constraint 2 of the standalone fuel cell system
Cfcbatsys−1
Constraint 1 of the integrated fuel cell­battery system
Cfcbatsys−2
Constraint 2 of the integrated fuel cell­battery system
Cfcbatsys−3
Constraint 3 of the integrated fuel cell­battery system
Crate
Discharge or charge rate of the battery
dX
dt : SoC
Rate of change of state of charge of the battery with time
dX
dt : mfuel
Rate of change of mass of fuel stored in the storage tank with time
Ebat
Energy storage capacity of the battery system
ηbat−dis
Efficiency of battery discharge
ηDC−DC
Efficiency of Direct Current to Direct Current conversion
ηDC−AC
Efficiency of Direct Current to Alternative Current conversion
ηmotor
Efficiency of motor
ηstor
Gravimetric efficiency of the hydrogen storage tank
Kfcsys
Specific power of the fuel cell stack in the fuel cell system module
Kbatsys
Energy density of the battery system
kg
Kilogram(s)
kWh
Kilowatt­hour(s)
L
Litre(s)
λair
Stoichiometry of air fuel flow rate into the fuel cell stack
λh2
Stoichiometry of hydrogen fuel flow rate into the fuel cell stack
mbatsys,powertrain
Mass of the standalone battery powertrain system
mcool
Mass of the cooling system
mcompressor
Mass of a compressor in the fuel cell system module
mfc−module
Mass of a single fuel cell system module
(with fuel cell stack and balance of plant components)
mfcstack
Mass of a single fuel cell stack in the fuel cell system module
mfcstackcomponents
Mass of a single fuel cell stack components
mfcsys,powertrain
Mass of the standalone fuel cell powertrain system
mfuel
Mass of the stored in the storage tank
mhumidifier
Mass of a humidifier in the fuel cell system module
mh2,fcmodule
Mass of hydrogen consumed by a single fuel cell system module
mtank
Mass of the hydrogen storage tank system
MJ
Mega Joule(s)
NM
Nautical Mile(s)
Pbat−dis
Power discharged by the battery in standalone battery system
Pbat−chg,dis
Power discharged or consumed by the
battery in integrated fuel cell­battery system
Pfc−del
Power delivered by the fuel cell system
Pfc−max
Maximum power deliverable by the fuel cell system
vi
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:9==
Pfcmodule−max
Maximum electrical power delivered by a single fuel cell system module
Pfcmodule−bop
Electrical power consumption of the
balance of plant components in the fuel cell system
Pfcstack
Power delivered by a fuel cell stack in the fuel cell system module
Pgearbox
Power demand at the gearbox input
Pgearbox−max
Maximum power demand at the gearbox input
Pmotor
Electrical power demand at the motor input
Pmotor−max
Maximum electrical power demand at the motor input
Pn−1,fcmodule
Power delivered each of the n −1 fuel cell system module
Pnth,fcmodule
Power delivered by the nth fuel cell system module
rpv
Ratio of power delivered by the fuel cell stack
to the voltage of a single fuel cell in the stack
Vfcstack
Voltage of the fuel cell stack in the fuel cell system module
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
vii
==PAGE:10==
Acronyms
DAE
Differential Algebraic Equation
DC­AC
Direct Current to Alternate Current conversion
DC­DC
Direct Current to Direct Current conversion
LGL
Legendre­Gauss­Lobatto
LGR
Legendre­Gauss­Radau
LTO
Landing and Take­Off
LHV
Lower Heating Value
MDO
Multidisciplinary Design Optimisation
NOx
Nitric oxide and Nitrogen dioxide emissions
ODE
Ordinary Differential Equation
RPK
Revenue per Passenger Kilometre
RPM
Radau Pseudospectral Method
SoC
State of Charge
TMS
Thermal Management System
viii
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Propulsion Concepts in Aviation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Batteries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Fuel Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
A Short History of Tools involved . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2
Background
19
2.1
OpenMDAO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.2
dymos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.2.1
Description of a Dynamic system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.2.2
Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.2.3
Optimisation method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.2.4
Variables in dymos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.2.5
Constraints and Objective in dymos
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3
Methods
25
3.1
Standalone Battery system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.1.1
Optimisation problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Standalone Fuel cell system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2.1
Fuel cell system model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2.2
Optimisation problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.3
Integrated Fuel cell­Battery system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.3.1
Optimisation problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.4
Mission profile
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4
Results and Discussion
43
4.1
Standalone Battery system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.2
Standalone Fuel cell system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.3
Comparison of standalone powertrain systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.4
Integrated Fuel cell­Battery system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.4.1
300 Nautical Mile cruise distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.4.2
900 Nautical Mile cruise distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5
Conclusions
59
5.1
Recommendations for future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Bibliography
63
A Appendix
69
B Appendix
72
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
Section 1.1 introduces the problem, narrows down the problem to the aviation sector
and introduces the goal of this thesis. In Section 1.2, some relevant literature from the
aviation sector is discussed. In Section 1.3, the history of softwares relevant to the goal
of this thesis is discussed, and finally in Section 1.4 research questions for this thesis are
presented along with an overview of the contents of this thesis.
1.1
Motivation
Figure 1.1: Carbon­equivalent emissions of Past (with breakdown shown in dark and light
shades of grey for the years 1990 to 2021) and Projected scenarios (carbon intensive,
reduced fossil use, and net­zero). Shades of carbon intensive (red), reduced fossil use
(blue), and net­zero (green) indicate the extent of emissions for different demand growth
rates in business as usual, industry, and ambitious scenarios. Business as usual scenario
has a demand growth rate of 4%, industry scenario has growth rates of 2.9% in passenger
and 2.6% in freight, and ambitious scenario has approximately 0% growth rate. In the
carbon intensive scenario 100% of planes are powered by fossil fuels, in the reduced
fossil scenario 65% of medium and long­haul aviation is powered by sustainable aviation
fuels and 13% short­haul aviation by zero­emission propulsion systems (such as batteries
and hydrogen), and in the net­zero scenario 100% of medium and long­haul aviation is
powered by biofuels and 50% of short­haul aviation by zero­emission propulsion systems
(remaining short­haul flights powered by bio­fuels) [1].
The global aviation and shipping sectors each account for nearly 1 billion tons of CO2 ­ a
total of nearly 2 billion tons of CO2 in 2019. The demand in the shipping sector is expected
to grow at 3.5% per year [2], and in the aviation sector at 4.5% per year [3]. At this rate,
emissions from the shipping sector will double in 20 years or by 2040, and emissions from
the aviation sector will double in 15.5 years or by 2034 and then double again to reach
nearly 4 billion tons of CO2 per year by 2050. One of the concerns with burning fuel in
a combustion engine is that there are emissions other than CO2. In the aviation sector,
passenger demand is currently the main contributor to emissions, and the magnitude
of non­CO2 emissions is approximately 67% more than the CO2 emissions (see Figure
1.1) [1]. With decarbonisation of other sectors and a continued increase in demand in
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
1
==PAGE:14==
the aviation and shipping sectors, this means that the share of the aviation and shipping
sector CO2 emissions globally would increase, without adequate decarbonisation efforts.
Heavy­duty vehicles or trucks account for a major share of nearly a quarter of CO2 emis­
sions from the road transportation sector in both the European Union [4] and the United
States of America [5]. Batteries, fuel cells, and fuel cell­batteries electric powertrains are
some of the ways to solve emission problems in the trucking sector. Tesla’s Semi, a full
electric battery powertrain, has an advertised range of 300 to 500 miles (1 mi ≈1.61
km) with an energy consumption of 1.24 kWh/km [6]. Sripad and Viswanathan [7] in their
study found that a truck with a payload of 14,500 ­ 17,200 kg powered by Li­ion battery
cells of 243 Wh/kg has a limited range of 600 mi. With beyond Li­ion systems (such as
Li­metal, Li­S, Li­air) of 500 Wh/kg and 600 mi range, the trucks can carry a payload of
20,300 ­ 21,700 kg of payload. In a follow­up study [5] they compared Li­ion batteries­
based trucks with diesel trucks, while also considering the degradation rate of batteries
due to driving and fast charging. They found that the payback period is highly sensitive to
the battery pack replacement fraction, the electricity price, and the initial price difference
of the vehicles. Any increase in the price of electricity above 0.2 $ per kWh (or) for the
battery replacement fraction over 50%, would mean that the payback period is more than
half the lifetime of the truck (10 years). Sripad and Viswanathan [7, 5] used Monte Carlo
simulations on a series of mission profiles or propulsion power­time series of truck models
to perform this analysis.
In battery electric vehicles, the mass remains the same, whereas in hydrogen fuel cell­
based electric vehicles, the mass is lost because of the consumption of hydrogen fuel
to move the vehicle. This thesis deals with exactly this, that is, to answer simple but
complicated questions like how much liquid hydrogen fuel should a fuel cell electric vehicle
carry or what the installed capacity of the battery should be in a battery electric vehicle to
meet a certain mission profile and state­of­charge (SOC) constraints. These questions are
answered through optimisation, specifically dynamic (states change with time or another
independent variable) optimisation.
With respect to battery electric vehicles, the rate of specific energy increase of Li­ion
batteries is predicted to be in the range of 3 ­ 10 % per year [3, 8], with an observed
increase of 4% per year [3] after 2000. Although today’s (01/24) specific energy is not
clearly known, even assuming 300 Wh/kg at cell level in 2023, and 4 % increase per year,
the energy density would double in 17.5 years or 2040. It is reasonable to assume that
500 Wh/kg would occur somewhere between the years 2030 and 2035 approximately.
European Union regulation states that heavy­duty vehicle emissions must be reduced
by 65% (below 2019 levels) by 2035, and by 90% by 2040. Combining this with the
results of Sripad and Viswanathan [7] would indicate that the regulations proposed by the
European Union for heavy­duty vehicles can be met by batteries (assuming the grid is
decarbonised).
There are other popular architectures for heavy duty vehicles. Some of them include fuel
cells. Fuel cells are usually coupled with batteries to manage the power ramp­up or ramp­
down fluctuations of the missions to overcome the slow response time of the fuel cells. To­
gether, fuel cells and batteries can be used in different contexts, such as range extension,
fuel cell­dominant hybrid, and battery­dominant hybrid. In addition, the fuel cells system
may employ a low­temperature polymer electrolyte membrane­based fuel cells stack or
a medium­temperature phosphoric acid­doped polybenzimidazole membrane­based fuel
cells stack powered by liquid hydrogen, gaseous hydrogen, and methanol (with reformer
and gas cleaning) (but not limited to these). Some advanced concepts include ammonia
2
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:15==
cracking, and the produced hydrogen powers the low­ and medium­temperature fuel cells
after sufficient gas cleaning or powers the high­temperature solid­oxide fuel cells. The
same concepts can be applied for the aviation and shipping sectors [9].
Figure 1.2: Proportional contributions of key operation variables (Departures, LTO NOx,
RPK, and Fuel) in the global commercial aviation fleet as a function of flight distance,
based on 2015 data by Schafer et al. [3].
In the aviation sector, as shown in Figure 1.2 for the year 2015, aircrafts travelling within
600 nautical miles globally account for approximately 15% global revenue per passenger
kilometre (RPK) and fuel consumed, for 40% global NOx emissions from the landing and
take­off (LTO) phases of the mission, and for nearly 50% global departures. The aircrafts
travelling between 600 and 1200 nautical miles account for nearly 25% global RPK and
fuel consumption, for 25% of LTO NOx emissions and for 35% of departures. Together,
aircrafts flying between 0 and 1200 NM range accounts for 40% of global RPK and fuel
consumption, for 65% of global LTO NOx emissions, and for 85% of global departures.
For this thesis, with respect to the aviation sector, two ranges ­ 300 NM or 555 km, and
900 NM or 1665 km ­ are chosen. 300 NM is arbitrarily chosen as a midpoint between 0
and 600 NM, and 900 NM is arbitrarily chosen as a midpoint between 600 and 1200 NM.
In the shipping sector, carbon emissions are mainly from container, dry bulk and gen­
eral cargo and tanker vessel types. Container vessels account for nearly 25% of global
shipping CO2 emissions in 2023, dry bulk and general cargo vessels accounted for nearly
another 25% of global shipping CO2 emissions [10]. Dry bulk and general cargo­type ves­
sels may also include container ships, which could mean that container ships can account
for 25 to 50% of global CO2 emissions. Up to 10% of the CO2 emissions from container
vessels are emitted in the ports [11]. A simple literature search for non­CO2 emissions
from container ships yielded no results. Even within the aviation sector, the focus has
been placed on non­CO2 emissions only very recently. Although not discussed here, it is
important to consider non­CO2 emissions from the shipping sector as well.
In the shipping sector, over the last few years, a major focus has also been on using am­
monia as fuel in the context of combustion in 2­stroke and 4­stroke engines and cracking
ammonia into hydrogen and using it in fuel cells. Although ammonia has good potential
to decarbonise the shipping sector, its lower volumetric energy density of 15.6 MJ/L, low
energy density (LHV) of 18.8 MJ/kg [12] combined with a very high toxicity may limit its
use to certain routes and types of vessels. Furthermore, in a recent article researchers
have estimated that if the entire shipping sector used ammonia as fuel, it would offset
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
3
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.3: Total carbon dioxide emissions for the years 2012 to 2023 by vessel type in
the shipping sector [10].
the climate benefits obtained and even disturb the nitrogen cycle of the Earth (which is
already on edge with current fertiliser use) [13]. For this reason, Ammonia is outside the
scope of this thesis.
Container ship emissions are highest on the Asia­Europe and Asia­North America routes.
Furthermore, container ships travel at 15 knots/h or
28 km/h and may have a travel
time of 20 days [14]. In the context of this thesis, a time scale of 20 days or 1,728,000
s would be limiting in terms of computational power. Therefore, the shipping sector and
specifically container ships are excluded from the calculations and analysis with respect to
this thesis. Calculations and analysis related to the aviation sector would be manageable
because travel times usually are within 500 minutes [15] and would be manageable on
the hardware of a personal computer. This means that the scope of this thesis is limited
to only the aviation sector. Within the aviation sector, the class of aircrafts chosen for
analysis in this thesis is discussed in the next section (1.2).
The goal of this thesis is to develop prototype of a sizing and optimal control tool for full
electric ­ battery and fuel cell ­ powertrain architectures. A sub goal of this thesis is that
the tool must be based on software(s) that is free for commercial use. The tool should also
support single­objective optimisation (specifically mass minimisation) to perform top­level
analysis or conducting preliminary studies. Future versions of the tool should be able to
support the design of a powertrain system for ships and aircrafts that can minimise the
volume, mass and cost of the powertrain system at the same time, and even package the
systems within the available vehicle volume (see [16]). Such tools are important in the
context of designing sustainable aviation and shipping powertrain systems (even trucks).
First prototype of this tool is kept general, so it can be used for any vehicle but with different
computation requirements depending on mission lengths or cruise distance range.
1.2
Propulsion Concepts in Aviation
In 2019, 78 % of the total aviation demand was passenger flights and the rest was freight
[1]. The majority of civil aviation is dominated by single­aisle or narrow­body aircrafts
that can cover a range of 500 to 4500 km [17]. Airbus’ A320 family and Boeing’s 737
family are good representatives of single­aisle aircrafts. The official market outlook reports
from Boeing [18, 19] and Airbus [20] also show that the narrow­body class of aircrafts
has the highest demand. Therefore, to stay relevant to the future and to have major
4
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:17==
impact in terms of key operational variables (global departures, LTO NOx, RPK and fuel
consumption) as discussed in Section 1.1, this thesis will focus on narrow­body aircrafts
capable of travelling 300 and 900 NM distances.
There are different power train architectures as shown in Figure A.1 in Appendix ??. Some
propulsion concepts, as shown in Figure A.1, involve the use of a gas turbine powered by
fossil jet fuel or sustainable aviation fuel in combination with batteries (for example, Heart
Aerospace is a Swedish company that is pursuing this concept). However, as shown in
Figure 1.1, non­CO2 emissions are also produced as a result of the combustion of jet fuel
in the turbine engine. Even with the use of low­carbon or carbon neutral sustainable avi­
ation fuel based on biomass feed stocks, the combustion of these fuels might still result
in more emissions than just the carbon involved in the fuel. For this reason, hybrid pow­
ertrains that involve both gas turbine engines and electric propulsion are not considered
in this thesis or for the prototype tool being developed.
Dray et al. [21] compared single fuel aviation sector decarbonisation pathways (liquid
hydrogen, power­to­liquid jet fuel using direct air capture, and biofuel) in a scenario with
an aviation demand growth rate of 3.7%, and found that the liquid hydrogen pathway
resulted in the highest well­to­wheel CO2 emissions that also includes non­CO2 effects.
The direct air capture­based jet­fuel pathway resulted in the largest indirect electricity use
and investment costs. They concluded that none of the pathways offers a solution to
aviation decarbonisation but suggests that a combination of these pathways may help
with aviation decarbonisation. They also concluded that none of the pathways address
the non­CO2 emissions problem.
1.2.1
Batteries
Bills et al. [15] performed Monte Carlo simulations (with a state of charge (SoC) con­
straint of 30% at the end of mission) for 3 different classes of aircraft: regional (30­75
passengers, 648 km, 50 tons), narrow­body (75 ­ 200 passengers, 926 km, 100 tons) and
wide­body (200­400 passengers, 1852 km, 250 tons) and found that a mean pack specific
energy of 600, 820, and 1280 Wh/kg is required for regional, narrow­body, and wide­body
aircrafts, respectively. The increased specific energy requirement is mainly attributed to
the cruise distance rather than size. They observed that only the regional aircraft cate­
gory can travel the full cruise distance range with full passenger capacity. Additionally,
they suggested that the battery specific energy may need to surpass 2000 Wh/kg for both
narrow­body and wide­body aircrafts to achieve any significant cruise range or passenger
capacity. Furthermore, they also found that as the pack energy increases, the pack power
decreases, i.e., the maximum discharge C­rate which was limited to values of 1.
Schafer et al. [3] did an in­depth study that also included environmental effects and found
that an aircraft with a pack­specific energy of 800 Wh/kg for a range of 600 Nautical
Miles (NM) or 1111 km is possible and can eliminate about 40% of NOx emissions during
landing and take­off in the airport area. In another comparison in terms of the cost per
kWh of jet fuel and battery, they found that a carbon tax (up to 100 $ per ton CO2 or 200
$ per ton of CO2 if non­CO2 effects are considered) is necessary along with a battery
cost of less than 100 $ per kWh to make a narrow­body class aircraft with 741 km cruise
range, with a battery pack of 800 Wh/kg, feasible. They also noted that the longer the
range, the higher the carbon tax must be. From these top­level analyses it is sufficient
to say that batteries by themselves are not enough to decarbonise the aviation sector,
especially the longer­range transportation of passengers and freight. In a recent update
on aircrafts, Viswanathan et al. [22] highlighted that the requirement of the energy left in
the battery at the end of a journey decreases as the mission lengthens, with an energy
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
5
==PAGE:18==
reserve requirement of up to 50% at 2,000 km and dropping to 10­12% at 11,000 km.
They also discuss that the major cost element is periodic battery replacement and, for the
battery to be cost competitive with the engine overhaul, it must cost less than 8 to 13 $
per kWh.
1.2.2
Fuel Cells
Fuel cells are another way to decarbonise the aviation sector, especially fuel cells powered
by higher gravimetric efficiency solutions such as liquid hydrogen, methanol reforming,
ammonia cracking, etc. More often than not, fuel cells are combined with gas turbines
(or) batteries (or), ultracapacitors (or), or a combination of them. When more than one
power source is involved, the power can be shared between each of the power production
units. In some cases, such as batteries or ultracapacitors, power may also be consumed
to recharge.
Power sharing can be unregulated or regulated [23]. In an unregulated power sharing
system between a fuel cell and a battery, they are connected in parallel with a diode in
series with the fuel cell stack and a dc­dc converter. This will lead to operation on the basis
of their natural current­voltage characteristics. This will lead to a drop in battery voltage
and a decrease in its state of charge. To compensate for the loss of battery power, the
voltage of the fuel cell also drops, leading to an increase in its current and power delivered
from it [23].
In a regulated power sharing system, the battery would be conserved with the use of
a high­power and energy­density fuel cell power source (but this can be different with
improvement in the energy density of batteries and their operational discharge or charge
rates). The battery is used only during high­power portions, such as take off, climb, etc.
Depending on the state of charge of the battery, they can also be recharged with fuel cell
power to meet the minimum landing requirements (20 ­ 35% SOC). An important question
that arises here is ‘How to split the power between the fuel cell and the battery, should and
when must a battery be recharged?’ To answer such a question, an optimal control tool
is required that can make decisions like sizing the fuel cell and battery, control when and
how much to discharge from or to charge the battery using fuel cell system, how much
fuel to carry to meet these decisions, etc.
Figure 1.4: Hybridization factor or peak power shaving strategy [24].
Figure 1.4 shows how the power may be regulated. To describe the power sharing crudely,
one can say that a horizontal line is drawn across the power profile or power­time series.
The battery satisfies (or discharges) any power requirement above, and at any power level
below this horizontal line, the battery is recharged. This horizontal line can be described
6
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:19==
as the hybridisation factor (or) power split ratio (or) split ratio (or) degree of hybridisation
[25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30].
In many cases, the mission profile is usually split into different segments. For example,
in an electric vertical take­off and landing vehicle, the mission profile is divided into more
than one segment: idle, hover, climb, cruise, descent, spindown, etc. In each of the
segments, the power required by the electric motors may be different, and in each of
these segments, the hybridisation factor or the split power ratio can be adjusted between
the power sources.
Ng and Datta [23], have no specific definition for power sharing, and also no target ratio
but rather use certain rules that control the charge or discharge decision of the battery
based on the electrical power requirement and on its state of charge (SoC) . Mazzeo and
Ilio [25] used a different terminology called the control factor ‘k ’, which is the ratio of power
delivered by the battery to the total power delivered. Park et al. [26] used a terminology
called ‘DoH ’or Degree of Hybridisation, which is the ratio of the maximum power deliv­
erable by the battery to the maximum power required at any point of the mission. The
maximum power required at any point of the mission is the sum of the maximum power
deliverable by the fuel cell and the maximum power deliverable by the battery. Staggat
et al. [24] in their study instead of using a specific terminology referred to this strategy as
the peak power shaving strategy. Staggat et al. [24] defined their control factor or degree
of hybridisation as the ratio of the power delivered by the fuel cell to the maximum power
required from the mission profile. Palladino [28] also used the term Degree of Hybridis­
ation or ‘Hp ’similar to Park et al. [26], with a modified definition depending on the use
case. For example, in the case of the fuel cell­gas turbine architecture, the term degree
of hybridisation refers to the ratio of the power delivered by fuel cells to the total power
required from the power train system. Eissele et al. [31] in their study with liquid hydrogen
and superconducting motors, determined the minimum power to be delivered based on
the minimum flow of hydrogen required to keep all components that it cools within the
operating temperature window. Kadyk et al. [27] in their study used the term degree of
hybridisation as the ratio of the maximum power delivered by the fuel cell to the maximum
total power required in a certain mission.
Lammen and Vankan [29] in their study of single­aisle aircrafts with fuel cells, batteries,
photovoltaics, and a gas turbine engine of reduced diameter used the term power split
ratio. They defined this term as the ratio of the power supplied by the electric motors to
the shaft to the total shaft power required. They also applied this ratio only during the taxi,
take­off, and climb phases in the mission. Tan [30] in the Master thesis on the design of
electrically assisted propulsion and power systems for short­range missions of an A320
aircraft with gas turbine, fuel cells, battery and photovoltaics used the term degree of
hybridisation or power split ratio. It is the ratio of electrical power supplied by the motor
to the total power required. Tan also used different power split ratio values for different
segments in the mission. For some segments like taxi­out, landing, and taxi­in, the power
split ratio is set to 1, and for cruise, descent, and approach segments, the power split ratio
is set to 0. However, the power split ratio is not fixed in the take­off and climb segments.
From surveying the literature, there seems to be no common ground for defining the split
of power between power sources, and the definitions vary as well. For this thesis, a
mission profile will be generated before hand. Since the mission profile will be available
and to reduce the size of the problem, Kadyk et al.’s [27] approach will be applicable where
degree of hybridisation (or) split ratio is defined as ratio of maximum power delivered by
the fuel cell to the maximum power from the mission profile or power­time series. This split
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
7
==PAGE:20==
ratio is only applicable if the powertrain has both fuel cells and batteries. Furthermore,
to keep the problem simple, the efficiencies of the motor, DC­DC, DC­AC, and any other
power converter are assumed to be 100 %.
Table 1.1 compares tank, fuel consumption, state of charge change in battery, balance
of plant and thermal management system model information from the surveyed literature.
Different sources in the literature applied and presented different levels of detail for mod­
elling subsystems of fuel cells, batteries, and their thermal management systems involved
in powertrain architectures, and some of them do not provide any information on certain
parts of the modelling and sizing. For this thesis, standard equations are used from the
‘Fuel Cell Systems Explained’ book by Larminie and Dicks [32] to model fuel flow rate
of hydrogen, water flow rate from fuel cells, compressor power for the fuel cell system
module, rate of change of state of charge, etc. The tables (1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, and 1.6)
presented at the end of the chapter list and compare vehicle, powertrain, methodology,
results, and data from the surveyed literature.
Tables 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, and 1.6 also compare software from the surveyed literature.
Four articles use MATLAB [33], one uses FAST­OAD [34] developed on top of OpenM­
DAO [35], one uses Simcenter Amesim [36], one uses RISPECT+ [37], and eight articles
have not reported any information about modelling software or the type of optimisation
technique used. MATLAB is not open source software and must be licenced, and the
licences quickly add up with extra features. FAST­OAD is an open source package built
on top of OpenMDAO but it does not have optimal control capabilities, and Simcenter
Amesim is commercially licenced. RISPECT+ is developed with vertical take­off and land­
ing vehicles and cannot be used to develop a general framework. Over the years, several
packages have been introduced to solve path­dependent optimal control aircraft design
problems. The next section gives a brief history of the tools involved in solving optimal
control problems, followed by a discussion of the software relevant for this thesis.
1.3
A Short History of Tools involved
The powertrain architectures that are of interest in this thesis are path­dependent systems
with multiple disciplines working together, where the path taken affects the performance
of the system or the objective for which the system was built. State­time histories such as
the state of charge of a battery is a good example in which the history of state of charge
affects the performance of the system directly. Failing to consider state­time histories
may lead to over­design or under­design of the system and inaccurately estimate the sys­
tem’s capabilities [38]. Some relevant terminologies of path­dependent systems include
states, controls or dynamic controls, design parameters or static controls, constraints, and
objectives, for which details are presented in the chapter 2.
Aircraft design, wind, solar farm layout design, optimal control or dispatch of power gen­
eration units in the electricity grid, etc. are some good examples of path­dependent prob­
lems. Each of these problems has some governing equations, referred to as ordinary
differential equations or ODE [38]. Fritz Kaiser from Germany in 1944 published the ear­
liest study on the path­dependent optimisation problem of the aircraft [39]. The objective
was to minimise the climb time of a jet­propelled aircraft. Over time, several improvements
were made for use in air and space applications, but can also be applied to other engi­
neering disciplines where optimal control of parameters over time or another independent
variable is required. Bryson and Denham [40] developed an optimisation problem for a
supersonic interceptor with the objective of minimising climb time and maximising range.
More examples of coupled multidisciplinary design optimisation (MDO) of path­dependent
systems have been published since then. In the 1990s, several new tools, with multiple
8
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:21==
disciplines, were developed, and Boeing’s research on using MDO to improve 46% perfor­
mance over baseline further motivated the use of MDO in path­dependent system design
and optimisation problems [38].
One of the issues with MDO problems is the computational cost. The number of disci­
plines, design variables and constraints within and outside the disciplines, and cost of
simulation contribute to the overall cost of solving MDO problem. MDO problems can be
solved using gradient­free or gradient­based optimisers. Gradient­based optimisers de­
pend on the derivatives of the objectives and constraints of the problem with respect to
its design variables. The advantage of gradient­based optimisers is that they scale well
with a number of design variables as opposed to gradient­free optimisers. In view of this,
OpenMDAO was developed to provide a high­performance and general purpose MDO
framework with linear and non­linear solver methods to converge disciplines within the
optimisation problem [41].
Electric aircraft design problems have strongly coupled disciplines than conventional air­
craft design problems. For electric aircrafts, there can be thermal constraints which are
time­ and path­dependent and would require trajectory analysis and optimisation [41].
ESAero is software for designing fixed­wing aircrafts, but is proprietary. PANTHER is
another tool developed for the same, but lacks the MDO capability. Georgia Tech’s GT­
HEAT [42] framework is a propulsion­focused model with all components implemented in
the Numerical Propulsion Simulation System software. However, GT­HEAT lacks capa­
bilities in other disciplines such as aerodynamics, structure, and cost.
LEAPS [43, 44] was introduced as a replacement for the FLOPS [45] mission analysis
software (by NASA). LEAPS also supports mixed electric and fuel­burning propulsion.
Hwang and Ning [46] introduced a medium­fidelity optimisation tool, but it lacked ther­
mal modelling. Falck et al. [47] in their study identified the need to model and include
thermal constraints. There have been several other works which are detailed in Brelje’s
Ph.D. Thesis [41]. Brelje [48] also developed OpenConcept, a Python package based
on OpenMDAO to model some components of an electric aircraft. Although LEAPS was
developed by NASA in FORTRAN intended for open­source release, the code is not open­
sourced yet. SUAVE [49] is the only open source tool as of now, but without the ability
to model thermal management systems. Moreover, SUAVE does not support automatic
or analytic gradients to solve using gradient­based optimiser. Hwang and Ning [46], and
Falck et al.’s [47] work set the basis for building dymos [50], an open­source Python pack­
age to solve optimal control problems. Aviary [51, 52] is another open source tool being
developed by NASA, built on top of OpenMDAO, and is based on flight design softwares
GASP or General Aviation Synthesis Program [53] and FLOPS or FLight OPtimisation
System [45] and is considered a successor. Although available at the time of writing this
thesis, the documentation is not fully developed and ready to be used. Aviary was initially
considered for this thesis; however, its ongoing documentation development and specific
focus on aircraft design could limit its applicability to other vehicle models.
There are other tools such as GPOPS­II [54], CASADI [55], OTIS­4 [56], etc. which can
solve optimal control problems. GPOPS­II is a package for MATLAB but with a licence
fee for commercial use. OTIS is another optimal control software, but is export restricted
due to US International Traffic in Arms Regulations. CASADI is an open source Python
package for optimal control problems. Dymos [50] has the advantage that it was built on
top of OpenMDAO and supports the modular derivative system and supports MDO prob­
lems. In Dymos, the user can set the partial derivatives with hand­differentiated values, or
use the complex­step method in addition to finite difference (unlike other state­of­the­art
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
9
==PAGE:22==
optimal control softwares), or use algorithmic differentiation. Choosing the partial deriva­
tives method matters because its accuracy directly affects the computed derivates by the
optimiser to solve the problem. Hwang and Ning [46] proposed an approach to compute
derivatives accurately and their work also forms the basis for Dymos. Dymos also has an
Apache licence which enables its use for commercial purposes. Future versions of the
tool being built in this thesis could be used in a commercial setting and Dymos would be
perfect due to its capabilities, licencing, and well­written documentation. Therefore, the
prototype of the optimal control and sizing tool will be built in Dymos. As part of this thesis,
the first standalone battery system and standalone fuel cell system models will be built to
minimise the mass of the powertrain. The framework for integrating the battery system
and the fuel cell system is also presented and tested.
1.4
Research Questions
The hypothesis from the discussion in Section 1.2.2 is that an integrated fuel cell­battery
system will perform better in terms of mass than standalone fuel cell or battery systems.
The main research question is as follows:
• How to split the power between the fuel cell and the battery, should and when must
a battery be recharged?
The sub­research questions that can answer the main research question and test the
hypothesis are listed below:
• How to make an optimization framework that is tailored to work for both ships and
aircrafts with vehicle specific mission constraints?
• How does the mass of a battery system vary with the range and energy density in
a standalone battery system designed to meet power demands?
• How does the mass of a fuel cell system (including the fuel and fuel tank system
mass) vary with the range, the gravimetric efficiency of the liquid hydrogen storage
tank, and the specific power of the fuel cell stack in a standalone fuel cell system
designed to meet power demands?
• How does the mass of a standalone battery system compare with that of a stan­
dalone fuel cell system?
• How to integrate a battery and a fuel cell system in the optimization framework?
• What is the size of the integrated fuel cell­battery system required to meet a con­
tinuous power requirement profile while minimising the mass and the cost of the
powertrain?
• What are the hybridisation or (power) split ratios of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system to meet the continuous power requirement profile while minimising the mass
and the cost of the powertrain?
• How does the future state battery and fuel cell parameter sets influence the size and
hybridisation or (power) split ratios of the investigated scenarios?
In Chapter 2, the background of the dymos and OpenMDAO Python packages is dis­
cussed. In Chapter 3, information on the setup of standalone battery, fuel cell, and an
integrated fuel cell­battery powertrain system optimisation problems is discussed. Chap­
ter 3 also provides information on how mission profiles or power­time series are generated
for different ranges of an A320 aircraft. In Chapter 4, the mission profile or power­time
10
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:23==
series for two different mission ranges is first introduced. The results of the optimisation
work are then discussed. In the final Chapter 5, conclusions of this work are discussed
with respect to the research questions, recommendations to improve the prototype tool
created through this thesis are also provided.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
11
==PAGE:24==
Table 1.1: Comparison of Tank, Fuel Consumption, battery SOC change, and TMS models from surveyed literature.
Citation
Tank Model
Fuel Consumption
Fuel Cells Balance of Plant &
Thermal Management System
Staggat et al. [24]
­ Liquid Hydrogen.
­ 1 % per h evaporation loss.
­ Tank not integrated into model.
No info provided.
­ Includes TMS components.
­ Accounts for parasitic compressor
and TMS (pump, fan) power required.
­ TMS modelled separately for
fuel cells.
Palladino [28]
­ Liquid Hydrogen.
­ Calculates Boil off rate,
Tank mass, & gravimetric efficiency.
­ Uses equation from
Fuel cells explained book
­ Assumes only 35 % of incoming fuel
energy needs to be removed from
fuel cells.
Eissele et al. [31]
­ Liquid Hydrogen.
­ Scales based on a reference but
method is unclear.
­ Minimum flow sized for
cruise power.
­ Scales based on a reference
but method is unclear.
Del Grano [57]
­ Liquid Hydrogen.
­ Also includes vented mass due
to boil­off.
­ Uses simple efficiency relation
to calculate mass flow per s.
­ Thermal management present only
for liquid hydrogen tank to calculate
boil­off rates.
Kadyk et al. [27]
­ Liquid Hydrogen.
­ Includes boil­off rate calculations.
­ No info provided.
­ No info provided.
Mazzeo and Ilio [25]
&
Ahluwalia et al. [58]
­ Liquid Hydrogen.
­ Uses gravimetric efficiency relation
to size storage tank.
­ Fuel flow rate based on LHV
efficiency of system.
­ Change of State of Charge of
battery based on simple power and
battery capacity relations.
­ No info provided by Ahluwalia et al.
­ No info provided.
Ng and Datta [23]
­ Gaseous Hydrogen.
­ Uses gravimetric efficiency relation
to size storage tank.
­ Fuel flow rate based on standard
formula.
­ Uses discharge rate to calculate
change in SOC.
­ Does not consider thermal effects,
but considers TMS mass.
Park et al.[26]
­ Gaseous Hydrogen 700 bar.
­ Uses gravimetric efficiency relation
to size storage tank.
­ Fuel flow rate based on standard
formula.
­ Uses current and battery capacity
to estimate change in state of charge.
­ Specific power values based on
DoE estimates
12
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:25==
Table 1.2: Comparison and short discussion of surveyed literature.
Citation,
Results, & Data
Vehicle
(Type, MTOW)
Powertrain
Methodology
(Software, Optimisation,
Palladino
PhD Thesis [28]
ATR72
(200 to 600 Nm,
MTOW ­ 23572 kg, 72 PAX)
LT/HT PEM Fuel Cell ­ Gas Turbine
Battery ­ Gas Turbine
TMS included
FAST­OAD (based on OpenMDAO)
SEGOMOE (Bayesian Optimizer)
Python
Objective (no info provided)
Conducted the study in 3 steps: First step conceptual study eliminated Full Electric Fuel Cell & Battery,
Series Hybrid Fuel Cell & Battery,Turbo­electric, Turboprop Hydrogen Combustion,
Second step Preliminary design study eliminated Parallel Hybrid Battery,
Optimisation study in third and final step for Parallel Hybrid Fuel Cell Aircraft.
Preliminary design study revealed that even solid state batteries of 500 Wh/kg would fail to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions below current levels and a loss of passenger capacity (55 to 20).
Optimisation step revealed that LT & HT PEM fuel cells used in 200 nautical miles aircraft carrying
60 passengers can reduce up to 30% of carbon dioxide emissions.
Volume changes to accommodate power train systems not considered.
H2 tank Gravimetric efficiency = 35 %,
Motor spec. power = 7 kW/kg, Motor eff. = 97 %
Power elec. spec. power = 11 kW/kg, Power elec eff. = 98 %
Fuel Cell spec. power = 1.6 kW/kg
Staggat et al. [24]
ATR72­600
(1850 km, MTOW ­ 22800 kg,
Payload ­ 6650 kg)
HT­PEM Fuel Cell ­ Battery
TMS included
No info provided
At Hybridisation factor of 0.38 (i.e. fuel cell covers 38% of peak power), doubling energy density of
battery (from 405 Wh/kg) reduces MTOW by a factor of 2.
Ideal hybridisation factor is around 0.5, and possible global minimum at this hybridisation factor
for a battery pack specific energy of 1000 Wh/kg.
Best combination still yields MTOW 5% higher than reference MTOW of aircraft.
1 % H2 evaporation per h,
SoC at end of mission = 20%
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
13
==PAGE:26==
Table 1.3: Comparison and short discussion of surveyed literature.
Citation,
Results, & Data
Vehicle
(Type, MTOW)
Powertrain
Methodology
(Software, Optimisation, )
Eissele et al. [31]
HAIQU
(800 km,
MTOW ­ 19600 kg,
Payload ­ 5800 kg)
PEM Fuel Cell (no info on LT/HT)
TMS included
Objective
(Minimise Direct Operating Cost
for 1500 flights per year)
Resulted in installed Fuel Cell system power capacity of 3400 kW, Battery power of 440 kW,
Fuel Cell system mass of 1020 kg, Battery system mass of 1950 kg.
Battery discharge/charge rate limit of 2C
Ragone plot for different battery chemistries
Gonzalez
MSc Thesis [59]
Boeing 787­8
(MTOW ­ 219539 kg,
Payload ­ 41000 kg)
SOFC ­ Battery ­ Gas Turbine
No info provided
possibly Python and MS Excel.
Operational empty weight increases by 53 % due to the new powertrain.
Gas turbine is primary power path, electric is secondary.
Modified breguet equation and used 3 power management parameters.
SOFC spec. power = 0.4 kW/kg
Del Grano
MSc Thesis [57]
A19 (A, B,C) (similar to Do228NG)
(MTOW ­ 7015 kg,
Payload ­ 1960 kg)
A70 (similar to ATR 720­600)
LT PEM Fuel Cells ­ Batteries
MATLAB,
HYPERION (PoliMi, Italy)
Observed that the case with 4.8 kW/kg of fuel cell system specific power outperformed cases with
1.08 and 2.08 kW/kg of fuel cell system specific power in both A19 and A70.
They also employed windmilling which is a gliding maneuvre to reduce energy consumption
and consequently reduce size of powertrain system and even fuel carried.
With windmilling in A70, they were able to reduce size of battery and the weight by 50 kg.
In the case with fuel cell system specific power of 4.8 kW/kg, optimiser predicted 0 MWh
of battery requirement.
Battery pack specific energy = 350 Wh/kg
Battery pack specific power = 2275 W/kg
Fuel cell system specific power = 4.8, 1.08, 2.28 kW/kg
14
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:27==
Table 1.4: Comparison and short discussion of surveyed literature.
Citation,
Results, & Data
Vehicle
(Type, MTOW)
Powertrain
Methodology
(Software, Optimisation, )
Ceschia et al. [60]
General design
Applied to City car
PEM Fuel Cell ­ Battery
Objective ­ Min. Energy Cons.
MATLAB
Particle Swarm Optimisation
with rapid Pontryaguin optimal
control algorithm
External optimisation searches for best architecture, Internal optimisation manages energy
management strategy.
Algorithm proposed suggestions which keep FC operating between 15 and 40 % of its rated power.
Could be because the objective is to minimise energy consumption.
Fuel Cell power of 17.5 kW, Battery power of 29.2 kW, Capacity of 3 kWh
Battery power seems very high for 3 kWh capacity.
SOC at beginning of trip = 90 %, SOC at end of trip = 15 %.
Lammen and
Vankan [29]
Airbus A320
Gas Turbine ­ Fuel Cell ­
Photovoltaic
No info provided
possibly Python and MS Excel.
Uses power split ratio.
Addition of Fuel Cells and Photovoltaics to reduced diameter gas turbine reduces fuel to be
carried by 11 % and 7% in energy for the year 2020. For the year 2040, these numbers increase
to 16 % and 12 % respectively.
Modified breguet equation and used 3 power management parameters.
Tan
MSc Thesis [30]
A320neo (1000 km, 165 PAX,
MTOW ­ 73500 kg)
A70 (similar to ATR 720­600)
Gas Turbine ­ Battery ­
Fuel Cells ­ Photovoltaics
MATLAB Simulink
Manually varied split ratios
Multi­Objective to fuel consumption
and energy consumption
Used different power split ratios for climb and takeoff mission phases for 2020+ and 2040+ cases.
In 2020+ case, optimised configuration can save 661 kg kerosene or roughly 17 % fuel.
In 2020+ case, optimised configuration can save 1110 kg kerosene or roughly 28 % fuel.
Power split ratio (or electrical power share) increase from 16.6% to 25.6% during takeoff,
and from 9.3 % to 42.6% during climb phase.
Battery pack specific energy = 500 and 1000 Wh/kg in 2020+ and 2040+ scenarios respectively.
Fuel cell specifc power = 500 and 1000 W/kg in 2020+ and 2040+ scenarios respectively.
Turbofan engine mass. Powercell Fuel cell i­V characteristics.
0.5 to 6C discharge rates.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
15
==PAGE:28==
Table 1.5: Comparison and short discussion of surveyed literature.
Citation,
Results, & Data
Vehicle
(Type, MTOW)
Powertrain
Methodology
(Software, Optimisation, )
Kadyk et al. [27]
Vehicle goes here
Fuel Cell ­ Battery
Monte Carlo Analysis, MATLAB
Objective ()
The model accounts for temperature increase of SOFC
Battery specific energy = 250 Wh/kg
Castaneda et al. [61]
Light manned aircraft
Fuel Cells ­ Battery
No info provided
Fuel cell system is first sized to meet a certain demand. After sizing the fuel cells, the power from
batteries is calculated for take­off and climb phases.
Minimum power from the fuel cells system must support maximum power during cruise and
auxiliary systems.
Marinaro et al. [62]
Pipistrel Taurus Electro G2
Fuel Cells ­ Battery
Simcenter Amesim by Siemens
Fuel Cells with battery increase the range by 61 % from 67.5 NM, and also incrase the overall energy
density of aircraft pwoer train system by 61 %.
SOC at start of trip = 80 %, SOC at end of trip = 20 %, 10 % of fuel left in the tank at the end of trip.
Battery discharge upto 5C.
16
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:29==
Table 1.6: Comparison and short discussion of surveyed literature.
Citation,
Results, & Data
Vehicle
(Type, MTOW, )
Powertrain
Methodology
(Software, Optimisation, )
Mazzero and Ilio [25]
Lightweight Helicopter
(MTOW ­ 763 kg,
payload =175 kg)
Fuel Cell ­ Battery
No information
Fixed the fuel cells sizes and tested for urban and regional missions.
Used a control factor to split the power between fuel cells and battery.
Divided power profile into low and high­power phases and used rule based strategy to recharge battery.
Also accounted for change in efficiency of fuel cell system with operation power.
Used a rule to land the aircraft if the SOC of battery approaches certain level.
Battery specific energy = 293 Wh/kg, Fuel cells specific power = <1.5 kW/kg.
Battery discharge rate max = 6C, charge rate max = 0.5C.
Ng and Datta [23]
EVTOL (75 miles)
Fuel Cells ­ Battery
Objective to
Minimise Takeoff weight
Uses a set of rules to determine when a battery must be charged or discharged.
Also uses a power split ratio to size the fuel cell.
Battery specific energy of 250 Wh/kg and Fuel cell specific power of 0.4 to 1.65 kW/kg.
Ahluwalia et al. [58]
Multi­rotor and Tilt­rotor
EVTOL (95 km,
Fuel Cells ­ Battery
Objective to
Minimise Total Cost of Ownership
FC Hybrid performs the best in terms of maximum take off weight.
Charge and Discharge rates of 4 to 5C needed.
Power demand to be met at the end of fuel cell life and
affect the aging severely.
Fuel Cell specific power = 300, 1000, and 2000 kW/kg
Battery specific energy = 200, and 300 Wh/kg
SOC at end = 20 %
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
17
==PAGE:30==
18
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:31==
2
Background
This chapter presents an overview of the OpenMDAO and dymos Python packages. Sec­
tion 2.1 covers OpenMDAO, while Section 2.2 focuses on dymos.
2.1
OpenMDAO
OpenMDAO is a Python software developed to solve multidisciplinary design optimisa­
tion (MDO) problems. An example aircraft design MDO problem has disciplines such
as structures, aerodynamics, controls, etc. which are all tightly coupled and also have
design trade­offs dependent on one another. OpenMDAO was developed to solve such
problems with the help of analytic derivatives. OpenMDAO has a modular environment
using which different models can be connected together to make a larger multidisciplinary
model. OpenMDAO has components which are used to package the system models
within them. Some of the components can also be grouped together to form a larger
system model. This framework also forms the basis for dymos where the behaviour of a
dynamic system is packaged within an OpenMDAO group. More details on OpenMDAO
package can be found in documentation [63] and the paper [35].
2.2
dymos
The section on the dymos Python package is organized into subsections that initially
present the concept of a dynamic system in Section 2.2.1, and followed by a brief in­
troduction to the dymos framework in Section 2.2.2. Section 2.2.3 covers the optimisation
method employed in dymos, and Section 2.2.4 discusses the variables used in dymos.
2.2.1
Description of a Dynamic system
Optimal control means the optimisation of a dynamical system. Dynamical systems can,
for example, be an electric battery aircraft in which states (¯x) such as the state of charge
of the battery changes ( ˙¯x) with time t. The evolution of these states (¯x) can be governed
by ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or differential algebraic equations (DAEs).
These dynamic systems can be path­dependent. In path­dependent systems, the path
taken affects the system performance. The word Path in path­dependent systems could
refer to a literal path of the aircraft (or) to any state­time histories (for e.g. a change in
state of charge of the battery in the battery electric vehicles) of the system [38].
˙¯x = fode(¯x, t, ¯u, ¯d)
(2.1)
In dymos, all dynamics are characterised as ODE or DAE. The behaviours of such sys­
tems (in other words their states) can be impacted by controls (¯u) in dymos. These controls
can be varied over time. For example, in a battery electric aircraft the controls can be the
discharge rate at every second of the mission. These dynamic controls can impact the
the SoC of the battery system onboard.
Static controls (or) controllable parameters that are fixed with time, referred to as param­
eters ( ¯d) in dymos is another type of control. These could be the energy storage capacity
of the battery system or the wingspan of an aircraft or the aerodynamic reference area of
an aircraft.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
19
==PAGE:32==
The end points in time t, state ¯x, control or dynamic control ¯u, and parameter or static
control ¯d values can be controlled by the optimiser to optimise the dynamic system to
achieve a certain objective f. The objective f can be to maximise or minimise any output
of the dynamic system. All of these variables can be design variables or constraints to
define the behaviour of the system [35].
2.2.2
Framework
dymos breaks a trajectory (or) a state­time history into one of more phases. dymos then
uses the implicit collocation methods (discussed in Section 2.2.3) to further break each
phase into one or more segments. On each segment, the state or control variable is
assumed to be continuous (meaning no sudden changes in the values over time) such
that these variables can be modelled as polynomials. The segments may also have one
or more nodes. At certain points or nodes within each segment, values are assigned to
state or control variables and these nodes are referred to as state discretisation (shown
by hollow blue circles in Figure 2.1 and 2.2) or control discretisation nodes (shown by
black circles in Figures 2.1 and 2.2), respectively [64].
Within each phase, initial time (t0), duration (tf), state variables at state disretisation nodes
(¯xd), dynamic control variables at control discretisation nodes (¯ud), and static control pa­
rameter ( ¯d) can be fixed or be design variables in dymos [65]. States and control variables
usually vary with time, but dymos can also take another variable in place of time. The be­
haviour of the system is modelled with the help of an OpenMDAO group. This group is a
collection of models that represent different parts of the dynamic system being modelled.
Any outputs from the models within the group can be constrained. This group is generally
referred to as ODE in this thesis.
Figure 2.1: Legendre­Gauss­Lobato collocation method where the state derivatives are
interpolated from discretization points to collocation nodes. The black line illustrates the
interpolating polynomial, while the blue hollow circles, black circles, and red squares on
it denote state discretization, control discretization, and collocation nodes, respectively
[65].
In dymos each phase can have an ODE associated with it. Within a trajectory the phases
can be linked using time t, state ¯x and control ¯u constraints to provide a continuous tra­
jectory. The eXtended Design Structure Matrix (XDSM) [66] of solving a dynamic system
form of the optimal control problem is presented in [65].
20
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:33==
2.2.3
Optimisation method
To solve an optimal control problem, the problem must first be discretised. dymos splits
the problem in time t into non­dimensional time segments and uses optimisers to solve
the problem. This process of discretising the problem in to a form that is understood by
the optimiser is called transcription.
dymos has two transcription techniques in place for the users: implicit collocation and ex­
plicit shooting but the focus is on implicit collocation techniques due to performance rea­
sons. In the collocation­based transcription technique, also known as the pseudospectral
method, the optimiser takes the entire state time, and the control time history is as dis­
cretised inputs in time t. Initially, the state­ and control­time histories are proposed at the
state and control discretisation nodes. The ODE is evaluated at the state discretisation
nodes to obtain state rates. The state rates, along with the state values, form an inter­
polating polynomial that is then used to calculate the state and the state rate values at
the collocation nodes. The state rate values based on the interpolating polynomial are
compared with the state rates from the ODE evaluation at the collocation nodes. The dif­
ference in slopes, called the collocation defect, at each of the collocation nodes is driven
to 0 by the dymos optimiser to represent the true state­time history. Since, the interpo­
lating polynomial is used to implicitly estimate the states and state rates at collocation
nodes within the discretised non­dimensional time, the collocation techniques are known
as ‘implicit’ collocation techniques [64].
Figure 2.2: The Legendre­Gauss­Radau or Radau Pseudospectral collocation method
features nodes that serve as collocation, state discretization, and control discretization
points, except for the final node, which is solely a state discretization node. The black
line represents the interpolating polynomial, with blue hollow circles, black circles, and
red squares indicating state discretization, control discretization, and collocation nodes,
respectively [65].
The explicit shooting method involves propagating the state and control­time history one
time step at a time. Since calculations are done one time step at a time, any change
in the state value at an earlier time step affects the objective, and such a method has a
high computation time. dymos has two collocation transcription techniques: Legendre­
Gauss­Lobatto (LGL) and Radau Pseudospectral Method (RPM) or Legendre­Gauss­
Radau (LGR). In RPM, collocation defects are calculated at all nodes except the last
one in the phase, and all collocation nodes are a subset of state discretization nodes.
LGL relies on interpolation and the initial guess, which can lead to poor performance if
the guess is inaccurate. LGL has fewer design variables and constraints due to fewer
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
21
==PAGE:34==
nodes but may require multiple ODE evaluations. However, RPM only requires an ODE
evaluation to assess defects. Interpolation in LGL can sometimes produce values outside
the expected range if the initial guess is not accurate, and convergence issues can arise
if there are nonlinear solvers within the ODE system [64].
2.2.4
Variables in dymos
An optimal control problem defined in dymos includes 5 types of variables. Their usage
varies according to the problem. Depending on the specific problem, they can be either
design variables or manually set by the user. All variables can be projected into the ODE
for the models to utilise their values. The 5 types of variables are:
1. Time
2. States
3. Controls
4. Parameters
5. Polynomial Controls
Time Variable
In dymos, it is assumed that the system progresses with time t. The initial and final values
of the time variable can be either design variables or fixed. For instance, in problems
like minimizing the time of an aircraft’s climb, the time variable will be a design variable.
However, in this thesis, the power­time series is pre­generated, so the initial and final
time values are fixed. dymos also provides options to project the time into the ODE. This
feature is utilized in this thesis to align the power value of the power­time series with the
dymos time step to size and control the system [64].
State and Control Variables
States, or state variables, describe the current state of the system (or any specific point
along the independent variable time t). Examples include State of Charge (SOC), fuel
tank level, and engine exhaust gas temperature. These states can be defined using their
respective state variables, each with its own initial, final, and historical values over time.
Control variables are categorized into two types: dynamic control (which changes over
time and may influence the system’s states or state variables) and static control (which
remains constant over time but may still affect the state variables). Examples of controls
include the accelerator or throttle level in a car, the charge or discharge rate of a battery in
an electric aircraft, and the positions of ailerons, elevators, and rudders in an aircraft. The
optimizer determines the values for these controls, although users can also input them.
State and control variables also offer additional options to ensure the continuity of the
values, their slopes, and second­order rates [64], if required.
Parameters & Polynomial Control
Parameters represent a type of control variable that maintains a constant value throughout
a phase and does not vary with time. Examples of parameters include the wingspan of an
aircraft or the energy storage capacity of an onboard battery. These values can be defined
as design variables or can be manually set by the user. Polynomial control variables, on
the other hand, are akin to dynamic control variables but are specifically employed to input
manual or user controls that change over time [64].
22
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:35==
2.2.5
Constraints and Objective in dymos
Using variables such as time, states, and controls, degrees of freedom can be added to
the system. To constrain the system, dymos has boundary and path constraints. For the
same system, an objective can also be added. In dymos, the objective can be to minimise
or maximise a certain output from the ODE at a particular point in the time. In dymos, the
boundary constraints can be used to constrain the dymos variables at the start or end of
the phase. These are those applied at the start or end of the phase. dymos also has
options to restrict the boundary values to a certain range of values. Path constraints, as
the name suggests, are constraints imposed at all points of time throughout the phase
[64].
This chapter only gives important and top­level information related to the dymos Python
package. Readers are recommended to go through the dymos documentation [64] and
dymos paper [65] to understand the features in depth.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
23
==PAGE:36==
24
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:37==
3
Methods
As discussed in Chapter 1 Section 1.3, Dymos is an open source (with Apache License)
that is suitable for solving optimal control problems with a specific objective. In this chap­
ter, the setup of the optimisation problem for standalone battery (Section 3.1), standalone
fuel cell (Section 3.2), and integrated fuel cell­battery (Section 3.3) systems is described,
along with information on the models built to describe the behaviour of such dynamic sys­
tems. In Section 3.4, the mission profile or power­time series of an A320 aircraft for two
different cruise distances (300 and 900 nautical miles) is also described.
3.1
Standalone Battery system
Figure 3.1 illustrates the workflow of the prototype tool designed to optimally size and con­
trol the standalone battery system. In this figure, green blocks denote various models,
orange blocks represent constraints, pink blocks indicate the dymos framework, which
includes an optimiser, grey blocks display the data being exchanged between different
blocks, and white blocks represent the objective function (f) or mass of the battery sys­
tem, and the state rates of interest (rate at which the energy is depleted from the battery
system).
Figure 3.1: eXtended Design Structure Matrix diagram of the standalone battery system
model.
Optimisation starts with a certain amount of energy stored in the battery (Ebat) set by the
optimiser. In parallel, the green block showing the ‘power input’ model takes the dymos
time variable ‘t’ (in seconds). Within the ‘power input’ model, the time ‘t’ is matched with
the corresponding power required at the gearbox input (Pgearbox) from the pregenerated
power­time series (see Section 3.4).
The propulsion power required at the gearbox input (Pgearbox) is then used in the ‘motor’
model to calculate the electrical power required at the motor input (Pmotor) using Equation
A.1. To meet the electrical power demand at the motor input (Pmotor) at each time ‘t’, the
discharge rate (Crate) of the battery is varied (by the optimiser) at each time ‘t’ to discharge
Pbat−dis power from the battery system (See Equation A.2)). The discharge power Pbat−dis
from the battery is calculated using the ‘battery operation’ model.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
25
==PAGE:38==
The orange block representing the ‘constraint 1’ makes sure that the electrical power
demand (Pmotor) is met by the battery (Pbat−dis). This model is represented by Cbatsys−1
which is calculated using Equation A.3. In the green block or the ‘battery state model’, the
change in the energy level of the battery ( dX
dt : SoC) at each time ‘t’ is calculated using
Equation A.4 based on the discharge power of the battery (Pbat−dis) and the total energy
stored in the battery (Ebat) input.
The ‘battery property’ model shown using the green block in Figure 3.1 computes the
objective f or the mass of the battery system (mbatsys,powertrain) using Equation A.5. Op­
timiser adjusts Ebat and Crate(t) until mbatsys,powertrain is minimised and converges to a
residual tolerance of 1e­8, while also making sure that all the constraints described in
Section 3.1.1 are satisfied.
3.1.1
Optimisation problem
The mass (mbatsys,powertrain) minimisation problem for a standalone battery system can
be defined as,
minimize:
mbatsys,powertrain(t0)
with respect to:
Kbatsys, Ebat, Crate(t), SoC(t), Cbatsys−1(t)
subject to:
0.1 kWh ≤Ebat ≤100, 000 kWh,
0.0 1/h ≤Crate(t) ≤2.5 1/h,
−100 W < Cbatsys−1(t) < 0 W,
SoC(t0) = 0.8,
0.3 ≤SoC(tf) ≤0.8,
t0 = 0 s,
tf = [3360, 7260] s,
Kbatsys = [0.25, 1, 2.5] kWh/kg,
(3.1)
Objective function
In Equation 3.1, the sizing and optimal control problem of a standalone battery system is
posed as a mass minimisation problem, and specifically the mass minimisation at t0 or at
the time step where t equals zero.
Design Variables
In Equation 3.1, Ebat, represents the energy storage capacity of the battery system (fixed
at t0 by the optimiser and remains constant throughout t). Crate(t), denotes the discharge
rate of the battery and is set by the dymos optimiser at each time step t.
Furthermore, Kbatsys, which represents the battery energy density, is also a design vari­
able, except that it is manually changed by the user performing the optimisation studies. It
is adjusted in increments of 0.25, 1, and 2.5 kWh/kg to perform optimization studies of the
standalone battery system, in order to understand the impact of future battery parameter
states on the take­off mass of the standalone battery powertrain system.
Constraints
tf, the final time step value is a constraint imposed by the user and is dependent on the
power­time series. The value of tf varies depending on the cruise distance travelled by
the aircraft and is derived from the generated power profile (see Section 3.4). A fixed
value of tf of 3360 corresponds to a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, while a value
of 7260 corresponds to a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles.
26
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:39==
Ebat, representing the battery’s energy storage capacity, is limited to a range from 0.1
kWh to 100,000 kWh. The upper limit of 100,000 kWh was determined based on sample
optimization studies to verify that the constraint is not violated in extreme conditions of
the standalone battery system for the cruise distances of interest. Crate(t) representing
the discharge rate of the battery at each time step t is limited to values that include and
are between 0 and 2.5. The upper limit is chosen based on the literature surveyed and
tabulated in Tables 1.2 to 1.6 in the Introduction (Chapter 1).
t0 initialised at zero is a constraint in itself. SoC(t0) or the state of charge of the battery
at t0 is initialised at 0.8 based on the literature surveyed and tabulated in Tables 1.2 to
1.6. Furthermore, the SoC(tf) or the final state of charge of the battery can have values
between 0.8 and 0.3, which means that the battery can have 80 to 30% charge left in it
at the end of the cruise distance. The value of SoC is updated t based on dX
dt : SoC. The
final state values depend on the mission length [22] and 0.3 is arbitrarily chosen as the
lower limit, while the upper limit matches the initial state of charge of the battery.
Cbatsys−1 is a power delivery constraint (calculated using Equation A.3) that ensures the
power supplied by the battery system (Pbat−dis) is at the maximum a 100 Watts more or
equal to the power demanded by the motor (Pmotor). Although Cbatsys−1 can be an equality
constraint, meaning it equals zero, it is defined here as an inequality constraint with a 100
W surplus to facilitate problem convergence.
Optimiser settings
Optimisations are performed using a gradient­based interior point optimiser (IPOPT) [67],
interfaced through the pyOptSparse [68] wrapper. pyOptSparse is a Python package for
formulating and solving nonlinear optimisation problems. The default residual tolerance
of 1e­8 of IPOPT is used as the convergence criterion, and no limit on the iterations is
placed. Optimisation terminates when the residual tolerance of 1e­8 is reached. The
IPOPT optimiser settings used in this thesis are shown in Table 3.1. These settings are
chosen based on existing dymos problems in the dymos documentation [65], and their
effects on the objective are not the subject of investigation in this thesis.
Table 3.1: Optimiser settings used for the standalone battery system optimisation prob­
lem.
Parameter
Description
Quantity
optimizer
Optimizer to be used
IPOPT
mu_strategy
Update strategy for barrier parameter
adaptive
bound_mult_init_method
Method for bound multiplier initialization
mu­based
mu_init
Initial value of the barrier parameter
0.01
nlp_scaling_method
Method for NLP scaling
gradient­based
Problem resolution
Problem resolution can be approached using two methods. The first method, referred
to as order, specifies the polynomial segment order connecting the state discretisation
nodes, as detailed in Chapter 2. In this thesis, the GaussLobatto transcription (see Chap­
ter 2) is employed with an order of 3 to keep computation time to a minimum. The second
method involves varying the number of segments into which time is divided. Dymos has
an inbuilt option that can be used to set the number of segments. For a 300 nautical mile
cruise distance, the number of segments is
1
10
th the number of time steps in the power
profile. In the 300 nautical mile cruise distance power­time series, there are 3360 points
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
27
==PAGE:40==
and this results in 336 segments. Similarly, for a 900 nautical mile cruise distance, the
number of segments is
1
20
th the number of time steps in the power profile. In the 900
nautical mile cruise distance power­time series, there are 7260 points, resulting in 363
segments. Various ratios are tested to evaluate the precision and computation time, as
shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Computed solutions (minimised objective) and computation times (for arriving
at the solution) at different problem resolutions (number of segments).
Case
Ratio
Jacobian shape
Time [s]
Objective [kg]
900 NM
1/10
4901x2102
49.92
62241.00
900 NM
1/20
2801x1202
26.56
62241.92
900 NM
1/30
1401x602
5.56
62214.45
300 NM
1/10
2101x902
11.63
33100.61
300 NM
1/20
1401x602
5.62
33100.61
300 NM
1/30
701x302
1.64
33070.76
Problem inspection ­ Partial and Total derivatives
Table 3.3: Calculated total derivatives of certain constraints and objectives in the problem
with respect to design variables are compared against the user provided total derivatives.
Shows the total derivatives with the largest difference.
of <variable>
w.r.t. to <variable>
computed value
provided value
Cbatsys−1
Crate
4.0000e+04
4.0000e+04
Cbatsys−1
Ebat
6.9444e­04
6.9444e­04
mbatsys
Crate
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
mbatsys
Ebat
2.7778e­07
2.7778e­07
Table 3.4: Calculated partial derivatives of certain problem output variables with respect to
input variables are compared against user provided partial derivatives. Shows the partial
derivative of variables with the largest difference.
of <variable>
w.r.t. to <variable>
computed value
provided value
Pbat−dis
Crate
4.0000e+04
4.0000e+04
Pbat−dis
Ebat
6.9444e­04
6.9444e­04
dX
dt : SoC
Ebat
4.8225e­12
4.8225e­12
dX
dt : SoC
Pbat−dis
6.9445e­09
6.9445e­09
mbatsys
Ebat
2.7778e­07
2.7778e­07
mbatsys
Kbatsys
4.0000e+01
4.0000e+01
In this thesis, gradient­based optimization is used. Techniques involving gradient­based
optimization work with partial and total derivatives. Partial derivatives indicate how the out­
put of a model within the optimisation problem varies with its input, whereas total deriva­
tives describe how the objectives and constraints of the optimisation problem change with
it’s inputs. Total derivatives of the standalone battery system optimisation problem is pre­
sented in Table 3.3. Table 3.3 shows that the magnitudes of computed and provided total
derivatives (calculated based on partial derivatives provided) are identical, confirming the
correct setup of the problem. Table 3.4 shows that the magnitudes of computed and pro­
vided partial derivatives are identical, confirming the correct setup of the problem.
28
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:41==
3.2
Standalone Fuel cell system
Figure 3.2 illustrates the workflow of the prototype tool designed to optimally size and
control the standalone fuel cell system. In this figure, green blocks denote various models,
orange blocks represent constraints, pink blocks indicate the Dymos framework, which
includes an optimiser, grey blocks display the data being exchanged between different
blocks, and white blocks represent the objective function (f) or the mass of the standalone
fuel cell powertrain system and the state rates of interest (rate at which fuel is consumed
from the tank). In the standalone fuel cell system, the mass of the fuel cell powertrain
system is the sum of the fuel cell system mass, fuel mass, and tank mass.
Figure 3.2: eXtended Design Structure Matrix diagram of the standalone fuel cell system
model.
The optimisation process begins with a specified quantity of mfuel in the tank, set by the
optimiser. Concurrently, within the constructed problem, three functions are executed:
energy management, system sizing and operation, and objective calculation, represented
by red, green, and blue dashed rectangles, respectively, encircling certain blocks.
Within the red dashed rectangle, the orange block representing ‘constraint 1’ receives the
electrical motor power demand (Pmotor), and the power delivered by the ‘Fuel cell System
model’ (Pfc−del), and makes sure that the electrical power demand (Pmotor) is met by the
fuel cell system Pfc−del using Cfcsys−1 calculated using Equation A.6.
Within the green dashed rectangle, the ‘Max FC Sys Module’ model calculates the net
maximum power output of a fuel cell system module (Pfcmodule−max) containing a fuel cell
stack operating at its maximum current (Ifc,max). In the ‘Installed FC Sys Modules’ model,
the maximum electrical power required at the motor input (Pmotor−max) (See Equation A.7)
and the net power produced by a single fuel cell system module (Pfcmodule−max) is used
to determine the number of fuel cell system modules required (nfcmodules). Once the total
number of fuel cell system modules (nfcmodules) necessary to meet the aircraft’s maximum
power demand is determined, the orange block representing ‘constraint 2’ ensures that
no more than nfcmodules are operational through Cfcsys−2 (See Equation A.10).
Inside the blue dashed rectangle, the ‘FC Sys Module Properties’ model determines the
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
29
==PAGE:42==
mass of a single fuel cell system module (mfcmodule), including its balance of plant compo­
nents (Equation A.8), using mass­power relationships from Palladino’s PhD Thesis [28].
This mass of a single fuel cell system module (mfcmodule) is then combined with the num­
ber of required fuel cell system modules (nfcmodules) to compute the mass of the fuel cell
system mfcsys (Refer to Equation A.9) in the ‘FC Sys Properties’ model. This mass of the
fuel cell system is further combined with the mass of the fuel mfuel and the mass of the
fuel storage tank mtank (mtank depends on ηstor and mfuel ­ See Equation A.11), using
Equation A.12 in the ‘Mass’ model. The resulting mass is the mass of the standalone fuel
cell powertrain system mfcsys,powertrain, which is also the objective of the problem.
Apart from the blocks with the colored rectangles, there are two additional blocks repre­
senting ‘power input’ and ‘motor’ models. ‘Power input’ model in the standalone fuel cell
system is same as the standalone battery system (Section 3.1, and is even the same for
the integrated fuel cell­battery system (Section 3.3). In the ‘motor’ model, Pmotor−max is
calculated based on the maximum power required at the gearbox input at any t within the
power­time series (Equation A.13). In real world application, this can be a constraint set
by the installed motor capacity.
The ‘Fuel Cell System’ and the ‘Max FC Sys Module’models are described in the Section
3.2.1. Optimiser adjusts mfuel(t0), activefc,n−1(t), Ifc,n−1(t), and Ifc,n(t) until mfcsys,powertrain
is minimised and converges to a residual tolerance of 1e­8, while also making sure that
all the constraints described in Section 3.2.2 are satisfied.
3.2.1
Fuel cell system model
The fuel cell system in the standalone fuel cell system is assumed to have ‘n’ fuel cell
system modules. These ‘n’ fuel cell system modules can have ‘n’design variables that
control the current of each of the ‘n’ fuel cell stacks in the fuel cell system modules to
control the total power delivered by the fuel cell system (Pfc−del). This would also require
the design of individual models for ‘n’ fuel cell system modules similar to the ‘Fuel Cell
System’ model, and would complicate the problem in terms of developer time and compu­
tational time. Therefore, to simplify the problem, the ‘n’ fuel cell system modules can be
divided into n −1 fuel cell system modules and nth fuel cell system module. The division
of nfcmodules into n −1 and nth module is arbitrary and may or may not affect the results
and is not a subject of investigation in this thesis.
Figure 3.3 shows the workflow of the ‘Fuel cell System’ model from Figure 3.2. In the ‘Fuel
Cell Sys Power’ model the power delivered by the fuel cell system (Pdel−fc) is calculated
using Equation A.6. Furthermore, the hydrogen consumption rate of the fuel cell system
(dX
dt : mfuel) is also calculated using Equation A.15.
The ‘n­1 FC Sys Module’ and ‘n FC Sys Module’ model from Figure 3.3, and ‘max FC Sys
Module’ model from Figure 3.2 are expanded and shown in Figure 3.4. Figure 3.4 shows
how the balance of plant and fuel cell stack models in the fuel cell system model are
connected to each other. Figure 3.4 also shows that all the workflows displayed are very
similar. This is because all three workflows are fuel cell system workflows and are used
to calculate the net power delivered by the n −1, n, and max fuel cell system modules,
and the mass of hydrogen consumed by the n −1 and n fuel cell system modules. The
series of equations used in the multidisciplinary fuel cell system model are A.16 to A.24.
Within the model shown in Figure 3.4, the voltage of the stack Vfcstack is calculated using
the input current Ifc to determine the power of the fuel cell stack (Pfcstack). This voltage
function (of current) is derived by fitting a polynomial control to the current voltage curve
of a commercial Fuel Cell Stack by Ballard Power Systems [69]. Figures 3.5a and 3.5b
30
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.3: eXtended Design Structure Matrix diagram of the Fuel Cell System model
from Figure 3.2
Figure 3.4: eXtended Design Structure Matrix diagram of the Max FC Sys Module model
from Figure 3.2, nth and n −1 FC Sys Module models from Figure 3.3
show the current­voltage curve of the commercial fuel cell [69] and the replicated current­
voltage curve with third­order polynomial, respectively.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
31
==PAGE:44==
(a) Performance curves of the commercial fuel
cell stack [69]. Blue solid line shows the rela­
tion between output power by the fuel cell stack
and the current of the fuel cell stack. Purple
solid line shows the relation between voltage
of the fuel cell stack and the current of the fuel
cell stack
(b) Recreated performance curves of the
commercial fuel cell stack. Orange coloured
line with orange circle markers shows the
power and current relation.
Blue coloured
line with blue circle markers shows the volt­
age and current relation.
The fit equation
for voltage­current curve is shown below the
voltage­current curve.
Figure 3.5: Comparison of voltage­current and power­current performance characteristics
of commercial fuel cell stack with recreated polynomial fit based performance character­
istics curves.
3.2.2
Optimisation problem
The mass (mfcsys,powertrain) minimisation problem for a standalone fuel cell system can
be defined as,
minimize:
mfcsys,powertrain(t0)
with respect to:
Ifc,max, Kfcsys, ηstor, mfuel,
activefc,n−1(t), Ifc,n−1(t), Ifc,n(t), Cfcsys−1, Cfcsys−2
subject to:
0 < activefc,n−1(t) < 500,
50 A < Ifc,n−1(t) < 642 A,
0 A < Ifc,n(t) < 642 A,
−100 W < Cfcsys−1(t) < 0 W,
Cfcsys−2(t) < 0,
mfuel(tf) = 0 kg,
5 kg ≤mfuel(t0) ≤10000 kg,
Ifc,max = 642 A,
t0 = 0 s,
tf = [3360, 7260] s,
Kfcsys = [1, 2, 4] kW/kg,
ηstor = [15, 30, 45] %,
(3.2)
Objective function
In Equation 3.2, the sizing and optimal control problem of a standalone fuel cell system is
posed as a mass minimisation problem, and specifically the mass minimisation at t0 or at
32
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:45==
the time step where t equals zero.
Design Variables
In Equation 3.2, mfuel(t), represents the fuel mass stored in the tank and is fixed at t0 by
the optimiser and changes with t. activefc,n−1(t) dictates how many of the n −1 fuel cell
system modules should be switched on to meet the electrical power demand at the motor
input (See Equation A.14). Ifc,n−1(t) is the design variable that controls the current of
each of the active n −1 fuel cell system modules (activefc,n−1(t)) and subsequently the
electrical power delivered by them at each time t. Similarly, Ifc,n(t) is the design variable
that controls the current of the nth fuel cell and subsequently the electrical power delivered
by the nth fuel cell system module.
Furthermore, Kfcsys, which represents the specific power of the fuel cell stacks installed
in the fuel cell system. ηstor is another design variable that represents the gravimetric effi­
ciency of the hydrogen storage tank. Kfcsys and ηstor are manually adjusted in increments
of 1, 2, and 4 kW/kg, and 15, 30 and 45%, respectively, to perform optimization studies
of the standalone fuel cell system, to understand the impact of future fuel cell parameter
states on the take­off mass of the standalone fuel cell powertrain system.
Constraints
tf, the final time step value is a constraint imposed by the user and is dependent on the
power­time series. The value of tf varies depending on the distance travelled by the
aircraft and is derived from the generated power profile (See Section 3.4). A fixed value
of tf of 3360 corresponds to a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, while a value of 7260
corresponds to a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles. t0 initialised at zero is a constraint
in itself.
mfuel(t0), representing the fuel mass in the fuel storage tank at the start of the cruise, is
limited to values including and between 5 and 10,000 kg. The upper and lower limits are
determined on the basis of sample optimization studies to verify that the constraint is not
violated in extreme conditions of the standalone feul cell system for the cruise distances
of interest. mfuel(tf) representing the fuel mass left in the tank at the end of the cruise,
and is assigned a value of 0 to make sure that there is no fuel left at the end of the
mission. activefc,n−1(t) representing the number of active n −1 fuel cell system modules
is limited to values that include and are between 0 and 500. The upper limit is chosen
based on sample optimization studies to verify that the constraint is not violated in extreme
conditions of the standalone fuel cell system for the cruise distances of interest.
t0 initialised at zero is a constraint in itself. Ifc,n−1(t) representing the current of the each
of the active n−1 fuel cell system modules is limited to values that include and are between
50 and 642. The upper limit is the limit set by the manufacturer (see Figure 3.5a [69]).
Lower limit was chosen based on optimiser convergence. Similarly, Ifc,n(t) representing
the current of the nth fuel cell system module is limited to values that include and are
between 0 and 642. The upper limit is the limit set by the manufacturer. Lower limit was
chosen based on optimiser convergence.
Cfcsys−1 is a power delivery constraint (see Equation A.6) that ensures the power supplied
by the battery system (Pfc−del) is at is at the maximum a 100 Watts more or equal to the
power demanded by the motor (Pmotor). Although Cfcsys−1 can be an equality constraint,
meaning it equals zero, it is defined here as an inequality constraint with a 100 W surplus to
facilitate problem convergence. Cfcsys−2 is another constraint that manages the number
of active n −1 fuel cell system modules. It makes sure that sum of number of active n −1
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
33
==PAGE:46==
fuel cell system modules activefc,n−1 and the nth active fuel cell system modules is less
than the installed quantity of the fuel cell system modules nfcmodules (See Equation A.10)
.
Optimiser settings
The optimiser are not changed between standalone battery, standalone fuel cell, and
integrated fuel cell­battery system and are the same as shown in Table 3.1 as discussed
in Section 3.1.1.
Problem resolution
As stated earlier in Section 3.1.1, this thesis employs polynomial segment order of 3 to
keep computation time to a minimum. For a 300 nautical mile cruise distance, the number
of segments is 1
10
th the number of time steps in the power profile. In the 300 nautical mile
cruise distance power­time series, there are 3360 points and this results in 336 segments.
Similarly, for a 900 nautical mile cruise distance, the number of segments is
1
20
th the
number of time steps in the power profile. In the 900 nautical mile cruise distance power­
time series, there are 7260 points, resulting in 363 segments. Various ratios are tested to
evaluate the precision and computation time, as shown in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Computed solutions (minimised objective) and computation times (for arriving
at the solution) at different problem resolutions (number of segments).
Case
Ratio
Jacobian shape
Time [s]
Objective [kg]
900 NM
1/20
4001x2803
135.67
31842.84
900 NM
1/30
2001x1403
26.78
31840.27
900 NM
1/50
1001x703
6.68
31848.88
300 NM
1/10
3001x2103
61.22
29680.26
300 NM
1/20
2001x1403
30.99
29679.48
300 NM
1/30
1001x703
8.26
29678.01
Table 3.6: Calculated total derivatives of certain constraints and objectives in the problem
with respect to design variables are compared against the user provided total derivatives.
Shows the total derivatives with the largest difference.
of <variable>
wrt <variable>
calc mag.
check mag.
Cfcsys−2
Ifc,n−1
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Cfcsys−2
Ifc,n
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Cfcsys−2
activefc,n−1
1.0000e+00
1.0000e+00
Cfcsys−1
Ifc,n−1
4.8647e+02
4.8647e+02
Cfcsys−1
Ifc,n
1.8402e+02
1.8402e+02
Cfcsys−1
activefc,n−1
2.4325e+04
2.4325e+04
mfcsys,powertrain
Ifc,n−1
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
mfcsys,powertrain
Ifc,n
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
mfcsys,powertrain
activefc,n−1
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Problem inspection ­ Partial and Total derivatives
As stated earlier in Section 3.1.1, this thesis employs gradient­based optimization. These
optimization methods require both partial and total derivatives. Total derivatives of the
standalone battery system optimisation problem is presented in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6
34
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:47==
Table 3.7: Calculated partial derivatives of certain problem output variables with respect to
input variables are compared against user provided partial derivatives. Shows the partial
derivative of variables with the largest difference.
of <variable>
wrt <variable>
calc mag.
check mag.
mfcmodule
Pfcmodule−max
6.9198e­04
6.9198e­04
shows that the magnitudes of computed and provided total derivatives (calculated based
on partial derivatives provided) are identical, confirming the correct setup of the problem.
Table 3.7 shows that the magnitudes of computed and provided partial derivatives are
identical, confirming the correct setup of the problem. Table 3.7 displays only the largest
error among the partial derivatives.
3.3
Integrated Fuel cell­Battery system
Figure 3.6 illustrates the workflow of the prototype tool designed to optimally size and
control the integrated fuel cell­battery system. In this figure, green blocks denote various
models, orange blocks represent constraints, pink blocks indicate the Dymos framework,
which includes an optimiser, grey blocks display the data being exchanged between dif­
ferent blocks, and white blocks represent the objective function (f) or the mass of the
integrated fuel cell­battery powertrain system and the state rates of interest (rate at which
the fuel is consumed from the tank, and rate at which the energy is depleted from the bat­
tery system). In the integrated fuel cell­battery system, the mass of the fuel cell­battery
powertrain system is the sum of the battery system mass, fuel cell system mass, fuel
mass, and tank mass.
Optimisation process begins with a specified quantity of mfuel in the tank and with a certain
amount of energy stored in the battery (Ebat), set by the optimiser. Concurrently, within the
constructed problem, three functions are executed: energy management, system sizing
and operation, and objective calculation, represented by red, green, and blue dashed
rectangles in Figure 3.6, respectively, encircling certain blocks.
Within the red dashed rectangle, the orange block representing ‘constraint 1’ receives
the electrical motor power demand (Pmotor), the power delivered by the ‘Fuel cell System
model’ (Pfc−del), and the the power generated or consumed by the battery (Pbat−dis/chg)
and makes sure that the the electrical power demand Pmotor is met by the fuel cell system
and the battery system using Cfcbatsys−1 calculated using Equation A.25. Within the fuel
cell and battery operation model or green block, the discharge or charge power of the
battery is calculated using Equation A.2. Additionally, the ‘Fuel cell and Battery Operation’
model also calculates the maximum installed fuel cell capacity Pfc−max (using Equation
A.27) based on the split ratio set by the optimiser. Pfc−max is then used in the orange block
‘constraint 3’ to make sure that the fuel cell system does not deliver (Pfc−del) more than
the maximum installed fuel cell capacity Pfc−max, using Equation A.28 and Cfcbatsys−3.
Within the green dashed rectangle, the ‘Max FC Sys Module’ model calculates the net
maximum power output of a fuel cell system module (Pfcmodule−max) containing a fuel cell
stack operating at its maximum current (Ifc,max).In the ‘Installed FC Sys Modules’ model,
the maximum installed fuel cell system capacity Pfc−max (See Equation A.27) and the net
power produced by a single fuel cell system module (Pfcmodule−max) is used to determine
the number of fuel cell system modules required (nfcmodules). Once the total number of
fuel cell system modules (nfcmodules) necessary to meet the aircraft’s maximum power
demand is determined, the orange block representing ‘constraint 2’ ensures that no more
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
35
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.6: eXtended Design Structure Matrix diagram of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system model.
than nfcmodules are operational through Cfcbatsys−2 (See Equation A.26).
Inside the blue dashed rectangle, the ‘FC Sys Module Properties’ model determines the
mass of a single fuel cell system module (mfcmodule), including its balance of plant compo­
nents (Equation A.8), using mass­power relationships from Palladino’s PhD Thesis [28].
This mass of a single fuel cell system module (mfcmodule) is then combined with the num­
ber of required fuel cell system modules (nfcmodules) to compute the mass of the fuel cell
system mfcsys (Refer to Equation A.9) in the ‘FC Sys Properties’ model. ‘Battery property’
model shown using the green block in Figure 3.6 computes the mass of the battery sys­
tem (mbatsys) using Equation A.5. The mass of the battery system is further is further com­
bined with mass of the fuel cell system mfcsys, tand the mass of the fuel storage tank mtank
(mtank depends on ηstor and mfuel ­ See Equation A.11), in the ‘Mass’model. The resulting
mass is the mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery powertrain system mfcbatsys,powertrain,
which is also the objective f of the problem.
Apart from the blocks with the colored rectangles, there are two additional blocks repre­
senting ‘power input’ and ‘motor’ models. In the ‘motor’ model, Pmotor−max is calculated
based on the maximum power required at the gearbox input at any point of time in a given
power­time series (Equation A.13). In real world application, this can be a constraint set
by the installed motor capacity. This Pmotor−max is used to restrict the installed fuel cell
system capacity (Pfc−max) using Equation A.27.
The ‘Fuel Cell System’ and the ‘Max FC Sys Module’models are described in the Sec­
tion 3.2.1 and are also applicable to the integrated fuel cell­battery powertrain system.
Optimiser adjusts mfuel(t0), activefc,n−1(t), Ebat and Crate(t) Ifc,n−1(t), and Ifc,n(t) until
mfcbatsys,powertrain is minimised and converges to a residual tolerance of 1e­8, while also
making sure that all the constraints described in Section 3.3.1 are satisfied. A copy of the
optimisation model is also uploaded in Zenodo [70].
36
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:49==
3.3.1
Optimisation problem
The mass (mfcbatsys,powertrain) minimisation problem for an integrated fuel cell­battery sys­
tem can be defined as,
minimize:
mfcbatsys,powertrain(t0)
with respect to:
Ifc,max, Kfcsys, Kbatsys, ηstor, mfuel, Ebat, SR,
Crate(t), SoC(t), activefc,n−1(t), Ifc,n−1(t), Ifc,n(t),
Cfcbatsys−1, Cfcbatsys−2, Cfcbatsys−3
subject to:
0 < activefc,n−1(t) < 500,
50 A < Ifc,n−1(t) < 642 A,
0 A < Ifc,n(t) < 642 A,
0.1 kWh ≤Ebat ≤100, 000 kWh,
0 ≤SR ≤1,
−1 1/h ≤Crate(t) ≤2.5 1/h,
−100 W < Cfcbatsys−1(t) < 0 W,
Cfcbatsys−2(t) < 0,
Cfcbatsys−3(t) < 0 W,
mfuel(tf) = 0 kg,
5 ≤mfuel(t0) ≤10000,
SoC(t0) = 0.8,
0.3 ≤SoC(tf) ≤0.8,
Ifc,max = 642 A,
t0 = 0 s,
tf = [3360, 7260],
Kfcsys = [1, 2, 4] kW/kg,
ηstor = [15, 30, 45] %,
Kbatsys = [0.25, 1, 2.5] kWh/kg,
(3.3)
Objective function
In Equation 3.3, the sizing and optimal control problem of an integrated fuel cell­battery
system is posed as a mass minimisation problem, and specifically the mass minimisation
at t0 or at the time step where t equals zero.
Design variables
In Equation 3.3, mfuel(t0) denotes the mass of fuel in the fuel cell system’s tank (and
changes with t based on dX
dt : mfuel (see Equation A.21), and Ebat signifies the battery
system’s energy storage capacity and are set by the optimiser. The split ratio SR is an­
other design variable, whose value is fixed by the optimiser and remains unchanged over
time t like Ebat. SR indicates the proportion of the maximum total power demand at the
motor input that the fuel cell system can supply.
Crate(t), denotes the discharge or charge rate of the battery which is varied by the dymos
optimiser at each time step t. activefc,n−1(t) dictates how many of the n −1 fuel cell
system modules should be switched on to meet the electrical power demand at the motor
input (See Equation A.14). Ifc,n−1(t) is the design variable that controls the current of
each of the active n −1 fuel cell system modules (activefc,n−1(t)) and subsequently the
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
37
==PAGE:50==
electrical power delivered by them at each time t. Similarly, Ifc,n(t) is the design variable
that controls the current of the nth fuel cell and subsequently the electrical power delivered
by the nth fuel cell system module.
Furthermore, Kfcsys which represents the specific power of the fuel cell stacks installed in
the fuel cell system, Kbatsys which represents the battery energy density, and ηstor which
represents the gravimetric efficiency of the hydrogen storage tank are all design variables.
Kfcsys, Kbatsys, and ηstor are manually adjusted in increments of 1, 2, and 4 kW/kg, 0.25,
1 and 2.5 kWh/kg, and 15, 30 and 45%, respectively, to perform optimization studies of
the integrated fuel cell­battery system, to understand the impact of future fuel cell and
battery parameter states on the take­off mass of the powertrain system.
Constraints
tf is final time step value and is a constraint imposed by the user. It is dependent on
the power­time series and varies depending on the cruise distance (300 or 900 nautical
miles). A fixed value of tf of 3360 corresponds to a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles,
while a value of 7260 corresponds to a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles (See Section
3.4). t0 initialised at zero is a constraint in itself. Ifc−max is set to 642 A which is the current
of the commercial fuel cell stack corresponding to maximum power that it can deliver.
mfuel(t0), representing the fuel mass in the fuel tank at the start of the cruise, is limited to
values including and between 5 and 10,000 kg. The upper and lower limits are determined
on the basis of sample optimization studies to verify that the constraint is not violated in
extreme conditions of the integrated fuel cell­battery system for the cruise distances of
interest. mfuel(tf) representing the fuel mass left in the tank at the end of the cruise, and
is assigned a value of 0 to make sure that there is no fuel left at the end of the mission.
Ebat, representing the battery’s energy storage capacity, is limited to a range from 0.1 kWh
to 100,000 kWh. The upper limit of 100,000 kWh is determined on the basis of sample
optimization studies to verify that the constraint is not violated in extreme conditions of
the integrated fuel cell­battery system for the cruise distances of interest. SR represents
the hybridisation of the fuel cell­battery system and is limited to values between 0 and 1,
where 0 means the integrated system has battery as the only power source and 1 means
the integrated system has fuel cell as the only power source.
Similarly, SoC(t0) or the state of charge of the battery is initialised at 0.8 based on the
literature surveyed and tabulated in Tables 1.2 to 1.6. Furthermore, the SoC(tf) or the
final state of charge of the battery can have values between 0.8 and 0.3, which means
that the battery can have 80 to 30% charge left in it at the end of the cruise distance. The
final state values depend on the mission length [22] and 0.3 is arbitrarily chosen as the
lower limit, while the upper limit matches the initial state of charge of the battery. Crate(t)
representing the discharge rate of the battery at each time step t is limited to values that
include and are between ­1 and 2.5. The upper and lower limits are chosen based on the
literature surveyed and tabulated in Tables 1.2 to 1.6 in the Introduction (Chapter 1).
activefc,n−1(t) representing the number of active n −1 fuel cell system modules is limited
to values that include and are between 0 and 500. The upper limit is chosen based on
sample optimization studies to verify that the the constraint is not violated in extreme
conditions of the integrated fuel cell­battery system for the cruise distances of interest.
Ifc,n−1(t) representing the current of the each of the active n−1 fuel cell system modules
is limited to values that include and are between 50 and 642. The upper limit is the limit set
by the manufacturer (see Figure 3.5a [69]). Lower limit was chosen based on optimiser
convergence. Similarly, Ifc,n(t) representing the current of the nth fuel cell system module
38
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:51==
is limited to values that include and are between 0 and 642. The upper limit is the limit
set by the manufacturer. Lower limit was chosen based on optimiser convergence.
Cfcbatsys−1 is a power delivery constraint (derived from Equation A.25) that ensures the
power supplied by the fuel cell and the battery systems is within 100 W of the power de­
manded by the motor (Pmotor). Although Cfcsys−1 can be an equality constraint, meaning
it equals zero, it is defined here as an inequality constraint to facilitate problem conver­
gence. Cfcsys−2 is another constraint that manages the number of active n −1 fuel cell
system modules. It makes sure that sum of number of n −1 fuel cell system modules
activefc,n−1 and the nth active fuel cell system modules is less than the installed quantitiy
of the fuel cell system modules nfcmodules (see Equation A.26). Cfcsys−3 is a power de­
livery constraint (derived from Equation A.28) which is to ensure that the fuel cell system
does not deliver power Pfc−del over the mandated limit by Pfc−max based on SR.
Optimiser settings
The optimiser are not changed between standalone battery, standalone fuel cell, and
integrated fuel cell­battery system and are the same as shown in Table 3.1 as discussed
in Section 3.1.1.
Problem resolution
As stated earlier in Section 3.1.1, this thesis employs polynomial segment order of 3 to
keep computation time to a minimum. For a 300 nautical mile cruise distance, the number
of segments is
1
20
th of the number of time steps in the power profile. In the 300 nautical
mile cruise distance power­time series, there are 3360 points, resulting in 168 segments.
Similarly, for a 900 nautical mile cruise distance, the number of segments is
1
40
th of the
number of time steps in the power profile. In the 900 nautical mile cruise distance power­
time series, there are 7260 points, resulting in 182 segments. Various ratios are tested to
evaluate the precision and computation time, as shown in Table 3.8.
Table 3.8: Computed solutions (minimised objective) and computation times (for arriving
at the solution) at different problem resolutions (number of segments).
Case
Ratio
Jacobian shape
Time [s]
Objective [kg]
900 NM
1/30
3401x2006
41.10
64997.10
900 NM
1/40
3401x2006
41.41
64997.10
900 NM
1/50
1701x1006
12.90
65005.74
300 NM
1/20
3401x2006
43.06
63080.52
300 NM
1/30
1701x1006
10.99
63079.07
300 NM
1/40
1701x1006
11.30
63079.07
Problem inspection ­ Partial and Total derivatives
As stated earlier in Section 3.1.1, this thesis uses gradient­based optimization. These
optimization methods require both partial and total derivatives. The total derivatives of the
optimisation problem of the standalone battery system is presented in Table 3.10. Table
3.10 shows that the magnitudes of computed and provided total derivatives (calculated
based on the partial derivatives provided) are identical, confirming the correct setup of
the problem. Table 3.9 shows that the magnitudes of the computed and provided partial
derivatives are identical, confirming the correct setup of the problem. Table 3.9 displays
only the largest error among the partial derivatives, as including all variables would take
up too much space and is unnecessary for the report.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
39
==PAGE:52==
Table 3.9: Calculated partial derivatives of certain problem output variables with respect to
input variables are compared against user provided partial derivatives. Shows the partial
derivative of variables with the largest difference.
of <variable>
wrt <variable>
calc mag.
check mag.
ηfcmodule
Ifc,n
6.9198e­04
6.9198e­04
Table 3.10: Calculated total derivatives of certain constraints and objectives in the problem
with respect to design variables are compared against the user provided total derivatives.
Shows the total derivatives with the largest difference.
of <variable>
wrt <variable>
calc mag.
check mag.
Cfcbatsys−1
Crate
1.0002e+03
1.0002e+03
Cfcbatsys−1
Ifc,n−1
1.0345e+03
1.0345e+03
Cfcbatsys−1
Ifc,n
1.3316e+02
1.3316e+02
Cfcbatsys−1
Ebat
2.7778e­04
2.7778e­04
Cfcbatsys−1
activefc,n−1
1.1277e+05
1.1277e+05
Cfcbatsys−1
SR
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Cfcbatsys−2
Crate
1.0002e+03
1.0002e+03
Cfcbatsys−2
Ifc,n−1
1.0345e+03
1.0345e+03
Cfcbatsys−2
Ifc,n
1.3316e+02
1.3316e+02
Cfcbatsys−2
Ebat
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Cfcbatsys−2
activefc,n−1
1.1277e+05
1.1277e+05
Cfcbatsys−2
SR
1.0000e+06
1.0000e+06
Cfcbatsys−3
Crate
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Cfcbatsys−3
Ifc,n−1
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Cfcbatsys−3
Ifc,n
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Cfcbatsys−3
Ebat
0.0000e+00
0.0000e+00
Cfcbatsys−3
activefc,n−1
1.0000e+00
1.0000e+00
Cfcbatsys−3
SR
8.8670e+00
8.8670e+00
mfcbatsys,powertrain
Crate
1.0002e+03
1.0002e+03
mfcbatsys,powertrain
Ifc,n−1
1.0345e+03
1.0345e+03
mfcbatsys,powertrain
Ifc,n
1.3316e+02
1.3316e+02
mfcbatsys,powertrain
Ebat
2.7778e­07
2.7778e­07
mfcbatsys,powertrain
activefc,n−1
1.0000e+00
1.0000e+00
mfcbatsys,powertrain
SR
1.3562e+03
1.3562e+03
3.4
Mission profile
To size the powertrain system, the time series of power demand is required. The applica­
tion considered here is aviation. This would mean that the propulsion power is required
in different phases of flight. The phases of flight considered are the following: Take off,
Climb, Cruise, Descent, and Landing. At each of these phases of flight, two degree­of­
freedom (altitude and time) point­mass equations are used to calculate the propulsion
power required. What this means is that the phases are converted to points of propulsion
power in time, which can then be interpolated to form a power profile. In addition, it is as­
sumed that the mass of the aircraft remains the same. In aircraft based on a standalone
battery system, this is true. But in the case of liquid hydrogen powered aircrafts, this may
not hold true but for the sake of reducing the complexity of model, the same is assumed
for fuel cell­based aircrafts as well ­ standalone or not.
40
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:53==
The representative aircraft from the aviation sector for the research in this thesis is the
Airbus A320. For all the reasons described in the Introduction chapter (1) and because
this segment of the aircraft (narrow body) is also difficult to decarbonise according to the
research by Bills et al. [15] and Viswanathan et al. [22], the Airbus A320 is chosen. Some
important information related to A320 to calculate the propulsion power is shown in Table
3.11.
Table 3.11: Important parameters of A320 aircraft that were used to generate the mission
or power profile at different phases of flight
Parameter
Value
Maximum Take Off Weight
73900 [kg]
Maximum Landing Weight
64500 [kg]
Operational Empty Weight
42200 [kg]
Fuel Burn Rate Factor
1.872132 [L/NM]
Specific Fuel Consumption
42.2 [kg/kN.h]
Fuel Density
0.785 [kg/L]
Aspect Ratio
10.3 [­]
Wing Planform Area
122.6 [m2]
Take­off decision speed
115 [knots]
Rate of Climb
1800 [ft/min]
Cruise Altitude
20000 [ft]
Climb speed
0.72 to 0.82 [Mach]
Cruise speed
0.62 to 0.76 [Mach]
Rate of Descent
1800 [ft/min]
Target Landing speed
135 [knots]
First, based on the take­off decision speed and the take­off distance, the time taken to
take­off is calculated. The take­off thrust is then calculated using standard take­off veloc­
ity, take­off distance, wind loading, and wing planform area for the given flight conditions.
The thrust required is then multiplied by the take­off decision speed to obtain the take­off
power. Based on the take­off decision speed and the take­off distance, the time taken for
take­off is calculated. This time is shown in Figure 3.7 by point A. The power at the end of
climb phase is calculated and this forms point B. The time taken to finish the climb phase
is then calculated on the basis of cruise altitude and rate of climb. The cruise power is
then calculated, and the point C1 represents the start of the cruise phase, and the point
C2 represents the end of the cruise phase. The time taken to complete the cruise phase
depends on the range of the aircraft and the cruise speed. In this thesis, whenever the
range is referred to, this actually refers to the cruise distance. Connecting these discrete
sets of points and the corresponding time, the power profile is obtained as shown in Figure
3.7. The power profiles are generated by modifying the excel generated based on a prior
tool developed and co­authored by the author of this thesis and can be found at [71].
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
41
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.7: Power profile with different phases of flight ­ Take Off till point A, Climb till point
B, Cruise from point C1 to C2.
42
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:55==
4
Results and Discussion
As discussed in Chapter 3, Section 3.4, the power profiles of an A320 aircraft are gener­
ated using two degree­of­freedom point mass equations and are compared against each
other in Figure 4.1. These power profiles are used to optimise powertrain systems with
the objective of minimising mass. First in Section 4.1, the results of the standalone bat­
tery system for cruise distances of 300 and 900 nautical miles are discussed, then in
Section 4.2, the results of the standalone fuel cell system for cruise distances of 300 and
900 nautical miles are discussed, and in Section 4.3 the results of the standalone fuel
cell and battery systems are compared. In Section 4.4, the results of the integrated fuel
cell­battery system are discussed for cruise distances of 300 and 900 nautical miles.
Figure 4.1: Power profile of an Airbus A320 aircraft travelling a distance of 300 nautical
miles shown in red dashed line with red circle markers, and the green dashed lines with
green square markers shows the power profile of an Airbus A320 aircraft travelling a
distance of 900 nautical miles. The take­off and climb phases of the power profile are
similar because only the cruise distance changes.
4.1
Standalone Battery system
In the standalone battery system, the take­off mass or the mass of the battery system is
directly related to the battery energy density. To understand how the mass of the bat­
tery system changes with the battery energy density, tests were conducted by changing
the battery energy density in three steps ­ 0.25, 1 and 2.5 kWh/kg. The tests were first
conducted for an A320 aircraft with a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles and then for a
cruise distance of 900 nautical miles. Figure 4.2 shows the battery energy density along
the x­axis and the minimised mass of the battery system along the log­scaled y­axis.
At today’s battery energy density of 0.25 kWh/kg, the mass of the battery system is
132,402 kg for the aircraft to travel 300 nautical miles, and the mass is 248,967 kg to
travel 900 nautical miles. For context, the maximum take­off mass of the Airbus A320 air­
craft is approximately 73,900 kg, and within this take­off mass, the fuel mass is 16,000 kg,
and the passenger mass is 15,300 kg (at 102 kg per passenger for 150 passengers). The
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
43
==PAGE:56==
mass of the battery system of A320 aircrafts travelling 300 and 900 nautical miles would
be 1.78 to 3.36 times that of the maximum take­off mass of aircraft. This would mean that
such an aircraft is technically infeasible because the mass of the battery system exceeds
the sum of fuel and passenger mass of 31,300 kg (15,300 kg + 16,000 kg). This also
means that there is no passenger capacity left, as batteries would substitute passengers
in terms of mass.
Figure 4.2: Mass of the battery system of an A320 aircraft with cruise distances of 300
and 900 nautical miles. Orange line with orange circle markers shows the change in mass
of the standalone battery system with change in the battery energy density for a cruise
distance of 300 nautical miles. Green line with green square markers shows the change
in mass of the standalone battery system with change in the battery energy density for a
cruise distance of 900 nautical miles.
At a battery energy density of 1 kWh/kg, the mass of the battery systems is approximately
33,100 kg and 62,241 kg for A320 aircraft travelling 300 and 900 nautical miles, respec­
tively. Even at 1 kWh/kg, the mass of the battery systems is more than the sum of fuel
and passenger mass available of 31,300 kg. Similar to the results of the 0.25 kWh/kg
battery energy density, there is no passenger capacity left on the A320 aircraft equipped
with a standalone battery system of 1 kWh/kg battery energy density, as batteries would
substitute passengers in terms of mass.
At a battery energy density of 2.5 kWh/kg, the mass of the battery systems is approxi­
mately 13,240 kg and 24,897 kg for A320 aircraft travelling 300 and 900 nautical miles,
respectively. Unlike battery energy densities of 0.25 kWh/kg and 1 kWh/kg, the mass of
the battery system is less than the sum of fuel and passenger mass of 31,300 kg. This
means that A320 aircraft travelling 300 nautical miles and powered with a 2.5 kWh/kg
standalone battery powertrain system can carry all 150 passengers (15,300 kg) because
the mass of the battery system (13,240 kg) is less than the fuel mass (16,000 kg). For
an A320 aircraft travelling 900 nautical miles powered by a 2.5 kWh/kg battery system,
passenger capacity is impacted because the mass of the battery system is greater than
the available fuel mass of 16,000 kg, but less than the sum of fuel mass and passenger
mass of 31,300 kg. This means that the increase in the mass of the battery system over
the fuel mass would need to be accommodated by a reduction in the passenger mass.
44
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:57==
The convergence plots (Figure B.2) of all cases tested in the standalone battery system
are shown in Appendix B.
4.2
Standalone Fuel cell system
In the standalone battery system, the take­off mass or the mass of the battery system
remains constant throughout the cruise distance. However, in the standalone fuel cell
system, the mass of the powertrain system changes throughout the cruise distance be­
cause fuel (liquid hydrogen) is consumed. The mass of the powertrain system is the sum
of the fuel mass, the tank mass (including the balance of plant components), and the
mass of the fuel cell system (fuel cell stacks and their balance of plant components). The
take­off mass would then be the mass of the powertrain system at the start of the mission
to cover a certain cruise distance.
Figure 4.3: Change in take­off mass of the standalone fuel cell powertrain system (along
y­axis) with change in hydrogen storage tank gravimetric efficiency (along x­axis) for dif­
ferent cruise distances, and for fuel cell stacks (in the fuel cell system) of varying specific
power. The take­off mass excluding the fuel and tank mass at different fuel cell stack spe­
cific powers is shown in solid lines, and the dashed lines show the take­off mass which
includes the fuel mass and tank mass. The blue lines represent the fuel cell system with
fuel cell stacks of 1 kW/kg specific power, the green lines represent the fuel cell system
with fuel cell stacks of 2 kW/kg specific power, and the red lines represent the fuel cell
system with fuel cell stacks of 4 kW/kg specific power. Lines with square markers rep­
resent a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles and lines with circle markers represent a
cruise distance of 300 nautical miles.
The fuel storage tank and specifically the liquid hydrogen storage tank can have different
gravimetric efficiencies, and the mass of the fuel storage tank is dependent on the mass
of the fuel required to cruise a certain distance. Since the fuel storage tank mass is part of
the mass of the powertrain system, any change in gravimetric efficiency affects the take­
off mass of the powertrain system. The fuel cell system has ‘n’ number of fuel cell system
modules, each with a fuel cell stack of a certain specific power [kW/kg]. Change in fuel
cell stack specific power can change the mass of the fuel cell system and consequently
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
45
==PAGE:58==
the mass of the powertrain system and the take­off mass. To understand how the take­off
mass of the standalone fuel cell powertrain system changes with the hydrogen storage
tank gravimetric efficiency and with the fuel cell stack specific power, tests were conducted
by changing the gravimetric efficiency and the specific power. The gravimetric efficiency
of hydrogen storage is changed in three steps, 15, 30 and 45%, and the fuel cell stack
specific power is changed in three steps, 1, 2, and 4 kW/kg.
Figure 4.3 shows the change in the take­off mass of the standalone fuel cell powertrain
system with the change in the gravimetric efficiency of the hydrogen storage tank. Within
the figure, there are two sets of lines (dashed and solid lines). The take­off mass of the
powertrain system which includes the fuel mass and the tank mass is shown by dashed
lines. Solid lines that represent the mass of the fuel cell system, which includes the fuel cell
system stacks and their balance of plant components and remains constant regardless of
the change in gravimetric efficiency of the storage tank. However, the dashed lines have
a certain slope that changes with gravimetric efficiencies.
At low gravimetric efficiency of hydrogen storage tank, the take­off mass of the powertrain
system (represented by dashed lines) is higher, and this reduces with an increase in the
gravimetric efficiency. With respect to the cruise distance, the take­off mass of the pow­
ertrain system increases with an increase in the cruise distance from 300 to 900 nautical
miles. The take­off mass of the powertrain system also reduces with increase in specific
power of the fuel cell stacks used in the fuel cell system. The convergence plots (Figures
B.3 to B.5) of all the cases tested under the standalone fuel cell system are shown in
Appendix B.
4.3
Comparison of standalone powertrain systems
The minimised take­off mass of the standalone battery and standalone fuel cell powertrain
systems at two different cruise distances (300 and 900 nautical miles) are compared and
shown in Figure 4.4. In Figure 4.4, the x­axis has different cases from the standalone
fuel cell system and the standalone battery system. With respect to the standalone fuel
cell system, highlighted in a shaded green rectangle, the cases are related to changes
in the hydrogen storage gravimetric efficiency and changes in the specific power of fuel
cell stacks used in the fuel cell system. With respect to the standalone battery system,
highlighted in a shaded orange rectangle, the cases are related to the changes in the
battery energy density.
Figure 4.4 also shows three more lines, of which two are dashed and one solid. These
three lines are the design parameters of the current A320 aircraft. The red dashed line
is helpful as a threshold to reject cases which are not technically feasible and retains
zero passenger capacity. The black dashed line helps to understand how the mass of the
powertrain system compares to the fuel carrying capacity of the A320 aircraft. The solid
blue line with blue triangle markers represents the maximum take­off mass of the A320
aircraft.
In Figure 4.4, it can be seen that only two cases in the standalone fuel cell system and
two cases in the standalone battery system have a take­off mass less than the sum of
fuel and the passenger shown by the red dashed line with the red triangle markers. The
(first) case in the standalone fuel cell system that has a take­off mass less than 31,300
kg has a hydrogen storage tank of 30 % gravimetric efficiency and is equipped with fuel
cell stacks of 4 kW/kg specific power and travels 300 nautical miles. The other (second)
case in the standalone fuel cell system with take­off mass less than 31,300 kg has a
hydrogen storage tank of 45 % gravimetric efficiency and is equipped with fuel cell stacks
46
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:59==
of 4 kW/kg specific power and also travels 300 nautical miles. The two cases in the
standalone battery system that have take­off mass less than 31,300 kg have a battery
energy density of 2.5 kWh/kg and travel 300 and 900 nautical miles. The figure does
not display the data for the standalone battery with 0.25 kWh/kg energy density, as its
exceedingly high take­off mass skews the plot.
Figure 4.4: Comparison of take­off masses of the standalone fuel cell system cases
(shaded in green rectangle) and the standalone battery system cases (shaded in orange
rectangle) for two different cruise distances using a column plot. The takeoff mass for the
300 nautical mile cruise distance cases are shown with orange columns, and the takeoff
mass for the 900 nautical mile cruise distance cases are shown with green columns. The
red dashed line with red triangle markers is the sum of fuel mass and passenger mass
(of the A320 aircraft) and is represented by the text ‘FUEL + PAX’ and has a value of
31,300 kg. The black dashed line with black triangle markers is the fuel mass of the A320
aircraft and is represented by the text ‘FUEL’ and has a value of 16,000 kg. The solid blue
line with blue triangle markers is the maximum take­off mass of the A320 aircraft and is
represented by the text ‘MTOM’and has a value of 73,900 kg.
Table 4.1 presents the computed retained passenger capacities for cases with a take­off
mass below 31,300 kg. Retained passenger capacity is the difference in mass of the
powertrain system and the sum of fuel and passenger mass over 102, where 102 is the
mass per passenger. The standalone battery system, featuring a battery energy density of
2.5 kWh/kg and designed for a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, can accommodate an
extra 25 passengers due to its lighter mass of 13,240 kg, which is less than the 16,000 kg
fuel mass available on the A320 aircraft. As the range increases, the retained passenger
capacity decreases to 63. The historical annual growth rate of battery energy densities
ranges from 3 to 10 % [3, 8]. At a 3 % growth rate, the batteries would achieve a 0.6
kWh/kg energy density by 2047, while at a 10 % growth rate, they would reach 2.5 kWh/kg
by 2045. Although 2.5 kWh/kg may seem unrealistic, a 10 % annual growth rate could
benefit standalone battery system powertrains for A320 class aircraft. Over the past few
decades, there has been significant interest in high­energy density batteries, such as
lithium­air batteries. However, lithium­air batteries have poor discharge rates [15]. Bills et
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
47
==PAGE:60==
al. [15] investigated battery energy densities up to 2.25 kWh/kg in their study. This thesis
adopts a similar approach, with a slightly higher value of 2.5 kWh/kg.
Table 4.1: Retained Passenger Capacity of selected cases (with mass less than 31,300
kg or the sum of the fuel mass and the passenger mass) from the standalone battery
system and from the standalone fuel cell system.
Cruise distance
[nautical miles]
Take­off mass
[kg]
Retained
passenger
capacity
Standalone fuel cell system
30 % gravimetric efficiency
and 4 kW/kg specific power
300
30972.83
3
Standalone fuel cell system
45 % gravimetric efficiency
and 4 kW/kg specific power
300
29697.48
16
Standalone battery system
2.5 kWh/kg battery energy density
300
13240.25
177
Standalone battery system
2.5 kWh/kg battery energy density
900
24896.77
63
4.4
Integrated Fuel cell­Battery system
In the previous three sections of this chapter, the results of the standalone battery and
the standalone fuel cell systems were discussed and then compared. In this section, the
results of the integrated fuel cell­battery system are discussed.
In the integrated fuel cell­battery system, the mass of the powertrain system is the sum
of the fuel (hydrogen) mass, the fuel storage tank mass, the fuel cell system mass, and
the battery system mass. The take­off mass would then be the mass of the powertrain
system at the start of the mission to cover a certain cruise distance. First, the results of
the integrated system for an A320 aircraft travelling a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles
are discussed, followed by results for the cruise distance of 900 nautical miles.
4.4.1
300 Nautical Mile cruise distance
Figure 4.5 showcases contour plots (4.5a, 4.5b, 4.5c) aligned side by side, arranged by
increasing the gravimetric efficiency of hydrogen storage. In each contour plot, the x­
axis represents the fuel cell stack specific power, while the y­axis denotes the battery
energy density. The contour lines, which illustrate minimised take­off mass data, are
spaced 7,750 kg apart and are displayed on an eight­shade color scale from light to dark,
indicating the highest to lowest mass. The color scale with mass bins of 7,750 kg is shown
on the right side of each subplot. Similarly, Figure 4.6 displays contour plots (4.6a, 4.6b,
4.6c) side by side, ordered by increasing gravimetric efficiency of hydrogen storage. In
each contour plot, the x­axis represents the fuel cell stack specific power, while the y­axis
denotes the battery energy density. The contour lines, which represent the energy storage
capacity of the integrated fuel cell­battery system, are spaced 4,375 kWh apart and are
displayed on an eight­shade color scale from light to dark, indicating the highest to lowest
battery energy storage capacity. The color scale with battery energy storage capacity bins
of 4,375 kWh is shown on the right side of each subplot. Figure 4.7 presents contour plots
(4.7a, 4.7b, 4.7c) aligned side by side, arranged by increasing the gravimetric efficiency of
hydrogen storage. In each contour plot, the x­axis represents the fuel cell stack specific
power, while the y­axis denotes the battery energy density. The contour lines, which
48
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:61==
illustrate the split ratio of the integrated fuel cell­battery system, are spaced 0.125 units
apart and are displayed on an eight­shade color scale from light to dark, indicating the
lowest to highest split ratio. The color scale with split ratio bins of 0.125 units is shown on
the right side of each subplot.
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 15% (300 NM)
20750
28500
36250
44000
750
13000
20750
28500
36250
44000
51750
59500
67250
75000
T
ake- off Mass [kg]
(a) Take­off mass distribution
for a H2 storage gravimetric ef­
ficiency of 15%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 30% (300 NM)
20750
28500
36250
000
750
13000
20750
28500
36250
44000
51750
59500
67250
75000
T
ake- off Mass [kg]
(b) Take­off mass distribution
for a H2 storage gravimetric ef­
ficiency of 30%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 45% (300 NM)
20750
28500
36250
000
750
13000
20750
28500
36250
44000
51750
59500
67250
75000
T
ake- off Mass [kg]
(c) Take­off mass distribution
for a H2 storage gravimetric ef­
ficiency of 45%
Figure 4.5: Contour plots illustrating the take­off mass distribution for different combina­
tions of battery energy density and fuel cell stack specific power at varying gravimetric
efficiencies of hydrogen storage for a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles. Each subfig­
ure represents a specific gravimetric efficiency: (a) 15%, (b) 30%, and (c) 45%. The x­
axis shows the fuel cell stack specific power (kW/kg), while the y­axis displays the battery
energy density (kWh/kg). The color gradient represents the take­off mass in kilograms,
where darker colours indicate lower masses.
In Figure 4.5, the light­coloured contours indicating the highest take­off mass are concen­
trated in the lower left corner of each subplot. This area corresponds to battery energy
densities ranging from 0.25 to 1 kWh/kg on the y­axis and fuel cell stack specific powers
from 1 to 2 kW/kg on the x­axis. The take­off mass is greater in these regions, suggest­
ing that low battery energy density combined with low specific power results in increased
overall take­off mass. At higher specific powers and battery energy densities, the take­off
mass distribution becomes more uniform and the contour lines extend further into the plot
(meaning that lower take­off mass regions cover more of the plot), showing that the take­
off mass decreases with increased fuel cell specific power and battery energy density.
Specifically, along the 28500 contour line in subplots 4.5a and 4.5b, there is a notice­
able dip or change in slope at a fuel cell stack specific power of 2 kW/kg. This dip is not
an anomaly; it appears because when the fuel cell specific power increases from 2 to 4
kW/kg, the take­off mass slightly increases for 15 and 30% gravimetric efficiencies at a
battery energy density of 1 kWh/kg. This increase in take­off mass also alters the slope
of the 20750 contour line above the specific power of 2 kW/kg. The increase in take­off
mass with an increase in specific power from 2 to 4 kW/kg at gravimetric efficiencies of 15
and 30% is due to the battery being recharged using fuel cell power. This recharging pro­
cess necessitates additional mass for the fuel cell system capacity, fuel, and fuel storage
tanks, resulting in a higher take­off mass. However, with a further increase in gravimet­
ric efficiency from 30 to 45% and an increase in specific power from 2 to 4 kW/kg, the
take­off mass of the system actually decreases. This explains why the 28500 contour line
maintains the same slope with an increase in fuel cell stack specific power in subplot 4.5c.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
49
==PAGE:62==
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 15% (300 NM)
4375
8750
13125
17500
21875
26250
30625
0
4375
8750
13125
17500
21875
26250
30625
35000
Battery Energy Storage Capacity [kWh]
(a) Energy storage capacity of
the battery in integrated fuel
cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 15%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 30% (300 NM)
4375
875
13125
17500
21875
26250
30625
0
4375
8750
13125
17500
21875
26250
30625
35000
Battery Energy Storage Capacity [kWh]
(b) Energy storage capacity of
the battery in integrated fuel
cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 30%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 45% (300 NM)
4375
8750
13125
17500
21875
26250
30625
0
4375
8750
13125
17500
21875
26250
30625
35000
Battery Energy Storage Capacity [kWh]
(c) Energy storage capacity of
the battery in integrated fuel
cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 45%
Figure 4.6: Contour plots illustrating the energy storage capacity of the battery in inte­
grated fuel cell­battery system for different combinations of battery energy density and
fuel cell stack specific power at varying gravimetric efficiencies of hydrogen storage for
a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles. Each subfigure represents a specific gravimetric
efficiency: (a) 15%, (b) 30%, and (c) 45%. The x­axis shows the fuel cell stack spe­
cific power (kW/kg), while the y­axis displays the battery energy density (kWh/kg). The
color gradient represents the energy storage capacity of the battery in kWh, where darker
colours indicate a lower battery energy storage capacity.
In Figure 4.6, the light­coloured contours indicating the highest battery storage capacity
is concentrated at the top of each subplot. For all battery energy densities (0.25 to 2.5
kWh/kg) and until the fuel cell stack specific power of 2 kW/kg, the contour lines are
horizontal, meaning that the battery storage capacity in the integrated fuel cell­battery
system is mainly dependent on the battery energy density. Beyond the fuel cell stack
specific power of 2 kW/kg at battery energy densities in the range of 0.25 to 2 kWh/kg,
the contour lines in the lower right region of the subplots increase in slope towards upper
face of the plot. This indicates that at higher fuel cell stack specific powers, the effect of
battery energy density on battery energy storage capacity is reduced while the effect of
fuel cell stack specific power on battery energy storage capacity is increased. The effect is
less pronounced with increase in storage tank gravimetric efficiency as shown in subplots
4.6a, 4.6b, and 4.6c.
Figure 4.7 showing split ratio also has pattern similar to Figure 4.6. For example, in
subplot 4.7a, past the specific power of 2 kW/kg on the x­axis, the split ratio contour lines
(of value below 0.75) incline towards the upper right corner. This suggests that a higher
specific power of the fuel cell stack results in a larger portion of the total power being
supplied by the fuel cell system at all storage tank gravimetric efficiencies tested. This
effect decreases with an increase in the gravimetric efficiency of the hydrogen storage
tank, as observed when moving from subplot 4.7a through 4.7b to 4.7c. Although the
effect still exists at a gravimetric efficiency of 45%, it is only noticeable at battery energy
densities above 1 kWh/kg. The convergence plots (Figures B.6 to B.23) of all the cases
tested under the integrated fuel cell­battery system for both 300 and 900 nautical mile
cruise distance are shown Appendix B.
Figure 4.8 compares the take­off mass of integrated fuel cell­battery systems equipped
50
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:63==
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 15% (300 NM)
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
0.000
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
1.000
Split Ratio [-]
(a) Split ratio of the integrated
fuel cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 15%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 30% (300 NM)
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
0.000
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
1.000
Split Ratio [-]
(b) Split ratio of the integrated
fuel cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 30%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 45% (300 NM)
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
0.000
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
1.000
Split Ratio [-]
(c) Split ratio of the integrated
fuel cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 45%
Figure 4.7: Contour plots illustrating the split ratio in integrated fuel cell­battery system
for different combinations of battery energy density and fuel cell stack specific power at
varying gravimetric efficiencies of hydrogen storage for a cruise distance of 300 nautical
miles. Each subfigure represents a specific gravimetric efficiency: (a) 15%, (b) 30%,
and (c) 45%. The x­axis shows the fuel cell stack specific power (kW/kg), while the y­
axis displays the battery energy density (kWh/kg). The color gradient represents the split
ratio, where darker colours indicate that fuel cell system’s share in the delivered power is
higher.
Integrated system: 15% | 1 kW/kg
Integrated system: 30% | 1 kW/kg
Integrated system: 45% | 1 kW/kg
Integrated system: 15% | 2 kW/kg
Integrated system: 30% | 2 kW/kg
Integrated system: 45% | 2 kW/kg
Integrated system: 15% | 4 kW/kg
Integrated system: 30% | 4 kW/kg
Integrated system: 45% | 4 kW/kg
Standalone battery system
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
T
ake- off mass of the system [kg]
300 NM
Energy Density
0.25 [kWh/kg]
1 [kWh/kg]
2.5 [kWh/kg]
Figure 4.8: Take­off mass of the fuel cell­battery integrated system with different combi­
nations of storage gravimetric efficiencies (15, 30, and 45%) and fuel cell stack specific
powers (1, 2, and 4 kW/kg) equipped with battery systems of energy densities (0.25, 1,
and 2.5 kWh/kg) is compared with the take­off mass of standalone battery systems with
different battery energy densities (1 and 2.5 kWh/kg) for a cruise distance of 300 nauti­
cal miles. The solid blue line with blue circle markers represents the powertrain system
with a battery of 0.25 kWh/kg energy density. The dashed green line with green square
markers represents the powertrain system with a battery of 1 kWh/kg. The dotted red line
with red diamond markers represents the powertrain system with a battery of 2.5 kWh/kg.
The take­off mass of the standalone battery system with a battery energy density of 0.25
kWh/kg is not included in the plot as its exceedingly high take­off mass skews the plot.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
51
==PAGE:64==
with different combinations of storage tanks of three different gravimetric efficiencies, fuel
cell stacks of three different specific powers, and batteries with three different battery
energy densities. The take­off mass of the systems is along the y­axis, and the different
integrated and standalone powertrain systems are along the x­axis. No standalone fuel
cell systems are included in this figure because the standalone fuel cell system of all
combinations of gravimetric efficiency and specific power has a higher take­off mass than
the standalone battery systems (see Figure 4.4) except in two cases where the gravimetric
efficiency is 30% and 45% and the fuel cell stack specific power is 4 kW/kg.
Figure 4.8 shows that at a battery energy density of 1 kWh/kg, represented by the dashed
green line with green square markers, the integrated system has a lower mass than the
standalone battery system. Since the standalone battery system has a lower mass than
the standalone fuel cell system, this indicates that the integrated fuel cell­battery system
performs better than both the standalone fuel cell and standalone battery system alterna­
tives. When the battery energy density is increased to 2.5 kWh/kg, the take­off mass of
the integrated system is the same as the standalone battery system, indicating that there
are no gains in integrating the fuel cell and battery systems at this battery energy density.
4.4.2
900 Nautical Mile cruise distance
Figure 4.9 showcases contour plots (4.9a, 4.9b, 4.9c) aligned side by side, arranged by
increasing the gravimetric efficiency of hydrogen storage. In each contour plot, the x­axis
represents the fuel cell stack specific power, while the y­axis denotes the battery energy
density. The contour lines, which illustrate minimised take­off mass data, are spaced
7,750 kg apart and are displayed on an eight­shade color scale from light to dark, indicat­
ing the highest to lowest mass. The color scale with mass bins of 7,750 kg is shown on
the right side of each subplot. Similarly, Figure 4.10 displays contour plots (4.10a, 4.10b,
4.10c) side by side, ordered by increasing gravimetric efficiency of hydrogen storage. In
each contour plot, the x­axis represents the fuel cell stack specific power, while the y­axis
denotes the battery energy density. The contour lines, which represent the energy stor­
age capacity of the integrated fuel cell­battery system, are spaced 8,125 kWh apart and
are displayed on an eight­shade color scale from light to dark, indicating the highest to
lowest battery energy storage capacity. The color scale with battery energy storage ca­
pacity bins of 8,125 kWh is shown on the right side of each subplot. Figure 4.11 presents
contour plots (4.11a, 4.11b, 4.11c) aligned side by side, arranged by increasing the gravi­
metric efficiency of hydrogen storage. In each contour plot, the x­axis represents the fuel
cell stack specific power, while the y­axis denotes the battery energy density. The contour
lines, which illustrate the split ratio of the integrated fuel cell­battery system, are spaced
0.125 units apart and are displayed on an eight­shade color scale from light to dark, indi­
cating the lowest to highest split ratio. The color scale with split ratio bins of 0.125 units
is shown on the right side of each subplot.
In Figure 4.9, the light­coloured contours indicating the highest take­off mass are concen­
trated in the lower left corner of each subplot. This area corresponds to battery energy
densities ranging from 0.25 to 1 kWh/kg on the y­axis and fuel cell stack specific powers
from 1 to 2 kW/kg on the x­axis. The take­off mass is greater in these regions, suggesting
that low battery energy density combined with low specific power results in an increased
overall take­off mass. At higher specific powers and battery energy densities, the take­off
mass distribution becomes more uniform, and the contour lines extend further into the plot
(meaning that lower take­off mass regions cover more of the plot), showing that the mass
decreases with increased fuel cell specific power and battery energy density.
In Figure 4.10, the light­colored contours indicate the highest battery storage capacity.
52
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:65==
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 15% (900 NM)
28500
36250
44000
51750
500
13000
20750
28500
36250
44000
51750
59500
67250
75000
T
ake- off Mass [kg]
(a) Take­off mass distribution
for a H2 storage gravimetric ef­
ficiency of 15%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 30% (900 NM)
0750
28500
36250
44000
750
13000
20750
28500
36250
44000
51750
59500
67250
75000
T
ake- off Mass [kg]
(b) Take­off mass distribution
for a H2 storage gravimetric ef­
ficiency of 30%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 45% (900 NM)
20750
28500
36250
000
750
13000
20750
28500
36250
44000
51750
59500
67250
75000
T
ake- off Mass [kg]
(c) Take­off mass distribution
for a H2 storage gravimetric ef­
ficiency of 45%
Figure 4.9: Contour plots illustrating the take­off mass distribution for different combina­
tions of battery energy density and fuel cell stack specific power at varying gravimetric
efficiencies of hydrogen storage for a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles. Each subfig­
ure represents a specific gravimetric efficiency: (a) 15%, (b) 30%, and (c) 45%. The x­
axis shows the fuel cell stack specific power (kW/kg), while the y­axis displays the battery
energy density (kWh/kg). The color gradient represents the take­off mass in kilograms,
where darker colours indicate lower masses.
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 15% (900 NM)
8125
16250
24375
32500
40625
48750
56875
0
8125
16250
24375
32500
40625
48750
56875
65000
Battery Energy Storage Capacity [kWh]
(a) Energy storage capacity of
the battery in integrated fuel
cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 15%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 30% (900 NM)
8125
162
243
325
406
487
0
8125
16250
24375
32500
40625
48750
56875
65000
Battery Energy Storage Capacity [kWh]
(b) Energy storage capacity of
the battery in integrated fuel
cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 30%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 45% (900 NM)
8125
162
243
325
406
487
0
8125
16250
24375
32500
40625
48750
56875
65000
Battery Energy Storage Capacity [kWh]
(c) Energy storage capacity of
the battery in integrated fuel
cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 45%
Figure 4.10: Contour plots illustrating the energy storage capacity of the battery in inte­
grated fuel cell­battery system for different combinations of battery energy density and
fuel cell stack specific power at varying gravimetric efficiencies of hydrogen storage for
a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles. Each subfigure represents a specific gravimetric
efficiency: (a) 15%, (b) 30%, and (c) 45%. The x­axis shows the fuel cell stack spe­
cific power (kW/kg), while the y­axis displays the battery energy density (kWh/kg). The
color gradient represents the energy storage capacity of the battery in kWh, where darker
colours indicate a lower battery energy storage capacity.
In the subplot 4.10a, corresponding to a gravimetric efficiency of 15%, the light­coloured
contour is concentrated at the top, indicating a higher battery storage capacity. In subplots
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
53
==PAGE:66==
4.10b and 4.10c, corresponding to gravimetric efficiencies of 30% and 45%, respectively,
the light­coloured contour lines are concentrated at the top left corner of the subplots.
In subplot 4.10a, for all battery energy densities (0.25 to 2.5 kWh/kg) and until the specific
power of the fuel cell stack specific power of 2 kW/kg, the contour lines are relatively
horizontal. This indicates that the battery storage capacity in the integrated fuel cell­
battery system is mainly dependent on the battery energy density in this region. Beyond
a fuel cell stack specific power of 2 kW/kg, at battery energy densities ranging from 0.25
to 2.5 kWh/kg, the contour lines in the lower right region of the subplot start to slope
upwards. This suggests that at higher fuel cell stack specific powers, the influence of
battery energy density on battery storage capacity decreases, while the influence of fuel
cell stack specific power increases.
The effect becomes more pronounced with an increase in the gravimetric efficiency of the
storage tank, as shown in the subplots 4.10b and 4.10c. At gravimetric efficiencies of 30%
and 45%, the contour lines increase in slope and become more concentrated towards the
top left corner where the specific power of the fuel cell stack is 1 kW/kg and the battery
energy density is 2.5 kWh/kg. This indicates that at gravimetric efficiencies equal to or
greater than 30%, the specific power of the fuel cell stack has a strong influence on the
energy storage capacity of the battery. This creates a larger design space where fuel cell
stacks of lower specific power and batteries of lower energy density can be used to form
an integrated fuel cell­battery system with minimised mass.
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 15% (900 NM)
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
0.000
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
1.000
Split Ratio [-]
(a) Split ratio of the integrated
fuel cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 15%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 30% (900 NM)
125
250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
0.000
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
1.000
Split Ratio [-]
(b) Split ratio of the integrated
fuel cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 30%
1
2
4
Fuel Cell Stack Specific Power [kW/kg]
0.25
1
2.5
Battery Energy Density [kWh/kg]
H
2
 Storage Tank Grav. Eff. 45% (900 NM)
125
250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
0.000
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
1.000
Split Ratio [-]
(c) Split ratio of the integrated
fuel cell­battery system for a H2
storage gravimetric efficiency
of 45%
Figure 4.11: Contour plots illustrating the split ratio in integrated fuel cell­battery system
for different combinations of battery energy density and fuel cell stack specific power at
varying gravimetric efficiencies of hydrogen storage for a cruise distance of 900 nautical
miles. Each subfigure represents a specific gravimetric efficiency: (a) 15%, (b) 30%,
and (c) 45%. The x­axis shows the fuel cell stack specific power (kW/kg), while the y­axis
displays the battery energy density (kWh/kg). The color gradient represents the split ratio,
where darker colours indicate that the fuel cell system’s share in the delivered power is
higher.
Figure 4.11 showing the split ratio also has a pattern similar to Figure 4.10. For example,
in the subplot 4.11a, past the specific power of 2 kW/kg on the x­axis, the contour lines
of the split ratio (of value below 0.75) incline toward the upper right corner. This suggests
that a higher specific power of the fuel cell stack results in a larger portion of the total
54
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:67==
power being supplied by the fuel cell system at all storage tank gravimetric efficiencies
tested. This effect increases with an increase in the gravimetric efficiency of the hydrogen
storage tank, as observed when moving from subplot 4.11a through 4.11b to 4.11c.
Integrated system: 15% | 1 kW/kg
Integrated system: 30% | 1 kW/kg
Integrated system: 45% | 1 kW/kg
Integrated system: 15% | 2 kW/kg
Integrated system: 30% | 2 kW/kg
Integrated system: 45% | 2 kW/kg
Integrated system: 15% | 4 kW/kg
Integrated system: 30% | 4 kW/kg
Integrated system: 45% | 4 kW/kg
Standalone battery system
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
T
ake- off mass of the system [kg]
900 NM
Energy Density
0.25 [kWh/kg]
1 [kWh/kg]
2.5 [kWh/kg]
Figure 4.12: Take­off mass of the fuel cell­battery integrated system with different combi­
nations of storage gravimetric efficiencies (15, 30, and 45%) and fuel cell stack specific
powers (1, 2, and 4 kW/kg) equipped with battery systems of energy densities (0.25, 1,
and 2.5 kWh/kg) is compared with the take­off mass of standalone battery systems with
different battery energy densities (1 and 2.5 kWh/kg) for a cruise distance of 900 nauti­
cal miles. The solid blue line with blue circle markers represents the powertrain system
with a battery of 0.25 kWh/kg energy density. The dashed green line with green square
markers represents the powertrain system with a battery of 1 kWh/kg. The dotted red line
with red diamond markers represents the powertrain system with a battery of 2.5 kWh/kg.
The take­off mass of the standalone battery system with a battery energy density of 0.25
kWh/kg is not included in the plot as its exceedingly high take­off mass skews the plot.
Figure 4.12 compares the take­off mass of integrated fuel cell­battery systems equipped
with different combinations of storage tanks of three different gravimetric efficiencies, fuel
cell stacks of three different specific powers, and batteries with three different battery en­
ergy densities. The take­off mass of the systems is along the y­axis, and the different
integrated and standalone powertrain systems are along the x­axis. For the integrated
system, the cases presented are combinations of different storage tank gravimetric effi­
ciencies and different specific powers of the fuel cell stack. In this figure, no standalone
fuel cell systems included although they weigh less than the standalone battery system at
a gravimetric efficiency of 30 % and higher. The mass of the standalone fuel cell systems
is presented in Table 4.2 for reference. Table 4.2 shows the take­off mass of standalone
fuel cell systems with different storage tank gravimetric efficiencies and fuel cell stack
specific powers.
Figure 4.12 shows that at a battery energy density of 1 kWh/kg, represented by the dashed
green line with green square markers, four cases of the integrated system has a lower
mass than the lightest standalone fuel cell system (31,840.27 kg) (See Table 4.2). Two
of the four cases have a storage gravimetric efficiency of 30% and fuel cell stack specific
powers of 2 and 4 kW/kg. The other two of four cases have a storage gravimetric efficiency
of 45% and fuel cell stack specific powers of 2 and 4 kW/kg.
When the battery energy density is increased to 2.5 kWh/kg, four cases of the integrated
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
55
==PAGE:68==
Table 4.2: Take­off mass of the standalone fuel cell system at different gravimetric effi­
ciencies and at different fuel cell stack specific powers.
Storage tank
gravimetric efficiency [%]
Fuel cell stack
specific power [kW/kg]
Minimised
take­off mass [kg]
30
1
52,508.80
30
2
45,387.53
30
4
43,013.77
45
1
41,335.30
45
2
34,214.03
45
4
31,840.27
system have a lower mass than the standalone fuel cell system. Two of the four cases
have a storage gravimetric efficiency of 30% and fuel cell stack specific powers of 2 and
4 kW/kg. The other two of four cases have a storage gravimetric efficiency of 45% and
fuel cell stack specific powers of 2 and 4 kW/kg. This shows that the integrated system
(equipped with 1 and 2.5 kWh/kg battery systems) with gravimetric efficiencies of 30 %
and higher and with fuel cell stack specific powers of 2 kW/kg and higher outperforms the
standalone fuel cell and the standalone battery systems.
Figure 4.13 depicts the retained passenger capacity for various configurations of an in­
tegrated fuel cell­battery system over two distances: 300 and 900 nautical miles. The
configurations differ in storage gravimetric efficiency (15%, 30%, and 45%), fuel cell stack
specific power (1, 2, and 4 kW/kg), and battery energy density (0.25, 1, and 2.5 kWh/kg).
The dashed black line indicates the passenger capacity of a typical Airbus A320.
For the 300 nautical mile range (orange bars), most integrated powertrain system config­
urations with a battery of 2.5 kWh/kg achieve a passenger capacity of 177, which exceeds
the current capacity of 150. Exceptions where a 2.5 kWh/kg battery does not reach 177
passengers are those with gravimetric efficiencies of 15% and 30% and a fuel cell stack
specific power of 2 kW/kg.
For the 900 nautical mile range (green bars), only systems with a gravimetric efficiency of
30% or higher, a fuel cell stack specific power of 2 kW/kg or higher, and a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg achieve more than 50% of the current passenger capacity or can
carry over 75 passengers.
56
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.13:
Retained passenger capacity of the integrated fuel cell­battery system
equipped with batteries of 1 and 2.5 kWh/kg and storage tanks of 15, 30 and 45 % gravi­
metric efficiencies is compared with retained passenger capacity of the standalone battery
systems with battery energy density of 1 and 2.5 kWh/kg at two different cruise distances.
Results of 300 nautical miles cruise distance is shown with orange column bars, and the
results of 900 nautical miles cruise distance is shown with green column bars. A dashed
black line shows the passenger capacity of the current A320 aircraft. The results of the
integrated fuel cell­battery system equipped with fuel cell stack of 1, 2, and 4 kW/kg spe­
cific powers are highlighted with red, blue and green shaded rectangles. Specifically for
standalone battery system of 1 kWh/kg there are no column bars because the retained
passenger capacity is 0. Similarly, integrated fuel cell­battery system with a battery of 1
kWh/kg, 1 kW/kg fuel cell stack specific power and gravimetric efficiencies of 30 and 45%
for a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles also has 0 retained passenger capacity. Hence,
no green column bars.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
57
==PAGE:70==
58
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:71==
5
Conclusions
In this thesis, a prototype of sizing and optimal control tool for battery and fuel cell pow­
ered aircraft is presented. The tool can take any power profile with a resolution in seconds
as input. This input is used to size and optimally control the standalone battery, the stan­
dalone fuel cells, and the integrated fuel cells­battery powertrain systems while minimising
their mass at the start of the mission. The built tool is tested with the pregenerated power
profile (at gearbox input) of an Airbus A320 aircraft at two different cruise distances ­ 300
and 900 nautical miles.
Results are generated for the standalone battery system at different cruise distances (300
and 900 nautical miles) and at energy densities of the battery system (0.25, 1 and 2.5
kWh/kg). Similarly, results are generated for the standalone fuel cell system at different
cruise distances (300 and 900 nautical miles), at different gravimetric efficiencies of the
hydrogen storage tank (15, 30 and 45%) and at different specific power values of the fuel
cells stack (1, 2, and 4 kW/kg). For the integrated fuel cell­battery system, the gravimetric
efficiencies of the hydrogen storage tank (15, 30 and 45%), specific power of the fuel cells
stack (1, 2, and 4 kW/kg), and energy densities of the battery system (0.25, 1, and 2.5
kWh/kg) are varied with the objective of minimising the mass of the powertrain system at
different cruise distances (300 and 900 nautical miles).
The research questions from Chapter 1 are restated below with an answer.
• How to make an optimization framework that is tailored to work for both ships and
aircrafts with vehicle specific mission constraints?
The tool built through this thesis as described in Chapter 3 is capable of taking any
power­time series as input and enforcing end­of­the­mission constraints such as
state of charge of battery, mass of fuel left in the tank, power delivery and operation
constraints.
• How does the mass of a battery system vary with the range and energy density in
a standalone battery system designed to meet power demands?
The mass of the battery system increases with range and reduces with an increase
in the energy density of the battery system. At 1 kWh/kg, the battery system weighs
33,100 kg and the retained payload capacity is 0. At 2.5 kWh/kg, the battery system
weighs 13,240 kg and the retained payload capacity is greater than that of the cur­
rent A320 (>150) meaning the battery aircraft can carry more than 150 passengers.
• How does the mass of a fuel cell system (including the fuel and fuel tank system
mass) vary with the range, the gravimetric efficiency of the liquid hydrogen storage
tank, and the specific power of the fuel cell stack in a standalone fuel cell system
designed to meet power demands?
The mass of the fuel cell system increases with range and reduces with increase
in gravimetric efficiency of hydrogen storage tank and specific power of the fuel
cell stack. The standalone fuel cell system cases equipped with hydrogen storage
tanks of gravimetric efficiencies 30 and 45% with a fuel cell stack of 4 kW/kg retains
passenger capacities of 3 and 16 compared to 150 in conventional A320 aircraft.
• How does the mass of a standalone battery system compare with that of a stan­
dalone fuel cell system?
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
59
==PAGE:72==
At 300 NM, battery system of 1 kWh/kg weighs more than the standalone fuel cell
systems only at fuel cell system with combination of storage tanks of 30 and 45%
gravimetric efficiencies and a fuel cell stack of 4 kW/kg, and at 900 NM 1 kWh/kg bat­
tery system weighs more than all the standalone fuel cell systems. Battery system
of 2.5 kWh/kg weighs less than the standalone fuel cell system at all combinations
and ranges tested.
• How to integrate a battery and a fuel cell system in the optimization framework?
The framework mainly involves a split ratio variable that determines the capacity of
the fuel cell system installed on the vehicle. Together with the split ratio, the fuel cell
power is limited. Rest of the power is covered by the battery system who state of
charge is tracked. Power delivery constraint is used to make sure that the fuel cell
and battery system delivers the required power, and an operation constraint on fuel
cell system modules makes sure that number of active fuel cell system modules is
less than the number of installed fuel cell system modules. More details are provide
in Section 3.3 of Chapter 3.
A combined answer is provided for the next three questions, as they are all related to each
other.
• What is the size of the integrated fuel cell­battery system required to meet a con­
tinuous power requirement profile while minimising the mass and the cost of the
powertrain?
• What are the hybridisation or (power) split ratios of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system to meet the continuous power requirement profile while minimising the mass
and the cost of the powertrain?
• How does the future state battery and fuel cell parameter sets influence the size and
hybridisation or (power) split ratios of the investigated scenarios?
Using the integrated fuel cell­battery system model developed, the fuel cell system
and the battery system are sized to minimise the take­off the mission for two different
ranges (300 and 900 NM), three different gravimetric efficiencies of storage tank (15,
30 and 45%), three different specific powers of the fuel cell stack (1, 2, and 4 kW/kg)
and three different energy densities of the battery system (0.25, 1 and 2.5 kWh/kg).
At a cruising distance of 300 nautical miles, the system’s mass decreases as gravi­
metric efficiency, specific power of the fuel cell stack, and battery energy density
increase. However, this trend does not hold for cases with a specific power of 4
kW/kg, a battery energy density of 1 kWh/kg, and gravimetric efficiencies of 15, 30
and 45%. At these design points, the optimizer opts to recharge the battery, result­
ing in increased fuel, tank mass, and size of the fuel cell system, thus breaking the
decreasing mass trend. When using a battery with 1 kWh/kg and a fuel cell stack
with less than 4 kW/kg, the split ratio is approximately 0.233, indicating that 23.3%
of the electrical load is supplied by the fuel cell system, with the remainder provided
by the battery system. This excludes cases with a 4 kW/kg fuel cell stack and 15%
and 30% gravimetric efficiency storage tanks, where the optimizer recharges the
battery, resulting in split ratios of 0.534 and 0.515 respectively. For the integrated
fuel cell­battery system with a fuel cell stack of 4 kW/kg, tank of 45% gravimetric
efficiency, and a 1 kWh/kg battery, the split ratio is 0.385. For a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg, the battery capacity is 0 kWh, and for 2.5 kWh/kg, the en­
ergy capacity is 32,879 kWh across all tested cases. At 1 kWh, the battery energy
60
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:73==
capacity is 13,662 kWh, except in two cases where higher split ratios lead to lower
battery capacities of 8,306 and 8,629 kWh for 15 and 30% storage tank gravimetric
efficiencies. For the integrated system case with a fuel cell stack of 4 kW/kg, tank
of 45% gravimetric efficiency, and a 1 kWh/kg battery the battery capacity is 10,958
kWh.
At a range of 900 nautical miles, the mass of the system also decreases with in­
crease in increase in gravimetric efficiency, with increase in specific power of the
fuel cell stack, and increase in energy density of battery system. Overall, the mass of
the integrated fuel cell system for 900 NM is less than the standalone batter system.
Only integrated fuel cell­battery systems with a storage tank gravimetric efficiency
of 30% or higher, a fuel cell stack specific power of 2 kW/kg or higher, and a bat­
tery energy density of 2.5 kWh/kg achieve more than 50% of the current passenger
capacity or can carry over 75 passengers.
5.1
Recommendations for future work
The models built using this thesis are top­level. Improvements to the model can come in
several forms. One of the ways is to change the optimiser from gradient­based to gradient­
free methods to find a possible global minimum for the mass. Another point of improve­
ment is to change the operational parameters of the modelled subsystems. For example,
the ramp­up rate of the fuel cell system modules can be implemented to understand its
effect on the mass. Other parameters include operation and boil­off rate management in
the liquid hydrogen storage tank (possibly adapting the OpenConcept [48] model to work
with the tool built in this thesis). The advantage of OpenConcept [48] Python package
is that it already has models built for the purpose of electric powertrains. In addition, the
discharge and charge rates of the battery can also be varied, which also has an effect
on the take­off mass of the powertrain system (preliminary results are shown in Figure
B.1). With respect to the motor, power converters, and compressors, their efficiencies
can be included in the OpenMDAO components as a function of operation power (or) the
current passing through them, etc. The mass relations of the motor, power conversion
components, electrical wires, coolant loops (based on liquid hydrogen or otherwise) and
gas lines can be included. The model can also be further extended to optimise the sys­
tem based on volume or cost or a combination of mass, cost, and volume. The model can
also be expanded to include the energy, cost and emissions of liquid hydrogen fuel pro­
duction, storage, and handling, and the indirect emissions from the grid used to recharge
the battery. Multi­objective optimisation can be used to optimise the system while giving
weightage to cost, mass, volume, emissions, etc. and look at the system from top level
where the whole supply chain involved can be considered. Other studies involving the use
of high­temperature fuel cells with a different current­voltage curve, methanol reforming,
ammonia cracking, or internal reforming of methane in solid oxide fuel cells can also be
conducted by changing the appropriate mass, cost, and volume relations with a specific
objective. Improvements can also be made to the model by increasing the level of detail
related to thermal management systems. For example, modelling a heat exchanger and
the associated balance of plant components such as pump. Some other improvements
can also be made in terms of integrating reactors in the case of fuel reformers or cracking
units using a Python package like Cantera [72]. Many enhancements can be applied to
the prototype tool developed in this thesis, but in some instances, the advantages may
not justify the expenses. For instance, precisely modeling the mass of each component,
including gas pipes and wires, can enhance sizing accuracy but might require extensive
development work to determine the mass of individual components in megawatt­scale
powertrain systems, particularly since such systems have only recently been explored
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
61
==PAGE:74==
by governments and companies. Nonetheless, the tool can be a valuable resource by
expanding the framework to account for efficiency and costs throughout the entire sup­
ply chain, thereby recommending a well­balanced powertrain system that also considers
performance metrics across different supply chain segments.
62
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Candelaria Bergero et al. “Pathways to net­zero emissions from aviation”. In: Nature
Sustainability 6 (4 Jan. 2023), pp. 404–414. ISSN: 2398­9629. DOI: 10.1038/s41893-
022-01046-9.
[2]
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). A Pathway to Decarbonise the
Shipping Sector by 2050. ISBN: 978­92­9260­330­4. International Renewable En­
ergy Agency (IRENA), Oct. 2021. URL: https://www.irena.org/publications/2021/
Oct/A-Pathway-to-Decarbonise-the-Shipping-Sector-by-2050.
[3]
Andreas W. Schäfer et al. “Technological, economic and environmental prospects
of all­electric aircraft”. In: Nature Energy 4 (2 Dec. 2018), pp. 160–166. ISSN: 2058­
7546. DOI: 10.1038/s41560-018-0294-x.
[4]
Hussein Basma and Felipe Rodríguez. A total cost of ownership comparison of truck
decarbonization pathways in Europe. International Council on Clean Tranportation,
2023. URL: https://theicct.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/ID-54-%E2%80%93-
EU-HDV-TCO_paper_final2.pdf.
[5]
Shashank Sripad and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan. “Quantifying the economic
case for Electric Semi­Trucks”. In: ACS Energy Letters 4.1 (2018), pp. 149–155.
DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.8b02146.
[6]
URL: https://www.tesla.com/semi.
[7]
Shashank Sripad and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan. “Performance Metrics
Required of Next­Generation Batteries to Make a Practical Electric Semi Truck”.
In: ACS Energy Letters 2 (7 July 2017), pp. 1669–1673. ISSN: 2380­8195. DOI:
10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00432.
[8]
George Crabtree, Elizabeth Kócs, and Lynn Trahey. “The energy­storage frontier:
Lithium­ion batteries and beyond”. In: MRS Bulletin 40 (12 Dec. 2015), pp. 1067–
1078. ISSN: 0883­7694. DOI: 10.1557/mrs.2015.259.
[9]
Mærsk Mc­Kinney Møller Center for Zero Carbon Shipping. Fuel Cell Technologies
and Applications for Deep­Sea Shipping. International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA), May 2024. URL: https://www.zerocarbonshipping.com/publications/fuel-
cell-technologies-and-applications-for-deep-sea-shipping/.
[10]
United Nations. Review of Maritime Transport. 2023. URL: https://unctad.org/
publication/review-maritime-transport-2023.
[11]
Bo Lu et al. “Challenges of decarbonizing global maritime container shipping toward
net­zero emissions”. In: npj Ocean Sustainability 2.1 (Aug. 2023). DOI: 10.1038/
s44183-023-00018-6.
[12]
A Valera­Medina et al. “Ammonia for power”. In: Progress in Energy and Combus­
tion Science 69 (Nov. 2018), pp. 63–102. DOI: 10.1016/j.pecs.2018.07.001.
[13]
Paul Wolfram et al. “Using ammonia as a shipping fuel could disturb the nitrogen
cycle”. In: Nature Energy 7.12 (Oct. 2022), pp. 1112–1114. DOI: 10.1038/s41560-
022-01124-4.
[14]
Global Centre for Maritime Decarbonization. Concept study to offload onboard cap­
tured CO￿. 2024. URL: https://www.lr.org/en/knowledge/research-reports/concept-
study-to-offload-onboard-captured-co2/.
[15]
Alexander Bills et al. “Performance Metrics Required of Next­Generation Batteries
to Electrify Commercial Aircraft”. In: ACS Energy Letters 5 (2 Feb. 2020), pp. 663–
668. ISSN: 2380­8195. DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.9b02574.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
63
==PAGE:76==
[16]
Hannah Hajdik et al. “Combined systems packaging and aerodynamic shape op­
timization of a full aircraft configuration”. In: AIAA AVIATION 2023 Forum (June
2023). DOI: 10.2514/6.2023-3589.
[17]
A W Ang et al. “Performance analysis of an electrically assisted propulsion system
for a short­range civil aircraft”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical En­
gineers, Part G: Journal of Aerospace Engineering 233.4 (2018), pp. 1490–1502.
DOI: 10.1177/0954410017754146.
[18]
Boeing. Current Market Outlook 2017­2036. Market Outlook. 2017. URL: https://
www.slideshare.net/EdwinFarrington/boeing-current-market-outlook-20172036.
[19]
Boeing. Commercial Market Outlook. Market Outlook. 2018. URL: https://www.
boeing.com/resources/boeingdotcom/commercial/market/commercial-market-outlook/
assets/downloads/2018-cmo-09-11.pdf.
[20]
Airbus. Cities, Airports, & Aircraft. Market Outlook. 2021. URL: https://www.airbus.
com/sites/g/files/jlcbta136/files/2021- 07/GMF- 2019- 2038- Airbus- Commercial-
Aircraft-book.pdf.
[21]
Lynnette Dray et al. “Cost and emissions pathways towards net­zero climate im­
pacts in aviation”. In: Nature Climate Change 12 (10 Oct. 2022), pp. 956–962. ISSN:
1758­678X. DOI: 10.1038/s41558-022-01485-4.
[22]
Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan et al. “The challenges and opportunities of battery­
powered flight”. In: Nature 601 (7894 Jan. 2022), pp. 519–525. ISSN: 0028­0836.
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-04139-1.
[23]
Wanyi Ng and Anubhav Datta. “Hydrogen fuel cells and batteries for electric­vertical
takeoff and landing aircraft”. In: Journal of Aircraft 56.5 (Sept. 2019), pp. 1765–
1782. DOI: 10.2514/1.c035218.
[24]
Martin Staggat et al. “Modelling of a battery supported fuel cell electric power train
topology for a regional aircraft”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2526.1
(June 2023), p. 012061. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2526/1/012061.
[25]
Francesco Mazzeo and Giovanni Di Ilio. “Fuel cell hybrid electric propulsion system
for a lightweight helicopter: Design and Performance Analysis in urban air mobility
scenario”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 50 (Jan. 2024), pp. 891–
907. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.09.134.
[26]
Junhwi Park et al. “A refined sizing method of fuel cell­battery hybrid system for
Evtol Aircraft”. In: Applied Energy 328 (Dec. 2022), p. 120160. DOI: 10.1016/j.
apenergy.2022.120160.
[27]
Thomas Kadyk et al. “Design of Fuel Cell Systems for Aviation: Representative
Mission Profiles and sensitivity analyses”. In: Frontiers in Energy Research 7 (Apr.
2019). DOI: 10.3389/fenrg.2019.00035.
[28]
Vincenzo Palladino. Multidisciplinary design method applied to a low­emission re­
gional aircraft ­ PhD Thesis. 2023. URL: https://depozit.isae.fr/theses/2023/2023_
Palladino_Vincenzo.pdf.
[29]
Wim Lammen and Jos Vankan. ELECTRIFICATION STUDIES OF SINGLE AISLE
AIRCRAFT: A ‘RETROFIT’ INVESTIGATION INCLUDING PARALLEL HYBRID ELEC­
TRIC PROPULSION. 2019. URL: https://reports.nlr.nl/server/api/core/bitstreams/
0fbb23cf-be04-499d-a38f-2b4702377a59/content.
[30]
Sheng Chien Tan. Electrically Assisted Propulsion & Power Systems for Short­
Range Missions ­ ELectrification of a Conventional Airbus A320neo ­ MSc Thesis.
2018. URL: http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:12ff33e4-78ce-43f0-893f-43e0b15b8e1e.
[31]
Jona Eissele et al. “Hydrogen­powered aviation—design of a hybrid­electric re­
gional aircraft for entry into service in 2040”. In: Aerospace 10.3 (Mar. 2023), p. 277.
DOI: 10.3390/aerospace10030277.
64
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:77==
[32]
James Larminie and Andrew Dicks. Fuel Cell Systems Explained. Wiley, Feb. 2003.
ISBN: 9780470848579. DOI: 10.1002/9781118878330.
[33]
The MathWorks Inc. MATLAB. Natick, Massachusetts, United States, 2022. URL:
https://www.mathworks.com.
[34]
Christophe David et al. “From FAST to FAST­OAD: An open source framework for
rapid Overall Aircraft Design”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering 1024.1 (Jan. 2021), p. 012062. DOI: 10.1088/1757- 899x/1024/1/
012062. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899x/1024/1/012062.
[35]
Justin S. Gray et al. “OpenMDAO: An open­source framework for multidisciplinary
design, analysis, and optimization”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
59.4 (Apr. 2019), pp. 1075–1104. DOI: 10.1007/s00158-019-02211-z.
[36]
Siemens Digital Industries Software. Simcenter Amesim. https://plm.sw.siemens.
com/en-US/simcenter/systems-simulation/amesim/. Accessed: 2024­05­24.
[37]
Donguk Lee, Daejin Lim, and Kwanjung Yee. “Generic Design Methodology for verti­
cal takeoff and landing aircraft with hybrid­electric propulsion”. In: Journal of Aircraft
59.2 (Mar. 2022), pp. 278–292. DOI: 10.2514/1.c036214.
[38]
John Jasa. Multidisciplinary Design Optimization of an Aircraft Considering Path­
Dependent Performance. 2020. URL: https://openmdao.org/pubs/johnjasa_thesis.
pdf.
[39]
F. Kaiser. The Climb of Jet­Propelled Aircraft, Part I: Speed Along the Path of Opti­
mum Climb. Technical Report GDC/15/14ST. Ministry of Supply (Great Britain), Apr.
1944.
[40]
A. E. Bryson and W. F. Denham. “A steepest­ascent method for solving optimum
programming problems”. In: Journal of Applied Mechanics 29.2 (June 1962), pp. 247–
257. DOI: 10.1115/1.3640537.
[41]
Benjamin J Brelje. Multidisciplinary Design Optimization of Electric Aircraft Consid­
ering Systems Modeling and Packaging. 2021. URL: https://deepblue.lib.umich.
edu/handle/2027.42/169658.
[42]
David Trawick et al. “Development and application of GT­heat for the electrically
variable engine (tm) design”. In: 55th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting (Jan.
2017). DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-1922.
[43]
Francisco M. Capristan and Jason R. Welstead. “An energy­based low­order ap­
proach for mission analysis of air vehicles in leaps”. In: 2018 AIAA Aerospace Sci­
ences Meeting (Jan. 2018). DOI: 10.2514/6.2018-1755.
[44]
Francisco M. Capristan et al. Aircraft Analysis Using the Layered and Extensible
Aircraft Performance System (LEAPS). Tech. rep. NASA/TM–2020–220558. NASA
Langley Research Center, 2020. URL: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20200001143.
[45]
Douglas P. Wells, Bryce L. Horvath, and Linwood A. McCullers. The Flight Optimiza­
tion System Weights Estimation Method. Tech. rep. NASA/TM­2017­219627/VOL1.
NASA Langley Research Center, 2017. URL: https : / / ntrs . nasa . gov / citations /
20170005851.
[46]
John T. Hwang and Andrew Ning. “Large­scale multidisciplinary optimization of an
electric aircraft for on­demand mobility”. In: 2018 AIAA/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures,
Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (Jan. 2018). DOI: 10.2514/6.2018-
1384.
[47]
Robert D. Falck et al. “Trajectory optimization of electric aircraft subject to sub­
system thermal constraints”. In: 18th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and
Optimization Conference (June 2017). DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-4002.
[48]
Benjamin J. Brelje and Joaquim R. R. A. Martins. “Development of a Conceptual
Design Model for Aircraft Electric Propulsion with Efficient Gradients”. In: Proceed­
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
65
==PAGE:78==
ings of the AIAA/IEEE Electric Aircraft Technologies Symposium. C, July 2018. DOI:
10.2514/6.2018-4979.
[49]
Trent W. Lukaczyk et al. “Suave: An open­source environment for multi­fidelity con­
ceptual vehicle design”. In: 16th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Opti­
mization Conference (June 2015). DOI: 10.2514/6.2015-3087.
[50]
Robert Falck et al. “dymos: A Python package for optimal control of multidisciplinary
systems”. In: Journal of Open Source Software 6.59 (2021), p. 2809. DOI: 10.21105/
joss.02809. URL: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.02809.
[51]
Aviary – NASA’s aircraft design tool. https://github.com/OpenMDAO/Aviary.
[52]
Kenneth Lyons et al. “Advancement of the general aviation synthesis program us­
ing python to enable optimization­based hybrid­propulsion aircraft design”. In: AIAA
AVIATION 2023 Forum (June 2023). DOI: 10.2514/6.2023-3224.
[53]
Aviary – NASA’s aircraft design tool. https://github.com/OpenMDAO/Aviary.
[54]
Michael A. Patterson and Anil V. Rao. “GPOPS­II: A MATLAB Software for Solving
Multiple­Phase Optimal Control Problems Using hp­Adaptive Gaussian Quadrature
Collocation Methods and Sparse Nonlinear Programming”. In: ACM Transactions
on Mathematical Software 41.1 (Oct. 2014), pp. 1–37. DOI: 10.1145/2558904.
[55]
Joel A E Andersson et al. “CasADi – A software framework for nonlinear optimiza­
tion and optimal control”. In: Mathematical Programming Computation 11.1 (2019),
pp. 1–36. DOI: 10.1007/s12532-018-0139-4.
[56]
John P. Riehl et al. Trajectory Optimization: OTIS 4. Tech. rep. LEW­18319­1. NASA
Glenn Research Center, 2010. URL: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20100012817.
[57]
Massimiliano Del Grano. Optimal Approach to the Preliminary Sizing of Hydrogen­
Driven Transport Aircraft ­ MSc Thesis. 2022. URL: https://www.politesi.polimi.it/
bitstream/10589/183637/6/2021_12_DelGrano.pdf.
[58]
R.K. Ahluwalia et al. “Performance and cost of fuel cells for urban air mobility”.
In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 46 (74 Oct. 2021), pp. 36917–36929.
ISSN: 03603199. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.08.211.
[59]
Pedro Garcia Gonzalez. Preliminary sizing methodologies for regional aircraft with
liquid hydrogen fuel and SOFC­GT­Battery hybrid­electric powertrains ­ MSc The­
sis. 2022. URL: http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:65cbbdf3-3627-4829-bd69-208fffc8eba9.
[60]
Adriano Ceschia et al. “Optimal design methodology for sizing a fuel cell/battery
hybrid power source”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
Part A: Journal of Power and Energy 235 (1 Feb. 2021), pp. 3–16. ISSN: 0957­6509.
DOI: 10.1177/0957650920910346.
[61]
Francisco Javier Sánchez Castañeda et al. “Hybridization of fuel cell­battery for
small and light manned full electric aircrafts”. In: 2019.
[62]
Gianluca Marinaro, Giuseppe Di Lorenzo, and Antonio Pagano. “From a Battery­
Based to a PEM Fuel Cell­Based Propulsion Architecture on a Lightweight Full
Electric Aircraft: A Comparative Numerical Study”. In: Aerospace 9 (8 July 2022),
p. 408. ISSN: 2226­4310. DOI: 10.3390/aerospace9080408.
[63]
OpenMDAO Developers. OpenMDAO Documentation. Accessed: 2024­05­31. 2024.
URL: https://openmdao.org.
[64]
Dymos Developers. dymos ­ Multidisciplinary Optimal Control Library. Accessed:
2024­05­31. 2024. URL: https://openmdao.org/dymos/docs/latest/index.html.
[65]
Rob Falck and Justin Gray. “Optimal Control within the Context of Multidisciplinary
Design, Analysis, and Optimization”. In: Jan. 2019. DOI: 10.2514/6.2019-0976.
[66]
Andrew B. Lambe and Joaquim R. R. A. Martins. “Extensions to the design structure
matrix for the description of multidisciplinary design, analysis, and optimization pro­
66
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:79==
cesses”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 46 (2 Aug. 2012), pp. 273–
284. ISSN: 1615­147X. DOI: 10.1007/s00158-012-0763-y.
[67]
Andreas Wächter and Lorenz T. Biegler. “On the implementation of an interior­point
filter line­search algorithm for large­scale nonlinear programming”. In: Mathemati­
cal Programming 106 (1 Mar. 2006), pp. 25–57. ISSN: 0025­5610. DOI: 10.1007/
s10107-004-0559-y.
[68]
Ella Wu et al. “pyOptSparse: A Python framework for large­scale constrained non­
linear optimization of sparse systems”. In: Journal of Open Source Software 5.54
(2020), p. 2564. DOI: 10.21105/joss.02564.
[69]
Ballard FC­Gen HPS. URL: https://www.ballard.com/docs/default-source/spec-
sheets/fcgen-hps.pdf.
[70]
Y. K. Pochareddy. An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells
and batteries powered aircrafts. 2024. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.11456239. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11456239.
[71]
Dipesh Kunwar and Yashwanth Kutti Pochareddy. A320 Power Profile. https://
github.com/louly-me/A320-Power-Profile. 2024.
[72]
David G. Goodwin et al. Cantera: An Object­oriented Software Toolkit for Chemical
Kinetics, Thermodynamics, and Transport Processes. https://www.cantera.org.
Version 3.0.0. 2023. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.8137090.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
67
==PAGE:80==
68
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:81==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Different powertrain architectures where electric is green and combustion
in red. GB means GearBox, EM means Electrical Motor, B means Battery, G means
Generator, M means Motor, ICE means Internal Combustion Engine, F means Fuel, PMM
means Power Management Modules.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
69
==PAGE:82==
Pmotor = Pgearbox
ηmotor
(A.1)
where, ηmotor is 100 %.
Pbat−dis = Crate [1
h] · Ebat [Wh] · ηbat−dis
(A.2)
Where, ηbat−dis is 100 %.
Cbatsys−1 = Pmotor −Pbat−dis
(A.3)
Where, Cbatsys−1 is limited to values between ­100 and 0.
dX
dt : SoC = −Pbat−dis
Ebat
(A.4)
Where, the negative sign is present to make sure that the SoC reduces when the Pbat−dis
is positive.
mbatsys,powertrain =
Ebat
Kbatsys
(A.5)
Cfcsys−1 = Pmotor −Pfc−del
(A.6)
nfcmodules =
Pmotor−max
Pfcmodule−max
(A.7)
mfcmodule = mfcstack + mfcstackcomponents + mcompressor + mhumidifier + mcool
(A.8)
mfcsys = mfcmodule · nfcmodules
(A.9)
Cfcsys−2 = (activefc,n−1 + 1) −nfcmodules
(A.10)
mtank = mfuel · (1 −ηstor)
ηstor
(A.11)
mfcsys,powertrain = mfcsys + mfuel + mfuel · (1 −ηstor)
ηstor
(A.12)
Pmotor−max = Pgearbox−max
ηmotor
(A.13)
Pfc−del = (activefc,n−1 · Pn−1,fcmodule) + (activefc,nth · Pnth,fcmodule)
(A.14)
where activefc,nth = 1.
dX
dt : mfuel = (activefc,n−1 · mh2,n−1,fcmodule) + (activefc,nth · mh2,nth,fcmodule)
(A.15)
where activefc,nth = 1.
Vfcstack = (−2 · 107 · I3
fc) + (0.0003 · I2
fc) −(0.2041 · Ifc) + 274.36
(A.16)
Pfcstack = Vfcstack × Ifc
(A.17)
rpv = Pfcstack
Vcell
309
[32]
(A.18)
70
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:83==
where 309 is the number of cells in the commercial fuel cell stack by Ballard Power Sys­
tems.
Pfcmodule = Pfcstack −Pfcmodule−bop
(A.19)
˙
mh2,fcmodule = 1.05 × 10−8 · rpv · λh2 [32]
(A.20)
where stoichiometry of hydrogen flow rate at the fuel cell inlet λh2 is 1.2
dX
dt : mfuel = −mh2,fcmodule
(A.21)
Where, the negative sign is present to make sure that the mfuel reduces with increase in
time t.
mair,fcmodule = 3.58 · 10−7 · rpv · λair [32]
(A.22)
where stoichiometry of hydrogen flow rate at the fuel cell inlet λair is 2.2
Pfcmodule−bop = Pcomp
(A.23)
Pcomp,max = Cp(air,in)
Tair,in
ηcomp
((P2
P1
) γ−1
γ
−1
)
·
˙
mair,fcmodule [32]
(A.24)
where the inlet pressure P2 of air at the fuel cell inlet is 3 bar, temperature of the inlet air
Tair,in is 298 K, efficiency of the compressor ηcomp is 70%, specific heat capacity of the
inlet air Cp(air,in) is 1004 kJ/kgK, and the ratio of specific heats γ is 1.4.
Cfcbatsys−1 = (Pfc−del + Pbat−chg,dis) −Pmotor
(A.25)
Cfcbatsys−2 = (activefc,n−1 + 1) −nfcmodules
(A.26)
Pfc−max = SR · Pmotor−max
(A.27)
Cfcbatsys−3 = Pfc−del −Pfc−max
(A.28)
nfcmodules =
Pfc−max
Pfcmodule−max
(A.29)
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
71
==PAGE:84==
B
Appendix
Figure B.1: Mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery powertrain system compared at two
different discharge rate limits of battery for the range 900 nautical mile cruise range. Green
column bars represent the integrated fuel cell­battery system with discharge limit upto 2.5,
where as the orange column bars represent the integrated fuel cell­battery system with
discharge limit upto 1.25. x­axis shows different configurations of the integrated fuel cell­
battery systems, and y­axis shows the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
powertrain system.
72
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:85==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Iteration
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.battery_properties_objective.mass_batsys
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg and 300 nautical miles
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Iteration
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.battery_properties_objective.mass_batsys
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg and 300 nautical miles
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Iteration
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.battery_properties_objective.mass_batsys
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg and 300 nautical miles
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Iteration
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.battery_properties_objective.mass_batsys
(d) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg and 900 nautical miles
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Iteration
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.battery_properties_objective.mass_batsys
(e) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg and 900 nautical miles
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Iteration
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.battery_properties_objective.mass_batsys
(f) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg and 900 nautical miles
Figure B.2: Objective function or the take­off mass of the standalone battery system at
different cruise distances and different battery energy densities over optimisation itera­
tions.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
73
==PAGE:86==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
68000
70000
72000
74000
76000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 15%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 1 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
65000
66000
67000
68000
69000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 30%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 1 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
63500
64000
64500
65000
65500
66000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 45%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 1 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
75000
75500
76000
76500
77000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(d) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 15 %, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 1 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
67800
68000
68200
68400
68600
68800
69000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(e) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 30 %, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 1 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
65400
65500
65600
65700
65800
65900
66000
66100
66200
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(f) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 45%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 1 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
Figure B.3: Objective function or the take­off mass of the standalone fuel cell system
at different cruise distances, different gravimetric efficiencies and different fuel cell stack
specific power over optimisation iterations.
74
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:87==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
46000
48000
50000
52000
54000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 15%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 2 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
42000
43000
44000
45000
46000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 30%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 2 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
41000
41500
42000
42500
43000
43500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 45%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 2 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
52500
53000
53500
54000
54500
55000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(d) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 15 %, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 2 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
45400
45600
45800
46000
46200
46400
46600
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(e) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 30 %, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 2 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
43000
43100
43200
43300
43400
43500
43600
43700
43800
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(f) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 45%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 2 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
Figure B.4: Objective function or the take­off mass of the standalone fuel cell system
at different cruise distances, different gravimetric efficiencies and different fuel cell stack
specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
75
==PAGE:88==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
36000
38000
40000
42000
44000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 15%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 4 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
31000
32000
33000
34000
35000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 30%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 4 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
30000
30500
31000
31500
32000
32500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 45%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 4 kW/kg and 300 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
41500
42000
42500
43000
43500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(d) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 15 %, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 4 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
34200
34400
34600
34800
35000
35200
35400
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(e) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 30 %, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 4 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
31800
31900
32000
32100
32200
32300
32400
32500
32600
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(f) Take­off mass evolution at a storage tank
gravimetric efficiency of 45%, and fuel cell
stack specific power of 4 kW/kg and 900 nauti­
cal miles
Figure B.5: Objective function or the take­off mass of the standalone fuel cell system
at different cruise distances, different gravimetric efficiencies and different fuel cell stack
specific power over optimisation iterations.
76
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:89==
0
5
10
15
20
25
Iteration
50000
55000
60000
65000
70000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Iteration
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
70000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.6: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery sys­
tem at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 15% gravimetric efficiency and 1 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
77
==PAGE:90==
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
40000
42000
44000
46000
48000
50000
52000
54000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
27500
30000
32500
35000
37500
40000
42500
45000
47500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.7: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery sys­
tem at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 15% gravimetric efficiency and 2 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
78
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:91==
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
34000
36000
38000
40000
42000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
50
100
150
200
Iteration
29000
30000
31000
32000
33000
34000
35000
36000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Iteration
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.8: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery sys­
tem at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 15% gravimetric efficiency and 4 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
79
==PAGE:92==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
Iteration
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Iteration
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.9: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery sys­
tem at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 30% gravimetric efficiency and 1 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
80
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:93==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
32000
34000
36000
38000
40000
42000
44000
46000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
25000
27500
30000
32500
35000
37500
40000
42500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.10: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 30% gravimetric efficiency and 2 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
81
==PAGE:94==
0
5
10
15
20
25
Iteration
26000
28000
30000
32000
34000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
Iteration
24000
26000
28000
30000
32000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
12500
15000
17500
20000
22500
25000
27500
30000
32500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.11: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 30% gravimetric efficiency and 4 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
82
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:95==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Iteration
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.12: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 45% gravimetric efficiency and 1 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
83
==PAGE:96==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
28000
30000
32000
34000
36000
38000
40000
42000
44000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Iteration
25000
27500
30000
32500
35000
37500
40000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
Iteration
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.13: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 45% gravimetric efficiency and 2 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
84
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:97==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
24000
26000
28000
30000
32000
34000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
Iteration
20000
22000
24000
26000
28000
30000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
Iteration
12500
15000
17500
20000
22500
25000
27500
30000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.14: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 300 nautical miles, 45% gravimetric efficiency and 4 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
85
==PAGE:98==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
50000
55000
60000
65000
70000
75000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
70000
75000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.15: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 15% gravimetric efficiency and 1 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
86
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:99==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
40000
42000
44000
46000
48000
50000
52000
54000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Iteration
37500
40000
42500
45000
47500
50000
52500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
Iteration
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.16: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 15% gravimetric efficiency and 2 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
87
==PAGE:100==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
34000
36000
38000
40000
42000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Iteration
32000
34000
36000
38000
40000
42000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Iteration
25000
27500
30000
32500
35000
37500
40000
42500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.17: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 15% gravimetric efficiency and 4 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
88
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:101==
0
10
20
30
40
Iteration
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
Iteration
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.18: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 30% gravimetric efficiency and 1 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
89
==PAGE:102==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Iteration
32000
34000
36000
38000
40000
42000
44000
46000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
Iteration
30000
32500
35000
37500
40000
42500
45000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
Iteration
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.19: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 30% gravimetric efficiency and 2 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
90
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:103==
0
10
20
30
40
Iteration
26000
28000
30000
32000
34000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Iteration
24000
26000
28000
30000
32000
34000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iteration
20000
22000
24000
26000
28000
30000
32000
34000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.20: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 30% gravimetric efficiency and 4 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
91
==PAGE:104==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
Iteration
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
Iteration
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.21: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 45% gravimetric efficiency and 1 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
92
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:105==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Iteration
28000
30000
32000
34000
36000
38000
40000
42000
44000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Iteration
25000
27500
30000
32500
35000
37500
40000
42500
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Iteration
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.22: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 45% gravimetric efficiency and 2 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
93
==PAGE:106==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Iteration
24000
26000
28000
30000
32000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(a) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 0.25 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Iteration
20000
22000
24000
26000
28000
30000
32000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(b) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 1 kWh/kg
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Iteration
18000
20000
22000
24000
26000
28000
30000
32000
Mass [kg]
traj.phases.phase0.rhs_disc.takeoff_mass.tot_takeoff_mass
(c) Take­off mass evolution at a battery energy
density of 2.5 kWh/kg
Figure B.23: Objective function or the take­off mass of the integrated fuel cell­battery
system at a cruise distance of 900 nautical miles, 45% gravimetric efficiency and 4 kW/kg
fuel cell stack specific power over optimisation iterations.
94
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
==PAGE:107==
An open­source tool for sizing and optimal control of fuel cells and batteries powered aircrafts
95
==PAGE:108==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 310
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.energy.dtu.dk
