==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-
energy storage farm to reduce wind 
curtailment
Saule Gudziute
DTU Wind-M-3
June 
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0843
June 202
E&T6 0
EduFation Master of 6FienFe
Supervisors:
Mattia Marinelli
Jan Martin Wilhelm Zepter
'78:iQG	(QerJ\S\sWePs
Mirko Ledro
Tomasz Jerominek
Ørsted
5ePDrNs:
TKis reSort is suEmitted as Sartial fulfillment 
of tKe reTuirements for graduation in tKe 
aEoYe eduFation at tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity 
of DenmarN
7eFKQiFDO8QiversiW\oI'eQPDrN
DeSartment of Wind and Energy 6ystems
)rederiNsEorgYeM 
000 5osNilde
'enmarN
ZZZZLnddtXdN
$uWKor:
Saule Gudziute
7iWOe:
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy 
storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
DTU Wind 	 Energy 6ystems is a deSartment of 
tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN ZitK a uniTue 
integration of researFK eduFation innoYation and 
SuEliFSriYate seFtor Fonsulting in tKe field of Zind 
energy 2ur aFtiYities deYeloS neZ oSSortunities 
and teFKnology for tKe gloEal and DanisK 
e[Sloitation of Zind energy 5esearFK foFuses on 
Ney teFKniFal-sFientifiF fields ZKiFK are Fentral for 
tKe deYeloSment innoYation and use of Zind 
energy and SroYides tKe Easis for adYanFed 
eduFation at tKe eduFation
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In recent years, global renewable source deployment has rapidly increased, with key
drivers being the ambitious carbon neutrality goals and reduction in wind and so-
lar technology cost. While this growth has increased the share of energy generated
from renewable energy sources in the ﬁnal energy mix, the nature of the produc-
tion variability has posed new challenges to grid operators. With this, the issue of
energy curtailment has become more prevalent. As the share of renewable energy
sources continues to grow, energy curtailment is expected to increase in signiﬁcance,
requiring certain mitigation strategies to be instated.
The goal of this Master’s thesis is to determine the optimal size of an energy storage
unit to minimize curtailed energy from an oﬀshore wind farm. The thesis begins with
an overview on the topic of energy curtailment with the focus on wind curtailment in
the UK. The categories of energy curtailment are described and possible mitigation
methods are presented, out of which, energy storage technologies are chosen as a
focus for the analysis.
An optimization model is developed for the purpose of optimal sizing, which takes
into account the technical and economical energy storage characteristics. The opti-
mal sizing results are obtained for three diﬀerent scenarios, each one investigating the
outcomes for three storage technology types: Lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries, Flow
batteries and Liquid Air Energy Storage (LAES). The objective of the ﬁrst scenario
is to determine the storage size needed to fully mitigate energy curtailment. There
are no limitations imposed on the energy storage size choice that can be taken and
only considers the eﬃciencies related to each technology. The second scenario imple-
ments the storage size limitations according to technology type. The third scenario
builds on top of the previous scenarios and additionally includes technology energy
and power prices as well as curtailment costs paid for the volume of energy curtailed.
The objective of the last scenario is to determine the most cost beneﬁcial energy
storage size between installation cost and curtailment mitigation.
The outcomes of the optimization model provided insights on the energy storage size
choice based on the technology type, the diﬀerences between power and energy cost
and the inﬂuence of curtailment price. Outcomes for technologies with high power
capacity installation costs resulted in higher energy and lower power ratings which
can provide energy for longer time periods, but might not be able in all cases to re-
spond appropriately to variations in wind production. In addition, curtailment price
proved to have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the payback of the project with high price
case scenarios resulting in substantial savings on avoided costs for curtailed energy.
Considering the rarity of high curtailment price scenarios, average curtailment price
scenarios were investigated, which showed that additional revenue streams would be
needed to result in a positive return.
iv
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge and thank my supervisors Jan Martin Wilhelm Zepter,
Mirko Ledro, Tomasz Jerominek and Mattia Marinelli for their guidance throughout
the thesis project. Their expertise and assistance has shaped the project from an
idea stage to a project that is now.
This thesis would not have been possible without my partner and my parents, who
have been there to celebrate the small and big wins of the project and whose con-
tinuous support and encouragement has given me the drive to tackle the hurdles.
My deepest gratitude goes to my partner’s family and friends both here in Denmark
and in Lithuania who have followed me through the whole process. Their advice
and support has immensely contributed to the completion of this project.
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
v
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
• BTM - Behind the meter
• CAES - Compressed Air Energy Storage
• CCGT - Combined cycle gas turbine
• DA - Day ahead market
• DCF - Discounted cash ﬂows
• DOD - Depth of discharge
• FOTM - Front of the meter
• LAES - Liquid air energy storage system
• LCOE - Levelized cost of electricity
• LDES - Long duration energy storage
• Li-ion - Lithium ion battery storage system
• OWF - Oﬀshore wind farm
• POC - Point of connection
• PV - Photovoltaic
• RES - Renewable energy sources
• RTE - Round trip eﬃciency
• SDES - Short duration energy storage
• SOC - State of charge
• VRE - Variable renewable energy
vi
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Energy curtailment overview
4
2.1
The problem of energy curtailment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Categories of energy curtailment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Consequences of curtailment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Curtailment mitigation options
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Energy storage systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Model explanation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Model for optimal energy storage system sizing to minimize curtailment 15
4
Case studies and data analysis
22
4.1
Case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Results and discussion
28
5.1
Scenario 1: Total curtailment reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Scenario 2: Curtailment mitigation using diﬀerent storage technologies 33
5.3
Scenario 3: Economically optimal curtailment mitigation . . . . . . .
35
6
Conclusions
41
Bibliography
44
A Nomenclature
47
B Appendix
50
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
vii
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
Wind curtailment in the UK 2020-2022 [5, 6]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
The set-up for problem analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1
Average hourly available wind production by month in 2020-2022
. .
24
4.2
Total available wind production and curtailed energy for each month
in 2020-2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Total hours of curtailment within each month
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Wind curtailment between 2020-2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Curtailment distribution in 2020 and 2020-2022
. . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6
Curtailment duration distribution in 2020 and 2020-2022 . . . . . . .
27
5.1
Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Lithium ion battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Curtailment minimization using Li-ion battery . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Lithium-ion battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.6
Curtailment minimization using Flow batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.7
Curtailment minimization using LAES system . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.8
Lithium-ion battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.9
Li-ion battery operation over 1 year, when curtailment cost is 76
£/MWh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
B.1 Curtailment distribution in 2021 and 2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B.2 Curtailment duration distribution in 2021 and 2022 . . . . . . . . . .
50
B.3 Curtailment minimization using Flow batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B.4 Curtailment minimization using LAES batteries . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B.5 Flow battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B.6 LAES battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.7 Curtailment minimization using Flow batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.8 Curtailment minimization using LAES batteries . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.9 Flow battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
B.10 LAES battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
B.11 Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries for three year wind
production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
viii
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:8==
B.12 Curtailment minimization using Flow batteries for three year wind
production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.13 Curtailment minimization using LAES batteries for three year wind
production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.14 Flow battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.15 LAES battery storage operation over one year . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
ix
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
3.1
Parameters and their values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Battery parameters and their values used in Scenario 2 and 3 . . . . .
16
3.3
Discount rate and curtailment prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1
Optimal energy sizes for each scenario using 2020 production data . .
29
5.2
Optimal energy sizes for each scenario using 2020-2022 production data 30
5.3
Optimal energy sizes for each scenario using 2020-2022 production data 38
A.1 Nomenclature of Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.1 Parameters and variables used in the optimization model . . . . . . .
48
B.1 Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries in Scenario 1 (1 year)
53
B.2 Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries in Scenario 3 (1 year)
57
B.3 Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries in Scenario 3 (3 year)
59
x
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This ﬁrst chapter of the thesis gives an introduction on the motivation and relevance
behind investigating energy storage solution applications for energy curtailment mit-
igation. The main objectives along with the research questions analyzed throughout
the work are presented and a summary of the chapters in this thesis is given at the
end.
1.1
Motivation
The global renewable energy targets, driven by the need to phase out carbon intensive
energy production sources in order to signiﬁcantly reduce global carbon emissions
and reach carbon neutrality by 2050, has accelerated renewable energy source deploy-
ment. This transition has led to the growth of solar and wind generation share in
the ﬁnal energy mix globally and has made it possible to utilize low cost, sustainable
primary energy sources for energy production. However, high penetration of highly
variable production sources has posed new challenges for network operators and oﬀ-
shore wind farm (OWF) owners, one of them being renewable energy curtailment.
This is the action of reducing power plant output when the full energy production
cannot be injected into the grid due to grid constraints or oversupply. This reduction
is taken to ensure system security and stability, however, with projected renewable
energy deployment growth, methods to address the issue of energy curtailment must
be developed. One of the strategies is to use energy storage solutions which can
be utilized to store renewable energy production at time periods when it cannot be
injected into the grid due to grid connection capacity constraints. The energy can
later be utilized during periods of low renewable generation.
This Master’s thesis work is focused on investigating the optimal sizing of an energy
storage system for oﬀshore wind production curtailment mitigation. An optimiza-
tion algorithm is developed in the work and is used to determine the optimal energy
storage size for three scenarios: total curtailment mitigation, curtailment mitigation
based on technical storage constraints and optimal storage size selection based on
techno-economical factors.
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
1
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Research questions
The main focus of the thesis is to investigate the mitigation of energy curtailment
through the use of energy storage technologies and their sizing when co-located with
an oﬀshore wind farm. The analysis is done by addressing the research questions
below:
• Which energy storage systems are the most suited for oﬀshore wind farm ap-
plications?
Currently, there is a variety of diﬀerent energy storage solutions in the market
with diﬀerent technical characteristics and diﬀerent Levelized cost of electric-
ity (LCOE). However, to determine the most suitable storage technology for
an OWF application, a comparison between the diﬀerent technologies has to
be made, taking into account their technical parameters as well as economical
factors.
• What are the regulatory and technical grid constraints that limit wind energy
production, causing wind energy curtailment?
Energy storage deployment and operation across diﬀerent countries will dif-
fer and will heavily depend on the national regulatory framework. Evalua-
tion of the energy storage point of connection (Front-of-the Meter (FTM) and
Behind-the-Meter (BTM)), voltage and thermal limitations, and how the en-
ergy curtailment is performed is key in the development of wind curtailment
minimization model. The main focus of the analysis will be centred around
the UK market.
• What is the optimal size of an energy storage system to minimize wind energy
curtailment of an oﬀshore wind farm?
During certain operational hours, due to suitable wind conditions, the pro-
duction of an OWF could be maximized by utilizing energy storage systems.
However, to make this type of application viable, appropriate storage sizing
(in both capacity and power) is essential.
• When dealing with energy curtailment, what type of control strategy would
present the best approach in controlling the storage system?
To gain the highest return on investment, it is important to not only ensure
that the available capacity in the coming hours is suitable to store the curtailed
energy, but to also utilize price arbitrage and to sell electricity at high price
periods. To address this, battery operational framework will be investigated
and discussed, providing insights into how this could be done.
1.3
Thesis structure
The work is divided into six chapters, from introducing the topic of energy curtail-
ment to presenting the results for the optimal energy storage sizing. The description
of the chapters is given as follows:
• Chapter 2: The problem of energy curtailment is presented both from a
global perspective and by looking at the topic within the UK as an example.
2
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:12==
The categories of curtailment are then described and the consequences of cur-
tailment and the existing mitigation methods are presented. Finally, energy
storage technologies for co-location with an oﬀshore wind farm are introduced.
• Chapter 3: The topology for integrating an energy storage system for en-
ergy curtailment is introduced graphically and explained. The methodology
for the mathematical model formulation is described along with the battery
parameters and curtailment prices that were later used in the analysis.
• Chapter 4: The assumptions taken during the optimization model creation
are outlined along with the description and objectives of each of the scenarios,
that will be further analyzed in Chapter 6. Data analysis is performed on
wind production data used in the optimization model in the second part of
the chapter. The energy production within the 3 year data set is presented
graphically and described. Using the assumptions from the previous chapter,
energy curtailment is analyzed on a yearly and monthly basis. Curtailment
duration is investigated on a yearly basis in order to understand the potential
of using short and long term energy storage systems.
• Chapter 5: Using the optimization model, three battery sizing scenarios
are analyzed and the outcomes are presented in this chapter. Optimal energy
storage sizes in energy and power terms are indicated and the battery operation
(charge and discharge) is visualized. Curtailment volume and its dependency
on diﬀerent energy storage sizes (diﬀerent energy and power capacities) is
visualized and described.
• Chapter 6: Conclusions are drawn from the results and presented in the last
chapter of the thesis. Research questions are revisited with reﬂections from
the work done within the thesis and recommendations for future work and
further development on this topic are described as closing remarks.
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
3
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Energy curtailment overview
Over the past decade, renewable energy penetration in electrical grids worldwide
has increased substantially [1]. This is due to several factors such as technological
advancements in renewable energy based energy production and economies of scale,
leading to a decrease in LCOE price, as well as governmental subsidies for solar
and wind installations. According to the 2020 EU report on LCOE costs, between
2008 and 2018, LCOE cost in EU has dropped 18% for onshore wind, 40% for oﬀ-
shore wind, 75% for utility scale photovoltaics and 80% for rooftop PV [2]. As the
PV module component prices continue to fall and as higher capacity factors are ac-
cessed with increasing wind turbine size, the reduction in LCOE will continue. One
of the main drivers for variable renewable energy (VRE) source growth has been
the Paris agreement of 2015, following which, many countries set national goals to
signiﬁcantly reduce carbon emissions. The UK, among other countries, has set out
to reduce greenhouse emissions to net-zero by 2050 compared to 1990 levels [3]. Be-
tween 2000 and 2022, the UK emissions per capita have fallen by 48% [4] and as the
country transitions from oil and gas based energy generation to renewable energy
sources, this trend is expected to continue.
The growing VRE source deployment has accelerated the transition towards en-
ergy production from sustainable energy sources. However, with this change, new
challenges in generation source operation and electrical grid management arise, espe-
cially related to VRE source intermittency. Since renewable energy (RE) production
is directly correlated with solar or wind source availability, the generation proﬁle is
highly variable, making generation forecasting a diﬃcult task. During times with
favorable conditions for high wind speeds or solar radiation, VRE generation can
exceed the grid connection capacity, which sets the limit for production that can be
injected into the electrical grid. In this case, production has to be manually reduced,
resulting in curtailment of the excess generation.
The following chapter explores the problem of energy curtailment with the focus on
wind curtailment in the UK. Curtailment categories are described based on techni-
cal and economical factors and the main curtailment consequences and mitigation
methods are presented. The chapter is concluded with a description on three types
4
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:14==
of energy storage technologies that will be later analyzed in the modeling section.
2.1
The problem of energy curtailment
With increasing RES share in the ﬁnal energy mix, issues related to the renewable
source generation intermittency arise. A particular phenomena that has grown in
signiﬁcance is energy curtailment. It is the action taken by the network operator
to reduce the output of a generation plant. One of the reasons for this reduction
is due to congestion in the network (bottlenecks) as certain transmission parts of
the network are not robust enough to handle the full loading during periods of high
energy production. In the case of renewable generation, this occurs during periods
of high solar radiation or favorable wind conditions combined with low transmission
availability to regions with high energy demand. Energy ﬂows in these cases have to
be "rerouted" to compensate for the energy deﬁcit and generation plants with fast
ramp-up rates like gas power plants, that are often high in carbon emissions, have
to be started up [5].
As VRE source deployment continues to rise globally, the problem of energy curtail-
ment will continue to be prevalent, unless appropriate grid reinforcements and in-
crease in transmission capacity between regions and countries are established. While
curtailment rate in most renewable energy markets is relatively low (between 1.5%
and 4%) [1], it can be signiﬁcantly higher in regions with grid infrastructure lim-
itations and large VRE source deployment. In the past 10 years, with yearly in-
vestments in grid infrastructure of USD 75 billion, China has successfully reduced
annual curtailment rates from 17% to 3% for wind and from 11% to 2% for solar.
Curtailment rates in Chile continue to grow with PV production having the largest
share, while in Germany, wind curtailment rates are rising, reaching 8% in 2021 [1].
While the processes of system planning and grid reinforcements take a signiﬁcant
amount of time and requires large investments in resources and technical work, en-
ergy curtailment can be mitigated through the use of energy storage technologies.
These technologies are used to store energy that would otherwise be curtailed and
release it at a later point when the grid constraints allow, using the available grid con-
nection capacity to discharge the storage and eﬀectively shift the energy production
over time.
2.1.1
Energy curtailment in the UK
In 2022, 41.9% of electricity generation in the UK was produced by renewable en-
ergy sources out of which 79% was from onshore and oﬀshore wind generation. In
total, 25% of total electricity generation was produced by wind. Based on the Inter-
national Energy Agency (IEA) Renewable Energy Market Update 2023 report [6],
total renewable energy curtailment in the UK was almost 4 TWh in 2022 (4.6% of
all renewable generation). This is a signiﬁcant increase from 2021 values, where 2.3
TWh (3.5% of all renewable generation) was curtailed. This statistic is reiterated
by a report on renewable curtailment and the role of long duration storage [5]. It
was found that between 2020 and 2021 there was a total 5.8 TWh (3.5 TWh in 2020
and 2.3 TWh in 2021) of curtailed wind generation due to system constraints - this
amount of energy could power approximately 800.000 homes each year (assuming
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
5
==PAGE:15==
a yearly average household consumption of 3.73 MWh) [5]. 2021 experienced lower
levels of wind curtailment due to lower wind power production and increased levels
of demand. However, this also resulted in an increase in cost to the consumers. The
end of 2021 saw a high increase in gas prices, meaning deploying ﬂexible but carbon
intense gas generation plants to counteract curtailed wind came at a greater cost.
Compared to 2020, costs for wind curtailment to consumers increased by 208 mln.
£ in 2021 and totaled 507 mln.£ [5]
Figure 2.1: Wind curtailment in the UK 2020-2022 [5, 6]
These high values of curtailed energy are mainly caused by the lack of transmission
capacity from Scotland, where most of the wind generation is located, to the south-
eastern part, where most of the demand is located. Currently, there is over 11 GW
of wind capacity installed in Scotland - that is 39% of UK wind capacity. Between
2020 and 2021, wind in Scotland produced 43.1 TWh of electricity (23.2 TWh in
2020, 19.9 TWh in 2021). During the same period, wind curtailment in Scotland
was 5.3 TWh (3.466 TWh in 2020 and 1.84 TWh in 2021)[5], [7]. This was 88%
of wind curtailment in the UK and primarily caused by the lack of transmission
capacity between England and Scotland [5].
2.2
Categories of energy curtailment
Energy curtailment can be deﬁned as the reduction of generation unit output below
what they could have produced [5]. This section describes the main reasons why
energy curtailment can be performed, such as due to grid connection constraints, to
ensure system stability and security as well as due to economical factors [8].
6
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:16==
2.2.1
Energy curtailment due to grid constrains
Grid constraints, such as network congestions [9] and lack of transmission capacity,
can create bottlenecks in the power system which, in order to maintain system
security, can cause the power plant production to be curtailed.
This constraint
management is closely related to the type of grid connection agreement that the
power plants have in place (ﬁrm and non-ﬁrm) and the curtailment scenario that
takes place (voluntary and involuntary curtailment).
Firm and non-ﬁrm grid connection agreements
Grid connection agreements can be categorized as ﬁrm and non-ﬁrm. As deﬁned by
the National Grid ESO [10], ﬁrm connection agreement allows for unrestricted capa-
bility under any conditions for the generation plant to export the maximum amount
of contracted power. If the generation exceeds the contracted transmission capacity,
this surplus will have to be curtailed [11]. Non-ﬁrm contracts contain restrictions
which limit, in this case, wind generation assets to export their full capacity under
certain conditions (can be either temporary or permanent restriction on power ).
In addition to allowing for higher generation capacity to be connected, non-ﬁrm
connection agreements allow generation to be connected earlier compared to ﬁrm
agreements. Grid operators often grant non-ﬁrm agreements for wind power plants
when a ﬁrm agreement cannot be granted in the required time frame, which aids
the growth of renewable resource installations. However, where ﬁrm agreements en-
sure the transmission availability will remain the same as per contracted agreement,
system operators can limit or curtail the production of a power plant with non-ﬁrm
agreements when needed to ensure system stability [12]. The wind farm is also not
remunerated for the losses incurred if the operator down-regulates the production
in non-ﬁrm agreements.
Voluntary and involuntary curtailment
Curtailment can be categorized in voluntary and involuntary curtailment and can
be applied to generators with non-ﬁrm as well as ﬁrm agreements. Generators can
agree to voluntarily reduce their output for a certain duration and in return to be
compensated for the lost energy production. Involuntary curtailment occurs when,
due to grid constraints, grid operator imposes limits on generation plant output.
In non-ﬁrm connection agreements, the network operator does not guarantee maxi-
mum transmission capacity availability at all times and can restrict generator output
without compensation for loss of generation. For oﬀshore wind parks, given that
export cables from oﬀshore to onshore substations require high investment, some
curtailment level can be chosen to be accepted by opting for a lower transmission
capacity. This can prove to be a cost-eﬀective solution especially if the curtailment
events are infrequent, which reduces the initial investment cost while still enabling to
export most of the potential production [13]. Involuntary curtailment can occur in
both ﬁrm and non-ﬁrm connection agreements, often due to the delays in infrastruc-
ture reinforcements for new generation plants or due to unplanned congestion in the
network. In these cases, to ensure system security (as deﬁned in section 2.2.2), some
of the production must be curtailed and the generators will be compensated based
on speciﬁc agreements and remuneration mechanisms in place. In some cases, the
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
7
==PAGE:17==
network owner, responsible for investments in new transmission lines, is obligated
to compensate the generator for all or some of the production lost.
2.2.2
Power system operation
Renewable energy sources (RES) such as wind have fast ramp up and ramp down
rates and can be operated with certain ﬂexibility within their operational range [14].
On the contrary, coal, nuclear and other conventional power plants have quite high
minimum load capability [13] and in order to ensure the suitable unit operational
eﬃciency and reliability, it must be operated above this threshold. During low de-
mand, wind generation could be curtailed to ensure that conventional generators in
the system to meet the minimum load limit [11].
Curtailment of wind generation can also take place during periods of low production
to ensure that there is enough spinning reserve capacity and ensure system balance
[11]. To prevent situations where the system abruptly loses too much capacity (e.g.
when wind turbines must be stopped during a storm), variable generation plants
can be curtailed well in advance to the expected drop in generation. This is done
so that generators with spinning reserves are able to react to the generation drop
within their ramp-up limits (dynamic capabilities).
High penetration of inverter based sources, especially in smaller or islanded systems,
poses the problem of reduced system inertia. Conventional generators have high
rotational inertia and are able to adjust to sudden disturbances in the grid. During
small imbalances, the kinetic energy stored in spinning reserves maintains the gen-
erators at constant speed, thus providing frequency stability. However, renewable
sources are non-synchronous generators that operate through power electronics and
do not inherently have inertia support. To address this, solutions such as synthetic
inertia are used, which emulates conventional generation inertia response through
power electronic device control. Due to control processes, the response rate of syn-
thetic inertia is slower than of rotational mass inertia. During contingency events,
lack of inertia support in networks with high share of non-synchronous generation
may lead to frequency stability issues [13],[8].
2.2.3
Curtailment due to economic factors
Negative prices
When there is signiﬁcant surplus of energy generation in the system and the demand
is low, the day ahead (DA) market price can become negative. To maintain system
stability, excess generation must be spilled and this often means curtailing wind
generation since, as mentioned before, conventional generation must maintain mini-
mum operating constrains. Conventional power plant operators choose to keep the
plants running even during negative price periods, since the alternative of shutting
them down would likely result in higher operational costs and would be limited by
technical limitations which include oﬀ-time on starting up.
Strategic bidding
In markets with imperfect competition, withholding generation, especially if the
negative price periods occur frequently, can help maximize revenues. Reduction in
generation will drive up the DA prices and when a small capacity is placed in the
8
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:18==
merit order with high prices, it will have a high impact on the market price.
2.3
Consequences of curtailment
While energy curtailment can be seen as the necessary action taken by the system
operator to ensure the supply and demand balance, it comes with certain implica-
tions. Naturally, this results in the loss of potential energy production, however it
also has economical and environmental consequences.
Increase in CO2 emissions
When wind production is curtailed, fast reacting, but CO2 emission intense genera-
tion plants such as Combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) and thermal power plants
must be turned up to cover this loss of production. While the overall deployment
of renewable energy sources has been growing rapidly, their sub-optimal utilization
in recent years hinders the overall transition towards carbon-neutrality. Based on
report [5], both 2020 and 2021 saw an additional 1.02 mln. tonnes of CO2 emis-
sions per year due to wind curtailment - this equals to yearly emissions produced by
497,000 cars on the road [5] with an average yearly car mileage of 6600 miles [15].
Economic loss
In addition to increased carbon emissions, curtailment results in costs of turning
down wind generation and cost of turning other generation up. Between 2020 and
2021, due to wind curtailment, consumers paid an additional 806 mln£: 299 mln£ in
2020 and 507 mln£ in 2021 [5]. The stark increase in curtailment costs in 2021 was
caused by very high gas prices through the use of conventional generation plants.
Wasted renewable energy
Curtailment results in wasted zero-emission generation that otherwise could have
been utilized to meet consumer energy needs.
The eﬀort to reduce carbon foot-
print by deploying renewable assets and increasing their share in the energy mix is
undermined by their under-utilization and the dependence on fossil fuel plants to
counteract the lost renewable production.
2.4
Curtailment mitigation options
As renewable energy source integration continues to rise globally, the challenges pre-
sented above will continue to rise in signiﬁcance. They can be addressed through
various mitigation strategies such as improvements in grid management and rein-
forcements as well as energy storage deployment.
Network reinforcements and interconnections
Curtailment often occurs as a consequence of lack of transmission capabilities. Net-
work congestions and lack of transmission capacity can cause bottlenecks and prevent
energy transmission from high generation areas to high consumption areas. In these
cases, wind generation might be curtailed and generation close to the load (often
times gas or thermal power plant) will have to be turned up to compensate for the
mismatch. Increasing capacity of existing transmission lines or building new ones
would enable better utilization of RES being integrated. To address wind curtail-
ment, UK’s national energy regulator is set to build a high-voltage direct current
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
9
==PAGE:19==
(HVDC) link [6] on the east coast to increase transmission capacity between the
north of the country where most of the generation is situated and the south, where
most of the demand is. However, these investments are costly and have long lead
times meaning that while this is the most straightforward approach to the problem,
interim solutions might be necessary.
Similarly to ensuring the network is able to transfer production from one part of
the local grid to the other (for example within countries), strong interconnections
with neighbouring grids allow to eﬃciently balance energy demand through energy
import and export.
Energy storage technologies
Energy storage technologies are utilized to store surplus energy during hours of low
demand and high production, and are discharged when demand exceeds generation
[5]. As fast response, ﬂexible generation units, storage systems are able to oﬀset the
use of gas power plants at times of low variable generation. Both short term (up
to 6h discharge time) and long term storage are used for this purpose. While short
term storage is easier to deploy, provide easier installation, and is not dependent
on geography (compared to long term pumped hydro storage), during long hours of
curtailment they are often not able to provide the needed volumes of supply.
2.5
Energy storage systems
The following section of the chapter describes Lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries, ﬂow
batteries and Liquid Air Energy Storage (LAES) systems. The main characteristics
of technologies and working mechanisms are described. These three storage tech-
nologies will be used in the optimization model to determine the optimal size of an
energy storage unit for energy curtailment mitigation.
As mentioned before, when the network constraints cause energy from the wind
farm to be curtailed, it can be stored in energy storage systems and transmitted at
a later point. Storage technologies are split into two categories depending on their
discharge duration: Long term and Short term energy storage systems.
• Long duration energy storage (LDES) are capable of storing large amount
of energy over a long period of time, ranging from over 4 hours to days to
several months in the case of seasonal energy storage systems.
This type
of energy storage can provide backup power during emergencies and power
during low RES generation periods.
Examples are Pumped Hydro Energy
Storage (PHES), LAES, Compressed Air Energy Storage (CAES), and Flow
batteries [5].
• Short duration energy storage (SDES) are typically storage units with a dis-
charge time of up to 4-6h.
This type of storage can manage the balance
between supply and demand on a short term scale and aid the stability of the
system. Examples are Li-ion batteries and Lead Acid Batteries [5].
10
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:20==
2.5.1
Electrochemical energy storage systems
The following subsection will describe three types of energy storage technologies
which will later be used in the analysis.
Lithium ion (Li-ion) batteries
Li-ion batteries are one of the most widely used energy storage technologies. Due
to their high energy density and high cycle count, they are used in various parts of
the industry - from smart phone applications to electric vehicles and to large scale
electric grid applications. Their working mechanism is based on electrochemical reac-
tions and the movement of lithium ions between the positive and negative electrodes.
The main components are the cathode (typically made out of lithium metal oxide),
a graphite anode and a membrane, which separates the anode from the cathode. All
the components are immersed in a lithium-ion conductive electrolyte and enclosed
in a storage tank. During the charging process, positive ions move from cathode to
anode through the electrolyte medium. The energy is stored in the form of chemical
potential when ions intercalate between the layers in the anode. The discharge is a
reverse process where lithium ions move from the anode to the cathode [16],[17].
The main advantages of Li-ion batteries are their high round trip eﬃciency (RTE)
(∼90%)[5], high energy density (170-300 Wh/l) and speciﬁc energy (75-125 Wh/kg),
which enable large amounts of energy to be stored relative to the battery size. This,
in addition to the high round trip eﬃciency and long cycle life, makes Li-ion bat-
teries suitable to provide support to energy production ﬂuctuations. However, the
cost of the batteries scales with size, making larger scale applications costly. In addi-
tion, Li-ion batteries are susceptible to signiﬁcant degradation with cycling use and
their production has environmental impacts related to lithium mining and battery
disposal. Nonetheless, their fast charge and discharge capabilities allowing them to
reach 90% of their rated power in 200 ms make Li-ion a suitable storage technology
for co-location with intermittent energy sources [16].
Flow batteries
A ﬂow battery is an electrochemical energy storage system where electrolyte solu-
tions are stored in tanks and energy is generated by pumping the electrolyte through
the electrochemical cell. During discharge, a redox reaction occurs in which the elec-
trolyte in the anode reservoir is oxidised while a reduction reaction occurs in the
cathode reservoir. The electrons are released at the anode which creates an electri-
cal potential diﬀerence between the anode and cathode and thus creates an electron
ﬂow to the cathode through an external membrane, connecting the two electrolyte
tanks. The positive ions ﬂow the opposite direction creating a current ﬂow from the
cathode to the anode. During charging, a reverse process occurs.
Their main advantage is scalability. The energy capacity of ﬂow batteries depends
on their volume, therefore the capacity can be scaled up by increasing the amount
of electrolyte stored, whereas the power capacity depends on the cell number and
electrode size [16]. This energy and power decoupling makes ﬂow batteries particu-
larly suitable for grid-scale storage applications. Another characteristic is their long
life span (estimated to be 20 years) due to very minimal degradation of materials,
providing larger cycling capabilities compared to other electrochemical energy stor-
age technologies. The use of costly materials such as vanadium (accounting for ∼
43% of the CAPEX) makes the ﬂow battery system high in capital costs, which
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
11
==PAGE:21==
limits their deployment. Currently other materials such as Hydrogen/Bromine and
organic molecules are being researched as alternatives for the electrolyte. With low
self-discharge, low maintenance costs, high DOD 1 and a RTE of 70%, ﬂow batteries
have suitable characteristics for large scale storage applications [17].
2.5.2
Liquid Air Energy Storage (LAES)
An emerging energy storage technology suitable for large scale applications is the
LAES system. The working principle of this thermomechanical storage system is
based on using surplus energy to liquefy air by compressing it and cooling it to
cryogenic temperatures, which is then stored in tanks. The process involves 3 sub-
processes: charging, storing and discharging [18]. During charging, excess energy
from oﬀ-peak demand periods is used by the air liqueﬁer to draw in, purify, and
cool ambient air to around -160 degrees Celsius. During liquefaction, a compressor
pressurises and cools down the air turning it into liquid - around 700 liters of air
are compressed into 1 liter of liquid air. It is then stored in an insulated tank pres-
surised at ∼16 bar. During the discharge cycle, cryogenic air is pumped through
high-pressure evaporator where it is heated and expanded back into gas. The heated
gas is then used to drive turbines which in turn drive the synchronous generators
for power production.
LAES eﬃciency (RTE) is in the 50-55% range [17], which is much lower than Li-ion
and ﬂow battery energy storage technologies. However, with the addition of high-
grade waste heat from industrial plans, the round trip eﬃciency can be improved
to 70% and even higher if, in addition, a cold waste source was combined. LAES
systems are easily scalable and due to their much higher energy density compared
to other mechanical storage systems, are suitable for long-duration storage applica-
tions. LAES are not limited based on location unlike other long-term energy storage
systems like Pumped Hydro (which require large water reservoirs at diﬀerent eleva-
tions) or CAES technologies (which require underground storage reservoirs). Since
a synchronous generator is used for energy conversion from mechanical to electrical,
LAES also has the capability to provide reactive power services as well as inertial
and voltage support.
1Depth of discharge (DOD) - percentage of the battery’s total capacity that has been discharged
12
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1
Model explanation
Having discussed curtailment and challenges associated with rapidly growing re-
newable energy source integration into the electrical grid, the topic will be further
explored through the utilization of energy storage technologies to address the issue
of curtailment. This chapter explains the methodology used in developing an opti-
mization model to determine the optimal size of an energy storage unit to minimize
the energy curtailed from an oﬀshore wind farm.
As mentioned in the previous chapter, one method of minimizing curtailed energy
volumes is to store it when production exceeds the grid connection point capacity
and to discharge it once the connection limitations allow. The base scenario without
energy storage is shown in Figure 3.1a. While the energy production is below the
ﬁrm grid connection agreement, the energy produced by an oﬀshore wind farm is
transferred onshore and injected into the grid.
However, during periods of high
wind generation, if energy production exceeds the ﬁrm grid connection capacity,
curtailment must be performed by reducing wind production through control systems
and pitch control. The aim of the optimization model is to determine the optimal size
of an energy storage system, taking into account technical and economical storage
limitations, in order to reduce wind curtailment.
Figure 3.1b shows the system with an integrated energy storage solution that will
be used in the creation of the optimization model. When wind production exceeds
the grid connection capacity, while there is available production capacity, the excess
energy production will be stored in an energy storage system.
Once the energy
storage is full, if the available wind generation exceeds the grid connection capacity,
the excess energy will be curtailed. Once the production is below grid connection
capacity, energy storage discharges, provided it has available capacity to provide
support during the sudden drops in wind production. The case scenario analysed is
for when a wind farm is connected to the grid with a ﬁrm grid connection agreement
and an onshore metering point.
Since the energy injected into the grid cannot exceed the contracted amount, energy
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
13
==PAGE:23==
curtailment must be performed behind the metering (BTM)1 point (which in this
case is an onshore substation). In the analyzed situation, the oﬀshore cable is owned
by the oﬀshore wind farm (OWF) owner and the storage system is installed onshore
where curtailment is performed. However, in a real case scenario, curtailment is
performed oﬀshore, before the connection point of the oﬀshore cable, by turning the
wind turbine blades out of the wind.
(a) The base set-up
(b) The model set-up
Figure 3.1: The set-up for problem analysis
However, the installation for energy storage systems come at a high cost in power
(cost for energy conversion) and energy (cost for energy storage). Deploying a stor-
1Behind The Meter (BTM) and Front of The Meter (FTM) are terms used to describe the energy
metering point location. BTM refers to the customer’s side of metering point and includes energy
generation, storage installed on end-user’s premises. FTM refers to the utility side of the grid
and includes the main grid infrastructure. In terms of curtailment, if an asset is connected BTM,
curtailment is managed by the customer/asset owner (as in the case of this analysis), whereas if it
is connected FTM, curtailment is managed by the grid operator.[19]
14
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:24==
age system that is large enough to store the full volume of excess energy can be both
technically and economically infeasible. Therefore, it is important to determine suit-
able storage system size that is able to store the largest amount of energy while
accounting for storage limitations.
3.2
Model for optimal energy storage system siz-
ing to minimize curtailment
In this section, parameters used in the analysis are presented and the optimization
problem formulation as a Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem is
explained. The section is concluded with an introduction to the three sizing scenarios
analysed, and the objective functions for each are deﬁned.
Parameters
The model input parameters are indicated in Table 3.1. For the purpose of the
analysis, the nominal capacity of the wind farm (P wcap) is assumed to be 3 GW,
while the ﬁrm connection agreement (P grid), setting the maximum power that can
be injected into the grid, is 2.25 GW. The wind generation data is provided in half
hourly time steps (∆t), and this is accounted for in the model when calculating the
energy terms. Parameter M is a large constant value used in the Big-M method
(further explained in below in "Constraints"). The minimum energy state of the
storage system (EESS
min ) is 0 GWh.
Table 3.1: Parameters and their values
P wcap [GW]
P grid [GW]
∆t [h]
M
EESS
min [GWh]
3
2.25
0.5
1 · 1010
0
Table 3.2 shows storage system parameters used in the analysis for lithium-ion bat-
tery, ﬂow battery and LAES. The values were obtained based on literature [17] and
industrial experience, coming from Ørsted insights. P ESS
max and EESS
max are the accord-
ingly maximum energy storage power and energy rating. E
P is the maximum energy
storage discharge duration (energy and power rating ratio). These values set the
maximum power and energy sizes as well as maximum discharge duration that can
be selected in the optimization model outcome. η indicates the charge/discharge
eﬃciency for each technology type while the RTE is deﬁned in parenthesis. Capital
expenditure prices for power (PCAPEX) and energy (ECAPEX) were used in the op-
timization model, however, as they were obtained from internal Ørsted reports, the
values have been omitted from the public thesis report.
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
15
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.2: Battery parameters and their values used in Scenario 2 and 3
Li-ion battery
Flow battery
LAES
P ESS
max [MW]
[0.1, 1100]
[1, 500]
[50, 500]
EESS
max [MWh]
[0.05, 2000]
[4, 2500]
[300, 2500]
E
P [h]
[0.5, 6]
[4, 12]
[6, 24]
η (RTE)
0.925 (0.85)
0.86 (0.74)
0.707 (0.5)
PCAPEX [£/kW]
*
*
*
ECAPEX [£/kWh]
*
*
*
Lifetime [years]
20
20
30
* actual prices from internal Ørsted reports were used in the modeling to derive results,
but have been omitted in the public thesis report
The analysis is done on 2 time periods T on half hourly time steps t: one year time
frame (2020 wind production data used) and 3 year time frame (2020 - 2022 data
wind production data used). The wind production data set contained normalized
values in per unit (pw
tpu), and each value was scaled by (P wcap) to obtain the avail-
able (potential) wind farm production before curtailment (P wav
t
) as per equation
3.1. Maximum storage capacity (EESS
max ) that can be deployed in each iteration is
calculated in equation 3.2 using the maximum nominal power rating and maximum
discharge duration E
P .
P wav
t
= pw
tpu · P wcap
∀t ∈T
(3.1)
EESS
max = P B
max · E
P
∀t ∈T
(3.2)
Limits
Energy storage charge (P ch
t ) and discharge power (P dch
t
) limits are between 0 and
the maximum storage power rating (P ESS
max ) (equations 3.3 and 3.4 accordingly). The
curtailment power (P curtail
t
) is limited to be between 0 and P wcap as per equation
3.5. Energy storage state of charge (SOCt) is expressed in terms of energy and
can take the value between 0 (fully discharged) and EESS
max . All the above limits are
described in equations 3.3 - 3.6 and hold for each time step t ∈T. The results of
the optimization model are energy storage energy (EESS
size ) and power (P ESS
size ) ratings
described in 3.7 and 3.8 respectively, and are between 0 and the maximum power
(P ESS
max ) and energy (EESS
max ) ratings set for each iteration.
16
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:26==
0 ≤P ch
t
≤P ESS
max
∀t ∈T
(3.3)
0 ≤P dch
t
≤P ESS
max
∀t ∈T
(3.4)
0 ≤P curtail
t
≤P wcap
∀t ∈T
(3.5)
0 ≤SOCt ≤EESS
max
∀t ∈T
(3.6)
0 ≤EESS
size ≤EESS
max
(3.7)
0 ≤P ESS
size ≤P ESS
max
(3.8)
Constraints
The energy storage SOC within each time step can be described using equation 3.9.
The binary variable BinaryCHDIS is 1, when there is under-supply and therefore,
available capacity for the energy storage system to be discharged. When there is
excess generation, BinaryCHDIS is 0, which initiates the energy storage charging
action. However, since it contains variable multiplication, the equation is non-linear.
To linearize it, the big-M method was used and formulated based on [20]. This is a
technique used in mixed-integer linear programming to handle non-linear constraints
that contain continuous and binary variables [21].
A large constant M (in this
case 1 · 1010) is introduced which allows to reformulate these constraints as linear
inequalities. For discharging action, the linearized constraints are in 3.10 - 3.15 and
constraints for charging are in 3.16 - 3.21.
SOCt−SOCt−1 = P ch
t ·(1−BinaryCHDIS)·∆t·η−P dch
t
· BinaryCHDIS · ∆t
η
∀t ∈T
(3.9)
The auxiliary variable zt in equations 3.11 - 3.15 is used to ﬁnd the power rating at
each time step and is constrained to be between minimum and maximum available
power rating within the whole modeling time period. Constraints 3.12 and 3.15
indicate that at any particular time step, the auxiliary variable has to be greater
than or equal to the discharge power and less than the big-M value. These constraints
determine whether the discharging action will be activated at a particular time step.
During discharge, constraint 3.13 is reduced to zt ≥P ESS
size , and in combination with
constraint 3.14 it gives the result zt = P ESS
size . This result determines the nominal
discharge power.
The same principle for determining the discharge power is used to determine the
charge power. In this case, auxiliary variable γt in equations 3.11 - 3.15 is used to
ﬁnd the power rating at each time step. During charging, the binary variable will
be equal to 0 - constraints 3.19 and 3.20 will result in γt = P ESS
size .
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
17
==PAGE:27==
For discharge:
BinaryCHDIS = 1
(3.10)
0 ≤zt ≤P ESS
max
∀t ∈T
(3.11)
P dch
t
≤zt
∀t ∈T
(3.12)
zt ≥P ESS
size −(1 −BinaryCHDIS
t
) · M
∀t ∈T
(3.13)
zt ≤P ESS
size
∀t ∈T
(3.14)
zt ≤BinaryCHDIS
t
· M
∀t ∈T
(3.15)
For charge:
BinaryCHDIS = 0
(3.16)
0 ≤γt ≤P ESS
max
∀t ∈T
(3.17)
P ch
t
≤γt
∀t ∈T
(3.18)
γt ≥P ESS
size −BinaryCHDIS
t
· M
∀t ∈T
(3.19)
γt ≤P ESS
size
∀t ∈T
(3.20)
γt ≤(1 −BinaryCHDIS
t
) · M
∀t ∈T
(3.21)
The system balance equation is described in 3.22. Here, the power at the point
of connection is the diﬀerence between the available wind farm production (P wav
t
),
the storage P ch
t
or P dch
t
and P curtail
t
. The P ch
t
and P dch
t
will depend on the state of
BinaryCHDIS. Power at the point of connection cannot exceed the ﬁrm connection
agreement (P grid) at any given point in time. Therefore, in the case of overproduc-
tion, the balance equation must be satisﬁed by storing excess energy or curtailing
it if there is no more available capacity in the energy storage. In the case of un-
derproduction, the battery is discharged to account for the diﬀerence. Since from
a modeling perspective, the output of the wind farm and the battery are both seen
as sources of generation, constraint 3.23 supplements the balance equation by in-
dicating that in the case of curtailment, only the wind farm production (P w
t ) can
be curtailed. Constraint 3.24 ensures that during energy storage discharge (when
BinaryCHDIS = 1) curtailment is not performed and when the storage is being
charged (BinaryCHDIS = 0), from constraint 3.23, P curtail
t
will take a value equal
to P wav
t
−P w
t . To make sure the energy storage is being charged only with excess
energy from the wind production and that there are no inﬂows from the electrical
grid, constraint 3.25 is introduced in the model.
P wav
t
−P ch
t
+ P dch
t
−P curtail
t
≤P grid
∀t ∈T
(3.22)
P wav
t
= P w
t + P curtail
t
∀t ∈T
(3.23)
BinaryCHDIS
t
· P curtail
t
≤0
∀t ∈T
(3.24)
P w
t + P dch
t
−P ch
t
≥0
∀t ∈T
(3.25)
18
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:28==
The initial state of the storage (SOCinit) system is assumed to be fully discharged
and equal to the minimum SOC (SOCmin), while the ﬁnal state of SOC (SOCtmax)
at the end of the computation is equal to the initial SOCinit (equations 3.26 and
3.27 accordingly). SOC is calculated in each time step as described in 3.28. At every
time step after the initial point, the energy charged over the previous time step ∆t is
added to the energy level at the previous point SOCt−1, while the energy discharged
over ∆t is subtracted from it. Charging and discharging losses are accounted for by
including the eﬃciency η. The actual energy stored in the energy storage over ∆t
will be lower by a factor of η as during charging, some amount of energy will be lost
through energy conversion from electrical to chemical. The reverse conversion will
occur when discharging the battery. However, in this case, to deliver energy at a
certain set point while accounting for the losses, the amount of energy discharged
from the battery will be higher by a factor of η compared to the energy delivered to
the battery terminals.
SOCinit = SOCmin
(3.26)
SOCtmax = SOCinit
(3.27)
SOCt =
!
SOCinit
t = 1
SOCt−1 + P ch
t
· ∆t · η −P dch
t
·∆t
η
∀t ∈T\{1}
(3.28)
Objective function
Scenario 1
The objective function for the ﬁrst scenario is described in equation 3.29 and it
includes the curtailed power at each time step.
Technology eﬃciencies (η) from
Table 3.2 are accounted for in the model. The function is minimized with respect to
P curtail for all time steps t ∈T, subject to constraints 3.3 - 3.28.
min
P curtail
"
t∈T
P curtail
t
· ∆t
(3.29)
Scenario 2
Objective function formulation for the second scenario is the same as in the ﬁrst
scenario (deﬁned in equation 3.29) and is subject to constraints 3.3 - 3.28. However,
as limits, this scenario introduces energy storage power (P ESS
max ) and energy (EESS
max )
ratings currently available in the market. The value ranges for both are indicated
in Table 3.2. The objective function aims to minimize P curtail for all t ∈T.
Scenario 3
In addition to parameters from the previous scenarios, last scenario also includes the
technology prices PCAPEX and ECAPEX from Table 3.2. The energy that cannot be
injected into the grid and must be curtailed has a cost tied to it. This curtailment
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
19
==PAGE:29==
cost translates into the cost for consumers and includes payments for lost revenue
to wind farm owners and payments for the additional generation that had to be
turned up to account for intermittent energy loss. Based on "Renewable curtailment
and the role of long duration storage report" [5] on energy curtailment, four price
scenarios will be analyzed: 2020 high and average price scenarios (76 £/MWh and
66 £/MWh accordingly) and 2021 high and average price scenarios (450 £/MWh
and 222 £/MWh) as described in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Discount rate and curtailment prices
Discount rate
(r) [%]
High price 2021
CPCurtail [£/MWh]
Average price 2021
CPCurtail [£/MWh]
High price 2020
CPCurtail [£/MWh]
Average price 2020
CPCurtail [£/MWh]
5
450
222
76
66
The savings that the energy storage installation brings over its lifetime is determined
using Discounted Cash Flows (DCF). DCF is used to calculate the present value of
an investment based on the future cash ﬂows (in this case the avoided curtailment
costs). EcurtailwithESS in 3.30 is the remaining energy curtailed after energy storage
installation. Ecurtailtotal in 3.31 is the total curtailment from the base scenario where
no storage is installed. The calculation for DCF is done in equation 3.32 where
the diﬀerence between the terms EcurtailwithESS and Ecurtailtotal (the savings acquired
from energy storage installation) is multiplied by the curtailment cost. The term
is then discounted over each year (n ∈Y ) dividing it by 1 + rn. Here, n is each
year in the time frame Y. Calculating the returns over the whole lifetime of the
energy storage operation, depending on the energy storage, Y will take the values
20 (n ∈{1, 2, . . . , 20}) or 30 (n ∈{1, 2, . . . , 30}) as in table 3.2. Analyzing the 3
year case, independently of the technology type, Y will be 3 years (n ∈{1, 2, 3}).
The result of 3.32 is the discounted savings acquired from utilizing the storage over
the time frame analyzed. The result of 3.32 is calculated separately and only the
constant is included in the objective function. This is done to avoid non-linearity
in the objective function formulation. Since the energy curtailed with a storage sys-
tem will be always lower than without it, the savings in this case are expressed as
a negative value. The objective function is a function to be minimized (goal is to
minimize expenditure), so a variable included with a negative sign results in that
variable being maximized.
EcurtailwithESS =
"
t∈T
P curtailwithESS
t
· ∆t
(3.30)
Ecurtailtotal =
"
t∈T
P curtailtotal
t
· ∆t
(3.31)
DCF =
"
n∈Y
CECurtail · (EcurtailwithESS −Ecurtailtotal)
(1 + r)n
(3.32)
20
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:30==
The goal of objective function for scenario 3 in 3.33 is to select to most suitable
energy storage size which would minimize the costs (minimize the P ESS
size , EESS
size ) for
installation and maximize the savings from avoided payments for curtailed energy
(maximize DCF). Objective function is subject to constraints 3.3 - 3.28 and accounts
for DCF (speciﬁed in 3.32) as well as the storage cost for installed power capacity
(power price CPCAP EX multiplied by nominal power rating P ESS
size ) and energy capacity
(accordingly CECAP EX multiplied by EESS
size ). The cost-beneﬁt analysis for the whole
energy storage lifetime was done on 2020 wind production data. Using 2020-2022
wind production data, the analysis was done looking at the 3 year time frame and
discounting the savings accordingly for 3 years.
min
DCF,P ESS
size ,EESS
size
"
t∈T
DCF + CPCAP EX · P ESS
size + CECAP EX · EESS
size
(3.33)
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
21
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Case studies and data analysis
The ﬁrst part of the following chapter describes the assumptions taken throughout
the analysis along with descriptions of the base case and three scenarios that were in-
vestigated. Further, to better understand curtailment distribution over the diﬀerent
years and months in the wind production data set used in the calculations, analysis
is performed.
Assumptions
To make the analysis feasible in the thesis time frame, certain assumptions were
taken during the optimisation problem formulation and are presented below:
• BTM point: While most commonly oﬀshore wind farm metering point is lo-
cated at the oﬀshore substation, in this case it is assumed to be onshore. The
oﬀshore cable is owned and managed by the wind farm developer and energy
curtailment from the oﬀshore wind farm is performed at the onshore substa-
tion. The energy storage system point of connection is assumed to be at the
onshore substation.
• Firm grid connection: the OWF is assumed to have a ﬁrm grid connection of
2.25 GW. The grid connection capacity assumed to be constant at all times.
• Transmission cable to onshore is assumed to be ideal (lossless line).
• Wind farm: the production values are known and are taken from historical
data of a wind farm in the UK for the period 2020 Jan-2022 Jan.
• Battery degradation is not taken in the consideration in the calculations.
• In the analysis, three types energy storage technologies are investigated (Li-ion
batteries, Flow batteries and LAES)
• The lifetime values to account for discounted cash-ﬂows in SC3 are Li-ion: 20
years, Flow batteries: 20 years, LAES: 30 years [17].
• Initial SOC is assumed to be fully discharged (0%) and the ﬁnal SOC is as-
sumed to be the same as the starting point. Battery charge and discharge are
constrained to not occur simultaneously and the battery is charged using only
22
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:32==
surplus energy from the wind farm (charging from the grid functionality is not
implemented).
4.1
Case studies
Optimal energy storage capacity and power ratings for each case were deﬁned as the
point at which larger ratings of either type would yield no additional beneﬁt for the
cost function. The analysis was done for Li-ion battery, Flow battery and LAES
storage technologies, taking into account their technical and economical parameters.
Base case
The initial model set up is a standalone oﬀshore wind farm with an onshore me-
tering point where curtailment is performed. Nominal capacity of the wind farm is
assumed to be 3 GW, and when the wind farm production exceeds the transmission
capacity of 2.25 GW, energy is curtailed. Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 include energy storage
technologies under diﬀerent conditions to store this excess energy and use it at a
later point.
Scenario 1 (SC1): Total curtailment reduction
The objective of the ﬁrst scenario is to determine the energy storage size in power
and energy terms to store all available excess production at any given point in
time. This is taken as the ideal case, should there be no technical limitations for
installation and no economical limitations for investment. The maximum power and
energy ratings are not constrained in this case. The model is allowed to choose a
large enough storage size, so that the total curtailed energy would be fully mitigated.
The scenario is analyzed for diﬀerent storage types taking into account their RTEs.
Scenario 2 (SC2): Curtailment mitigation using diﬀerent storage tech-
nologies
Second scenario objective function outcome is based only on technical storage size
limitations of diﬀerent storage technologies. The optimal selection range is narrowed
by the maximum power, energy and discharge duration ratings (as described in Table
3.2) for each of the analyzed technologies.
Scenario 3 (SC3.1-SC3.4): Economically optimal curtailment mitigation
The third scenario builds on top of the second, and in addition to the technical
energy storage constraints, the model includes the energy storage installation cost
(speciﬁed in Table 3.2) and the cost for curtailed energy (speciﬁed in Table 3.3). The
model is incentivised to select storage size to balance avoidance of curtailment cost
with economical feasibility of energy storage technology deployment. The result is
chosen by determining a storage size that enables achieving the highest savings by
avoiding costs for curtailed energy.
To understand curtailment price inﬂuence on the optimal storage size selection, 4
scenarios for curtailment prices are analyzed as follows: scenario 3.1 (SC3.1) - 450
£/MWh, scenario 3.2 (SC3.2) - 222 £/MWh, scenario 3.3 (SC3.3) - 76 £/MWh,
scenario 3.4 (SC3.4) 66 £/MWh.
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
23
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Data analysis
In this section, the wind production data set is analysed and the values for average
and total generation are presented on a monthly and yearly basis. The second part
of the section focuses on the curtailed energy volumes given the ﬁrm grid connection
agreement and its distribution based on the curtailment duration.
Historical half-hourly production data used in the analysis was provided by Ørsted.
It contains production values from a wind farm in the UK that were measured at
the metering point and were normalized over the nominal capacity of the wind farm.
Data set contains production for the years 2020, 2021 and 2022 and in total, 52608
data points were used in the calculations. The per-unit values in the data set were
scaled by the nominal capacity of the wind farm, which was assumed to be 3 GW.
Figure 4.1 shows the average wind generation for each month within the period
analysed.
The production proﬁle follows the usual wind production trend with
higher values in the winter and autumn seasons and lower values during summer
and spring. It can be seen that on average, wind production does not exceed the
ﬁrm connection capacity, with the exception of February 2022 where the average
wind farm production per hour was 2.36 GWh.
Figure 4.1: Average hourly available wind production by month in 2020-2022
When considering the values above, on average, ﬁrm grid connection agreement
constraint on how much energy can be injected into the grid should not pose a
problem. However, when looking at the total available energy production within each
month of the year, there is a substantial amount of wasted (curtailed) energy during
peak production hours. Figure 4.2, shows total available energy generation and the
energy that is curtailed due to ﬁrm connection agreements. Available generation
in this analysis refers to the energy that could be generated by the wind farm and
injected into the grid if there were no transmission constrains. Taking 2020 as an
example, there was 12676 GWh of available generation (light green) out of which
7.54% (957.1 GWh) were curtailed (dark green). 2020 saw the lowest curtailment
volumes (with 2021 having 8.92% and 2021 10.26%) and will be used extensively
further in the result analysis to show the potential of energy storage deployment,
even when having lower values of overproduction.
24
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: Total available wind production and curtailed energy for each month in
2020-2022
Figure 4.3 shows the total curtailment hours throughout 2020 and 2022. The values
mirror the energy production trend having higher number of curtailment hours in
winter and autumn seasons. In each month of the year, there is between 52 and 520
hours of un-utilized energy production which can be mitigated using a co-located
wind farm and energy storage solution to displace energy within time by storing it
during periods of over production (which in this data sample are the most frequent in
February) and use it during underproduction, smoothing out the energy production
periods and reducing the curtailment hours on a monthly and yearly basis.
Figure 4.3: Total hours of curtailment within each month
The curtailment volumes discussed above were aggregated on a yearly basis and
presented below. As shown in ﬁgure 4.4a, between 2021 and 2022, yearly energy
curtailed ranged between 957.1 - 1266.96 GWh, and in total amounted to 3239.84
GWh over 8807 curtailment hours. Taking the assumption that annual consumption
of 1 home in the UK is 7250 kWh [5], the energy curtailed within the 3 years would
be enough to power 446758 homes. The maximum consecutive hours of curtailment
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
25
==PAGE:35==
shown in ﬁgure 4.4b ranged between 112-143 h with an average ranging from 0.29-
0.46 GWh energy curtailed per hour and total of 33.8-66.76 GWh. The occurrence
of this type of long term overproduction is rather rare - between 2020 and 2022 there
were 113 instances (out of 753 total curtailment instances) that curtailment duration
lasted longer than 24h. However, during these instances, utilizing the long discharge
capabilities of energy storage technologies such as Flow and LAES can eﬀectively
minimize both the duration and the volume of energy curtailed.
(a) Total energy and hours
curtailed per year
(b) Maximum consecutive hours and
energy curtailed
Figure 4.4: Wind curtailment between 2020-2022
To better understand the duration of overproduction within each year and what
type of storage technology would be better suited for this application, data was
sorted within diﬀerent bins of diﬀerent curtailment durations.
Figure 4.5 shows
the hour distribution for year 2020 and 2020-2022. It can be seen that with the
increase in curtailment duration, the frequency reduces (this can also be seen in
years 2021-2022 in ﬁgure B.1 in the appendix). The cumulative energy over all the
instances within the 10-20h period is the highest out oﬀall intervals, amounting to
228GWh in 2020 and 692GWh throughout 2020-2022. So while 0-10h has by far
the highest number of occurrences (171 in 2020 and 471 in total over 2020-2022), in
terms of total energy, it is between 2.3 - 2.5 times lower than in the 10-20h duration
(90 in 2020 and 303 in total over 2020-2022). Therefore, a short duration energy
storage such as Lithium-ion batteries, would be better utilised in terms minimizing
curtailment frequency - reducing the large number of curtailment occurrences in the
short term span. However, longer duration storage would be needed to minimize the
curtailment volume - technologies with discharge duration of at least 10-15h would
be needed.
26
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:36==
(a) 2020
(b) 2020-2022
Figure 4.5: Curtailment distribution in 2020 and 2020-2022
The curtailment volume can be better seen in curtailment distribution within the
diﬀerent duration intervals. On average, there was 0.16 GWh curtailed in the 0-10h
interval and 4.5 GWh in the 10-20h interval in 2020.
These values are close to
comparing them to the average energy curtailed over the 3 year period: 0.25 GWh
in the 0-10h interval and 5.3 GWh in the 10-20h interval.
(a) 2020
(b) 2020-2022
Figure 4.6: Curtailment duration distribution in 2020 and 2020-2022
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
27
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
In the following chapter, the diﬀerent scenarios using the optimization model are
described and the main results for each are presented.
The results for diﬀerent
energy and power rating sizing combinations for each of the analyzed technologies
and the corresponding curtailment volumes mitigated are presented. In addition, the
optimal size energy storage operation over the year is shown for each of the scenarios.
The scenarios described in 4.1 Case studies are analyzed in more detail in their ded-
icated sections: Scenario 1 - Section 5.1, Scenario 2 - Section 5.2 and Scenario 3 -
Section 5.3. Below, the aggregated results for optimal energy storage sizing for the
diﬀerent scenarios and technologies are presented. Two time periods were analyzed:
Table 5.1 shows results derived using 2020 wind production data, while Table 5.2
shows results for calculations using the 2020-2022 year time frame. In these tables,
optimal energy storage power and energy ratings are presented along with the cycle
count over the time period analyzed (one cycle is equivalent to one full charge and
one full discharge).
28
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:38==
Table 5.1: Optimal energy sizes for each scenario using 2020 production data
Li-ion battery
Flow battery
LAES
SC1
Power (GW)
1.87
1.87
1.39
Energy (GWh)
65.71
55.26
39.95
Cycle count∗
21.12
23.61
33.1
SC2
Power (GW)
1
0.5
0.42
Energy (GWh)
2
2.5
2.5
Cycle count∗
116.47
117.36
117.02
SC3.1
Power (GW)
0.52
0.5
0.2
Energy (GWh)
2
2
2
Cycle count∗
131
101.56
75.51
SC3.2
Power (GW)
0.46
0.29
0.11
Energy (GWh)
2
0.78
1.05
Cycle count∗
118.27
145.69
110.4
SC3.3
Power (GW)
NA
NA
NA
Energy (GWh)
NA
NA
NA
Cycle count∗
NA
NA
NA
SC3.4
Power (GW)
NA
NA
NA
Energy (GWh)
NA
NA
NA
Cycle count∗
NA
NA
NA
* cycle count is calculated for 1 year storage operation, no degradation included
The optimization model storage size outcome trends are similar between the two time
frames. Going from the ideal case where the aim is to fully mitigate curtailment to
a technically and economically feasible case, energy storage system size will reduce
in both energy and power terms. A drastic reduction in storage size seen between
scenarios 1 and 2 (in table 5.1 for Flow battery case: from 1.87 GW/55.26 GWh to
0.5 GW/2.5 GWh), is due to the technical size limitations on energy storage, intro-
duced in scenario 2. When additionally, energy storage installation and curtailment
costs are introduced in SC3.1 - SC3.4, a further reduction in size can be seen when
compared to SC1 and SC2. However, it can be observed, that smaller storage size is
chosen for the lower curtailment cost scenario SC3.2 (in the ﬂow battery case, a 0.5
GW/2 GWh storage was chosen in SC3.1, whereas in SC3.2 - 0.29 GW/0.78 GWh),
showing that with higher curtailment costs it is beneﬁcial to deploy larger storage
sizes. SC3.3 and SC3.4 (as well as LAES case for SC3.2) resulted in optimization
model choosing to curtail all the energy, rather than storing it in an energy storage
system. Meaning, that if an energy storage would be deployed in these scenarios,
the return on investment would be negative.
When analyzing the results for the 3 year analysis case in 5.2, similar observations
as described above, regarding the change in sizes between the scenarios, can be
made. The storage sizes are larger (especially when considering the power rating)
since results as shown in 4.2 Data analysis Figure 4.4, indicate that production in
2022 was overall higher than in 2020 and 2021, which will have an inﬂuence on how
much energy must be stored during curtailment periods. SC3.3 and SC3.4 just as
in the previous case showed negative payback. SC3.2 and SC3.1 resulted in positive
returns for Li-ion battery while for Flow battery, only SC3.1 resulted in the positive
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
29
==PAGE:39==
payback.
From the results, an increase in cycle count can be observed with a decrease in power
and energy size ratings. As seen in table 5.1, cycle count increases as the energy
storage size gets smaller, since it is able to fully charge during shorter periods of
curtailment compared to a large energy storage. Comparing these results to Table
5.2, larger cycle counts can be seen, as they are calculated for a 3 year period.
Table 5.2: Optimal energy sizes for each scenario using 2020-2022 production data
Li-ion battery
Flow battery
LAES
SC1
Power (GW)
2.249
2.242
2.247
Energy (GWh)
73.16
57.41
47.2
Cycle count∗
57.28
69.75
71.27
SC2.1
Power (GW)
1
0.5
0.5
Energy (GWh)
2
2.5
2.5
Cycle count∗
740.18
471.32
347.31
SC3.1
Power (GW)
0.5
0.5
NA
Energy (GWh)
2
2
NA
Cycle count∗
718.02
730.64
NA
SC3.2
Power (GW)
0.44
NA
NA
Energy (GWh)
1.67
NA
NA
Cycle count∗
369.10
NA
NA
SC3.3
Power (GW)
NA
NA
NA
Energy (GWh)
NA
NA
NA
Cycle count∗
NA
NA
NA
SC3.4
Power (GW)
NA
NA
NA
Energy (GWh)
NA
NA
NA
Cycle count∗
NA
NA
NA
* cycle count is calculated for 3 year storage operation, no degradation included
5.1
Scenario 1: Total curtailment reduction
As mentioned before, the objective function was formulated to minimize curtailment
by not limiting the storage size choice neither through power nor energy ratings and
not taking the storage price into consideration. The outcome of all 3 scenarios for all
the diﬀerent technologies follows the same trend - to reach full curtailment mitiga-
tion, large energy storage capacities need to be installed. With curtailment volumes
gathered from the data analysis, this result is expected, however, the size of the
storage needed varies quite a bit between the technologies.
The analysis was ﬁrst performed based on 2020 historical wind production data.
Results from the optimization model for diﬀerent power and energy rating combi-
nations and the remaining curtailment volume for lithium-ion batteries can be seen
in Figure 5.1 (results for the diﬀerent energy and power rating combinations can
be seen in Table B.1). Results for Flow and LAES can be found in the Appendix
(Figure B.3 and Figure B.4 accordingly). The ﬁgures depict the curtailment volume
remaining, depending on the size of storage used - higher diameter circles in yellow
show the highest curtailment volume left, while smallest circles in purple show the
30
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:40==
lowest. It should be noted, that certain input combination outcomes resulted in
the same power and energy rating selection and consecutively, the same amount of
mitigated energy curtailment. Therefore, the dots displayed in the plots might not
be indicative of the total number of calculations done for each case, as these values
would be located in the same place with the same diameter circle and overlap on
top of each other.
Figure 5.1: Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries
The distributions were obtained by limiting the maximum energy storage power
rating (P B
max) and discharge duration ( E
P ) to increasingly larger values through the
diﬀerent iterations to get the curtailment volumes at diﬀerent steps. Once the maxi-
mum storage size is reached (65.71 GWh, 1.87 GW for Lithium-ion case), increasing
the storage size does not change the optimization model outcome. As seen in the
lower power rating selection, despite the large nominal energy capacity rating cho-
sen, the storage is unable to avoid curtailment entirely. This is due to the storage
not being able to discharge the amount needed and maintaining a large SOC, before
the next curtailment period begins. Therefore, a signiﬁcantly larger nominal power
rating will be needed to enable the storage to discharge appropriate amounts when
production is below the ﬁrm grid connection, in order to have enough available ca-
pacity to store the energy during the following overproduction period.
While in this scenario, there are no limitations on what storage size can be chosen,
the optimal choice between storage technologies diﬀers. This is due to the diﬀer-
ent eﬃciencies associated with each of the technology types as deﬁned in Table 3.2.
Lithium-ion batteries having the highest eﬃciency (RTE = 0.85) out of the analysed
storage types, also has the highest energy and power ratings. LAES will eﬀectively
have to store the same volume of excess energy, however, due to the much lower
eﬃciency (RTE = 0.5), it will lose some of the energy through energy conversion
from electrical to mechanical to thermal and back to electrical energy. This results
in a lower energy capacity needed and a lower rated power needed to charge and
discharge it. Hence, a low eﬃciency energy storage solution is able to achieve the
same curtailment avoidance as a high eﬃciency energy storage solution, but with
lower energy and power ratings, simply through loosing most of the charged energy
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
31
==PAGE:41==
to eﬃciency losses.
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure 5.2: Lithium ion battery storage operation over one year
Figure 5.2a shows the Lithium-ion battery storage operation for the selected hours
within the year. The ﬁrst subplot shows the actual wind production (line plot "Avail-
able"), the energy at point of connection (POC) (line plot "POC") and the ﬁrm grid
connection capacity (line plot "Firm-connec."). Second subplot displays the change
in battery SOC expressed in energy terms and the remaining curtailment, which
could not be stored in the storage. The last subplot shows the charge and discharge
action of the storage - here the generator convention is taken, where the discharge
power is shown as a positive.
The storage aims to counteract the under generation and over generation periods by
32
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:42==
discharging or charging accordingly. It can be seen, that the battery operation helps
to stabilize energy injected into the grid at POC. When wind production exceeds
the connection capacity, the storage system is being charged with excess energy
(duration 50-100h) and is discharged once the wind production reduces below the
maximum connection capacity. The chosen energy storage size is able to store all
curtailed energy, and so the curtailed energy over the time frame is equal to 0.
The data analysis revealed that during the maximum consecutive hours, there was
33 GWh of energy curtailed in 2020. However, the optimization model outcome
showed higher capacity values for all technologies analysed. From Figure 5.2b, it
can be seen that there are periods in a year (around the 7500h mark), where the
storage right before the long periods of overproduction is not at a fully discharged
state. In addition to that, the periods between the curtailment events can be too
short for the battery to discharge signiﬁcantly and therefore, SOC remains high.
Results for Flow and LAES can be found in the Appendix (Figure B.5 and Figure
B.6 accordingly) and the same trends can be seen.
5.2
Scenario 2: Curtailment mitigation using dif-
ferent storage technologies
Seeing as the storage size outcomes from scenario 1 result in too high of values to
be technically feasible, technical storage limitations are included in the optimization
model.
Figure 5.3 shows the remaining curtailment volumes for diﬀerent Li-ion battery
energy and power ratings for one year analysis. The model aims to fully reduce
curtailment, but in this case, is bounded by the maximum size that can be selected.
The curtailment volume is much larger than what could be mitigated with any of
the energy storage technologies and since the economical aspects are not taken into
consideration, the resulting energy storage power and energy ratings chosen is the
maximum available storage size for each technology in shown in Table 3.2. For Li-ion
storage case presented below, that is at 1 GW and 2 GWh, and in this case, 26% of
total curtailment is mitigated.
Figure 5.3: Curtailment minimization using Li-ion battery
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
33
==PAGE:43==
As seen in Figure 5.3, an increase in nominal power does not seem to signiﬁcantly de-
crease the remaining curtailment for the same nominal energy. The results are quite
similar despite a two times larger nominal power when comparing the 1GW/2GWh
and 0.5GW/2GWh cases. This shows a diﬀerent trend from Scenario 1, where a
higher nominal power was necessary to achieve the optimal conﬁguration. As seen
in the data analysis in Figure 4.5, the vast majority of curtailment durations are in
the range of 0 to 10 hours and do not present large, concentrated curtailment vol-
umes. Despite lacking the nominal capacity to achieve curtailment mitigation rates
close to the energy storage in Scenario 1, a smaller battery is still able to utilize the
frequent short periods of over generation, eﬀectively mitigating curtailment.
A small misalignment can be observed in Figure 5.3 when the power rating is set to
0.7 GW. The diﬀerence a is rather small (range between 0.67GW - 0.7GW) which
can be caused by the optimization model choosing diﬀerent control strategies of
when to charge the battery and when to discharge.
Results for Flow and LAES can be found in the Appendix (Figure B.7 and Figure
B.8 accordingly).The results for these technologies follow an identical trend to re-
sults obtained using Li-ion batteries and show curtailment reduction with increase
in storage size and the lowest curtailment at the highest energy and power ratings.
The maximum curtailment that is mitigated by 33% for Flow batteries and 37%
(for LAES) while the total curtailment volume for 1 year analysis is 957 GWh. It
can also be observed that for example at 0.1 GW power rating, the energy rating
is selected on the lower part of the range. Storage with a lower power rating will
be charged and discharged at a lower rate, meaning that during underproduction
periods, if the power rating is not chosen appropriately, the storage might not be
able to respond to sudden drops in generation with the needed power. Vice versa -
during periods of surplus wind production, lower power rating storage will store a
lower volume of energy, therefore, a lower energy storage rating will be selected.
The curtailment in the second scenario is not completely mitigated, rather only
reduced.
The size of the reduction naturally depends on the storage size - the
maximum curtailment volume that can be reduced using lithium-ion is 26% of the
total curtailment volume (957 GWh). The curtailment volumes using the 1 GW and
2 GWh lithium-ion battery can be seen in Figure 5.4a. During overproduction, the
excess energy is stored in the battery while there is available capacity (until approx.
time step 100h). If at that point, the production does not fall below the maximum
transmission capacity, the remaining energy is curtailed, which is indicated by the
steep increase in curtailment in the second subplot. It can also be seen from 5.4b,
that storage charge level is maintained during longer periods of under production
(around the 3000 and 5000h mark).
34
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:44==
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure 5.4: Lithium-ion battery storage operation over one year
Since the storage size limits are set to represent the sizes of lithium-ion battery, ﬂow
battery and LAES, currently available in the market, in order to store the highest
volume of curtailed energy, the largest available storage sizes will be selected through
the optimization model as the optimal outcome.
5.3
Scenario 3: Economically optimal curtailment
mitigation
The ﬁnal scenario, in addition to technical size limitations for each technology, takes
into account the economical energy storage factors. It analyses the inﬂuence that
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
35
==PAGE:45==
power and energy price as well as curtailment have on the optimal storage size se-
lection.
The ﬁnancial return over the whole lifetime of the battery operation (values for
diﬀerent technologies are indicated in Table 3.2) was performed using 2020 wind
production data. The valuation was done by calculating the diﬀerence between the
spending for curtailed energy prior to and after the energy storage installation (eﬀec-
tively the savings). The cost for selected storage size was subtracted from it. If the
obtained diﬀerence is positive - the battery cost is lower than what would have oth-
erwise been spent on curtailed energy. The savings were calculated for each year of
the energy storage operation and adjusted using the Discounted Cash Flow method
to account for the future value on investment. The calculation method has been
further explained in 3.2 - Scenario 3.
It can be observed in Figure 5.5 (all data points speciﬁed in B.2) that while the same
trend as previously is followed, and in the higher energy and power rating ranges
curtailment volume is lower, contrary to previous scenarios, lithium-ion battery se-
lection is more scattered in terms of energy and power rating combinations. This
can be explained through the diﬀerences between the power and energy prices per
installed capacity. For lithium-ion, it is around 3 times more expensive to install one
unit of power (GW) than it is to install one unit of energy (GWh). Therefore, storage
at the highest power ratings will be accompanied by the largest volume, being able
to eﬀectively utilize it for discharge during sudden drops in energy production. The
results for this scenario are close to that of Scenario 2 and unsurprisingly, roughly
the same curtailment rates are found for power and energy combinations in the
same areas. Similarly as in Scenario 2, the diﬀerence for a given nominal capacity
between one nominal power rating and another are small as looking at power ratings
of 0.3MW and 0.5MW for similar nominal capacity values as an example.
Figure 5.5: Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries
In Figure 5.6, results with slightly higher energy ratings are chosen for ﬂow batteries,
for the same power ratings as for lithium-ion. Flow batteries are slightly more ex-
pensive than lithium-ion batteries, however the ratio between the power and energy
costs, is still very similar (approx. 2.6 times).
36
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.6: Curtailment minimization using Flow batteries
Comparing LAES results from scenario 2 in Figure B.8 to scenario 3 Figure 5.7,
much lower storage power ratings are selected, once the storage price is taken into
consideration. LAES power cost is 6 times larger than the energy cost. Therefore,
when aiming to maximize savings, lower power ratings will be favored, even though
this will impact the response rate of the system during real time operation.
Figure 5.7: Curtailment minimization using LAES system
To understand the curtailment price inﬂuence on the storage size selection and on
ﬁnancial return, four diﬀerent cases were analysed, as described in the chapter intro-
duction. In the optimization model, the largest energy and power ratings described
in Table 3.2 were set as limits. The optimal storage size selection as well as the
objective function results, which represent the savings from the avoided payments
for curtailed energy, are presented in Table 5.3. To calculate savings over the storage
lifetime, 2020 wind production data was used, which was then recalculated to show
the savings over 20 years. Savings over 3 years were obtained using 2020-2022 wind
production data.
From the results it was observed, that curtailment price has to be quite high for it
to be economically beneﬁcial to deploy an energy storage for the sole purpose of cur-
tailment mitigation. The highest curtailment value analysed (SC3.1 - 450 £/MWh)
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
37
==PAGE:47==
proved to result in positive return on investment for all technologies and time peri-
ods analyzed except for when analyzing LAES returns over the 3 year period. SC3.3
- 76 £/MWh and SC3.4 - 66 £/MWh resulted in negative return and energy storage
was not deployed.
As shown in Table 5.3, the highest savings were achieved by using LAES storage
through its use over the whole lifetime operation, when price per curtailed MWh
was 450 £/MWh. It should be noted that the lifetime duration for LAES is assumed
to be 30 years, whereas for lithium-ion and ﬂow batteries is it 20 years. This longer
utilization period is the reason for LAES having the largest returns when taking into
account the lifetime operation. Since LAES has quite high installation costs (espe-
cially the power price), the shorter, 3 year time span at 450 £/MWh will not yield
returns. The savings on avoided curtailment cost over 3 years will not be enough to
cover for the investment on the lowest energy and power rating (0.5 MW and 300
MWh) analyzed. In that case, it would be more beneﬁcial economically to accept
costs for curtailment and therefore, the storage is not deployed.
The savings achieved when using Li-ion and Flow batteries follow the same trend as
those achieved with LAES: highest returns are gained from utilizing the storage over
its lifetime, when curtailment price is at its highest. It can be seen, that for Li-ion
batteries, when curtailment price is 222 £/MWh, a positive return will be gained
from deploying it. However, if Flow batteries would be used in the same setting, the
return on investment would be negative.
Li-ion batteries
Flow batteries
LAES
SC3.1 savings over
lifetime [£]
1536 mln.
1020 mln.
1653.6 mln.
SC3.2 savings over
lifetime [£]
265 mln.
65 mln.
37 mln.
SC3.1 savings over
3 years [£]
507.2 mln.
266.8 mln.
NA
SC3.2 savings over
3 years [£]
18 mln.
NA
NA
Table 5.3: Optimal energy sizes for each scenario using 2020-2022 production data
Figure 5.8 shows lithium-ion battery charge and discharge cycles over 150h and 1 year
of operation. During periods when wind production exceeds the ﬁrm grid connection
capacity, the lower power and energy rating of the battery results in slower charge
rate as seen in Figure 5.8a. Compared to battery operation in previous scenarios
(Figures 5.2a and 5.4a), this results in a more curved charge proﬁle rather than a
step increase. It can be seen that from the beginning of the charge, a certain amount
of energy will be curtailed, as the power rating is not large enough to allow the full
available energy to be stored.
38
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:48==
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure 5.8: Lithium-ion battery storage operation over one year
The analysis for 2020 prices (76 £/MWh and 66 £/MWh), showed a negative pay-
back for both prices and time frames analyzed. Figure 5.9 shows Li-ion battery
charge and discharge cycles over 1 year of operation for when curtailment cost is 76
£/MWh. Comparing these results to Figure 5.8, it can be seen, that battery is not
operational over the one year period and all energy that cannot be injected into the
grid will be curtailed.
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
39
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.9: Li-ion battery operation over 1 year, when curtailment cost is 76 £/MWh
Curtailment prices in 2021 were extreme cases, whereas the 2020 prices are more
indicative of actual curtailment cost year to year. Therefore, installation of an energy
storage system only for the purpose of storing energy during overproduction periods,
makes sense economically only during high curtailment price periods. Other revenue
streams for the battery could be investigated, such as utilizing energy arbitrage
and enabling the storage to be charged from the grid during low price periods and
discharged once electricity price is high.
40
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
Throughout the thesis, the sizing of a co-located OWF and energy storage unit with
the goal of energy curtailment mitigation was investigated. To address this, an op-
timization model was created. A speciﬁc study case of 3GW nominal capacity wind
farm with a ﬁrm grid connection agreement was analysed. The research questions
indicated in the introduction are revisited and answered below based on the analysis
done and results obtained.
Which energy storage systems are the most suited for the oﬀshore wind farm appli-
cations?
The selection of Li-ion battery, ﬂow battery and LAES that were later used in de-
termining the optimal energy size, was primarily based on their scalability, high
eﬃciency, response time and location independence when it comes to their instal-
lation. The systems are fairly easily scalable making them suitable for application
with large oﬀshore wind farms. The high round trip eﬃciencies (85% in the case
of lithium-ion) results in low losses during the conversion process, meaning energy
is better retained and a higher volume can be provided during the discharge pro-
cess. For co-location with an oﬀshore wind farm, energy storage should be fairly
compact in size since they have to be located close to oﬀshore. Li-ion batteries pro-
vide the best use case, while ﬂow battery advantage is their modularity. LAES are
larger systems, however are much more compact than their long-duration storage
counterparts.
What are the regulatory and technical grid constraints that limit wind energy produc-
tion, causing wind energy curtailment?
The primary causes for energy curtailment are limitations in transmission capacity
and network congestions. The problem is especially prevalent in areas with high
wind production potential, but limited grid infrastructure. To maintain system sta-
bility, some production in high generation areas will have to be curtailed and the
remuneration for the production lost will depend on the type of grid connection
agreement the wind farm has in place. Firm grid connection agreements contract
the maximum power that can be injected into the grid at all times and if it cannot
- power plants are remunerated for the curtailment action. During high production,
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
41
==PAGE:51==
low demand periods, system operator may choose to curtail wind power and keep
conventional generator plants operating within their operational limits. As wind
power plants do not inherently provide system inertia, maintaining rotational mass
in the system is crucial to maintain grid stability. Curtailment action can also be
performed on voluntary basis, planning production ahead in time while taking into
consideration low price periods in the electricity market.
What is the optimal size of an energy storage system to minimize wind energy cur-
tailment of an oﬀshore wind farm?
To determine the optimal size of an energy storage system, co-located with an oﬀ-
shore wind farm, with the aim of full energy curtailment mitigation, an optimization
model was developed. Three storage sizing scenarios were analyzed, each considering
three energy storage technologies. The sizing outcomes for the three scenarios are
as follows:
• The ﬁrst scenario, where the objective was to store the largest volume of curtail-
ment without considering technical or economical energy storage limitations,
were 1.87 GW/65.71 GWh for Li-ion batteries, 1.87 GW/55.26 GWh for Flow
batteries and 1.39 GW/38.95 GWh for LAES when analyzing one year wind
production data set. The diﬀerence of storage size between technologies is
the result of the diﬀerence in eﬃciencies, meaning more energy will be lost in
conversion processes in lower eﬃciency technologies (LAES).
• Second scenario included typical power and energy ranges that are currently
in the market for the three storage technologies analyzed. The results showed
that since curtailment volume is much larger than any of the technology ranges,
the maximum available energy and power ratings will be chosen.
• Third scenario analyzed the energy storage and curtailment price inﬂuence on
the optimal energy storage size selection. Within the three storage technolo-
gies, power price proved to have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the nominal power
rating selected, since it is much more expensive to install one unit of power
(MW) than it is to install one unit of energy (MWh) (especially for LAES).
The resulting storage sizes chosen were larger in energy capacity rather than
in power capacity rating: for one year data set, 0.54 GW/ 2 GWh Li-ion
battery, 0.5 GW/ 2 GWh for Flow batteries and 0.2 GW/ 2 GWh for LAES
were chosen. These results were obtained assuming the curtailment price to be
450£/MWh. Three additional curtailment price scenarios were analyzed. It
showed that the 66£/MWh, 76£/MWh scenarios resulted in negative returns
on investment looking at both the payback over the lifetime of the energy stor-
age operation and over three year time span. 222£/MWh scenario resulted
in positive returns except for the three year payback for Flow and LAES, and
the 450£/MWh scenario for three years also did not yield positive returns for
LAES.
When dealing with energy curtailment, what type of control strategy would present
the best approach in controlling the storage system?
During the optimization model formulation, constraints relating to the storage charge
42
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:52==
and discharge operation were implemented. The charging is initiated as soon as wind
production exceeds the transmission capacity and continues until there is available
capacity in the energy storage. If the storage is fully charged and there is additional
production that cannot be injected into the grid, this energy is curtailed. The dis-
charge process begins once there is available connection capacity and prevents large
drops in energy transferred into the grid when there is a sudden reduction in wind
production. It was observed, that by utilizing energy storage technologies, when
taking into technical and economical considerations, curtailment can be mitigated
by 27% when deploying Li-ion batteries, 25% when using Flow batteries and by 22%
when using LAES.
Future research Some aspects of storage sizing for curtailment mitigation were
outside this thesis scope and were not not covered. Some additional research areas
for analysis are presented below:
• Current analysis primarily focused on determining the storage size and only
focused on savings that come from avoided payments for curtailed energy. In-
cluding revenue streams that come from wind farm production and energy
discharged from the storage would give more realistic results. It is likely, that
with this addition the returns would prove to be positive at a lower curtailment
price than what was found in current analysis making it a better business case.
• Thesis scope focused on three energy storage technologies for which the optimal
sizes were determined.
However, this can be expanded by analyzing other
storage technologies such as hydrogen based storage systems and lead acid
batteries.
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
43
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Renewables 2023. Tech. rep. IEA, 2024. url: https://iea.blob.core.windows.
net/assets/96d66a8b-d502-476b-ba94-54ﬀda84cf72/Renewables_2023.pdf.
[2]
Thierry Badouard et al. Final Report Cost of Energy (LCOE): Energy costs,
taxes and the impact of government interventions on investments. Tech. rep.
European Commission, 2020. url: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/system/ﬁles/
2020-10/ﬁnal_report_levelised_costs_0.pdf.
[3]
Net Zero Government Initiative. url: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/media/6569cb331104cf000dfa7352/net-zero-government-emissions-roadmap.
pdf.
[4]
CO2 emissions per capita in United Kingdom. url: https://www.iea.org/
countries/united-kingdom/emissions.
[5]
Chris Matson and James Knighton. Renewable curtailment and the role of long
duration storage. Tech. rep. Drax, May 2022. url: https://www.drax.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/Drax-LCP-Renewable-curtailment-report-1.pdf.
[6]
International Energy Agency. Renewable Energy Market Update. 2023, p. 87.
doi: https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1787/89017c62- en. url: https:
//www.oecd-ilibrary.org/content/publication/89017c62-en.
[7]
Constraint Payments to Wind Power in 2020 and 2021. url: https://www.ref.
org.uk/ref-blog/371-constraint-payments-to-wind-power-in-2020-and-2021.
[8]
Henrik Klinge Jacobsen and Sascha Thorsten Schröder. “Curtailment of re-
newable generation: Economic optimality and incentives”. In: Energy Policy
49 (2012), pp. 663–675. issn: 0301-4215. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2012.07.004. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S030142151200585X.
[9]
Guy Block et al. Study on technical and legal deﬁnitions of congestions in
electricity networks. Tech. rep. Engie Impact and Janson, 2023. url: https:
//www.acer.europa.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/Publications/Study_
electricity_networks_congestions_deﬁnitions.pdf.
[10]
Glossary of terms. url: https://www.nationalgrideso.com/industry-information/
connections/help-and-support/glossary-terms.
[11]
Pavlos S. Georgilakis. “Technical challenges associated with the integration
of wind power into power systems”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 12.3 (2008), pp. 852–863. issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rser.2006.10.007. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1364032106001250.
44
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:54==
[12]
CEER Paper on Alternative Connection Agreements. Tech. rep. CEER, 2023.
url: https://www.ceer.eu/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/ACA_2023.pdf.
[13]
Lori Bird et al. “Wind and solar energy curtailment: A review of international
experience”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 65 (2016), pp. 577–
586. issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.06.082. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032116303161.
[14]
Jan Martin Zepter et al. “Experimental assessment of active power control of
distributed generation units”. In: Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assess-
ments 60 (2023), p. 103500. issn: 2213-1388. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.seta.2023.103500. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2213138823004939.
[15]
GOV.uk. url: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/nts09-
vehicle-mileage-and-occupancy.
[16]
Francisco Daz-González et al. “A review of energy storage technologies for
wind power applications”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 16.4
(2012), pp. 2154–2171. issn: 1364-0321. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
rser.2012.01.029. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1364032112000305.
[17]
DNV. Energy Storage for Constraint Management. 2022.
[18]
Ayah Marwan Rabi, Jovana Radulovic, and James M. Buick. “Comprehensive
Review of Liquid Air Energy Storage (LAES) Technologies”. In: Energies 16.17
(2023). issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en16176216. url: https://www.mdpi.
com/1996-1073/16/17/6216.
[19]
Mostafa Rezaeimozafar et al. “A review of behind-the-meter energy storage
systems in smart grids”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 164
(2022), p. 112573. issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.
112573. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032122004695.
[20]
Hisham Alharbi and Kankar Bhattacharya. “Optimal Sizing of Battery Energy
Storage Systems for Microgrids”. In: 2014 IEEE Electrical Power and Energy
Conference. 2014, pp. 275–280. doi: 10.1109/EPEC.2014.44.
[21]
Liudong Zhang et al. “Big-M based MILP method for SCUC considering al-
lowable wind power output interval and its adjustable conservativeness”. In:
Global Energy Interconnection 4.2 (2021), pp. 193–203. issn: 2096-5117. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloei.2021.05.001. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2096511721000396.
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
45
==PAGE:55==
46
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:56==
Appendix A
Nomenclature
Table A.1: Nomenclature of Parameters
Parameter
Description
P wcap
Nominal capacity of the wind power plant [GW]
P grid
Maximum transmission capacity [GW]
P wav
t
Available wind power production at time t [GW]
P w
t
Wind power production injected into the grid at time t [GW]
P curtail
t
Wind power curtailment at time t [GW]
pw
tpu
Normalized production values in per unit
EESS
max
Maximum capacity of the energy storage system (ESS) [GWh]
EESS
min
Minimum capacity of the energy storage system (ESS) [GWh]
P ESS
max
Maximum power of the energy storage system (ESS) [GW]
P ESS
min
Minimum power of the energy storage system (ESS) [GW]
P dch
t
Energy storage system (ESS) discharge power at time t [GW]
P ch
t
Energy storage system (ESS) charge power at time t [GW]
P ESS
size
Optimal power rating of the energy storage system (ESS) [GW]
EESS
size
Optimal energy rating of the energy storage system (ESS) [GWh]
PCAPEX
Capital expenditure of nominal power [£/kW]
ECAPEX
Capital expenditure of nominal capacity [£/kWh]
EcurtailwithESS
Remaining energy curtailed after energy storage installation [GWh]
PcurtailwithESS
Curtailment at time t in energy storage scenarios [GW]
Ecurtailtotal
Total curtailment from base scenario [GWh]
Continued on next page
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
47
==PAGE:57==
Table A.1 – Continued from previous page
Parameter
Description
Pcurtailtotal
Curtailment at time t in base scenario [GW]
SOCt
Energy storage state of charge (SOC) at time t [GWh]
SOCmax
Maximum state of charge (SOC) of the energy storage system (ESS)
[GWh]
SOCmin
Minimum state of charge (SOC) of the energy storage system [GWh]
SOCinit
Initial state of charge (SOC) of the energy storage system [GWh]
SOCtmax
Final state of charge (SOC) of the energy storage system [GWh]
E
P
Discharge duration of the energy storage system (ESS) [h]
η
Charge/discharge eﬃciency of the energy storage system (ESS)
∆t
Time step on half hour basis [0.5h]
M
Big M parameter
BinaryCHDIS Binary variable indicating charge (if 0) and discharge (1)
zt
Discharge auxiliary variable
γt
Charge auxiliary variable
r
Discount rate [%]
CPCurtail
Cost of curtailment [£/MWh]
Table A.1: Parameters and variables used in the optimization model
48
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:58==
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
49
==PAGE:59==
Appendix B
Appendix
(a) 2021
(b) 2022
Figure B.1: Curtailment distribution in 2021 and 2022
(a) 2021
(b) 2022
Figure B.2: Curtailment duration distribution in 2021 and 2022
Results for SC1
50
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:60==
Figure B.3: Curtailment minimization using Flow batteries
Figure B.4: Curtailment minimization using LAES batteries
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure B.5: Flow battery storage operation over one year
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
51
==PAGE:61==
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure B.6: LAES battery storage operation over one year
Results for SC2
Figure B.7: Curtailment minimization using Flow batteries
Figure B.8: Curtailment minimization using LAES batteries
52
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:62==
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure B.9: Flow battery storage operation over one year
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure B.10: LAES battery storage operation over one year
Table B.1: Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries in Scenario 1 (1 year)
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
Li
20
1.2
24
1.20
24.0
32.64
Li
20
1.3
26
1.30
26.0
30.75
Li
20
1.4
28
1.40
28.0
28.89
Li
20
1.5
30
1.50
30.0
27.32
Li
20
1.6
32
1.60
32.0
52.11
Li
20
1.7
34
1.70
34.0
24.56
Li
20
1.8
36
1.80
36.0
23.28
Li
20
1.9
38
1.87
38.0
34.48
Li
25
1.2
30
1.20
30.0
27.15
Li
25
1.3
32.5
1.30
32.5
25.52
Li
25
1.4
35
1.40
35.0
23.87
Li
25
1.5
37.5
1.50
37.5
22.42
Li
25
1.6
40
1.60
40.0
21.17
Li
25
1.7
42.5
1.70
42.5
20.10
Continued on next page
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
53
==PAGE:63==
Table B.1 continued
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
Li
25
1.8
45
1.80
45.0
19.03
Li
25
1.9
47.5
1.87
47.5
28.38
Li
30
1.2
36
1.20
36.0
23.15
Li
30
1.3
39
1.30
39.0
21.58
Li
30
1.4
42
1.40
42.0
20.21
Li
30
1.5
45
1.50
45.0
19.01
Li
30
1.6
48
1.60
48.0
18.02
Li
30
1.7
51
1.70
51.0
17.09
Li
30
1.8
54
1.80
54.0
16.20
Li
30
1.9
57
1.87
57.0
24.18
Li
35
1.2
42
1.20
42.0
20.10
Li
35
1.3
45.5
1.30
45.5
18.80
Li
35
1.4
49
1.40
49.0
17.61
Li
35
1.5
52.5
1.50
52.5
16.59
Li
35
1.6
56
1.60
56.0
15.69
Li
35
1.7
59.5
1.70
59.5
14.85
Li
35
1.8
63
1.80
63.0
14.04
Li
35
1.9
66.5
1.87
65.7
21.12
Flow
20
1.2
24
1.20
24.0
40.74
Flow
20
1.3
26
1.30
26.0
29.13
Flow
20
1.4
28
1.40
28.0
36.65
Flow
20
1.5
30
1.50
30.0
37.27
Flow
20
1.6
32
1.60
32.0
33.66
Flow
20
1.7
34
1.70
34.0
34.95
Flow
20
1.8
36
1.80
36.0
31.34
Flow
20
1.9
38
1.87
38.0
31.38
Flow
25
1.2
30
1.20
30.0
32.66
Flow
25
1.3
32.5
1.30
32.5
32.75
Flow
25
1.4
35
1.40
35.0
30.68
Flow
25
1.5
37.5
1.50
37.5
27.72
Flow
25
1.6
40
1.60
40.0
20.04
Flow
25
1.7
42.5
1.70
42.5
28.18
Flow
25
1.8
45
1.80
45.0
18.08
Flow
25
1.9
47.5
1.87
47.5
26.53
Flow
30
1.2
36
1.20
36.0
28.76
Flow
30
1.3
39
1.30
39.0
20.31
Flow
30
1.4
42
1.40
42.0
24.43
Flow
30
1.5
45
1.50
45.0
18.01
Flow
30
1.6
48
1.60
48.0
17.04
Flow
30
1.7
51
1.70
51.0
23.49
Flow
30
1.8
54
1.80
54.0
15.31
Flow
30
1.9
57
1.87
55.3
23.61
Flow
35
1.2
42
1.20
42.0
24.33
Continued on next page
54
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:64==
Table B.1 continued
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
Flow
35
1.3
45.5
1.30
45.5
17.83
Flow
35
1.4
49
1.40
49.0
20.85
Flow
35
1.5
52.5
1.50
52.5
15.69
Flow
35
1.6
56
1.60
55.9
14.81
Flow
35
1.7
59.5
1.70
55.5
22.10
Flow
35
1.8
63
1.80
55.3
14.99
Flow
35
1.9
66.5
1.87
55.3
22.92
Flow
40
1.2
48
1.20
48.0
21.36
Flow
40
1.3
52
1.30
52.0
15.80
Flow
40
1.4
56
1.40
56.0
18.91
Flow
40
1.5
60
1.50
56.6
14.63
Flow
40
1.6
64
1.60
55.9
14.81
Flow
40
1.7
68
1.70
55.5
22.22
Flow
40
1.8
72
1.80
55.3
14.99
Flow
40
1.9
76
1.87
55.3
22.40
Flow
45
1.2
54
1.20
54.0
19.20
Flow
45
1.3
58.5
1.30
58.5
14.18
Flow
45
1.4
63
1.40
57.4
18.07
Flow
45
1.5
67.5
1.50
56.6
14.63
Flow
45
1.6
72
1.60
55.9
14.81
Flow
45
1.7
76.5
1.70
55.5
22.47
Flow
45
1.8
81
1.80
55.3
14.99
Flow
45
1.9
85.5
1.87
55.3
22.49
Flow
50
1.2
60
1.20
60.0
17.52
Flow
50
1.3
65
1.30
58.5
14.17
Flow
50
1.4
70
1.40
57.4
18.51
Flow
50
1.5
75
1.50
56.6
14.63
Flow
50
1.6
80
1.60
55.9
14.81
Flow
50
1.7
85
1.70
55.5
22.61
Flow
50
1.8
90
1.80
55.3
14.99
Flow
50
1.9
95
1.87
55.3
22.37
LAES
10
1.2
12
1.00
12.0
61.84
LAES
10
1.3
13
1.25
13.0
62.58
LAES
10
1.4
14
1.40
14.0
58.75
LAES
10
1.5
15
1.50
15.0
54.30
LAES
10
1.6
16
1.51
16.0
62.78
LAES
10
1.7
17
1.51
17.0
61.04
LAES
10
1.8
18
1.51
18.0
54.55
LAES
10
1.9
19
1.51
19.0
50.37
LAES
15
1.2
18
1.20
18.0
46.60
LAES
15
1.3
19.5
1.30
19.5
44.22
LAES
15
1.4
21
1.40
21.0
41.48
LAES
15
1.5
22.5
1.50
22.5
41.73
Continued on next page
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
55
==PAGE:65==
Table B.1 continued
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
LAES
15
1.6
24
1.51
24.0
47.51
LAES
15
1.7
25.5
1.51
25.5
45.83
LAES
15
1.8
27
1.51
27.0
41.56
LAES
15
1.9
28.5
1.51
28.5
38.47
LAES
20
1.2
24
1.20
24.0
39.03
LAES
20
1.3
26
1.30
26.0
36.27
LAES
20
1.4
28
1.40
28.0
33.46
LAES
20
1.5
30
1.50
30.0
35.04
LAES
20
1.6
32
1.51
32.0
37.59
LAES
20
1.7
34
1.51
34.0
36.84
LAES
20
1.8
36
1.51
36.0
35.03
LAES
20
1.9
38
1.51
38.0
31.65
LAES
25
1.2
30
1.20
30.0
31.81
LAES
25
1.3
32.5
1.30
32.5
31.44
LAES
25
1.4
35
1.40
35.0
29.18
LAES
25
1.5
37.5
1.50
37.5
29.15
LAES
25
1.6
40
1.39
39.9
33.10
LAES
25
1.7
42.5
1.39
39.9
32.14
LAES
25
1.8
45
1.39
39.9
29.31
LAES
25
1.9
47.5
1.39
39.9
27.20
LAES
30
1.2
36
1.20
36.0
27.14
LAES
30
1.3
39
1.30
39.0
26.70
LAES
30
1.4
42
1.39
39.9
29.70
LAES
30
1.5
45
1.39
39.9
28.73
LAES
30
1.6
48
1.39
39.9
27.68
LAES
30
1.7
51
1.39
39.9
27.93
LAES
30
1.8
54
1.39
39.9
26.79
LAES
30
1.9
57
1.39
39.9
26.03
LAES
35
1.2
42
1.20
40.4
25.81
LAES
35
1.3
45.5
1.30
40.1
24.53
LAES
35
1.4
49
1.39
39.9
26.63
LAES
35
1.5
52.5
1.39
39.9
25.58
LAES
35
1.6
56
1.39
39.9
26.94
LAES
35
1.7
59.5
1.39
39.9
26.85
LAES
35
1.8
63
1.39
39.9
25.81
LAES
35
1.9
66.5
1.39
39.9
25.99
LAES
40
1.2
48
1.20
40.4
23.47
LAES
40
1.3
52
1.30
40.1
24.62
LAES
40
1.4
56
1.39
39.9
25.92
LAES
40
1.5
60
1.39
39.9
25.55
LAES
40
1.6
64
1.39
39.9
26.46
LAES
40
1.7
68
1.39
39.9
26.59
LAES
40
1.8
72
1.39
39.9
25.33
Continued on next page
56
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:66==
Table B.1 continued
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
LAES
40
1.9
76
1.39
39.9
25.65
Table B.2: Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries in Scenario 3 (1 year)
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
Li-ion
1
1.10
1.10
0.44
1.10
134.45
Li-ion
1
0.90
0.90
0.40
0.90
140.45
Li-ion
1
0.70
0.70
0.36
0.70
179.48
Li-ion
1
0.50
0.50
0.29
0.50
188.01
Li-ion
1
0.30
0.30
0.22
0.30
174.28
Li-ion
1
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
204.11
Li-ion
1
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
241.43
Li-ion
1
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
251.33
Li-ion
2
0.90
1.80
0.50
1.80
140.71
Li-ion
2
0.70
1.40
0.49
1.40
141.56
Li-ion
2
0.50
1.00
0.42
1.00
154.95
Li-ion
2
0.30
0.60
0.30
0.60
272.51
Li-ion
2
0.10
0.20
0.10
0.20
176.59
Li-ion
2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
201.48
Li-ion
2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
214.24
Li-ion
2
1.00
2.00
0.52
2.00
126.13
Li-ion
3
0.50
1.50
0.49
1.50
149.72
Li-ion
3
0.30
0.90
0.30
0.90
216.64
Li-ion
3
0.10
0.30
0.10
0.30
158.19
Li-ion
3
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
177.67
Li-ion
3
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
177.54
Li-ion
4
0.50
2.00
0.50
2.00
130.99
Flow
4
0.50
2.00
0.50
2.00
125.50
Flow
4
0.40
1.60
0.40
1.60
121.18
Flow
4
0.30
1.20
0.30
1.20
188.42
Flow
4
0.20
0.80
0.20
0.80
135.38
Flow
4
0.10
0.40
0.10
0.40
145.16
Flow
4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
166.87
Flow
5
0.40
2.00
0.40
2.00
114.51
Flow
5
0.30
1.50
0.30
1.50
120.71
Flow
5
0.20
1.00
0.20
1.00
127.53
Flow
5
0.10
0.50
0.10
0.50
136.09
Flow
5
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
154.83
Flow
6
0.30
1.80
0.30
1.80
114.76
Flow
6
0.20
1.20
0.20
1.20
121.23
Continued on next page
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
57
==PAGE:67==
Table B.2 continued
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
Flow
6
0.10
0.60
0.10
0.60
128.70
Flow
6
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
139.27
Flow
7
0.20
1.40
0.20
1.40
115.59
Flow
7
0.10
0.70
0.10
0.70
122.50
Flow
7
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
132.05
Flow
8
0.20
1.60
0.20
1.60
110.34
Flow
8
0.10
0.80
0.10
0.80
117.02
Flow
8
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
125.73
Flow
9
0.20
1.80
0.20
1.80
151.57
Flow
9
0.10
0.90
0.10
0.90
160.03
Flow
9
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
120.05
Flow
10
0.20
2.00
0.20
2.00
101.56
LAES
6
0.05
0.30
0.05
0.30
131.32
LAES
6
0.10
0.60
0.10
0.60
139.91
LAES
6
0.20
1.20
0.16
1.20
123.75
LAES
6
0.30
1.80
0.23
1.80
107.77
LAES
6
0.40
2.40
0.28
2.40
108.60
LAES
6
0.50
3.00
0.33
3.00
94.01
LAES
8
0.05
0.40
0.05
0.40
129.06
LAES
8
0.10
0.80
0.10
0.80
115.73
LAES
8
0.20
1.60
0.20
1.60
108.80
LAES
8
0.30
2.40
0.28
2.40
99.90
LAES
8
0.40
3.20
0.33
3.20
91.44
LAES
8
0.50
4.00
0.36
4.00
89.32
LAES
10
0.05
0.50
0.05
0.50
109.01
LAES
10
0.10
1.00
0.10
1.00
106.01
LAES
10
0.20
2.00
0.20
2.00
98.81
LAES
10
0.30
3.00
0.30
3.00
91.87
LAES
10
0.40
4.00
0.36
4.00
90.12
LAES
10
0.50
5.00
0.40
5.00
83.10
LAES
12
0.05
0.60
0.05
0.60
100.22
LAES
12
0.10
1.20
0.10
1.20
97.44
LAES
12
0.20
2.40
0.20
2.40
95.81
LAES
12
0.30
3.60
0.30
3.60
84.31
LAES
12
0.40
4.80
0.39
4.80
77.66
LAES
12
0.50
6.00
0.41
5.69
76.80
LAES
14
0.05
0.70
0.05
0.70
92.66
LAES
14
0.10
1.40
0.10
1.40
90.08
LAES
14
0.20
2.80
0.20
2.80
87.29
LAES
14
0.30
4.20
0.30
4.20
77.60
LAES
14
0.40
5.60
0.40
5.60
71.41
LAES
14
0.50
7.00
0.41
5.69
78.04
LAES
16
0.05
0.80
0.05
0.80
86.07
Continued on next page
58
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:68==
Table B.2 continued
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
LAES
16
0.10
1.60
0.10
1.60
86.61
LAES
16
0.20
3.20
0.20
3.20
77.31
LAES
16
0.30
4.80
0.30
4.74
72.24
LAES
16
0.40
6.40
0.40
5.69
70.69
LAES
16
0.50
8.00
0.41
5.69
78.28
LAES
18
0.05
0.90
0.05
0.90
80.45
LAES
18
0.10
1.80
0.10
1.80
78.06
LAES
18
0.20
3.60
0.20
3.40
77.94
LAES
18
0.30
5.40
0.30
4.72
77.34
LAES
18
0.40
7.20
0.40
5.66
104.23
LAES
18
0.50
9.00
0.41
5.69
77.56
LAES
20
0.05
1.00
0.05
1.00
100.08
LAES
20
0.10
2.00
0.10
2.00
96.72
LAES
20
0.20
4.00
0.20
3.40
78.64
LAES
20
0.30
6.00
0.30
4.69
77.07
LAES
20
0.40
8.00
0.40
5.69
102.22
LAES
20
0.50
10.00
0.41
5.69
77.39
LAES
22
0.05
1.10
0.05
1.04
73.78
LAES
22
0.10
2.20
0.10
2.03
75.51
Table B.3: Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries in Scenario 3 (3 year)
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
Li
1
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
701.94
Li
1
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
657.95
Li
1
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
578.88
Li
1
0.30
0.30
0.29
0.30
563.81
Li
1
0.50
0.50
0.37
0.50
535.71
Li
1
0.70
0.70
0.45
0.70
504.44
Li
1
0.90
0.90
0.52
0.90
493.75
Li
1
1.10
1.10
0.53
1.10
396.69
Li
2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
580.43
Li
2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
567.94
Li
2
0.10
0.20
0.10
0.20
505.26
Li
2
0.30
0.60
0.30
0.60
987.82
Li
2
0.50
1.00
0.50
1.00
1240.70
Li
2
0.70
1.40
0.65
1.40
427.29
Li
2
0.90
1.80
0.74
1.80
388.51
Li
2
1.10
2.20
0.76
2.20
395.54
Li
3
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
536.16
Continued on next page
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
59
==PAGE:69==
Table B.3 continued
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
Li
3
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
497.38
Li
3
0.10
0.30
0.10
0.30
849.34
Li
3
0.30
0.90
0.30
0.90
435.75
Li
3
0.50
1.50
0.50
1.50
366.69
Li
3
0.70
2.10
0.70
2.10
706.55
Li
3
0.90
2.70
0.79
2.70
356.82
Li
3
1.10
3.30
0.92
3.30
344.53
Li
4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
454.79
Li
4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
454.57
Li
4
0.10
0.40
0.10
0.40
779.00
Li
4
0.30
1.20
0.30
1.20
637.25
Li
4
0.50
2.00
0.50
2.00
718.01
Flow
4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
453.46
Flow
5
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
422.00
Flow
6
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
396.06
Flow
7
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
374.62
Flow
8
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
356.18
Flow
9
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
340.00
Flow
10
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
324.82
Flow
11
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
310.78
Flow
12
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
297.86
Flow
4
0.10
0.40
0.10
0.40
420.31
Flow
5
0.10
0.50
0.10
0.50
416.03
Flow
6
0.10
0.60
0.10
0.60
613.10
Flow
7
0.10
0.70
0.10
0.70
351.69
Flow
4
0.20
0.80
0.20
0.80
395.38
Flow
8
0.10
0.80
0.10
0.80
347.06
Flow
9
0.10
0.90
0.10
0.90
334.92
Flow
10
0.10
1.00
0.10
1.00
446.14
Flow
5
0.20
1.00
0.20
1.00
660.67
Flow
11
0.10
1.10
0.10
1.10
412.54
Flow
4
0.30
1.20
0.30
1.20
397.41
Flow
6
0.20
1.20
0.20
1.20
350.78
Flow
12
0.10
1.20
0.10
1.20
393.31
Flow
7
0.20
1.40
0.20
1.40
536.69
Flow
5
0.30
1.50
0.30
1.50
576.71
Flow
4
0.40
1.60
0.40
1.60
381.89
Flow
8
0.20
1.60
0.20
1.60
317.83
Flow
6
0.30
1.80
0.30
1.80
513.48
Flow
9
0.20
1.80
0.20
1.80
303.99
Flow
5
0.40
2.00
0.40
2.00
599.69
Flow
10
0.20
2.00
0.20
2.00
421.91
LAES
6
0.05
0.30
0.05
0.30
661.20
Continued on next page
60
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:70==
Table B.3 continued
Battery Discharge
Max Power
Max Energy
Power
Energy
Cycle
type
duration
rating limit
rating limit
rating
rating
count
(input) [h] (input) [GW] (input) [GWh] (result) [GW] (result) [GWh]
LAES
8
0.05
0.40
0.05
0.40
346.75
LAES
10
0.05
0.50
0.05
0.50
475.58
LAES
6
0.10
0.60
0.10
0.60
364.90
LAES
12
0.05
0.60
0.05
0.60
291.44
LAES
14
0.05
0.70
0.05
0.70
268.38
LAES
8
0.10
0.80
0.10
0.80
328.92
LAES
16
0.05
0.80
0.05
0.80
240.60
LAES
18
0.05
0.90
0.05
0.90
227.19
LAES
10
0.10
1.00
0.10
1.00
459.76
LAES
20
0.05
1.00
0.05
1.00
210.69
LAES
22
0.05
1.10
0.05
1.10
198.50
LAES
6
0.20
1.20
0.20
1.20
385.07
LAES
12
0.10
1.20
0.10
1.20
401.35
LAES
24
0.05
1.20
0.05
1.20
191.66
LAES
14
0.10
1.40
0.10
1.40
263.40
LAES
8
0.20
1.60
0.20
1.60
522.07
LAES
16
0.10
1.60
0.10
1.60
242.53
LAES
6
0.30
1.80
0.30
1.80
326.60
LAES
18
0.10
1.80
0.10
1.80
305.06
LAES
10
0.20
2.00
0.20
2.00
445.58
LAES
20
0.10
2.00
0.10
2.00
280.68
Scenario 3
Figure B.11: Curtailment minimization using Li-ion batteries for three year wind
production
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
61
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.12: Curtailment minimization using Flow batteries for three year wind
production
Figure B.13: Curtailment minimization using LAES batteries for three year wind
production
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure B.14: Flow battery storage operation over one year
62
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
==PAGE:72==
(a) Time period 50h to 199h
(b) Time period 0h to 8784h
Figure B.15: LAES battery storage operation over one year
Optimal sizing of co-located wind-energy storage farm to reduce wind curtailment
63
==PAGE:73==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
