==PAGE:1==
Clusters in SAE Latents
Characterizing Sparse AutoEncoder latents
for LLM interpretability
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Clusters in SAE Latents
Characterizing Sparse AutoEncoder latents for LLM interpretability
Master Thesis
July 4, 2024
By
Albert Ramus Sidenius Garde
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Albert Ramus Sidenius Garde - s183969
Signature
Date
ii
Clusters in SAE Latents
07/04/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have emerged as a promising approach for extracting in-
terpretable features from large language models (LLMs) in an unsupervised manner. We
provide a comprehensive review of SAE literature in transformer model interpretability,
and introduce the novel application of the Neuron to Graph (N2G) method as a measure
of interpretability. Using N2G in this way, we replicate several key findings. We confirm
that SAE latents are more interpretable than multi-Layer perceptron (MLP) neurons, we
identify clusters of SAE latents based on density and interpretability, revealing an unex-
pected ultra-high density cluster, and we corroborate the phenomenon of highly similar
feature directions within a extreme density, low interpretability cluster. We also find that
N2G may be biased towards simple syntactical features, but remains a useful proxy for
interpretability. This work contributes to ongoing efforts to understand LLMs, aiming to
enhance their safety and alignment with human values.
Clusters in SAE Latents
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Neuron2Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Sparse autoencoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Method
15
3.1
SAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
N2G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Results
19
4.1
N2G Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Density and performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
N2G size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Discussion
23
5.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Conclusion
27
Bibliography
28
Clusters in SAE Latents
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:9==
List of Acronyms
SAE sparse autoencoder
MLP multi-Layer perceptron
LM language model
N2G Neuron to Graph
LLM large language model
Clusters in SAE Latents
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) based on the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.
2023) have shown exceptional performance across a range of tasks, yet how they achieve
such impressive results remains poorly understood. As these models are increasingly de-
ployed in real-world applications, concerns have been raised about the potential for harm
(Statement on AI Risk | CAIS 2024)(Hendrycks et al. 2023). These include the potential for
bias, the potential for misuse by malicious actors, and existential risks from misaligned
models (Ngo et al. 2024). This makes the opacity of these models a significant issue,
since only having a black-box understanding of their behaviour limits our ability to foresee
or guarantee against harmful behaviour in out of distribution scenarios. Additionally, a
greater understanding of these models may allow us to better correct these behaviours
once they are identified. The fields of interpretability and explainability aim to address this
issue by providing insights into the internal workings of these models. Many approaches
have been developed within these fields. Bereska et al. (2024) provides a recent overview
and a useful taxonomy, while Räuker et al. (2023) provides a more thorough survey in-
cluding a list of previous reviews in the same area.
Transformer models contain both attention and multi-Layer perceptron (MLP) layers and
the latter is the focus of this thesis. Previous attempts at interpreting MLP neurons have
focused on understanding the behaviour of individual neurons (Wang et al. 2022), but as
demonstrated in Elhage et al. (2022b), the behaviour of individual neurons often doesn’t
map onto human understandable concepts. Bricken et al. (2023) shows a possible way
forward by suggesting the latents of sparse autoencoders (SAEs) trained on the MLP
layer activations as alternative units of interpretability. In this work, we focus on these
along with the Neuron to Graph (N2G) (Foote et al. 2023) method. This is an interesting
combination, since if SAEs truly do provide more interpretable features and N2G truly does
provide a useful representation of feature behaviour, we would expect this to be reflected
when comparing N2G graphs for individual neurons against those for SAE latents.
In this work we first provide a review of the literature on SAEs as applied to interpretability
of transformer models as well as giving a description of the N2G method. The review
differs from the reviews mentioned above by focussing exclusively on SAEs and includ-
ing the most recent work. To our knowledge there is no other review that does this. This
allows us to go into considerable detail, and since the field is so young, it means we can
cover essentially all relevant work. We then move on to our own experiments, where our
main goal is to explore the clusters found in the SAE latents by Bricken et al. (2023). To
do so we measure the density of both SAE latents and MLP neurons and estimate their
interpretability using the proxy of N2G performance. We also explore how these clusters
relate to the geometry of SAE latents in MLP space, and the size of the N2G graphs. How-
ever, to start, we corroborate the main finding of Bricken et al. (2023) and Cunningham
et al. (2023) that the SAE latents are more interpretable than the MLP neurons, using N2G
performance as a measure of interpretability. Finally, we investigate the hypothesis that
language models exploit the exponentially many nearly orthogonal directions in the MLP
activation space to encode information. We do this by looking at the encoding vectors for
the SAE latents.
Clusters in SAE Latents
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
In this chapter we define the terminology used in this thesis (section 2.1) and present the
prior work that serves as a basis for the thesis (section 2.2). We also provide a more in
depth overview of the literature on SAEs (section 2.3).
2.1
Terminology
Before we can dive into the specifics of the methods used in this thesis, we need to es-
tablish some basic concepts and terminology. Firstly, throughout this section, we assume
there is some fixed transformer language model (Vaswani et al. 2023) which we want to
interpret. We will refer to this as the language model or abbreviated as the LM.
Next we introduce the unit of interpretability, namely features. In the technical sense, a
feature is any function of the activations of a language model (LM), e.g. a neuron in a MLP
layer is a feature, where the function is simply the value of that neuron. The same holds
for neurons in the residual stream or attention heads. Indeed, neurons are the basic form
of feature and other features are built up from these. Especially interesting are features
built from linear combinations of neurons. In this thesis we will focus on two types of
features: MLP neurons and a specific type of linear combination of neurons, namely the
latents of SAEs (see section 2.3). We will generally refer to features of the first type as
neurons and features of the second type as SAE latents or just latents. A core concept
in the study of SAEs is sparsity, which is a measure of how many of the activations of the
SAE latents are zero. A set of features (e.g. the latents of an SAE) is sparse if only a small
fraction of the activations are non-zero on any given input. The transpose of this term is
density, which describes an individual feature. A feature is dense if it only activates on a
small fraction of the samples in the dataset.
Note that there is some ambiguity in the literature around the term ”feature”. Sometimes
it is meant as we describe here, a function of the LM’s activations, sometimes it is used
specifically for what we call SAE latents (Templeton et al. 2024), and sometimes it is used
in a more abstract way to refer to human-understandable concepts represented in the LM.
This last meaning we refer to as a concept. This ambiguity in the literature is worth being
aware of even if it is mostly clear from context what is meant.
2.2
Neuron2Graph
The main interpretability method we use to investigate SAEs is N2G (Neuron2Graph) as
described in Foote et al. 2023. It attempts to build a graph model of the behaviours of a
feature by finding a set of patterns which activate the feature. Each pattern consists of a
string of tokens (an n-gram) with the possibility of a special ignore token which signal that
the token at that position does not matter. In the original paper, this is done on the basis
of maximum activating samples, but we use a different method as described in section
3.2.1.
To run this method for a particular feature f, we need a set of highly activating samples
S. For sample s ∈S, we identify a pivot token e, which is the most activating token in
the sample, and perform 3 steps: pruning, saliency detection, and augmentation. This
results in a set of string patterns that all activate f highly. These are then used to build a
graph model of the feature (subsection 2.2.4), which can be used to predict the activation
of the feature on any given input (subsection 2.2.5).
Clusters in SAE Latents
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2.1
Pruning
For a token string s ∈S, and pivot token e, pruning consists of finding the smallest sub-
string of s that ends in e and still sufficiently activates f. What ”sufficiently activates”
means is a parameter of the method, but in the original paper it is defined as causing an
activation at least half of original activation. This removes context that is irrelevant to the
activation of f. We call the pruned string s′
2.2.2
Saliency detection
Here we find the most important tokens in the pruned string s′. This is done by replacing
each token in the pruned string with a padding token and finding the change in activation.
If the change is large, the token is important. How large the change needs to be is another
parameter of the LM. Once this step is done, we have a set B of important tokens in s′.
2.2.3
Augmentation
Given a pruned string s′ and a set of important tokens B in that string, augmentation is
the process of finding nearby strings that activate f similarly to s′. To do this, we replace
each b ∈B with other ”similar” tokens and see whether the resulting string activates
f sufficiently. What counts as sufficient is yet another parameter, while ”similar” tokens
are found using a helper LM (distilbert-base-uncased in the original paper and in our
experiments) that is asked to predict replacements for b given the rest of s′ as context. All
alternative strings that activates f sufficiently are stored.
2.2.4
Graph building
After performing the 3 previous steps on all strings in S, we have a set S′ ⊆T of pruned
and augmented strings that all activate f highly. In order to make predictions we must
build a model from these strings. This is done by creating a trie T by working backwards
through each string. The first nodes after the root of T are the activating tokens in the
strings of S′. The rest of the nodes are the tokens in the strings of S′, so that each path
from the root to a leaf represents a string in S′. At the end of each of these paths through
T, we add an end node storing the activation of f on the represented string. An example
of this can be seen in figure 2.1. The activating tokens are represented by red nodes
while the rest are blue. Note that in this representation, ignore tokens are not shown, and
nodes at the same depth representing the same token are collapsed.
2.2.5
Prediction
To predict the activation of f on the last token of a new string s, we start from the root of
T and the last token of s. We then traverse the trie, going backwards through s following
any node that matches the current token of s, with the special ignore tokens matching any
token. If we reach an end node, we return the activation stored there. If at some point no
node matches the current token of s, we return 0.
For an example, consider figure 2.1. If we let s be the string "The big ten", tokenized as
"The"," big"," ten", then we start from the end and see that the last token is " ten".
This is indeed an activating token, so we move to the next token in s, " big". There is a
preceding node for this token, and since it is an end node, we return the activation stored
there. If we instead consider the string "The last ten", tokenized as "The"," last","
ten", we again have that the last token is an activating token, but since no preceding
node matches the token " last", we return 0.
This gives us a quantative measure of how good a model of the feature the graph is. It
also allows us to create a visual representation of the feature behaviour. To do this, we
create a new graph from T where all ignore nodes are removed, and nodes representing
the same token on the same layer are collapsed. We refer to both this representation and
the original trie T as the feature graph.
6
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:15==
big
east
ten
west
Figure 2.1: N2G Graph of neuron 1817 in the second MLP layer of gpt2-small. Note
that in this representation, ignore tokens are not shown, and nodes at the same depth
representing the same token are collapsed.
2.3
Sparse autoencoders
Sparse coding has been an active area of research for at least 30 years, especially in rela-
tion to biological mammalian neurons responsible for vision (Olshausen et al. 1997)(Lee
et al. 2006). This long-standing research provides a foundation for the use of sparse
autoencoders in the context of mechanistic interpretability. In this section we cover the
literature on this use case of sparse autoencoders, including the theoretical background
(subsection 2.3.1), the basic structure of sparse autoencoders (subsection 2.3.2), sug-
gested improvements (subsection 2.3.3), evaluation methods (subsection 2.3.4), and ap-
plications (subsection 2.3.5). Lastly, we cover a number of criticisms and considerations
that have been raised in the literature (subsection 2.3.6) and some of the alternatives to
sparse autoencoders (subsection 2.3.7).
2.3.1
Theoretical background
When interpreting a language model, there is a question of what the unit of interpretability
should be. What part of the model should we be looking at? Mechanistic interpretability
aims to understand models as granularly as possible, which makes individual neurons
in either the residual stream, MLP layers or attention heads the obvious choice. Indeed,
previous research has aimed to understand the behaviour and effect of individual neurons
(Foote et al. 2023)(Bills et al. 2023). However, there are reasons to believe that individual
neurons are fundamentally difficult to interpret. According to the superposition hypothesis
(Elhage et al. 2022b), individual neurons do not cleanly represent interpretable concepts.
Instead, interpretable concepts are spread over several neurons in order to pack more
concepts into the same set of neuron dimensions. This is possible due to the Johnson-
Lindenstrauss lemma which implies that there are exponentially many nearly-orthogonal
directions in an n-dimenstional space. Therefore, by spreading out concepts across neu-
rons, the model can store many more concepts at the cost of only a little interference.
Vaintrob et al. (2024) present a model for how the model performs computation on this
Clusters in SAE Latents
7
==PAGE:16==
representation of concepts. Since concepts are spread over multiple neurons, this also
means that each neuron represents multiple concepts, that it is polysemantic.
Fortunately, even though concepts are not represented by individual neurons, there is
some evidence for the linear representation hypothesis. This states that concepts are
represented as linear combinations of neurons, i.e. directions in activation space. Park
et al. (2023) formalize the hypothesis and provide both theoretical and empirical evidence
for it. Though Engels et al. (2024) show that not all concepts are represented in this way,
there is empirical evidence to suggest that many are (Nanda 2023a). Given the linear
representation hypothesis, an open problem becomes finding the directions in activation
space that represent interpretable concepts. This can be formalized as finding a transfor-
mation f ∈Rn →Rd which takes an activation vector x ∈Rn and gives an encoding f(x)
whose basis vectors are interpretable features. The most studied solution to this problem,
and the one we shall focus on, is that of sparse autoencoders (SAEs). Later, in 2.3.7 we
will also briefly cover alternative solutions to this problem.
Apart from linearity, one of the main assumptions SAEs make is that concepts are sparse.
This means that only very few concepts are present for each input. Deng et al. (2023)
provide empirical evidence for both this assumption and the linear representation hypoth-
esis.
2.3.2
Architecture
In general, autoencoders encode an activation vector x ∈Rn into a feature vector y ∈Rd,
before reconstructing ˆx ∈Rn. This is only useful if the feature space is somehow re-
stricted. In the case of SAEs in the context of mechanistic interpretability, that restriction
comes from an L1 regularization during training, which is intended to encourage sparsity
and thereby hopefully monosemanticity. The core structure of the encoder is an affine
transformation followed by a ReLU nonlinearity while the decoder is simply a linear trans-
formation (Cunningham et al. 2023). The loss function is the sum of mean squared error
between the input and the output and the L1 regularization mentioned above. Illustration
is available in figure 2.2 and formally this can be written as
y =ReLU (Wex + b)
ˆx =Wdy
(2.1)
L(x) = ||x −ˆx||2
2 + α ||y||1
where We ∈Rd×n, Wd ∈Rn×d and b ∈Rd are the parameters of the model and α ∈R+ is
a hyperparameter controlling the sparsity of the feature representation. There are many
variations to this, including in the seminal work Bricken et al. (2023) where a post-decoder
bias is added that is subtracted before encoding and added after decoding. We go into
detail on some of these variations in 2.3.3. As to why L1 regularization recovers features,
Sharkey et al. (2022) provide empirical evidence while J. Wright et al. (2022) provide
theoretical arguments.
2.3.3
Improvements to sparse autoencoders
Though the performance of SAEs in the original papers (Bricken et al. 2023)(Cunningham
et al. 2023) was impressive, there are many ways in which they can be improved. Taggart
(2024) suggest an alternative nonlinearity to the ReLU, which they call the ProLU and is
designed to overcome a theoretical weakness in using ReLU for SAEs. They show that
this improves the L1/MSE Pareto frontier. An issue that has received much attention
is that of feature suppression. Since the loss function is the sum of the mean squared
error and the L1 regularization, the model is encouraged not only to activate few features,
8
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.2: Borrowed from Cunningham et al. (2023). Figure showing the structure of a
SAE and its place in a language model. The left part of the figure shows how the input of
the SAE is the activations of the language model. The middle part illustrates the structure
of an SAE in the same way as equation 2.1. We is the encoder matrix, Wd is the decoder
matrix, b is the bias vector, x is the activation vector, and ˆx is the reconstructed activation
vector and y is the sparse feature coefficients (latents).
but also to keep the activations smaller than what would cause the best reconstruction.
Ideally, this would be fixed by using a L0 regularization, which is what L1 is a proxy for,
but since L0 has no gradient, this is not possible. Instead, various other approaches have
been suggested (B. Wright et al. 2024). Riggs et al. (2024) suggest taking the square
root of the L1 regularization term, which they show can improve the performance of the
model. This is motivated by the square root penalizing small values more than large
values. Therefore it still has the effect of encouraging sparcity, but should supress active
features less. This however does not address supression of features that are active but
have low activations. Although using an L0 regularization is not possible, Rajamanoharan
et al. (2024) attempt to simulate it. They do this by separating the calculation of which
features are active from that of their value.
All these represent Pareto improvements over the original SAEs according to their own
experiments, but since they are tested with different methods on different models and
datasets, it is hard to compare them directly. However, Rajamanoharan et al. (2024) pro-
vide a theoretical argument for why their method should fix the same issue as the ProLU
activation function along with the other advantages, so there is reason to believe that it is
the best of the three. Also, Riggs et al. (2024) only test their methods on reconstruction
loss and L1, so it is possible that they are overoptimizing for these and perform worse on
other metrics.
Luckily, there is work that attempts to compare these methods directly. Gao et al. (2024)
train SAEs with many of the activations suggested above along with introducing a new
TopK activation function that only keeps the k largest SAE latents and therefore does
not need a sparsity regularization term. Their experiments (see subsection 2.3.4) on
GPT-4 (OpenAI et al. 2024) show that the TopK activation function performs best overall.
This result is somewhat supported by Quaisley (2024) which uses the methods of Huben
(2024) to find that the a leaky TopK activation function performs best.
Clusters in SAE Latents
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3.4
Evaluation
The previous subsection touched on the issue of evaluating the performance of SAEs.
This is a difficult problem, partly because we have yet to find a good definition for inter-
pretability, however there are some metrics that are commonly used. The choice between
them represents a tradeoff between expense and accuracy.
At the most expensive end, we have human evaluation. This is the most accurate, since
we are ultimately interested in human interpretability, but it is also the most expensive
since a human must be paid to form interpretations of each individual feature. This also
makes it difficult to scale and to reproduce. One of the most thorough examples of this
can be seen in Bricken et al. (2023).
At the other end of the spectrum, we have the L1 loss used in training. This is practically
free since it is already calculated during training, but it is also a very indirect measure
of interpretability. Since we are evaluating and so do not need gradients, we can also
directly measure L0 loss, which is a direct measure of sparsity. However, though there is
evidence that the features we wish to find will be sparse, that does not mean that sparsity
is sufficient for interpretability. While neither of these is reliable, Bricken et al. (2023) find
that they correlate sufficiently with more powerful measures to be useful as proxies during
iteration.
Somewhere between these two extremes, we have automatic interpretability methods.
The most commonly used of these is that presented by Bills et al. (2023). It consists of
feeding the activations of each feature on a set of samples to a (usually different) lan-
guage model and getting it to interpret the feature. That interpretation is used by the
language model to predict the activation of the feature on new samples, which can then
be compared against the true activations. How well the language model can predict the
activations is then used as a measure of the quality of the interpretation. As a measure
of interpretability, it takes the quality of the LM’s interpretation of the feature as a proxy of
how interpretable the feature is to a human. While being far cheaper than human evalu-
ation, it is still expensive since it generally requires advanced language models for useful
results.
A novel approach to evaluating features is presented by Aleksandar Makelov et al. (2024)
(followup at Alex Makelov et al. (2023)). It suggests methods not only for evaluating the
interpretability of features, but also how well they represent important parts of the model,
irrespective of human interpretability. To do this they attach attributes to samples and
use these to create supervised feature dictionaries. These are then used to benchmark
unsupervised feature dictionaries, like SAEs. It raises an important point that for many
applications, human interpretability of features is not necessarily essential, as long as
we can understand how to steer the model in the direction we want. Huben (2024) uses
evaluation methods along the same lines based on Li et al. (2023). Though these methods
do much to avoid dependence on the specific attributes assigned to the input, they still
rely on good attributes. This may restrict usage to cases where we know what aspects of
the input we are interested in, which would be reintroducing one of the issues SAEs are
meant to solve. Despite this criticism, more work in the direction of finding more objective,
reproduceable and scalable methods for evaluating features (on interpretability and other
metrics) is sorely needed, and this is a step in the right direction.
2.3.5
Applications
While finding interpretable features is interesting in itself, it is not the overall goal of inter-
pretability. Luckily there have been many succesful attempts at using SAEs as a part of
other methods.
10
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:19==
Samuel Marks et al. (2024) presents a fully automatic method for finding circuits (Elhage
et al. 2021) responsible for specific model behaviours. They then manage to edit these to
remove reliance on unintended signals, like gender or race. Sam Marks (2024) describes
how this can fit into a broader framework of scalable oversight.
Templeton et al. (2024) and Gao et al. (2024) explore how SAEs scale to much larger
models than otherwise attempted by training SAEs on respectively Anthropics Claude 3
Sonnet (Anthropic 2024) and GPT4 (OpenAI et al. 2024). Since the weights of neither
models are open to the public, we do not know how much larger they are than previously
studied models, but we do know the size of the SAEs trained on it. While most SAEs
trained in the literature have no more than 100,000 features, the SAEs trained on Claude
3 have between 1 and 34 million features and the largest SAE trained on GPT4 has 16
million latents. This is a significant increase in scale, and the results are promising. As
with smaller SAEs, SAEs at this scale continue to find more and more nuanced features
that are still interpretable. Additionally, the work on Claude 3 show that these features can
be used to steer the model in a desired direction. Since Claude 3 is a multimodal model,
they also test how the features generalize to images and find that they do so well, despite
having been trained only on activations from pure text inputs.
In a similar vein, Fry (2024) train an SAE directly on a vision transformer. They find that
many features are interpretable based on the highest activating samples, but also find
that most features activate very rarely and seemingly rarely (what Bricken et al. (2023) call
the ”ultralow density cluster”). This is more than generally seen for other SAEs, but more
research is required to understand whether this is a general property of vision transformer
SAEs or an artifact of the authors’ specific methodology.
Turning back to language models, Bloom et al. (2024) attempt to understand features of
SAEs based on logit attribution (nostalgebraist 2020) (see Dao et al. (2023) for criticism),
i.e. the direct effect of features on the model’s output. They split features into 4 different
categories based on statistical properties of each feature’s logit attribution and find that
these features within each category have interesting interpretable commonalities. How-
ever, they do not state how many features fit cleanly into each category.
While most of the work on SAEs is done on either MLP neurons or the residual stream,
Kissane et al. (2024b) and Kissane et al. (2024a) show that they can also be used for
understanding attention layers. In Krzyzanowski et al. (2024) the same authors use the
features of SAEs to study every attention head in GPT2-Small. To do this, they find the
10 features that each head most contributes to and interpret the head based on these.
By this method they reproduce previous results on the roles of some heads. They also
answer an open question about the role of some of the heads and confirm with more
rigorous methods that do not involve SAEs. The reliance on the top 10 features for each
head risks running into interpretability illusions (Bolukbasi et al. 2021), but the fact that the
results line up with those from previous work and alternative methods provides evidence
that this is not too severe here.
All these applications suggest that SAEs are indeed useful both for getting a handle on
what is happening inside the models and for controlling behaviour. However, it remains
to be seen whether this works in practice for models of interest.
2.3.6
Considerations
While SAEs are surely a large step forward for interpretability, there are still many issues
that must be resolved before we achieve the goals the field is working towards. Huben
(2024) train SAEs on OthelloGPT (Li et al. 2023) to see whether they recover the lin-
Clusters in SAE Latents
11
==PAGE:20==
ear features found by Nanda (2023a). These linear features each represent whether a
specific cell has the colour of the current player and so represent the board in a human
interpretable way. However, the authors find that the SAEs only recover 9/180 of these
features. While they do find other interpretable features, it highlights an important point
that though SAEs often find interpretable features, they may not find any specific feature.
Casper (2024) argues that while work on SAEs is useful, the results are often overblown.
Especially, say the authors, the work from Anthropic (Bricken et al. 2023)(Templeton et
al. 2024) is often presented in a way so it seems more groundbreaking than it is. The
arguments are partly based on the social media coverage surrounding the papers, but
also on how Anthropic papers often focus on deep dives into a few interpretable features
which can make the work look more impressive and more useful than it is. That does not
mean that the method cannot provide valuable insight, only that one should be wary of
updating too forcefully on possibly cherry-picked examples.
Another issue that is often mentioned is the reliance on unproven proxies. This is men-
tioned in many of the papers, especially those mentioned in subsection 2.3.4, that luckily
are taking steps to resolve this issue.
As mentioned in 2.3.5, we have yet to see a concrete example of SAEs being used to solve
problems in the real world, though given that the field is still young, this is perhaps to be
expected. Unfortunately, this is also connected to the issue that much of the important
work of applying SAEs to real-world problems will be difficult to contribute to outside of
a few large companies. This is both due to the fact that only those companies have the
resources to train SAEs of the scale required, but also because the most important work
will be done on proprietary models, which are not open to the public. This is mostly a
property of the field of modern ML in general, but there may be ways to work around it,
like by working on open source models like those in the Llama family (Touvron 2024) and
by finding ways of vastly reducing the resource requirements for training SAEs.
2.3.7
Alternatives to sparse autoencoders
The overall problem SAEs solve is that of finding directions in the activation space that
are interpretable by humans. SAEs are not the only proposed solution to that problem.
Instead of training a separate model to find interpretable directions in activation space,
Millidge et al. (2022) looks directly at the weight matrix preceding the neurons of interest.
They take the SVD of the matrix and project it using the unembedding matrix to the token
space. Taking the top k closest tokens shows that many singular vectors map to inter-
pretable clusters of tokens. They also show that updating the weight matrices to remove
the singular vector has a larger effect on the logits for those tokens than others. The ad-
vantage of this method is that it requires no training and is computationally far cheaper
than SAEs and has fewer hyperparameters. However, interpretation of the singular val-
ues is based solely on clusters of tokens which likely covers only a small part of interesting
use-cases, though this may be solvable by using singular vectors in other ways than the
authors do. Bushnaq et al. (2024a) builds on theory from Bushnaq et al. (2024b) to find
a new activation basis. The goal is to align the basis with the computationally important
directions in order to provide an alternative but equivalent view of the model that more
clearly represents the internal calculations. When comparing to PCA on modular addition
and CIFAR-10 models, they find that their method does succesfully separate the activa-
tions into features that interact sparsely, but that these results do not transfer to language
models. Both previous works differ from SAEs in that they assume (implicitly in the case
of Millidge et al. (2022)) that the features of interest are not over-complete in activation
space. Given the results from work on SAEs, especially Templeton et al. (2024), this
12
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:21==
seems like an optimistic assumption, but since it is easier to work with and reason about
fewer features, there may still be use cases for this kind of solution.
Instead of transforming existing components of the model, Tamkin et al. (2023) inserts
new components called ”codebooks” into each layer. Each added codebook consists
of a set of ”codes” (linear features). For each input, the cosine similarity between each
code and the input is found, and the output is the sum of the k most similar codes. They
function much like SAEs, but differ in two important ways. Firstly, instead of encouraging
sparsity with regularization, they enforce sparsity by including only some set k codes.
Secondly, instead of being trained to autoencode activations after the model has been
trained, the codebook is inserted into the model from the beginning. The first difference is
interesting, since many of the issues that work presented in 2.3.3 attempts to fix are related
to precisely the L1 loss, so this can be seen as a way of circumventing that entirely. The
second one however can be a large disadvantage. There has been previous work (Elhage
et al. 2022a) to change the architecture of language modles to make them inherently more
interpretable, but this has been largely abandoned mostly due to infeasibility (Bricken et
al. 2023). It might therefore be of interest to investigate whether codebooks can be used
on pre-trained models in the same way SAEs are.
Clusters in SAE Latents
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:23==
3
Method
In this chapter we describe the methods used in this work. We first describe what SAEs
we use. Then we describe which text dataset we use, and how we obtain the samples
needed for N2G from that dataset. Afterwards we go into detail about the implementation
of the N2G method, including the code changes needed from the original implementation
as well as how we evaluate the resulting N2G models. Finally we describe the statistical
methods used to analyse the data gained from the features and from evaluating the N2G
models. Most code used in this work is available at 1 while our modifications to the N2G
code can be found at 2.
3.1
SAE
Since SAEs are finnicky to train, we will be using a pre-trained SAE, namely that provided
by Nanda (2024b). Though the past months have seen the development of several open
source SAE libraries (Bloom 2024)(Cooney 2024), we started this work before then and
do not use any of them. Attempts were made to extend the experiments to SAEs on
gpt2-small, specifically those provided by Wu (2024), but they proved unsuccesful due
to memory constraints making the process too time consuming.
3.2
Dataset
Our experiments require data in the form of a number of samples for each feature. The
text dataset we use is the same as was originally used to train both the LM and the SAE,
namely Nanda (2024a). The dataset contains samples of varying lengths, but we need
fixed lengths samples for both more convenient and more efficient processing. We solve
this by creating overlapping samples of fixed length within each dataset sample, padding
with the padding token when necessary. The overlap is to ensure that all tokens are
included with some preceding context.
3.2.1
Sampling
For N2G to run on a feature, it needs a set of samples that activate the feature. Since
the running time scales linearly in the number of samples, we would like to keep this
number as low as possible. At the same time, what samples N2G is run on has a large
impact on the results. In the original N2G paper (Foote et al. 2023), maximum activating
samples were used. However, we found that this leads to many of the samples being
very similar which pollutes the test set. Because of this and arguments that maximum
activating samples can be misleading (Bolukbasi et al. 2021), we instead use a weighted
random sampling approach. Like with maximum activating samples we assume that the
samples that activate the feature most highly are the most important for understanding
the feature, but we do not assume that they are the only important samples. Inspired by
softmax, we assign each sample a weight equal to
w = eαa
where a is the maximum activation of the feature on that sample and α is a hyperparameter
controlling how much to prioritize the most activating samples. A key is then calculated
1https://github.com/albertsgarde/thesis
2https://github.com/albertsgarde/Neuron2Graph
Clusters in SAE Latents
15
==PAGE:24==
for each sample given by
k = ξ
1
w −[a < c]
where ξ ∼Uniform(0, 1) is a random number and [a < c] is 1 when the activation is
below a firing threshold and 0 otherwise. Since the first term is always between 0 and 1,
the second term ensures that samples with activations above the threshold are always
prioritized. Sampling is then done by streaming through a part of the dataset, calculating
the key for each sample, and keeping the n samples with the highest keys. The second
term ([a < c]) was included after noticing that some samples with all zero activations were
included, which is a waste since they do not contribute to either training or evaluation.
The implementation used for these experiments is available 3 in the repo. For the results
below, we used α = 1, c = 0.5, and n = 32.
3.3
N2G
Our code for training and evaluating N2G models is heavily based on the original imple-
mentation (Foote 2024). However the original was a single script with no documentation
and since we needed to work in depth with the code we have done considerable refactor-
ing work to improve code quality. In our fork, the code has a more modular structure, all
functions are typed, all constants are configurable from outside the code, and we follow
the standards enforced by Ruff (Marsh 2024). During this work we found many redundant
calculations, the removal of which has likely sped up the code though we have not done
any formal benchmarking. We also found that the original representation of the N2Gs
took up so much memory that our computers often struggled to load all at once and they
took up a lot of space on disk. While the disk usage could be solved by compressing
the files (N2G graphs compress very well), this would not solve the memory usage. Our
solution was to create a Rust implementation of the N2Gs. While the memory impact is
non-trivial to measure, the compressed disk size is not and it fell by a factor of 10. This
implementation does not support training, but can be used to evaluate N2Gs and produce
the visual graph representations. The algorithm thus works by first training the N2Gs using
the Python implementation, before converting them to the Rust implmentation for storage.
3.3.1
Evaluation
Given a feature and a N2G model trained on that feature’s training set, we evaluate the
model on the test set. This is done by getting it to predict for each token in each sample
of the test set whether the feature will fire on that token, where firing is defined as the
activation being above a threshold. These predictions can then be compared to the actual
activations of the feature to calculate recall, precision, and F1-score.
3.4
Analysis
After N2G models have been trained and evaluated for all MLP and SAE features, we can
compare the two populations. Our analysis is based on 4 main statistics for each feature:
recall, precision, F1-score, and feature density. The first three refer to the performance of
the N2G model of the feature when predicting the feature’s activations on the test set while
the last one is the fraction of tokens that activate the feature. To compare these statistics
between the two populations, we implement two-sample bootstrap tests. After defining a
few ad-hoc clusters based on these statistics, we investigate the geometric properties of
the features in these clusters. Specifically, we look at the encoding directions of the SAE
latents and compare statistical properties of directions in the clusters. All these concepts
are described in more detail in the following subsections.
3https://github.com/albertsgarde/thesis/blob/main/thesis/mas/weighted_samples_store.py
16
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:25==
3.4.1
Density
To calculate density, we first define a threshold for what counts as an ”activating” feature.
In this work, we choose a threshold of 0.6. This is somewhat arbitrary, but seems like a
good balance between including high activations and excluding noise. Experiments with
other thresholds such as 0.2 showed that the results were not particularly sensitive to the
choice of threshold. After defining a threshold, we run the LM on the dataset and count the
number of tokens where each feature has an activation above the threshold. The density
of a feature is then the number of such tokens divided by the total number of tokens in
the dataset.
3.4.2
Geometry
The ”direction” of an SAE latent is the vector in MLP activation space that the latent rep-
resents. If we take the mathematical representation of an SAE (2.1)
y =ReLU (Wex + b)
bx =Wdy
the direction of the i’th latent is We[i], i.e. the i’th row of the encoding matrix We. There
are arguments to be made (Nanda 2023b) that the respective row in the decoder matrix
Wd is more representative of the latent, but we have chosen to use the encoding matrix
for this work in keeping with our theme of looking at the behaviour of the features rather
than their effect on the LM.
Since these are directions in a high-dimensional space, we cannot simply visualize them
or reason intuitively about them. Instead we use two statistics to boil down interesting
properties to a few numbers we can understand: mean cosine similarity and variance.
Cosine similarity
Cosine similarity is a measure of how similar the directions of two vectors are and is
defined for two non-zero vectors a, b ∈RN \ {0} in an N ∈N dimensional space as
cos(a, b) =
a · b
||a|| ||b|| = ba · bb
where bx denotes the normalized vector x. Since matrix multiplication is defined as the dot
product of the rows of the first matrix with the columns of the second, finding the cosine
similarity between all of latent directions can be written as
c
We c
We
⊤
where bA is the matrix where each row is normalized. The mean of these values gives a
measure of how similar the directions are on average, and can be calculated as
1
N(N −1)

sum

c
We c
We
⊤
−N

where N ∈N is the number of latents. The N −1 and the subtraction of N is in order to
ignore the similarity of a latent with itself, since that is always trivially 1. Taking the mean
naturally loses a lot of nuance, but the metric still has some interesting properties. A
high mean cosine similarity implies that at least most directions are similar to most other
directions. Especially interesting is that a high mean similarity implies a single cluster
of similar directions, since even if half the directions are similar to each other and the
other half are similar to each other, if the two halfs are orthogonal to each other the mean
similarity cannot exceed 0.5. Unfortunately, this also means that a low mean similarity
does not rule out relatively large clusters of similar directions. Indeed, a mean similarity of
0.1 would still allow a cluster of equal directions to be 10% of the total number of directions.
Clusters in SAE Latents
17
==PAGE:26==
Variance
The variance is a measure of how spread out the directions are, and is calculated as the
trace of the covariance matrix of either We or c
We. The former we call the raw variance
and the latter the normalized variance. The main difference between the two is that the
raw variance is sensitive to the magnitude of the directions, while the normalized variance
is not.
18
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
In this chapter we present the results of our experiments, starting with an investigation
of the performance of N2G on the two populations of features: MLP neurons and SAE
latents. We then look at the relationship between feature N2G performance and density.
This gives rise to an intuitive clustering of features based on these two statistics, which are
defined as the high density, low density cluster, and interpretable clusters. This clustering
is also related to both the geometry of the features and the sizes of the N2G graphs,
which we investigate in the last two sections of this chapter. In all cases, the focus is on
the direct results of our experiments and not any broader conclusions. This we leave for
the discussion in chapter 5
As described in section 2.1, features are functions of the LM’s activations. In the following,
two sets of features are studied: MLP neurons and SAE latents. ”Features” here refers
to the union of the two sets while ”neurons” and ”latents” refer to the individual sets.
MLP
SAE
Mean
Std
Mean
Std
Recall
0.237
0.203
0.367
0.370
Precision
0.109
0.153
0.251
0.373
F1
0.112
0.112
0.256
0.356
Density
0.094
0.114
0.179
0.146
Table 4.1: Means and standard deviations for the statistics (N2G performance and feature
density) of the two populations. Only includes features with a non-nan F1-score and a
nonzero density. According to a two-sample bootstrap test, the distribution means for all
statistics are different with p < 0.0001.
4.1
N2G Performance
The analysis begins with an examination of the performance of the N2G models across
the two populations: MLP neurons and SAE latents. For each feature, we calculate the
recall, precision, and F1-score of the N2G model trained on that feature along with the
density of that feature, i.e. on what proportion of tokens does its activation exceed some
threshold. Table 4.1 and Figure 4.1 show the distributions of these statistics across the two
populations, with the activation threshold set to 0.6. A two-sample bootstrap test shows
that the means of the distributions are different for all statistics with p < 0.0001. More
interesting is what the plots show about the nature of this distribution difference. Looking
at the plots of the performance metrics, it seems that the two populations share a mode
at roughly 0.1, but the SAE population has a second mode at almost 1. This indicates
that while most SAE latents are as badly modelled by N2G as the MLP neurons, there is
a cluster of SAE latents that are modelled almost perfectly. Figure 4.2 confirms this by
showing that there is a set of SAE latents with both near perfect recall and near perfect
precision.
4.2
Density and performance
Density also has a bimodal distribution for SAEs, though here neither mode lines up well
with the MLP distribution. This begs the question of whether the modes of the performance
Clusters in SAE Latents
19
==PAGE:28==
NaN
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Frequency
Recall
group
mlp
sae
(a) Recall Distribution
NaN
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Frequency
Precision
group
mlp
sae
(b) Precision Distribution
NaN
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Frequency
F1
group
mlp
sae
(c) F1 Distribution
5
4
3
2
1
0
Log density
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Frequency
Log density
group
mlp
sae
(d) Density Distribution
Figure 4.1: Distributions of our statistics across the two populations. Density is calculated
with a activation threshold of 0.6. Since for some of the features the N2G model never
predicts an activation, the precision and F1 is sometimes undefined. A value of NaN is
used to indicate this.
metric distributions are related to the modes of the density distribution. Figure 4.3 sheds
light on this question. Figure 4.3a shows that while some features with poorly performing
N2G models (F1 < 0.5) are in the low density cluster, none of the well-performing features
are in the high density cluster. Likewise, Figure 4.3b shows that while low density features
are spread over much of the N2G performance spectrum, the dense features are almost
entirely located in the low performing cluster. Altogether this means that low density is a
necessary but not sufficient condition for a feature to be well modelled by N2G. In other
words, the high F1 cluster is a subset of the low density cluster. This is backed up by the
N column of Table 4.2 which confirms that almost all high F1 features are low density.
4.3
Geometry
We have shown a strong relationship between density and N2G performance. Both of
these are empirical measures of the behaviour of the feature on a dataset. This raises
a question of whether these clusters are also meaningful directly in terms of the feature
directions (see subsection 3.4.2) read directly from the We encoding matrix in the SAE. It
turns out the answer is yes. Specifically, it turns out that features in the high density cluster
all represent directions that are very similar, i.e. they all point in the same direction. This
can be seen in Table 4.2 where the high density cluster has a mean cosine similarity of
0.96, and a variance of 0.04. Meanwhile, the other clusters have a mean cosine similarity
20
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:29==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
MLP
(a) Recall vs Precision for MLP
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
SAE
(b) Recall vs Precision for SAE
Figure 4.2: Distributions of our statistics across the two populations. Only includes fea-
tures with a non-nan F1-score and a nonzero density.
5
4
3
2
1
0
Log Density
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Frequency
Density (SAE)
High F1
F1 < 0.5
F1 >= 0.5
(a) Density in each F1 cluster
NaN
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Frequency
F1 (SAE)
Is Dense
Dense (>= -1.2)
Sparse (< -1.2)
(b) F1 in each density cluster
Figure 4.3: The relationship between density and F1-score for SAE features. Each plot
splits the features into clusters based on one metric and shows the distribution of the other
within each cluster. The cluster boundaries are chosen based on figure 4.1c and 4.1d.
less than 0.02 and a variance of at least 0.98. The variance of the raw high density feature
directions implies that though the vectors point in roughly the same direction, they still
vary significantly in magnitude.
Together with the results of the previous paragraph, this suggests that there are three
meaningful clusters of features: a high density, low F1 cluster, a low density, high F1
cluster, and ”the rest”, a low density, low F1 cluster. The high density cluster is character-
ized by all features pointing in the same direction, while the low density, high F1 cluster
is characterized by a spread of directions.
4.4
N2G size
The clusters found above also have a clear relationship to the size of the N2G graphs.
Table 4.3 shows the quartiles of the N2G graph sizes for the different feature clusters. It
shows a clear difference in graph sizes, with an ordering in all quartiles of high density <
MLP < low density < high F1. This is confirmed by a two sample bootstrap test, where
within each quartile, all pairs are significantly different with p < 0.0001. The only exception
is the first quartile where both the low density cluster and the high F1 cluster have a Q1
Clusters in SAE Latents
21
==PAGE:30==
Variance
N
Cos sim.
Raw
Normalized
High density (> -1.2)
9944
0.9639
1.45
0.04
Low density (< -1.2)
6440
0.0097
1.44
0.99
High F1 (> 0.5)
3795
0.0190
1.95
0.98
High F1, low density
3662
0.0171
1.74
0.98
Random
16384
0.0000
2047.73
1.00
Table 4.2: Results of statistical analysis on the directions of various feature clusters. The
clusters are the same as those used in previous figures (log density threshold is −1.2 and
F1 threshold is 0.5), except the random cluster which is a set of directions randomly gen-
erated according to the standard 2048-dimensional normal distribution. N is the number
of features in the cluster. Cos sim. is the mean pairwise cosine similarity of directions
in the cluster. Variance is the trace of the covariance matrix and is split into a raw and
a normalized column, where the former is the value for the directions taken directly from
the SAE while for the latter the directions have been normalized to norm 1.
of 1 in all bootstrap samples.
Q1
Q2 (Median)
Q3
MLP
27
48
98
High density (> -1.2)
232
349
482
Low density (< -1.2)
1
5
57
High F1 (> 0.5)
1
2
4
Table 4.3: Quartiles of N2G graph sizes for the different feature clusters. The graph size
is measured as the number of nodes in the trie, not the number of nodes in the vizualized
graph. All differences are significant in a two sample bootstrap test with p < 0.0001.
22
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:31==
5
Discussion
In the previous chapter, we showed three properties of features in an SAE trained on the
MLP layer of gelu-1l:
1. The performance of N2G on SAE latents is significantly better than on MLP neurons.
2. The distribution of both N2G performance and feature density is bimodal with the
high performance cluster being a subset of the low density cluster.
3. The directions in MLP space represented by the high density features are very sim-
ilar, while the directions of the other clusters are much closer to orthogonal.
4. Clusters with high N2G performance generally have smaller N2G graphs.
We will discuss all of these, but first we discuss a point of methodology, namely our use
of N2G as a measure of interpretability.
5.1
Methodology
Our conclusions are based on a measure of interpretability that is not widely used in the
literature, namely N2G. This potentially has a large effect on our results. The main reason
for using N2G is that it is far cheaper than the more powerful interpretability measurements
like automated interpretability with LLMs or human evaluation. This was crucial for us
since we do not have the resources of e.g. Anthropic, but as SAEs are scaled to larger
sizes, finding cheaper interpretability measures may become essential even for large AI
labs. Indeed, while we were doing this work, Gao et al. (2024) published a paper on
scaling SAEs where they used N2G as a measure of interpretability for their 16 million
latent SAE. This does not mean that N2G is without faults.
First of all, the N2G interpretation of each feature is based on a set of text samples.
Though it performs some augmentation of these samples to explore the sample space,
the result is still heavily dependent on the samples chosen and can easily miss aspects of
behaviour not present in them. This can be mitigated by improving the how the samples
are chosen, as we have attempted to do here, and by increasing the number of sam-
ples. However, the compute cost of N2G scales linearly with the number of samples, so
eventually this removes the cost advantage of N2G.
A second issue is that N2G is purely syntactical. While any semantic pattern can be
represented by a sufficiently complex syntactical pattern, it is not clear how well N2G
can capture these patterns. Our observation 4 suggests that N2G may struggle with
more complex patterns, since most of the features that N2G does well on have very small
graphs. One counter example to this is latent 36 1 in the SAE trained on gelu-1l which has
a very large graph but still performs well on N2G. However, while there are many nodes
in that graph, there is only a single activating node (see subsection 2.2.4). This points to
a pattern where N2G is mainly good at modelling features that activate on a single token
mostly irrespective of context. Further support for N2G’s inability to capture more abstract
patterns is found in table 1 in Foote et al. (2023) which shows that performance of N2G
falls in the later layers of the LM. This is consistent with later layers representing more
abstract and semantic features which are difficult for N2G’s purely syntactical approach
to capture. If this is true, it has large implications for the use of N2G as a measure of
1https://www.student.dtu.dk/~s183969/thesis/features/good/36.html
Clusters in SAE Latents
23
==PAGE:32==
interpretability. It would mean that N2G is only useful for finding features with simple
syntax-based behaviour, and that it is not a good measure of interpretability in general.
This is especially true for the more complex features that are likely to be the most important
for understanding the LM, especially with regards to safety. In a sense this would mean
that N2G as a measure of interpretability has high precision but low recall; if a feature is
simple enough to be captured by N2G, it is likely to be interpretable, while more complex
features may still be interpretable even if N2G cannot model them. However, this is only
a hypothesis and further work is needed to establish the validity of this claim. As a start
it would be interesting to compare the size of N2G graphs to more robust measures of
interpretability, such as human evaluation or automated interpretability measures, and to
do so on larger models with more abstract features.
5.2
Experimental results
Viewing the performance of N2G as a measure of interpretability, observation 1 suggests
that SAE latents are more interpretable than MLP neurons. This corroborates the findings
of both foundational SAE papers (Bricken et al. 2023)(Cunningham et al. 2023) despite
using a totally different interpretability measure.
Our research points to a strong clustering of SAE latents. We observe two distinct clusters
of features based on density: a mid density cluster with log density around −3.5 and a high
density cluster with log density around −0.5. The data also shows a cluster of interpretable
features (measued as high N2G performance) that is almost a subset of the mid density
cluster. These results both align with and challenge the work by Bricken et al. (2023) and
Nanda (2023b). The latter observe a mid density cluster with log density around −2.5 and
a low density cluster with log density around −4.5. In agreement with our results, they
also find that the interpretable features are a subset of the mid density cluster. There is
a disagreement in the density of the mid density cluster, but the main difference is that
we find a high density cluster while they find a low density cluster. Where this difference
comes from is unclear, and it is especially puzzling since we ran our experiments on the
same LM, SAE and dataset, with the URLs taken from their code at 2. This only leaves
the experiment and data analysis. One large difference here is that while both define a
feature activating on a token as having an activation greater than 0, we use a threshold of
0.6. This could explain why we find a slightly lower density for the interpretable cluster, but
it cannot explain why we find an ultra high density cluster instead of an ultra low density
cluster, since a higher threshold can only decrease the density of a feature. Overall the
discrepancy remains a mystery.
Our observation 3 matches the result in Nanda (2023b) that the encoder directions of
features in the uninterpretable cluster are very similar. The results of the other clusters
are more difficult to interpret. With a cosine similarity no higher than 1.9% and variance no
less than 0.98, the other cluster directions are far more distributed than the high density
cluster, they are much more similar than even randomly generated directions. A different
perspective on the similarity of these features can be found by looking at the activating
sample of the features 3. This shows that of the first 10 features in the high density cluster,
6 have the same max activating sample. Given the randomness in our method of sampling
(see subsection 3.2.1) this may even be understating the effect.
Lastly, observation 4 suggests that the most interpretable features have small N2G graphs.
Since we measure interpretability with N2G performance, it may simply be because N2G
2https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1u8larhpxy8w4mMsJiSBddNOzFGj7_RTn?usp=sharing
3https://www.student.dtu.dk/~s183969/thesis/features
24
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:33==
cannot interpret other features. Therefore we cannot conclude that all interpretable fea-
tures have small N2G graphs, the data does imply that a significant proportion (at least
10%) of SAE latents are well-modelled as activating on individual tokens regardless of
context. However, this may well be a feature of the specific LM we use. Since it is a
single layer model, it does not have the capacity to model more complex patterns. This is
supported by the fact that the N2G performance of the SAE latents falls in the later layers
of the LM (Foote et al. 2023).
5.3
Further work
The experiments in this work have focussed on the behaviour of features, i.e. what they
activate on. It would be interesting to explore whether the results also extend to the effects
of the features, i.e. how they affect the SAE and the LM. Specifically whether the clusters
found also have meaning in terms of the effect they have on the SAE and LM, e.g. how
much SAE or LM performance drops when the high density cluster is removed or if we
retain only the interpretable cluster. If performance remains roughly the same when only
the interpretable cluster is retained, this implies that while N2G may not model all features
well, it does model the important ones. More broadly for SAEs it would imply that though
many features are uninterpretable, the important ones are interpretable, which would be
a strong argument for their usefulness. Of course these results would have to be shown
to scale to larger LMs and SAEs.
The finding that the features of the high density cluster all point in the same direction also
seems worth exploring. Though this was originally discovered right after the publication
of the original SAE papers in Nanda (2023b), we have not found any sign of further explo-
ration. Therefore, a first step would be to see whether it still holds for modern SAEs and
SAEs trained on e.g. the residual stream, since though the overall structure of SAEs has
not changed much, as we saw in subsection 2.3.3, many details have. If it does, poten-
tial hypotheses to explore includes those presented in the comments to Nanda (2023b).
Gaining a greater understanding of this phenomenon could potentially aid in the training
of SAEs, since avoiding dead neurons could save many resources.
Lastly, exploring empirically the arguments made in section 5.1 would be a useful avenue
of research, since it could help establish N2G as a measure of interpretability. Further
work in that direction could include investigating how the size of the N2G graph relates
to the interpretability of the features. Intuitively, if a features requires a larger graph to
model, it is less interpretable. This could be tested by devising some combined measure
of N2G performance and graph size and seeing how it relates to more robust measures
of interpretability.
Clusters in SAE Latents
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:35==
6
Conclusion
Our study of SAEs and the N2G method has yielded insights into the structure of SAE
latents and the use of N2G as a measure of interpretability. We corroborated previous
findings that SAE latents are more interpretable than MLP neurons, specifically observing
higher N2G performance on SAE latents compared to MLP neurons. This aligns with the
results of Bricken et al. (2023) and Cunningham et al. (2023), despite our use of a differ-
ent interpretability measure, thus further strengthening the evidence for this foundational
property of SAEs.
We also observed a clustering of SAE latents based on density and interpretability, par-
tially corroborating the findings of Bricken et al. (2023) and Nanda et al. (2023). Amongst
these are the correlation between density and interpretability, and the presence of a clus-
ter of uninterpretable SAE latents that represent nearly the same linear combination of
MLP neurons. However, we also found some discrepancies in the specific characteristics
of these clusters, highlighting the need for further investigation in this area.
Our investigation into N2G revealed both potential benefits and limitations of this method.
N2G offers a computationally efficient approach to assessing interpretability, which is par-
ticularly valuable for large-scale models where more resource-intensive methods may be
impractical. However, our results suggest that N2G may be biased towards simple syn-
tactical features. Despite this, it is still a useful proxy for interpretability, as long as this
caveat is taken into account.
Overall this work has made clear a number of avenues of further research, especially into
the geometry of the uninterpretable SAE latents and the behaviour of the N2G method as
a measure of interpretability.
Clusters in SAE Latents
27
==PAGE:36==
Bibliography
Anthropic (Mar. 2024). Introducing the next generation of Claude. en. URL: https://www.
anthropic.com/news/claude-3-family (visited on 05/30/2024).
Bereska, Leonard and Efstratios Gavves (Apr. 2024). Mechanistic Interpretability for AI
Safety – A Review. arXiv:2404.14082 [cs]. DOI: 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2404 . 14082. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14082 (visited on 05/30/2024).
Bills, Steven et al. (2023). “Language models can explain neurons in language models”. In:
URL https://openaipublic.blob.core.windows. net/neuron-explainer/paper/index. html.(Date
accessed: 14.05. 2023).
Bloom, Joseph (June 2024). jbloomAus/SAELens. original-date: 2023-11-29T10:37:55Z.
URL: https://github.com/jbloomAus/SAELens (visited on 06/18/2024).
Bloom, Joseph and Johnny Lin (Mar. 2024). “Understanding SAE Features with the Logit
Lens”. en. In: URL: https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/qykrYY6rXXM7EEs8Q/
understanding-sae-features-with-the-logit-lens (visited on 05/29/2024).
Bolukbasi, Tolga et al. (Apr. 2021). An Interpretability Illusion for BERT. arXiv:2104.07143
[cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2104.07143. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.07143 (visited on
02/12/2024).
Bricken, Trenton et al. (2023). “Towards Monosemanticity: Decomposing Language Mod-
els With Dictionary Learning”. In: Transformer Circuits Thread.
Bushnaq, Lucius et al. (May 2024a). The Local Interaction Basis: Identifying Computationally-
Relevant and Sparsely Interacting Features in Neural Networks. en. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2405.10928v2 (visited on 05/29/2024).
Bushnaq, Lucius et al. (May 2024b). Using Degeneracy in the Loss Landscape for Mecha-
nistic Interpretability. arXiv:2405.10927 [cs] version: 2. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2405.10927.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10927 (visited on 06/02/2024).
Casper, Stephen (May 2024). “EIS XIII: Reflections on Anthropic’s SAE Research Circa
May 2024”. en. In: URL: https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/pH6tyhEnngqWAXi9i/
eis-xiii-reflections-on-anthropic-s-sae-research-circa-may (visited on 05/31/2024).
Cooney, Alan (June 2024). ai-safety-foundation/sparse_autoencoder. original-date: 2023-
10-27T07:37:15Z. URL: https://github.com/ai-safety-foundation/sparse_autoencoder
(visited on 06/18/2024).
Cunningham, Hoagy et al. (Oct. 2023). Sparse Autoencoders Find Highly Interpretable
Features in Language Models. arXiv:2309.08600 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2309.08600.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.08600 (visited on 02/09/2024).
Dao, James et al. (Nov. 2023). An Adversarial Example for Direct Logit Attribution: Memory
Management in gelu-4l. arXiv:2310.07325 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.07325. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07325 (visited on 05/31/2024).
Deng, Mingyang, Lucas Tao, and Joe Benton (Oct. 2023). Measuring Feature Sparsity in
Language Models. en. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07837v2 (visited on 05/29/2024).
Elhage, Nelson et al. (2021). “A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits”. In:
Transformer Circuits Thread.
Elhage, Nelson et al. (2022a). “Softmax Linear Units”. In: Transformer Circuits Thread.
Elhage, Nelson et al. (2022b). “Toy Models of Superposition”. In: Transformer Circuits
Thread.
Engels, Joshua et al. (May 2024). Not All Language Model Features Are Linear. en. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14860v1 (visited on 05/29/2024).
28
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:37==
Foote, Alex (June 2024). apartresearch/Neuron2Graph. original-date: 2022-11-14T12:27:28Z.
URL: https://github.com/apartresearch/Neuron2Graph (visited on 06/18/2024).
Foote, Alex et al. (May 2023). Neuron to Graph: Interpreting Language Model Neurons at
Scale. arXiv:2305.19911 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.19911. URL: http://arxiv.org/
abs/2305.19911 (visited on 02/09/2024).
Fry, Hugo (Apr. 2024). “Towards Multimodal Interpretability: Learning Sparse Interpretable
Features in Vision Transformers”. en. In: URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
bCtbuWraqYTDtuARg/towards-multimodal-interpretability-learning-sparse-2 (visited on
05/31/2024).
Gao, Leo et al. (June 2024). Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders. arXiv:2406.04093
[cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.04093. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04093 (visited on
06/11/2024).
Hendrycks, Dan, Mantas Mazeika, and Thomas Woodside (Oct. 2023). An Overview of
Catastrophic AI Risks. arXiv:2306.12001 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2306.12001. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.12001 (visited on 06/18/2024).
Huben, Robert (Mar. 2024). “Research Report: Sparse Autoencoders find only 9/180
board state features in OthelloGPT”. en. In: URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
BduCMgmjJnCtc7jKc/research-report-sparse-autoencoders-find-only-9-180-board (visited
on 05/29/2024).
Kissane, Connor et al. (Feb. 2024a). “Attention SAEs Scale to GPT-2 Small”. en. In: URL:
https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/FSTRedtjuHa4Gfdbr/attention-saes-scale-to-gpt-
2-small (visited on 05/31/2024).
– (Jan. 2024b). “Sparse Autoencoders Work on Attention Layer Outputs”. en. In: URL:
https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/DtdzGwFh9dCfsekZZ/sparse-autoencoders-work-
on-attention-layer-outputs (visited on 05/31/2024).
Krzyzanowski, Robert et al. (Mar. 2024). “We Inspected Every Head In GPT-2 Small using
SAEs So You Don’t Have To”. en. In: URL: https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/
xmegeW5mqiBsvoaim/we-inspected-every-head-in-gpt-2-small-using-saes-so-you-don
(visited on 05/29/2024).
Lee, Honglak et al. (2006). “Efficient sparse coding algorithms”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. Vol. 19. MIT Press. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2006/hash/2d71b2ae158c7c5912cc0bbde2bb9d95- Abstract.html
(visited on 06/26/2024).
Li, Kenneth et al. (Feb. 2023). Emergent World Representations: Exploring a Sequence
Model Trained on a Synthetic Task. arXiv:2210.13382 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.
13382. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13382 (visited on 06/01/2024).
Makelov, Aleksandar, George Lange, and Neel Nanda (May 2024). Towards Principled
Evaluations of Sparse Autoencoders for Interpretability and Control. arXiv:2405.08366
[cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2405.08366. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.08366 (visited on
05/30/2024).
Makelov, Alex, Georg Lange, and Neel Nanda (Dec. 2023). “SAEs Discover Meaningful
Features in the IOI Task”. en. In: URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/zj3GKWAnhPgTARByB/
saes-discover-meaningful-features-in-the-ioi-task (visited on 06/19/2024).
Marks, Sam (Apr. 2024). “Discriminating Behaviorally Identical Classifiers: a model prob-
lem for applying interpretability to scalable oversight”. en. In: URL: https : / / www .
alignmentforum.org/posts/s7uD3tzHMvD868ehr/discriminating- behaviorally- identical-
classifiers-a-model (visited on 05/30/2024).
Marks, Samuel et al. (Mar. 2024). Sparse Feature Circuits: Discovering and Editing Inter-
pretable Causal Graphs in Language Models. arXiv:2403.19647 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/
arXiv.2403.19647. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19647 (visited on 05/30/2024).
Clusters in SAE Latents
29
==PAGE:38==
Marsh, Charlie (June 2024). astral-sh/ruff. original-date: 2022-08-09T17:17:44Z. URL:
https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff (visited on 06/18/2024).
Millidge, Beren and Sid Black (Nov. 2022). “The Singular Value Decompositions of Trans-
former Weight Matrices are Highly Interpretable”. en. In: URL: https://www.alignmentforum.
org/posts/mkbGjzxD8d8XqKHzA/the- singular- value- decompositions- of- transformer-
weight (visited on 06/01/2024).
Nanda, Neel (Mar. 2023a). Actually, Othello-GPT Has A Linear Emergent World Repre-
sentation. en-US. URL: https://www.neelnanda.io/mechanistic-interpretability/othello
(visited on 06/01/2024).
– (Oct. 2023b). “Open Source Replication & Commentary on Anthropic’s Dictionary Learn-
ing Paper”. en. In: URL: https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/fKuugaxt2XLTkASkk/
open-source-replication-and-commentary-on-anthropic-s (visited on 06/24/2024).
– (2024a). NeelNanda/c4-code-20k ∙Datasets at Hugging Face. URL: https://huggingface.
co/datasets/NeelNanda/c4-code-20k (visited on 06/18/2024).
– (2024b). NeelNanda/sparse_autoencoder ∙Hugging Face. URL: https://huggingface.
co/NeelNanda/sparse_autoencoder (visited on 06/13/2024).
Ngo, Richard, Lawrence Chan, and Sören Mindermann (Mar. 2024). The Alignment Prob-
lem from a Deep Learning Perspective. en. arXiv:2209.00626 [cs]. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/2209.00626 (visited on 06/18/2024).
nostalgebraist (Aug. 2020). “interpreting GPT: the logit lens”. en. In: URL: https://www.
alignmentforum.org/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens (visited
on 05/31/2024).
Olshausen, B. A. and D. J. Field (Dec. 1997). “Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis
set: a strategy employed by V1?” eng. In: Vision Research 37.23, pp. 3311–3325. ISSN:
0042-6989. DOI: 10.1016/s0042-6989(97)00169-7.
OpenAI et al. (Mar. 2024). GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/
arXiv.2303.08774. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 (visited on 06/12/2024).
Park, Kiho, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch (Nov. 2023). The Linear Representation
Hypothesis and the Geometry of Large Language Models. en. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2311.03658v1 (visited on 05/29/2024).
Quaisley, Andrew (June 2024). “Research Report: Alternative sparsity methods for sparse
autoencoders with OthelloGPT.” en. In: URL: https : / / www . lesswrong . com / posts /
ignCBxbqWWPYCdCCx/research-report-alternative-sparsity-methods-for-sparse (visited
on 06/16/2024).
Rajamanoharan, Senthooran et al. (Apr. 2024). Improving Dictionary Learning with Gated
Sparse Autoencoders. arXiv:2404.16014 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2404.16014. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16014 (visited on 05/30/2024).
Räuker, Tilman et al. (Aug. 2023). Toward Transparent AI: A Survey on Interpreting the
Inner Structures of Deep Neural Networks. arXiv:2207.13243 [cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2207.13243. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.13243 (visited on 06/03/2024).
Riggs, Logan and Jannik Brinkmann (Mar. 2024). “Improving SAE’s by Sqrt()-ing L1 &
Removing Lowest Activating Features”. en. In: URL: https://www.alignmentforum.org/
posts/YiGs8qJ8aNBgwt2YN/improving-sae-s-by-sqrt-ing-l1-and-removing-lowest (visited
on 05/29/2024).
Sharkey, Lee, Dan Braun, and Beren Millidge (Dec. 2022). “[Interim research report] Tak-
ing features out of superposition with sparse autoencoders”. en. In: URL: https://www.
alignmentforum.org/posts/z6QQJbtpkEAX3Aojj/interim-research-report-taking-features-
out-of-superposition (visited on 05/30/2024).
Statement on AI Risk | CAIS (2024). en. URL: https://www.safe.ai/work/statement-on-ai-
risk (visited on 06/18/2024).
30
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:39==
Taggart, Glen (Apr. 2024). “ProLU: A Nonlinearity for Sparse Autoencoders”. en. In: URL:
https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/HEpufTdakGTTKgoYF/prolu-a-nonlinearity-for-
sparse-autoencoders (visited on 05/30/2024).
Tamkin, Alex, Mohammad Taufeeque, and Noah D. Goodman (Oct. 2023). Codebook
Features: Sparse and Discrete Interpretability for Neural Networks. arXiv:2310.17230
[cs]. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.17230. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17230 (visited on
06/01/2024).
Templeton, Adly et al. (2024). “Scaling Monosemanticity: Extracting Interpretable Features
from Claude 3 Sonnet”. In: Transformer Circuits Thread. URL: https://transformer-
circuits.pub/2024/scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.
Touvron, Hugo (2024). Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models | Re-
search - AI at Meta. URL: https://ai.meta.com/research/publications/llama-2-open-
foundation-and-fine-tuned-chat-models/ (visited on 06/19/2024).
Vaintrob, Dmitry, Jake Mendel, and Kaarel (Jan. 2024). “Toward A Mathematical Frame-
work for Computation in Superposition”. en. In: URL: https://www.alignmentforum.
org/posts/2roZtSr5TGmLjXMnT/toward-a-mathematical-framework-for-computation-in
(visited on 05/29/2024).
Vaswani, Ashish et al. (Aug. 2023). Attention Is All You Need. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs].
DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1706.03762. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 (visited on
02/14/2024).
Wang, Kevin Ro et al. (Sept. 2022). “Interpretability in the Wild: a Circuit for Indirect Ob-
ject Identification in GPT-2 Small”. en. In: URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
NpsVSN6o4ul (visited on 05/29/2024).
Wright, Benjamin and Lee Sharkey (Feb. 2024). “Addressing Feature Suppression in
SAEs”. en. In: URL: https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/3JuSjTZyMzaSeTxKk/
addressing-feature-suppression-in-saes (visited on 05/29/2024).
Wright, John and Yi Ma (2022). High-Dimensional Data Analysis with Low-Dimensional
Models: Principles, Computation, and Applications. Cambridge University Press.
Wu, Jeff (June 2024). openai/sparse_autoencoder. original-date: 2024-06-12T04:36:12Z.
URL: https://github.com/openai/sparse_autoencoder (visited on 06/18/2024).
Clusters in SAE Latents
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Clusters in SAE Latents
==PAGE:41==
Clusters in SAE Latents
33
==PAGE:42==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
