==PAGE:1==
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
Towards Flexible Thermal Energy Storages
Master Thesis
Peter Grønning
DTU Compute
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
Towards Flexible Thermal Energy Storages
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Peter Grønning
Peter Grønning - s183922
Signature
Date
Supervisors
Henrik Madsen, Professor, Head of Section, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Dynamical Systems
Christian Ankerstjerne Thilker, Postdoc, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Dynamical Systems
Ioannis Sifnaios, Postdoc, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Energy and Ser-
vices
Adam Rasmus Jensen, Researcher, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Energy
and Services
Cover photo:
Arial photo of the Dronninglund Pit Thermal Energy Storage.
Source: Dronninglund Fjernvarme, 2019
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As the share of renewable energy sources increases, the energy sector requires greater flex-
ibility to achieve net zero emissions. Heating constitutes a significant portion of global energy
consumption, and large-scale thermal energy storage systems, such as Pit Thermal Energy
Storage (PTES), have gained popularity in recent years due to their ability to store thermal en-
ergy for later use. However, operating such systems presents challenges, as current simulation
models are computationally expensive and not well-suited for control algorithms. Additionally,
these models lack flexibility for new systems because the physical parameters must be derived
manually. This thesis investigates how a data-driven digital twin, suited for control purposes,
can be developed using the open-source software ctsmr.
The digital twin is formulated as a grey-box model based on a state-space formulation of a multi-
node PTES model. It is calibrated with data from the Dronninglund PTES, by estimating the
physical parameters directly from sensor measurements. Slow dynamics, such as natural heat
convection and conduction, cannot be estimated from the data and are thus not included in the
model. Consequently, during standby periods, the model assumes that the system’s state stays
constant, which significantly simplifies the system’s behavior. It is observed that second-order
dynamics introduced through additional states are needed to achieve white noise residuals.
However, due to software limitations, this requires reducing the model’s spatial resolution, which
results in the final model partitioning the storage into layers 3 meters high.
The final model delivers reasonable forecasts of up to 1 week ahead, with a root mean square
error of 3◦C for the best-predicted storage layer and 5◦C for the worst. However, the chosen
partitioning of the storage is too coarse to accurately describe the storage thermocline. As a
result, the model overestimates the storage’s MIX number with absolute relative errors up to
30-40% for 1-week forecasts, when the observed degree of stratification is high. Furhtermore,
the inaccurate estimation of the thermocline leads to prediction errors of 10◦C for the top tem-
perature of the storage during discharge. To correct for this a finer spatial resolution is needed.
However, this is not feasible with a single model given the current state of the ctsmr software.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my DTU Compute supervisors, Henrik Madsen and Christian Ankerstjerne
Thilker, for their time and guidance. Their expertise in stochastic modeling has been truly in-
spiring.
I would also like to thank my DTU Construct supervisors, Ioannis Sifnaios and Adam Rasmus
Jensen, for the great conversations and for providing essential data. Without this data, writing
this thesis would not have been possible.
Additionally, a warm thank you to my office mate, Hjalte Pind, for all the valuable discussions,
great company, and shared love for flat whites.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acronyms
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation and Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Litterature Review
4
2.1
Performance Indicators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Numerical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Research Gap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory Behind Grey-Box Mdeling
10
3.1
Stochastic Differential Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
State Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Maximum Likelihood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Case Study
15
4.1
Dronninglund PTES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Data Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Data Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Statistical Model Building
20
5.1
Data Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Multi-Node Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Model Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Model Evaluation
42
6.1
Key Performance Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
An Experiment - Charging and Discharging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Discussion
59
7.1
KPIs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Temperature Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.3
Probabilistic Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.4
Seasonal vs. Short-Term
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.5
Data Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.6
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
iv
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
8
Conclusion
63
Bibliography
64
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
v
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
ACF Auto Correlation Function. 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 41
AIC Akaike Information Criterion. 26
BTES Borehole Thermal Energy Storage. 4
CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics. 7, 8
CHP Combined Heat and Power. 1, 57, 58
CRPS Continuous Ranked Probability Score. 53, 54
CTSM Continuous Time Stochastic Modelling. 25
DH District Heating. 1, 2, 57, 58
HMM Hidden Markov Model. 11
KPIs Key Performance Indicators. 42, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49, 55, 59
ML Maximum Likelihood. 13, 14, 27, 31, 33, 37
MPC Model Predictive Control. 9
MSE Mean Squared Error. 26, 36
PTES Pit Thermal Energy Storage. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 23, 31, 42, 44, 57,
58, 60, 61, 63
RMSE Root Mean Squared Error. 8, 33, 34, 35, 36, 50, 51, 53
SACF Sample Auto-Correlation Function. 21, 26, 32
SDE Stochastic Differential Equation. 10, 11, 61
SDEs Stochastic Differential Equations. 2, 10, 11, 25
TES Thermal Energy Storage. 1, 5, 9
TTES Tank Thermal Energy Storage. 4
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
vi
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Heating represents a significant part of global energy consumption. In 2021, the residential
sector accounted for almost a third of the final energy consumption in the European Union
(EU). More than half of the energy consumed in this sector is used to heat homes. That is, 17.4
% of all the energy consumed in the EU was directed toward keeping our houses warm [1].
Looking ahead, our energy systems are expected to become increasingly weather-dependent
due to higher proportions of renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar power. Integrat-
ing renewables into the power grid presents a challenge, as these sources may not always be
available when power demand peaks [2]. This challenge extends to the thermal energy sector,
where solar heating is gaining popularity [3].
District Heating (DH) networks efficiently cover space heating demand by centralising heat pro-
duction from different heat sources. Combined Heat and Power (CHP) plants are particularly
suitable for DH systems because excess heat generated during power production can directly
be used for space heating via the DH grid, making CHP one of the most energy-efficient meth-
ods for heat and power generation [4]. However, similar to the variability of solar and wind
power, the power demand may not always align with the demand for heating.
It is clear that to achieve the net-zero emissions by 2050 goal set by the EU, the challenge of
the energy sector’s lack of flexibility must be addressed. The EU has acknowledged this by
launching the 11M € ELEXIA project1, which aims to improve flexibility through digitalisation.
Thermal Energy Storage
A Thermal Energy Storage (TES) addresses the issue of limited flexibility in the thermal energy
sector by providing a means to store thermal energy for later use when demand is higher. One of
the most promising and cost-effective large-scale TES solutions is Pit Thermal Energy Storage
(PTES), which stores heated water in a pit in the ground, as the name suggests [5]. Since a
PTES uses water as a storage medium, the thermal energy is most accessible at the top of
the storage. Therefore, the system is discharged by taking hot water out at the top and adding
colder water at the bottom and vice versa when charging. The system’s state is the storage’s
temperature profile, as this summarises the total energy content and how much energy can be
taken out of the storage at any given point in time [5].
Data-Driven Digital Twins
A digital twin is a virtual representation of a real physical system. It is useful for planning an
operational strategy for the system, as simulations are cheaper and risk-free compared to test-
1https://www.elexia-project.eu/
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
1
==PAGE:9==
1.2. MOTIVATION AND SCOPE
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
ing the actual system. Unlike a traditional simulation model, a digital twin is connected to the
physical system through sensors that gather real-time data. This data feed informs the digital
twin of the system’s current state, enabling it to maintain accuracy and adapt to changes. The
data-driven digital twin utilises the collected data to learn the system’s physics [6].
When the digital twin is for decision-making, it creates a bi-directional data flow between the
physical system and the digital twin. This interconnection defines the digital twin and has driven
its popularity in academia and the industry, with the market projected to grow by $32 billion from
2021 to 2026 [6].
1.2
Motivation and Scope
In 2023, Denmark’s largest short-term PTES was put into operation. It is connected directly to
the district heating grid in Høje Taastrup and can store up to 3,300 MWh of thermal energy with
charge and discharge capacities of 30 MW [7]. The short-term storage system is charged and
discharged weekly, allowing for a more flexible operation of the DH grid in Høje Taastrup [7]. A
part of the ELEXIA project is to build and use a data-driven digital twin of this storage.
Scope
This thesis investigates how a type of data-driven digital twin of a PTES, commonly known as
a grey-box model, can be developed using the open-source software ctsmr. Using ctsmr, the
model can be formulated based on Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs), which combines
physics with data through statistical inference of parameters. Furthermore, ctsmr is made to
be efficient and can deliver rapid predictions.
Since the Høje Taastrup PTES is a short-term storage, the model will be evaluated based on up
to 2-week forecasts of the system’s state. Table 1.1 lists the essential features the digital twin
needs to have to be successful, in order of importance.
1.3
Structure of the Thesis
This thesis is structured in the following way:
Chapter 2 introduces PTES as a technology and provides relevant terminology through a review
of the state of the art.
Chapter 3 briefly introduces the mathematical principles behind data-driven digital twins, also
called grey-box models.
Chapter 4 presents the central case study of this thesis, namely the PTES situated in Dron-
ninglund, which is seen on the cover of this thesis, along with the associated data used for
building the data-driven digital twin of the storage.
Chapter 5 details the steps for creating a data-driven digital twin using a statistical framework,
including intermediate results and modeling considerations.
Chapter 6 evaluates the model’s forecasting performance for different forecasting horizons.
Chapter 7 further discusses the results and ideas for future work.
Finally, Chapter 8 concludes the thesis.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
2
==PAGE:10==
1.3. STRUCTURE OF THE THESIS
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Table 1.1: Required features for a model to be successful. The features are listed in order of
importance.
Feature
Reason
Model the top water temperature
It is the top water that is discharged and
its temperature describes the system’s available energy.
Model the overall temperature profile
The temperature profile is the ’memory’ of the system
and the top dynamics cannot be modeled accurately without
the rest of the temperature profile
Make fast predictions
The model is intended for a control purpose.
To function well with control algorithms, it needs to be fast.
Flexible parameters
It should be possible to estimate parameters based on data
such that the model can easily adapt to the system.
Model the surrounding soil temperature
To accurately model the heat loss of the storage
the soil temperature also needs to be considered.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
3
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Litterature Review
The amount of solar district heating has experienced a significant rise over the past decade,
particularly in Denmark. From 2006 to 2016, Denmark alone installed over 1 million square
meters of solar collector fields [3]. As solar heating has expanded, so has the interest in large-
scale thermal energy storage [5]. To increase efficiency and flexibility, the solar collector fields
are often equipped with a (relatively) low temperature (< 95◦C) sensible thermal energy storage
[8]. Most commonly, the storages are Borehole Thermal Energy Storage (BTES), Tank Thermal
Energy Storage (TTES), or PTES, which all share water as a storage medium. It is, however,
acknowledged that PTES is the most promising storage type in terms of construction costs,
especially when the storage volume exceeds 60, 000m3 [5], [9].
Recently, the ribbon was cut to the largest short-term PTES in Denmark, located in Høje Taas-
trup. This system is a short-term storage directly connected to the district heating grid [7]. By
investigating the interactive map on VEKS’ webpage1, it can be seen how it receives heat pro-
duced from various sources, including Combined Heat and Power (CHP) plants.
Essentially, a PTES consists of an excavation in the ground, typically shaped like a truncated
pyramid, and fitted with an insulated lid at the top and a liner at the bottom [9]. This liner cov-
ers the pit’s base and sides, preventing water leakage. While the liner material may not be an
efficient insulator, it acts as a barrier, preventing water from evaporating into the construction’s
sides, which could cause damage and lead to heat losses [10]. Figure 2.1 shows the con-
struction of a PTES located in Dronninglund, Denmark. The pit has the characteristic truncated
pyramid shape and a liner made of high-density polyethylene [5]. The inlets and outlets are
typically designed as radial diffusers to minimise mixing within the storage by ensuring laminar
flow during charge and discharge [5]. For PTES, three inlets/outlets are generally used: one at
the bottom, one two-thirds of the way up, and one at the top.
1https://www.veks.dk/
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
4
==PAGE:12==
2.1. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
CHAPTER 2. LITTERATURE REVIEW
Figure 2.1: The almost constructed PTES situated in Dronninglund, Denmark. The bottom liner
of the PIT is installed and the three inlet/outlet diffusers are visible. Missing now is just the lid
and the water. Source: [11] (PlanEnergi)
2.1
Performance Indicators
Since a PTES is basically a large, irregularly shaped hot water storage tank, the terminology
used to assess its performance comes from studies of such tanks. Similar to these storage
tanks, PTES is a stratified TES, with hot water entering at the top and cold water entering at
the bottom. Due to buoyancy-driven by temperature-dependent density differences, the hot and
cold water remain separated, creating a mixing layer in the middle. This mixing layer is referred
to as the thermocline.
Rosen (2001) [12] investigates how conventional performance analysis based on energy effi-
ciency compares with exergy analysis. Where the former is the ratio of the energy recovered
from the system to the energy put into it, the latter investigates the ”available energy” in the
system. Rosen (2001) [12] shows that energy efficiency is inadequate on its own, as it does
not consider the degradation of the energy’s quality due to entropy. Furthermore, improving
the level of thermal stratification is shown to improve the efficiency and exergy capacity of the
TES. Figure 2.2 shows how the temperature profile in a PTES could look. Since hot water in the
storage is charged and discharged through the top the thermocline is created, separating the
hot water from the cold. This is an ideal example of rather well-stratified storage, characterised
by the steep thermocline.
The metrics most commonly used to assess the degree of stratification are the stratification
coefficient and the MIX number.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
5
==PAGE:13==
2.1. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
CHAPTER 2. LITTERATURE REVIEW
Figure 2.2: Idealised temperature profile in PTES. The x-axis is the storage height from bottom
to top, and the y-axis shows the height-increasing storage temperature. The thermocline is here
located in the middle of the storage. The location of the thermocline and its width/steepness
change during operations.
Stratification coefficient
Wu and Bannerot (1987) [13] introduced the stratification coefficient (or factor), which is the
mass-weighted mean squared difference between the temperature in separate storage layers
compared to the average storage temperature. Equation (2.1) shows the stratification coefficient
St, where mi and Ti are the mass and temperature of storage layer i, respectively, Tavg is the
average storage temperature and mtotal is the total mass of the storage
St =
N
X
n=1
mi(Ti −Tavg)2
mtotal
(2.1)
The stratification coefficient ranges from zero to infinity, with higher values indicating greater
stratification. However, the stratification coefficient is difficult to interpret and to compare across
different systems [14].
MIX number
Introduced by Davidson, Adams, and Miller (1994) [15], the MIX number evaluates the temper-
ature profile of a storage system by comparing it to two reference profiles: one for a fully mixed
storage and one for a perfectly stratified storage. All three storage scenarios must share the
same total energy content for the comparison to be meaningful. This results in a value rang-
ing between 0 and 1, with 0 displaying the highest degree of stratification. The MIX number is
based on the moment of energy ME, which is simply the energy content of the storage layer
multiplied by its distance to the bottom. The MIX number is defined as the ratio:
MIX =
Mstratified
E
−Mactual
E
Mstratified
E
−Mfully−mixed
E
(2.2)
where Mscenario
E
is the sum of all storage layers’ moment of energy for a given scenario. Figure
2.3 compares a possible storage temperature profile with the two reference storage’s tempera-
ture profiles.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
6
==PAGE:14==
2.2. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
CHAPTER 2. LITTERATURE REVIEW
Many other performance indicators are also discussed in (Sifnaios [16], Thomas et al. [14] and
Chandra and Matuska [17]). However, these will not be included in this thesis. How the metrics
are calculated is described in detail in Chapter 6.
Figure 2.3: Idealised example of how the actual temperature profile compares to the two refer-
ence temperature profiles used to compute the MIX number. The mixed storage (blue) has the
same temperature in the entire storage, whereas the perfectly stratified (red) has the steepest
possible thermocline.
2.2
Numerical Analysis
Thorough planning is essential before commissioning new PTES projects. Xiang et al. (2022)
[5] summarises how numerical models are widely employed to simulate the dynamics of PTES
systems. They describe how the modeling of PTES is difficult due to its complicated geometry,
fluid dynamics, and its status as a relatively novel technology with sparse monitoring data. Con-
sequently, there is considerable ongoing research in developing simulation models for PTES.
The current state of the art spans from simple Excel models (Sorknæs [18]), through more intri-
cate 1D or 2D finite difference models (Pan et al. [19], Bai et al. [20]), to advanced Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) 3D models (Xiang et al.[21]).
Sorknæs (2018) [18] argue that while many PTES models excel at simulating the single system,
they are often too complex to integrate with the overall energy system simulations. Therefore,
they present a simple 1D Excel model that focuses only on the water region and considers only
the top and bottom temperatures of the storage. They assumed uniform heat loss through the
sides and bottom, with a constant ground temperature of 8◦C. They calibrated and validated
the model using measurement data from the Dronninglund PTES. However, they did not report
errors between measurements and simulation.
Pan et al. (2022) [19] examine the thermal performance of the Dronninglund PTES using a fi-
nite difference model made in the system simulation software TRNSYS. The considered model
uses a 1D discretisation of the water region, dividing it into 32 evenly distributed vertical nodes,
each corresponding to a 0.5-meter layer in the storage assumed to have a uniform temperature
distribution. Additionally, the surrounding soil region’s thermal conductance is considered with
a 2D discretisation of the surrounding soil. The simulation model is validated using the mea-
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
7
==PAGE:15==
2.3. RESEARCH GAP
CHAPTER 2. LITTERATURE REVIEW
surement data from 2017. They report a deviation of 2.2K for the maximum temperature, 0.2K
for the minimum temperature, and 2.7K for the average temperature between the simulated
values and the measurements. However, the model overestimates the MIX number from July
to October since it cannot accurately model the temperature profile in the storage. The authors
hypothesize that this discrepancy may come from the model’s inability to consider natural con-
vection during the standby period. Unfortunately, except for the MIX number, they do not report
how the simulated temperature profile deviates from the measured over time.
As noted by Bai et al. (2020) [20], who employ a very similar model for an underground PTES
situated in China, the number of nodes in the water column determines the spatial resolution of
the model and, hence, its accuracy. Furthermore, increasing the number of nodes decreases
the impact of numerical diffusion. An increase in nodes naturally results in higher computational
costs, which is what Powell and Edgar (2013) [22] addresses with an adaptive-grid model. This
model tracks the thermocline and has a fine grid in the region of thermal stratification and a more
coarse grid at the ends of the storage. They show how this improves the accuracy as it lowers
numerical diffusion compared to a model with evenly spaced nodes. Nevertheless, this model
is designed for a simple storage tank and may not accurately capture the temperature profile in
a PTES, as multiple thermoclines could exist simultaneously within this system as pointed out
by Xiang et al. (2022) [21].
Xiang et al. (2022) [21] present a full-scale CFD 3D model of the PTES in Dronninglund. The
model is created using the FLUENT simulation software and exhibits a maximum temperature
difference of 1K in the water region compared to the measurements. Additionally, recognising
the challenges faced by models like those proposed by Pan et al. (2022) [19] in accurately rep-
resenting the thermocline, Xiang et al. [21] recommend a grid scheme in such models. This
proposed scheme has a total of 226 nodes, and, hence, a much finer partitioning is recom-
mended than the one followed by Pan et al. (2022) [19]
Xiang et al. (2022) [5] summarises some of the main challenges for simulation models. Firstly,
they note that estimating the heat transfer coefficients for the storage surfaces is generally chal-
lenging, leading to significant discrepancies between simulation results and the system’s heat
loss. Additionally, the models exhibit ’thermocline inversion,’ where the temperature does not
monotonically increase from the bottom to the top of the storage. Moreover, numerical diffusion
is an issue in one-dimensional multi-node models, which can be addressed by increasing the
number of nodes, though this increases computational costs.
2.3
Research Gap
While simulation models’ state of the art varies in terms of model types and complexity, they
share a common characteristic. They are all white-box models, wherein all parameters are
derived from the physics of the PTES and material properties. Based on this literature review,
grey-box models have not yet been applied to PTES.
Farooq et al. (2015) [23] investigated a grey-box model of 300L electric boiler for a domestic hot
water system. The temperature in the water boiler was logged at 8 different heights, and heat
conduction and heat capacity parameters were estimated using least squares. The grey-box
model aligned well with observations with Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) lower than 3K for
all 8 layers of the tank.
After the beginning of this thesis, van Schalkwyk et al. (2024) [24] proposed a state-space model
to describe the vertical temperature distribution within a similar 150L electric water boiler. This
model was designed as a state-space model to facilitate seamless integration with optimisa-
tion tools, and model parameters were again estimated using least squares. The predicted
temperature profile matched the observed well, with the experiment’s highest error of 2.9K.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
8
==PAGE:16==
2.3. RESEARCH GAP
CHAPTER 2. LITTERATURE REVIEW
Both Farooq et al. [23] and van Schalkwyk et al. [24] advocate for using grey-box models to
represent a water-based TES. Grey-box models allow for parameters to be estimated from
data, providing flexible models where new parameters can easily be recalibrated if the model
changes. Additionally, formulating the grey-box model in state-space form facilitates smooth
integration with optimisation tools, such as Model Predictive Control (MPC). However, their
research is confined to simple hot water tanks with an electric boiler, which are easy to control,
and experiments are cheap to conduct. In contrast, PTES is a more complex system, not only
because of its geometry but also due to the inlet of hot water (instead of an electric heater),
which causes vertical flow throughout the entire system. Additionally, obtaining experimental
data is more challenging. As a result, grey-box models remain an unexplored frontier in the
research on simulation models of PTES.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
9
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Theory Behind Grey-Box Mdeling
This chapter provides an introduction to the theory behind grey-box modeling.
White-box models are essentially first-principle models that are designed to obey fundamental
physical laws such as mass balance and energy balance. They are often precise and perfectly
interpretable but require domain knowledge and engineering expertise.
Black-box modeling is an entirely data-driven approach that has become extremely popular
lately. The most common black-box models are machine learning algorithms and neural net-
works, which require substantial data and computational resources. Nevertheless, unlike white-
box models, they lack interpretability, which is critical for understanding and controlling the sys-
tem.
As the name suggests, grey-box models offer a compromise between the physical models and
the data-driven ones [25]. The grey-box model in this thesis will be based on Stochastic Differ-
ential Equations (SDEs).
3.1
Stochastic Differential Equations
A general SDE is defined as:
dXt = f(Xt, ut, t)dt + g(Xt, ut, t)dBt,
(3.1)
where Xt is a N-dimensional vector of states, ut is a M-dimensional vector of control inputs and
t denotes time. The functions f : RN × RM × R →RN and f : RN × RM × R →RN are referred
to as the drift and noise intensity, respectively. Furthermore, Bt is a N dimensional vector of
Brownian motion. Brownian motion, {Bt : t ≥0}, is a special stochastic process with some
important characteristics. The process starts at B0 = 0, and its increments are independent
and Gaussian with mean zero and variance equal to the time lag [26].
A solution to Xt can be obtained through the following integral equation:
Xt = X0 +
Z t
0
f(Xs, us, s)ds +
Z t
0
g(Xs, us, s)dBs,
(3.2)
where the integral of the drift can be understood as a standard Riemann integral. The second
integral of the noise intensity with respect to Brownian motion is the Itô Integral defined as:
Z t
0
g(Xs, us, s)dBs = lim
|∆|→0
n−1
X
i=0
g(Xti, uti, ti)
 Bti+1 −Bti

,
(3.3)
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
10
==PAGE:18==
3.2. STATE ESTIMATION
CHAPTER 3. THEORY BEHIND GREY-BOX MDELING
where the integrand g is evaluated at the left side of each sub-interval [26]. This integral involves
a stochastic process, making the Itô integral itself a stochastic process. A key characteristic of
the Itô integral is that it possesses the martingale property, meaning its expected future value
is zero. Using the Itô integral, a solution, Xt, to Equation (3.1) is a specific kind of stochastic
process, called an Itô process [26].
3.2
State Estimation
With a sequence of k-dimensional discrete time measurements yi ∈Rk of a system, i.e., the
observed time series, the problem of inference with SDEs is to estimate the state of the system,
Xti, at time ti. Here, {Xt : t ≥0} is a stochastic process governed by a generel SDE, Equation
(3.4), and the measurment yi relates to Xti through the obersvation equation, Equation (3.5),
where eti ∈Rk is the measurment noise [26].
dXt = f(Xt, ut, t)dt + g(Xt, ut, t)dBt
(3.4)
yi = h(Xti, uti, ti) + eti
(3.5)
The function h : RN × RM × R →RN is the observation function. Since {Xt : t ≥0} is
an Îto process and thus Markovian [26], the state estimation problem is essentially a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM). Figure 3.1 presents a probabilistic graphical model of the state estimation
problem, where Xti are the hidden states of the system and Yi are the observations. Note that
Yi is first observed at time ti and hence remains unknown until ti The horizontal arrows indicate
how the SDE propagates the state in time, and the vertical arrows indicate the relationship
between observations and states [26].
Figure 3.1: A probabilistic graphical model of the state estimation problem. The circles symbol-
ise a stochastic variable. The horizontal arrows indicate the state transition probabilities of the
hidden state Xt, and the vertical arrows are the conditional probabilities of Yi given Xti.
The overall purpose of state estimation is to estimate the conditional density of the state Xti
given the observation Yi. With a prior density of the state, Bayes’ theorem can be used to
compute the posterior density fXti|Yi(x|yi). The prior distribution arises from the evolution of
the state via the SDE, which can be computed using Kolmogorov’s forward equation. However,
in practice for a general SDE, this is only feasible for a limited number of states [26].
3.2.1
The Kalman Filter
For linear systems with state-independent noise intensity, i.e., g(ut, t), the conditional density
of the state can be assumed Gaussian. This is because the increments of Brownian motion
are Gaussian, and a linear transformation of a Gaussian variable yields another Gaussian vari-
able [26], [27]. Equation (3.6)-(3.7) represents a multivariate linear time-invariant continuous-
discrete time stochastic state space model with state independent noise intensity. Here, A ∈
RN×N, B ∈RN×M, C ∈Rk×N, D ∈Rk×M and G ∈RN×N are matrices and Stk ∈Rk×k is the
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
11
==PAGE:19==
3.2. STATE ESTIMATION
CHAPTER 3. THEORY BEHIND GREY-BOX MDELING
noise covariance matrix. Moreover, ut represents an exogenous input.
dXt = (AXt + But)dt + GdBt
(3.6)
yi = CXti + Duti + eti
eti ∼N(0, Sti)
(3.7)
Since a Gaussian variable is completely characterised by its second-order moments, the mean,
and covariance, it is useful with a notation for these:
ˆxt|ti = E[Xt|Y1 = y1, Y2 = y2, . . . , Yi = yi]
(3.8)
Pt|ti = V[Xt|Y1 = y1, Y2 = y2, . . . , Yi = yi]
(3.9)
The state prediction equations or the time update equations, Equation (3.10)-(3.11), are found
by combining Equation (3.6) with Equation (3.8)-(3.9). Solving these equations with initial con-
ditions ˆxti|ti and Pti|ti from time ti to ti+1, yields the one-step prediction of the state, ˆXti+1|ti,
[26], [27].
dˆxt|ti
dt
= Aˆxt|ti + But
(3.10)
dPt|ti
dt
= APt|ti + Pt|tiAT + GGT
(3.11)
The equations for predicting the output or observation distribution are derived by computing
the expected value (as the one-step prediction, ˆyti|ti−1), and the covariance matrix, Rti|ti−1, of
Equation (3.7). Equation (3.12)-(3.13) show the two equations, respectively [27].
ˆyti|ti−1 = Cˆxti|ti−1 + Duti−1
(3.12)
Rti|ti−1 = CPti|ti−1CT + Sti
(3.13)
Since both Xti and Yti are assumed Gaussian, the conditional distribution of X given Y is also
Gaussian and its second-order moments are found as in Equation (3.14)-(3.15) below [26]:
E[Xti|Yti = yti] = ˆxti|ti−1 + Kk(yti −ˆyti|ti−1)
(3.14)
V[Xti|Yti = yti] = Pti|ti−1 −KkRti|ti−1KT
k
(3.15)
Kk = Qti|ti−1R−1
ti|ti−1
(3.16)
Equation (3.16) is the Kalman gain, where Qti|ti−1 = Pti|ti−1CT is the covariance matrix between
the predicted state and the predicted observation. The prediction equations are used before
new observations are available to track the system’s state. Once a new observation becomes
available, the state is then reconstructed utilising this new information and the predicted states
as a prior.
This continuous-discrete time version of the Kalman filter comes with the highest computational
expense in solving the two differential equations, Equation (3.10)-(3.11).
Extended Kalman Filter
For a non-linear system:
dXt = f(Xt, ut, t)dt + G(ut, t)dBt
(3.17)
yi = h(Xti, uti, ti) + eti,
(3.18)
Gaussianity is not assured; consequently, the linear system equations cannot be directly ap-
plied. However, if the nonlinearities are not too strong, the nonlinear system, Equation (3.17-
3.18), can be approximated quite accurately by the linearised system:
dXt = (A(t)Xt + B(t)ut) dt + G(ut, t)dBt
(3.19)
yi = C(ti)Xti + D(ti)ut + eti,
(3.20)
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
12
==PAGE:20==
3.3. MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD
CHAPTER 3. THEORY BEHIND GREY-BOX MDELING
where the time-dependent matrices A, B, C and D are the Jacobian matrices of the system
given by:
A(t) = ∂f(x, ut, t)
∂x

x=ˆxt|t−1,u=ut
B(t) = ∂f(x, ut, t)
∂u

x=ˆxt|t−1,u=ut
(3.21)
C(t) = ∂h(x, ut, t)
∂x

x=ˆxt|t−1,u=ut
D(t) = ∂h(x, ut, t)
∂u

x=ˆxt|t−1,u=ut
(3.22)
For the linearised system, Equation (3.19)-(3.20), prediction equations become:
dˆxt|ti
dt
= f(ˆxt|ti, ut, t)
(3.23)
dPt|ti
dt
= A(t)Pt|ti + Pt|tiA(t)T + GGT
(3.24)
which need to be solved from ti to ti+1 to get the one-step predictions of the state. The obser-
vations are predicted by:
ˆyti|ti−1 = h(ˆxt|ti, uti, ti)
(3.25)
Rti|ti−1 = CPti|ti−1CT + Sti
(3.26)
and the reconstruction follows the same equations as for the linear Kalman filter.
The linearised system is only an approximation, and the extended Kalman filter is not exact.
This is because the Gaussian assumption on which the filter relies can be quite weak, even for
some linearised systems.
3.3
Maximum Likelihood
In this project, Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimation will be the statistical tool used for estimating
unknown parameters. A physical system can be described by a set of physical parameters,
θ. The likelihood of θ is the joint probability of a set of T k-dimensional observations YT =
[y0, y1, . . . , yT−1]:
L(θ, YT ) = p(YT |θ) = p(y0|θ)
 T−1
Y
i=1
p(Yi|θ, Yi−1)
!
(3.27)
The conditional probability densities, p(Yi|θ, Yi−1), are computed from the Kalman filter and,
therefore, also assumed to be Gaussian with mean and covariance:
E [Yi|θ, Yi−1] = ˆyti|ti−1
(3.28)
V [Yi|θ, Yi−1] = Rti|ti−1.
(3.29)
Introducing the innovation equation:
ϵti = yi −ˆyti|ti−1
(3.30)
the likelihood of the parameters θ can be written using the formula for a multivariate normal
distribution as follows:
L(θ, YN) = p(y0|θ)


T−1
Y
i=1
exp
 −1
2ϵT
i Rti|ti−1ϵi

q
det
 Rti|ti−1
  √
2π
k

.
(3.31)
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
13
==PAGE:21==
3.3. MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD
CHAPTER 3. THEORY BEHIND GREY-BOX MDELING
The likelihood function can be evaluated for various parameter values ˜θ. The parameter set
that maximises this function, given the observations YT , is the maximum likelihood estimator ˆθ
of the true parameters θ [27].
Since evaluating a product is more demanding than evaluating a sum and most optimisers
minimise instead of maximising, the negative log-likelihood is often used. The objective is then
written as:
ˆθ = arg min
θ
−ln (L(θ, YT ))
(3.32)
The maximum likelihood estimator ˆθ is unbiased and has mean θ. Moreover, due to the Central
Limit Theorem, it is asymptotically Gaussian with covariance Σ. In the multivariate normal case,
Σ is equal to the inverse of the Fischer information matrix I(ˆθ), which is the negative expectation
of Hessian of the log-likelihood evaluated at ˆθ. This is approximated by:
I(ˆθ) ≈−

∂2
∂θi∂θj
ln L(ˆθ, YT )

(3.33)
With Σ = I−1(θ) various statistics of the ML estimator can be computed [27].
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
14
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 4
Case Study
The data used in this project is from the PTES located in Dronninglund, Denmark, and pro-
vided by DTU Construct. The data consists of measurements of various parameters such as
temperature, flow rates, and inlet/outlet temperatures of the PTES over the years 2014-2020.
A detailed description of both data and the specific PTES has been provided by Sifnaios et al.
(2023) [11] and Python scripts (Jupyter Notebooks) used for data treatment of the given data
can be found in the associated GitHub repository [28].
This chapter provides a summary of the Dronninglund Dataset with emphasis on the key pa-
rameters for modeling a data-driven digital twin, as well as the design decision made to accom-
modate these parameters.
4.1
Dronninglund PTES
The PTES in the Northern Jutland town, Dronninglund, has the shape of an inverted truncated
pyramid, as seen in Figure 2.1, with a depth of 16 meters and a volume of 60,000 m3. The top
area is approximately 91×91m, and with a side slope of 1 : 2, the bottom is about 26×26m [11].
Inlet and outlet water travels through three pipes entering the storage from below, slightly dis-
placed from the center, as seen in Figure 2.1. Each pipe ends in a diffuser consisting of two
parallel discs, each 2.5 meters in diameter and a distance of 0.58 meters between them. The
diffusers are located at different heights from the bottom of the storage, with the bottom diffuser
at 0.4 m, the middle diffuser at 10.9 m, and the top diffuser at 15.3 m. All heights are measured
at the center of the diffuser opening [11]. Figure 4.1 shows a sketch of the storage, including
the diffusers.
The Dronninglund PTES is connected to a 37,473 m2 flat-plate solar collector field and oper-
ates as a seasonal and short-term storage [11]. Whenever the heat production from the solar
collector fields exceeds the demand, the excess heat is used to charge the PTES. The storage
can supply heat directly to the district heating grid when the outlet temperature exceeds 75◦C.
Otherwise, it functions as a low-temperature heat source to an absorption heat pump [11].
4.2
Data Description
This thesis aims to model the temperature distribution in the PTES over time given input and
output water flows. Hence, the most essential measurements are the temperatures and flow
rates. In the Dronninglund dataset, these are measured every 10 seconds and saved as aver-
ages over 10 minutes. The temperature measurements are taken with two vertical temperature
sensor strings, each with 16 sensors with a distance of 1 meter between them. The strings are
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
15
==PAGE:23==
4.2. DATA DESCRIPTION
CHAPTER 4. CASE STUDY
located next to each other approximately in the middle of the storage, with an offset of 0.5 me-
ters in the positions of their sensors [11]. The approximate positions of the temperature sensors
are shown in the sketch of the PTES in Figure 4.1. The inlet and outlet water temperatures are
measured with 3 temperature sensors dedicated to each diffuser opening.
Figure 4.1: A rough sketch of the Dronninglund PTES. [11]. The red dots are temperature
sensors, and the yellow discs represent diffusers. NB dimensions are not to scale.
The PTES is charged and discharged either through the top or the middle diffuser, depending on
the current state of the storage and its operation strategy. The bottom diffuser ensures the mass
balance of the storage by pumping the same amount of water charged or discharged out from
or into the storage [11]. The flow rate, both magnitude and direction, has only been measured
for the middle diffuser. The SCADA control system, which operates the storage, estimates the
top and bottom flow rates. However, these estimates appear erroneous since they result in a
significant mass imbalance [11]. Sifnaios et al. (2023) [11] have provided derived estimates of
the top and bottom flow rates which ensure mass flow and energy balances. These derived
estimates are used in this thesis. The ambient temperature has been measured by the nearby
weather station Tylstrup, operated by DMI [11]. This data is available through the DMI API. The
Dronninglund dataset is provided in .csv format, where it has been stored with only one decimal
precision.
A summary of the measurements used in this thesis is shown in Table 4.1 below, and the data
is visualised in Figure 4.2. The top panel of Figure 4.2 shows the temperature distribution of
the storage over time. Since the storage is seasonal, it exhibits a yearly cycle. The middle and
bottom panels show the input flow rates and the temperature of the incoming water as weekly
averages, respectively.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
16
==PAGE:24==
4.2. DATA DESCRIPTION
CHAPTER 4. CASE STUDY
Table 4.1: List of measurements. The temperature uncertainty is derived from the single mea-
surement uncertainty of 0.15K and the averaging over 10 minutes considering each measure-
ment error to be uniformly distributed: [−0.15, 0.15]. The flow rates are directed with a positive
sign indicating inlet and a negative sign indicating outlet.
Name
Description
Unit
Interval
Uncertainty
T0.5
Temperature at 0.5 m
◦C
10 min
1.25 × 10−4K
T1.5
Temperature at 1 m
◦C
10 min
1.25 × 10−4K
...
...
...
...
...
T15.5
Temperature at 15.5 m
◦C
10 min
1.25 × 10−4K
Ttop
Temperature at top diffuser
◦C
10 min
1.25 × 10−4K
Tmid
Temperature at middle diffuser
◦C
10 min
1.25 × 10−4K
Tbot
Temperature at middle diffuser
◦C
10 min
1.25 × 10−4K
Tamb
Ambient temperature
◦C
-
-
Qtop
Flow rate at top diffuser
m3/h
10 min
-
Qmid
Flow rate at middle diffuser
m3/h
10 min
-
Qbot
Flow rate at bottom diffuser
m3/h
10 min
-
Figure 4.2: A visualiations of parts of the Dronninglund PTES dataset from 2014 to 2019. Top:
The temperature distribution of the storage as a function of time. The y-axis is temperature [◦C],
and height from the bottom of the storage is indicated by color. Middle: Weekly average of input
flow rates for the three inlets. Bottom: Weekly average of input water temperature at the three
inlets. Missing values for the two lower panels mean no input for the respective diffuser was
observed in the given week.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
17
==PAGE:25==
4.3. DATA TREATMENT
CHAPTER 4. CASE STUDY
4.3
Data Treatment
The temperatures measured within the storage will serve as observations in the Kalman filter,
which is used to estimate the system parameters. Ideally, a full storage cycle should capture
all the dynamics accurately. However, since the PTES in Dronninglund operates as a seasonal
storage, one cycle spans approximately one year, as shown in the top panel of Figure 4.2. With
a sampling frequency of 10 minutes, this results in 365 × 24 × 6 = 52, 560 samples per stor-
age cycle. Consequently, computing the Kalman filter-based likelihood for a parameter choice
becomes computationally intensive. To save computational resources, the data needs to be
downsampled. A lower sampling frequency of 1 hour is selected, and the data is downsampled
by averaging over each hour, resulting in 365 × 24 = 8, 760 samples per storage cycle.
4.3.1
Input and Outputs
The water flowing through the three diffusers changes the state of the system. The water flows
are denoted, from top to bottom, as Qtop, Qmid, and Qbot. These variables are positive for
incoming flow and negative for outgoing flow. To emphasize the direction, each flow variable
Q is divided into two components: Q = Q+ −Q−, where Q+ represents the positive-valued
incoming flow and Q−represents the positive-valued outgoing flow. Since water cannot flow in
both directions at the same time, when Q+ > 0, the outgoing flow must be zero, i.e., Q−= 0,
and conversely, when Q−> 0, the incoming flow must be zero, i.e., Q+ = 0.
Moreover, due to the mass-flow balance constraint and the three diffusers in the storage, there
are only 6 unique combinations of flow direction [11]. For instance, if a volume of water enters
at the top, the same volume must exit through the bottom, the middle, or a combination of both.
Water entering at the top creates a downward flow in the storage, as it needs to exit further
down. Conversely, water entering at the bottom creates an upward flow, as the water must exit
further up. The middle diffuser acts as a barrier between the upper and lower storage regions.
If the same volume of water that enters at the top exits through the middle, it can be reasonably
assumed that there is no water flow in the lower part of the storage, and vice versa.
The vertical direction of the storage water flow will affect the temperature profile. As this depends
not only on whether water enters or exits the storage but also on where it does, upward flow is
denoted as Q↑and downward flow as Q↓. It follows from above that:
Q+
bot = Q↑
bot,
Q−
bot = Q↓
bot
Q+
top = Q↓
top,
Q−
top= Q↑
top
4.3.2
Test and Training Data
Figure 4.3 shows many missing temperature measurements from 2014 to 2016. In contrast,
the years 2017 to 2020 have more consistent measurements. Therefore, 2017 was selected
for model fitting (training), and 2018 was chosen for evaluation (testing).
To reduce the computational expenses of computing the Kalman filter, a quite narrow storage
cycle spanning from May to November is selected for the training data, resulting in 4,500 ob-
servations. For the test set, a slightly wider storage cycle spanning from April to December is
selected, resulting in 6,000 observations. Table 4.2 provides summary statistics for the system’s
input variables for the training and test data. In the training and test data, the average top input
temperature is much larger than the other input temperatures, and the largest input flow comes
from charging the system Q+
top. The middle input diffuser is being used much less than the two
others.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
18
==PAGE:26==
4.3. DATA TREATMENT
CHAPTER 4. CASE STUDY
Figure 4.3: Visualisation of missing temperature measurements in the Dronninglund PTES
dataset.
Table 4.2: Summary statistics of the different input variables for the training data (2017)
Training N = 4, 500
Test N = 6, 000
Variable
Unit
Average
Min
Max
Std.
Average
Min
Max
Std.
Q+
top|Q↓
top
m3
h
28
0
455
75
20
0
525
66
Q−
top|Q↑
top
m3
h
37
0
144
30
36
0
255
44
Q+
mid
m3
h
15
0
318
34
33
0
555
86
Q−
mid
m3
h
7
0
64
9
19
0
137
24
Q+
bot|Q↑
bot
m3
h
34
0
148
32
45
0
258
47
Q−
bot|Q↓
bot
m3
h
33
0
453
76
43
0
538
96
Ttop
◦C
82
48
91
7
79
33
94
11
Tmid
◦C
56
19
80
13
68
14
97
21
Tbot
◦C
39
14
55
6
36
8
68
12
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
19
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 5
Statistical Model Building
This chapter outlines the statistical methods used to build the data-driven digital twin. First,
insights from an initial data exploration are presented, followed by physical considerations re-
garding the model structure. The model is then iteratively tested and improved based on one-
step residual diagnostics. The chapter ends with a brief discussion of the final model and its
limitations.
5.1
Data Exploration
As discussed in Chapter 2, the performance of the PTES depends on its energy content and
degree of stratification. The energy content is not useful to model alone, as the efficiency of the
system depends on the thermocline, which changes during both standby and operations. For a
digital twin to accurately describe and predict the general performance of the storage one week
from now, following some control strategy, the twin needs to model the temperature profile of
the storage correctly.
Figure 5.1 shows observed temperature distribution at various points during the training data
period (2017) for the Dronninglund PTES. The temperature distributions all follow a similar pat-
tern. The temperature remains constant, starting from the bottom and extending a few meters
up. Then, a thermocline appears, and the temperature rises sharply. This happens in one or
two stages until the top of the storage, where the hottest water is located. The temperature dis-
tributions, hence, do not follow the ideal logistic curve shown in Figure 2.2, but they do feature
many of the same characteristics. They all have monotonically increasing functions and dis-
play the same logistic thermocline. However, there is not just a single thermocline but several
located at different storage heights.
Describing the temperature distribution with a single logistic function seems inadequate, as two
thermoclines are present in all the considered distributions. However, some linear combinations
of logistic functions, such as the double logistic function:
f(x) = β0 +
β1
1 + exp {−κ1 (x −α1)} +
β2
1 + exp {−κ2 (x −α2)}
(5.1)
might describe the temperature profiles quite precisely. Figure 5.1 also shows numerically fitted
double logistic functions for each temperature profile indicated by the dashed lines. The fit is
qualitatively quite good for the 6 considered temperature profiles.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
20
==PAGE:28==
5.1. DATA EXPLORATION
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.1: The observed temperature distribution in the Dronninglund PTES for different points
in time during the training period in 2017. The dashed lines are numerically fitted double logistic
functions.
An experiment is conducted to evaluate how well the double logistic functions fit to N = 1, 125
(every fourth observed) temperature distribution in the training data. With a fitted temperature
distribution as a vector yi,fit, this is compared to an observed temperature distribution yi,obs of
the same dimension. The mean maximum absolute error, MMAE = 3.08K, Equation (5.2),
shows that, on average, the fitted temperature profiles are very close to the observed. Never-
theless, the overall maximum absolute deviation, MAD = 37K, Equation (5.3), shows that not
all fits are as precise as shown in Figure 5.1.
MMAE = 1
N max
i
|yi,obs −yi,fit|
(5.2)
MMAE = max max
i
|yi,obs −yi,fit|
(5.3)
The results indicate that the double logistic model can describe most observed temperature
profiles, with a few exceptions. Nonetheless, this is not useful for controlling the system, as the
physical interpretation of the parameters is missing.
5.1.1
Inputs
The nature of the inputs controlling the system is worth investigating, as this might affect the
model’s performance. Since a solar collector field charges the storage, the inputs are expected
to depend on the time of day. Figure 5.2 shows the Sample Auto-Correlation Function (SACF)
for the flow rate for each of the three diffusers. The input time series displays a strong auto-
correlation and a 24-hour seasonality, which aligns well with the production of solar heating.
The inputs change the temperature distribution in the storage. If the model does not perfectly
explain this, the same pattern will be visible in the residual distribution.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
21
==PAGE:29==
5.2. MULTI-NODE MODEL
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.2: The sample autocorrelation function for the input flow rates for the three diffusers.
The inputs display a strong autocorrelation with a 24-hour seasonality.
5.2
Multi-Node Model
Inspired by the works of others ([23], [24], [20], [19]), the fundamental structure of the digital
twin model will be a multi-node model employing a vertical 1D discretisation of the storage.
Each node i corresponds to a layer in the storage with an observable temperature Ti, assumed
to be uniform within the layer. This temperature, Ti, is the average temperature measured by
the sensors located in the layer. The temperature profile of the storage can be assumed to be
affected by natural heat convection in the water, heat conduction with the surroundings, forced
convection induced by the inlet/outlet water flow and the input water temperature.
Natural Heat Convection and Conduction
During a standby period, i.e., when no input or output flows affect the storage, only natural
convection and heat lost to the surroundings change the temperature distribution in the storage.
Natural convection affecting the temperature in storage layer i is modeled by
dTi
dt =
1
CpViρ ((Tt,i+1 −Tt,i)AiUs + (Tt,i−1 −Tt,i)Ai−1Us) ,
(5.4)
where Cp is the specific heat capacity of water, [
J
kg·K ], Vi is the volume of storage layer i, [m3], ρ
is density [ kg
m3 ], Ai is the top areal of layer i, [m2] and Us is the heat transfer coefficient between
storage layers, [
W
m2·K ]. It should be noted that natural convection does not occur upwards in
the top storage layer or downwards in the bottom storage layer as there is no water above or
below, respectively. To keep the model simple, the density of water is assumed to be constant
in the first place. By introducing the coefficient Ks =
Us
Cpρ, which has the unit [m/h], Eq. (5.4)
simplifies to
dTi
dt = 1
Vi
((Tt,i+1 −Tt,i)AiKs + (Tt,i−1 −Tt,i)Ai−1Ks) .
(5.5)
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
22
==PAGE:30==
5.2. MULTI-NODE MODEL
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
In addition to natural convection, heat is assumed to be lost from the storage to the surroundings
via heat conduction. Heat conduction is modeled similarly to convection but with other coeffi-
cients, Ksoil for heat lost to the surrounding soil and Kamb for heat lost through the top to the
ambient air. Ksoil and Kamb both have the unit [m/h]. Heat conduction is modeled as follows:
dTi
dt = 1
Vi
((Tt,soil,i −Tt,i)SiKsoil) ,
dTt,top
dt
=
1
Vtop
((Tt,amb −Tt,top)AtopKamb) ,
(5.6)
where the subscript top indicates the top layer and Si is the side areal of layer i.
Forced Convection
Vertical water flow in the storage imposes forced heat convection. This occurs whenever water
enters or exits the storage, causing water to move up or down. Since there are three inlet/outlets,
the vertical flow of water must be considered separately in two regions: the first between the
bottom and middle diffusers and the second between the middle and top diffusers. Due to
the mass flow balance in the storage, the amount of water entering the storage equates to
the amount of water exiting. Consequently, the bottom diffuser controls the vertical flow in the
lower region, and the top diffuser controls the upper region. Forced convection in the storage
is described by
dTi
dt = 1
Vi

(Tt,i+1 −Tt,i)Q↓
t,i + (Tt,i−1 −Tt,i)Q↑
t,i

ϕi,
(5.7)
where Q↓
t,i is downward directed water flow in layer i [ m3
h ], Q↑
t,i is upward directed water flow
in layer i [ m3
h ] and ϕi is a unitless parameter controlling the effect of forced convection. For
all layers below the middle diffuser, the water flow equals the flow through the bottom diffuser,
and for layers above the middle diffuser, the water flow equals the flow through the top diffuser.
Downward flow occurs during system charging, while upward flow occurs during discharging.
Input
Layers with an inlet are also affected directly by the incoming water temperature. This effect is
modeled by
dTi
dt = 1
Vi
(Tt,i,in −Tt,i)Qt,i,inνi,
(5.8)
where Tt,i,in is the temperature of the incoming water [◦C], Qt,i,in is the flow rate of the incoming
water [ m3
h ], and νi is a unitless parameter controlling the effect of input.
Geometry
Since the PTES considered has the shape of a truncated pyramid with a slope of 1 : 2, the
volume and surface areas used in the model are calculated using the corresponding geometrical
formulas for this shape. Note that each layer will also be shaped as a truncated pyramid. Given
the top area, G and bottom area, g, with G > g, the volume, V , of a truncated pyramid of height
h is found as:
V = h
3

G + g +
p
Gg

.
The length, l, of one of the sides can be found as
l =
q
h2 + (
√
G −√g)2,
and the area of one side is found as the area of a trapeze:
s = 1
2l + (
√
G + √g).
The total side surface area of the truncated pyramid, S, is then:
S = 4s
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
23
==PAGE:31==
5.2. MULTI-NODE MODEL
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Parameters to be Estimated
The parameters left to be estimated in the model are the modified heat transfer coefficients
Ks, Ksoil and Kamb, the forced convection parameters ϕi and the input parameters νi. The
soil temperature Tsoil must be estimated as a constant or as a time-varying parameter Tt,soil.
Furthermore, the modified heat transfer coefficients are assumed to be the same for all layers
in the model, but ϕi and νi lack physical interpretation and might differ from layer to layer, hence
the subscript i. Furthermore, the soil temperature can vary by depth: Tt,soil,i.
5.2.1
Continuous-Discrete Time Stochastic State Space Model
By combining all the effects considered above and adding Brownian motion Bt and constant
state-independent system noise intensity σX, the system equations for a model with N nodes
are as follows:
dXt,N−1 =
1
VN−1

(Xt,N−2 −Xt,N−1) · (Q↑
t,topϕN−1 + AN−2Ks) + (Tt,amb −Xt,N−1)AN−1Kamb
+(Tt,in,top −Xt,N−1)Q↓
t,topνtop

dt + σXdBt,N−1
dXt,N−2 =
1
VN−2

(Xt,N−3 −Xt,N−2) · (Q↑
t,topϕN−2 + At,N−3Ks) + (Xt,N−1 −Xt,N−2) · (Q↓
t,topϕN−2 + AN−2Ks
+(Tt,soil,N−2 −XN−2)SN−2Ksoil) dt + σXdBt,N−2
...
dXt,M =
1
VM

(Xt,M−1 −Xt,M) · (Q↑
t,botϕM + AMKs) + (Xt,M+1 −Xt,M) · (Q↓
t,topϕM + AMKs)
+(Tt,soil,M −XM)SMKsoil + (Tt,in,mid −TM)Qt,in,midνmid) dt + σXdBt,M
...
dXt,1 = 1
V1

(Xt,0 −Xt,1) · (Q↑
t,botϕ1 + A0Ks) + (Xt,2 −Xt,1) · (Q↓
t,botϕ1 + A1Ks)
+ (Tt,soil,1 −Xt,1)S1Uside) dt + σXdBt,1
dXt,0 = 1
V0

(Xt,1 −Xt,0) · (Q↓
t,botϕ0 + A0Ks) + (Tt,in,bot −Xt,0) · Q↑
t,botνbot
+(Tt,soil,0 −Xt,0)AbotKsoil) dt + σXdBt,0
where Xt,i is the true temperature at time t for layer i, Tt,amb and Tt,soil are the temperatures at
time t for the ambient air and the soil region, Utop, Uside, Ubot are heat loss coefficients for heat
lost through the top, side, and bottom of the storage, respectively. Furthermore, Tt,in,top,Tt,in,mid
and Tt,in,bot are the inlet water temperatures through the top, middle and bottom diffusers, re-
spectively. The layers are numbered from bottom to top as 0 < M < N −1, where M is the
middle input layer. Figure 5.3 illustrates the model with a sketch of the three top storage layers.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
24
==PAGE:32==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.3: A sketch of three top storage layers in the multi-node model. The arrows indicate
the direction of the heat.
A model with N nodes has N states:
Xt = [Xt,0, . . . , Xt,N−1],
and 9 inputs:
Ut = [Q↑
t,bot, Q↓
t,bot, Q↑
t,top, Q↓
t,top, Qt,in,mid, Tt,in,bot, Tt,in,top, Tt,in,mid, Tt,amb].
The system equations above will be written more compactly as:
dXt = f(Xt, Ut)dt + σXdBt
(5.9)
where f is a vector valued function representing the N system equations above and Bt is N-
dimensional Brownian motion.
The observation equations relate the true states of the system, Xtk,i, at the discrete time tk, to
the discrete-time measurements Ttk,i as follows:
Ttk,i = Xtk,i + etk,i,
etk,i ∼N(0, σT ),
where etk,i is the oberservation noise in layer i at time tk. The noise stems from measurement
errors, uniformly distributed within ±0.15K (see Table 4.1). The observations, however, are
averages of these, and according to the central limit theorem, it is fair to assume that etk,i is
normally distributed with mean 0 and variance σ2
T .
The effect of input depends on the state of the system. Hence, the system is nonlinear. There-
fore, the extended Kalman filter will be employed to simulate the system and to estimate the
parameters.
5.3
Model Building
The foundation for all models considered is Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) as de-
scribed in Chapter 3. For parameter and state estimation, the open software ctsmr1 is used.
ctsmr is an R package for estimating continuous-discrete time state-space models based on
the log-likelihood and the extended Kalman filter [29]. It is a tool developed over many years
at DTU Compute and is considered both efficient and stable [29]. The ctsmr are state-space
models implemented in Fortran and thus extremely fast.
1Continuous Time Stochastic Modelling (CTSM): https://ctsm.info/
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
25
==PAGE:33==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Selection Procedure
A standard statistical selection procedure is employed to identify the most suitable model. The
process begins with specifying and fitting a simple model to the training data by estimating pa-
rameters that maximise the likelihood of one-step predictions given the training data. The model
is then refined by adding more parameters and comparing the extended model’s likelihood to
that of the initial model. Evaluation is also based on the model’s adherence to fundamental
assumptions, specifically that residuals are independent and normally distributed around zero.
Different tools will be used to verify these assumptions. A different model structure should be
considered if the extended model fails to meet the assumptions. The selection procedure is
then repeated with the new model structure.
5.3.1
Initial Model
The Dronninglund dataset features readings from 32 temperature sensors positioned every half
meter. This could form a continuous-discrete time state-space model with 32 observable states.
However, a current limitation of ctsmr is the number of states possible to estimate. Therefore,
the sensors are grouped by taking the average temperature over 1 meter, with 2 sensors in each
interval. This procedure results in N = 16 observable states. The middle diffuser is located in
layer M = 10 following this storage partitioning.
The computational expenses are reduced further by setting one step in discrete time to one
hour. Hence, the observations are grouped by hourly averages. Eq. (5.10) below shows how
the observation noise is calculated from the measurement uncertainty of σϵ = 1.25×10−4, given
in Table 4.1, as hourly averages of two sensors, i and j,
σT =
q
V [etk] =
v
u
u
tV
"
1
2
1
6
6
X
k=1
ϵtk,i + 1
2
1
6
6
X
k=1
ϵtk,j
#
=
1
√
12σϵ
(5.10)
For the initial model, the soil temperature is assumed to be constant, i.e. Tt,soil,i = Tsoil. Addi-
tionally, all layers are assumed to share the same forced convection parameter, i.e. ϕi = ϕ. As
a result, the initial model has k = 9 parameters to be estimated. The left column of Table 5.1
lists these parameters, including initial values and lower and upper bounds for the numerical
optimiser. All parameters are assumed to be positive and are thus estimated in the log domain.
The model is fitted to the training data using the likelihood computed from the extended Kalman
filter. The initial values of the states are set as the first measurements. The right column of Ta-
ble 5.1 shows rounded log estimates, actual estimates, and standard errors of the log estimates
for all the parameters.
The model is evaluated based on one-step prediction errors using Mean Squared Error (MSE)
described in Eq. (5.11) and Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) described in Eq. (5.12) below.
MSE =
1
N · T
N
X
i
T
X
tk
(Ttk,i −Xtk,i)2
(5.11)
AIC = 2k −2 ln(ˆL),
(5.12)
where, k is the number of parameters in the model and ˆL is the maximised likelihood. Low values
for each score indicate a good fit. A persistent forecast model (random walk) is chosen as a
baseline for comparison. Table 5.2 shows the validation metrics based on one-step predictions
for the baseline and the proposed initial model.
Figure 5.4 shows the one-step residuals over time across all layers, Figure 5.5 shows the cor-
responding Sample Auto-Correlation Function (SACF) and Figure 5.6 shows QQ plots, which
compare the residual distribution to a normal distribution.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
26
==PAGE:34==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Table 5.1: Left: The initial values and upper and lower bounds for parameter estimation of the
initial model. Right: ML estimates for the parameters. It should be noted that parameters are
fitted in the log domain, and the column ’Est.’ shows the exponential of these estimates.
Param.
Unit
Initial
Lower
Upper
Est.
Log Est.
Std. Error
ϕ
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.937
−0.065
2.667 × 10−3
νbot
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.257
−1.357
0.022
νmid
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.589
−0.528
0.020
νtop
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
1.816
0.597
0.010
Ks
[m/h]
1
1 × 10−12
10
7.046 × 10−11
−23.376
7.086
Ksoil
[m/h]
1
1 × 10−12
10
3.504 × 10−4
−7.956
0.129
Kamb
[m/h]
1
1 × 10−12
10
1.599 × 10−4
−8.741
0.067
Tsoil
[◦C]
1
1 × 10−12
10
3.230 × 10−6
−12.643
82.704
σx
[K]
0.1
1 × 10−12
1
0.037
−3.293
3.573 × 10−3
σT
[K]
3.61 × 10−5
−
−
Table 5.2: Training log-likelihood, AIC, and MSE for one-step predictions for the initial model
compared to a baseline model. The baseline model is a persistent forecast model (random
walk).
Model
Log Lik.
AIC
MSE
Persistent Forecast
7.0103 × 104
−1.4020 × 105
0.0142
Initial Model
1.17826 × 105
−2.35634 × 105
0.0042
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
27
==PAGE:35==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.4: The residual of one-step prediction for the 16 layers in the model distributed over
time. In general, the model’s one-step predictions deviate with less than 0.2K from the actual
temperature in the different layers, with the largest deviations observed in the top layer 15.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
28
==PAGE:36==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.5: The sample ACF of the residuals of the one-step predictions for the 16 layers in the
model. Red lines are the ACF for the initial model and blue lines are for the baseline (persistent
forecast) The residuals depict a strong positive autocorrelation for positive lags and a clear 24H.
seasonality.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
29
==PAGE:37==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.6: QQ plot of the one-step residuals for the 16 layers in the model, comparing the
residual distribution with a normal distribution with the same mean and variance as observed
in the residuals. The residuals are not normally distributed as the upper and lower sample
quantiles deviate from the theoretical (indicated with the red lines).
Comments
The soil temperature Tsoil cannot be estimated as a constant value from the training data. This
is seen in Table 5.1 where the standard error of Tsoil is 82.7◦C. It should hence be excluded
from the model Tsoil = 0◦C or allowed to vary with the storage layers or over time. Excluding
Tsoil from the model is not meaningful without reconsidering Ksoil. Otherwise, the model loses
energy to a surrounding soil region that is constantly freezing.
The estimate for Ks is practically 0m
h (see Table 5.1) with a relatively large associated standard
error of 7.086m
h . This indicates that natural convection cannot be measured from the training
data, and the parameter can be excluded from the model. The fact that Ks cannot be estimated
from the data is an issue since natural convection is the only thing affecting the temperature
distribution in the storage during standby periods. The dynamics of natural convection are too
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
30
==PAGE:38==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
slow to be measured in the data compared to the almost constant changing dynamics due to
forced convection.
The impact of the input water temperature on the top layer, νtop, is 3 and 7 times greater than its
impact on the middle, νmid, and bottom, νbot, layers, respectively. Consequently, the dynamics
in the top layer are faster than in the other layers. This is also evident in Figure 5.4, where the
residuals for the top layer are significantly larger.
Table 5.1 also shows that the effects of natural heat convection and heat conduction are minor
compared to the effects of the input and forced convection.
The model performs significantly better than the baseline (Table 5.2). However, Figure 5.5
shows a large autocorrelation for all positive lags over all layers, suggesting that the model
misses some system dynamics. It can also be seen that the residuals exhibit a daily season-
ality, most likely due to the inputs displaying the same patterns as discussed in section 5.1.1.
Additionally, the QQ plot shows that the residual distributions for all layers have quite heavy
tails compared to a normal distribution.
5.3.2
Removing Heat Conduction
Heat conduction with the soil is neglected from the model, reducing the number of parameters to
k = 7. Table 5.3 compares the initial model with the reduced model without heat conduction in
respect to log-likelihood, AIC, and MSE. Removing heat conduction from the model reduces its
predictive performance across all three measures. However, assuming a constant soil tempera-
ture of 0◦C all year around does not seem logical either and might harm the model’s longer-term
forecasting capabilities.
The soil temperature could be modeled more precisely by incorporating it as additional states
within the model. In other studies that utilise multi-node models for simulation, such as those by
Pan et al. [19] and Bai et al. [20], the surrounding soil region is represented as a two-dimensional
grid of nodes with heat conduction between them, incorporating several extra nodes into the
model. This should perhaps be the recommended procedure, but it is not feasible with the
current state of ctsmr. It is observed, that when the number of states increases the software
struggles to make any predictions. Therefore, the temperature distribution of the soil region
around the PTES will be neglected for now.
5.3.3
Removing Natural Heat Convection
Table 5.1 shows an insignificant estimated value of Ks. This indicates that the effect of natural
convection is so small it might be neglected. Therefore, it is set to zero, i.e., removed from the
model. Table 5.3 shows that removing Ks from the model improves the AIC slightly compared
to the model without heat conduction.
An interesting observation is that allowing Ks to be negative improves the model in all validation
metrics. In this case, the ML estimate for the natural convection coefficient is Ks = −3.4589 ×
10−3 with a standard error of 4.4224 × 10−5 and is, hence, significantly negative.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
31
==PAGE:39==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Table 5.3: Training log-likelihood, AIC, and MSE for one-step predictions for the initial model
compared to reduced models. The first step removes the conduction of heat to the soil from the
model. The second step removes natural convection and the final step considers a negative
value of Ks.
Model
Log Lik.
AIC
MSE
Initial Model
1.17826 × 105
−2.35634 × 105
0.0042
No heat conduction
1.17232 × 105
−2.34450 × 105
0.0043
Removing Ks
1.17374 × 105
−2.34737 × 105
0.0043
Negative Ks
1.20498 × 105
−2.40982 × 105
0.0040
Comments
In physical terms, a negative value for Ks lacks logical interpretation. It is associated with spon-
taneous heat convection, which stems from the second law of thermodynamics. Therefore, a
negative Ks value would imply a reversal of the system’s entropy, which is impossible. Allowing
Ks to be negative may improve the model’s one-step predictions but reduce its interpretability.
Since it no longer follows the laws of physics, it should not be used to control the system. The
fact that negative Ks improves the model is most likely due to overfitting.
5.3.4
Adding ’Inertia’
The ACF in Figure 5.5 display an exponential decay, with several significantly positive lags. This
pattern is evident across all layers and shows that some higher-order dynamics are missing
from the model. An extra state should be added to better model each layer. This will double
the number of states, which will be a problem for ctsmr to handle. Therefore, a different and
coarser spatial partitioning of the storage must be chosen.
The new partitioning consists of six layers: five layers, each measuring 3 meters, from the
bottom up to the top layer, which measures 1 meter. The data is transformed to match this model
by averaging the hourly aggregated temperature measurements over each layer. The model
sacrifices some spatial resolution to accommodate the additional states, primarily because of
the limitations of the software. Perhaps future implementations of ctsmr will be able to deal with
a larger number of states.
Deciding how the additional states should enter the model is not straightforward. Ideally, the
new states should represent some system dynamics currently absent in the model, which could
be many things due to fluids’ complex behavior. Figure 5.5 displays SACF of the residuals of a
model in which temperature is primarily influenced by forced convection, that is, the temperature
change is due to the movement of fluids with varying temperatures. Furthermore, the model
assumes that the entire water column adapts instantaneously to the slightest change in the
input water flow. Hence, introducing the model to some inertia seems reasonable. This is
done through an extra temperature state Yt,i for each layer i. The system equations of the new
augmented model are as follows:
d ˜Xt = f( ˜Xt, Ut)dt + µx(Yt −˜Xt)dt + σXdBt
(5.13)
dYt = µy( ˜Xt −Yt)dt + σY dBt,
(5.14)
where ˜Xt is the new state vector of the temperatures, Yt is the vector of extra temperature
states, and µx and µy are parameters with unit [h−1] which control the heat transfer between
˜Xt and Yt. These are assumed to be positive. f(·) is the system equation for layer i as in the
initial model, Equation (5.9). Yt can be considered artificial temperatures regulating how fast
the temperatures of the system, ˜Xt, are allowed to change. Therefore, inertia has not been
introduced exactly, but a similar effect is regulated. To initialise the filter, Y0 is set equal to X0.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
32
==PAGE:40==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
The new observation equations are as before:
Ttk,i = ˜Xtk,i + etk,i,
etk,i ∼N(0, σT ),
A model without any additional states will serve as a baseline for comparing the augmented
models. Natural heat convection and heat conduction with the soil will be excluded from all
models in this subsection. This aligns with the observations made in the previous section and
simplifies parameter estimation.
The new model is fitted to the training data, and the parameters are estimated using ML esti-
mators. Table 5.4 shows the estimated parameters in the right column and initial values and
bounds passed to the optimiser in the left column.
Table 5.5 shows the validation metrics for the fitted model based on one-step predictions for
the augmented model compared with the baseline. Additionally, Figure 5.7 compares the aug-
mented model with the baseline in terms of the ACF of the one-step residuals, and Figure 5.8
shows QQ plots of the one-step residuals for the augmented model.
Furthermore, Table 5.6 compares the model’s predictive performance for each layer in terms of
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) with the baseline.
Table 5.4: Left: The initial values and upper and lower bounds for parameter estimation for the
augmented model. Right: ML estimates for the parameters. It should be noted that parameters
are fitted in the log domain, and the column ’Est.’ shows the exponential of these estimates.
Param
Unit
Initial
Lower
Upper
Est.
Log Est.
Std. Error
ϕ
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.8161
−0.2031
0.0109
νbot
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
1.1651
0.1529
0.0294
νmid
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.7922
−0.2330
0.0457
νtop
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
2.4349
0.8896
0.0132
Kamb
[m/h]
1
1 × 10−12
10
4.0912 × 10−10
−21.617
0.40234
µX
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.0629
−2.7661
0.0531
µY
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.2165
−1.5299
0.0282
σX
[K]
0.1
1 × 10−12
1
0.0217
−3.8299
0.0097
σY
[K]
0.1
1 × 10−12
1
0.5355
−0.6245
0.0506
σT,3m
[K]
3.61 × 10−5
-
-
σT,1m
[K]
2.08 × 10−5
-
-
Table 5.5: Training log-likelihood, AIC, and MSE for one-step predictions for the augmented
model compared to the baseline model without extra states.
Model
Log Lik.
AIC
MSE
Baseline Model
3.8352 × 104
−7.6693 × 104
0.0048
Augmented Model
4.6886 × 104
−9.3754 × 104
0.0028
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
33
==PAGE:41==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Table 5.6: The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) for the one-step predictions across the 6
layers in the model. The augmented model is compared to the baseline without extra state.
The lower part of the table shows how much the augmented model improves compared to the
baseline.
RMSE [K]
X0
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Baseline
0.0614
0.0542
0.0367
0.0348
0.0684
0.1226
Augmented Model
0.0380
0.0330
0.0233
0.0256
0.0411
0.1092
Improvement [K]
0.0234
0.0212
0.0134
0.0092
0.0273
0.0134
Relative Improvement (%)
38.04
39.18
36.62
26.34
39.92
10.95
Figure 5.7: The sample ACF of the one-step prediction residuals for the 6 layers in the model.
The blue lines are the residual ACF for the baseline model, and the black lines are the corre-
sponding residual ACF for the augmented model. The 24-hour seasonality is still visible in both
models, but overall, the ACF goes much faster to zero for the augmented model, indicating a
better fit.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
34
==PAGE:42==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.8: QQ plots of the residual for the one-step predictions comparing the residual distribu-
tion for each of the 6 layers with a normal distribution. The residuals are not normally distributed,
as the upper and lower sample quantiles deviate from the theoretical (the red lines).
Comments
Introducing the artificial temperature states Yt improves the model significantly compared to the
baseline. Table 5.5 shows large improvements in both the AIC and MSE, which is reduced from
48 × 10−3 to 28 × 10−3. Table 5.6 shows that the improvement is significant across all layers
in the model. The relative improvement in RMSE is above 30% in most layers. The top layer,
where the performance is worst, is also the layer with the smallest relative improvement.
Figure 5.7 demonstrates that the ACF has improved across all layers. The new model’s residu-
als are closer to being white noise than the baseline, as the ACF declines quickly towards zero.
The 24-hour seasonality is, however, still evident.
Figure 5.8 shows that the sample quantiles of the residual distribution do not follow a theoretical
Gaussian distribution. The residuals can thus still not be considered Gaussian.
Table 5.4 shows that the effect of heat loss is quite insignificant compared to the other estimates,
with Kamb = 4.1 × 10−10 m
h .
5.3.5
Improving the Model
The augmented model only has k = 9 parameters since most of them are shared between the
different layers in the model. One way to increase the model’s performance is to introduce more
layer-specific parameters. This is done for the top layer first since this has the highest RMSE.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
35
==PAGE:43==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
By doing so, the model can more accurately describe the dynamics of the top layer without
considering all the other layers.
Table 5.7 compares the augmented model with its extension with 3 extra parameters (k = 12).
The extended model has a log-likelihood of ˆl = 5.3 × 104 and is, hence, significantly better than
the simple model, which has a log-likelihood of ˆl = 4.7 × 104. The MSE also improves slightly
from 0.0028 to 0.0027. The model is further extended by considering each layer to not share
any parameters, resulting in a model with k = 24 parameters. Table 5.7 shows that this further
improves the model regarding AIC and MSE. Table 5.8 compares the RMSE for each layer for
the augmented model with shared parameters and the one with layer-specific parameters. The
RMSE is reduced across all layers for the extended model. All parameters in the final model are
listed in Table 5.9. Moreover, Figure 5.9 compares the ACF for the residuals of the final model
with the first augmented model and the baseline, and Figure 5.10 shows QQ plots for the final
model’s residuals.
Table 5.7: Training log-likelihood, AIC, and MSE of one-step predictions compared for different
models. The first row is the original augmented model with 9 parameters, and the others are
extended models with 12 and 24 parameters, respectively.
Model
Log Lik.
AIC
MSE
Augmented (k = 9)
4.6886 × 104
−9.3754 × 104
0.0028
Extended (k = 12)
5.3297 × 104
−1.06583 × 105
0.0027
Extended (k = 24)
5.4579 × 104
−1.09109 × 105
0.0026
Table 5.8: The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) for the one-step predictions across the 6
layers in the model. The extended model with 24 parameters is compared to the model with 9
parameters. The lower part of the table shows how much the extended model has improved
compared to the original.
RMSE [K]
X0
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Augmented (k = 9)
0.0380
0.0330
0.0233
0.0256
0.0411
0.1092
Extended (k = 24)
0.0356
0.0316
0.0226
0.0253
0.0344
0.1068
Improvement [K]
0.0024
0.0014
0.007
0.003
0.0067
0.0024
Relative improvement (%)
6.47
4.13
2.95
1.22
16.28
2.15
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
36
==PAGE:44==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Table 5.9: Left: The initial values and upper and lower bounds for parameter estimation for the
extended model. Right: ML estimates for the parameters. It should be noted that parameters
are fitted in the log domain, and the column ’Est.’ shows the exponential of these estimates.
Param.
Unit
Initial
Lower
Upper
Est.
Log Est.
Std. Error
νbot
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
1.0142
1.4101 × 10−2
2.9488 × 10−2
νmid
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.8449
−0.1685
2.7325 × 10−2
νtop
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
2.2017
0.7892
2.1663 × 10−2
ϕ0
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.5345
−0.6263
2.8902 × 10−2
ϕ1
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.8193
−0.1992
1.6807 × 10−2
ϕ2
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.8436
−0.1699
1.1911 × 10−2
ϕ3
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.6982
−0.3592
1.4980 × 10−2
ϕ4
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
1.3755
0.3188
1.1480 × 10−2
ϕ5
[−]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.4316
−0.8402
5.9979 × 10−2
µX0
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.0254
−3.6730
2.0492 × 10−2
µX1
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.0231
−3.7641
2.1530 × 10−2
µX2
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.0136
−4.2954
2.6148 × 10−2
µX3
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.0156
−4.1580
3.2407 × 10−2
µX4
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.0280
−3.5746
2.3399 × 10−2
µX5
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.1813
−1.7071
2.3726 × 10−2
µY0
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.1505
−1.8937
6.3431 × 10−2
µY1
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.1372
−1.9856
7.3595 × 10−2
µY2
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.1193
−2.1253
7.0786 × 10−2
µY3
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.1637
−1.8095
7.3696 × 10−2
µY4
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
0.2225
−1.5024
5.8861 × 10−2
µY5
[h−1]
1
1 × 10−12
10
1.2598
0.2310
4.0746 × 10−2
Kamb
[m/h]
1
1 × 10−12
10
3.5634 × 10−4
−7.9396
0.12262
σX
[K]
0.1
1 × 10−12
1
0.0133
−4.3178
9.1953 × 10−3
σY
[K]
0.1
1 × 10−12
1
1
−1.3441 × 10−9
0.0506
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
37
==PAGE:45==
5.3. MODEL BUILDING
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.9: The sample ACF of the one-step predictions residuals across the 6 layers in the
model. Each figure compares the ACF of the baseline with the augmented model with 9 param-
eters and its extended version with 24 parameters.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
38
==PAGE:46==
5.4. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Figure 5.10: QQ plots of the one-step prediction residuals for the 6 layers in the model. The
QQ plots compare the residual distribution with a normal distribution with the same mean and
variance. The residual distributions are not Gaussian, as the upper and lower sample quantiles
deviate from the theoretical (the red lines).
5.4
Discussion
Interpretation of Parameters
Table 5.9 indicates that the effect of input in the top layer, νtop ≈2.2, is twice as large as in
the bottom layer, νbot ≈1.0. This means that when the same volume of water, relative to the
layers’ volume and with an equivalent temperature difference, enters the top layer rather than
the bottom, the temperature at the top layer increases by twice as much as it would for the
bottom layer. This could be explained by the fact that if relatively warm water enters the bottom
of the storage, it will quickly mix with the above layers.
The effects of forced convection ϕi generally stay below the effect of input ν, except for layer
X4, between the top and middle diffuser. This layer might be affected more directly by the input
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
39
==PAGE:47==
5.4. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
from either diffuser, which results in the relatively large value for ϕ4. The ϕi parameters are
unitless and regulate how much the temperature in a storage layer responds to incoming water
from an adjacent layer. Therefore, ϕi < 1 means that only a fraction of the incoming water is
mixed with layer i, whereas ϕi > 1 means more water is mixed with layer i than expected. For
example, ϕ2 ≈0.84 indicates that for layer 2, when water moves either up or down through this
layer, roughly 16 % of the moving water is not mixed with this layer. This could be because the
vertical water flow is not uniform in the storage as assumed in the model, and the mixing effect
due to forced convection is more complex. Nevertheless, ϕi < 1 will result in some heat loss
as the water not mixing with layer i is not accounted for.
The artificial temperature states Yt regulate how the actual temperature state Xt responds to the
system inputs. Figure 5.11 illustrates this effect for two different deterministic scenarios for the
parameters µX = 0.02 and µY = 0.1. With the constant drift f(Xt, Ut) = 0.1, the model without
the extra state would follow the black dashed lines in each panel. The top panel shows how
Xt and Yt evolve when X0 = Y0, and the bottom panels show how they evolve when X0 < Y0.
In the first case, the dynamics for Xt are slowed down, and in the latter case, they are initially
sped up and then slowed down again. This model extension introduces some second-order
dynamics, which were missing before.
Figure 5.11: The evolution for Xt and Yt in two different scenarios with constant drift f(Xt, Ut) =
0.1 over an arbitrary time interval [0 : 10], with parameters: µX = 0.02 and µY = 0.1. Top: Shows
a scenarios where X0 = Y0. Bottom: Shows a scenerio where Y0 = X0 + 0.5.
The estimate for the system noise for Yt has reached the optimiser’s upper bound, σY = 1K, and
is significantly larger than its counterpart: σX ≈0.01K. Since it has reached the optimisation
bound, it might have been estimated even higher if the bounds had been different. The relatively
high value of σY also means that in the reconstruction step of the Kalman filter, Yt is likely to
change much more than Xt is. Consequently, even though the dynamics between Xt and Yt
can be slow, as shown in Figure 5.11, Yt might suddenly jump after being reconstructed. This
could result in a jump from the top to the bottom scenario in Figure 5.11, which gives two quite
different predictions in the next step of the Kalman filter.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
40
==PAGE:48==
5.4. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 5. STATISTICAL MODEL BUILDING
Residuals
The top layer, X5, is more challenging to model than other layers due to its faster dynamics
caused by high-temperature water entering the top of the storage. This results in a larger vari-
ance in the residual distribution than in other layers, with an RMSE of 0.1K.
Figure 5.10 indicates that the residuals are not normally distributed as the lower and upper
sample quantiles deviate from the theoretical. A fundamental assumption in the Kalman filter
is that the residual distribution is Gaussian. Since this is not the case, the model’s probabilistic
forecasts are untrustworthy, and the likelihood function might have been wrongly assumed to
stem from a multivariate Gaussian distribution. In other words, this false assumption harms the
model’s forecasting capabilities and parameter estimation. Ideally, ensuring normally distributed
residuals should be investigated further, perhaps by introducing some input-dependent noise
intensity.
Figure 5.9 shows minimal autocorrelation in the residuals for the final model. Only the 24-hour
seasonality is evident. The seasonality is mostly due to the input exhibiting the same pattern.
Therefore, the model captures the overall dynamics of the system quite well compared to the
initial model. It should be noted that the ACF only captures linear dependencies, but the system
is assumed to be nonlinear. A more careful residual diagnostic that includes the lag dependence
function could have been used to capture non-linear dependencies [25].
Modeling Considerations
The final model features no natural convection, and only very little heat is lost through the top.
This is not quite in alignment with reality, where heat is also lost to the surrounding soil region
and degraded within the storage. However, for small time steps, such as 1 hour, these effects
are too subtle to be captured in data and, hence, cannot be estimated. A different objective
function that includes longer forecast horizons rather than one-step predictions could address
this issue.
The temperature of the soil region could have been modelled with additional states, describing
the temperature distribution here. The surface areal of the sides of the storage are large and,
therefore, the heat loss through the sides of the pit is substantial. To better assess the perfor-
mance of the storage, this should be considered. However, with ctsmr it is a trade-off between
modelling the thermocline or the heat loss correctly.
The model’s primary limitation is the software used, which struggles with estimating more than
10 states. As a result, a very coarse partitioning of the storage had to be chosen, which makes
the model very prone to numerical diffusion and potentially unable to capture the thermocline
correctly. Despite this, accurately modeling the water temperature at the top of the storage over
time is more crucial for optimising system control than for modeling the thermocline. Describ-
ing the thermocline correctly would improve the accuracy of the prediction of the top layer’s
temperature, but it is not strictly necessary for control purposes.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
41
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Model Evaluation
The purpose with the model developed in Chapter 5 is to be used for short-term control. The
definition of ”short-term” will be determined by the stakeholders of the PTES in Høje Taastrup.
However, based on notes from Energianalyse [30], and VEKS [31], the system is anticipated
to be operated based on weekly forecasts. This chapter will evaluate the model on different
forecasting horizons of up to two weeks.
6.1
Key Performance Indicators
The predicted temperature distribution is compared to the observed data to evaluate the model’s
performance across various forecasting horizons. This comparison is not straightforward since
the temperature profile of the storage is described with numerous measurements. Moreover, the
importance of the predicted temperatures depends on the thermocline of the system. Therefore,
different Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) that quantify the state of the system with a single
number will be used to compare.
6.1.1
Density and Specific Heat as Functions of Temperature
In the model building phase, the density ρ of water was, for simplicity, assumed to be constant.
Nonetheless, the temperature-dependent density of water, together with gravity, is the driving
factor behind the thermal stratification of the storage. When assessing the energy content of
the storage, it is more correct to consider the density as a function of temperature. Moreover,
the specific heat of water also depends on the temperature. To provide more correct estimates
of the KPIs, both the density and the specific heat capacity will be considered functions of the
temperature. These functions will be the same as used in the GitHub project [28] and are as
follows:
ρ(T) =999.85 + 5.332 · 10−2 · T −7.564 · 10−3 · T 2 + 4.323 · 10−5 · T 3
−1.673 · 10−7 · T 4 + 2.447 · 10−10 · T 5
(6.1)
Cp(T) =4218.4 −2.8218 · 10 · T + 7.3478 · 10−2 · T 2 −9.4712 · 10−4 · T 3
+ 7.2869 · 10−6 · T 4 −2.8098 · 10−8 · T 5 + 4.4008 · 10−11 · T 6
(6.2)
The functions are plotted over the interval T : [10, 90] in Figure 6.1 below. The density decreases
as the temperature increases, while the specific heat initially dips, reaching a minimum of around
40°C, and increases hereafter.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
42
==PAGE:50==
6.1. KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.1: Top: The water density as a temperature function. Bottom: The specific heat of
water as a function of temperature.
6.1.2
Energy Content
The total energy content, ˆQt, measures the total amount of energy [J] the storage contains at
time t. For a single storage layer, i, with volume, Vi and temperature Tt,i the energy content of
this layer at time t Qt,i is found as
Qt,i = Vi · ρ(Tt,i) · Cp(Tt,i) · (Tt,i −Tmin),
(6.3)
where Tmin is a reference temperature, which is taken to be Tmin = 10◦C. The total energy
content is then found by summing the energy content of all storage layers:
ˆQt =
N−1
X
i=0
Qt,i
(6.4)
6.1.3
Stratification Coefficient
The stratification coefficient measures the mass-weighted mean square distance of the storage
layers’ temperatures to the average storage temperature Tt,avg. This is measured as follows:
Str =
1
mt,total
N−1
X
i=0
mt,i (Tt,i −Tt,avg)2
where mt,i is the mass of storage layer i and mtotal,i is the total mass of the storage, which
depends on the temperature distribution in the storage and, hence, on time t.
6.1.4
MIX Number
Estimating the MIX number is more complex compared to other KPIs. It assesses where the
energy-momentum content measured in the storage, Meexp, falls between two extreme sce-
narios: a fully mixed storage, Memixed, and a perfectly stratified storage, Mestratified. In a fully
mixed storage, the temperature is uniform throughout the entire storage. In a perfectly stratified
storage, the storage is divided into two regions: a top region with a temperature of Tmax and
a bottom region with a temperature of Tmin, where Tmax is set to 90◦C and Tmin is set to 10◦C.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
43
==PAGE:51==
6.1. KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
For this comparison to be valid, all three storage scenarios must have the same total energy
content: ˆQexp = ˆQstratified = ˆQmixed. The MIX number is then defined as:
MIX =
Mestratified −Meexp
Mestratified −Memixed
.
The energy-moment content in the storage, Mestorage, is defined as the sum of energy-moment
for each layer in the storage as follows:
Met,storage =
N−1
X
i=0
Met,i =
N−1
X
i=0
Vi · ρ(Tt,i) · Cp(Tt,i) · (Tt,i −Tmin)zi =
N−1
X
i=0
Qt,izi
where zi is the geometric centroid of storage layer i, measured in meters from the bottom of the
storage [16]. Since each storage layer is shaped as a square upside-down truncated pyramid
of height hi, bottom area Abot,i and top area Atop,i, the geometrical centroid of the storage layer
is given as1:
zi = hi
 Atop,i + pAtop,iAbot,i + 3Abot,i

4
 Atop,i + pAtop,iAbot,i + Abot,i
 + dzi,
where dzi is the layer i’s displacement from the bottom of the storage.
The temperature of the fully mixed storage Tt,mixed is found as the mass-weighted average
temperature of the storage:
Tt,mixed =
1
mt,total
N−1
X
i=0
mt,iTt,i
The energy-moment content for the fully mixed storage is then found by considering the entire
storage as one single layer with volume Vstorage and geometric centroid zstorage:
Met,mixed = Vstorageρ(Tt,mixed)Cp(Tt,mixed)(Tt,mixed −Tmin)zstorage
For the stratified storage, the bottom region can be disregarded as this is assumed to have a
temperature equal to Tmin and, hence, has no energy content. Therefore, only the volume of
the top region with a temperature Ttop = 90◦C needs to be found. This is found numerically by
minimising the following objective for Vt,top for each time-step t:
objective =

ˆQt −Vt,top · ρ(90) · Cp(90) · (90 −10)
2
In this way, the energy content of the theoretical storage scenarios is kept as close as possible to
the actual energy content. Figure 6.2 compares the actual energy content of the Dronninglund
PTES in 2019 with the energy content of the mixed and stratified storages. The comparison
shows that the energy contents are very similar, validating the approaches to estimate the tem-
perature distribution for fully mixed and stratified storages.
1https://mathworld.wolfram.com/PyramidalFrustum.html
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
44
==PAGE:52==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.2: Energy contents for the three storage scenarios: true, mixed, and stratified. The
lower panel shows the same but zoomed in on the interval [2000:3000]. Regardless of the
scenario, the energy contents are practically identical.
6.2
Results
Interpolation
The 6 observable temperature states in the model each represent an average temperature for
a layer in the storage. This storage partitioning is rather coarse; hence, it is worth considering
how to model the temperature between the nodes. This is done by interpolation. The centers
of the nodes are located 1.5, 4.5, 7.5, 10.5, 13.5, and 15.75 meters from the bottom. Since
sensors are positioned every 0.5 meters, extrapolating to the top and bottom of the storage is
also needed. Figure 6.3 shows the observed temperature profile of the storage at one point in
time, together with the predicted temperature distribution and a first-order interpolation of this
prediction.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
45
==PAGE:53==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.3: The model predicts the average temperature of 6 layers in the storage. These are
interpolated by a zeroth-order interpolation indicated by the black dots. A first-order interpo-
lation, indicated by the orange line, resembles the actual temperature profile, indicated by the
blue line, more accurately.
The coarse partitioning of the storage prevents the model from describing the thermocline region
correctly. This is seen as the large gap between the measured temperature profile and the
predicted in Figure 6.3 from 8 to 12 meters in height.
6.2.1
KPIs
The KPIs are calculated for the observed temperature distribution and the forecasted predictions
for various horizons: 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, 4 days, 1 week, and 2 weeks for the test data
(2018). The predicted temperature profiles are interpolated using linear interpolation to model
the temperature distribution between the nodes in the model. The energy content is normalised
by dividing by the maximum energy storage capacity computed from Equation (6.4) to be 5412
MWh.
Figure 6.4 compares the energy content (top), MIX number (middle), and stratification coefficient
(bottom) of the measured data with the predictions. Figure 6.5 displays the relative error erel of
the predicted KPIs. The absolute relative error is computed as follows:
erel = |yobs −ypred|
|yobs|
(6.5)
where yobs and ypred are observed and predicted KPIs, respectively. The dashed black line
indicates a relative error of 10%. Finally, Figure 6.6 shows the ’accuracy’ of the model’s KPIs
predictions. Here, accuracy relates to the mean absolute relative error but is given as a per-
centage by:
ACC = (1 −1
N
N
X
i
erel,i) × 100%
(6.6)
Figure 6.4 shows that the model follows the general trend, but its performance declines when
the prediction horizon increases. During the summer period, from June to October, the predicted
energy content is below the observed with a relative error of 2-4 % for 1-week predictions. The
1-day and 2-day predictions have an energy content accuracy of around 98% (see Figure. 6.6),
which indicates that the model predicts the storage energy content fairly well on these short-term
forecasts.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
46
==PAGE:54==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.4 indicates that the predicted MIX number is generally higher than the actual MIX
number, while the predicted stratification coefficient is usually lower than the actual stratification
coefficient. This suggests that the predicted degree of thermal stratification in the storage is
less than in reality.
The deviation in the predicted MIX number and stratification coefficient is apparent across all
prediction horizons. The relative errors, shown in Figure 6.5, exceed 10% for the MIX number
and 20% for the stratification coefficient across all forecast horizons, when the actual degree of
stratification is relatively high, such as in May to June and again in October.
The stratification coefficient gets fairly low from June to September and is relatively heavily over-
estimated for the longer forecasting horizons, resulting in the exploding relative errors shown in
Figure 6.5. This is also seen in Figure 6.6, where the accuracy for the stratification coefficient
drops to 60 % for the longest forecasting horizon.
Figure 6.4: The predicted storage KPIs in the test period for different forecasting horizons span-
ning from 1 day to 2 weeks compared to the actual. Top: The total energy content of the storage.
Middle: The MIX number. Bottom: The stratification coefficient.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
47
==PAGE:55==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.5: The relative error |yobs−ypred|
|yobs|
between predicted KPIs and the observed. Top: The
absolute relative error for the total storage energy content. In general, this error stays below 10%
for all forecasting horizons. Middle: The absolute relative error of the predicted MIX numbers.
This also stays quite low but with large deviations in May and October. Bottom: The absolute
relative error of the predicted stratification coefficient. The large spikes seen in June and Juli
come from a relatively low actual stratification coefficient compared to the predicted.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
48
==PAGE:56==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.6: The accuracy score defined in Equation 6.6 of the three KPIs across the 6 forecasting
horizons.
6.2.2
Temperature Distribution
The selected Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) measure the temperature distribution using a
single value, but it is also crucial to examine the accuracy of the predicted temperatures within
the storage. Figure 6.7 illustrates the prediction errors across time for the six layers of the model,
covering the same forecasting horizons discussed in the previous subsection. The deviations
from the actual temperatures are quite significant, and the temperature of the five top storage
layers was consistently underestimated from May to October. This consistent underestimation
is, however, most severe for layer X1 and X2, where the 2-week predictions are constantly
5-10◦C below the actual from May to October. For prediction horizons of up to one week, the
absolute deviations remain below 10°C, but they can reach up to 15°C for a forecasting horizon
of 2 weeks.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
49
==PAGE:57==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.7: The predicted temperature deviations across the 6 layers in the model for the 6
different forecast horizons. Layer X0 is the bottom, and X5 is the top.
The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of the temperature predictions will be used to assess
the overall model performance. For each layer i with observed temperature Tt,i at time t the
RMSE is defined as:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
M
M
X
t

Tt,i −ˆXt,i
2
,
(6.7)
where ˆXt,i is the predicted temperature at time t for layer i and M is the total number of time
steps in the test data.
Figure 6.8 shows the temperature RMSE for the interpolated model across the entire storage,
and Figure 6.9 shows the temperature RMSE for the layers considered in the model. For the
interpolated model, the RMSE increases from 5-6K at the bottom to 7-8K just two meters up
and gradually decreases toward 2-3K at the top of the storage. Interestingly, the 1-day forecast
performs worst on the first 3.5 meters, whereas it is better across the rest of the storage. The
RMSE has a small peak around 9.5 meters, right below the middle diffuser. This might be due
to sudden temperature increases here, which the first-order interpolation does not model well.
For the 6-layer model, the 1-day forecasts are best across all layers. The two bottom layers
X0 and X1 seem the hardest to model for forecasting horizons longer than 1 day. Again, the
bottom layers have a larger RMSE than the top.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
50
==PAGE:58==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.8: The RMSE of the temperature predictions of the interpolated model from the bottom
to the top of the storage for the 6 different forecast horizons.
Figure 6.9: The RMSE of the temperature predictions of the layered model for the 6 different
forecast horizons.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
51
==PAGE:59==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.10: 9 different observed storage temperature profiles over time. Each of these is
accompanied by the predicted and interpolated temperature profile for the different forecast
horizons.
Figure 6.10 shows 9 different temperature profiles at different points in time in the test data.
Predicted temperature profiles for the 6 forecast horizons are shown as dashed lines with the
observed temperature profile. The model is not able to correctly model the thermocline in the
storage. This is, for instance, seen on dates like May 16 or October 2. This is due to numerical
diffusion caused by the coarse partitioning of the storage. The temperature in the top of the
storage appears to be predicted well, with October 29 as an exception, where all predictions
lie approximately 10◦C below the actual. The system is being discharged from October 2 to
October 29, as indicated by the thermocline shifting from a height of 6 meters to 13 meters.
When the thermocline approaches the top of the storage, the model fails to predict the top
temperature accurately.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
52
==PAGE:60==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
6.2.3
Probabilistic Predictions
The predictions come from the Kalman filter and include estimates of the associated variance,
σ2
Xt,i. This variance can be used to provide prediction intervals. This is what Figure 6.11 shows
for 1-day and 2-day forecasts for the top layer only, where the shaded areas are 95% prediction
intervals. Assuming that the predicted distributions are Gaussian, these are found by
ˆXt,i ± qα/2
q
σXt,i2,
(6.8)
where qα/2 is the α/2 percentile of a normal distribution and the degree of confidence is given as
100%(1 −α). For α = 0.05, q ≈1.96. Figure 6.11 demonstrates that the prediction intervals are
symmetric around the predictions and that the uncertainty increases with a longer forecasting
horizon. A 95% prediction interval means that 95% of the time, the observed temperature value
lies within this interval. However, during the model-building phase, it was observed that the
residual distributions did not perfectly follow a normal distribution (see Figure 5.10). Therefore,
the proportion of observations falling within this interval is tested.
The top panel of Figure 6.12 shows the percentage of observations within the confidence bands
for different forecasting horizons. The prediction interval for one-step predictions is the only one
close to capturing 95% of the observations. For other prediction horizons, this ’accuracy’ stays
below 80% for the 4 bottom layers. For 1- and 2-week predictions, it further decreases to below
40%. This indicates that the model is quite overconfident in its predictions.
Instead of evaluating model performance solely on point estimates, predictive uncertainty can
be used to weigh certain predictions when evaluating the model. One evaluation metric that
incorporates this is the mean Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS), which is computed
by:
CRPS(F, y) = 1
N
N
X
i
Z  F(x) −1{x≥yi}
2 dx
(6.9)
where F(x) is the cumulative distribution function of the predictive distribution, y is the observed
temperature function and 1{x≥y} is an indicator function taking 1 as value when x ≥y and zero
otherwise. A low CRPS indicates a good and very certain prediction. The bottom panel of
Figure 6.12 shows the CRPS for the different layers for different forecasting horizons. The
results show a similar pattern as the accuracy reported by Figure 6.9 with a worse CRPS for
increasing forecasting horizons. For the longer forecasts, the prediction quality decreases for
X1 and X2; otherwise, it stays somewhat constant for the entire storage. Due to the large
bias in the model (consistently over or underestimating the temperatures), which Figure 6.7
shows, and the fact that the model is overconfident, the CRPS do not reveal much more than
the temperature RMSE.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
53
==PAGE:61==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.11: An example of probabilistic predictions for the temperature in the top layer in the
model. The two considered forecast horizons are 1 day and 2 days ahead. The shaded area
around each prediction indicates a 95% prediction interval based on a normal distribution.
Figure 6.12: Top: Shows how many percentages of the observation reside within the 95 %
prediction intervals computed for different forecast horizons. Bottom: Shows the CRPS of the
6 model layers for different forecasting horizons. Note the one-step predictions are included in
this figure.
Including uncertainty in the predictions gives upper and lower bounds for the estimated temper-
ature in the storage layers. This can be used to form two reference temperature distributions,
one where the temperatures have been raised to the upper bound and one where they have
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
54
==PAGE:62==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
been lowered to the lower bound. Upper and lower bounds for the predicted storage KPIs can
be estimated by using these. It will not affect the stratification coefficient much as this procedure
increases or decreases the average storage temperature.
Setting the upper and lower bounds as the ends of the 95% prediction interval, the reference
temperature distributions are found and the storage energy content and MIX numbers are com-
puted for these two reference profiles. Figure 6.13 shows the predicted storage energy content
for 6 different forecasting horizons, including the minimum and maximum predicted storage en-
ergy contents. The shaded area between the minimum and maximum guides as a pseudo-95%
prediction interval for the predicted storage energy content. The actual storage energy content
is contained within these bounds almost all the time for up to 4-day forecasts. For the 2-week
forecast, the model underestimates the storage energy content from June to August, and the
actual storage energy content is above the upper bound.
The same thing is done for the MIX number. Figure 6.14 shows the resulting MIX number for
the predicted and upper and lower bound distributions. Here, the upper bound temperature
distribution does not necessarily have the highest MIX number, and hence, the MIX number
for the lower bound is colored orange, and the MIX number for the upper bound green. The
upper and lower bounds still serve as ’extremes’ and the predicted MIX number consistently lies
between the two, therefore, the region between them is used as a pseudo-prediction interval.
The actual MIX number is not perfectly contained in this interval. Still, for longer forecasting
horizons (4 days or longer) the confidence bands widen in the summer period (June to October).
The model misses some dynamics in this period, but the increasing uncertainty on the level of
stratification indicates that the model is ”aware” of this.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
55
==PAGE:63==
6.2. RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.13: The predicted and actual storage energy content for 6 different forecast horizons.
The shaded area around the predictions indicates a pseudo 95% prediction interval based on
upper and lower temperature predictions. The green line is the maximum temperature profile,
and the orange line is the minimum.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
56
==PAGE:64==
6.3. AN EXPERIMENT - CHARGING AND DISCHARGING
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.14: The predicted and actual MIX number for 6 different forecast horizons. The shaded
area around the predictions indicates a pseudo 95% prediction interval based on upper and
lower temperature predictions. The green line is the maximum temperature profile, and the
orange line is the minimum.
6.3
An Experiment - Charging and Discharging
To investigate how the model reacts to powerful inputs a simple experiment is conducted. The
experiment consists of charging and discharging the storage at maximum power. The test sce-
nario is an idealized setting in which the PTES is connected directly to a DH grid. Heat is
supplied by a CHP plant, which is assumed to supply water at a constant temperature of 90◦C.
The PTES delivers heat to the distribution net when needed, and the mass balance of the stor-
age is ensured by the return water, which is assumed to have a constant temperature of 40◦C.
The PTES is assumed to have a charge/discharge capacity of 30 MW. This translates to a max-
imum inlet/outlet flow rate of 532 m3/h, in this case. For simplicity, only the top and bottom
diffusers will be used. Figure 6.15 illustrates the test scenario.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
57
==PAGE:65==
6.3. AN EXPERIMENT - CHARGING AND DISCHARGING
CHAPTER 6. MODEL EVALUATION
Figure 6.15: The test scenario. To the left, a CHP plant produces heat to the DH grid. In the
middle is the PTES, and to the right, a community served with heat from the DH grid. Hot water
(90◦C) is transferred via the orange arrows, and the cooled return water (40◦C) via the blue
arrows.
For the charging experiment, the initial state of the storage is assumed to be at a constant
temperature of 40◦C and at a constant temperature of 90◦C for the discharging experiment.
The storage is then charged and discharged with 30 MW (532 m3/h) for 300 hours. Figure 6.16
shows the temperature of the 6 layers. The top panel shows the charging experiment, where
all layers reach 90◦C at the end of the experiment. The discharge experiment is shown in the
bottom panel of the figure and almost perfectly mirrors the top panel.
Figure 6.16: Top: The system starts at 40◦C and is then charged at maximum capacity (30 MW)
for 300 hours. The top layer X5 quickly reaches maximum temperature, whereas it takes almost
300 hours for the bottom layer X0. Bottom: The system starts at 90◦C and is then discharged
at maximum capacity (30 MW) for 300 hours. Here, the opposite behavior is observed, with the
bottom layer X0 quickly decreasing to 40◦C
Figure 6.16 shows that charging or discharging the system completely takes almost 300 hours.
Furthermore, the top layer charges quickly and discharges slowly, and vice versa for the bottom
layer.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
58
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 7
Discussion
In this chapter, the results and the methods used are discussed. The discussion concludes with
suggestions for future work.
7.1
KPIs
Figure 6.13 shows that the predicted storage energy content primarily lies below the actual
energy content during most of the storage cycle. This discrepancy increases with the forecasting
horizon, which means the model loses more heat than the actual storage. This is unexpected,
as heat is only lost slowly through the top as modeled by the modified heat transfer coefficient
Kamb = 3.6 × 10−4 m
h , see Table 5.9. Incorporating heat loss to the ground into the model
could improve the estimated heat loss. The ϕi parameters which regulate the effect of forced
convection in the storage are all, except for ϕ4, less than 1. Over longer forecast horizons, this
contributes to the model’s overestimation of the heat loss.
The negative effect of these parameter estimates can be observed in the ’Charging and Dis-
charging’ experiment. Figure 6.16 illustrates that charging or discharging the system takes
almost 300 hours (12 days) at full power. That is 300h × 532m3
h
= 159, 600m3 of water that
needs to enter a storage with a volume of 60, 000m3. The model overestimates the time of
charge/discharge, primarily due to the estimates of ϕi. A different and less likely explanation is
that the model is right.
The MIX number and the stratification coefficient measure the storage’s degree of stratification,
which is related to the system’s available energy. These are based on thermocline analysis,
which is difficult for the model to capture as it only considers 6 layers in the storage. The model
is expected to improve by introducing a finer partitioning of the storage.
7.2
Temperature Distribution
The KPIs quantify the system’s state and allow a simple comparison between the observed and
the predicted temperature distribution. However, for control purposes, they are not decisive.
The heat stored at the top of the storage is what is available, and predicting this correctly is
enough to control the system. Figure 6.8 shows that the top layer is predicted quite well com-
pared to the rest of the storage with a RMSE < 3K for the interpolated model. Moreover, the
predicted temperature distributions in Figure 6.10 seem qualitatively to be quite good fits.
Nonetheless, accurately predicting the top temperature at all times is impossible if the model
cannot capture the thermoclines correctly. Figure 6.10 shows how the model fails to predict the
top temperature accurately on October 29, with a deviation of almost -10◦C across all forecasting
horizons. This can also be observed in Figure 6.7 as spikes around the end of October in all
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
59
==PAGE:67==
7.3. PROBABILISTIC PREDICTIONS
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
layers. The cause of this is numerical diffusion. The actual thermocline is much steeper than
predicted, and as the system is discharged, this error reaches the top of the storage.
Now, ±10◦C might not seem like too much, but with the size of the storage, it is a significant
amount of energy. There is roughly 4,000m3 of water in the top 0.5 meters of the storage and
heating this volume by 10◦C requires approximately 46MWh. This translates to one week’s heat
for 133 households connected to the district heating network1. All this heat is missed simply
because of numerical diffusion.
7.3
Probabilistic Predictions
The model is overconfident in its predictions. This is clearly illustrated by the top panel of Figure
6.12, where only about 70-80% of the observations lie within the 95% prediction intervals across
all forecasting horizons. It gets even worse for longer-term forecasts with less than 30 % of the
observations residing within the prediction intervals for some layers. This fault comes from the
violated assumption of Gaussian residuals as discussed in Chapter 5.
The prediction intervals can provide uncertainty estimates of predicted storage energy content
and the MIX number. In both cases, these pseudo-prediction intervals seem quite reasonable.
Figure 6.14 shows how the model’s uncertainty of the MIX number increases in the summer
period, where the observed MIX numbers is quite vigorous. Here the observed MIX number
almost stays within the prediction intervals across all forecast horizons.
Probabilistic statements can be quite insightful and assist the professionals operating the sys-
tem, but unfortunately, the model is not reliable, especially for longer forecasts of one week or
more.
7.4
Seasonal vs. Short-Term
The data used in this project comes from a seasonal storage, but the model is intended to
operate as a short-term storage. The model’s performance is thus evaluated on a system with
relatively slow dynamics. Theoretically, the state of the short-term system can go from fully
charged to emptied for energy within a week, whereas this happens over a year for the seasonal
storage. Therefore, the model can be expected to perform much better when evaluated on data
from a seasonal storage than on short-term storage.
Moreover, since a short-term storage is charged and discharged more rapidly, it might exhibit
dynamics which are not present in a seasonal storage. Higher flow rates could induce more
mixing in the storage due to increased turbulence, which is difficult to predict.
Nevertheless, fitting the model to short-term storage data might also have its benefits. As the
storage cycles are much shorter, less data is needed to capture more dynamics, and hence,
parameters can be estimated more efficiently. Furthermore, heat loss and natural convection,
which the model was not able to estimate, are also less relevant for a short-term storage as
standby periods are shorter.
Data from the Høje Taastrup PTES should be obtained and used to estimate model parameters.
How well the model performs when dealing with a short-term storage remains unknown.
7.5
Data Treatment
Some information about the dynamics of the system is lost because the data is stored with only
one decimal precision. Therefore, the recorded temperatures do not change smoothly but in
steps, which could explain parts of the residual distributions in Chapter 5. The model-building
1https://sparenergi.dk/privat/spar-energi-i-hverdagen/spar-paa-varme-og-vand-i-hjemmet
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
60
==PAGE:68==
7.6. FUTURE WORK
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
procedure would benefit from more carefully stored data. Moreover, downsampling data from
a 10-minute sampling frequency to an hourly sampling frequency by averaging is not ideal. If
the inputs change quickly during an hour, this could introduce errors. With data from short-
term storage, less data will be needed to estimate parameters accurately, allowing for a higher
sampling frequency.
7.6
Future Work
Different Objective Function
The system is characterised by some very slow dynamics, which cannot be measured over
short time steps. A different objective function, incorporating both short and long-term forecasts,
might be useful to address this.
Soil States
To improve the model, heat loss to the surroundings could be considered more carefully with
additional ’soil’ states. However, with the current state of the software, ctsmr, this limits the
spatial resolution within the storage further and, consequently, its ability to model the thermocline
correctly. The effect of heat loss to the ground is less significant than the effect of incoming water
flows. Therefore, it might suffice to model the heat loss approximately for operating a short-term
system, such as the Høje Taastrup PTES.
Improve Residuals
The model residuals are not Gaussian, which is a fundamental assumption for the underlying
statistical model. The Kalman filter and, therefore, also the likelihood function is based on
this assumption. The violation results in an inexact filter and possibly erroneous parameter
estimates. To address this issue, a different noise intensity function should be considered. This
could be done by making the function input or state-dependent. However, if the noise is state-
dependent, the system should be transformed using the Lamparti transformation to align with
the Kalman filter assumptions.
Parametric Models
Some time was spent in this project investigating possible parametric models of the storage
instead of using a multi-node model. The most promising model was the double logistic model
described at the beginning of Chapter 5. However, the parameters were hard to interpret which
made it difficult to use for control purposes. Since the proposed multi-node model needs more
states to describe the thermocline correctly, it is interesting to investigate whether this can be
done better with a parametric model with few parameters, such as the double logistic function.
However, the parameters must be time-varying and interpretable for this model to be useful.
Alternatives to ctsmr
ctsmr delivers fast predictions and supports the SDE formulation of the model, efficiently inte-
grating system physics with data. However, the number of states ctsmr can estimate is limited.
This leads to a poor spatial resolution of the temperature profile and, consequently, poor predic-
tive performance. Therefore, alternatives to ctsmr should be investigated. Here, some variation
of recursive least squares could be worth investigating. It is not as computationally intensive as
computing the extended Kalman filter, and a high spatial resolution can be achieved. Further-
more, time-varying parameters could address the changing temperature loss of the storage.
Since the system’s dynamics are slow and the proposed model is just weakly non-linear, it
should be possible to formulate a decent discrete-time version of the model.
Multiple Filters
A workaround to the limitations of ctsmr could be to use an ensemble of models with few states.
Each model could consider one layer of the storage, including parts of the surrounding soil
region. While this approach would require some extra engineering to combine all the ctsmr
models, it is viable since ctsmr only struggles with the number of states in a single model. This
method should deliver high spatial resolution and predictive performance.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
61
==PAGE:69==
7.6. FUTURE WORK
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
Finally, the model still needs to be tested for controlling the system. Addressing some of the
above issues first is recommended as it will produce a more accurate and robust model, which
is more likely to be used in a control scenario.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
62
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The data-driven digital twin of the PTES was developed as a continuous-discrete time state-
space model and implemented using the open-source software ctsmr. This ensured extremely
fast predictions, which made it suited for control purposes.
Physical parameters of the system were estimated through maximum likelihood estimates based
on sensor measurements from the PTES situated in Dronninglund, a novel method in PTES re-
search. Nonetheless, natural convection and heat conduction with the surrounding soil region
could not be measured, as their dynamics were too slow. Consequently, these effects had to
be excluded from the model.
A notable limitation of ctsmr is its difficulty in estimating a large number of states. This resulted
in a compromise between the model’s spatial resolution of the storage and its ability to capture
storage dynamics correctly. The final model’s residuals exhibited minimal autocorrelation, but
they were not Gaussian, which violates the modeling assumptions.
The model’s coarse spatial resolution negatively impacted its predictive performance, as it was
unable to describe the storage’s thermocline due to numerical diffusion. This resulted in con-
sistent overestimation of the MIX number and significant temperature prediction errors. Fur-
thermore, during storage discharge, when the thermocline reached the top of the storage the
prediction error of the storage’s top temperature increased considerably. Therefore, the model
is not suited for control uses yet.
Future work should aim to improve the model’s spatial resolution of the storage, possibly by
exploring alternatives to ctsmr.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
63
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
“Energy consumption in households”. In: Eurostat (2023). URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat / statistics - explained / index . php ? title = Energy _ consumption _ in _ households #
Energy_products_used_in_the_residential_sector.
[2]
Juan M Morales et al. Integrating renewables in electricity markets: operational problems.
Vol. 205. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[3]
Zhiyong Tian et al. “Large-scale solar district heating plants in Danish smart thermal grid:
Developments and recent trends”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 189 (2019),
pp. 67–80. ISSN: 0196-8904. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2019.03.071. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0196890419303759.
[4]
Ole Odgaard. “A progressive way to cogenerate heat and power”. In: (2022). URL: https:
//ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Globalcooperation/chp.pdf.
[5]
Yutong Xiang et al. “A comprehensive review on pit thermal energy storage: Technical
elements, numerical approaches and recent applications”. In: Journal of Energy Storage
55 (2022), p. 105716. ISSN: 2352-152X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.105716.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352152X22017042.
[6]
Mohsen Attaran and Bilge Gokhan Celik. “Digital Twin: Benefits, use cases, challenges,
and opportunities”. In: Decision Analytics Journal 6 (2023), p. 100165. ISSN: 2772-6622.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dajour.2023.100165. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S277266222300005X.
[7]
Simon Stokholm Nørskov. “The largest pit thermal storage of its kind is about to be put into
service”. In: Ingeniøren (2023). URL: https://ing.dk/artikel/largest-pit-thermal-storage-its-
kind-about-be-put-service.
[8]
Cynthia Ann Cruickshank and Christopher Baldwin. “Chapter 15 - Sensible Thermal En-
ergy Storage: Diurnal and Seasonal”. In: Storing Energy. Ed. by Trevor M. Letcher. Oxford:
Elsevier, 2016, pp. 291–311. ISBN: 978-0-12-803440-8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-803440-8.00015-4. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128034408000154.
[9]
Thomas Schmidt et al. “Design Aspects for Large-scale Pit and Aquifer Thermal En-
ergy Storage for District Heating and Cooling”. In: Energy Procedia 149 (2018). 16th
International Symposium on District Heating and Cooling, DHC2018, 9–12 September
2018, Hamburg, Germany, pp. 585–594. ISSN: 1876-6102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.egypro.2018.08.223. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1876610218305198.
[10]
Abdulrahman Dahash et al. “Advances in seasonal thermal energy storage for solar dis-
trict heating applications: A critical review on large-scale hot-water tank and pit thermal
energy storage systems”. In: Applied Energy 239 (2019), pp. 296–315. ISSN: 0306-2619.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.01.189. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0306261919301837.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
64
==PAGE:72==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11]
Ioannis Sifnaios et al. “Dronninglund water pit thermal energy storage dataset”. In: Solar
Energy 251 (2023), pp. 68–76. ISSN: 0038-092X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.
2022.12.046. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038092X22009252.
[12]
Marc A Rosen. “The exergy of stratified thermal energy storages”. In: Solar Energy 71.3
(2001), pp. 173–185. ISSN: 0038-092X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X(01)
00036-6. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038092X01000366.
[13]
Ly Wu and Richard B Bannerot. “Experimental study of the effect of water extraction on
thermal stratification in storage”. In: Proceedings of the 1987 ASME-JSME-JSES solar
energy conference, Honolulu. Vol. 1. 1987, pp. 445–451.
[14]
B. Thomas et al. “Thermodynamic analysis of stratification in thermal energy storages
implemented in cogeneration systems”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 232 (2023),
p. 121015. ISSN: 1359-4311. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2023.121015.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S135943112301044X.
[15]
Jane H Davidson, DA Adams, and JA Miller. “A coefficient to characterize mixing in solar
water storage tanks”. In: (1994).
[16]
Ioannis Sifnaios. Phd Thesis, Investigations of pit thermal energy storages in district heat-
ing systems. Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[17]
Yogender Pal Chandra and Tomas Matuska. “Stratification analysis of domestic hot water
storage tanks: A comprehensive review”. In: Energy and Buildings 187 (2019), pp. 110–
131. ISSN: 0378-7788. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enbuild . 2019 . 01 . 052. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778818316669.
[18]
Peter Sorknæs. “Simulation method for a pit seasonal thermal energy storage system
with a heat pump in a district heating system”. In: Energy 152 (2018), pp. 533–538. ISSN:
0360-5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.03.152. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544218305619.
[19]
Xinyu Pan et al. “Long-term thermal performance analysis of a large-scale water pit ther-
mal energy storage”. In: Journal of Energy Storage 52 (2022), p. 105001. ISSN: 2352-
152X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.105001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2352152X22010064.
[20]
Yakai Bai et al. “Numerical and experimental study of an underground water pit for sea-
sonal heat storage”. In: Renewable Energy 150 (2020), pp. 487–508. ISSN: 0960-1481.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.12.080. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0960148119319524.
[21]
Yutong Xiang et al. “Heat transfer of a large-scale water pit heat storage under transient
operations”. In: Journal of Energy Storage 55 (2022), p. 105455. ISSN: 2352-152X. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.105455. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2352152X22014475.
[22]
Kody M. Powell and Thomas F. Edgar. “An adaptive-grid model for dynamic simulation of
thermocline thermal energy storage systems”. In: Energy Conversion and Management
76 (2013), pp. 865–873. ISSN: 0196-8904. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.
2013.08.043. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0196890413005177.
[23]
Abdul Atisam Farooq et al. “Grey-box modeling of a low pressure electric boiler for do-
mestic hot water system”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 84 (2015), pp. 257–267. ISSN:
1359-4311. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.03.050. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359431115002744.
[24]
P.D. van Schalkwyk et al. “A state-space heating and cooling model for thermal stratifi-
cation in horizontally configured electric hot water storage cylinders”. In: Applied Thermal
Engineering 245 (2024), p. 122851. ISSN: 1359-4311. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.applthermaleng.2024.122851. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1359431124005192.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
65
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[25]
Henrik Madsen and Jan Holst. Modelling Non-Linear and Non-statinary Time Series. Ed.
by IMM. 2006.
[26]
Uffe Høgsbro Thygesen. Stochastic Differential Equations for Science and Engineering.
CRC Press, 2023. Chap. 10 - State Estimation. ISBN: 9781032232171.
[27]
CTSM-R Development Team. Continuous Time Stochastic Modeling in R - User’s Guide
and Reference Manual. 2021. URL: https://ctsm.info/index.html.
[28]
Ioannis Sifnaios. Dronninglund Data. https://github.com/PitStorages/DronninglundData.
git. 2021.
[29]
Rune Juhl, Jan Kloppenborg Møller, and Henrik Madsen. ctsmr - Continuous Time Stochas-
tic Modeling in R. 2016. arXiv: 1606.00242 [stat.CO].
[30]
Katja Jensen. Metodevalg af HT-lager i lastfordelingen. Notat, Ea Energianalyse. 2022.
[31]
VEKS. Overordnet styringsnotat damvarmelager Høje Taastrup. Notat, VEKS. 2019.
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
66
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Data Driven Digital Twins for Energy Systems
67
==PAGE:75==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
