==PAGE:1==
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to
LCA and LCoH
Sergio Armando Ortega Flores
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
Sergio Armando Ortega Flores
Date, year
By
Sergio Armando Ortega Flores
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Brovej, Building
118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. in Sustainable Energy
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Sergio Armando Ortega Flores ­ s213000
Signature
Date
ii
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will
look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no
information? Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest
gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected
font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should contain
all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There is no
need for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Sergio Armando Ortega Flores, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
iv
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation ­ IEA SHC Task 71 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Objective
6
2.1
Energy Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
LCA ­ Environmental Aanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
LCoH ­ Economic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
PVT System Configuration and Alternative Systems
9
3.1
Energy Demand Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
PVT­HP Setup and Energy Analysis Simulation Software
. . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Simulation Loop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Energy Analysis
13
4.1
Controllers Configuration and Initial Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Simulation Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Comparison of PVT System in Other Cities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.5
Energy Performance of Alternative Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)
19
5.1
Goal and Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.4
Software and Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.5
Environmental Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Economic Analysis
26
6.1
Life Cycle Cost (LCC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.2
Levelized Cost of Heat (LCoH) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.3
Investment Payback Time (IPBT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7
Results and Discussion
27
7.1
Energy Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.2
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.3
Environmental Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7.4
Economic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
8
Conclusions
34
8.1
Technical Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
8.2
Personal Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
9
Further Work
35
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
v
==PAGE:8==
10 Appendix
36
Bibliography
37
A Title
39
vi
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Residential and non­residential buildings are one of the largest contributors to climate
change. According to the latest publication of the International Energy Agency and the
latest Global Status Report of the UN Environment Programme, the operation of buildings
account for around 30% of global final energy consumption, as shown in Figure 1.1, and
26% of global energy­related Greenhouse Gas Emissions, 8% being direct emissions from
combustion appliances, and 18% indirect emissions from the production of electricity and
heat used in buildings [1].
Within the energy demand of buildings, the need for heating and cooling accounts for the
largest share of total consumption, and although it may vary depending on the geograph­
ical region and the season, studies estimate that around 60% of energy in residential
buildings is demanded for thermal purposes, while the percentage is approximately 50%
in commercial buildings [2].
Figure 1.1: Global Share of Energy Consumption ­ UN Environment Programme 2022 [3]
While global CO2 emissions for space and water heating systems vary significantly by
region due to climate, energy resources, and environmental policies, the International
Energy Agency estimates that about 4.2 GtCO2 were emitted in 2022 alone [4], of which
57% were direct emissions from fossil fuel combustion in buildings, and the rest were
indirect emissions from off­site electricity and heat production. The CO2 emissions in the
Net Zero Scenario from 2010 to 2030 are shown grafically in Figure 1.2. It is important
to emphasize that these emissions represent over 80% of direct CO2 emissions in the
building sector.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: CO2 Emissions for space and water heating in the Net Zero Scenario, 2010 ­
2030 [4]
Regarding global CO2 emissions due to cooling systems, although they account for a
quarter of those produced by heating systems, with 1 GtCO2 in 2022 [5], they are rapidly
increasing each year, having doubled over the past 20 years, as can be seen in Figure 1.3.
This rapid increase in the demand for cooling systems is mainly attributed to the effects
of global warming, which lead to increasingly warmer summers and global temperature
rise at an average rate of 0.20°C per decade over de last 40 years [6].
Figure 1.3: CO2 Emissions for space cooling in the Net Zero Scenario, 2010 ­ 2030 [5]
Although the market for fossil fuel­based heating systems has declined, boilers and nat­
ural gas systems still predominate. Clean alternatives such as Heat Pumps are key tech­
nologies for energy transition. Around 10% of global heating needs were covered by this
technology in 2022 [7], but their installation has grown considerably. However, it’s impor­
2
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:11==
tant to note that Heat Pump technology alone is not sufficient to address the challenges
of climate change. Additional measures and technologies are required to achieve the
ambitious energy goals of NET Zero by 2050 [8].
The search for sustainable energy solutions to mitigate the environmental impact of build­
ing energy consumption has led to the emergence of innovative technologies like Photovoltaic­
Thermal (PVT) systems. These systems integrate photovoltaic (PV) modules and solar
thermal collectors, offering a dual­purpose solution for electricity generation and thermal
energy production from solar energy, thereby reducing both greenhouse gases (GHG)
emissions and dependency on conventional energy sources. The synergy between these
two functions enhances overall energy efficiency and system performance. A detailed
analysis of this and other technologies will be addressed in Section ??, and the charac­
teristics of the specific system for this study will be reviewed in Section 3.
The adoption of PVT technology has been steadily rising, with an average annual global
growth rate of +9%, and a slightly higher growth rate of 14% in the European market [9].
This growth trajectory is attributed to increasing awareness of sustainability, supportive
government policies, and technological advancements driving down costs.
One notable advancement in PVT technology is its integration with Heat Pumps, which
amplifies its energy conversion efficiency and versatility. By coupling PVT systems with
Heat Pumps, surplus electricity generated during peak sunlight hours can be utilized for
operating the Heat Pump to provide heating or cooling according to the needs of the build­
ing. This symbiotic relationship not only optimizes energy utilization but also enhances
the economic viability of PVT installations by maximizing self­consumption and minimiz­
ing grid dependency. A schematic example of the PVT­HP integrated system is shown in
Figure 1.4
Figure 1.4: PVT­HP integrated system [10]
While PVT technology offers attractive advantages, it is essential to conduct comparative
assessments along with alternative technologies like conventional heating systems. Such
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
3
==PAGE:12==
analyses would provide insights into the overall environmental impact, energy efficiency,
and economic viability, helping stakeholders in making informed decisions, and providing
valuable information for environmental policy makers. In this context, the main objective
of this thesis project will be the conducting of a comprehensive Life Cycle Assessment
(LCA) to evaluate the environmental footprint of PVT­HP systems across their entire life
cycle, from raw material acquisition to the disposal and recycling processes. Additionally,
integrating economic analysis like Levelized Cost of Heat (LCoH) will help in assessing the
financial feasibility and long­term sustainability of PVT­HP investments. A more extensive
analysis of the particular objectives of the thesis will be addressed in Section 2
1.1
Motivation ­ IEA SHC Task 71
The research and assessments carried out and reflected in this report are closely aligned
with the goals of the IEA SHC program, particularly focusing on Task 71 [11]. This task is
driven by the dual objective of preparing for forthcoming regulations and initiatives while
simultaneously enhancing the environmental sustainability of solar heating and cooling
systems. Understanding and prioritising the ecological impact of sustainable energy tech­
nologies is of great importance in order to mitigate the potential negative effects and en­
sure a better world for generations to come.
By using validated data and models, this initiative seeks to optimize the integration or
coupling of various heating and cooling technologies, including heat pumps, electrical
heating/cooling by PV, PVT technologies, and condensing fossil combustion.
The specific objectives of Task 71, which serve as motivation for the development of the
goal and assessments of the PVT­HP system described in Chapter 3, can be summarized
as follows:
1. Best Practice Integration and Learning to Evaluate Environmental Impacts of
SHC Systems: Leveraging insights from other industries, academic reasearch, and
renewable energy sectors to identify and incorporate best practices for the correct
assessment of environmental indicators.
2. Data Collection and Analysis: The process of compiling reliable data and access­
ing a robust scientific database on life cycle inventories is essential to support the
assessment of the environmental impact of SHC technologies.
3. Existing Knowledge on Models and Methodologies for LCA and LCoH Evalua­
tion: Task 71 focuses on refining and extending Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and
Levelized Cost of Heating (LCoH) methodologies.
4. Environmental Impact Assessment: Utilizing life cycle assessment methodolo­
gies and models that are aligned with the ISO 14040 standards. These standards
provide a framework for conducting comprehensive assessments of the environ­
mental impacts associated with products and technologies throughout their entire
life cycle.
5. Economic Analysis and Optimization: In accordance with the aforementioned
objective, Task 71 facilitates the calculation of the Levelized Cost of Heat (LCoH)
for SHC systems, based on the findings from IEA SHC Task 54 [12].
6. Improvement and Extension of LCA and LCoH: One of the primary objectives of
this task is to refine standarized LCA methodologies and develop new models that
provide a more precise evaluation of the environmental impact of SHC systems.
4
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Thesis structure
This thesis will be divided into 10 sections to facilitate easy navigation through the different
stages of research and result development. Each section will address a distinct aspect of
the study, providing a comprehensive and systematic exploration of the topic.
In Section 2, the specific objectives of this project will be analyzed, encompassing the
energy, environmental, and economic analyses. Section ?? will go deep into the theory
related to the type of SHC system of interest for this thesis, as well as the theoretical
foundations of LCA and LCoH analysis. Additionally, relevant and significant scientific
research on similar projects will be examined.
Section 3 will describe the configuration of the PVT system used for the purposes of
this thesis, detailing its design, components, and location. This section will provide a
comprehensive overview of the system setup, ensuring the understanding of technical
specifications and operational context of the specific PVT system under study.
The subsequent sections will provide a detailed description of the processes for the dif­
ferent project’s analyses. Section 4 will aim to obtain the energy performance and energy
balance of the system, while Section 5 will review the scope of the LCA, the methodolo­
gies employed, the models and boundaries, as well as the development of the Life Cycle
Inventory (LCI) and the tools used to achieve environmental impact results. Section 6 will
conduct the economic analysis of the system, with a particular focus on the LCoH.
Finally, Section 7 will present the results for each of the three different analyses, interpret­
ing them graphically for better understanding. Sections 8 and 9 will discuss the conclu­
sions and further work, respectively, which will be of significant interest to stakeholders.
This structured approach will ensure that all aspects of the project are thoroughly exam­
ined and clearly communicated.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Objective
This thesis aims to investigate the current panorama in LCA analysis of SHC technolo­
gies, with the objective of identifying the most accurate models and methodologies for
determining the environmental impact of PVT systems, specifically a PVT system cou­
pled with a Heat Pump (HP), to meet the needs for Domestic Hot Water (DHW), space
heating, and cooling if necessary. The specific system to be evaluated is described in
detail in Section 3.
In addition to analyzing the environmental impact of the PVT­HP system, this thesis aims
to evaluate its economic feasibility compared to alternative systems, in order to determine
whether it is cost­effective to invest in technologies that accelerate the energy transition
towards a greener future.
The first step in the evaluation of this project is invariably the energy analysis of the inves­
tigation setup, which allows understanding the energy demand under certain conditions,
dictating the appropriate configuration it should have for its proper functioning. Subse­
quently, and with the help of accurate databases, the inventory and usage conditions for
the life cycle assessment are generated, to finally analyze the economic feasibility of the
system with a special focus on the Levelized Cost of Heat (LCoH). The specific objectives
for each of the above­mentioned stages are detaled below.
2.1
Energy Analysis
The energy analysis is conducted by modeling the PVT­HP system using simulation soft­
ware, with the objective of calculating the energy balance of the system according to its
thermal and electrical performance. This allows for determining the degree of energy in­
dependence relative to the energy consumed from the grid. To achieve this objective, a
series of specific steps must be undertaken, detailed as follows:
• Determine Energy Demand: According to the requirements for a single family
household, establish the annual space heating demand and hot water requirement.
Similarly, the electricity demand for general use, heating, and cooling must be es­
tablished.
• Define System Configuration ­ Modeling: With the help of simulation software,
model the entire system with each of its components connected in a logical and
sequential arrangement, digitally representing the configuration of the PVT­HP sys­
tem.
• Define the Parameters of Each Component: Attribute values to each component
of the system, such as thermal and optical efficiency, heat loss coefficients, flow
rate, and PVT collector area.
• Obtain Electrical and Thermal Performances: With the correct system configu­
ration and appropriate parameters, carry out the corresponding simulations to de­
termine the electrical and thermal performance of the system.
• Energy Balance: Analyze the total energy consumption of the system, evaluat­
ing the values corresponding to self­production, grid consumption, and grid export.
Consider that this is a dynamic system, whose production and consumption vary
throughout the year and across different geographical regions. This is highly useful
for the scenario comparison to be conducted in the LCA analysis.
6
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:15==
2.2
LCA ­ Environmental Aanalysis
Life Cycle Assessment is a complex and somewhat ambiguous process that allows to
understand the degree of impact a product or system has on the environment. It considers
a large number of variables and must be followed carefully to obtain the most reliable
results.
The primary objective of this thesis is to conduct a Life Cycle Assessment of the PVT­HP
system described in Section 3, following the steps detailed below:
• Life Cycle Model and Boundaries: Define the scope of the LCA study accord­
ing to the four main models [13] and the specific requirements of each project. In
this thesis, the environmental impact will be evaluated from the acquisition of raw
materials to the disposal and recycling process. The details of this model and the
corresponding boundaries are detailed in Section 5.
• Goal and Scope: Determine the environmental impacts to be assessed, the most
common being greenhouse gas emissions, heavy metal emissions, health risk, and
damages to terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Additionally, define which scenarios
will be compared, which elements of the system will be included (in case some
components or materials are discarded), and what the Functional Unit will be. For
the purposes of this thesis, it is recommended to use kWh/year as a Functional Unit.
• Life Cycle Inventory: With the help of reliable and accurate databases, create the
total inventory of the system according to the stablished boundaries, including ma­
terials, manufacturing processes, transportation, operational phase, disposal, re­
cycling, and all relevant sub­processes. It is important to mention that the more
detailed the inventory, the more precise the results will be at the end of the assess­
ment.
• Methodology: Select the methodology that best aligns with the project objectives.
There are different methodologies based on ISO 14040 standards that allow for the
calculation of the environmental effects. Each methodology focuses on different
evaluation criteria, and it is important to justify the use of any of them for the pur­
poses of each project. For this thesis, the two most widely used methodologies for
sustainable energy systems (ReCiPe 2016 and IPCC) will be used.
• Simulations: Conduct the necessary calculations and simulations according to the
inventory and the selected methodology. These simulations can be carried out using
custom tools such as programmed spreadsheets or specialized software. For the
purposes of this thesis, the open­source software OpenLCA will be used.
• Environmental Impact Assessment Interpretation: Generate graphs and reports
with the results obtained from the corresponding simulations. Stacked column charts,
Sankey diagrams, pie charts, and scatter charts are very useful for representing re­
sults, which should be accompanied by an appropriate interpretation according to
the different scenarios evaluated and comparisons of different systems.
2.3
LCoH ­ Economic Analysis
Life cycle cost analysis is necessary to evaluate the economic performance of the system,
especially compared to other systems that meet similar energy demands but may be less
environmentally friendly. For the purpose of this thesis, the objective will be to evaluate
the economic performance of the system using two indicators, the Levelized Cost of Heat
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
7
==PAGE:16==
(LCoH) and The Investment Payback Time (IPBT). These indicators take into account
different parameters and costs for their correct interpretation.
The LCoH is a useful indicator to calculate the cost per kWh for a given type of energy
generation. It accounts for all the costs that the system has over its lifetime, such as initial
investment, operation and maintenance, subsidies, fuel, among others, and divides it by
the total energy production. This provides an effective cost per kWh metric. By doing this
calculation it is possible to compare the costs of different generation systems, and thus
find the most economically efficient system for each particular region or situation.
On the other hand, the IPBT is an indicator defined as the period of time for a genera­
tion system to recover the initial investment, usually through the savings due to energy
production during the operation phase.
Section 6 will explain in greater detail what each of these indicators consists of, how all
the parameters that comprise them are obtained, and the mathematical background for
their calculation.
8
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:17==
3
PVT System Configuration and
Alternative Systems
3.1
Energy Demand Assumptions
The PVT­HP system evaluated in this thesis was modeled under specific standard condi­
tions for a hypothetical single­family household of 3­5 inhabitants, located in the metropoli­
tan area of Copenhagen, Denmark. The weather and solar irradiation data were based
on the Meteonorm 7.2 database [14], and the energy demand was determined according
to the average statistics of the region, as explained below.
3.1.1
Electricity Demand
It is assumed that the household in which the PVT­HP system was installed is connected
to the electric grid with a three­phase nominal voltage of 400 V, a nominal frequency of
50 Hz, and a phase voltage of 230 V. The household operates under a Feed­in scheme,
making it possible to sell the surplus electricity produced by the PVT system.
The electricity consumption profile considers typical activities of a family household, which
include lighting, cooking/washing dishes, cleaning/washing clothes, practical work, family
care/free time, relaxing/TV, among others. According to a study by Kyriaki Foteinaki et al.
[15] that includes data from around 5,000 houses in Denmark, the average annual elec­
tricity consumption of a single­family household covering the aforementioned activities
ranges between 1,800 kWh and 3,535 kWh. For the purposes of this thesis, an annual
consumption of 3,500 kWh was considered.
3.1.2
Space Heating and DHW Demand
The heated area of the household was assumed to be 150 m², and its annual space
heating demand was calculated to be 10,000 kWh, according to the current trend of 70
kWh/m² of heating­related energy consumption by the Danish Energy Agency [16]. A total
of 25,000 kWh of energy losses was also considered, following the lower margin of the
rule of thumb assumption, which states that this value is usually 2 to 8 times greater than
the annual energy demand. It is important to mention that these losses do not correpond
to the distribution losses of the PVT­HP system, but to the added energy due to occupants,
electrical devices usage, windows/ventilation, etc.
Regarding the DHW demand, it was considered that the house operates under a profile
of 150 liters of water per day at 50°C, in accordance with the 30­50 liters of hot water
consumed per person daily [17]. This results in an annual demand of 2,600 kWh, as
calculated with eq. (3.1), where Q is the heat transfered to water, m is the mass of one
liter of water, Cp is the specific heat capacity of water, and dT is the temperature difference
from average cold and hot water.
Q = m · Cp · dT
(3.1)
Q = 1.000 g/L · 4.186 J/g°C · (50 °C −10 °C) = 167.440 J/L = 0.046 51 kWh/L
(3.2)
DHWDemand = 0.046 51 kWh/L · 150 L/day · 365 day/year = 2546 kWh/year
(3.3)
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
9
==PAGE:18==
Table 3.1 summarizes the energy demands of the assumed household for the necessary
simulations of the PVT­HP system. It includes the electrical, space heating, and DHW
demands for easy interpretation.
Energy Demand
Amount
Units
Annual Electricity Consumption
3,500
kWh
Annual Space Heating Demand
10,000
kWh
Annual DHW Demand
2,600
kWh
Table 3.1: Household Annual Energy Demand
3.2
PVT­HP Setup and Energy Analysis Simulation Software
The design of the hybrid PVT­HP system consists of a set of interconnected compo­
nents, creating a dynamic and energy­efficient loop that optimizes solar energy utilization
and meets the previously described household’s energy needs. In order to satisfy these
needs, the technical characteristics of the system components must be carefully selected
and simulated, assuring the 100% of thermal demand coverage throughout the year with­
out the need for auxiliary heating elements, other than the PVT Collectors and the Heat
Pump.
The system layout and corresponding energy simulations were carried out using the
POLYSUN Software [18], which rely on quasi­dynamic models to obtain accurate results
in terms of functionality and energy efficiency. Each component of the system was se­
lected based on a previous layout developed by Racell [19] for the Task 71 of the SHC
Programme mentioned in Section 1.1. Minor modifications were made in order to meet
the technical characteristics currently available in the market, and they were connected
with the appropriate sensors and controllers. Figure 3.1 shows the layout of the studied
system, with all its components and the electric grid connection.
Figure 3.1: PVT­HP System Layout
10
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:19==
The Table 3.2 presents the components of the system according to the numbering as­
signed in Figure 3.1, indicating their main technical characteristics. There are some com­
ponents that are not numbered, such as three­way valves and the electronic sensors and
controllers. Although these components are fundamental for the operation of the system,
they might be considered as an extension of other components, and thus negligible for
the subsequent analyses. Previous research on similar systems [ref] also recommend to
discard them from LCA and economic analyses, since their impact is usually very low and
they are present in almost any type of heating systems that needs to be compared.
No.
Component
Technical Specifications
1
RACELL PVT Collector
Eff STC = 0.21; Area = 10 m²; A1 = 4.5 W/m²K
2
Growatt 2000TL­X PV Inverter
Efficiency = 97.6%; Max PV Power = 2800 W
3
Small Eco­Pump
Power = 6 W; Max Flow rate = 300 l/h
4
SMA Solar Heat Exchanger
Transfer Capacity = 1000 W/K; Nr. of plates = 30
5
Metro Delta W/W Heat Pump
COP 5.4; Heating Power = 3.05 kW
6
Metro Delta Storage Tank
Volume = 190 l; Rigid PU Foam Insulation
7
Metro Delta Buffer Tank
Volume = 93 l; Rigil PU Foam Insulation
8
Large Eco­Pump
Power = 50 W; Max Flow rate = 250 l/h
9
Adax Neo Radiator
Power = 1000 W; inlet/return temp = 50°C/40°C
10
Copper Pipes 22x1
Ext diameter = 22 mm; Int diameter = 20 mm
11
Small Eco­Pump
Power = 6 W; Max Flow rate = 300 l/h
Table 3.2: PVT­HP system components and their technical specifications, from Figure 3.1
The technical data sheets for all components selected for the system simulations can be
consulted in Appendix A.
3.3
Simulation Loop
As mentioned in Chapter ??, a PVT system has considerable advantages over standalone
solar collectors or PV systems, as it serves a dual purpose by generating electricity and
capturing thermal energy that would otherwise be lost as waste heat. Furthermore, if this
system is coupled with a heat pump, the benefits can be even greater due to the capacity
to further boost thermal energy with relatively low electrical consumption. For the design
and simulation of the PVT­HP system in this thesis, the first step is to understand how
the energy loop works in order to meet the household’s energy demands. Therefore, this
section will analyze the role of each component and its relationship with the rest of the
system, following the logical order of energy transfer.
Starting with the PVT collectors, solar irradiation directly reaches the monocrystalline
unglazed collectors of the proposed system, converting approximately 21% into electric­
ity and about 45% into usable heat, according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The
rest of the energy is reflected or dissipated as losses. From here, the transformed energy
takes two distinct paths: electrical and thermal.
The DC power produced by the solar cells is converted to AC power by the inverter, and
depending on the household’s electrical needs, it can either directly meet those needs
(including the operation of the heat pump) or be sold to the electric grid, thanks to the
feed­in scheme that allows for the sale of surplus. This largely depends on the time of
day, weather conditions, or the season, as production and consumption vary considerably.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
11
==PAGE:20==
Thermal energy, on the other hand, is transported via a water­based fluid running through
the internal pipes of the PVT collectors. Through insulated copper pipes and with the
help of a small pump, the thermal energy is directed into the system through a three­way
valve which plays a crucial role in regulating the flow of the heated fluid, directing it either
towards the heat pump or the heat exchanger, depending on the system’s operational
needs. When the thermal energy requirement for space heating and DHW is high, the
three­way valve will prioritize the flow to the heat pump, and conversely, divert it to the
heat exchanger when there is sufficient heat stored and the heat pump is in standby sta­
tus. Passing through the heat exchanger, the fluid will lower its temperature and return
to the PVT collectors, at an optimal temperature for efficient thermal collection, starting
the solar collector loop again. By maintaining an appropriate temperature differential be­
tween the PVT collectors and the returning fluid, the system maximizes the thermal energy
harvested.
The heat pump is a central component of the system, responsible for transfering ther­
mal energy from PVT collectors to the DHW storage tank and the buffer tank for space
heating. The heat pump operates by taking the relatively low­temperature thermal energy
through its inlet pipe, boosting it to a higher temperature suitable for domestic use. Once
the fluid is heated up, it passes through another three­way valve and is stored in a pri­
mary storage tank, which serves as the main reservoir for DHW. If the storage tank has
sufficient hot water at optimal temperature, the output flow from the heat pump is diverted
by the three­way valve to the buffer storage tank, which is the intermediary for the space
heating distribution. This buffer tank.stores thermal energy and supply it to the radiators
distributed thoughout the household.
Once the water circulates through the heating components, it begins to lose tempera­
ture, dropping from 50°C to approximately 40°C, and takes the return path to the heat
exchanger. Along the way, it mixes with the return water from the storage tank and the
buffer tank, and after passing through the heat exchanger, it is conducted with the help of
a small pump to the low­temperature fluid inlet of the Heat Pump, completing the cycle.
12
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:21==
4
Energy Analysis
Once the energy demand of the household was defined and the PVT­HP system layout
was designed, the corresponding energy analysis simulations were carried out with the
help of the POLYSUN [18] software, to determine if the energy needs were met and to
make the pertinent changes if necessary.
As a result of these simulations, it was possible to observe both the electrical and ther­
mal performance of the system, which translates into final energy consumption and is
very useful for the life cycle assessment and economic analyses that were subsequently
developed. The results of these simulations are analyzed in Chapter 7.
The following sections of this chapter will detail the energy analysis process and the sen­
sitivity analysis carried out to evaluate the behavior of the system with different config­
urations, as well as the simulation of alternative scenarios in which the PVT­HP system
is located in different geographical locations, or that instead of using a PVT­HP system,
alternative heating systems are used.
4.1
Controllers Configuration and Initial Parameters
The components of the PVT­HP system layout, besides being connected to each other
by piping, require a complex control system to activate or deactivate certain functions,
such as turning on one of the pumps, changing the flow direction in one of the three­way
valves, or starting the heat pump. These tasks are coordinated by a set of electronic
devices known as controllers, which rely on the information provided by sensors present
in the components involved, usually temperature sensors.
Configuring the controllers can be a challenging task as each sub­process of the system
and the interactions of each component must be considered, so deliberately increasing
the set point temperature for water storage in the DHW tank, for example, could have
repercussions on the energy consumption of the heat pump and therefore make the sys­
tem less efficient. The logical conditions for which a certain controller should perform a
certain action must be carefully programmed, as shown in Figure 4.1 with the example
capture of a controller configuration in POLYSUN.
It is beyond the scope of this thesis to delve into the programming of controllers, so it
was limited to follow the configurations established in the layout developed by Racell
[19], comparing the parameters against the manufacturer’s data sheets, and following
the comfort standards suitable for a household [20] to ensure that the system has the
best performance.
It is important to mention that all layout and controllers parameters are kept the same
in the sensitivity analyses and simulations of different scenarios that were subsequently
carried out. Keeping these parameters constant also ensured that the LCA and economic
analyses were consistent when comparing the results of the PVT­HP with those of other
heating systems.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.1: Example of programmable controller configuration in POLYSUN
Besides the system layout and controllers, the environmental characteristics of the site
where this study is assumed to be carried out were reviewed before starting with the
simulation process.
The PVT­HP system is installed in a house in the Copenhagen metropolitan area, and the
PVT collectors are mounted on the roof with a tilt angle of 15° and orientation to the south,
i.e. azimuth = 0°. Being in Danish territory, it is assumed that there are no obstructions
due to mountains or orographic differences that generate shading on the collectors, so
their horizon profile is defined as in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Horizon profile for PVT collectors oriented towards South in Copenhagen,
Denmark. Image from POLYSUN
The electrical performance of the PVT­HP system depends on the solar irradiance, which
14
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:23==
varies with the time of year. During the summer months, the higher solar irradiance is
expected to result in increased electricity generation from the photovoltaic cells, thus re­
ducing the dependency on external grid electricity. To support these initial assumptions,
the annual global horizontal irradiance for Copenhagen was consulted in the Photovoltaic
Geographical Information System (PVGIS) [21], as shown in Figure 4.3
Figure 4.3: Annual global horizontal irradiance profile ­ Copenhagen, Denmark. Image
from PVGIS [21]
Similarly, the thermal performance of the PVT­HP system is closely linked to the ambient
temperature and solar irradiance. In summer, it is expected to experience a higher am­
bient temperature, and therefore that the PVT collectors increase their temperature and
capture more solar heat. This temperature increase can be oserved in Figure 4.4, from
the POLYSUN initial assumptions.
Figure 4.4: PVT collectors maximum temperature thoughout a year. Image from POLY­
SUN
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
15
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Simulation Process
POLYSUN Software rely on quasi­dynamic simulations, which is a method used in mod­
eling and simulation that strikes a balance between static (steady­state) simulations and
fully dynamic simulations. It incorporates aspects of both approaches to achieve a more
accurate representation of systems that have both time­dependent and time­independent
characteristics.
In the context of a PVT­HP system, quasi­dynamic simulations are for example applied to
calculate:
• Solar Energy Harvesting: Thermal and electrical outputs of PVT panels based on
time­varying solar radiation.
• Heat Pump Performance: Determining the heat pump’s operation and efficiency
at each time step, taking into account changing ambient temperatures and heat
demand.
• System Performance: Analyzing the long­term performance of the system, allow­
ing for adjustments and optimization to improve efficiency and meet energy de­
mands more effectively.
The results obtained in the simulation process are very extensive, and are mainly divided
into general values, thermal energy values and electricity values. It is also possible to
analyze the component results, with specific energy performance values for each compo­
nent.
However, since the main objective of this thesis is to use the energy analysis results to
carry out a life cycle assessment and economic analysis of the system, it was decided to
establish a list of valuable results for further analysis. The results obtained, which will be
analyzed in Chapter 7, are:
• Solar Fraction: Percentage of energy to the system supplied by the sun.
• Collectors Yield: Energy transferred from the collectors to the fluid.
• Yield Photovoltaics AC: Energy production of the photovoltaic inverters.
• Heat Generator Energy (HP) to the System: Energy transferred by the heat pump
to the fluid for DHW and space heating use.
• COP of HP: Final thermal energy use (DHW + space heating) divided by the elec­
tricity consumption of the HP.
• HP Electricity Consumption: Total electricity consumption of the HP regardless of
whether it comes from self­production or the grid.
• Electrical Self­Suficiency: Ratio between self­consumption and total consump­
tion.
• Energy Balance: Final calculation of the electricity obtained from the grid according
to the energy needs and self­production.
It is important to mention that all the results obtained in the simulation process correspond
to annual values, but the PVT­HP system is expected to have a life span of 20 years, so
it will be necessary to consider the energy yields obtained over that period of time. To
simplify this process, it was considered that the degradation effects on the components
are negligible, so the yields will remain constant throughout its useful life.
16
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:25==
4.3
Sensitivity Analysis
Sensitivity Analysis is defined as an analysis designed to test the robustness of a model
to ensure that small changes in model parameters or data structure do not exhibit large
changes in the results [22], and for a PVT­HP system this is interpreted as meaning that
if the characteristics of any of its components are changed, the final energy performance
should be maintained without many changes to continue meeting the energy needs of the
household.
However, the main objective of doing a sensitiviy analysis of this system is to optimize the
number of components and their capacity in order to have a lower environmental impact
and a lower investment and operational cost during the life cycle of the system.
After carefully analyzing the possible parameter variations in all the components, it was
concluded that the ones that could be the most significant in terms of environmental im­
pact and cost are the PVT collectors and the storage tanks. Although the heat pump is
probably the most expensive element of the system, it was decided to leave it as a fixed
component since it is practically impossible to modify parameters or scale performance
without changing the device. The rest of the components were completely discarded be­
cause they do not represent the possibility of easily quantifiable changes.
Finally, among the components selected to apply sensitivity analysis, it was decided to
analyze only the PVT collectors, considering that it is the most scalable component and
whose parameters can be changed more easily without the need to modify the rest of the
system. The storage tanks could also be a good component for analysis, since changing
their most representative parameters such as volume and insulation could modify the
performance of the heat pump; however, it was decided to leave them out of the analysis,
with the potential to retake this analysis as further work.
The most representative parameters of the PVT collectors that were evaluated to verify
that there were no major changes in energy performance are the total collector area and
the heat loss coefficient of the collectors. Table 4.1 shows the values at both the lower
and upper limits that were evaluated.
PVT Collector Parameter
Base
Analysis 1
Analysis 2
Analysis 3
Total Gross Area
10 m²
5 m²
20 m²
40 m²
Heat Loss Coefficient
14.5 W/m²K
7.25 W/m²K
29 W/m²K
58 W/m²K
Table 4.1: PVT collector parameters for sensitivity analysis
4.4
Comparison of PVT System in Other Cities
In addition to the sensitivity analysis, there are certain comparisons that are worth making
on the proposed PVT­HP system. One of them is the simulation of the system in conditions
of solar irradiation and climate of other cities in the world, with the objective of observing
the energy performance of the system in places where the availability of solar resources
are better or worse than Copenhagen, and where the ambient temperature is very different
throughout the year, with the possibility of using the system for cooling instead of heating.
The cities selected to evaluate the energy performance of the PVT­HP system are shown
in Table 4.2. The selection was not arbitrary, since in addition to covering most of the
continents with very different climate and solar availability, the cities selected were cities
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
17
==PAGE:26==
in countries where the energy mix of electricity generation is also very different. This in
order to enrich the subsequent LCA analysis.
City
Country
Typical Weather Conditions
Sevilla
Spain
Warm and Dry
Skelleftea
Sweden
Cold and Dry
Hermosillo
Mexico
Hot and Dry
Shenzhen
China
Hot and Humid
Nairobi
Kenya
Warm and Humid
Table 4.2: Comparison cities for PVT­HP system
Energy performance comparisons of the PVT­HP system in different cities were only car­
ried out with the base system, and the different sensitivity analysis scenarios in each
region were not analyzed.
4.5
Energy Performance of Alternative Systems
In order to show the benefits of the PVT­HP system compared to traditional heating sys­
tems, it was decided to make a comparison with three other widely used systems. The
results obtained were of great help for the LCA and LCoH analysis, since they represent
a basis for comparison on the possible environmental improvements of new and techno­
logical systems.
The systems to be compared are:
• PV ­ A/W HP System: Roof­mounted PV array which provides part of the electricity
needs of the household, contribuiting to the operation of the air­water heat pump.
• Electric Boiler: The DHW storage tank and the buffer tank for space heating are
heated up by an electrical boiler device. There are no heat pump and PV/PVT
collectors.
• NG Boiler: The DHW storage tank and the buffer tank for space heating are heated
up by a Natural Gas boiler device. There are no heat pump and PV/PVT collector.
The energy performance of each of these alternative systems yielded extremely interest­
ing data in terms of environmental impact and economic viability, even when compared
only to the base PVT­HP system. An interesting evaluation as further work would be to
analyze the different systems in the geographical scenarios mentioned above.
The layout of the alternative systems can be seen in Appendix XX.
18
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:27==
5
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)
A Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a systematic analysis of the potential environmental
impacts of a product, process or service throughout its entire life cycle. This analysis
encompasses life stages such as the extraction of raw materials, production, distribution,
use, and final disposal. Its objective is to identify and quantify the use of energy, materials
and emissions to the environment, providing a global view of the environmental impact.
The International Organization for Standardization provides the guidelines and require­
ments for conducting a Life Cycle Assessment according to ISO 14040, which provides
the principles and framework for conducting an LCA analysis, ensuring that consistent
and reliable methods are followed. The four main principles within this framework are:
• Standardization of methodology: ISO 14040 sets the guidelines for conducting
an LCA. This includes the LCA phases (definition of objectives and scope, inven­
tory analysis, impact assessment and interpretation) and ensures that studies are
conducted in a systematic and consistent manner.
• Transparency and comparability: Following ISO 14040, LCA studies must clearly
document their methods, data and assumptions, allowing results to be transparent
and comparable between different studies and products.
• Credibility and international recognition: Adopting ISO 14040 in LCA studies
brings credibility, as it is an internationally recognized standard. This is especially
important for companies wishing to demonstrate their commitment to sustainability
and environmental management at a global level.
• Continuous improvement: ISO 14040 encourages continuous improvement in
LCA practice by providing guidelines for critical review and updating of studies as
needed.
The main objective of this thesis is to carry out an LCA analysis of the PVT­HP system
described above, making use of the energy analysis results obtained in the POLYSUN
simulations, as well as databases from external sources for the accounting of materials
and processes during the lifetime of the system.
In order to effectively apply ISO 14040 in the LCA analysis of this system and obtain
meaningful results on the true environmental impact, a series of steps were followed to
comply with the principles and requirements established in the standard. The guidelines
for each of these steps are detailed below and addressed with specific data to the PVT­HP
system studied.
5.1
Goal and Scope
The first phase on the LCA analysis is the definition of goal and scope, which establishes
the purpose, context and boundaries of the study, providing a clear and structured basis
for all subsequent stages of the analysis. The key components of this phase are detailed
in this section, in accordance with the objectives for the PVT­HP studied.
5.1.1
Goal
The goal of the LCA study should answer the question why is it being carried out? any
reason that is aligned to identify environmental impact, compare with other products, or
communicate to stakeholders for regulatory action is valid.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
19
==PAGE:28==
The general purpose of the LCA analysis for the PVT­HP system is to: Evaluate the en­
vironmental impact of the system over a 20­year lifetime, comparing the results to other
heating systems widely used today. This comparison is done with the objective of com­
municating the environmental benefits of the PVT­HP system, if any, or identifying oppor­
tunities for improvement in the environmental performance of the system.
The analysis is intended for any stakeholder who considers it valuable, both in the SHC­
related industry and the academic community conducting similar research.
5.1.2
Scope
El alcance del estudio de LCA consiste basicamente en tres puntos, definir el sistema
que se va a evaluar, definir la unidad funcional del estudio, y set boundaries sobre lo que
se pretente analizar.
La definición del sistema consiste en simplemente describir el producto o servicio que
se está evaluando, incluyendo todas sus etapas de ciclo de vida. El sistema PVT­HP de
este proyecto puede definirse como: Sistema híbrido Photovoltaic­Thermal acoplado a
una Heat Pump para generación de energía térmica en una household. El análisis incluye
el proceso de manufactura, instalación, operación y end­of­life.
La functional unit es la medida cuantitativa que se utiliza para comparar los resultados del
LCA. Para los propósitos de este proyecto y de acuerdo a los resultados obtenidos en el
análisis energético, se definió como functional unit 1 kWh de energía térmica producida,
por lo que todos los resultados de impacto ambiental están en función de esta unidad.
En cuanto a las boundaries del sistema, existen cuatro principales enfoques de establecer
qué etapas del ciclo de vida del producto o servicio se incluirán en el estudio. Estos son:
• Cradle­to­Grave: Este alcance incluye todas las etapas del ciclo de vida de un
producto, desde la extracción de materias primas (cuna), pasando por la produc­
ción, uso y hasta su disposición final (tumba). Es el tipo más completo de LCA y
proporciona una visión integral del impacto ambiental total del producto.
• Cradle­to­Gate: Este enfoque considera las etapas desde la extracción de mate­
rias primas hasta la salida del producto de la fábrica, antes de que llegue al con­
sumidor final. No incluye el uso ni la disposición final del producto. Es útil para
evaluar el impacto ambiental de la fase de producción.
• Gate­to­Gate: Este tipo de LCA se enfoca solo en una parte específica del ciclo de
vida, generalmente un proceso particular dentro de la cadena de suministro, como
una etapa de producción específica. Es útil para comparar diferentes procesos o
mejorar una etapa específica de la producción.
• Cradle­to­Cradle: Este enfoque considera todas las etapas del ciclo de vida del
producto, similar al cradle­to­grave, pero con la diferencia de que al final del ciclo
de vida, el producto se recicla o se reutiliza en un ciclo cerrado. El objetivo es
minimizar el desperdicio y promover la sostenibilidad al crear un ciclo continuo de
uso de materiales.
El sistema PVT­HP analizado en esta tesis tiene un enfoque mixto entre Cradle­to­Gate
y Cradle­to­Cradle, ya que considera la posibilidad del reciclaje de solo algunos de sus
componentes. Además, se excluyen fuera de los límites de análisis la extracción de
materias primas, ya se el análisis comienza con la adquisición de esas materias primas.
Para entender un poco mejor la estructura y los límites de este sistema se puede observar
el diagrama de la Figura 5.1.
20
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.1: PVT­HP System Scope
5.2
Life Cycle Inventory (LCI)
A Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) is a fundamental component of a LCA analysis. It involves
the systematic collection and quantification of inputs and outputs for a product system
throughout its lifecycle. This includes data on the use of energy, raw materials, emissions
to air, water and soil, and the generation of waste. The LCI serves as the quantitative
backup of an LCA, providing the essential data needed to assess the environmental im­
pacts of the system being studied.
For this thesis, the access to EcoInvent databases was not allowed, so the LCI was com­
piled using data from similar research studies, ensuring that the information was relevant
and applicable to the PVT­HP system under evaluation. These studies often utilize the
EcoInvent database, which is widely recognized as the most reliable and comprehensive
life cycle inventory database available globally. EcoInvent provides high­quality, consis­
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
21
==PAGE:30==
tent, and up­to­date data across various industries and regions, making it an indispens­
able resource for conducting accurate and credible LCA studies.
One of the main projects used to obtain data for the PVT­HP system LCI was the PVPS
project, specifically Task 12. The publications made in this task based their LCIs on EcoIn­
vent datasets, as well as direct information from suppliers (without specifying the supplier).
Within the publications of this task, studies such as —­ and —­ stand out, which represent
an important repertoire of useful information for developing the PVT­HP system LCI.
Although the PVPS project only focuses on PV technology and does not contain informa­
tion on the other components of the system studied in this thesis, it is very useful to have
data on complex components such as the inverter and the photovoltaic part of the PVT
collectors.
The inventory data corresponding to the heat pump was collected based on the study —­
which deals with the analysis of a similar system but with an air­water heat pump. Despite
the efforts made to obtain realiable information on a water­water heat pump, the search
was unsuccessful and it was decided to continue with the air­water component. Further
work is possible to improve the accuracy of the information presented here.
The other components of the system were added to the inventory by simply quantifying the
mass of the main component materials. For example, the copper pipes were reduced to
the mass that represents the entire piping system in the system. Similarly, the heat trans­
fer components of the PVT collectors, the heat exchanger plates, and the main structure
of the DHW storage tank were calculated.
It is important to mention that the Buffer Tank, the space heating loop radiators, and the
three­way valves were not considered for the inventory, since all these are common com­
ponents in the other three systems that were evaluated to compare the results along with
the PVT­HP. To graphically identify which elements are not considered in the LCI and are
therefore discarded from any type of analysis, the following Figure ?? can be observed
Figure 5.2: PVT­HP System components excluded from LCI
22
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:31==
5.3
Methodology
5.3.1
ReCiPe 2016 Endpoint
The ReCiPe 2016 methodology is one of the most comprehensive and widely used ap­
proaches for Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA). It translates life cycle inventory (LCI)
data into a profile of environmental impacts. ReCiPe 2016 encompasses a detailed frame­
work that integrates mid­point and end­point indicators to provide a thorough assessment
of potential environmental impacts. This dual­level assessment allows for both detailed
analysis and more aggregated, understandable results suitable for decision­making.
ReCiPe 2016 operates through a series of steps that convert the LCI data into mean­
ingful environmental impact scores. These steps include classification, characterization,
normalization, and weighting.
In the classification step, LCI results are assigned to relevant impact categories. ReCiPe
2016 defines several mid­point impact categories, such as climate change, ozone deple­
tion, human toxicity, and others. Each category aggregates emissions or resource uses
that contribute to that particular type of environmental impact.
Characterization involves quantifying the potential impact within each category. This is
done using characterization factors, which are coefficients that express the relative po­
tency of different substances within a category. The characterization factor for each sub­
stance is derived from scientific models that describe its environmental behavior and ef­
fects.
The general equation for calculating the impact in each category is given by:
Ii =
∑
j
(EFij · mj)
(5.1)
where:
• Ii is the impact score in category i.
• EFij is the characterization factor for substance j in category i.
• mj is the mass of substance j emitted or consumed.
For example, in the climate change category, the characterization factors are Global
Warming Potentials (GWP) over a specified time horizon (typically 100 years). The char­
acterization equation for climate change can be represented as:
GWP100 =
∑
j
(GWP100,j · mj)
(5.2)
where GWP100,j is the GWP of substance j over 100 years.
5.3.2
Normalization
Normalization involves comparing the characterized results to a reference value, which
could be the total impacts per person or per region over a specific period. This step helps
to understand the relative significance of the impact scores.
The normalization equation is:
Ni =
Ii
Nref,i
(5.3)
where:
• Ni is the normalized impact score in category i.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
23
==PAGE:32==
• Ii is the impact score in category i.
• Nref,i is the normalization factor for category i, representing the reference impact.
5.3.3
Weighting
Weighting aggregates the normalized impact scores into a single score by applying weight­
ing factors, which reflect the relative importance of each impact category. These factors
are typically derived through expert elicitation or policy targets.
The weighted score W is calculated as:
W =
∑
i
(Ni · WFi)
(5.4)
where:
• W is the weighted overall impact score.
• Ni is the normalized impact score in category i.
• WFi is the weighting factor for category i.
ReCiPe 2016 includes a range of impact categories and characterization models for both
mid­point and end­point indicators. Mid­point indicators reflect impacts at an earlier stage
of the cause­effect chain, providing detailed insight into specific environmental mecha­
nisms. End­point indicators aggregate these impacts into broader damage categories,
such as damage to human health, ecosystems, and resource availability, offering a more
holistic perspective.
• Climate Change: Uses GWP characterization factors to assess impacts.
• Ozone Depletion: Evaluates impacts based on the Ozone Depletion Potential (ODP).
• Human Toxicity: Characterizes impacts using factors derived from toxicological
data.
• Ecotoxicity: Assesses the potential harm to ecosystems using Ecotoxicity Potential
(ETP).
• Particulate Matter Formation: Measures impacts on human health from particu­
late emissions.
• Ionizing Radiation: Assesses human health impacts from ionizing radiation expo­
sure.
• Photochemical Ozone Formation: Evaluates impacts of ozone precursors leading
to smog.
• Terrestrial Acidification: Measures the acidifying effects on terrestrial environ­
ments.
• Freshwater Eutrophication: Assesses nutrient enrichment in freshwater systems.
• Marine Eutrophication: Evaluates nutrient impacts on marine environments.
• Water Depletion: Assesses the impacts of water use on water scarcity.
• Mineral Resource Depletion: Measures the depletion of mineral resources.
• Fossil Resource Depletion: Assesses the depletion of fossil energy resources.
• Land Use: Evaluates impacts of land occupation and transformation.
24
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:33==
5.3.4
IPCC 2021
5.4
Software and Simulations
• OpenLCA
• SimaPro and Ecoinvent Datasets as a general rule within the LCA sector
5.5
Environmental Impact Assessment
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
25
==PAGE:34==
6
Economic Analysis
6.1
Life Cycle Cost (LCC)
6.2
Levelized Cost of Heat (LCoH)
6.3
Investment Payback Time (IPBT)
26
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:35==
7
Results and Discussion
In this section, the results obtained in all phases for the evaluated PVT­HP system will be
presented and interpreted. Additionally, the simulation results of alternative systems will
be shown, with the aim of comparing the energy performance, environmental impact, and
economic viability of different scenarios.
The results will be divided into the three evaluation stages developed in the previous
sections, which are Energy Analysis, Environmental Analysis (LCA), and Economic Anal­
ysis. The main objective of this section is to provide robust quantitative and qualitative
assessments that support the importance of continuing to develop innovative technology
for heating and cooling in the context of the energy transition.
7.1
Energy Analysis
Based on the energy demand described in Chapter 3 and the simulation process for en­
ergy analysis developed in Chapter 4, the annual production of electrical and thermal
energy from the PVT­HP system was obtained. Although the thermal energy transferred
from the collectors to the fluid is not sufficient to meet the house’s demand, it is impor­
tant to remember that the system is coupled with a W/W Heat Pump, which boosts the
received thermal energy.
Figure 7.1 shows the total monthly irradiation received by the PTV collectors. Although
the annual irradiation equals 11,432 kWh, the effective thermal energy transferred to the
systems is almost 50% of the annual irradiation, which is equal to 5,716 kWh. If the PVT
system were not connected to a heat pump, the energy yield would not be sufficient to
meet the household’s needs, not to mention that the energy is inversely available to the
monthly energy needs profile. While the thermal performance of the collectors increases
during the summer months, the thermal needs at that time of the year are minimal.
Figure 7.1: Irradiation onto collectors area
However, thanks to the capacity of the heat pump to drive the thermal energy received
from the solar collectors, it is possible to cover the energy needs of the household, with a
total supplied heating energy of 12,690 kWh, which is even higher than the demand. The
energy supply profile by the heat pump can be seen in Figure 7.2.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 7.2: Thermal Energy from HP
From Figure 7.2 it can be seen that after the intervention of the heat pump, the thermal
energy is being produced and used correctly according to the needs of each season.
In order to meet the energy needs of the house, the heat pump had to consume electric­
ity, either from the PVT collectors or directly from the grid. Its total annual consumption
amounted to 2,975 kWh, which is approximately 43% of the electricity used in the house
during the whole year (6,907 kWh).
On the other hand, the inverter’s annual yield was only 2,024 kWh, with maximum pro­
duction in June with 297 kWh, and minimum production in December with 24 kWh, as
can be seen in Figure 7.3. Although the electrical production of the inverter represents
68% of the electrical consumption of the heat pump, only a part of it could be used for
self­consumption of the house, specifically 1,443 kWh. The remaining 582 kWh were sold
to the grid, partly due to the high performance during the summer when less electricity is
used.
Figure 7.3: AC Inverter Yield
Throughout the year of study, it is expected to both purchase and sell electricity to the grid
to meet demand and alleviate overproduction, respectively. During periods of high solar
irradiance, particularly in the summer months, the PVT collectors generate an excess of
electrical energy beyond the household’s immediate needs. This surplus electricity can
be sold back to the grid, providing not only a source of revenue but also contributing to
the overall efficiency and sustainability of the energy system. Conversely, in the winter
months, when solar production is lower and the demand for heating and electricity is
higher, the household will need to purchase additional electricity from the grid to ensure
all energy needs are met.
This dynamic interaction with the grid is a critical component of the overall energy strat­
28
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:37==
egy for the PVT­HP system. By leveraging the grid as a buffer, the system can maintain
a balance between production and consumption, optimizing energy use and minimizing
waste. The ability to sell excess energy during periods of low demand and purchase en­
ergy during periods of high demand ensures that the household remains energy efficient
and cost­effective throughout the year. This strategy also helps to stabilize the grid, as
the excess renewable energy generated during peak production times can be distributed
and used elsewhere, reducing the reliance on fossil fuels and enhancing the grid’s sus­
tainability.
Given this interaction with the grid, it is essential to consider the energy balance for both
electricity and thermal energy in the subsequent Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) analyses.
The LCA will need to account for the net energy consumed and produced over the year,
including the periods of excess production and deficit. This comprehensive view of energy
flows will provide a more accurate assessment of the environmental impact and economic
viability of the PVT­HP system. By evaluating the net energy balance, the LCA can high­
light the system’s efficiency and its potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
reliance on non­renewable energy sources. Figure 7.4 shows the Electricity balance for
the investigated PVT­HP system.
Figure 7.4: Electricity Balance
From the electricity balance it can be concluded that the household has a dependence on
the grid of about 72%, but has a sales participation of just over 10% of what it buys from
the grid.
On the other hand, it is vital to understand the thermal energy balance because it directly
influences the system’s capacity to supply sufficient heat for space heating and DHW.
The efficiency of the Heat Pump, coupled with the thermal input from the PVT system,
ensures that the household’s heating demands are met without relying on external energy
sources. The annual average COP of 4.14 significantly boosts the thermal output, making
it possible to achieve a high level of energy efficiency. This amplified heat production,
driven by the combination of the PVT system and the Heat Pump, ensures that the energy
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
29
==PAGE:38==
needs of the household are adequately supplied throughout the year. The thermal energy
balance obtained for the PVT­HP system is shown in Figure 7.5
Figure 7.5: Thermal Energy Balance
From the thermal energy balance it can be concluded that this is an extremely efficient
system, in which a cumulative electricity consumption of 3,406 kWh (including the elec­
tricity consumed by the pumps), generates 11,745 kWh of heat, combining space heating
and DHW.
7.2
Sensitivity Analysis
In this section, the sensitivity analyses is carried out, exploring how variations in two key
parameters influence the energy performance. Through these analyses, the system’s
robustness can be assessed, and potential areas for optimization can be identified.
7.2.1
Influence of changing PVT Collectors Area
The size of the solar collector area plays an important role in determining the energy ef­
ficiency and overall performance of the PVT­HP system. A larger collector area allows
for greater absorption of solar radiation, thereby increasing the system’s energy capture
potential. Conversely, reducing the collector area can lead to diminished energy produc­
tion and efficiency. A smaller collector area means less surface area available for solar
absorption, resulting in lower energy capture rates. Consequently, the system may strug­
gle to meet the household’s energy requirements, necessitating greater reliance on the
external grid.
To determine the influence of reducing or increasing the area in the PVT­HP system, a
simultaneous and comparative evaluation of 4 possible scenarios was carried out, one
being the base scenario of 10 m², and the other three from smallest to largest 5 m², 20
m², and 40 m².
Figure 7.6 shows what is perhaps the most obvious and expected result, in which clearly
increasing the area 4 times the area results in a much higher AC inverter yield, while
reducing the area by half results in a proportional reduction of electric yield. However,
30
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:39==
it should be remembered that much of this production occurs during the summer, and
although the economic benefit may be considerable by selling the excess electricity to the
grid, it may not really have such a significant impact on overall system performance.
To really see the influence of increasing or decreasing the PVT collector area, the heat
pump thermal power generation process, shown in Figure 7.7, must be analyzed. Here it
can be observed that regardless of the collector area, the production remains very similar
in all scenarios. Thus, it is concluded that for LCA and LCoH analysis, if there is a larger
PVT collector area, there could be an economic benefit after a certain time to amortize
the initial investment, but the environmental impact would be higher.
Figure 7.6: AC Inverter Yield Comparison
Figure 7.7: Thermal energy from the heat pump
7.2.2
Influence of PVT Cells Efficiency
Conversely, adecreaseinPV efficiencycanresultinreducedenergyproductionandefficiency.LowerPV ef
sufficiencybutalsoincreasestheenvironmentalfootprintofthehouseholdduetoheighteneddependenceon
renewableenergysources.Therefore, optimizingPV efficiencyisessentialformaximizingtheenergyeff
HPsystem, ensuringitoperatesatitshighestpotentialwhileminimizingenvironmentalimpact.Throughse
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
31
==PAGE:40==
7.3
Environmental Analysis
Figure 7.8: Influence of changing PVT Solar Collector Area
Figure 7.9: Influence of changing PVT Solar Collector Area
32
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:41==
7.4
Economic Analysis
Figure 7.10: Life cycle environmental benefits of the PVT­HP system compared to other
systems
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
33
==PAGE:42==
8
Conclusions
8.1
Technical Conclusions
8.2
Personal Conclusion
34
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:43==
9
Further Work
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
35
==PAGE:44==
10
Appendix
36
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
International Energy Agency. Tracking Buildings. 2023. URL: https://www.iea.org/
energy-system/buildings.
[2]
Diana Ürge­Vorsatz et al. Heating and cooling energy trends and drivers in build­
ings. 2015. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032114007151?
via%3Dihub.
[3]
UN Environment Programme. Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction.
2022. URL: https://globalabc.org/our-work/tracking-progress-global-status-report.
[4]
International Energy Agency. Tracking Heating. 2023. URL: https://www.iea.org/
energy-system/buildings/heating#tracking.
[5]
International Energy Agency. Tracking Space Cooling. 2023. URL: https://www.iea.
org/energy-system/buildings/space-cooling.
[6]
National Centers for Environmental Information. Annual 2023 Global Climate Re­
port. 2024. URL: https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/monitoring/monthly-report/
global/202313.
[7]
International Energy Agency. Annual 2023 Global Climate Report. 2023. URL: https:
//www.iea.org/energy-system/buildings/heat-pumps.
[8]
United Nations. For a livable climate: Net­zero commitments must be backed by
credible action. 2024. URL: https : / / www . un . org / en / climatechange / net - zero -
coalition.
[9]
Diogo O. Cabral. Photovoltaic­Thermal Solar Collectors – A Rising Solar Technol­
ogy for an Urban Sustainable Development. 2022. URL: https://www.intechopen.
com/chapters/81467.
[10]
Bharat Chhugani et al. Comparison of PVT ­ heat pump systems with reference
systems for the energy supply of a single­family house. 2022. URL: https://www.
researchgate . net / publication /366074836 _Comparison _of_PVT_- _heat _pump_
systems_with_reference_systems_for_the_energy_supply_of_a_single-family_house.
[11]
IEA SHC. Task 71 ­ Life Cycle and Cost Assessment for Heating and Cooling Tech­
nologies. 2023. URL: https://task71.iea-shc.org/.
[12]
IEA SHC. Task 54 ­ Price Reduction of Solar Thermal Systems. 2018. URL: https:
//task54.iea-shc.org/.
[13]
Laura Golsteijn. Life Cycle Assessment Explained. 2022. URL: https://pre-sustainability.
com/articles/life-cycle-assessment-lca-basics/.
[14]
Meteonorm ­ Worldwide irradiation data. 2024. URL: https://meteonorm.com/en/.
[15]
Kyriaki Foteinaki et al. Modelling household electricity load profiles based on Danish
time­use survey data. 2019. URL: https://www-sciencedirect-com.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/science/article/pii/S0378778818338660.
[16]
Danish Energy Agency. Energy Statistics 2022. 2023. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/
ens.dk/files/Statistik/energy_statistic_2022.pdf.
[17]
Karina Tumanova1 and Anatolijs Borodinecs. Analysis of centralized hot tap water
systems calculation’s specifics. 2018. URL: https://doi.org/10.1051/matecconf/
201824506011.
[18]
Vela Solaris. Polysun. 2024. URL: https://www.velasolaris.com/?lang=en.
[19]
Racell. Racell ­ Research Development. 2024. URL: https://racell.dk/research-
development/.
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
37
==PAGE:46==
[20]
Building Ministry of Transport and Housing. Executive Order No. 1615 of 13 Dec.
2017. 2018. URL: https://bygningsreglementet.dk/~/media/Br/BR-English/BR18_
Executive_order_on_building_regulations_2018.pdf.
[21]
Photovoltaic Geographical Information System. Typical Meteorological Year. 2022.
URL: https://re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pvg_tools/en/#TMY.
[22]
ESRI. Sensitivity Analysis. 2023. URL: https : / / support . esri . com / en - us / gis -
dictionary/sensitivity-analysis.
38
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
==PAGE:47==
A
Title
Investigation of a PVT System in Regard to LCA and LCoH
39
==PAGE:48==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
