==PAGE:1==
Compressing Highly-Repetitive Collections
Master’s thesis
Author: Roar Nind Steffensen
Study Number: s144107
Supervisors: Philip Bille & Inge Li Gørtz
Submission: June 12’th 2024
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This project is submitted in candidacy for the MSc degree in Computer Science and En-
gineering from the Technical University of Denmark. The project was originally proposed
and supervised by the professors Philip Bille and Inge Li Gørtz, and has been carried out
by Roar Nind Steffensen.
The idea to this project was largely inspired by the previous work Hierarchical Relative
Lempel-Ziv Compression by Simon J. Puglisi and Simon R. Tarnow together with Philip
and Inge.
Prior to this project, a special course of 5 ECTS points has been completed as preparation,
where relevant papers and the basic compression techniques were researched and tested.
The work on this project was carried out from January 22 to June 12, spanning a total of
21 weeks and a workload of 30 ECTS points.
All source code is submitted as a zip file to DTU Inside along with the dissertation. Com-
bined the implementation is ∼30k lines of code implemented in rust, however significant
portions of code is duplicated between versions to allow for quick iteration of versions and
ensure that later changes did not break previous versions, making it easy to AB test.
Roar Nind Steffensen
==PAGE:3==
Table of contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
1
3
Basic compression tools
2
3.1
LZ77 Compression (LZ77) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.2
Relative LZ77 Compression (RLZ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.3
Phrase encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4
Git compression scheme
5
4.1
Repository structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.2
Objects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Packfiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.4
Advantages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.5
Drawbacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Alternative compression scheme
10
5.1
S1: Plain LZ77 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.2
S2: RLZ compressing previous commits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.3
S3: Phrase encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6
Improving performance
14
6.1
S4: File buffers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.2
S5: Adapt magic heuristic from git . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6.3
S6: Extend DAG to full history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
7
Experimental results
21
7.1
Handcrafted tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7.2
Comparing all schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.3
Random Github repository benchmarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.4
Commit size benchmarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.5
Large repository test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8
Conclusion and evaluation
33
9
Appendix
i
9.1
All versions overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
9.2
LZ77 Search data structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
==PAGE:4==
1
Abstract
In this project we investigated the compression scheme currently found in the version con-
trol system called git. Based on previous work with reference based compression, it was
assumed that the history of commits in a git repository could be compressed more efficiently.
We briefly went through some basic compression tools/methods as well as how the current
compression scheme in git works. With this knowledge we developed alternative compres-
sion schemes focused on the drawbacks highlighted in gits compression. The alternative
schemes started as a very simple idea and was improved iteratively, initially focusing on the
compressed database size and then on compression time. The most significant implemented
schemes S1-S6 are discussed in this report, out of a total of 16 versions comprised of several
intermediate steps between the six discussed schemes as well as some alternative approaches
which were discontinued.
Each of the alternative schemes are initially tested on a suite of data sets where compression
ratios, and later also commit performance, are compared to git.
Finally the two best
schemes, S3 and S6, are tested on a sample of ∼400 random GitHub repositories, again
compared to git, in order to see how they perform on real data.
Overall the mean compression ratio of the best alternative schemes used between 25% and
50% of the database size used by git, but during testing we found some edge cases, with
large files, where the phrase encoding in git would perform best, and several options are
discussed which could improve on this.
The final scheme uses an internal structure similar to the repository structure found in git,
but allows for multiple references for each file. This means, that the amount of phrases for
compression is generally expected to be equal or better than in git, but checkout and phrase
encoding now has to manage the increased amount of compression dependencies.
2
Introduction
In this project, we will evaluate how well we can compress highly-repetitive collections,
using simple compression schemes. Here we define such collections as an ordered set of
entries, in this case strings, where the change between consecutive entries is small. Therefore
many/large substrings from an entry will be shared with its neighbours.
The concrete domain we are going to focus on, is the commit history of a git repository,
however many of the implemented principles are domain agnostic and should work for any
such collection. Take the case where entries are numbers, where the repetition would in the
patterns over the history of entries and not between consecutive entries. By segmenting the
history into blocks, we could map the domain into a similar problem; consecutive blocks of
shared patterns.
In the modern world, this problem is of high significance, due to the large amounts of data
stored in cloud platforms providing backups and history access. Storing each snapshot as
1
==PAGE:5==
raw data would be wasteful as each change between subsequent history entries usually only
contain minor local changes. According to Wikipedia GitHub alone has over 420 million
repositories[1], and therefore if this data can be compressed more efficiently, the overall
reduction in storage and energy resources could have a considerable environmental and
economical impact.
3
Basic compression tools
The main compression tool we are going to use, is LZ77 compression[2]. This is a simple,
universal and loss-less compression scheme, which has been shown to produce an essentially
optimal loss-less compression[3] on an individual sequence of data.
In addition to the
isolated LZ77 compression, we will also use a relative LZ77 compression scheme[4] which
allows reuse between multiple strings.
Since these tools will be used in different ways
throughout this project, we will briefly go through their inner workings and how they have
been adapted/extended.
Throughout the report there are two major parameters of interest, being how well data is
compressed compared to its original size, and how much time it takes to compress. These
two parameters will be referred to as compression ratio and performance respectively.
3.1
LZ77 Compression (LZ77)
The principal concept of the LZ77 compression scheme, is to represent the string as phrases
reusing substrings from the string itself, where phrase k contains an offset ok and a length
lk. More formally, the phrase k producing a substring starting at position i in the source
string is greedily matched with the longest common substring starting at position j < i,
setting ok = i −j and lk to the length of the matched substring. Importantly, the matched
substring is allowed to exceed the starting position i of the currently evaluated phrase.
The resulting phrases from compressing a string S is then
lz77(S) = (o1, l1), (o2, l2), . . . , (om, lm)
(1)
where m is the total amount of phrases, and
S = S(0 −o1, l1) ∥S(l1 −o2 + 1, l2) ∥. . . ∥S(
 m−1
X
i=1
li
!
−om + 1, lm)
(2)
where S(i, l) is the substring of S starting at position i and of length l, and ∥is the string
concatenation operator.
From eq 2 we immediately see an issue with the first phrase not having any symbols available
to reuse, similarly how do we handle the first occurrence of each symbol in S, since it will
by definition not be available to reuse in the already parsed portion of S.
2
==PAGE:6==
There are many ways to handle this, such as appending the next symbol s to each phrase,
or prepending the used alphabet uncompressed as metadata to the parsed string to lookup
first occurrences. In this case, we are going to split phrases into either literal or pointer
phrases, where literal phrases contain a single symbol, and pointer phrases are equivalent
to the phrases in 1. By splitting up these phrase types, we have more control when deciding
how to encode the phrases before storing on disk.
3.2
Relative LZ77 Compression (RLZ)
A clear limitation on the LZ77 compression scheme, is that it only allows reuse within a
single string S. However, if we have an existing collection R of strings available, it might
be possible to compress S as phrases reusing substrings from reference strings R ∈R. The
best case would be if ∃R ∈R | S = R(i, |S|) for some i allowing S to be compressed as a
single phrase. Alternatively it may be the case that ∃s ∈S, ∀R ∈R | s ̸∈R. The solution
here is to allow the RLZ compression to have literal and pointer phrases similar to the LZ77
compression where pointer phrases can either point to S or some reference string R ∈R.
This way, unique symbols are again handled as literal phrases, and the pointer phrases are
greedily chosen as the longest matching substring in R or in the parsed string from S.
Since phrases resulting from RLZ compression may have multiple sources, each pointer
phrase requires some meta data, and we are going to see multiple ways this can be encoded.
3.3
Phrase encoding
The final size of the compression relies heavily on how the phrases are encoded. Here we
will go through different phrase encodings, which we are going to use later.
Naive pointer phrase encoding
Based on the simple phrase structure from eq 1, a naive encoding could simple be storing the
phrases exactly as written: (ok, ol), .... This is generally a wasteful way to encode phrases,
since the offset and length could be on the order of |S| using up to 2 × log10(|S|) × 8 bits
plus the 3 × 8 bits for the parentheses and comma, per phrase.
Static pointer phrase encoding
A simple improvement would be to remove the redundant symbols, and store the two
parameters as N-bit integers, for some suitable choice of N such as 32. This would create
statically sized phrases, but limit the size of strings possible to compress to 232 bits. Total
size per phrase is then 2 × 32.
This phrase encoding is not bad for relatively large strings, however for smaller strings there
is a large overhead from the unused range in the 32 bit parameters.
3
==PAGE:7==
Tight static pointer phrase encoding
To improve on the issue with the static pointer phrase encoding, we can scan the pointer
phrases and record the largest offset and length used. The minimum amount of bits to
encode these parameters are then used when encoding pointer phrases. This reduces the
total size of each phrase to at most 2 × log2(|S|).
In order to decode the phrases, we need to store the offset and length bit sizes as meta
data, however this is a constant overhead and not per phrase. Using the same size limit as
before, it would be a constant 2 × log2(32) = 10 bit overhead from metadata.
Huffman coding
If we make use of the frequency of symbols, we can improve phrase encoding even more by
use of Huffman coding[5]. The way it works, is by assigning each symbol a Huffman code,
which is a unique prefix-free code, where frequently occurring symbols are assigned shorter
codes than infrequent codes. By enforcing the Huffman codes to be prefix-free, it is possible
to know when a code has been fully parsed during the decoding step.
To construct the Huffman tree, the frequencies/amount of occurrences of each symbol is
recorded. Each symbol is then set as the root of a tree with only one node, with each node
storing the total frequency of symbols in its subtree. Two trees from the forest with the
smallest values in their roots are picked and merged with a new root storing the sum of the
subtree frequencies. Trees are merged until a single tree remains. The final tree contains
the Huffman codes for all symbols stored in the leafs. The base b of the code here is 2
since we use binary codes, but in principle any base can be configured by merging b trees
at a time. By construction, all symbol codes must be prefix-free, since they are mapped
to a unique leaf in the tree. Symbols of low frequency will be merged early and thereby
be pushed deeper in the final tree producing a longer code, compared to high frequency
symbols which are merged later.
3
b
1
c
5
a
0
1
0
1
1
3
4
5
9
a
b
c
0
1
4
5
a
3
b
1
c
Figure 1: Huffman Tree example with construction.
4
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1 shows an example tree with its construction. Here the symbols are assigned the
following codes: a = 1, b = 01 and c = 00. A nice lower bound for the size of the codes is
when the symbol frequencies consist of a single symbol which is given the empty code.
In general choosing the lowest frequency trees while merging can tie-break arbitrarily, how-
ever for a given set of symbols and frequencies to consistently produce the same tree, there
should be a consistent set of rules for how the forest is ordered during merging, e.g. ini-
tially having symbols ordered by frequency where groups of same frequencies are ordered
lexicographically. When merging trees, each same frequency group could then be treated
as a queue and child nodes are ordered according to the relative ordering of the trees before
merging.
Variants of Huffman coding has also been shown to asymptotically approach the same
optimal complexity bounds as LZ77 compression[2], however storing the Huffman tree as
meta data requires a non-trivial amount of data for a large set of symbols.
With these tools, we now have the basic building blocks to compress a highly-repetitive
collection. There are several important steps that we have not yet considered, but first we
should have a brief look into how the current compression scheme in Git works, since it
operates on similar principles.
4
Git compression scheme
The compression scheme currently implemented in Git, is a two level compression scheme,
working on a custom representation of the repository through history. By splitting the
compression into two levels, it is possible to have a very fast initial compression which
compromises on the compression ratio, allowing for quick iterations while creating commits.
Here all changes are tracked as objects in git which are compressed in isolation. When either
an I/O operation is required or sufficiently many objects are generated the second level of
compression compress objects into a packfile which is more computationally intensive but
produces a much better compression ratio[6].
First we will look into the internal structure managed in Git (as we will see a similar
structure in our final scheme), and then briefly go into the core mechanics of the two levels
of compression. Finally we will consider the advantages and drawbacks of this compression
scheme which will guide how our alternative compression scheme will function.
4.1
Repository structure
The main components of the repository structure is the tree over the file system originating
at the root folder of the git repository. To represent this, git builds a tree with 3 node
5
==PAGE:9==
types1. The first two node types are tree which represent a folder with its child references
and blob which most commonly store the contents of a file. The third node type is commit
which stores meta-information such as commit author, commit message, pointer to previous
commit and to the tree node representing the repository root folder at time of that commit.
The full structure creates a directed acyclic graph (DAG) since any cycles would correspond
to an infinitely large repository state at the corresponding commit. Where a repository state
defines the full set of folders and files in the tracked repository at some time in history.
Commit 1
Commit 2
Tree
"foo"
Tree
"bar"
FileA.txt
FileA.txt
FileB.txt
Commit 3
Tree
src
Tree
"John Doe"
meta
author.txt
Figure 2: Repository structure example.
Node types are represented as commit: teal
diamond, tree: green superellipse and blob: red rectangle. Edge labels represent file/folder
names.
In figure 2, we see an example of a git repository structure, with commits on the left, each
pointing to its root tree node and potentially a previous commit for navigation. After the
first commit, the repository contains a single file called FileA.txt with the contents ”foo”.
The second commit adds a new file called FileB.txt with the contents ”bar”, and since the
previous file stays unchanged, the tree node has a reference to the existing blob node for
FileA.txt. The third commit moves the existing files into a subfolder called src which in
this case reuses the existing tree node. A new folder called meta is also added at the root
of the repository with a file called author.txt containing the string ”John Doe”.
Nodes may be reused if git recognises that files have been moved. In general, the state of a
repository for a given commit, is found by the reachable nodes from its root tree node.
1Technically, Git also has a tag node type to label a commit, but that is not important for the purpose
of this project.
6
==PAGE:10==
4.2
Objects
With the repository structure already defined, objects are very simple. Each node in the
repository structure is serialised into a string and compressed with zlib[7] using the deflate
algorithm[8].
The compression used in zlib is a windowed LZ77 compression with Huffman coding. By
keeping the LZ77 compression windowed, phrases are restricted to a limited offset and
length by using a statically sized buffer of size b storing the last b bytes streamed from the
source string S. This buffer size b defines the size of the window and limits the time used
to search for phrases as well as memory usage.
As mentioned in section 3.3 under Huffman coding, you need the Huffman tree to de-
code phrases using this encoding technique, however pre-calculated Huffman trees based on
common symbol frequencies exist, making it possible to omit the overhead of the tree as
metadata, in the hope that the compressed data follows a similar distribution of symbol
frequencies as the static tree. To get the best of both worlds, zlib by default encodes phrases
with both the a static and dynamic Huffman tree approach and use the one providing the
best overall compression ratio, including metadata.
4.3
Packfiles
Even if the object compression was not windowed, the compression ratio would be wasteful,
since it does not take advantage of the similarity between files and across commits. By
only creating objects for changed files and their ancestor tree nodes, it does not waste
space by recompressing unchanged files, but duplicating the content would still double the
compression size2.
To improve on this, packfiles order all objects, from the history of the repository, according
to a magic heuristic. The documentation on how the internals of packfiles are precisely
carried out have been improved over the years, however it has never been great, as quoted
from Linus Torvalds himself[9]:
... I don’t think the docs exist. That’s something where I don’t think anybody
else than me even really got involved. Most of the rest of Git others have been
busy with (...), but packing nobody touched after I did it.
And later when outlining the pack heuristics:
2Git may recognise that files have been copied and reuse objects, but by adding trivial changes to each
file, this example holds.
7
==PAGE:11==
... Git really doesn’t follow files. So what it does is
- generate a list of all objects
- sort the list according to magic heuristics
- walk the list, using a sliding window, seeing if an object can be diffed against
another object in the window
- write out the list in recency order
And finally on the choice of heuristic:
... The point is that it’s all really just any random heuristic, and the ordering
is totally unimportant for correctness, but it helps a lot if the heuristic gives
”clumping” for things that are likely to delta well against each other.
From this, as well as consolidating the documentation[7] and code[10], we can gather that
each object oi at position i in this magic ordering, the best reference oj<i is found, by
calculating the delta compression between oi and oj and choosing the reference that produces
the smallest compression.
The magic heuristic/delta ordering is then briefly described as:
The delta ordering is (...):
- first sort by the ”basename” of the object, as defined by the name the object
was first reached through when generating the object list
- within the same basename, sort by size of the object
- but always sort different types separately (commits first).
That’s not exactly it, but it’s very close.
Again from the documentation[7] and code[10], we see that the reference search is win-
dowed/limited to a max offset to limit time spent on compression. The compression used
for delta compression is a custom implementation (xdiff[11]) based on LibXDiff. According
to the library’s home page[12], it implements binary file compression using the algorithm
described in File System Support for Delta Compression[13] together with Rabin-Karp fin-
gerprints as described in Fingerprinting By Random Polynomials[14]. For text file compres-
sion, it implements the algorithm created by Eugene W. Myers in An O(ND) Difference
Algorithm and Its Variations[15].
The resulting pack-format according to its documentation[16], contains some meta data
including version and object count followed by the compressed objects which are either
stored in undeltified representation or deltified representation each with their own meta data
and associated compressed data. The compressed data uses variable sized blocks of either
a) batched offset and size instructions for reference compression, or b) zlib compressed data
to append the target buffer without use of reference. Numbers in the packfile also follow a
custom integer encoding, where the most significant bit of each byte in the number is a flag
indicating if it is the last byte, and the remaining 7 bits carries the information to generate
the number. This produces a variable sized integer encoding, not setting an upper bound
8
==PAGE:12==
on compressed files and limiting the overhead of unused range for small values.
The result from packing objects is again a DAG with all objects having at most 1 outgoing
edge. All compressed objects are serialised and written in recency order to the packfile. An
index is stored next to the packfile, storing meta data such as at what offset each object is
stored, size, type and dependencies. Figure 3 contains a visual of the packfile dependencies,
but keep in mind that these are only compression references, and all data regarding the
repository structure, as mentioned in 4.1, is stored inside the objects.
commits
trees
blobs
Pack order
Figure 3: Dependency graph of packed objects. Objects are shown in groups of object type,
in pack order. Dependencies are depicted by arrows between objects.
For subsequent packfile compressions, delta compressions are reused where possible. If either
an object or its dependency/reference has changed, it is recompressed. Many configurations
in git impact how pack files are managed, such as the window used to scan for references,
splitting the pack into clusters to limit the time used to read the pack file and pruning
objects, to name a few.
As such, the delta compression is in principle similar to what we have seen with RLZ, where
data is compressed by evaluated references and reusing content to improve compression.
4.4
Advantages
As mentioned under packfiles, only compressing changed objects is an immediate advantage
in both compression ratio and performance compared to compressing the full repository
state and since packfiles operate on objects, it benefits both levels of compression.
By only allowing a single reference for delta compression, there is no need for meta data
per phrase, as self reference phrases are only included in the zlib compressed data blocks.
The dependency graph is also only a path from the target object, meaning recompressions
due to changed dependencies are reduced.
4.5
Drawbacks
Although there are advantages from limiting the amount of references in delta compression,
it is also the main drawback. Removing this restriction, and letting phrases reuse substrings
9
==PAGE:13==
from multiple references it should be possible to produce more efficient phrases and therefore
higher compression ratios.
According to the pack-format documentation and other sources implementing parsers of
gits packfile[17][18] these blocks are stored explicitly and not further encoded, meaning
offset and size parameters in their reference blocks are stored using the custom integer size
encoding, and data blocks are stored according to the compression produced by zlib.
When defining our own compression scheme, we will see what happens when we remove
this restriction, initially only considering compression ratio, and then later adapting the
algorithm to improve performance.
5
Alternative compression scheme
Based on what we have seen so far from the basic compression tools and the methods used
by Git, lets start with the simplest (but still practical) compression scheme we can create,
and then iteratively try to improve it.
While developing the alternative compression scheme(s), each iteration is implemented as an
individual scheme. This makes it possible to compare schemes with respect to compression
ratio and performance. The following sections will go through the 6 most important schemes
(named S1-S6), amongst all implemented versions3. Test results for each scheme are shown
in section 7, and an overview of all implemented versions is available in Appendix 9.1.
5.1
S1: Plain LZ77
So far, LZ77 compression has been the backbone of most compression methods seen. The
simplicity of the algorithm combined with the great compression ratio is what makes this
so appealing. However, running LZ77 compression on the entire history of the repository
quickly becomes unfeasible, so our first version will try to run LZ77 on the repository at
each commit. To do this, we read in the repository, serialise it to one big blob (binary large
object), concatenating all files with their paths as metadata, and compress it in isolation
using LZ77 compression.
This scheme effectively allows each file to have all previous files as reference in the order
that files were serialised, meaning similar files can be compressed very efficiently. The main
drawback is, that most files in this commit is assumed to be unchanged from the previous
commit, and therefore if we could reuse phrases from the previous commit, we would be
able to compress unchanged files as a single phrase. This drawback is clearly seen in the
experimental results in section 7.1.
3Not all versions differ enough to be considered different schemes, which is why schemes and versions are
distinguished here.
10
==PAGE:14==
S1 decompression
To decompress the repository state at a given commit, we load the corresponding compressed
blob from disk for the requested commit id and decompress the repository state directly
according to the LZ77 decompression as shown in eq 2. The simplest way to restore the
repository state from here is to delete all files and folders in the current root folder and
write all files found when scanning the decompressed blob at their stored paths. Creating
sub-directories when needed.
If we want to avoid touching unchanged files, we can initially record all existing files prior
to restoring the repository state. Before writing a file to disk, we check if it already exists
and has the correct content, if not we update the file. When all decompressed files have
been handled, we check for any unhandled existing files and delete them. This way we avoid
having the modified timestamp updated by the operating system.
LZ77 implementation
Until now, we have only discussed what LZ77 compression is, but not how to calculate it
in practice. As this will be used in various ways throughout the different versions, lets go
through the main mechanics.
Calculating the LZ77 over a string S of size n can be done by e.g. calculating the suffix
tree over S, where each internal node is augmented by the smallest index of the suffixes
in its subtree. A phrase is then calculated by matching from the root of the suffix tree,
stopping at the deepest matched node sn covering a suffix index si strictly less than the
current phrase position i in S. The phrase offset is then i −si and the length is the string
depth of sn.
Building the suffix tree can be done in O(sort(n, Σ)) time, where Σ is the alphabet of S, and
matching a phrase (ok, lk) takes O(lk) time by traversing the matched path in the suffix tree.
Since all of S will be compressed as phrases, and each phrase contributes a non-overlapping
segment of S, evaluating all phrases takes O(n) in total. This requires that phrase offset
can be found in constant time from the last matched internal node, but that can be done
by e.g. pointers in internal nodes to smallest covered leaf.
In practice, the alphabet over our string S can be restricted, since we are serialising files
stored on disk, which are stored as bytes (where extended alphabets such as unicode is
encode as multiple bytes). By operating directly on the bytes of S, we have a fixed alphabet
size of 256, making it possible to create the suffix tree in O(n) time (where n now is the
amount of bytes of S), giving a total LZ77 compression time of O(n). This definition of n
is a very natural choice, since the compression ratio metric is measuring how many bytes
on disk is required to store the data.
The final implementation did not use suffix trees due to its construction overhead, however
its an important compression bound, since it shows that we can compress in optimal linear
time and that the compression performance really comes down to how much data we need to
11
==PAGE:15==
compress in the implemented scheme, as well as scaling constants hidden in the asymptotic
bound. See Appendix 9.2 for how the LZ77 compression was implemented in practice.
5.2
S2: RLZ compressing previous commits
Building on the highlighted drawback from S1, we introduce RLZ compression to reuse
content across commits.
We load in the full repository state and serialise it as a blob similar to S1, and the first
commit is simply LZ77 compressed. However for subsequent commits, we decompress the
head commit, and recompress it using RLZ with the current repository blob as reference.
The current repository blob is then LZ77 compressed and stored, updating the head to
point at the new commit.
For this scheme to work, it is important that the RLZ compressed commits are allowed to
produce pointer phrases pointing to either the reference or itself, since new symbols could
be introduced and new sections may be more efficiently compressed using self referencing
phrases instead of reusing content from the reference. Another requirement it, that the
RLZ compressed commits are compressed in recency order, i.e. each commit is compressed
with the next commit as reference, such that dependencies go forward in history. This is
because, we need to have random access in the reference in order to use it for RLZ, and
if dependencies went the other way, we would have to decompress the entire history to
recompress the head commit. An immediate consequence of this, is that latter commits are
faster to decompress compared to old commits, which is an accepted checkout compromise
in Git.
This compression scheme has the same advantages when compressing the last commits,
allow files to reuse content from many other files within the repository, but now also allowing
unchanged/copied content to be compressed as single phrases between consecutive commits.
Based on the outlined features from highly-repetitive collections, this produces a highly
effective compression scheme.
S2 decompression
To decompress the compressed data from S2, we start with the head commit which is
LZ77 decompressed the same way as S1. From here, we can RLZ decompress the previous
commit, using the current head as reference, which will recursively serve as the reference for
the next commit, until the target commit is reached. All commits after the target commit
must therefore be decompressed as the compression dependencies form a linked list.
RLZ decompression is similar to LZ77 decompression, with the only difference being which
source we are looking up the phrases from.
Each LZ77 and RLZ decompression takes linear time in the size of the decompressed string,
and since each commit stores the full repository state, decompression time is equivalent to
12
==PAGE:16==
the total size of all repository states from the target to the head O(Pt
i=h |Si|), and while
decompressing we store at most 2 full repository states in memory, using O(maxt≤i≤h |Si|)
space, as each compression data structure for LZ77 and RLZ use linear space over the size
of the source and reference.
RLZ implementation
Using the LZ77 implementation from S1 we can implement RLZ compression as follows.
Build an LZ77 search data structure for both source and reference. When evaluating the
next phrase, we lookup the longest matching substring in both the source and reference,
where only the source lookup is index restricted. The phrase is then set to the index and
length of the longest match, as well as some metadata to indicate if it is referencing the
source or reference. As we will see, this metadata is only temporary, as the phrases will be
transformed during encoding.
5.3
S3: Phrase encoding
So far S1 and S2 has only considered the quality of compression in terms of phrase count,
but since the phrases produced here are different than the phrases produced by git, we
need to consider how phrases are encoded. As mentioned in section 3.3, phrase encoding
can have a big impact on the final compression ratio, as reducing the bits required to store
each phrase by some fraction, will result in a similar fractional reduction in the size of the
database.
The implemented versions, backing the discussed schemas so far, have used the naive en-
coding in plain text. This was done intentionally to see the difference encoding makes in
the final compression ratio.
For LZ77 compression we are going to use Huffman coding for literal phrases, and tight
static pointer encoding for pointer phrases. Since the majority of literals are expected to
be lexical, the used alphabet is assumed to be a small fraction of the 256 possible bytes.
In code and text there is usually also an uneven distribution in symbol frequencies which
Huffman coding will take advantage of. However for the pointer phrases, the offset and
length can be any of the n possible values and the large possible range of values would
also generate a lot of metadata if encoded in the Huffman tree. Therefore the tight static
encoding is chosen as a compromise.
A similar encoding is used for the RLZ phrases, the only change being that in pointer
phrases, instead of storing the offset, we treat the source as R∥S and use the absolute index
into this buffer. Thereby differentiating pointer phrases source based in whether the index
is within the length of R. In the worst case where the combined length of R∥S exceeds the
next power of 2 compared to the longest of the R and S buffers, it works like a bit flag in
front, and otherwise it has no overhead.
For both the LZ77 and RLZ compression we store the following metadata:
13
==PAGE:17==
• Total size of the uncompressed string
• Amount of bits for index and length of pointer phrase parameters
• Huffman tree over literals
In practice, we don’t store the entire Huffman tree as metadata, instead we store the used
literals with their frequencies, similar to how the dynamic Huffman tree is encoded in zlib[8].
By following a similar set of rules for constructing the tree, we can recalculate the same
Huffman tree while decoding.
Since the set of phrases are identical to S2 but with less space required to store each phrase,
we expect S3 to be a strictly better compression than S2 assuming that meta data overhead
is relatively small.
6
Improving performance
With S3, we have developed an efficient compression scheme for highly-repetitive collections
with respect to compression ratio while keeping computation within the scope of the current
and previous entry/commit. In section 7.1 we see that S3 seems to outperform the current
Git compression scheme with respect to compression ratio, however the commit time per-
formance is several times slower when the committed changes are small/few relative to the
size of the repository state.
In section 5.1 we mention that calculating the LZ77 compression is asymptotically optimal
in terms of time, so either we can optimise the time required to calculate the LZ77 phrases
for a marginal/scalar performance increase, or we need to cache compressed files.
Using the assumption of, only a small fraction of files are changed between commits, we can
check if a file and its dependencies have changed to determine if it needs to be recompressed.
Attempting to improve performance naively may have dire consequences on the compression
ratio, so it is important that we are aware of this compromise going forward. E.g. caching
LZ77 search data structure of the head commit would be counter productive, as it would
use O(n) space meaning we would be better off storing the last commit uncompressed.
6.1
S4: File buffers
Tracing the compression time when committing to S3, it is apparent that the majority of
time is used compressing the new head. Inspecting the phrases of the head commit and
previous commits this is explained by, the head commit being a pure LZ77 compression
with many small phrases, compared to previous commits being RLZ where large sections
are compressed as single phrases spanning multiple files each. This scheme will therefore
focus on time used to compress the head commit.
We still need to recompress the previous head commit with RLZ, however by serialising the
repository state blob once the current head compression is done, we can run an identical
14
==PAGE:18==
RLZ as in S3. Here we just need to be careful when serialising the repository state blob,
being sure to sort the files the same way as in S3 to allow RLZ phrases to span file borders.
S4 head compression
To improve the speed of compressing the head, we will introduce file compression caching as
mention previously, but maintain the main features of S3, letting files be compressed with
multiple reference files and maximally reusing content between commits for compression.
Instead of immediately serialising the new repository state into a blob, we will track the files
separately, and build a dependency graph defining the references of each file for compression.
For each file, we decompress the corresponding file from the previous head commit and check
if any changes has occurred, in which case it is marked as dirty. A second pass of the file
graph is then conducted to mark files containing dirty dependencies. This set of marked
nodes/files are the only files which are compressed, and all other files can directly copy the
compressed phrases from the previous head commit.
A non-trivial amount of time during compression is used to build the LZ77 searching data
structures, so these are lazily created to avoid time used on unnecessary files. This now
introduces a multi-reference setup for RLZ compression phrases, compared to S3 where we
had 1 real reference and many implicit references by serialising all files into a single blob, but
we will see an elegant solution to the issue of phrase meta data when considering encoding.
RLZ
RLZ
RLZ
h
h-1
h-2
h-3
r
Figure 4: S4 head compression structure.
r: New repository state.
h: Head commit
with individual files and dependency graph. h-x: x’th commit before head in history with
serialised files. Color coding of r: Removed files have no color. Green files are changed.
Files with bold border requires recompression.
The new representation/structure used for compression in S4 can be seen in figure 4. Here
we clearly see how the previous commits h-1, h-2, ... are serialised and RLZ compressed
identical to S3, but the head commit now contains the full compression dependency graph.
Comparing the new state r with the head h, we also see how some files can be reused directly,
15
==PAGE:19==
but changed/removed files and any files depending on them requires recompression.
S4 dependency graph
To build the dependency graph, we want to connect files with references which are good
candidates for compression. Evaluating these connections should be more performant than
running the full LZ77 compression of S3, so it would not be productive to compress files
with all possible sets of references. Instead we are going to approximate how well a file can
be compressed using a certain other file as reference. This approximate compatibility will
be called the compression potential from one file to another, and is a directed relationship,
as one file may be fully embedded in another larger file, but not the other way.
A suitable tool for calculating this compression potential would be locality sensitive hashing
(LSH) using e.g. Jaccard Similarity[19], to compare the approximate similarity between
files. As part of the implementation of the LZ77 data structure seen in the appendix 9.2,
we calculate Rabin Karp fingerprints, so instead of calculate a different set of hashes for
the LSH, we will use the already computed fingerprints, as these are the exact hashes used
to determine if a potential phrase is evaluated during both LZ77 and RLZ compression.
The main difference between this Rabin Karp based compression potential compared to the
Jaccard Similarity measure is also that we want to prioritise files which can be compressed
fully by the reference, which is not a symmetric relation.
The compression potential is calculated as:
CP(f1, f2) = |{RKz,p(f1)} T {RKz,p(f2)}|
|{RKz,p(f1)}|
(3)
where CP denotes the compression potential approximating how well f1 can be compressed
by f2 as reference. RKz,p denotes the Rabin Karp fingerprints calculated from the given
string using fixed parameters p and z where p is the prime defining the field of randomised
polynomials and hashing exponent z ∈{1 . . . p}.
Compared to the Jaccard Similarity which approximates how much of the two sets are
in common, CP approximates the how much of the first set it has in common with the
second, giving us the asymmetric relation we wanted. If the two sets are disjoint, we get a
compression potential of 0, and if the first file is fully contained in the second, we get 1.
It is important that we also consider the unique set of hashes, as otherwise the similarity
would be biased by the difference in frequency of hashes, and considering how much of e.g.
code has leading whitespace, this bias could be large.
To build the dependency graph, we therefore calculate the Rabin Karp fingerprints for all
files, and evaluate the compression potential between all pairs. The files are then topologi-
cally sorted by iteratively choosing the file with the highest outgoing compression potential,
and then removing all remaining connections to that file to avoid cyclical dependencies.
16
==PAGE:20==
Adapting a similar windowed dependency limit as seen in git’s packfile, we can limit the
amount of outgoing dependencies for each file to some upper bound which we can test
experimentally. Again this is done to reduce the amount of files to recompress on subsequent
commits due to dirty dependencies. Any choice of limit on dependencies would produce a
valid compression and could in principal be adjusted dynamically throughout the history
of the repository.
S4 phrase encoding
With the dependency graph built, and files compressed, it is now time to encode the phrases.
Each pointer phrase contains meta data to indicate which source is used, either self referenc-
ing or external reference. The key idea here, comes from the fact that we have a topological
sorting of the files. Firstly, the ordering of files is reversed, such that all dependencies point
backwards. Next, we calculate a prefix sum array P over all the raw lengths of the files
in order. Each pointer phrase with source at index is > 0 then gets their index offset by
P[is −1]. Finally, all phrases are appended into single list and encoded similar to the LZ77
compression in S3.
Doing this completely avoids the need for phrase meta data to track reference dependencies.
Effectively, we have generated a similar LZ77 compression of the head to S3, but now with
each file only compressed using phrases of a limited amount of other files, and phrases are
guaranteed to not cross file borders.
By appending the compressed phrases instead of individual file encodings, we also only
require 1 Huffman tree over literals and similar to S3 head encoding.
One important detail which must not be omitted, is when reusing file compressions across
commits the phrases must be mapped from LZ77 phrases to the intermediate phrase con-
taining source metadata, and then mapped back to the final ordering together with the
recompressed file compressions. This is a required step, since new files may be interleaved
between the reused files in the topological ordering, meaning the index offset would be
incorrect if not mapped.
S4 decompression
Due to the choice of phrase encoding, we can decompress the S4 compression identically to
S3, as decompression is not dependent on the choice of phrases.
6.2
S5: Adapt magic heuristic from git
Inspecting the performance traces of S4, the head compression is now only a small frac-
tion of the overall time used for a commit. The bottleneck is now between calculating the
compression potential matrix and the head RLZ compression. This indicates that improv-
ing RLZ by e.g. extending the dependency graph to the previous commits, would stall
performance, as the LSH bottleneck would be worsened.
17
==PAGE:21==
Currently S4 is very attractive, as it produces a good compression ratio with minimal
assumptions/heuristics to the structure of the compressed content.
However, with git repositories being able to have an arbitrarily large state per commit, the
next significant performance improvement is found by adapting a similar file comparison
heuristic as git, to avoid the heavy cost of building a dependency graph based on file
contents. By only sorting files, i.e. objects if same type and where all files are in the latest
commit, the heuristic is simplified to comparing the file by name, in this case lexicographic
ordering. The idea here is that the file name is associated to the domain of what a file
contains and therefore similarly named files have something in common.
Here, git weights the last characters most in this string comparison to group files of the
same extension, which could easily be adapted in S5 also.
S5 dependency graph
With the file comparison defined, we can again build the dependency graph, now without
processing file contents. The dependency graph is then constructed by connecting files with
their previous k files in this ordering for some window size k determined experimentally.
Again, any positive non-zero value of k would yield a valid compression, and could be
adjusted dynamically.
Connecting a file f to the previous k files may produce dependencies which do not contribute
phrases to the compression of f, however since the graph is not saved explicitly between
commits, any unused dependencies are erased when parsing the dependencies of the head
commit on subsequent commits and will therefore not trigger recompressions if changed.
S5 phrase encoding
The encoding task for S5 is conceptually identical to S4, as it is not dependent on how the
dependency graph is built. We have a set of files compressed as phrases with meta data
to their references. Encoding is therefore the exact same as in S4, reversing the file order,
calculating the prefix array P over raw file sizes, and appending all compressed phrases
according to their ordering and encoding as a whole, with phrase indices offset by the
source in P.
S5 decompression
Similar to S4, the final compressed phrases and encoding of S5 can be parsed identically as
in S3.
6.3
S6: Extend DAG to full history
Finally, to avoid recomputing the RLZ compression of the entire repository state each
commit, we get to S6. The next step is to extend the dependency graph of S5 to the entire
18
==PAGE:22==
commit history, which is now feasible since we are sorting objects by their meta data.
By extending the dependency graph to the entire history we are now closing in on the
packfile compression scheme used in git as described in section 4.3.
For this to be possible, we need to track the different objects of the repository, such that
each commit can reproduce the correct state. Here we reach a similar data structure as
seen in git with commit, tree and blob nodes structured as a DAG. Similarly, to compare
these we define the following comparison seen in 4:
CMP(o1, o2) =

























Less
type(o1) < type(o2)
Greater
type(o1) > type(o2)
Less
name(o1) < name(o2)
Greater
name(o1) > name(o2)
Less
id(o1) > id(o2)
Greater
id(o1) < id(o2)
Equal
otherwise
(4)
where type(o) refers to the commit, tree and blob object type of the object o and are
compared in any consistent order (in this case as listed here), name(o) is the name of
the object (empty, folder name and file name respectively) compared according to their
lexicographic ordering, id(o) is comparing the consecutive id given to all objects following
recency order, sorting most recent objects first. The cases are checked top-down, i.e. id’s
are compared only if type and name were equal.
The intuition behind this ordering is, that all objects of each type are grouped together,
and all objects with the same name within a type is grouped together. As this ordering
will contain all versions of all files, previous versions of file f will be positioned as near
neighbours of f, and importantly they will be after f due to the tie-breaks on id for recency
order. Previous versions of f can therefore still use f as reference using RLZ compression.
The focus is now changed from storing the state of each commit, to storing the state of each
file, only producing new states when changes occur. Commit objects are then responsible
for tracking the states of files required for that commit.
S6 dependency graph
From the previous schemes, we saw the importance of both allowing cross references within
the latest repository state for file compression, and maximal reuse for head compression.
To accommodate both these features in the new scheme, we will need to consider which
objects are evaluated as dependencies. Some limited amount of the k allowed dependencies
will be allocated to references within the name group of an object, i.e. the objects sharing
the same name as the current object. The remaining dependencies will be connected to
19
==PAGE:23==
the most recent object in each of the previous name groups. Figure 5 shows how such
dependencies could look within a group of objects of same type.
a1
a4
a6
a8
a9
a10
a11
c3
b2
b5
b7
Figure 5: Full history object dependency connections. This example shows the dependencies
within the group of blob type objects. Letters a-c represent simple file names. Objects are
annotated with their id in the corner. Not all arrows are shown to reduce clutter.
The conditions which trigger an object to be recompressed is then: 1) its content has
changed and 2) an object is added to its name group.
The second condition is there
to ensure that objects are efficiently RLZ compressed using its newer versions, allowing
for efficient reuse when changes are small, and reuse across multiple commits. To avoid
recompressing the entire name group, the top x most recent objects of the group could be
recompressed.
S6 phrase encoding
As seen in figure 5, S6 phrases can refer to dependencies which are far away in terms of
the topological sorting.
Storing phrases with their absolute offset like with S4 and S5,
would grow too much in size since we are offsetting into the entire history of the repository.
Additionally, new objects added to this sorting would invalidate the offset and require a full
mapping of the entire history.
To mitigate this, we are going to store an index of meta data over the compressed objects.
Each object’s id is mapped to a list of its dependencies storing their id’s. The index also
contains the offset into the database where the object is stored, as well as their original size.
With this setup, each phrase can store the index into its dependency array as meta data,
which is bounded in size by the allowed amount of dependencies, and since not all objects
are assumed to be equally good for compression, these dependency indices will be Huffman
encoded to further decrease the size of phrase meta data on the most common dependencies
per object. This Huffman encoding will be added to the Huffman tree of the literals to only
store a single Huffman tree per object.
S6 decompression
To decode a specific commit, we store a handle to the head commit (similar to HEAD in
git). The state is then extracted by looking up each node in the graph in the index and
parsing it from disk. Once the graph is parsed we can write all folders and files similar to
20
==PAGE:24==
the previous schemas, tracking changed files and cleaning up deleted files. When checkout
out earlier commits, the target commit is found in the index instead.
7
Experimental results
Each compression scheme will now be tested and compared to git. Again, we will initially
be focusing on compression ratio and then performance. First we will be testing all schemes
on some handcrafted data sets showcasing some typical change patterns, and then S3 and
S6 will be tested on real data.
Lastly we will test how we handle data sets with large
repository states.
7.1
Handcrafted tests
For the handcrafted data sets, the first 4 consists of the 154 sonnets by William Shake-
speare[20] s0, . . . , s153, and the last is a collection of multiple of his works. Each of the data
sets are created as follows:
1. add - Starting with an empty repository, commit number i adds sonnet si in an
individual file.
2. remove - Starting with all 154 sonnets in individual files, commit number i removes
the file containing sonnet s154−i.
3. overwrite - Starting with the first sonnet in its own file, each commit overwrites the
file with the next sonnet.
4. recurring - Similar to add except commit number i adds sonnet si%10 and every 10
commit clears the repository. Creating a repeating pattern across multiple commits.
5. big-random - Starting with all sonnets in individual files, including other full works
combined in single files, we have many files with very different sizes. Each commit
will perform small random changes in a random file. Primarily used as a big enough
sample to see relevant performance differences.
Each test is performed by replaying a git repository onto an empty git and Sx repository,
where the database size is recorded using the ubuntu disk usage command to ensure that all
data stored in each repository is tracked independent of format. Execution times is recorded
by retrieving the span in nanoseconds, using the date command, before and after calling
commit/checkout on each repository. To compare the commit speed, git is configured to
disable multiprocessing when processing the packfile.
S1
Since S1 does not take advantage of the repetition of content across commits, we do not
expect this test to be particularly efficient, which is confirmed by the results in figure 6.
21
==PAGE:25==
Figure 6: S1 compression ratio vs git. Values are averaged in groups of 10 to reduce clutter.
The data set where this scheme performs the best, is overwrite which makes sense, since it
has the most relative change for each commit.
S2
The benefit of RLZ compression as seen in figure 7 compared to S1 in figure 6 clearly shows
the importance of reusing content for compression across commits.
Figure 7: S2 compression ratio vs git. Values are averaged in groups of 10 to reduce clutter.
These results suggest that repositories, such as add and remove, which has relatively small
changes between commits are efficiently compressed by this scheme.
But based on big-
random data set, we also see that the encoding is not very efficient, since the initial commit
is an unbounded LZ77 compression across the full repository state compared to a reference
limited and windowed LZ77 compression.
22
==PAGE:26==
The data sets overwrite and recurring show how the scheme performs when commits con-
tain relatively large changes compared to the size of the repository state. Here the RLZ
compression has less benefit as less content is common between commits and again we see
the issue of phrase encoding.
S3
The results, as seen in figure 8, shows as expected that reducing the required space per
phrase, produces a better compression ratio. These results are similar to a scaled down
version of the results from S2, which is due to the phrase count being identical.
Figure 8: S3 compression ratio vs git. Values are averaged in groups of 10 to reduce clutter.
Interestingly, the big-random data set initially is close to the same compressed size as git.
This will be investigated further under the experimental results in section 7.4.
S4
When measuring commit performance we will be focusing on the big-random data set, since
the other data sets are too small to give us a realistic comparison. In fact S3 on the other
data sets is comparable or faster than git as seen in figure 9, which is very misleading.
In general we need to be cautious with reaching for conclusions in terms of performance
unless if we run a large scale benchmark as test results can be misleading as seen in figure
9. Instead of micro-optimising routines in S3, to reduce the commit time, we are tracing
the bottlenecks of the schemes and minimising the amount of work performed, while trying
to not compromise the compression ratio too much.
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 9: S3 commit performance
(a) S4 commit performance
(b) S4 compression ratio
Figure 10: S4 compared to git.
In figure 10a) we see the ratio in commit performance, and 10b) the ratio in compression
ratio. The head compression, when disallowing phrases to cross file borders and limiting
the amount of references, as seen in 10b is comparable to the results from S3, suggesting
that S4 is a useful approach to improve performance.
S5
The results from S5 in figure 11 show that sorting by the file name heuristic compared to
the compression potential further improves the commit performance while still producing
a comparable compression ratio.
24
==PAGE:28==
(a) S5 commit performance
(b) S5 compression ratio
Figure 11: S5 compared to git.
S6
The results from figure 12 shows that the performance of S6 is now very comparable to git
when tested on the big-random data set. We do see a bigger compromise in the compression
ratio, since the RLZ compression between commits is now also limited as well as adding the
object index as well as phrase source meta data.
(a) S6 commit performance
(b) S6 compression ratio
Figure 12: S6 compared to git.
With these results from S6, we expect that the commit performance can be optimised to be
very comparable with git, as the internal structure requires a similar amount of processing
as in git, and the reference compression in S6 and git both compress a file towards some
25
==PAGE:29==
limited set of references, where S6 compress using all references at the same time compared
to git compressing one-by-one. Compared to S5, compression dependencies cannot become
dirty in S6, since new commits are added by compressing changed objects and not by reusing
the head compression in S5. The only case where we trigger recompressions is when we add
new objects to name groups, and generate more efficient RLZ compressions.
7.2
Comparing all schemes
Figure 13 shows the combined results from the previous scheme tests, comparing all 6
schemes for each set of test data.
Figure 13: Combined test results from previous sections.
Here we see that schemes S3-S5 are very similar in compression ratio and S6 is generally
slightly worse, however for the recurring we see that S6 produces the best compression,
being able to reuse content across multiple commits.
7.3
Random Github repository benchmarks
Using an api[21] to query random repositories from GitHub, we have collected ∼400 repos-
itories in an attempt to get a representative sample of the typical repositories found in
GitHub.
Figures 14 and 15 contains information regarding the amount of commits and final repository
state sizes of the sampled repositories. This benchmark limited the amount of commits per
repository to 50 due to processing time, and according to figure 14 only a few repositories
had more than this amount of commits. We also see that the far majority of repositories
26
==PAGE:30==
consist of only a few commits, and according to figure 15 the majority also has a final
repository state size in the order of megabytes, with only around 5 repositories using more
than 100Mb, and the largest being around 13Gb.
Figure 14: Amount of repositories contributing to each commit.
Figure 15: Histogram over the sampled repository state sizes at their last tested commit.
Axes are logarithmic.
Based on this sample of repositories, the far majority of GitHub repositories seem to have
only a small amount of commits, suggesting that the results from the sample show how the
schemes perform on the average GitHub repository, but not necessarily on large repositories
both in terms of amount of commits and size of repository state.
The sampled repositories are replayed similarly to the previous test suite, and all binary
files from each commit are removed during testing. This is done since these compression
schemes are focused on compressing text/strings and git handles binary files differently.
Results are shown in figures 16 and 17.
27
==PAGE:31==
Figure 16: S3 tested on 400 random GitHub repositories.
Figure 16 shows a stable mean compression ratio between 25% and 50% of the size used
by git to store the same data. However on some repositories we use up to almost twice the
space. This could be explained by S3 not being able to reuse content across commits, or
commit size as will be checked further in 7.4. The mean commit performance is also very
low, however as we saw when testing S3 on the test data set, if each repository state is
small enough S3 is faster than git. We know that S3 is processing more data than git when
the repository state grows compared to the changes in a commit, and we also see a high
variation in commit performance for S3.
Figure 17: S6 tested on 400 random GitHub repositories.
28
==PAGE:32==
Interestingly, in 17 we see that the mean compression ratio is again between 25% and 50%
however the high end is reduced, where the worst recorded cases use around 125% of the
space used by git. Since S3 should be able to produce more efficient phrases within a single
commit, it suggests that this difference is due to being able to reuse content across multiple
commits. The variation in commit performance is also significantly less, going from over
x20 to under x10.
It seems that the commit performance of S6 grows with commit history size, however in the
current implementation we also load the full history of objects which are then re-encoded
and stored to disc. This is due to new objects being sorted into the ordering of existing
objects, however the relative placement in the db is in principal not critical as along as
this ordering is maintained in the index. This way new compressed objects could just be
appended to the db. Re-compressed objects however, already placed in the middle of the
db would need to be updated. While developing the replay script for git repositories I also
investigated some of git’s configuration parameters when manually running the garbage
collection which forces git to repack the pack file, and here I found that --no-prune had
a non-trivial impact on size of the final db size, although we are within a single branch.
The --no-prune parameter instruct git to avoid pruning unreachable objects while packing.
Unreachable objects are usually explained by changing the head of a branch and continuing
from a previous step in the history, making the old branch head unreachable, however this
is never done during our tests. It would therefore seem that git makes another compromise
between compression ratio and performance by appending compressed objects to the db,
leaving old objects until some threshold is reached and only then prune the neglected objects
from history. Git also supports splitting the pack file into multiple files, such that time used
cleanup up is contained.
As the internal structure and history management in S6 is so similar to git’s, these changes
could easily be applied, as well as most other performance improvements.
7.4
Commit size benchmarks
Until now, we have primarily tested consecutive commits, where the RLZ/cross commit
compression has played a big role. The results for big-random showed that the first commit,
containing a lot of data, has a similar compressed size in S3 and S6 compared to git, but
subsequent commits were compressed more effectively.
Since we use LZ77 compression
across the entire repository state for S3, it is unlikely that the compression in git is more
compact/less phrases but the encoding may be more succinct.
To test this, we will perform 2 tests. 1) a single file of increasing size, and 2) increasing
amount of same sized files.
In both cases we are going to use the complete works of
Shakespeare (∼5Mb), where the single file test uses the first x bytes of the collected works,
and the multiple file test will divide the text up into 5k files and commit the first x files
each of size 1kb.
29
==PAGE:33==
(a) Single file of different sizes.
(b) Different amount of 1K sized files.
Figure 18: Initial commit only.
Based on the results in figure 18 it would seem that our intuition was correct.
Figure
18b shows that S3 produces a consistently better compression when the commit consists of
many small files, as it effectively has unbounded reuse between files where git pack and S6
are limiting the amount of dependencies and keeping phrases within single files. The more
interesting case is 18a where git pack consistently produces the smallest compression when
the commit contains large files.
Here S3 and S6 both compress the single file with LZ77 but S6 also has the object index as
overhead, and is therefore shown as consistently using slightly more data than S3. Looking
at git where we have recorded the database size before and after packing the objects, it also
shows that the packfile must use higher compression parameters for the zlib compressed
data blocks, using a larger window for the LZ77 compression.
The fact that 18a has S3 and S6 producing a similar compressed size as git objects suggests
that the encoding is the dominating factor in this test, as the amount of phrases produced
by a windowed LZ77 compression is expected to be greater than with unbounded lookback.
Checkout time
The compression efficiency is basically worthless if we cant retrieve an entry of the collection,
so even though it has not been the main focus in this project, we still care about the checkout
performance.
30
==PAGE:34==
Figure 19: Checkout performance ratio between S3 and git, tested on the test data set
specified in section 5.
The results in figure 19 are as expected, since S3 has to decode and decompress starting
from the head of the collection, it is more costly to checkout commits further back in history.
Also the repositories with larger state per commit, such as big-random requires more data
to be decompressed and decoded per step, which is clearly seen in the larger gradient in the
graph.
For S6 however, the checkout time looks more comparable to git. Starting from the requested
commit found in the index, we can lazily decompress the repository structure and their
compression dependencies. The actual implementation however decompresses the whole
database and looks up the structure directly, so we see a constant time overhead as seen in
figure 20.
Figure 20: Checkout performance ratio between S6 and git, tested on the test data set
specified in section 5.
31
==PAGE:35==
The main difference in checkout time between S6 and git, other than the less optimised
code, is that the dependency graph in S6 is allowed to have more dependencies. In git,
since objects are only allowed to have a single compression dependency, the dependency
graph necessary to decompress can be viewed as paths/chains originating from the objects
in the repository structure. In S6, it would instead be a tree of degree up to to the allowed
amount of dependencies, potentially producing an exponential checkout time compared to
linear in the size of the repository state and length of the chains.
7.5
Large repository test
Based on the random sample and commit size benchmarks it seems like the S6 scheme
performs well over time, but falls behind when commits contain many changes/large files.
To verify that our found conclusions hold for large repositories, we run 100 commits out
of a total of 122k on Microsoft’s VSCode on GitHub. Each repository state is recorded to
+100Mb.
(a) S6 vscode commit performance
(b) S6 vscode compression ratio
Figure 21: Benchmark on large repository: Microsoft’s VSCode
Figure 21 shows S6 compared to git, where the commit performance in 21a nicely shows the
majority of commits are within 5-15x of the time taken by git. The two exceptions shown are
commits with many inserts/deletions suggesting that the current LZ77/RLZ compression
implementation could be improved in terms of speed.
The compression ratio results seen in figure 21b nicely shows the same as in the commit
size benchmark, that a single large commit is compressed more efficiently by git’s packfile,
however as discussed previously, this is most likely due to pointer phrase encoding. We will
evaluate how this can be improved in section 8. The initial commit in this repository seems
to be a migration from a previous version control system and is therefore a big ∼105Mb
32
==PAGE:36==
commit. Subsequent commits are either managed equally good or better by S6 compared
to git.
8
Conclusion and evaluation
Going from schema S1 to S3 we have shown that using simple compression techniques we
can produce an effective compression scheme for highly-repetitive collections, in this case
tested on the domain of git repositories. When the repository state increased we saw that
the commit performance of S3 grew compared to git. To improve this we developed schemas
S4 to S6, which grew in complexity to reduce the amount of processing required per commit,
but ended up with a structure which could be adapted to perform a similar amount of work
as the current compression scheme in git, while still allowing the multi-reference reuse across
commits.
Since the phrases produced by git and our developed schemes are different, we were not able
to compare the compression ratio in terms of phrase count, but instead in the final database
size on disc. This means that phrase encoding became a large factor in the scheme, which
was the main difference between S2 and S3, but also in the commit size benchmarks with
large files in 7.4. Here we saw that even the encoding in S3 could be improved further, since
for larger files zlib compression seems to produce similar compression ratio’s as S3 despite
it most likely containing more phrases.
To verify this, we tested 100 commits of Microsoft’s VSCode repository in GitHub as an
example of a large repository, where commits were still possible to process fully in memory.
Here we saw the same as with the commit size benchmark, that a commit with a large set of
changes would be compressed more efficiently by git packfiles than S6. Subsequent commits
however were managed better by S6, suggesting that S6 produces better compression phrases
but the encoding needs improvement.
The most likely culprit here is our pointer phrase encoding, which is not using Huffman
coding. This choice was made to avoid a too big overhead from the Huffman tree. In the
zlib documentation[8] they write:
Length codes or distance codes may actually be a code that represents a base
value, followed by extra bits that form an integer to be added to the base value.
meaning length and offset parameters are also Huffman coded, but with custom code man-
agement to avoid the bloated Huffman tree. Nothing prevents us from developing a similar
encoding for the developed schemes, meaning the found exceptions, of large individual files,
could possibly also be compressed more effectively.
The overhead of the Huffman tree could also be reduced, since the absolute symbol fre-
quencies are unnecessary. We only need to know the order of symbols for the leaves, and
structure of the tree. Currently we store a 32-bit frequency along with every 8-bit symbol.
By using bit encoded parenthesis encoding of the tree, we only need to store the order of
33
==PAGE:37==
symbols together with the encoded tree, going from a total of 40s bits to 8s + 2(s −1) for
s symbols.
When storing both literal and pointer phrases using Huffman codes, we could leverage that
we know the structure of the phrases, so either we could continue using the bit flag for each
phrase and store 2 different trees, one for literal symbols and one for pointers parameters
(either full integers or just digits) or alternatively we could include the differentiation be-
tween literal and pointer parameters in a single tree. These encodings have not been tested,
but shows that there is still a lot of room for improvement.
From figure 17 we saw that the commit performance of S6 was comparable to git, and in
principle both schemes maintain a very similar internal data structure for the history, and
both perform n to k amount of deltified file compressions, for each of the n files required to
compress in the commit and window of k reference files evaluated in the compression. The
difference between these two schemes is that git performs k individual 1 to 1 delta com-
pressions to determine the best reference, where S6 perform the 1 to k compression directly
allowing all k files as reference. Arguably the S6 compression could be more performant
than the method used in git, as a single large phrase found by S6 will skip large portions
of text in the main file.
From our tests, we see that checkout time from S3 is progressively slower than git when
going back in history, but with S6 we get very similar checkout times as git. However, in
section 7 we also mention the potential difference in asymptotic checkout time, where the
increase in object compression dependencies spans a tree which needs to be decompressed
before the object itself can be decompressed, compared to only a length restricted path of
dependencies in git. This change means that checkout time is potentially exponential in the
allowed amount of dependencies per object. By caching decompressed objects, the checkout
time is limited by the size of the database, however limiting the height of the dependency
tree, as well as adjusting the degree may be important for checkout to not become too slow.
Overall we have shown that the developed compression schemes are very efficient at com-
pressing highly-repetitive collections, especially when changes between commits are small.
Further testing with large repositories where many/large changes are more typically seen,
we see that git’s packfile compression tends to produce a smaller compression and based
on the commit size benchmark we deduced that the phrase encoding in pointer phrases are
sub-optimal for large files. We also saw that the encoding used by zlib scales well for large
files. Nothing prevents S6 from adapting a better pointer phrase encoding, meaning it could
probably be more efficient at compressing large repositories also.
34
==PAGE:38==
References
[1]
Wikipedia contributors. GitHub — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 2024. url:
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=GitHub&oldid=1222126122
(visited on 05/06/2024).
[2]
J. Ziv and A. Lempel. “A universal algorithm for sequential data compression”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 23.3 (1977), pp. 337–343. doi: 10.1109/
TIT.1977.1055714.
[3]
Jacob Ziv. “The Universal LZ77 Compression Algorithm Is Essentially Optimal for
Individual Finite-Length N-Blocks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Theory
55.5 (2009), pp. 1941–1944. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2009.2016069.
[4]
Philip Bille et al. Hierarchical Relative Lempel-Ziv Compression. 2022. arXiv: 2208.
11371 [cs.DS].
[5]
David A. Huffman. “A Method for the Construction of Minimum-Redundancy Codes”.
In: Proceedings of the IRE 40.9 (1952), pp. 1098–1101. doi: 10.1109/JRPROC.1952.
273898.
[6]
Git - git-gc Documentation. https://git- scm.com/docs/git- gc. (Visited on
05/25/2024).
[7]
Git - Book. https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2. (Visited on 05/25/2024).
[8]
Antaeus Feldspar. An Explanation of the Deflate Algorithm. https://www.zlib.
net/feldspar.html. (Visited on 03/10/2024).
[9]
Concerning Git’s Packing Heuristics. https://github.com/git/git/blob/master/
Documentation/technical/pack-heuristics.txt. (Visited on 05/28/2024).
[10]
Linus Torvalds. Git - fast, scalable, distributed revision control system. https://
github.com/git/git. 2023. (Visited on 05/07/2024).
[11]
Yuriy Chernyshov Edward Thomson. xdiff (via git). https://github.com/libgit2/
xdiff. (Visited on 05/07/2024).
[12]
LibXDiff. http://www.xmailserver.org/xdiff-lib.html. (Visited on 05/07/2024).
[13]
Joshua MacDonald. “File System Support for Delta Compression”. In: (July 2003).
[14]
M.O. Rabin. Fingerprinting by Random Polynomials. Center for Research in Comput-
ing Technology: Center for Research in Computing Technology. Center for Research
in Computing Techn., Aiken Computation Laboratory, Univ., 1981. url: https :
//books.google.dk/books?id=Emu_tgAACAAJ.
[15]
Eugene W. Myers. “An O(ND) difference algorithm and its variations”. In: Algorith-
mica 1.1 (Nov. 1986), pp. 251–266. issn: 1432-0541. doi: 10.1007/BF01840446. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01840446.
[16]
Git - pack-format Documentation. https://git- scm.com/docs/pack- format.
(Visited on 06/01/2024).
[17]
The Git Pack Format. https://driusan.github.io/git-pack.html. 2016. (Visited
on 06/01/2024).
[18]
Reimplementing git clone in Haskell from the bottom up. https://stefan.saasen.
me/articles/git-clone-in-haskell-from-the-bottom-up. 2013. (Visited on
06/01/2024).
35
==PAGE:39==
[19]
Paul Jaccard. “THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE FLORA IN THE ALPINE ZONE.1”.
In: New Phytologist 11.2 (1912), pp. 37–50. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-
8137.1912.tb05611.x.
[20]
The Complete Works of William Shakespeare. https://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/
6 / 6 . 006 / s08 / lecturenotes / files / t8 . shakespeare . txt. 1990. (Visited on
05/21/2024).
[21]
git -random — Random GitHub repo generator. https://gitrandom.digitalbunker.
dev/. (Visited on 05/20/2024).
36
==PAGE:40==
9
Appendix
9.1
All versions overview
Version 1: Plain LZ77 (S1)
Current repository state, files and paths, is loaded from disk and serialised to a combined
blob, where each file has a null terminated path and byte length as meta data.
The serialised blob is then LZ77 compressed and saved to disk using the commit id as
handle.
Version 2: Plain RLZ
Repository state is loaded and serialised in the same way as in version 1, but instead of
LZ77 compressing individual commits, we RLZ compress a commit with its successor as
reference.
This initial RLZ implementation only allows phrases in the reference, meaning no phrase
source meta data is included. Literal phrases are used when a new symbol is found or the
possible phrase is too little. Minimum phrase size is 4.
Head commit is saved uncompressed as no successor commit exists.
Version 3: RLZ includes self references
Extending version 2, now calculating the longest phrase from
• RLZ phrase from reference
• LZ77 phrase from self
Phrase encoding with two sources for a pointer phrase is handled by offsetting self-reference
phrases with the size of the reference, effectively treating the buffer as the combined buffer
from reference and source.
Version 4: LZ77 compressing HEAD (S2)
Extending version 3, where instead of storing the head raw, its is LZ77 compressed.
Version 5: Flag bit for phrase type
We include a leading bit to distinguish between pointer and literal phrases.
Phrases are now encoded as:
• Pointer: 1 bit flag and 2x32 bit numbers: |flag : 1||index : 32||length : 32|
• Literal: 1 bit flag and 8 bit character: |flag : 1||character : 8|
i
==PAGE:41==
Version 6: Pointer index/length size meta data
As most files do not use the full range of the 32 bit integer for index and length of pointer
phrases, we calculate the minimum required amount bits to reduce the amount of leading
zeroes.
Bit lengths are stored as meta data at the beginning of the encoding.
Version 7: Huffman coding of literals
Calculating huffman tree for literals and their frequencies.
Using huffman codes for encoding literals and storing the symbol frequencies as meta data.
Huffman tree is recalculated during decoding using stored frequencies.
Version 8: Rabin-Karp fingerprints (S3)
Instead of a hash map with symbol arrays as keys, we manually calculate Rabin-Karp
fingerprints for the string segments, and manage the lookup table with fingerprints as id’s.
With the rolling property of Rabin-Karp fingerprints, the lookup table construction is faster,
but more importantly we use less memory to store the hash map.
Additionally, we also avoid recomputing the lookup table for the repo when compressing
the head.
Version 9: Head files compressed in isolation
Compression speed is much better, but the compression ratio of the head is much worse, no
longer competing with git.
This version was discontinued.
Version 10: Tracking dirty phrases
Attempting to reuse compression phrases by tracking dirty phrases and only (re)compressing
changes and phrases dependent on changed data. Phrase boundaries when recompressing
interleaved phrases cascade if new phrases are matched greedily.
This version was discontinued.
Version 11: Restricted lookback for head compression
Building on version 8. The compression ratio is worse, but better performance. Still beating
git on many repos not containing binary files.
Current restrictions, during head compression, are:
• Lookback threashold: max(100, lg(repo size)).
ii
==PAGE:42==
• If a pointer phrase of length >1000 is found, it is accepted.
Version 12: File specific search buffers (S4)
Building on version 10, but working on whole files to avoid cascading phrase boundaries.
Splitting search buffers for each file. Calculate Rabin-Karp fingerprints for all files with
(same z and p parameters), and approximating similarity by overlap in unique fingerprints.
Build topological sorting where the each entry is chosen by the file with the largest similarity
with remaining files divided by its size, i.e. how much can potentially be compressed of its
content. The strongest similar files are used for compressing. On subsequent commits, we
can reuse file compressions where the file and dependencies are unchanged (and are still
ordered relatively).
Version 13: Single database file
Testing the impact of using a single data base file on disc, compared to a file per commit.
Min disc file size is 4K, and many repos have RLZ compressed commits in history which
are smaller.
The effect was negligible when tested, however IO is faster on a single file if the majority
of the content needs to be retrieved.
Version 14: Simple sorting by path (S5)
Testing performance and compression impact of using naive path sorting instead of the LSH
topological sorting in version 12.
Version 15: Full topo sort of history
In v14, we see that RLZ compression of the head is the majority of commit time.
This version is a POC where we track commit, folder and file objects on changes throughout
history. Objects are sorted based on type, name and id (i.e. recency order).
Only changed files and folders are compressed, reusing objects to represent the repo, and
allowing lookback up to 32 commits back in history.
This is a similar heuristic as the current git heuristic, but with the RLZ compression between
objects and allowing phrase on multiple files.
Version 16 Dependency index and phrase meta data (S6)
Extending v15 by tracking a list of dependencies by id for each file. The phrase meta data is
reduced from file index offset to a Huffman coded index in its dependency array, significantly
reducing the phrase meta data overhead, and sorting new files into the database order does
not force re-encoding compressed phrases due to offset changes.
iii
==PAGE:43==
9.2
LZ77 Search data structure
To perform the LZ77 compression, we need a data structure allowing us to search for the
following query:
longest matchS(i)−Longest substring in S starting before i matching the prefix of S[i : n]
where i is the start index of the remaining uncompressed symbols and n is the size of original
string S. S[a : b] represents the substring of S spanning from position a to b.
One choice for such a query is to build a suffix tree over S in O(n) time, with each internal
node augmented with the smallest suffix index among the leafs in its subtree to ensure that
the substring match only proceeds along a path where a suffix starting within the limited
range exists. All longest match queries could then be performed in O(m) where m is the
size of the found match.
In practice even though it is linear on n due to the limited alphabet of 256 possible bytes,
calculating the full suffix tree takes time, as we don’t necessarily need the relation between
all suffixes in S when searching for phrases.
Instead we are going to implement our data structure similar to an unbounded version of
the data structure used in zlib. Here we will calculate the Rabin-Karp fingerprint for each
k consecutive symbols. I.e. for S = abcabc and k = 3 we will compute the tokens:
RK(abc), RK(bca), RK(cab), RK(abc)
Here the Rabin-Karp fingerprints are chosen as way of hashing due to the rolling property
meaning that the total time to calculate all fingerprints is O(n) compared to O(nk).
Fingerprints appearing multiple times in S, as well as possible collisions between different
set of k symbols, will share the same entry in the hash table and each index will therefore
be stored in an array.
As the pointer and literal phrases in the developed schemes as different sizes, we are only
interested in pointer phrases of some minimum length l, as representing smaller substrings
would be more effective by individual literal phrases. This is easily done by setting the
token size k = l.
To perform the longest matchS(i) query, we calculate the token RK(S[i : i + k]) and walk
the list of indices. For each index j < i we evaluate the common prefix between S[j : n]
and S[i : n], and output the longest found match.
To avoid comparing the same prefix for all indices, we track the currently longest found
match and query that backwards on the next index. If the next index is a shorter match,
then there is a high probability of an early exit. And the only cases where we compare the
full prefix is when we find a longer phrase match.
The value for k used in the developed schemes is 4 based on experiments.
iv
==PAGE:44==
RLZ using LZ77 search data structures
With a search data structure specified in 9.2, we can easily query for RLZ phrases by
building it on the reference R and disabling the index filtering j < i. This disabling is just
a index filtering parameter given to the longest matchR query on R.
LZ77 search clusters
With a data structure defined to calculate longest matchS on some string S, and multiple
sources where a phrase can reference, such as the multi-reference setup in S6, we can create
an LZ77 search data structure for each source, and the source producing the longest match
is then returned together with a handle to the source it is referencing.
This way we can compose a search cluster for a arbitrarily many sources. To limit the
search to only the allowed dependencies (e.g. as the windowed history lookback in S6) we
can accept a list of source handles to activate before querying the cluster, such that only
the activated sources are matched against.
v
