==PAGE:1==
Advancing the Photovoltaic Performance
Potential through Compound Engineering in
Selenium Solar Cells
Master Thesis
by
Tobias H. Hemmingsen (s194111)
Supervisors
Rasmus Nielsen - Postdoc, DTU SURFCAT
Peter C. K. Vesborg - Professor, DTU SURFCAT
Technical University of Denmark
29th of June 2024
==PAGE:2==
Advancing the Photovoltaic Performance Potential through Compound Engi-
neering in Selenium Solar Cells
Master Thesis
29th of June 2024
By
Tobias Høyrup Hemmingsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
A tandem solar cell illustrated
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, 2024, using Blender 4.1
Published by:
DTU, Department of Physics, Fysikvej, building 311,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 22 weeks at the section for Surface Physics & Catalysis
(SURFCAT), Department of Physics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of solid state physics and
photovoltaics.
Tobias Høyrup Hemmingsen - s194111
Signature
Date
Page 2 of 47
29-06-2024
==PAGE:4==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
Abstract
Selenium is a semiconductor with a band gap of 1.95 eV, and is proposed as a tandem
solar cell partner for silicon. To match current between the two cells the band gap should
be 1.75 eV. It has previously been attempted to lower the band gap of selenium by alloying
it with tellurium, which has a low band gap of 0.35 eV. In this work selenium-tellurium
alloys are fabricated using a simple sequential thermal evaporation process. The alloys
have tunable band gaps, but significant composition gradients. The composition gradient
was severely reduced by splitting the sequential deposition into more steps. Photovoltaic
devices were made using this alloy featuring a PCE of 2.5 % and a Jsc of 10.6 mA/cm2.
Acknowlegdements
I would like to thank my supervisors Rasmus and Peter for their valuable inputs to my
project. The help and suggestions they provided has been key in accelerating me towards
great results. My thanks also goes to Joao for his inputs and making sure the lab was
always a pleasant and fun place to be. I would also like to show my appreciation for
my parents, listening to, reading, and refining my ideas. Last and most importantly, my
deepest thanks goes to Xandra, for supporting me, helping me using time sensibly, and
getting me through when thing were rough.
Page 3 of 47
==PAGE:5==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
List of abbreviations
AC
alternating current
AFM
atomic force microscopy
BSE
back scatter electron
CV
capacitance voltage
DC
direct current
DOS
density of states
EDX-S
energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy
EQE
external quantum efficiency
ETL
electron transport layer
FF
fill factor
FTO
flourine-doped tin oxide
GI
grazing incidence
HTL
hole transport layer
IV
current voltage
PCE
power conversion efficiency
PV
Photovoltaic
QCM
quartz crystal microbalance
RF
radio frequency
SEM
scanning electron microscopy
SE
secondary electron
SLG
soda-lime glass
UV-Vis
UV-visible spectroscopy
XPS
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD
x-ray difraction
Zf
impedance spectroscopy
Page 4 of 47
==PAGE:6==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
List of symbols
A
maximum quantum efficiency
%
A
absorbance
%
α
absorption coefficient
cm−2
b
non linear bending strength
eV
β
peak width
rad
c
speed of light
2.998 · 108 ms−1
D
diffusion constant
m2s−1
D0
maximum diffusion
m2s−1
e
elementary charge
1.602 · 10−19 C
EA
activation energy
eV
EF
fermi energy
eV
EG
band gap
eV
ε
microstrain
1
h
planck constant
6.626 · 10−34 Js
ℏ= h/2π
reduced planck constant
1.055 · 10−34 Js
Isc
short circuit current
mA
Jsc
short circuit current density
mAcm−2
kB
boltzmanns constant
1.381 · 10−23 JK−1
λ
wavelength
nm
λs
absorption onset width
nm
φ
concentration
cm−3
R
reflectance
%
Rs
series resistance
Ω
Rsh
shunt resistance
Ω
t
time
s
T
temperature
K
T
transmittance
1
τ
crystallite size
nm
θ
diffraction angle
◦
Voc
open circuit voltage
V
ω
angular frequency
s−1
x
mole fraction
1
z
depth
nm
Page 5 of 47
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
2
Abstract
3
Acknowlegdements
3
List of abbreviations
4
List of symbols
5
1
Introduction
7
2
Theory
9
2.1
Alloys
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Solid State Physics and Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Solar Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Experimental Methods
13
3.1
Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results & Discussion
18
4.1
Band Gap Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Film Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Conclusion
30
Appendices
35
A What is Te even good for?
35
B Additional Work
36
B.1 XRD references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
B.2 Surface morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
B.3 Transmission through cracks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
B.4 Bias Dependent Sigmoid Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
C Code Listing
43
==PAGE:8==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
The need for green energy is critical, especially as this year has been the warmest on
record. The energy sector, which includes electricity and heat, is a major source of global
emissions, making up a large part of greenhouse gases released into the atmosphere [1].
Solar cells are a promising solution. They harness the energy from the sun, which is
about 1000 W/m2 [2]. This energy is spread across a spectrum, following a Planck black
body radiation curve. Solar cells use semiconductor materials to convert the sunlight into
electrical energy. Photons with energy above the band gap of a material can be converted
into electrical current, while the voltage produced is roughly equal to the band gap. Thus,
the maximum efficiency of a solar cell is limited by these factors [3].
Tandem cells can improve efficiency by working together to capture more energy from the
spectrum [4]. This comes at the expense of increased complexity, especially for monolithic
devices. To get the best performance, the current produced by each cell in the tandem
structure must match. If not, the current will be limited by the lowest cell.
Silicon (Si) solar cells is a very mature technology with power conversion efficiencies
(PCE) approaching 27% [5], and it’s band gap of 1.12 eV makes it not only good for single
junction cells but also as a candidate for the bottom cell of a two cell tandem.
Selenium (Se) has a band gap of 1.95 eV and has recently been integrated as the top cell
in an Se/Si tandem cell [6]. The optimal band gap for this purpose is 1.75 eV. The band
gap of Se is slightly too high, and the current of the Se cell is too low. In this context,
selenium-tellurium alloys could help mitigate the problem. Tellurium (Te) has a lower
band gap of 0.35 eV [7]. By mixing Se with Te, it is possible to get a band gap more
suitable for Si tandem integration.
Existing Literature
Se was the first material which was found to show photoconductivity [8] and efficient Se
solar cells (PCE > 5 %) were shown already in 1984 by Nakada et al. [9]. Se band gap
tuning with Te has been explored in several studies. Se and Te have long been known to
have isomorphic crystal structure and the alloy of the two has been studied extensively in
terms of thermodynamics, phase diagrams, and crystal structure [10].
Solar cells using the SeTe alloy have only recently been explored. In 2019, Hadar et
al. showed SexTe1−x devices with x ranging from 0 to 0.4 using FTO/TiO2/SeTe/Au
structure. They found that the band gap could be tuned in a non-linear manner and
that the alloy devices had superior short circuit current density of 15 mA/cm2 compared
to pure Se which had around 10 mA/cm2 [7]. Zheng et al. similarly produced films
with varing Te content. They used a different electron transport layer (ETL) in their
structure; FTO/ZnO/SeTe/Au. The finished devices had relatively poor performance
(PCE = 0.81 %) but a significant performance increase was noticed after 9 months of
aging (PCE = 1.85 %) [11]. This behavior has also been observed in pure Se devices
[12]. In both of these works Se and Te are mixed in the appropriate ratio and heated
to crystallize it. This SexTe1−x material is then used as a source material in thermal
evaporation. Deshmukh et al. proposed a solution process where Se and Te are dissolved
in organic solvent and spin coated onto the substrate. This method is potentially faster
and cheaper, compared to the thermal evaporation. They also introduced a hole transport
layer (HTL) into their structure; FTO/TiO2/SeTe/Spiro/Au. While the devices were
Page 7 of 47
==PAGE:9==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
not high performing (PCE = 1.11 %) the fact that both ETL, absorber, and HTL are
spin coated is promising in terms of large scale production [13]. These works all attempt
to tune the band gap to the single junction optimum of ∼1.3 eV and not the tandem
optimum of 1.75 eV.
The SeTe alloy has also been used as a photodiode. Fu et al. demonstrate the imaging
properties of the FTO/ZnO/SeTe/Au structure. They use 70 % Te to make the device
sensitive to infrared light. They demonstrate how the low processing temperature of SeTe
films allow direct fabrication onto existing CMOS circuits [14].
The Project
In this work, a simple sequential thermal evaporation process (section 3.1) is used to
create a stack of Te and Se thin films. The films are alloyed by thermal annealing and
integrated into a modern Se solar cell structure; FTO/ZnMgO/SeTe/MoOx/Au. The band
gap tuneability (section 4.1), alloy/film optimization (section 4.2), and device performance
(section 4.3) are investigated.
Page 8 of 47
==PAGE:10==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
2
Theory
This section briefly introduces the theory necessary for interpreting the results. First
alloying is described which is relevant for the band gap tuning and mixing of tellurium
and selenium. Next solid state physics and optics is described which is relevant for the
absorption and crystal properties. Lastly some of the principles of solar cells are described.
2.1
Alloys
When alloying two crystalline materials the lattice constant of the resulting structure
can be described by Vegard’s law. It is a weighted average or linear interpolation of the
lattice constants of the individual materials [15]. The same approach can sometimes also
describe other material parameters such as the band gap:
EG,A1−xBx = (1 −x) · EG,A + x · EG,B
(1)
The relationship is an empirical finding. In many cases it is useful but sometimes the
actual relationship is more complex and a non-linear bowing term is added [7]:
EG,A1−xBx = (1 −x) · EG,A + x · EG,B −b · x · (1 −x)
(2)
In both of these it is assumed that the two materials have the same crystal structure
which is the case for selenium and tellurium [10].
Solid state diffusion describes how solids interdiffuse which is relevant since selenium and
tellurium will be sequentially deposited. The concentration profile, φ(z), can be derived
from Fick’s laws of diffusion [16, 17]:
φ(z) =
1
√
4πDt exp
 
−z2
4Dt
!
,
(3)
D = D0 exp

−EA
kBT

(4)
D is the diffusion constant or diffusivity and it is characterized by the activation energy,
EA, and the maximum diffusion, D0. Time, t, and temperature, T, are the controllable
parameters. The profile also depends on initial configuration of the solute and solvent. In
equation (3) it is assumed that the solute is all concentrated at z = 0 at t = 0 and that
the solvent extends infinitely.
2.2
Solid State Physics and Optics
Solving the Schrödinger equation for a single atom gives the energy levels for the electrons.
For a material consisting of many atoms the energy levels are no longer discrete but turn
into energy bands. The bands may be filled, empty, or somewhere in between. Still the
bands must be filled starting from the lowest energy and no two electrons can be in the
same state. The density of states (DOS) describes how many states there are at a given
energy. The Fermi level (EF) is the energy at which an electron would have 50% chance
of occupying a hypothetical state. In semiconductors there is a small gap in the energy
bands right around EF. The bands below EF are filled, and the bands above are empty.
Page 9 of 47
==PAGE:11==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
When light is incident on a semiconductor it has a chance of being absorbed by the
material according to Fermi’s Golden Rule [18]:
Γi→f = 2π
ℏ· | ⟨i|H|f⟩|2 · DOS(Ef)
(5)
Where Γi→f is the transition rate from the initial state i to the final state f. A hole is left
behind in the initial state and acts as a pseudo particle. Since the DOS is zero in the
band gap no photons with energy less than Eg should be absorbed. From here the change
of being absorbed or absorption coefficient, α, depends on the DOS.
Figure 1: The trigonal crystal structure of selenium
Many solids form crystal structures where the atoms are arranged in a periodic lattice. The
lattice can be constructed by repeating a unit cell. The unit cell is a parallelepiped with
side lengths a, b, c and angles α, β, γ as well as positions for the atoms. The most stable
phase of selenium is a crystalline phase called gray selenium. Is has a trigonal structure
(a = b = 4.368 Å, c = 4.958 Å, α = β = 90◦, γ = 120◦) with three atoms in positions (XYZ
coordinates in Å): (0.985, 0, 1.653), (1.692, 2.93, 0), and (−0.492, 0.853, 3.305). Tellurium
forms the same trigonal crystal structure, but the lattice constants are slightly larger
a = b = 4.456 Å, c = 5.921 Å ) [10].
2.3
Solar Cells
Photovoltaic devices, generate current and/or voltage by extracting the electrons and
holes created by incoming photons. Solar cells specifically are designed to maximize the
power generated from the incoming light.
The Shockley-Queisser (SQ) model describes the detailed balance limit, which is the most
common model for determining the maximum attainable efficiency of a solar cell [3]. The
efficiency is influenced by the band gap of the absorber material. A high band gap results
in higher voltage since the excited electrons have more energy, but lower current since less
of the solar spectrum can be absorbed. A low band gap on the opposite provides higher
current but lower voltage. The efficiency limit predicted by the SQ model is shown in
figure 2. The optimal band gap for the AM1.5G spectrum is ∼1.3 eV, where maximum
power, ∼34 % is obtained.
Tandem cells utilize multiple absorbers in sequence, where a high band gap absorber
captures high-energy photons, and a lower band gap absorber captures the remaining
photons [4]. More absorbers can be added to this configuration, with some designs using
Page 10 of 47
==PAGE:12==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
(a) Single junction cell
(b) Tandem cell
Figure 2: SQ limits of a single juction solar cell (left) and a two absorber tandem cell (right).
up to four different absorbers [19]. For optimal performance, the tandem cells must be
current-matched, as the lowest current among the cells determines the total current. The
voltage of the tandem cell will be the sum of the two individual cell voltages.
2.3.1
What makes a bad solar cell?
The electronic behavior of a solar cell can be modeled by an equivalent circuit as shown
in figure 3.
Iph
Rs
+
−
V
I
Id
Rsh
Figure 3: Equivalent circuit model of a solar cell.
Iph is the photo-generated current, Id is the current running back through the diode. Rs
and Rsh are the series and shunt resistances respectively. V is the applied voltage and I
is the measured current. This model leads to the ideal diode equation:
I = Iph −Id −Is = Iph −I0
 
exp
 e (V + RsI)
nkBT
!
−1
!
−V + IRs
Rsh
(6)
The IV curve (section 3.2.3) follows this equation. There are three points of special
interest. The short circuit point at V = 0 has the current Isc that relates to how efficient
light is captured from the device. The open circuit point at I = 0 has the voltage Voc and
relates to the carrier mobility [20]. The maximum power point, Pmp = Vmp · Imp, is the
point where the power is highest, and is the optimal operating point for the solar cell.
The fill factor, FF, and power conversion efficiency, PCE, are also important parameters
defined as:
PCE =
Pmp
PAM1.5G
,
FF =
Pmp
Voc · Jsc
Page 11 of 47
==PAGE:13==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
There are several ways to make a bad solar cell. High Rs leads to resistive losses as the
current has to go through it. This reduces the fill factor and overall efficiency. Rs relates
to the mobility of the carriers and interfaces. Low Rsh leads to leakage currents from the
positive side to the negative side, reducing the open-circuit voltage and efficiency. Rsh
relates to defects in the material and macroscopic effects such as cracks.
There are different types of defects in crystalline material. Intrinsic defects can be in the
pure crystal. Point defects include interstitials, where an extra atom is lodged in the
crystal, and vacancies where an atom is missing. Line and plane defects are extended
defects, where whole rows of atoms are shifted. When the material is polycrystalline (small
"randomly" oriented crystallites) there will also be grain boundaries. Extrinsic defects
or impurities are foreign atoms that either replace an intrinsic atom or takes up some
space in the crystal. While intrinsic defects are usually bad and lead to recombination or
leakage current, extrinsic defects can be beneficial. They are used in doping silicon [21]
and in case of this project they adjust the electronic band structure in a favorable way.
Heterostructures can enhance the extraction of generated electrons and holes. Typically,
carrier-selective transport layers are placed on either side of the absorber before the
electrical contacts to improve efficiency. The alignment of the energy bands of different
layers is also crucial to avoid barriers in the energy landscape, ensuring efficient charge
transport [21].
When photons are absorbed and excess carriers are generated the Fermi level stays the same,
but individual quasi-Fermi levels for electrons and holes are assigned. The photovoltage
generated in a cell depends on the energy difference between the two quasi-Fermi levels.
How much the quasi-Fermi levels move depends on the concentration of generated carriers.
At a given illumination and as long as all light is absorbed, the concentration will depend
inversely on the thickness of the absorber [22].
Page 12 of 47
==PAGE:14==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
3
Experimental Methods
The following sections presents the various fabrication equipment and characterization
methods used during the project. The characterization is further split into visualization,
material properties, and electronic measurements.
3.1
Fabrication
The pure absorber, selenium (Se) and tellurium (Te), was analysed alone using soda-lime
glass (SLG) substrates, and was deposited directly onto these. To make photovoltaic
devices, SLG coated with flourine-doped tin oxide (FTO) was used as the substrate.
The FTO acts as a contact. The eletron transport layer (ETL) zink-magnesium-oxide
(ZnMgO) was then deposited, followed by the absorber, and hole transport layer (HTL)
molybdenum oxide (MoOx). Lastly a gold (Au) contact was deposited.
Thermal Evaporation.
Se and Te were deposited using the custom built Volvo thermal
evaporation chamber (base pressure < 10−8 mbar). Thermal evaporation works quite
simply by heating a crucible with the source material under high vacuum. Material is
evaporated from the source material due to the vapor pressure. The ultrahigh vacuum
allows the atoms to then travel ballistically to the substrate and form a film. A sketch of
the principle is shown in figure 4(a).
(a) Thermal evaporation
(b) Sputtering
Figure 4: Deposition processes used in this project.
The deposition rate is monitored using a Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM). The
system can not deposited Te and Se simultaniously, which means they are unmixed when
deposited.
Sputtering.
ZnMgO, MoOx, and Au were deposited using an AJA Sputtering system
(base pressure < 10−7 mbar). The magnetron sputter system works by applying an electric
field between the substrate and target (source material) in argon gas under high vacuum.
This ionizes the gas creating a plasma. The positive Ar+ ion accelerate to the target. The
impact will release material which then travels to the substrate and forms a film similar
to thermal evaporation. The principle is shown in figure 4(b). The magnetron is a series
of magnets just below the target that increases confinement of the plasma leading to a
higher deposition rate.
Page 13 of 47
==PAGE:15==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
The electric field can be either direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC) using a
radio frequency (RF) which is typically 13.56 MHz. RF sputtering offers better control
over the film, but at a lower deposition rate compared to DC. RF is also necessary if the
target is a dielectric (such as ZnMgO and MoOx) to prevent charge from accumulating on
the target which would hinder the sputtering process.
Thermal Annealing.
The Se, Te, and Se/Te films were crystallized in a thermal
annealing process. The setup used in this project consists of a hotplate with a custom built
aluminium "oven". This ensures greater temperature stability and has a thermocouple
feedthrough for more accurate temperature reading.
3.2
Characterization
3.2.1
Visualization
Optical microscopy (OM), is a non-destructive imaging technique. A series of optical
lenses are used to magnify an image of a sample. While simple and fast the resolution is
limited to around 200 nm.
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) uses electrons to form images instead of
photons like a normal optical microscope. The wavelength of electrons, defined by de
Broglie, is much smaller than that of photons and thus higher resolution can be obtained.
Electrons are accelerated to high velocity using a high voltage. The electron beam is
collimated and scanned across the sample using electromagnets. When the electrons
arrive at the sample they can scatter elastically or inelastically. In elastic scattering the
electron is flung around a nucleus. This is called a back scattered electron (BSE). The
intensity of BSE’s depend on the atomic number, Z; higher Z results in more BSE’s. In
inelastic scattering the electron collides with an electron in an atomic shell and knock it
out. This is called a secondary electron (SE). SE’s give higher edge contrast [23]. The
depth the electron travel into the sample before their kinetic energy is lost depends on the
acceleration voltage. The interaction volume is the part of the sample where the electrons
scatter.
When electrons are knocked out of inner orbitals higher energy electrons can fill the
vacancy while emitting an X-Ray photon. The energy of the photon corresponds to the
difference in energy of the high and low orbital. These X-Rays are characteristic for
each element and can be used to quantify the elemental composition of the sample. This
method is called Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDX-S).
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) works by scanning an atomically sharp needle
attached to a micro-cantilever across a sample. The deflection of the cantilever is measured
using a laser and can be related to the height of the sample. In this way a surface height
map can be constructed.
The scan time increases with measured area and desired
resolution. Therefore the area is usually relatively small (< 100 µm2).
3.2.2
Material Properties
UltraViolet-Visible Spectroscopy (UV-Vis) measures the transmittance (T) of a
material. White light is split into specific wavelengths using a monochromator and T is
measured at each wavelength to form a spectrum. The intensity is calibrated at each
wavelength such that T = Isample/I0.
Page 14 of 47
==PAGE:16==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
The transmittance depends on reflectance (R) and absorbance (A) and obeys the conser-
vation: R + A + T = 1. Light might also be scattered if the surfaces of the material are
not completely flat. Some UV-Vis equipment can also measure the reflected and scattered
light, but not the one used in this project. The absorbance depends on the thickness of
the material, L, and the absorption coefficient, α. It can be modelled with Lambert-Beers
law:
A(L) = I(0) −I(L)
I(0)
= 1 −e−α·L
(7)
With these an expression for the transmission can be written:
T = (1 −R)e−αL
(8)
This can be used to calculate the absorption coefficient from the transmission data
assuming the reflectance is negligible. The absorption onset can be used to calculate the
band gap using the Tauc method [24].
X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) works by sending X-Rays into a crystal structure and
measuring the intensity of diffracted rays. The incident angle is denoted ω and the angle
between the incident and outgoing angle is denoted 2θ. The diffraction pattern will show
peaks according to the Bragg equation:
nλ = 2dhkl sin(θ)
(9)
n is the diffraction order (1, 2, · · · ), λ is the wavelength of the X-Ray source, dhkl is the
lattice plane spacing in the crystal for indexes h, k, and l. The spacing depends on the
crystal structure as described in section 2.2 and the diffraction pattern will thus be a
fingerprint for the crystal structure. In this work the Kα transition in a Cu source is used,
which has a wavelength of 1.54 Å. Two types of XRD measurements are used in this work;
symmetric or 2θ/ω scans, where ω = θ are varied together, and grazing incidence (GI)
where ω is kept low (∼1◦) and 2θ is varied. In 2θ/ω scans the Bragg plane is always
parallel to the sample surface and and the crystal orientation will change the intensity of
peaks. This is not the case for GI, but since the incident angle is small the penetration
depth will be smaller which can eliminate signal from the substrate. This can be favorable
especially for thin films (< 1 µm) where the signal is not very strong.
The width of the peaks, usually denoted by the full width at half of the maximum intensity,
FWHM, depends on both crystallite size and strain in the crystal. A Williamson-Hall
analysis relates the peak broadening due to crystal size (Scherrer analysis) and strain
(Wilson analysis) to the diffraction angles. Since they depend differently on the angle
they can be decoupled by looking at the broadening as a function of θ:
β cos(θhkl) = Kλ
τ
+ 4ε sin(θhkl)
(10)
β is the peak broadening, τ is the crystallite size, and ε is the strain. K is a constant
usually taken to be 0.9 [25]. There will also be some instrumental broadening which is
quantized and subtracted using the (400) peak of a silicon wafer, which is practically a
single crystal (see appendix figure 27).
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) work by sending X-Rays onto a surface.
This will excite electrons out of the material and the energies of these electrons are
measured. Like XRD, peaks will form, but now at specific energies corresponding to the
Page 15 of 47
==PAGE:17==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
chemical state of the atoms in the material. This allows the identification and quantization
of the constituents of the film.
XPS only penetrates 1 −10 nm into the material and is thus highly surface sensitive. By
measuring a spectrum, subsequently etching, measuring another spectrum and repeating,
a depth profile can be constructed.
3.2.3
Electronic Measurements
Current-Voltage (IV) measurement of solar cells allows evaluation of critical perfor-
mance parameters such as short circuit current, Isc, open circuit voltage, Voc, fill factor,
FF, and power conversion efficiency, PCE. Additionally for high performance cells an
estimate for total series and shunt resistances (Rs and Rsh) can be extracted as the inverse
slope of the curve at the open circuit and short circuit points respectively [26].
In the IV measurement a voltage is applied to the cell while the current response is measured
using a four point probe [2]. This is done both in darkness and under illumination with
the AM1.5G spectrum1.
Figure 5: Electronic measurements on a solar cell. EQE measures current while varying the
incoming wavelength. IV measures current while varying DC voltage. Zf measures the current
response while varying the frequency of AC voltage. All three can be done in the dark (single
wavelength for EQE), or in light.
External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) measures how efficiently a photovoltaic device
converts incident photons to electrical current across different wavelengths. EQE is
thus affected by both the absorber (absorption coefficient, band gap, and optoelectronic
properties) and the device structure (thicknesses, interfaces, transport layers) as well as
surface morphology and anti-reflective coating.
Specific wavelengths are picked out using a monochromator and sent into the device while
the current response is measured. The instrument is calibrated to a reference cell where
the EQE is known. EQE is measured in percent as the number of outgoing electrons
divided by the number of incoming photons, called quantum efficiency. The light is usually
switched on and off or chopped at around 100 Hz for better signal to noise ratio [27].
Integrating EQE together with the AM1.5G spectrum obtains Jsc, which can then be
used to normalize the IV curve to show current density instead of current.
The EQE spectrum roughly follows the absorption spectrum and should ideally be a step
function at the band gap. In real cells the EQE is seldom a step function, but can be
1The AM1.5G is the standard solar spectrum used in solar cell characterization.
Page 16 of 47
==PAGE:18==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
approximated with a sigmoid function:
EQE(λ) =
A
1 + exp[κ(λ −λg)/λs]
(11)
Here λ is the wavelength, λg is the band gap, A is the maximum efficiency, κ ≈2.63 is
a constant, and λs describes how much the curve deviates from a step function2. While
collection below the band gap can potentially allow more current than what is predicted
by the SQ model, it is detrimental to Voc and PCE [28].
Impedance spectroscopy (Zf) applies an alternating voltage to the device and measures
the current response. This is done in terms of the complex resistance, impedance (Z).
The depletion region in a solar cell can be modeled as a parallel plate capacitor. The
capacitance can be found through an R-RC equivalent circuit model [29]:
C =
−Im(Z)
[Re(Z) −Rs)2 + (−Im(Z))2
i
ω
(12)
The depletion region width can be changed with applied DC bias voltage. By measuring
the capacitance as a function of voltage the apparent carrier concentration vs depth can
be extracted. The first relates to the slope, ∂C
∂V , while the second is derived from the
parallel plate capacitor model.
2Specifically it is the wavelength distance between the two peaks in the second derivative.
Page 17 of 47
==PAGE:19==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
4
Results & Discussion
The results section is split into three main parts.
Section 4.1, band gap tuning is
investigated by making Te/Se alloys on glass with varying Te content. The band gaps
are found using UV-Vis. Section 4.2, the film is optimized through different annealing
temperatures and times. The Te concentration profiles of Te/Se and Te/Se/Te films are
analysed using XPS depth profiling. Section 4.3, the optimized film is used to make
photovoltaic devices. The performance of these devices are analysed using EQE and IV.
Before trying to improve Se a reference is made. This reference device is shown in figure
6. The device has PCE = 4.5 %, Voc = 0.93 V, Jsc = 8.86 mA/cm2, and FF = 54 %.
(a) EQE
(b) IV
Figure 6: EQE and IV curves of a reference Se solar cell
Page 18 of 47
==PAGE:20==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
4.1
Band Gap Tuning
The first endeavor of the project was to alloy selenium (Se) and tellurium (Te) and
investigate how the band gap changed with increasing Te content.
Te and Se were sequentially deposited onto soda lime glass (SLG) using the Volvo thermal
evaporation system. The thickness of Te was varied from 0.3 nm to 41 nm while the
thickness of Se was kept at 300 nm. In this way the Te content was varied from ∼0 % to
∼12 %. The films are amorphous as deposited. To crystallize the films they were heated
Time [min]
Te [%]
4
0.0
2.33
6.13
8.43
15
0.0
2.47
5.79
12.12
Table 1: Tellurium content of the different films.
to 195 ◦C in a thermal annealing process for 4 min and 15 min respectively. The actual
atomic percentages were then found using EDX-S. Since the films were very thin they
could be probed entirely using the interaction volume. At the 10 keV used, the probing
depth for the X-rays is in the order of micrometers [23]. The Se and Te signals were
deconvoluted and the resulting Te atomic percentages are presented in table 1.
Figure 7: XRD patterns of the alloyed films with varying Te content and annealing time along
with the SLG substrate. A new peak arises at 28.5◦when the Te content increases and one is
suppressed at 48◦. Peak heights generally decrease with Te.
The crystallinity was further analysed using XRD. Figure 7 shows XRD patterns of the
different films that were annealed for 15 minutes along with the substrate.
When comparing to the reference spectrum for trigonal Se (appendix figure 24) the sought
phase was present in all films. The addition of Te suppressed the peak at 2θ = 48◦and
added a new peak at 28.5◦right before the (101) peak at 29.7◦. This could be due to the
presence of pure Te which has a peaks slightly before the Se peaks due to its larger lattice
constants. Beyond this the XRD patterns are difficult to interpret so a Williamson-Hall
analysis was carried out for each film by first fitting Gaussian curves to all the peaks in
Page 19 of 47
==PAGE:21==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
each spectrum. There was no noticeable peak shift even though the Te reference pattern
would suggest this (see figure 24). Figure 8 shows the result of the Williamson-Hall
analysis.
(a) Strains calculated from the slope of the
Williamson-Hall plot.
(b) Grain sizes calculated from the y-intercept
of the Williamson-Hall plot.
Figure 8: Williamson-Hall analysis of the alloys. There is some strain present in the films
which is independent of annealing time and Te content. The grain size increases with annealing
time and decreases with Te content.
The FWHM of the peaks increase with diffraction angle. This indicates that there is
residual tensile strain in the film. This is likely due to the thermal annealing step. The
density of amorphous selenium (4.28 g/cm3) is lower than crystalline (4.81 g/cm3) [30]
and this could lead to tensile strain. The grain size decreases with Te content. This agrees
with SEM and AFM measurements shown in appendix B.2. The annealing conditions
that yield the largest grains are likely different, but this will be explored further in the
next section.
Next, the films were measured with UV-Vis. The transmittance of the films were measured
using light wavelengths from 185 nm to 1400 nm (6.7 eV to 0.9 eV). The results are shown
in figure 9.
As seen on figure 9(a) the samples annealed for 15 minutes transmit less light than
those annealed for 4 minutes for any given Te %. It is expected that longer annealing
produces more rough films and a rough surface will scatter the light. Since only the direct
(and not diffuse) component is measured it makes sense that the rougher films show less
transmittance. The transmittance is converted to absorption coefficient using eq. (8) and
showed on figure 9(b). The absorption onset shift due to Te content is more pronounced
here. There is also a shift due to the annealing. This is somewhat surprising but can be
attributed to the distribution of Te. If all the Te is concentrated close to one side of the
film it will affect the spectrum differently compared to being uniformly distributed.
The absorption onset is quantified using the Tauc method [24]. Figure 10 shows the
extrapolated band gaps as a function of Te content.
The band gap is decreasing with Te content but the effect is not as pronounced as expected
from Vegards Law (eq. (1)). It is also not in line with what was found by Hadar et al. [7].
They found a bowing coefficient of b = 1.1 eV, while this study gives b = −0.91 eV. This
Page 20 of 47
==PAGE:22==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
(a) Transmission spectra.
(b) Absorption spectra.
Figure 9: UV-Vis spectra of the alloyed films with varying Te content and annealing time. The
low energy transmission is lower for the films annealed for 15 minutes. The absorption coefficient
onset (around 1.75-2 eV) is shifted to lower energies with increasing Te content.
Figure 10: Tauc extrapolated band gaps as a function of Te content for films annealed at 4
and 15 minutes.
large discrepancy is likely related to the fabrication. The films are sequentially deposited
and heated to interdiffuse Te and Se. If the Te is still concentrated in one side of the film,
the absorption spectrum will be dominated by Se. This effect and how to get around it
is investigated in the next section. The Te content will be kept at 12 % for the further
studies.
Page 21 of 47
==PAGE:23==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
4.2
Film Optimization
When introducing 12 % Te in the thin film the optimal annealing conditions inevitably
change. The crystallization temperature, TC, depends on Te content [10]. The morphology
of the surface is also sensitive to Te content as discussed in appendix B.2.
Since Te and Se were sequentially deposited the interdiffusion of the two layers was also a
concern. The interdiffusion depend on both temperature and time (eq. (3)). Both higher
temperature and time gives better diffusion but evaporation and thermal expansion sets
an upper limit on these. Two samples were made with different annealing conditions; 1:
195 ◦C for 4 minutes and 2: 100 ◦C for 2 minutes + 195 ◦C for 15 minutes. The second
features preannealing at a lower temperature before the final crystallization. XPS depth
profiles of these films can be seen on figure 11(a).
(a) Te/Se annealed for 4 and 15 minutes at 195 ◦C
(b) Te/Se/Te annealed for 30 minutes at 150 ◦C
(c) Te/Se/Te annealed for 15 minutes at 195 ◦C
(d) Te/Se/Te annealed for 15 minutes at 210 ◦C
Figure 11: XPS depth profiles of Te/Se (upper left) and Te/Se/Te. The Te/Se composition has
a distinct gradient, which is only slightly affected by longer annealing. The Te/Se/Te profiles
suggest that the Te is more evenly distributed throughout the film when annealed at 195 or
210 ◦C for 15 minutes.
The Te has not diffused to the point where it is uniform. The concentration varies from
∼25 % on one side to ∼0 % on the other side. The profile is also not significantly affected
by the longer tanneal. tanneal and Tanneal are already above the normal conditions for the
Page 22 of 47
==PAGE:24==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
reference Se film [31].
To mitigate the poor Te distribution in the Te/Se films, films were fabricated with the Te
layer split into one below and one above the Se, a kind of sandwich structure, Te/Se/Te.
The total Te and Se thicknesses were kept the same to achieve the same Te content. These
new films were also encapsulated in a layer of molybdenum oxide (15 nm) to prevent the
Se from evaporating and allow for higher tanneal and Tanneal. The following combinations
were explored:
Tanneal( ◦C)
150
195
195
210
210
210
210
225
tanneal( min)
30
4
15
15
30
60
120
15
Figure 12 shows XRD patterns around the two main peaks, (010) and (101), for the first
four films and a one film that has only been preannealed. It is clear that the crystallinity
Figure 12: XRD patterns around the (010) and (101) peak for Te/Se/Te films annealed at
different temperatures and times. The crystallinity increases with both temperature and time.
increases with both temperature and time. There is also a slight peak shift towards lower
angles which is most notable in the (101) peak.
XPS depth profiles for 3 of the films are shown in figures 11(b), 11(c), and 11(d). From the
profiles for 195 ◦C for 15 minutes and 210 ◦C for 15 minutes it is clear that the Te/Se/Te
structure becomes more uniform than the Te/Se structure. There is some Te present
throughout all of the film. Also annealing at 210 ◦C for 15 minutes gives the most uniform
distribution. The films that were annealed for longer could be even better but UV-Vis
measurements showed significant transmission above the band gap (appendix figure 30).
This is most likely due to evaporation of the film. Figure 13 shows that large cracks form
in the Te/Se film when it is annealed for longer time.
These cracks make the film unsuited for device fabrication as the gold contact could
potentially get into the cracks and form serious shunts. The annealing time should be
kept short to avoid this. Similar problems were encountered when going to 225 ◦C.
Despite the poor film quality it was still possible to extract band gaps of the Te/Se/Te
films. The band gap was found to be around 1.8 eV but the absorption onset was still
very weak which made the Tauc analysis difficult.
4.2.1
Leopard Spots
When transferred to substrates relevant for devices (FTO coated glass) an interesting
problem was encountered. When annealed at 210 ◦C small spots were noticed on the
Page 23 of 47
==PAGE:25==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
Figure 13: OM images of Te/Se films annealed at 210 ◦C for 15, 30, 60, and 120 minutes. The
magnification is unknown but the same for each image.
surface (see figure 14). The spots were analysed using SEM and EDX-S mapping. They
are around 1 −20 µm in diameter and have a leopard-like pattern. They bare some
resemblance to the "craters" observed by Nielsen in [31], in being completely circular.
(a) SEM image of some leopard
spots
(b) SEM image of a single leopard
spot
(c) EDX-S map of a leopard
spot
Figure 14: SEM and EDX-S Analysis of the Leopard spots
The leopard spots seem to be a local delamination of Se. In the dark areas the signal
from the substrate is bigger. Interestingly the Te and Mo signals seem completely uniform
across the spots. It looks like the entire spot is bulging up, and most of the spots have
cracks as shown in figure 14(b).
Figure 15: OM images of the films preannealed at 50, 100, and 150 ◦C after MoOx and final
annealing at 210 ◦C. The magnification is unknown but the same for each image.
The temperature during the preannealing step was altered to 50 ◦C, and 150 ◦C. It was
found that both increasing and decreasing the temperature got rid of the leopard spots.
Page 24 of 47
==PAGE:26==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
Figure 15 shows images of the two films as well as a parallel processed 100 ◦C preannealed
film. XRD was carried out before and after each annealing step. Figure 16 shows these
XRD patterns. Before final annealing 50 ◦C is very similar to no preannealing. They
(a) Before final annealing
(b) After final annealing
Figure 16: XRD patterns of the films before and after final annealing for different preannealing
temperatures.
both have a strong amorphous signal. 100 ◦C is already somewhat crystallized and 150 ◦C
is even more. Interestingly after final annealing the three films have almost identical
patterns.
The cause of the leopard spots is still unknown but it could be related to water or organic
material stuck on the surface. If a small amount is trapped beneath the Se film it could
expand and somehow make the Se more volatile.
Page 25 of 47
==PAGE:27==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
4.3
Devices
Devices were fabricated featuring Te/Se and Te/Se/Te structures, as previously described.
The fabrication process began with FTO-coated glass substrates cut into 14x16 mm pieces.
These substrates were cleaned by wiping with a chemwipe and blowing with a dry nitrogen
gun to remove larger particles. They were then ultrasonicated in Milli-Q water, acetone,
and isopropanol for 15 minutes each to further clean the surface.
The electron transport layer (ETL), ZnMgO (∼70 nm thick), was deposited using sputter
deposition. Next, the Te and Se absorber layers were deposited using sequential thermal
evaporation. The films were preannealed at 100 ◦C for 2 minutes before the hole transport
layer (HTL), MoOx (∼15 nm thick), was deposited using sputter deposition.
The encapsulated films were then annealed at 210 °C for 15 minutes to crystallize the
absorber. Finally, an Au contact (∼75 nm thick) was deposited using sputter deposition.
Throughout this section, various fabrication parameters were varied in search of better
performing devices, in terms of PCE, Voc, Jsc, and FF.
4.3.1
Sandwich or not?
Devices using the Te/Se and Te/Se/Te structures were measured using EQE and IV. The
results are shown in figure 17.
(a) EQE
(b) IV
Figure 17: EQE and IV curves of Te/Se (black) and Te/Se/Te (red) devices.
The Te/Se/Te structure has higher maximum EQE at around 30 % instead of 15 %. Te/Se
has higher EQE above 650 nm, but this is likely due to the higher concentration of Te,
and thus lower band gap, in one end of the absorber.
4.3.2
Bi-directional Diodes
In some of the sandwich cells a peculiar phenomenon was observed. The devices were able
to carry current in both directions, a bi-directional diode behavior. Figure 18 shows a
device which acted in this way.
The bi-directional diode behavior suggests that the Te is not evenly distributed but still
concentrated at either side of the thin film. This could create an npn junction creating
Page 26 of 47
==PAGE:28==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
Figure 18: The bi-directional diode behavior in dark (hollow) and light (solid).
a double rectifying diode. This could potentially be proven by capacitance profiling.
Interestingly some favorable light dependence is still observed. This is likely due to the
carrier selective contacts.
4.3.3
Closed-Space Annealing
To improve the performance and mitigate the bi-directional diode problem a closed-space
annealing (CSA) strategy was employed following the work by Nielsen et al. [32]. The
devices were post-annealed at 210 ◦C for an additional 15 minutes. The effect of CSA on
the EQE is shown in figure 19.
(a) Te/Se
(b) Te/Se/Te
Figure 19: EQE before (black) and after (red) CSA for Te/Se and Te/Se/Te devices.
CSA increased the quantum efficiency tremendously at all wavelengths for both Te/Se
and Te/Se/Te. It is still clear that Te/Se/Te shows the best performance. Moreover CSA
also removed the bi-directional diode problem. There was, however still some leakage
current at negative voltages.
4.3.4
Follow-up on the Leopard Spots
The leopard spots were eliminated by both increasing and decreasing the temperature to
50 and 150 ◦C during the preannealing but interestingly in this batch the leopard spots
Page 27 of 47
==PAGE:29==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
turned out not to be a problem for the performance. This can be seen in figure 20(a) and
20(b) where there is very little difference in performance between the three.
(a) EQE
(b) IV
Figure 20: EQE and IV curves of devices preannealed at different temperatures. The curves
are remarkably similar.
The Leopard spots are not as detrimental as initially anticipated. The XRD patterns in
the previous section (figure 16(b)) also suggested similar crystallinity of the three films.
Voc is 0.669, 0.665, and 0.651 V and Jsc is 10.6, 10.2, and 9.66 mA/cm2 for the three
devices. Additionally the band gaps are 1.79, 1.82, and 1.84 eV. From this preannealing
at 50 ◦C seems to be slightly better than 100 ◦C and 150 ◦C.
Page 28 of 47
==PAGE:30==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
4.3.5
A Compilation of our Best Efforts
A parallel project on pure Se devices found that a thinner Se film (250 nm instead of 300
nm), a thicker ZnMgO layer (80 nm instead of 70 nm), and higher pressure during ZnMgO
deposition (10 mTorr instead of 5 mTorr) increased performance. These adjustments,
along with changing the Au sputtering method to RF instead of DC, and altering the
pre-annealing temperature to 50°C instead of 100°C, were implemented to further enhance
device performance.
Bias EQE and IV curves of the champion device are shown in figure 21.
(a) EQE
(b) IV
Figure 21: Champion device performance
The performance of the champion device showed significant improvement with the following
parameters: PCE = 2.5 %, Voc = 0.67 V, Jsc = 10.6 mA/cm2, and FF = 35 %. Notably
the short circuit current density is higher than the reference Se device.
The EQE curve (figure 21(a)) while better still has a wide absorption onset, indicating
that there is still more to be gained. The bias EQE is however wavelength independent,
which signals good carrier diffusion [33]. The fill factor remains suboptimal, which may be
attributed to series resistance within the device. Additionally, the issue of the bi-directional
diode effect has been resolved, further contributing to the improved device performance.
Table 2 shows the performance of the different devices explored in this section.
Device
PCE (%)
Voc (V)
Jsc

mA
cm2

FF (%)
Rs (Ω)
Rsh (Ω)
λs (nm)
Se
4.47
0.931
8.86
54.2
70.7
1658
53.4
Te/Se
0.123
0.428
1.49
19.3
835.0
527.5
-
Te/Se/Te
0.247
0.536
2.12
21.8
1153
751.4
124
Te/Se+CSA
0.653
0.590
4.78
23.2
372.3
360.1
144
Te/Se/Te+CSA
1.20
0.681
6.87
25.6
300.8
471.6
110
Te/Se/Te New
2.48
0.669
10.6
35.0
106.2
561.3
103
Table 2: Performance of devices, extracted from their IV and EQE curves.
Page 29 of 47
==PAGE:31==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
5
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to alloy selenium and tellurium. This was done to tune the
band gap to an energy more appropriate for tandem integration with silicon solar cells.
This alloy should then be used to make photovoltaic devices.
Films were produced with Te atomic percentages ranging from 0 to 12 percent. The band
gap of the films decreased with increasing Te content but not as strongly as predicted by
simple linear interpolation. The sequential deposition of Te and Se led to a significant
composition gradient in the Te/Se film.
The film was attempted optimized through increased annealing temperature, but this was
found to have little effect on the gradient. Instead a stack of Te/Se/Te was produced
resulting in a much more uniform Te distribution throughout the film. Encapsulating the
film with MoOx enabled exploration of higher temperatures and longer annealing times.
This improved the distribution further but led to poorer film morphology.
The optimized Te/Se/Te film was transferred to a substrate relevant for photovoltaic
devices.
Several interesting problems were encountered.
Local delaminations of Se
appeared during annealing. This was mitigated by reducing the pre-annealing temperature
to 50 °C instead 100 °C. Some devices showed significant leakage current in reverse bias,
resembling a bi-direction diode. This issue was resolved with an additional annealing step
after completing all other fabrication steps. These improvements along with alterations to
the deposition of the ETL (thicker film and higher deposition pressure), and Au contact
(RF instead of DC sputtering), and a thinner absorber layer led to a device with 2.5 %
efficiency. It also had a promising current density of 10.6 mA/cm2 which was higher than
the reference Se cell.
Outlook
The efficiency of the alloy devices was improved from 0.1 to 1 to 2.5 % during the relatively
short span of this project. Given more time and further optimization, it could potentially
be improved even more to also compete with regular Se devices on PCE and FF. A
simple improvement could be to follow the work by Zheng et al. [11], and let the devices
age for 9 months and see whether the performance increases. Another improvement
is to use simultaneous thermal evaporation to avoid the graded composition. Further
investigation into the annealing steps is also necessary to understand the underlying
mechanisms. Although ZnMgO is a good ETL for Se, its band alignment with the
alloy must be evaluated, and other ETLs (and HTLs) should be considered. Despite
imperfections, valuable insights could also be gained from creating a tandem device with Si.
The fabrication parameters are likely different when Si solar cells are used as substrates.
Page 30 of 47
==PAGE:32==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
References
[1] “Breakdown of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide emissions by sector.”
[2] C.B.Honsberg and S.G.Bowden, “Photovoltaics Education Website,” 2019.
[3] W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, “Detailed balance limit of efficiency of p-n junction
solar cells,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 510–519, 1961.
[4] M. A. Green, “Third generation photovoltaics: Ultra-high conversion efficiency at
low cost,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 9, pp. 123–135,
3 2001.
[5] M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis, K. Bothe, G. Siefer, and
X. Hao, “Solar cell efficiency tables (Version 63),” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research
and Applications, vol. 32, pp. 3–13, 1 2024.
[6] R. Nielsen, A. Crovetto, A. Assar, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff, and P. C. Vesborg,
“Monolithic Selenium/Silicon Tandem Solar Cells,” PRX Energy, vol. 3, 3 2024.
[7] I. Hadar, X. Hu, Z.-Z. Luo, V. P. Dravid, and M. G. Kanatzidis, “Nonlinear Band
Gap Tunability in Selenium–Tellurium Alloys and Its Utilization in Solar Cells,” ACS
Energy Letters, vol. 4, pp. 2137–2143, 9 2019.
[8] W. Smith, “Effect of Light on Selenium During the Passage of An Electric Current
*,” Nature, vol. 7, pp. 303–303, 2 1873.
[9] T. Nakada and A. Kunioka, “Efficient ITO/Se Heterojunction Solar Cells,” Japanese
Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 23, p. L587, 8 1984.
[10] G. Ghosh, R. C. Sharma, D. T. Li, and Y. A. Chang, “The Se-Te (Selenium-Tellurium)
system,” Journal of Phase Equilibria, vol. 15, pp. 213–224, 4 1994.
[11] J. Zheng, L. Fu, Y. He, K. Li, Y. Lu, J. Xue, Y. Liu, C. Dong, C. Chen, and
J. Tang, “Fabrication and characterization of ZnO/Se1-xTex solar cells,” Frontiers of
Optoelectronics, vol. 15, p. 36, 12 2022.
[12] T. K. Todorov, S. Singh, D. M. Bishop, O. Gunawan, Y. S. Lee, T. S. Gershon,
K. W. Brew, P. D. Antunez, and R. Haight, “Ultrathin high band gap solar cells
with improved efficiencies from the world’s oldest photovoltaic material,” Nature
Communications, vol. 8, no. 1, 2017.
[13] S. D. Deshmukh, C. K. Miskin, A. A. Pradhan, K. Kisslinger, and R. Agrawal,
“Solution Processed Fabrication of Se–Te Alloy Thin Films for Application in PV
Devices,” ACS Applied Energy Materials, vol. 5, pp. 3275–3281, 3 2022.
[14] L. Fu, Y. He, J. Zheng, Y. Hu, J. Xue, S. Li, C. Ge, X. Yang, M. Peng, K. Li, X. Zeng,
J. Wei, D. j. Xue, H. Song, C. Chen, and J. Tang, “TexSe1–x Photodiode Shortwave
Infrared Detection and Imaging,” Advanced Materials, vol. 35, 6 2023.
[15] L. Vegard, “Die Konstitution der Mischkristalle und die Raumfullung der Atome,”
Zeitschrift fur Physik, vol. 5, pp. 17–26, 1 1921.
[16] A. Fick, “Ueber Diffusion,” Annalen der Physik, vol. 170, no. 1, pp. 59–86, 1855.
[17] “Fick’s laws of diffusion.”
[18] M. Fox, Optical properties of solids. Oxford, second ed., 2010.
[19] “Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart.”
Page 31 of 47
==PAGE:33==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
[20] A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler, and W. C. Sinke, “Photovoltaic
materials: Present efficiencies and future challenges,” Science, vol. 352, 4 2016.
[21] S. Sze and M. Lee, Semiconductor devices : : physics and technology. John Wiley &
Sons, 2013.
[22] A. Smets, K. Jäger, O. Isabella, R. v. Swaaij, and M. Zeman, Solar energy The
physics and engineering of photovoltaic conversion, technologies and systems. UIT
Cambridge Ltd., 2016.
[23] B. Hafner, “Scanning Electron Microscopy Primer,” tech. rep., University of Min-
nesota, 2007.
[24] J. Tauc, “Optical properties and electronic structure of amorphous Ge and Si,”
Materials Research Bulletin, vol. 3, pp. 37–46, 1 1968.
[25] G. F. Harrington and J. Santiso, “Back-to-Basics tutorial: X-ray diffraction of thin
films,” Journal of Electroceramics, vol. 47, pp. 141–163, 12 2021.
[26] K. Mertens, Photovoltaics : Fundamentals, Technology, and Practice. John Wiley &
Sons, Incorporated, 2018.
[27] S. Ravishankar, C. Aranda, P. P. Boix, J. A. Anta, J. Bisquert, and G. Garcia-
Belmonte, “Effects of Frequency Dependence of the External Quantum Efficiency of
Perovskite Solar Cells,” Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, vol. 9, pp. 3099–3104,
6 2018.
[28] O. Almora, C. I. Cabrera, J. Garcia-Cerrillo, T. Kirchartz, U. Rau, and C. J.
Brabec, “Quantifying the Absorption Onset in the Quantum Efficiency of Emerging
Photovoltaic Devices,” Advanced Energy Materials, vol. 11, no. 16, 2021.
[29] E. von Hauff, “Impedance Spectroscopy for Emerging Photovoltaics,” The Journal
of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 123, pp. 11329–11346, 5 2019.
[30] D. R. Lide, “CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics,” Journal of the American
Chemical Society, vol. 126, pp. 1586–1586, 2 2004.
[31] R. Nielsen, Large Bandgap Photovoltaic Devices and Tandem Integration with Silicon
Solar Cells. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[32] R. S. Nielsen, M. Schleuning, O. Karalis, T. H. Hemmingsen, O. Hansen, I. Chork-
endorff, T. Unold, and P. C. K. Vesborg, “Increasing the Collection Efficiency in
Selenium Thin-Film Solar Cells Using a Closed-Space Annealing Strategy,” ACS
Applied Energy Materials, 5 2024.
[33] C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter, and R. Agrawal, “Generalized quantum efficiency analysis
for non-ideal solar cells: Case of Cu2ZnSnSe4,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 119,
no. 1, 2016.
[34] D. C. Nguyen, S. Tanaka, H. Nishino, K. Manabe, and S. Ito, “3-D solar cells by
electrochemical-deposited Se layer as extremely-thin absorber and hole conducting
layer on nanocrystalline TiO2 electrode,” Nanoscale Research Letters, vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 1–7, 2013.
[35] O. Almora, C. I. Cabrera, S. Erten-Ela, K. Forberich, K. Fukuda, F. Guo, J. Hauch,
A. W. Ho-Baillie, T. J. Jacobsson, R. A. Janssen, T. Kirchartz, M. A. Loi, X. Mathew,
D. B. Mitzi, M. K. Nazeeruddin, U. W. Paetzold, B. P. Rand, U. Rau, T. Someya,
E. Unger, L. Vaillant-Roca, and C. J. Brabec, “Device Performance of Emerging
Photovoltaic Materials (Version 4),” 1 2024.
Page 32 of 47
==PAGE:34==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
[36] P. Deimel and F. Allegretti, “Elemental and Chemical Analysis with X-ray X-ray
Photoelectron Spectroscopy,” Electron Spectroscopy of Surfaces, no. 35, pp. 1–22,
2011.
[37] A. Ngan, D. Ren, Z. Q. Chen, R. Simm, and F. Gu, “From contaminant to com-
modity: a critical review of selenium usage, treatment, and recovery,” Reviews in
Environmental Science and Bio/Technology, 1 2024.
[38] C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter, R. Agrawal, and T. Unold, “Generalized current-voltage
analysis and efficiency limitations in non-ideal solar cells: Case of Cu2ZnSn(SxSe
1-x)4 and Cu2Zn(SnyGe 1-y)(SxSe1-x)4,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 115, no. 23,
2014.
[39] J. F. Moulder and J. Chastain, Handbook of x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy : a
reference book of standard spectra for identification and interpretation of XPS data.
Physical Electronics Division, Perkin-Elmer Corp, 1992.
[40] M. K. Jamarkattel, A. B. Phillips, D. B. Li, E. Bastola, G. K. Liyanage, J. D. Friedl,
S. S. Bista, D. Pokhrel, A. Quader, P. N. Kaluarachchi, Z. Hussain, A. Abudulimu,
X. Mathew, Y. Yan, R. J. Ellingson, and M. J. Heben, “High vacuum heat-treated
MZO: Increased n-type conductivity and elimination of S-kink in MZO/CdSe/CdTe
solar cells,” MRS Advances, vol. 7, pp. 713–717, 11 2022.
[41] W. Liu, F. Yu, W. Fan, and Q. Zhang, “Improved stability and efficiency of polymer-
based selenium solar cells through the usage of tin(iv) oxide in the electron transport
layers and the analysis of aging dynamics,” Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
vol. 22, pp. 14838–14845, 7 2020.
[42] B. Yan, X. Liu, W. Lu, M. Feng, H. J. Yan, Z. Li, S. Liu, C. Wang, J. S. Hu, and D. J.
Xue, “Indoor photovoltaics awaken the world’s first solar cells,” Science Advances,
vol. 8, 12 2022.
[43] R. Nielsen, T. H. Hemmingsen, T. G. Bonczyk, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff, and
P. C. K. Vesborg, “Laser-Annealing and Solid-Phase Epitaxy of Selenium Thin-Film
Solar Cells,” ACS Applied Energy Materials, vol. 6, pp. 8849–8856, 9 2023.
[44] I. Hadar, T. B. Song, W. Ke, and M. G. Kanatzidis, “Modern Processing and Insights
on Selenium Solar Cells: The World’s First Photovoltaic Device,” Advanced Energy
Materials, vol. 9, no. 16, 2019.
[45] S. Ravishankar, Z. Liu, U. Rau, and T. Kirchartz, “Multilayer Capacitances: How
Selective Contacts Affect Capacitance Measurements of Perovskite Solar Cells,” PRX
Energy, vol. 1, 4 2022.
[46] A. K. Bhatnagar, K. V. Reddy, and V. Srivastava, “Optical energy gap of amorphous
selenium: effect of annealing,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, vol. 18, pp. L149–
L153, 9 1985.
[47] P. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells. Wiley, 1 2005.
[48] T. Nakada and A. Kunioka, “Polycrystalline Thin-Film TiO <sub>2</sub> /Se
Solar Cells,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 24, p. L536, 7 1985.
[49] S. Lu, C. Chen, and J. Tang, “Possible top cells for next-generation Si-based tandem
solar cells,” 9 2020.
Page 33 of 47
==PAGE:35==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
[50] H. Huang, J. Zha, S. Xu, P. Yang, Y. Xia, H. Wang, D. Dong, L. Zheng, Y. Yao,
Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. C. Ho, H. P. Chan, C. Zhao, and C. Tan, “Precursor-Confined
Chemical Vapor Deposition of 2D Single-Crystalline Se xTe1– x Nanosheets for
p-Type Transistors and Inverters,” ACS Nano, 6 2024.
[51] X. Chen, S. Bai, R. Li, Y. Yang, and Q. Lin, “Resolving the trap levels of Se and
Se1-xTex via deep-level transient spectroscopy,” Physical Review Materials, vol. 8, 3
2024.
[52] K. Wang, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, Y. Xing, Q. Dong, and T. Ma, “Selenium as a photoab-
sorber for inorganic-organic hybrid solar cells,” Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
vol. 16, pp. 23316–23319, 10 2014.
[53] W. Liu, F. Yu, Y. Wang, T. Michinobu, W. Fan, and Q. Zhang, “Selenium-Based
Solar Cell with Conjugated Polymers as Both Electron and Hole Transport Layers to
Realize High Water Tolerance as well as Good Long-Term and Thermal Stability,”
Solar RRL, vol. 4, 12 2020.
[54] M. Zhu, F. Hao, L. Ma, T. B. Song, C. E. Miller, M. R. Wasielewski, X. Li, and
M. G. Kanatzidis, “Solution-Processed Air-Stable Mesoscopic Selenium Solar Cells,”
ACS Energy Letters, vol. 1, pp. 469–473, 8 2016.
[55] R. Nielsen, “Synthesis of New Carrier-selective Transport Materials for Tandem Solar
Cell Applications,” tech. rep., Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[56] J. J. Loferski, “Theoretical considerations governing the choice of the optimum
semiconductor for photovoltaic solar energy conversion,” Journal of Applied Physics,
vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 777–784, 1956.
[57] S. S. Hegedus and W. N. Shafarman, “Thin-film solar cells: Device measurements
and analysis,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 12, no. 2-3,
pp. 155–176, 2004.
Page 34 of 47
==PAGE:36==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
A
What is Te even good for?
Alongside the main project, work was done on trying to make Se films without using Te
as adhesion. The Te layer is needed as adhesion for the Se absorber [44, 12].
The addition of Te does however come with some problems. The Te source material has
low but significant halogen impurities [31]. These create defect states in the band gap
which can be detrimental to the performance. Additionally Chen et al. [51] resently found
that Te itself creates deep defects in the band gap in Te/Se alloys, giving more reason
still to try to get rid of it.
The shutter in the thermal evaporation system builds up a blob of Se over time. One of
these blobs was analysed using XRD to see whether it was crystalline. Figure 22 shows
scans around the usual Se peaks at different height through the blob. There is a clear
Figure 22: XRD pattern of the Se blob from the shutter of the thermal evaporator measured
at different heights.
peak, which could suggest that the blob is crystalline Se.
A new thermal evaporation chamber was also worked on simultaniously. A single batch of
FTO/Se was made, no Te was used. After lying on the shelf for a month the films were
annealed and surprisingly the films were intact and crystalline. This is shown in figure
23. Both of these experiments suggest that it should be possible to make a Se thin film
without the need for and problems from Te.
(a) As deposited
(b) After 1 month
(c) After annealing
(d) SEM after annealing
Figure 23: Images of the Se films without Te.
Page 35 of 47
==PAGE:37==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
B
Additional Work
B.1
XRD references
Figure 24 shows reference XRD patterns for Se and Te from the Inorganic Crystal Structure
Database (ICSD), collection codes 40018 (Se) and 65692 (Te). Since the two have the
Figure 24: Reference XRD patterns for Se and Te, which have the same crystal structure. The
indexes for the peaks of Se are shown. The lattice constants of Te are slightly larger than Se so
the peaks are similar but shifted to lower angles.
same space group the patterns are very similar. Te has slightly larger lattice constants so
the peaks are generally shifted to lower angles compared to Se.
Figure 25 and 26 shows measured background patterns of SLG and FTO respectively.
Figure 25: Background XRD patterns of SLG
Figure 26: Background XRD patterns of FTO
SLG is amorphous and has one very broad "peak" that is not very intense. FTO is
crystalline, and has peaks accordingly. The crystal is thick enough to mostly screen the
SLG underneath.
Page 36 of 47
==PAGE:38==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
Figure 27: Background XRD patterns of a (100) silicon wafer.
Figure 27 shows the measured pattern of a (100) silicon wafer used to find the instrumental
brodening, FWHM0. The (400) peak is very intense, and is used for this purpose. Other
reflections are minimal due to extinction rules.
Page 37 of 47
==PAGE:39==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
B.2
Surface morphology
Figure 28 shows SEM images of the 8 different Te/Se films with varying Te content and
annealing time.
The films are covering the entire surface with crystal grains around 0.1−1 µm. The crystal
grain size increase with annealing time. The annealing dependence has been observed
before [55].
Figure 29 shows AFM scans of these same films.
There is a very similar trend in the AFM and SEM scans. Longer time leads to larger
grains and higher roughness. Increased Te atomic % leads to smaller grains.
Page 38 of 47
==PAGE:40==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
(a) 0.3 %, 4 min
(b) 0.3 %, 15 min
(c) 4 %, 4 min
(d) 4 %, 15 min
(e) 8 %, 4 min
(f) 8 %, 15 min
(g) 12 %, 4 min
(h) 12 %, 15 min
Figure 28: SEM images of the alloyed film with varying Te content and annealing time. The
crystal grain size increases with annealing time.
Page 39 of 47
==PAGE:41==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
(a) 0.3 %, 4 min
(b) 0.3 %, 15 min
(c) 4 %, 4 min
(d) 4 %, 15 min
(e) 8 %, 4 min
(f) 8 %, 15 min
(g) 12 %, 4 min
(h) 12 %, 15 min
Figure 29: AFM images of the alloyed film with varying Te content and annealing time. The
crystal grain size increases with annealing time.
Page 40 of 47
==PAGE:42==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
B.3
Transmission through cracks
Figure 30 shows UV-Vis transmission measurements of Te/Se/Te films annealed at 210 ◦C
for different amounts of time.
Figure 30: UV-Vis transmittance measurements of Te/Se/Te films annealed at 210 ◦C for
different periods of time.
With increased annealing time there is a significant increase in transmission above the
band gap. This is likely because of the large cracks formed in the film which can be seen
in figure 13.
Page 41 of 47
==PAGE:43==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
B.4
Bias Dependent Sigmoid Analysis
The sigmoid analyses were performed on the negatively biased devices. For poor performing
devices the shape of the EQE is highly affected by the bias, and only at negative bias
does it resemble a sigmoid function. Figure 31 shows the bias dependence of the fitted
parameters for a Te/Se device.
Figure 31: Bias dependence of the parameters of the sigmoid analysis
The strong bias dependence is not a good sign. It signals bad FF and Rsh. It does however
look like the parameters are converging when negative bias is applied. Therefore negative
bias was used when determining the parameters, but care was also taken to not expose
the devices to too high negative bias.
Page 42 of 47
==PAGE:44==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
C
Code Listing
Below is the Python script used for sigmoid analysis of the EQE curves. It uses the SciPy
curve fitting to fit eq. (11).
1
# -*- coding: utf -8
-*-
2
"""
3
Created on Fri May 24 14:05:58
2024
4
5
@author: s194111
6
7
EQE
analyser
8
"""
9
10
import
numpy as np
11
import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
12
import
pandas as pd
13
from
scipy.optimize
import
curve_fit
14
import
tkinter as tk
15
from
tkinter
import
filedialog
16
17
def
open_file_dialog ():
18
root = tk.Tk()
19
root.withdraw ()
# Hide the main
window
20
filepaths = filedialog. askopenfilenames ()
# Open the file
dialog
21
return
filepaths
22
23
EQEpaths = open_file_dialog ()
24
25
print(’A\tlg\tls\tEg’)
26
print(’%\tnm\tnm\teV’)
27
for
EQEpath in EQEpaths:
28
### Read the data
29
name = (EQEpath.split(’/’)[-1]).split(’ ’)[ -1][: -4]
30
rawData = pd.read_csv(EQEpath , sep = ’\t’, usecols =(0 ,1))[: -17]
31
data = np.array(rawData , dtype=float)
32
l = data [:,0]
33
EQE = data [:,1]
34
35
### Sigmoid
function
for
fitting
36
k = np.log (7+4* np.sqrt (3))
37
def
sigmoid(l,A,lg ,ls):
38
return A/(1+ np.exp(k*(l-lg)/ls))
39
40
### Curve
fitting
41
llim , ulim = 20, 120 # Limits for the data
42
popt , pcov = curve_fit(sigmoid , l[llim:ulim], EQE[llim:ulim],
bounds =([0 ,300 ,0] ,[100 ,900 ,300]))
43
A,lg ,ls = popt # Fitted
parameters
44
Eg = 1240/ lg
45
46
### Plotting
the EQE and fitted
sigmoid
47
plt.figure ()
48
plt.plot(l,EQE ,’bo’, label=name)
49
plt.plot(l[llim:ulim],sigmoid(l[llim:ulim], A, lg , ls),’r-’, label=
’Sigmoid
Fit’)
50
plt.xlim (300 ,900)
51
plt.ylim (0 ,80)
Page 43 of 47
==PAGE:45==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
52
plt.xlabel(’Wavelength (nm)’)
53
plt.ylabel(’EQE (%)’)
54
plt.legend(loc=’upper
right ’)
55
plt.show ()
56
57
### Print
fitted
parameters
58
print(f’{A:.4}\t{lg :.4}\t{ls :.4}\t{Eg :.4}\t{name}’)
Listing 1: EQE Sigmoid Analysis
Page 44 of 47
==PAGE:46==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
Below is the Python script used for finding the performance parameters from the IV
curves. The IV curves are normalized using Jsc from the EQE curves. Voc, Rs, and Rsh
are found by linear fitting around the OC and SC points. PCE and FF are found simply
through the maximum of P. This could alternatively be done with a parabolic fit around
the MP point.
1
# -*- coding: utf -8
-*-
2
"""
3
Created on Sun May
5 12:02:25
2024
4
5
@author: s194111
6
7
IV analyser
8
"""
9
10
import os
11
import
numpy as np
12
import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
13
import
pandas as pd
14
15
def
analyseIV(datapath ,batchID ,sampleID ,skipfirst=False):
16
IVpath = ’/’.join ([ datapath ,’IV’,batchID ])
17
18
EQEpath = ’/’.join ([ datapath ,’EQE’,batchID ])
19
20
for p in os.listdir(IVpath):
21
if ((p.find(sampleID) !=
-1) and (p.find(’light ’) !=
-1)) and (
not
skipfirst):
22
samplepath = p
23
break
24
elif ((p.find(sampleID) !=
-1) and (p.find(’light ’) !=
-1)) and
skipfirst:
25
skipfirst = False
26
27
IVpath = ’/’.join ([IVpath ,samplepath ])
28
29
### Read the data
30
rawData = pd.read_csv(IVpath , sep = ’\t’, skiprows =5)
31
data = np.array(rawData)
32
33
### Cut of forward
measurement
34
IVfile = open(IVpath ,’r’)
35
IVlines = IVfile.readlines ()
36
37
if IVlines [3]. find(’REVERSE + FORWARD ’) !=
-1:
38
data = data [:int(len(data)/2)]
39
40
IVfile.close ()
41
42
43
### Fetch jsc from EQE file
44
for i, p in enumerate(os.listdir(EQEpath)):
45
if (p.find(sampleID) !=
-1) and (p.find(’_0V’) !=
-1):
46
EQEpath = ’/’.join ([ EQEpath ,p])
47
EQEfile = open(EQEpath)
48
break
49
jline = EQEfile.readlines ()[-16]
50
jsc = float(jline [15:19])
Page 45 of 47
==PAGE:47==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
51
52
V = data [:,0]
53
I = data [:,1]
54
55
### Finding Voc and Rs with a linear fit around the open
circuit
point
56
OCindex = np.argmin(np.abs(I))
57
OCa , OCb = np.polyfit(V[OCindex -2: OCindex +3],I[OCindex -2: OCindex
+3] ,1)
58
Voc = -OCb/OCa
59
Rs =
-1/OCa
60
61
### Finding Isc and Rsh with a linear fit around the short
circuit
point
62
SCindex = np.argmin(np.abs(V))
63
SCa , SCb = np.polyfit(V[SCindex -2: SCindex +3],I[SCindex -2: SCindex
+3] ,1)
64
Isc = SCb
65
Rsh =
-1/SCa
66
67
### Calculate
current
density
and power
density
68
j = I/Isc*jsc
69
P = V*j
70
71
### Maximum
power
point
72
MPP = np.argmax(P)
73
Vmpp = V[MPP]
74
jmpp = j[MPP]
75
Pmpp = P[MPP]
76
77
FF = Pmpp /(Voc*jsc)*100
78
79
### Print
parameters
80
print(f’{Pmpp :.4}\t{Voc :.4}\t{jsc :.4}\t{FF :.4}\t{Rs :.4}\t{Rsh :.4} ’)
81
82
### Plot the IV curve
83
plt.figure(dpi =128)
84
plt.plot(V,j,’ko’,label=sampleID)
85
plt.plot(V,P,’ro’)
86
plt.xlim(min(V),max(V))
87
plt.ylim(-jsc ,2* jsc)
88
plt.hlines (0,min(V),max(V),’k’,alpha =0.2)
89
plt.vlines(0,-jsc ,2*jsc ,’k’,alpha =0.2)
90
plt.legend ()
91
plt.show ()
92
### end of IV -analyser
function
###
93
94
datapath = ’Path to data
folder
here ’
95
batchID = ’Batch ID here ’
96
97
print(f’IV analysis of {batchID}’)
98
print(’PCE\tVoc\tjsc\tFF\tRs\tRsh ’)
99
print(’%\tV\tmA/cm2\t%\ tOhm\tOhm ’)
100
for i in range (1 ,10):
101
sampleID = batchID+’-’+str(i)
102
try:
103
analyseIV(datapath , batchID , sampleID , skipfirst=False)
104
except:
Page 46 of 47
==PAGE:48==
Tobias H. Hemmingsen, s194111
Master Thesis
105
print(f’Error
occured
while
analysing {sampleID}’)
Listing 2: IV Curve Analysis
Page 47 of 47
