==PAGE:1==
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive
T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Master Thesis in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Author:
Supervisors:
Kamille Mercedes Kranker, s184255
Professor Sunil Kumar Saini
Research Assistant Konstantin Danilov
June 29th 2024
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Experimental & Translational Immunology
T-Cell Antigens and Immunogenicity
SARS-CoV-2 specific activation of CD8+ T-cell
The MHC class I molecule on the antigen-presenting cell presents the SARS-CoV-2-derived epitope to the TCR on the
CD8+ T cell, with B7/CD28 co-stimulation and cytokine release leading to full activation. Epitopes are derived from
ORF1, nsp7 (PDB 6M5I), nucleocapsid (PDB 8FD5), and Spike (PDB 6VYB) proteins. Created with BioRender.com
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
DTU Health Tech
T-Cell Antigens and Immunogenicity
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Master Thesis in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
June 29th 2024
By:
Kamille Mercedes Kranker
Supervisor:
Professor Sunil Kumar Saini (sukusa@dtu.dk)
Research Assistant Konstantin Danilov (konda@dtu.dk)
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over a period of 5 months from 29-01-2024 to 29-06-2024.
The workload of this Master Thesis project is 30 ECTS points and represents the final part of
the degree Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng.) in Pharmaceutical Design and Engi-
neering at DTU. It has been carried out at the T-Cell Antigens and Immunogenicity research
group, Section for Experimental and Translational Immunology (xTI), Department of Health
Technology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to the following individuals who have supported
me throughout the journey of completing this project:
First and foremost, I am grateful to my supervisor, Sunil Kumar Saini, for your guidance and
for giving me the opportunity to join your research group. You and your research have been
an inspiration since I started my master in 2022.
A special thanks to Konstantin Danilov, for your invaluable guidance, support, and encour-
agement throughout this project. I am grateful for the time you have used helping me under-
stand the many aspects of scRNA-seq data analysis. I would also like to thank Darya Trubach
and Lasse Frank Voss for insightful input and feedback during project meetings.
I would like to express my gratitude to all members of the T-cells antigens and Immunogenic-
ity group as well as the T-cells and Cancer group for the scientific learning’s and for being so
welcoming throughout these months. To the other master students, Alberte and Oliver, for
your conversations and encouragement during the project.
Lastly, I extend my heartfelt appreciation to my friends and family, especially Peter, for your
feedback, support, and understanding during this educational journey.
This project would not have been possible without the support and contributions of each and
every individual mentioned above - Thank you!
Kamille Mercedes Kranker, s184255
June 29th 2024
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page iii of ix
==PAGE:6==
Page iv of ix
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The T-cell-mediated immune response to SARS-CoV-2 in hematological cancer patients is of
significant interest due to the immunocompromised nature within this patient group. It has
important implications for vaccination strategies, as these patients may not elicit as strong an
immune response following standard vaccination protocols. This project aimed to investigate
the CD8+ T-cell-specific response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and vaccination in hematological
cancer patients using a single-cell multi-omics approach. The project focused on enhancing
the understanding of the heterogeneity and dynamics of CD8+ T-cells by characterizing the
functional activity, phenotypic change, and clonal expansion by characterizing.
Utilizing multimodal single-cell sequencing with transcriptomic, surface protein, T-cell recep-
tor, and peptide-major histocompatibility complex (pMHC) data, a detailed profile of the indi-
vidual CD8+ T-cells was acquired. Additionally, Hashtag Oligonucleotides (HTOs) were used
for demultiplexing, enabling the accurate handling of samples from different time points
within the same experiment. The project emphasized the importance of iterative and thor-
ough data processing, including quality control, normalization, dimensionality reduction, in-
tegration, and clustering, to interpret single-cell data accurately.
The phenotypic and functional diversity of CD8+ T-cell populations in hematological cancer
patients was characterized during infection and vaccination. Two distinct effector memory
clusters were identified, each associated with specific viral targets: one cluster was specific
to SARS-CoV-2, while the other targeted Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and Influenza
(CEF). The SARS-CoV-2 specific effector memory cells displayed high levels of cytotoxic mark-
ers (GZMB, GZMH, GNLY) compared to the CEF-specific cells. T-cell receptor (TCR) sequence
analysis distinguished between clones present before infection (persistent) and those emerg-
ing after infection (emerging). Persistent clones exhibited higher cytotoxicity than emerging
clones, indicating a positive effect of vaccination. Additionally, a significant clonal expansion
of SARS-CoV-2-specific CD8+ T-cells was observed among the persistent clones during infec-
tion, suggesting that infection strongly drives clonal expansion.
This project highlights the value of single-cell multi-omics in understanding T-cell functional-
ity in hematological cancer patients. It emphasizes the complexity of multimodal single-cell
sequencing, the importance of careful experimental sample handling, and computational
data processing. Additionally, the project identifies a critical need for the development of
advanced processing tools, especially for emerging modalities such as pMHC, to improve
the reproducibility and reliability of the analysis. Finally, standardization of data processing
methodologies could further contribute to these advancements. The findings of the project
indicate an enhanced immune response to SARS-CoV-2 in hematological cancer patients after
vaccination and additional booster doses, as the CD8+ T-cells attain highly cytotoxic function-
ality. The understanding gained during the project could serve as a basis for future research
on the immune response of hematological cancer patients. Expanding sample sizes will be
interesting for better understanding the early immune response during vaccination and for
validating these findings across a broader population. Furthermore, integrating these results
with other immunological data could offer a more comprehensive view of the immune re-
sponse in hematological cancer patients.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page v of ix
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
ACE2
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2
ADT
Antibody-derived tag
APCs
Antigen-presenting cells
ARDS
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
CD62L
L-selectin
CDR
Complementariry Determining Region
CEF
Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and Influenza
CLL
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
CLR
centered log ratio
COVID-19
Coronavirus disease 2019
DEA
Differential Expression Analysis
DEGs
Differentially expressed genes
FACS
Fluorescence activated cell sorting
GEX
Gene expression
GLM
Generalized Linear Model
GSEA
Gene set enrichment analysis
HLA
Human leukocyte antigen
HTO
Hashtag Oligonucleotide
IFNs
Interferons
MAIT
Mucosal Invariant T-cells
MDS
Myelodysplastic syndrome
MHC
Major histocompatibility complex
MSigDB
Molecular Signatures Database
NK cells
Natural Killer cells
NKT-cells
Natural Killer T-cells
ORFs
Open Reading Frames
PAMPs
Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns
PBMC
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
PCs
Principal Components
pDCs
plasmacytoid dendritic cells
Page vi of ix
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:9==
pMHC
Peptide-Major Histocompatibility Complex
PRRs
Pattern Recognition Receptors
QC
Quality Control
SARS-CoV-2
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
scRNA-seq
single-cell RNA sequencing
SPICA
Swiss portal for immune cell analysis
Tcm
Central memory T cells
TCR
T-cell receptor
Tem
Effector memory T cells
Tex
Terminally differentiated T cells
Tscm
Stem cell-like memory T cells
Trm
Tissue-resident memory T cells
UMAP
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
WNN
Weighted Nearest Neighbors
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page vii of ix
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Immune System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
T-cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
SARS-CoV-2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.1
Pathogenisis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.2
The SARS-CoV-2 Specific Immune Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.3
Vaccines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Hematological Malignancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3.1
COVID-19 in Hematological Cancer Patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Single Cell RNA sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.1
Computational framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Methodology
12
2.1
Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.1
Clinical samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.2
Experimental Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Computational methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Alignment and quantification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Transcriptional and Surface Protein Profiling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Clonal Profiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.4
Visualizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Results
19
3.1
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Demultiplexing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.3
Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.4
Dimensionality reduction and integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.5
Cluster Resolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Cell Type Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Cell Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Data Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.1
The Impact of CEF vs SARS-CoV-2 Response, Vaccination Doses and In-
fection Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.2
Variation in SARS-CoV-2 T-Cell Responses Across Vaccination Doses and
Infection Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.3
Phenotypic differences in Spike vs non-Spike T-cells
. . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4.4
Differential T-Cell Responses in SARS-CoV-2 Patients Across Vaccination
Numbers and Infection Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Page viii of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:11==
3.4.5
SARS-CoV-2 Epitope GVYFASTEK Mimics CEF Effector Functions . . . . . .
39
4
Discussion
41
5
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
A
Appendix
51
A.1
Cell Numbers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.2
Sample information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.3
CITE-seq antibody panel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.4
Gene sets for FGSEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.5
Peptide MHC Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.6
Additional Plots - Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.7
Additional Plots - Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page ix of ix
==PAGE:12==
Page x of ix
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has underscored the importance of a robust public
health infrastructure during a pandemic, with almost 775 mio. cases and more than 7 mio.
deaths reported globally [1]. Measures such as lockdowns, social distancing, and vaccination
have been instrumental in reducing the spread of the virus. Although the current infection
rates are lower and the pandemic is no longer a global health emergency, the Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) responsible for COVID-19 persists. Hence,
the risk of infection remains and is of concern, especially for immunocompromised individu-
als such as hematological cancer patients [2].
Hematological cancer patients are more susceptible to infection and have an increased risk of
severe disease and death from infection. While vaccination offers protection, their weakened
immune system often results in reduced vaccine efficacy [3, 4]. Among the various compo-
nents of the immune system, the T-cells are proposed to be the major mediators of disease
control, where a high expression of CD8+ T-cells are correlated with improved outcome and
immunological memory [5, 6]. However, knowledge regarding T-cell-mediated immunity is
still limited for hematological cancer patients [7].
The aim of the project is, therefore, to explore the T-cell-specific response to SARS-CoV-2 infec-
tion and vaccination in hematological cancer patients by characterizing the heterogeneity and
dynamics of CD8+ T-cell populations at the single-cell level. The analysis will focus on pheno-
type change, clonal expansion, functional activity, and a comparative analysis with previously
elicited T-cell responses. The analysis is carried out with a single-cell multi-omics approach,
which allows the characterization of cellular diversity based on both transcriptomic-, surface
protein-, and T-cell receptor (TCR) profiles. Additionally, the project aims to deepen the under-
standing of the technical processes involved in single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) anal-
ysis, ensuring accurate interpretation of the sequencing data. Enhancing the understanding
of the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in hematological cancer patients is es-
sential for effective vaccine recommendations and could potentially reduce the incidence of
infection, severe disease, and infection-related deaths.
1.1
The Immune System
The immune system functions to defend the body against infectious pathogens such as viruses.
It comprises two main branches: innate and adaptive immunity [8]. The innate immune sys-
tem is the first line of defense and relies on common pathogenic structures to become ac-
tivated. These structures are called Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs) and
are recognized by Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) on the innate immune cells. This
recognition facilitates an immediate, antigen-independent, thus non-specific, defense against
pathogens. Numerous cells are involved in the innate immune response, such as macrophages,
neutrophils, dendritic cells, Natural Killer cells (NK cells), and several types of granulocytes.
The cells have different roles, but collectively, they combat the pathogen via phagocytosis,
cell lysis, and antigen presentation, which activates the adaptive immune response [8, 9].
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 1 of 70
==PAGE:14==
1 Introduction
1.1 The Immune System
In contrast to the innate immune response, the adaptive requires time to mount and will
develop throughout life, owning its name as the acquired immune response. It is antigen-
dependent, antigen-specific, and can create immunological memory [8]. The adaptive im-
mune response consists of humoral and cellular components. Humoral immunity is medi-
ated by B-cell antibody production, and cellular immunity is mediated by T-cells. Upon activa-
tion, the B-cells will differentiate into plasma cells, which can secrete antibodies, protecting
against pathogens by neutralization, opsonization, and complement activation [8, 9]. T-cells
are differentiated into two main groups: the CD4+ T-cells and the CD8+ T-cells. The CD4+
T-cells are also called helper T-cells as they help or regulate both the humoral and cellular
immune responses [8]. CD8+ T-cells are called cytotoxic T-cells and carry out their effec-
tor functions by secreting cytotoxic granules containing proteins such as perforin, granzyme,
and granulysin, which induce apoptosis of the pathogen-infected cells. After clearance of
the pathogen, a subset of the B- and T-cells will differentiate into memory cells, facilitating a
more rapid and efficient response upon re-exposure to pathogens. The exact mechanism of
protection varies depending on the type of pathogen encountered [10].
1.1.1
T-cells
T-cells are the major drivers against viral infection due to their ability to fight intracellular
pathogens and establish long-term immunity. Several T-cell subtypes exist with different
phenotypes and functions. They are best described by their different functional stages, from
development through activation to their effector roles and memory formation [10].
Development
T-cells arise from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow, which differentiate into,
among others, T-cell progenitors. The T-cell progenitors migrate to the thymus, where they
undergo several developmental stages to become naive, single-positive CD8+ or CD4+ T-cells.
A major part of the T-cell development is the formation of the TCR, the unique antigen-binding
receptor responsible for the highly specific recognition of pathogenic epitopes presented by
the Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) (known as Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)s in
human) [10, 11]. This is accomplished through a process called V(D)J recombination, which
will be described in the later section 1.1.1 The T-cell receptor. After successful recombina-
tion, the TCR is presented on the T-cell surface, ready for the positive and negative selection
processes. Positive selection ensures that only the T-cells capable of recognizing self-peptide-
MHC complexes receive survival signals. In contrast, negative selection will eliminate T-cells
that bind with high affinity to self-antigens [10]. This ensures that only self-tolerant T-cells,
able to recognize self-MHCs, survive. The surviving cells differentiate into naive CD4+ or CD8+
T-cells, ready to exit the thymus and patrol the peripheral lymphoid organs [10, 11]. This
project focuses on viral infection, primarily eliminated through the cell-mediated response
driven by CD8+ T-cells, which will be described in the following section.
Activation
When naive T-cells encounter their target antigen they undergo clonal expansion and differen-
tiate into effector and memory T-cells. To ensure proper activation and avoid inappropriate
responses, several signals are required (see figure 1.1) [11, 12].
Page 2 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:15==
1.1 The Immune System
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1:
CD8+ T-cell activation signals
including Peptide-Major Histocompatibility Com-
plex (pMHC):TCR binding enhanced by CD8, co-
stimulatory signal from B7:CD28 interactions and
cytokines (often IL-2 and IL-12). Additionally, the 4-
1BBL:4-1BB interaction stimulated by CD4+ T-cells
[12]. Modified from Biorender.com
The first signal involves the recognition of a
peptide from the target antigen, presented
by the MHC on the surface of Antigen-
presenting cells (APCs).
This recognition
is mediated by the TCR and enhanced by
the CD8 receptor.
The second signal is
co-stimulation provided by the interaction
of CD28 on T-cells with B7 (CD80/CD86)
molecules on APCs. This signal prevents an-
ergy and promotes survival and full activa-
tion.
The third signal is the cytokine envi-
ronment, which determines the differentia-
tion of the T-cells [11, 13]. In most infections,
the CD8+ T-cells require additional signaling.
This is provided by the CD4+ T-cells, which
interact with the APCs, leading to an increase of B7 and 4-1BBL, which offers additional co-
stimulation for the naive CD8+ T-cell [12].
Activated CD8+ T-cells can directly eliminate infected cells through the Fas-FasL interaction
or by releasing perforin, which creates pores in the target cells and allows the delivery of
granzymes to induce apoptosis. Additionally, they secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines to
inhibit viral replication and chemokines to attract other immune cells to the infection site.
Upon continuous antigen stimulation, the T-cells can become exhausted and gradually lose
cytotoxic functions and memory potential; these cells can also be termed Terminally differ-
entiated T cells (Tex). Most of the effector T-cell populations are short-lived and will undergo
apoptosis after clearance of infection [10, 11].
Memory
After the clearance of infection, a small proportion of effector T-cells differentiate into long-
lived, antigen-specific memory T-cells. These memory T-cells respond quickly upon subse-
quent encounters with the same pathogen. There are various types of memory T-cells, in-
cluding Stem cell-like memory T cells (Tscm), Central memory T cells (Tcm), Effector mem-
ory T cells (Tem), Tissue-resident memory T cells (Trm). This project will focus on the central
memory-like and effector memory-like subsets, characterized by distinct phenotypic features
reflecting differences in function, proliferative capacity, and homing behavior [14].
Tcm have a lower cytotoxic capacity than Tem, but contribute to a long-lived immune re-
sponse with their high proliferative potential. They primarily reside in the secondary lym-
phoid tissue, such as the lymph node, and express homing-receptors CCR7 and L-selectin
(CD62L), which allows them to circulate the lymphatic system and interact with APCs. Upon
re-exposure to antigen, they rapidly expand and differentiate into effector T-cells [10, 14, 15].
Tem are essential for a rapid response to re-infection, as they are capable of immediate effec-
tor functions. They are more differentiated than Tcm and can secrete inflammatory cytokines
to sustain direct cytotoxicity. They have a shorter lifespan relative to Tcm and lower prolifer-
ative potential. They reside in the peripheral tissues and express chemokines such as CCR5
and CXCR3, which makes them able to migrate to inflamed tissues [10, 14, 15].
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 3 of 70
==PAGE:16==
1 Introduction
1.1 The Immune System
In summary, the two subtypes complement each other in a robust immune response, where
the Tem are important in the immediate response to re-exposure and Tcm are important for
the long-term immunity [14, 15].
Phenotypes
The T-cells are dynamic and change phenotypic traits depending on their developmental
stage and function (see table 1.1). The phenotype is, therefore, an indication of the functional
state and role within the immune system.
In addition to the different common T-cells, distinct categories of invariant T-cells exist. These
cells can recognize non-peptide antigens, show limited diversity in the TCR and show some
resemblance to innate-like cells. They include Natural Killer T-cells (NKT-cells) and Mucosal
Invariant T-cells (MAIT). Each exhibits unique phenotypic traits (see table 1.1) and functions.
NKT-cells recognize lipid-based antigens presented by the CD1d MHC class I molecules. MAIT-
cells are important mediators of early T-cell response, especially in the lung tissue; they rec-
ognize microbial vitamin B metabolites presented by MR1 MHC class I molecules [16].
Table 1.1: Phenotypic, Surface, and Transcriptional Markers of T-cell Subtypes in-
cluding naive T-cell (Tn), central memory T-cell (Tcm), effector memory T-cell (Tem), effec-
tor T-cell (Te), exhausted T-cell (Tex), Mucocal invariant T-cell (MAIT), natural killer T-cell
(NKT) [17, 18, 19, 20].
Tn
Tcm
Tem
Te
Tex
MAIT
NKT
Lineage markers
CD3
CD8
CD3
CD8
CD3
CD8
CD3
CD8
CD3
CD8
CD3
CD8
CD3
CD8 or
CD4
Surface markers
CD27
CD45RA
CD62L
CD127
CD69
CD95
CCR7
CD31
CD27
CD45RO
CD62L
CD28
CD95
CCR7
CD73
CD27
CD45RO
CD95
CD57
KLRG1
CD195
CX3CR1
CD28
CD127
CD27
CD45RO
CD95
CD69
KLRG1
CX3CR1
CD38
CD26
CD279
CD152
TIGIT
CD39
CD38
CD57
CD73
CD161
CD26
CD196
CD28
CD127
CD161
CD56
CD94
CD335
CD158b
CD328
CD11c
CD158e1
CD158
Transcriptional markers
TCF7 LEF1
BCL2
KLF2 IL7R
FOS
CEBPD
KLF2
BACH2
TCF7 LEF1
BCL2
EOMES
CCR7
BACH2
ID2
RUNX2
GATA3
TBX21
EOMES
PRDM1
IFNG
ZNF683
GZMK
CXCR3
KLRG1
CCL5
TBX21
EOMES
IRF4
GZMB
PRF1
GNLY LTB
KLRG1
CCL5
IFNG
TOX NFAT
BATF
EOMES
TBX21
PDCD1
FOXP3
CTLA4
GZMB
LAG3
HAVCR2
RORC
ZBTB16
TBX21
IL18R1
KLRB1
PLZF
ZBTB16
RORA
CXCR6
IL7R
ZBTB16
TBX21
GATA3
EOMES
IFNG IL4
PLZF
NKG7
GNLY
Page 4 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:17==
1.1 The Immune System
1 Introduction
The T-cell receptor
The TCR consists of two chains, with most T-cells having an α chain and a β chain. These
chains are created through a process called V(D)J recombination (see figure 1.2), where the
variable (V), diversity (D) (specific for the β chain), and joining (J) gene segments are randomly
reorganized [11, 21]. This rearrangement results in a unique TCR for each T-cell clone, lead-
ing to a wide TCR repertoire capable of recognizing many pathogens. The development of
such a diverse set of TCRs is crucial for the adaptive immune system’s ability to combat the
numerous pathogens encountered over a lifetime [22].
Figure 1.2: TCR α/β V(D)J recombination occurs at the DNA, RNA, and protein levels. In germline
DNA, the α chain has multiple variable (Vα) and joining (Jα) segments followed by
a constant (Cα) segment, while the β chain has Vβ, diversity (Dβ), and Jβ segments
followed by Cβ segments. Recombination joins specific V, D, and J segments to form
rearranged DNA. Transcription of rearranged DNA produces primary RNA transcripts,
spliced to remove introns, forming mature mRNA.Translation of mRNA produces the
TCR polypeptide chains. Modified from BioRender.com
Each TCR chain consists of three Complementariry Determining Region (CDR) loops which
define the TCR antigen-binding site. The CDR1 and CDR2 primarily interact with the MHC,
while the CDR3 recognizes and binds the specific peptide presented on the MHC. Research
suggests that the CDRs undergo structural adaptations during TCR-peptide-MHC interactions
to fit the peptide-MHC complex, with CDR3 showing the most significant changes. Due to its
variability and adaptability, CDR3 is often called the hypervariable region and is important in
determining the TCR’s clonotype [21, 22].
Cross-reactivity
The hypervariable CDR3 region allows TCRs to adapt their conformation to bind various pep-
tides with similar structures. This adaptability facilitates the recognition of multiple Peptide-
Major Histocompatibility Complex (pMHC) complexes by a single TCR, expanding the range
of antigens the T-cell can respond to. This is referred to as cross-reactivity, and studies indi-
cate that a single TCR can recognize between 10,000 and 10 million different MHC-associated
epitopes. This capability allows a limited repertoire of TCRs to protect against many different
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 5 of 70
==PAGE:18==
1 Introduction
1.2 SARS-CoV-2
pathogens [22]. Despite the broad potential, TCR recognition remains highly specific. Once
a TCR binds to a particular pMHC complex, its likelihood of reacting with another randomly
chosen peptide is considerably reduced. Nevertheless, cross-reactive T-cells can recognize
previously unencountered pathogens and thereby elicit a rapid immune response [21, 22].
1.2
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the Coronaviridae family and shares structural similarities with other
coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. SARS-CoV-2 primarily infects respiratory ep-
ithelial cells, leading to a range of symptoms from mild respiratory distress to severe pneu-
monia and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) [23, 24].
SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped virus with a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA genome of ap-
proximately 30 kb (see figure 1.3). The genome includes a 5’ cap and a 3’ poly A tail, contain-
ing 14 Open Reading Frames (ORFs) that encode structural, non-structural, and accessory
proteins [23]. The accessory proteins (ORF3, ORF6, ORF7, and ORF8) are not essential for
replication but have shown immunoevasive activities. The largest gene, ORF1ab, encodes a
polyprotein cleaved into 16 non-structural proteins involved in replication and transcription.
Structural proteins include the spike glycoprotein, membrane glycoprotein, envelope protein,
and nucleocapsid phosphoprotein [23, 25]. The spike protein facilitates viral entry into host
cells by binding to the Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor and is the primary
target for neutralizing antibodies. The envelope and membrane proteins are involved in virus
assembly and release. In contrast, the nucleocapsid protein binds to the viral RNA, playing a
critical role in viral replication and transcription [23, 24].
Figure 1.3: Genomic Organization and Structure of SARS-Cov-2. The first and largest part of
the genome consists of ORF1a and ORF1b, it encodes the non-structural proteins.
The 3’end encodes the structural spike (S) protein, envelope (E) protein, membrane
(M) protein, and nucleocapsid (N) protein and the accessory proteins encoded by
ORF3, ORF6, ORF7, ORF8, and ORF10 [25]. Created with BioRender.com
1.2.1
Pathogenisis
SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis begins with the virus binding to the ACE2 receptor on the surface of
host cells, primarily in the respiratory tract. The spike glycoprotein of the virus facilitates this
interaction. Following attachment, the spike protein undergoes proteolytic cleavage by host
Page 6 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:19==
1.2 SARS-CoV-2
1 Introduction
cell proteases, enabling the viral envelope to be fused with the host cell membrane, allowing
the viral RNA to enter the host cell cytoplasm [23]. Once inside the cell, the viral genome is
replicated and transcribed into mRNAs, which are then translated into viral proteins. Newly
synthesized viral RNA and structural proteins assemble into new virions in the endoplasmic
reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment. The assembled virions are transported to the
cell surface in vesicles and released by exocytosis, ready to infect new cells. This process
leads to host cell damage and triggers an immune response [23, 24].
1.2.2
The SARS-CoV-2 Specific Immune Response
The immune response to SARS-CoV-2 follows the general pattern of immune responses to
viruses (see section 1.1), involving a rapid containment phase mediated by innate immunity
and a more specialized adaptive immune response. However, specific aspects of the immune
response to SARS-CoV-2 are particularly important.
The Innate Immune Response
Type I Interferons (IFNs), mainly produced by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), play a cru-
cial role in the antiviral response. They block viral entry and trafficking, degrade viral ge-
netic material, enhance antigen presentation, inhibit protein synthesis, induce apoptosis of
infected cells, and activate macrophages, NK cells, and T cells. PRRs like RIG-I, MDA-5, and
TLRs 7 and 8 activate signaling cascades, leading to the production of proinflammatory cy-
tokines and Type I IFNs [24, 26].
In most COVID-19 patients, the recruited immune cells effectively control the infection in the
pulmonary tissue, leading to the termination of the immune response and recovery. Com-
mon symptoms might show in these cases, including fever, cough, fatigue, loss of taste or
smell, and myalgia [24]. However, in a subset of patients, SARS-CoV-2 evades innate immu-
nity, triggering a delayed Type I IFN production and excessive recruitment of proinflamma-
tory cells, which can lead to lung dysfunction and severe outcomes, such as pneumonia,
ARDS, septic shock, and multi-organ failure. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have shown mecha-
nisms to dampen early Type I IFN responses, and similar evasion tactics might be present in
SARS-CoV-2 [5, 24].
The Adaptive Immune Response
Adaptive immune responses involve virus-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells, Type 1 CD4+ T helper
cells, antibody-producing plasma cells, and memory T and B cells. Remarkably reduced T-cell
counts, lymphopenia, has been linked to severe COVID-19. Dysregulation of T-cell responses
may play a pivotal role in disease severity, leading to poorer outcomes in older adults and
immunocompromised individuals [27, 28].
Both humoral and cellular responses are crucial for long-term protection. While antibodies
are important in neutralizing the virus and preventing reinfection, the T-cells are important
in directly killing the viral infected cells. Different effector cytokines have been related to
cytotoxic activity against SARS-CoV-2, including IFN-γ, TNF-α and granzyme B (GZMB) [27].
Studies have shown that T-cell responses, particularly those involving memory T-cells, are
essential for sustained immune protection against SARS-CoV-2. Memory T-cells can quickly
respond to subsequent exposures to the virus, providing long-lasting immunity and aiding in
the control of the infection [6, 27].
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 7 of 70
==PAGE:20==
1 Introduction
1.3 Hematological Malignancies
Cross-reactivity
The structural similarity between SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses might be a source of
cross-reactive immune responses. Cross-reactive immune responses may affect disease out-
comes, either promoting protection or disease severity, depending on the origin of the cross-
reactive immune cells [26, 29].
Several studies have shown immune reactivity to SARS-CoV-2 epitopes in pre-pandemic sam-
ples [29, 30]. Most studies have focused on the cross-reactivity between SARS-CoV-2 and
other coronaviruses or influenza due to the inherent similarity [30]. However, cross-reactive
CMV-specific T-cells have been detected, suggesting that previous exposure to CMV might
influence the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 [31]. This cross-reactivity could potentially
affect the severity of COVID-19 and the overall immune response, although the exact impli-
cations are still being studied. Understanding these cross-reactive immune responses may
help explain the heterogeneity of clinical outcomes in COVID-19 and inform the development
of vaccines that provide broad protection against diverse coronaviruses [26, 29].
1.2.3
Vaccines
The development of vaccines has been essential in controlling the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and
reducing severe disease, hospitalizations, and deaths. Vaccination aims to mimic natural in-
fection by inducing a robust and long-lasting immune memory without causing disease [32].
Most vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 target the spike protein to elicit strong neutralizing anti-
body responses and T-cell immunity. However, the frequent mutations in the spike protein
pose challenges for vaccine efficacy, necessitating ongoing adaptation of vaccine formula-
tions and booster strategies to maintain protection against emerging variants. Continued re-
search and development of pan-coronavirus vaccines targeting other proteins hold promise
for broader and more durable immunity [26, 33].
1.3
Hematological Malignancies
Hematological cancers, such as Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and Myelodysplastic syn-
drome (MDS), significantly impair the immune system. These cancers disrupt the normal
production and function of blood cells, leading to immunodeficiency. The weakened immune
response in these patients can leave patients vulnerable to infections, including SARS-CoV-2,
and lead to more severe outcomes and complications due to their inability to mount an ef-
fective immune defense.
CLL is the most common form of leukemia in adults. The immune system is compromised
due to the proliferation of dysfunctional B-cells, which results in inadequate antibody pro-
duction, crowds out healthy cells, and impairs the ability to fight infections. This leads to
increased number of deficient monocytes, NK cells, and neutrophils. Increased levels of de-
ficient T-cells with impaired cell-cell interactions and reduced cytokine production [34, 35]
further compromise the immune response.
MDS is a group of disorders of the hematopoietic stem cells, which results in ineffective
hematopoiesis, causing blood reduction in the number of blood cells, known as cytopenias.
It is characterized by extensive apoptosis of hematopoietic cells and immune dysregulation
caused by factors such as abnormal cytokine production. This immune dysregulation is a
major cause of apoptosis and escape from immune surveillance in MDS [36, 37].
Page 8 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Single Cell RNA sequencing
1 Introduction
1.3.1
COVID-19 in Hematological Cancer Patients
Hematological cancer patients are at an increased risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes, in-
cluding higher rates of hospitalization and mortality, due to both disease-related immune
dysfunction and treatment-induced immunosuppression. These patients often experience
complications such as prolonged viral shedding and secondary bacterial infections, exacer-
bating the severity of their illness [7, 38]. The immune response to COVID-19 vaccination in
these patients is also suboptimal, with lower rates of seroconversion, reduced production of
antigen-specific antibodies, and impaired T-cell responses [39, 40]
Although the rapid development of mRNA vaccines has been pivotal in the fight against COVID-
19, their effectiveness varies among immunocompromised patients [40]. For instance, mRNA
vaccines like those from Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna have demonstrated significant effi-
cacy in the general population, but their performance in hematological cancer patients is
less robust, necessitating ongoing research and adaptation of vaccination protocols [7]. For
instance, studies have shown that patients with hematological malignancies, especially those
undergoing active treatment, exhibit significantly diminished antibody responses to COVID-
19 vaccines [40, 41]. This underscores the necessity for tailored vaccination strategies, such
as more frequent booster doses and detailed monitoring of immune responses to enhance
protection against SARS-CoV-2 [40, 42].
1.4
Single Cell RNA sequencing
scRNA-seq allows detailed analysis of individual cells, resolving cellular heterogeneity and
defining cellular differentiation stages. This is particularly advantageous in immunology, as
immune cell development, dynamics, and functional differentiation can be tracked. Com-
pared to other widely used methods in immunology research, such as bulk RNA sequencing
and flow cytometry, scRNA-seq can distinguish single cells while capturing variations in gene
expression across thousands of genes, thus measuring the transcriptome at a much larger
scale and resolution [43, 44].
There are two primary experimental workflows for scRNA-seq: droplet-based and plate-based
methods. Plate-based methods like Smartseq2 involve isolating single cells into individual
wells on a microplate. This method typically provides higher sensitivity and coverage of tran-
scriptomes than droplet-based approaches but at a lower throughput. Plate-based scRNA-
seq is advantageous when detecting rare cell types is required [44, 45]. Droplet-based scRNA-
seq, such as 10x Genomics, encapsulates individual cells in droplets with barcoded beads.
This high-throughput approach is suitable for profiling thousands of cells, making it ideal for
capturing the diversity of immune cell responses during vaccination [45, 46].
Recent advancements in scRNA-seq technologies have enabled the integration of multiple
modalities within a single experiment. Techniques like Cellular Indexing of Transcriptomes
and Epitopes by Sequencing (CITE-seq) merge transcriptomic data with surface protein ex-
pression, offering a more comprehensive profile of immune cells. This is especially useful for
studying T-cells, where surface markers are essential for identifying subsets and activation
states. Additionally, this approach leverages ubiquitous surface markers, facilitating sample
multiplexing using HTO [47]. Techniques like single-cell TCR sequencing (scTCR-seq) allow for
the simultaneous capture of TCR sequences and transcriptomic data, facilitating the study of
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 9 of 70
==PAGE:22==
1 Introduction
1.4 Single Cell RNA sequencing
TCR clonality and diversity. This is crucial for understanding the specificity and breadth of
T-cell responses to vaccination. Furthermore, technologies like peptide-MHC multimer stain-
ing combined with scRNA-seq can identify T-cells specific to particular antigens, providing
insights into the antigen-specific T-cell responses critical for vaccine efficacy [48].
1.4.1
Computational framework
The great potential of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has driven the development of
a wide array of computational tools designed to process and analyze the complex data gen-
erated by this technology. According to scRNA-tools.org [49], more than 1787 tools are now
available, each tailored to handle various aspects of scRNA-seq data processing and analysis
across different platforms and coding languages. Tools such as Seurat, Scanpy, and Single-
CellExperiment are widely used for data processing and some analytical tasks, providing the
necessary frameworks to manage the large and intricate datasets typical of scRNA-seq [50].
Ensuring a balance in processing is essential; too stringent quality control may lead to loss of
biological data, while too lenient criteria can make data annotation difficult [43].
Effective preprocessing of scRNA-seq data is critical to exclude technical variance and low-
quality cells without over-correcting and potentially discarding biologically relevant informa-
tion. The preprocessing pipeline typically involves five key steps: quality control, normal-
ization, feature selection, dimensionality reduction, and clustering and cell annotation [45,
50]. No standard parameters work for all data, and often, the data processing is an itera-
tive process where the results are to be re-assessed several times to get the best biological
representation of the data [50].
The first step of preprocessing is quality control, which involves removing low-quality cells
based on metrics such as the number of detected genes. Low counts may indicate empty
droplets or ambient RNA; high counts could suggest doublets or larger cells. High mitochon-
drial gene counts are also monitored, as they can indicate compromised cell integrity. [43,
50].
After quality control, the data should be normalized to remove technical variation. During
normalization, the data is scaled and transformed to adjust for differences in sequencing
depth and gene depth/library size to make gene expression comparable between cells and
within cells [45, 50].
Single-cell RNA data contains many genes, most of which have zero counts and some without
any relevant biological variation, which can be used to distinguish the cells. Feature selection
excludes uninformative genes, reducing computational load and focusing the analysis on rel-
evant biological variation [43, 50].
To simplify the complexity of the data and aid in visualization, dimensionality reduction tech-
niques are employed. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is commonly used to transform
the data into principal components (PCs) that capture the most variance. However, due to
the non-linear and sparse nature of scRNA-seq data, more advanced non-linear methods like
t-SNE or UMAP are often preferred for visualization [43, 45, 50].
Accurate cell annotation is crucial in scRNA-seq analysis for identifying and classifying cell
types based on gene expression profiles. This step is important for interpreting the biolog-
ical context of the data. Manual annotation, which involves clustering cells and identifying
Page 10 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:23==
1.4 Single Cell RNA sequencing
1 Introduction
differentially expressed genes, can be labor-intensive and error-prone. Here, automated an-
notation tools have been developed. While these tools effectively differentiate major cell
populations, annotating specific T-cell subtypes remains challenging due to their complex
and heterogeneous nature [50, 51].
In the context of T-cell analysis, the exclusion of TCR genes from the dataset is often necessary
to prevent bias in downstream analysis. TCR genes can dominate T-cell expression profiles
due to their high variability and expression levels. By excluding these genes, the focus shifts
to the overall transcriptomic landscape of T-cells, ensuring the analysis reflects broader gene
expression patterns rather than being skewed by TCR diversity. This step is particularly impor-
tant for accurately identifying and characterizing T-cell subtypes and their functional states
[52].
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 11 of 70
==PAGE:24==
2
Methodology
2.1
Experimental Design
The experimental part, including sample acquisition, evaluation, and preparation, was com-
pleted by a PhD student and will be briefly described below. Figure 2.1 summarizes the clinical
samples section, whereas figure 2.2 summarizes the experimental workflow section.
2.1.1
Clinical samples
The patient cohort consisted of 8 patients, of which six were diagnosed with CLL, and two
were diagnosed with MDS with a median age of 71 years. The patients were screened and
selected by attending physicians. The inclusion criteria were age above 18 years, a CLL or MDS
diagnosis, prioritized for vaccination, without prior COVID-19 infection, and without receiving
treatment affecting the immune system at the time of inclusion. All patients received two
doses of the BNT162b2 COVID-19 mRNA vaccine and either two (n=3) or three (=5) booster
vaccinations. Blood samples were collected at six time points (TP0-TP5): before vaccination
(TP0), 7-10 days after the first vaccination (TP1), two months after the first vaccination (TP2),
six months after the first vaccination (TP3), 12 months after the first vaccination (TP4), and
24 months after the first vaccination (TP5) (figure 2.1). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) were isolated from the blood, HLA genotyped, and cryopreserved.
26 samples were included in the study, distributed equally between patients with three (n=6)
or four (n=2) samples per patient. Samples from later time points were preferred to allow for
the assessment of breakthrough infection and included one sample from TP1, four from TP2,
six from TP3, eight from TP4, and seven from TP5.
Figure 2.1: Cohort Composition and Timeline for Sample Collection, Vaccination, and Break-
through Infections. The study cohort includes patients with CLL and MDS. All CLL pa-
tients received a fourth vaccination between TP3 and TP4 and a fifth vaccination between
TP4 and TP5, except PT28, for whom no sample (PT2805) was collected; thus, the fifth
vaccination for this patient is not accounted for. MDS patients received their fourth vacci-
nation between TP4 and TP5. Breakthrough infections occurred, as noted in the timeline.
Created using BioRender.com
2.1.2
Experimental Workflow
DNA-barcoded multimer libraries for peptides derived from SARS-CoV-2 and Cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-Barr virus, and Influenza (CEF) (table A.6 in appendix) were created following the
methods outlined by Bentzen et al. [53]. The CEF peptides were included to compare the
SARS-CoV-2 and CEF-reactive T-cells. The PBMCs were thawed, and for CLL samples, CD3+
T-cells were isolated; for MDS PBMCs were used without isolation.
Samples were stained with HLA-matched SARS-CoV-2 and CEF DNA-barcoded pMHC multi-
mers, cell hashing antibodies and DNA-barcoded antibodies specific for a set of surface mark-
ers (see table A.4). The pMHC multimer binding CD8+ T-cells were sorted using Fluorescence
Page 12 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Computational methods
2 Methodology
activated cell sorting (FACS). Sorted cells were processed using the Chromium Controller for
cell separation. scRNA and scTCR libraries were constructed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions protocol CG000330 RevF - Chromium Single Cell 5’ Kit v2 with Feature Barcoding
technology for Cell Surface Protein and Immune Receptor Mapping 10xGenomics - scImmune-
Profiling protocol. Sequencing was performed on Illumina Nova 6000 on a single chip in two
channels.
Figure 2.2: Experimental workflow of scRNA sequencing assay. 1) T-cells (for CLL patients) or
PBMCs (for MDS patients) are stained with Antibody-derived tag (ADT), Hashtag Oligonu-
cleotide (HTO), and pMHC, and 2) sorted for pMHC-specific CD8+ T-cells. 4) The cells are
isolated with microbeads in droplets with a microfluidic device and 5) lyzed to release
mRNA, and 6) the mRNA is hybridized to the microbeads to synthesize cDNA. 7) The
cDNA is amplified, sequencing libraries are constructed, 8) pooled and sequenced. The
sequencing data is input for the following computational workflow and analysis. Modi-
fied from BioRender.com
2.2
Computational methods
Except for the sequence alignment and quantification, all data was processed and analyzed
using R version 4.3.2 [54]. The initial processing was done for each sequenced channel sepa-
rately (see figure 2.3) and merged for joined analysis. All packages and dependencies used in
the project are managed with renv version 1.0.5 [55]. This package creates a project-specific
library and a lockfile (renv.lock) that captures the state of the project’s R environment, in-
cluding the packages and their versions, to enhance reproducibility. The R project, including
the environment and scripts, can be accessed at https://github.com/KamilleMercedes/scRNAseq.
The following sections describe the computational workflows in detail. Tidyverse 2.0.0 [56]
was used throughout the project for data tidying. Unless otherwise specified, all functions
were run with standard parameters.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 13 of 70
==PAGE:26==
2 Methodology
2.2 Computational methods
Figure 2.3: Computational workflow of the multimodal single-cell sequencing data processing and
analysis. Raw sequencing data are converted into count matrices of different features
for each cell, resulting in three count matrices for scRNA-seq (Gene), TCR (V(D)J), and HTO,
ADT, and pMHC (Antibody) analyses. Using the Seurat package, the data undergo back-
ground filtering to remove noise, demultiplexing to separate cells into samples, and qual-
ity control to filter out low-quality cells. The filtered data are then merged, annotated,
and normalized to ensure comparability across cells. PCA and UMAP are applied to re-
duce dimensionality and identify cell clusters, followed by batch correction to address
batch effects and accurately capture biological variation. The integrated data from RNA
and ADT modalities undergo additional dimensionality reduction and clustering. Cell
annotation assigns cell types based on clustering and known markers. The final anno-
tated data are used for downstream analyses, including differential expression, gene set
enrichment, and clonal analyses. Created with BioRender.com
2.2.1
Alignment and quantification
A research assistant did the sequence alignment and read quantification for each channel sep-
arately. The raw scRNA seq FASTQ files were aligned to the human transcriptome reference
GRCh38-2024-A (accessible at 10xGenomics - Reference GRCh38-2024-A) and the scVDJ seq
FASTQ files were aligned to the human V(D)J reference GRCh38-CR7.1 (accessible at 10xGe-
nomics - Reference GRCh38-CR7.1). All surface features, including ADT, pMHC, and HTO ,
were aligned to a custom feature barcode reference file (not provided). The alignment was
done using the multi pipeline of Cell Ranger version 7.2.0 [57]. This allows for paired process-
ing of the different modalities, including Gene expression (GEX), V(D)J, and from the surface
features data: ADT, HTO, and pMHC. Furthermore, CellRanger is used to filter read alignment,
cell barcodes, and UMIs, which excludes low read count droplets and generates filtered count
matrices for the specified modalities: GEX, V(D)J and surface features (containing HTO, ADT
and pMHC data).
2.2.2
Transcriptional and Surface Protein Profiling
The filtered GEX and surface feature count matrices were processed using Seurat version
5.0.1 [58] and saved into a Seurat object of four assays: RNA, HTO, ADT, and pMHC. The HTO
data was prefiltered for total barcode counts above 10000 to leave out background signal
from ambient barcodes.
Page 14 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Computational methods
2 Methodology
Demultiplexing
Samples were demultiplexed for each channel separately using HTODemux, an integrated
Seurat function. Before demultiplexing, the HTO counts are normalized using the Normalize-
Data function in Seurat with centered log ratio (CLR) transformation. After demultiplexing,
negatives, doublets, and samples with three or fewer cells were sorted out.
Quality control
The RNA gene expression was quality controlled and filtered to exclude cells expressing fewer
than 200 genes, more than 3000 genes, and more than 10% mitochondrial reads. The re-
maining cells were annotated based on which sequencing channel they originated from and
according to sample information (time point for sample collection, number of vaccinations,
diagnosis, see table A.3 in appendix). The data was merged using the function merge, and the
counts and data layers collapsed using JoinLayers.
Normalization, dimensionality reduction and clustering
Normalization, dimensionality reduction, and batch correction were performed separately
for the RNA and ADT modalities. Followed by Weighted Nearest Neighbors (WNN) multimodal
integration to define modality weights for combined visualization of the two modalities.
For the RNA modality, the data was normalized by log transformation using Seurat Normal-
izeData. The top 2000 most variable genes were selected with FindVariableFeatures. Next,
all features were scaled using the ScaleData function in Seurat. TCR genes were excluded
from further dimensionality reduction and clustering steps to avoid clustering based on spe-
cific TCR clones. Dimensionality reduction was performed using Principal Component Anal-
ysis (PCA) with Seurat’s RunPCA function. From the PCA results, the top 20 Principal Compo-
nents (PCs) were selected for downstream analysis, guided by an elbow plot to determine
the number of PCs. Graph-based clustering and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Pro-
jection (UMAP) visualization was performed using the Seurat functions FindNeighbors, Find-
Clusters, and RunUMAP. Louvain clustering [59] was utilized with a resolution ranging from
0.1-1.
For the ADT modality, normalization was achieved with NormalizeData using a CLR transfor-
mation and a margin at 2 to normalize across cells. Like RNA, the ADT data was scaled using
ScaleData. PCA was then performed using RunPCA and saved as ”apca” on the top 10 PCs, se-
lected based on elbow plot. The UMAP visualization was generated using RunUMAP specified
to run on ADT data (with parameters: reduction = ’apca’, dims = 1:10, assay = ’ADT’, reduc-
tion.name = ’adt.umap’, reduction.key = ’adtUMAP_’).
Batch correction
To address batch effects between samples (such as those arising from different donors or
time points), Harmony version 1.2.0 [60] was used. For RNA data, batch correction was ap-
plied to the PCA results using the RunHarmony function with ”pat_id” as the variable, and the
corrected data was saved as ”harmony”. Similarly, for ADT data, Harmony was applied to
the PCA results (referred to as ”apca”), and the corrected output was stored as ”aharmony”.
After batch correction, UMAP visualization and clustering were repeated using the Harmony-
adjusted data instead of the original PCA results. The UMAP visualizations were saved as
”harmony.umap” for RNA and ”aharmony.umap” for ADT.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 15 of 70
==PAGE:28==
2 Methodology
2.2 Computational methods
Cross Modality Integration
For integrating RNA and ADT modalities, Seurat’s WNN workflow was employed. The Find-
MultiModalNeighbors function was used to construct a WNN graph and calculate cell-specific
modality weights and multimodal neighbors. Different numbers of multimodal neighbors
were computed to determine the optimal parameter, including k=10, k=20, and k=40. The
function integrated the Harmony-adjusted embeddings and all PCs from both RNA and ADT
data. Based on the WNN results, a multimodal UMAP was created with the RunUMAP func-
tion in Seurat. Clustering of the integrated data was then performed using the FindClusters
function employing the Louvain algorithm [59] and a resolution range of 0.1-1.
Clustering Optimization
Different parameters for cluster resolution and the number of multimodal neighbors in the
Weighted Nearest Neighbor (WNN) framework were evaluated to achieve optimal integration
and clustering of the RNA and ADT modalities. This evaluation focused on two primary criteria:
cluster consistency and biological plausibility.
Cluster consistency across different resolutions and numbers of multimodal neighbors was
assessed using clustree version 0.5.1 [61] and ClustAssess version 0.3.0 [62]. The clustree
function was used to visualize how clusters changed with varying resolutions. The function
element_sim_elscore was iteratively run across different resolutions to compare them individ-
ually.
Cluster-specific markers were identified using the FindAllMarkers function in Seurat for both
RNA and ADT data. The function finds markers for each cluster by comparing expression lev-
els across clusters using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. These markers were then compared
to known cell-type markers (see table 1.1) to evaluate biological plausibility. Furthermore,
marker_overlap from the ClustAssess package was run on the top 10 markers, ranked by log-
FoldChange to compare the marker similarity between clusters of varying parameters. The
optimal parameter was determined to be k=20 and a resolution of 0.2.
Cell Annotation
Clusters were manually annotated based on known gene markers (see table 1.1). Cluster
markers were identified for RNA and ADT data with FindAllMarkers, where significantly dif-
ferential expressed markers were defined with an average log fold change of more than 1.
The annotation was verified through two methods of reference mapping. First, SingleR ver-
sion 2.4.1 [63] was used, employing the fine labels from MonacoImmuneData [64] in celldex
version 1.12.0 as reference. Second, the classifier from ProjecTILs version 3.3.1 [65] was em-
ployed with the human CD8+ T-cell reference map from Swiss portal for immune cell analy-
sis (SPICA) [66] as reference.
One cluster was identified with high mitochondrial counts. It lacked gene expression for CD3,
CD8, and TCRs but showed high CD3 and CD8 surface marker expression. Due to these char-
acteristics, this cluster was excluded from further analysis.
Differential expression analysis
Differential expression analysis was conducted at the single-cell level to compare clusters.
This involved using the FindAllMarkers function in Seurat to compare each cluster with the
rest or the FindMarkers function to compare one cluster with another. Both functions were
applied to the RNA and ADT data. Various contrasts were tested to identify Differentially
Page 16 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Computational methods
2 Methodology
expressed genes (DEGs). These contrasts included comparisons based on time points, vacci-
nation status, infection status, type of infection, and T-cell specificity.
Pseudobulk Differential expression analysis
To perform pseudobulk differential expression analysis, the single-cell gene counts were ag-
gregated by sample and condition using the Seurat command AggregateExpression. The con-
ditions included the same as the contrasts mentioned above (time points, vaccinations, in-
fection status, type of infection, and T-cell specificity) and combinations thereof to allow the
removal of variance from other conditions while assessing the other.
The analysis was carried out using DESeq2 version 1.42.1 [67]. Initially, the data was con-
verted to a DESeqDataSet using DESeqDataSetFromMatrix, with the aggregated count data as
input and the design parameter having 1, 2, or 3 conditions. Genes were filtered to include
only genes with non-zero counts across the minimal number of samples (n=2). The pseudob-
ulk gene expression estimation steps are performed using DESeq, which applies the Wald test
for the negative binomial Generalized Linear Model (GLM) and calculates adjusted p-values
using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Results are extracted with the results function.
Quality assessment of the DESeq2 data analysis was performed using various visualizations.
Heatmaps of the top 20 most highly expressed genes and sample-to-sample distance matri-
ces were created using pheatmap version 1.0.12, facilitating the visualization of expression
patterns and sample clustering. The plotPCA function was employed to perform and visualize
principal component analysis, allowing the assessment of major sources of variation and the
identification of sample outliers or batch effects. Dispersion estimates and MA plots were
generated using the plotDispEsts and plotMA functions, respectively. These plots provided in-
sights into the variability of the data and the distribution of differentially expressed genes,
helping to ensure the reliability of the differential expression analysis.
Gene set enrichment analysis
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was conducted to identify enriched pathways that were
significantly represented by the DEGs from both pseudobulk and single-cell analyses. The
FGSEA algorithm from the fgsea package version 1.28.0 was used [68]. Rank scores were cal-
culated using the statistics for the DEGs with the formula: -log10(p-value) · sign(log2FoldChange).
The analysis focused on pathways from the Reactome and Hallmark pathways in the Molecular
Signatures Database (MSigDB) and custom gene sets. The custom gene sets were prepared
from gene sets used in different relevant articles (see table A.5), and only gene sets with at
least 10 genes were considered. The analysis was performed iteratively for each patient, for
differenT-cell types, and for T-cells with specificity towards different pathogens (SARS-CoV-2
and CEF) and compared different numbers of vaccinations, different pathogen, protein, and
pMHC specificities. The results were plotted with plotEnrichment for individual enriched path-
ways and with plotGseaTable for the top-regulated up and down-regulated pathways.
2.2.3
Clonal Profiling
The filtered contig annotations generated by Cell Ranger were processed using scRepertoire
version 2.0.0 [69]. First, a multiplexed experiment-contig list was generated with createHTO-
ContigList separated by samples (”pat_id” variable in Seurat metadata, as HTO identifiers are
identical for different patients across channels). The paired sequences were combined based
on their TCR sequences using combineTCR, where only the top two expressed genes per cell
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 17 of 70
==PAGE:30==
2 Methodology
2.2 Computational methods
barcode are included (filterMulti = TRUE). Lastly, the cell-assigned TCR clone data were added
to the Seurat object with the combineExpression function.
TCR:pMHC assignment
A research assistant manually assigned the TCR clones to pMHC complexes. The TCR clones
were grouped according to their clone size: Big clones (more than 10 cells), medium clones
(4-10 cells), small clones (2-4 cells), rare clones (1 cell), and NA for cells without TCR clone
data. Based on the raw count data, big and medium clones were manually assigned to pMHC
matches. Small clones were manually assigned by iteratively determining thresholds for each
pMHC barcode and assigning pMHC specificity to cells, with a count above those thresholds.
Cells with pMHC mismatches due to demultiplexing errors were filtered out.
Clonal analysis
Several functions within the scRepertoire were used to analyze the diversity and abundance
of clonotypes. The clonotype frequencies and dynamics between samples and conditions
were compared using clonalCompare. The proportion of different clonotypes within each
sample was visualized using clonalProportion. The clonal similarity or overlap of different
clonotypes within different samples was assessed using clonalOverlap. UMAP plots were gen-
erated with the integrated clonal information to evaluate the clonal expansion and clonotypes
within the differenT-cell clusters.
2.2.4
Visualizations
All visualizations, with the exception of specific functions mentioned previously, were gener-
ated using several tools and packages. ggplot2 version 3.5.1 was used to create various plots,
such as bar plots, to visualize barcode counts or cell numbers. EnhancedVolcano version
1.20.0 was employed to generate volcano plots to highlight differentially expressed features.
The package ggVennDiagram version 1.5.2 was used to visualize the intersections of cells
within each condition with the function ggVennDiagram.
For single-cell RNA-seq data analysis, the Seurat package was utilized for several key visual-
izations. The DoHeatmap function was used to generate heatmaps displaying the expression
levels of selected genes, surface markers, and HTOs across cell clusters and conditions. The
DimPlot function was used to visualize cells in reduced dimensional space, such as PCA and
UMAP plots. The VizDimLoadings function was used to visualize the loadings of features in
principal component analysis. The FeaturePlot function was employed to visualize the expres-
sion of individual features in a dimensional reduction plot. The VlnPlot function was used to
show the distribution of single-cell gene expression and protein abundance data across sam-
ples, clusters, and conditions in a violin plot format.
Patchwork version 1.2.0 was utilized to improve the layout of combined plots, allowing for
more complex and organized visual presentations. RColorBrewer version 1.1-3 was applied
for color selection to enhance the visual appearance of the plots.
Page 18 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:31==
3
Results
The primary aim of this project was to characterize the molecular heterogeneity and dynamics
of CD8+T-cells in hematological cancer patients during SARS-CoV-2 infection and vaccination
using multimodal single-cell sequencing. By employing a multi-omics approach, distinctT-cell
phenotypes were identified, their gene expression patterns were analyzed, clonal expansion
was examined, and their functional activity was assessed. The different multi-omics modal-
ities included were scRNA-sequencing, V(D)J-sequencing, ADTs, pMHC-multimers, and HTOs
to allow the collected analysis of gene expression, T-cell clonotype, surface proteins, antigen
specificity, and multiplexing.
The analysis was based on samples collected at five different time points to capture various
stages of the immune dynamics influenced by varying vaccine doses. It included CD8+T-cells
specific for SARS-CoV-2, for CEF and those without detected pMHC specificity (negatives) to
provide a view of the general T-cell landscape and those specific to different pathogens.
The section is structured to reflect the computational workflow of scRNA-seq with both data
processing and biological analysis. The first part will focus on the key data processing steps,
including Quality Control (QC), integration, and clustering. This part is essential for accurate
data representation and will allow robust downstream analysis. The second part will focus on
the data analysis, including T-cell phenotype characterization, functional activity evaluation,
and clonal analysis.
3.1
Data Processing
The first part of data processing involved filtering the HTO raw count data to remove signal
from ambient HTO s. HTO S2, S7, S8, and S10 were intentionally left blank due to previously
detected cross-contamination. They served as negative controls in the analysis, guiding the
determination of a threshold for valid HTO counts.
Figure 3.1: Total HTO counts per HTO across two channels, L1 and L2, with counts plotted on a
logarithmic scale (log10). Each bar represents the total counts for a specific HashID (S1
to S17). The threshold for 10,000 counts is indicated by a dashed line at log10(10,000) =
4. In both channels, bars are color-coded based on whether the HTO is included in the
experiment (TRUE) or not (FALSE).
Using the negative HTO signal as a reference, a threshold of 10,000 counts per HTO was
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 19 of 70
==PAGE:32==
3 Results
3.1 Data Processing
established. Those with fewer than 10,000 counts were excluded from further analysis. This
filtering step excluded barcodes S15 and S16 from Lane 1 and barcodes S15 to S17 from Lane
2 (figure 3.1). After applying this threshold, the remaining barcodes were considered valid for
subsequent demultiplexing.
3.1.1
Demultiplexing
After removing ambient HTO s, demultiplexing was performed to assign cells to their corre-
sponding samples based on their HTO profiles. The cells were assigned an HTO , linking them
to a specific sample. This HTO assignment is crucial for downstream analyses, ensuring that
each cell’s data can be accurately associated with its sample. In addition to this classification,
the cells were also classified into singlets, doublets, or negatives (figure 3.2, A.1 in A.6), where
singlets showed expressed on a single HTO , doublets exhibited expression of multiple HTOs,
and negatives showed no significant HTO expression.
Figure 3.2: UMAP Projections of cell classification and sample assignment for Channel L1 be-
fore and after filtering. (A & B) UMAP plots showing the initial classification and as-
signment of cells. In panel A, cells are classified into singlets (red), doublets (green), and
negatives (blue) based on their HTO expression profiles. Panel B displays the initial as-
signment of cells to their respective HTOs, highlighting the close association between
HTO s S13 and S14. (C & D) UMAP plots of cells after excluding doublets and negatives.
In panel C, only singlet cells are retained. Panel D shows the HTO assignment of the
singlets, demonstrating improved separation of the samples following the removal of
problematic cells.
A high number of doublets were detected in both channels. This issue was predominantly
associated with HTO s S13 and S14 (figure 3.3), indicating cross-contamination between the
two HTOs. This cross-contamination led to the exclusion of a significant fraction of S13 cells.
For channel L1, 4257 out of 6017 cells were identified as singlets, whereas 1555 cells were
identified as doublets and 205 as negatives. The sample with HTO S13 was only assigned two
cells; these and the negatives and doublets were excluded from subsequent processing. For
channel L2, 2852 out of 4220 cells were identified as singlets and kept for further processing.
The 1271 doublets and 97 negatives were excluded.
Page 20 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Data Processing
3 Results
Figure 3.3: HTO expresssion heatmaps of normalized HTO values for (A) channel L1 and (B) chan-
nel L2. Singlets are positioned to the left and only show expression to one HTO . Neg-
atives are to the right and have no HTO expression. Multiplets are positioned in the
middle; they show expression of more than one HTO . There is a big overlap between
S13 and S14 and partly also S12, indicating cross-contamination between HTO s.
The exclusion of doublets, negatives, and problematic HTO s (such as S13) ensured that only
confidently assigned cells were retained for subsequent analyses. This careful sample assign-
ment and filtering process were essential for the precise association between the cellular data
and its corresponding sample.
3.1.2
Quality Control
After HTO demultiplexing, quality control (QC) was performed on the retained singlets to re-
move low-quality cells. Before establishing the filtering criteria, the quality of the data for
channels L1 and L2 was individually assessed (figure 3.4). The applied quality metrics in-
cluded the number of UMIs per cell (nCount), number of genes detected per cell (nFeature),
mitochondrial percentage (percent_mt), and ribosomal percentage (percent_ribo).
Figure 3.4: Quality Control Metrics for (A) Channel L1 and (B) L2 Samples Before Filtering. (A1,
B1) Number of UMIs per cell. (A2, B2) Number of unique features per cell. (A3, B3)
Mitochondrial gene content percentage. (A4, B4) Ribosomal gene content percentage.
Sample S4 in Channel L1 has high variability and extreme values, indicating low-quality
cells. Channel L2 shows more consistent quality metrics across samples, suggesting
better overall data quality.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 21 of 70
==PAGE:34==
3 Results
3.1 Data Processing
Channel L2 generally showed more consistent and uniform quality control metrics across
samples than Channel L1, with fewer cells exhibiting high mitochondrial content and fewer
cells with either low or high unique feature count. In contrast, sample S4 in Channel L1
stood out, displaying higher variability and extreme values across metrics, particularly in
nCount_RNA, nFeature_RNA, and percent_mt, which suggested many low-quality cells.
However, evaluating quality control (QC) metrics in isolation could lead to misinterpretation
of cellular signals, as variations could arise from biological or technical sources. Multiple QC
metrics were examined simultaneously to provide a more comprehensive assessment (figure
3.5). The figure indicates a better quality for channel L2 compared to channel L1. Addition-
ally, a relationship between a high mitochondrial percentage and a low number of genes can
be detected for channel L1, which indicates dying cells. Furthermore, a deviation from the
nFeature-nCount relationship in channel L1 could indicate doublets, continuous sequencing
of a few sequences, or inefficient library preparation.
Figure 3.5: Quality Control Metrics evaluating the relationship between nCount_RNA and nFea-
ture_RNA, color-coded by mitochondrial gene content percentage (percent_mt), for (A)
Channel L1 and (B) Channel L2. The red line represents a linear regression fit, and the
horizontal black lines indicate thresholds for filtering criteria. Cells with low nCount_RNA,
low nFeature_RNA, or high percent_mt (darker points) were identified as low quality and
were candidates for exclusion from further analysis.
Based on these observations, specific thresholds were established to filter out low-quality
cells. The filtering criteria included a lower gene count threshold of 200 genes, an upper
gene count threshold of 3,000 genes, and a mitochondrial gene percentage threshold of more
than 10%. Applying these thresholds excluded 855 cells from Channel L1 and 262 cells from
Channel L2.
These filtering thresholds successfully excluded cell outliers believed to be low-quality cells.
The exclusion of outliers and the improvement in uniformity of the quality metrics observed
post-filtering (figure 3.6) confirms the effectiveness of the filtering.
Page 22 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Data Processing
3 Results
Figure 3.6: Quality Control Metrics for (A) Channel L1 and (B) L2 Samples After Filtering. (A1,
B1) Number of UMIs per cell. (A2, B2) Number of unique features per cell. (A3, B3)
Mitochondrial gene content percentage. (A4, B4) Ribosomal gene content percentage.
Samples are much more homogenous, verifying effective quality control
Of the 855 cells excluded, 489 cells were derived from sample S4, highlighting the poor-quality
cells within this sample. To assess the impact of filtering on data variability, a PCA plot of
sample S4 from Channel L1 was generated, displaying the first two principal components
(PC1 and PC2) before and after filtering (figure 3.7).
Figure 3.7: PCA of Sample S4, Channel L1 Before and After
Filtering illustrating contributions to PC1 and PC2 before (A) and
after (B) filtering. (A) Before filtering, PC2 was predominantly de-
scribed by variance within sample S4, indicating significant vari-
ability that could overshadow the biological differences among
other samples. (B) The contributions to PC2 are more balanced
across samples, indicating an effective reduction of the dispro-
portionate impact of sample S4, thus improving the data quality
for downstream analysis.
Before filtering, the variance
of PC2 is primarily driven by
the variability in sample S4.
This could overshadow the
biological differences among
other
samples
and
poten-
tially skew the results. After
filtering, the PCA plot showed
a more balanced contribu-
tion to PC2 from all samples,
effectively reducing the im-
pact of sample S4. Hence, fil-
tering achieved a more accu-
rate representation of the bi-
ological variability across all
samples.
3.1.3
Normalization
After performing quality control and filtering, normalization was applied to ensure compara-
ble expression levels across cells (figure A.3 in A.6). Additionally, TCR genes were filtered out
to prevent clustering based on TCR clonotype. The TCR genes accounted for a large amount
of the most expressed genes (figure A.2, in A.6), and due to the clonal variability among T-cells,
including these genes would result in clustering based on clonotype rather than phenotype.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 23 of 70
==PAGE:36==
3 Results
3.1 Data Processing
3.1.4
Dimensionality reduction and integration
After performing quality control and normalization, dimensionality reduction and integration
techniques were applied to the dataset to facilitate accurate data representation and analysis.
The optimal number of principal components (PCs) for downstream analysis was determined
to be 20 for RNA and 10 for ADT modalities. Elbow plots (figure 3.8) helped determine the
number of PCs by identifying the point at which additional PCs contributed minimally to in-
creases in variance.
Figure 3.8: Elbow Plots for Principal Component Selection in RNA and ADT modalities. The
plots show the standard deviation of each principal component for RNA (left) and ADT
(right) modalities. The cutoff at PC 20 or PC 10 is indicated by the red dashed line and
ensures the caption of sufficient variance for both modalities.
The initial structure and clustering of the data were assessed using UMAP projections (figure
3.9). These revealed apparent batch effects between sequencing lanes, patients, and samples
and could negatively impact analysis across samples.
Figure 3.9: UMAP Projections Before Batch Correction for RNA and ADT Data illustrating the
clustering and distribution of cells based on RNA (top row) and ADT (bottom row) modal-
ities. The cell relationships and differences were categorized by sequencing channel,
patient, and sample. The projections helped to identify sources of batch effects in the
data.
Batch Correction
Given the identified batch effects, especially in the ADT modality, batch correction became
necessary. Various methods were tested for batch correction (data not shown), but Harmony
produced the best results in terms of both runtime and data representation.
Page 24 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Data Processing
3 Results
Batch correction was tested using both patients (figure A.4 in A.6) and samples as parameters,
and the best projections were observed with sample-specific batch correction. After batch
correction, PCA and UMAP projections were performed using the same parameters (figure
A.5 in A.6) as the pre-batch correction data to visualize the removal of batch effects. The new
projections demonstrated significantly reduced batch variability (figure 3.10), highlighting the
effectiveness of the correction process.
Figure 3.10: UMAP Projections After Batch Correction for RNA and ADT Data. illustrating the
clustering and distribution of cells based on RNA (top row) and ADT (bottom row) modal-
ities highlighting the correction of batch effects arising from different samples (pat_id).
The cell relationships and differences were categorized by sequencing channel, patient,
and sample. The projections demonstrate reduced batch effects.
Cross modality integration
To incorporate both RNA and ADT modalities in a single UMAP projection, cross-modality
integration was performed using Weighted Nearest Neighbor (WNN) analysis based on the
full-dimensional harmony embeddings. Various numbers of neighbors were assessed (data
not shown), and the best projections were achieved using the default parameter of k=20. This
data integration ensured comparable data across patients and provided a more comprehen-
sive understanding of cellular heterogeneity by simultaneously assessing transcriptional and
surface markers (figure 3.11).
Figure 3.11: UMAP Projections After WNN Integration illustrating the clustering and distribution
of cells based on weighted contributions of RNA and ADT data. The cell relationships
and differences were categorized by sequencing channel, patient, and sample. The
projections demonstrate only minor batch effects.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 25 of 70
==PAGE:38==
3 Results
3.1 Data Processing
3.1.5
Cluster Resolution
Clustering helps to identify distinct cell populations. To ensure the robustness and biological
relevance of the clusters, cluster stability was assessed, and the optimal cluster resolution
was determined through resolution parameter tuning and biological plausibility.
The resolution parameter in the clustering algorithm was systematically varied to observe
its effect on cluster granularity and stability. The resolution parameter directly influenced
the number of clusters, with higher resolutions resulting in more, smaller clusters, and lower
resolutions producing fewer, larger clusters (figure 3.12, panel B). The cluster resolution tree
(figure 3.12, panel A) demonstrated the hierarchical relationships between clusters at differ-
ent resolutions. It was observed that increasing the resolution from 0.1 to 0.2 and up to 1.0
resulted in changes within cluster 0 (from 0.1), as this was subdivided into smaller and more
refined clusters. However, no significant changes in clustering patterns were observed be-
tween resolutions 0.2-0.5, indicating that most structural changes were concentrated in this
largest initial cluster.
Figure 3.12: Cluster Resolution and Stability Analysis. (A) Cluster Resolution Tree showing the
hierarchical relationship between clusters at different resolutions. Each node repre-
sented a cluster, with its size indicating the number of cells and arrows showing the
transitions between clusters as the resolution changed. (B1-B6) UMAP projections of
the data at various resolution parameters (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and 1.0) were displayed,
highlighting the clustering patterns. (C) The consistency of clusters across all resolu-
tions, each cell’s color represented the proportion of times a pair of cells was clustered
across different resolutions, with darker colors indicating higher consistency.
After identifying clusters at various resolutions, their biological plausibility was evaluated by
comparing the expression of known marker genes within each cluster. This step ensured that
the clusters were statistically robust and biologically meaningful. Specifically, it was examined
whether increasing the resolution and subdividing clusters brought additional biological in-
sights. It was observed that the marker genes for cluster 0 at resolution 0.2 were consistent
with those for clusters 0 and 2 at resolution 0.7 (figure 3.13). This indicates that the biolog-
ical information captured by cluster 0 in resolution 0.2 was preserved in clusters 0 and 2 at
the higher resolution. It was concluded that a resolution of 0.2 was sufficient to capture the
biological relevance needed for the analysis without unnecessary complexity.
Page 26 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Data Processing
3 Results
Figure 3.13: Heatmaps of Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) at Different Resolutions. The
heatmaps highlight DEGs across the clusters, which subdivide with increasing resolu-
tion. (A) DEGs at resolution 0.2. (B) DEGs at resolution 0.7. Cluster 0 and cluster 2
showed expression profiles similar to cluster 0 at resolution 0.2, indicating the lower
resolution was sufficient to capture key biological information.
During the biological evaluation of clustering, one cluster was identified as low-quality based
on several metrics. This cluster consistently exhibited low ribosomal gene percentages and
high mitochondrial gene percentages, with mitochondrial genes being the most highly ex-
pressed. To further investigate the removal of this cluster, the lineage markers CD3 and CD8
were examined (figure 3.14). The analysis justified removing the low-quality cluster, ensuring
that the retained clusters represented high-quality and biologically relevant cells.
Figure 3.14: Quality Control and Marker Gene UMAP Plots for Cluster Evaluation. The low-
quality cluster showed no TCR gene expression, high mitochondrial gene expression,
low ribosomal gene expression, and low expression of lineage markers CD8A, CD8B,
and CD3E. The bottom row displays CD8 and CD3 surface marker expressions similar
to those of other cells. These metrics suggest the presence of dying cells or issues with
gene capture.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 27 of 70
==PAGE:40==
3 Results
3.2 Cell Type Identification
The preprocessing steps ensured that the scRNA-seq data were of high quality and accurately
represented. The first part included demultiplexing, QC, integration, etc., to prepare data for
downstream analysis. Of the approximately 45000 cells prepared for sequencing, 4892 could
be used for analysis (table 3.1).
Table 3.1: Cell counts throughout the scRNA-seq experiment for each channel seperately
and together. From the number of cells sorted during FACS, to number of se-
quenced cells, demultiplexed and those left after QC. Additional filtering was ap-
plied, as some wrongly demultiplexed cells were identified during pMHC classifi-
cation. Finally, the cells were excluded due to the lack of TCR gene expression and
CD3 and CD8 gene expression.
Pre-
sequencing
Post-
sequencing
Post-
demulti-
plexing
Post-QC
Post-
pMHC
classifica-
tion
Post-
Extra
quality
filtering
L1
24468
6017
4255
3400
3365
2749
L2
20982
4220
2852
2590
2568
2143
L1 + L2
45450
10237
7107
5990
5933
4892
Only 23% of the loaded cells were successfully sequenced, which is significantly lower than
the 80% capture rate reported by the company. During demultiplexing, many duplicates were
identified, primarily due to cross-contamination, resulting in the exclusion of many cells. This
was followed by QC, which mainly affected one sample, leading to further cell exclusion. Ad-
ditionally, the pMHC classification step, not previously discussed in the results section, ex-
cluded 57 cells due to incorrect sample assignment identified by incorrect MHC specificity.
Lastly, 1,041 cells were excluded from further analysis due to low-quality metrics.
3.2
Cell Type Identification
The 4,892 cells retained for data analysis were classified into seven distinct clusters. Manual
annotation was performed to assign phenotypes to these identified clusters, utilizing a com-
bination of marker gene expression, surface protein expression, and known cell type-specific
markers (table 1.1). The expression profiles provided insights into the potential phenotypes
of each cluster (figure 3.15):
• CD8+ Effector T-cells: Granzyme B (GZMB), Granzyme K (GZMK), GNLY, NKG7, and
ZNF683 at the RNA level and CD57, CCR5 on the ADT level.
• Naive T-cells: Identified by high expression of LEF1, CCR7 and SELL at the RNA level
and CD31 and CD27 at the ADT level.
• Central Memory T-cells: Marked by high expression of IL7R, LEF1, CCR7, and SELL at
the RNA level and CD27, CD28, and CD127 at the ADT level.
• MAIT cells: Identified by high expression of SLC4A10, RORC, and ZBTB16 at the ADT
level and TCR Vα7.2, CD161 and IL7RA at the ADT level.
• NK(T) cells: Characterized by high expression of TYROBP, KLRC2, KLRF1, KIR3DL2, and
NCR1 at the RNA level and CD56, CD94, CD335, CD16, and CD158b at the ADT level.
• KIR+ Cluster: Identified by high expression of KIR2DL1, KIR3DL1, GNLY, and CD158.
Page 28 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Cell Type Identification
3 Results
Figure 3.15: Heatmaps of Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) and Proteins across Clusters.
The heatmaps provided an overview of the different gene and protein expression pro-
files across the identified cell clusters and helped identify T-cell phenotypes.
The phenotypic identities of the clusters were further assessed by visualizing known markers
(table 1.1) on UMAP feature plots and violin plots. This approach allowed for a comprehensive
and spatial understanding of marker distribution across the clusters.
Figure 3.16: UMAP and Violin Plots for Naive T-cell Marker Expression The expression levels
of key naive T-cell markers across different clusters using UMAP and violin plots. The
distinct expression of these markers in cluster 5, as visualized in the UMAP and violin
plots, led to the annotation of this cluster as naive T-cells.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 29 of 70
==PAGE:42==
3 Results
3.2 Cell Type Identification
Here, data for naive T-cells were specifically presented (figure 3.16). The feature UMAP and
violin plots demonstrated the distinct expression of naive T-cell markers within cluster 5, lead-
ing to its annotation with this phenotype. This process was systematically applied to the other
T-cell subtypes denoted in table 1.1, ensuring that each cluster was accurately characterized
based on the combined expression of known marker genes and surface proteins. The seven
clusters were identified as 0) and 1) Effector memory-like T-cells; 3) and 5) Naive-like 4) NK-
like, 6) MAIT cells 7) KIR+ cells. The two naive-like clusters were further subdivided into cen-
tral memory-like and naive-like clusters. The two largest clusters were identified as effector
memory-like clusters, each exhibiting distinct effector signatures (figure 3.17).
Figure 3.17: UMAP Projections of Cell Clusters and Phenotypic Annotation Illustrating the clus-
tering and phenotypic annotation of all cell clusters.
The phenotypic classifications of the cell clusters were validated using automated reference
mapping methods SingleR and ProjecTILs. The reference data from SingleR included various
immune cells such as CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ T-cells, and macrophages, among others. For clarity,
non-relevant cell types were filtered out. The ProjecTILs reference data consisted of CD8+ T-
cells (figure 3.18, A.7 for complete SingleR data).
Figure 3.18: Validation of Cell Type Annotations Using Automated Reference Mapping. Left:
UMAP plots showing cell type annotations. Right: Heatmaps illustrating consistency
of cell type annotations across clusters.
Page 30 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Cell Characterization
3 Results
The overall results of the reference mapping validated the manual annotations but revealed
different cell types within clusters, proving the difficulty of annotating small cell subsets with
similar expression profiles.
3.3
Cell Characterization
Of the 4892 cells left after the various data-processing steps, 2197 were classified as SARS-CoV-2
specific, where 2117 cells had pMHC and TCR data available, and 80 cells only had pMHC data.
695 cells were classified as CEF-specific, where both TCR and pMHC data were captured for
601 cells; 94 cells only had pMHC data available. 335 (316+19) cells could not be assigned to
SARS-CoV-2, or CEF specifically, and 1347 cells could not be assigned to specific pMHC com-
plex (figure 3.19). For 318 cells, neither pMHC nor TCR data was captured; they were included
in the analysis of the full data but not in the Venn diagram.
Figure 3.19: Venn Diagram of Cell Classifica-
tions Based on pMHC, TCR, SARS-CoV-2, and
CEF Specificity.
Illustrates the distribution of
4,574 cells based on the availability of pMHC and
TCR data and their classification as SARS-CoV-2
specific or CEF specific.
The 318 cells not in-
cluded in the Venn diagram showed no expres-
sion of either TCR or pMHC and could not be as-
signed CEF of SARS-CoV-2 specificity.
SARS-CoV-2 specific cells were primarily found in the GZMB+ effector memory cluster (figure
3.21), while CEF-specific cells were primarily located in the GZMK+ effector memory cluster.
The SARS-CoV-2 specific T-cells mainly targeted the spike protein, whereas the CEF-specific T-
cells targeted pp65, a CMV protein. Naive-like T-cells were characterized by clones primarily
consisting of single cells, while effector memory T-cells predominantly had larger clonal sizes
above 10. Central memory T-cells exhibited a mix of both larger and smaller clonal sizes.
Figure 3.20: Comparison of T-cell Clusters by Virus Specificity, Target Protein, and Clone Size
highlighting the distribution and proportion of various T-cell clusters based on virus
specificity, target protein, and clonal sizes. The projections revealed functional differ-
ences among T-cell subsets, demonstrating how virus specificity and clonal expansion
contribute to the diversity within these populations. NAs are not classified and are
perceived as negatives.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 31 of 70
==PAGE:44==
3 Results
3.3 Cell Characterization
The distribution and proportion of T-cell clusters were also analyzed based on time points,
vaccination status, and infection status (figure 3.20) to understand the dynamics of T-cell
responses during immunization. The most noticeable difference originated from the two
effector memory clusters. The GZMK+ effector memory cluster was associated with early im-
mune responses, fewer vaccinations, and pre-infection status. In contrast, the GZMB+ effec-
tor memory cluster was involved in sustained immune responses, higher vaccination status,
and post-infection phases. Even though the two clusters were annotated as effector mem-
ory cells, they did show differences in both gene expression and surface protein abundance
(figure A.6), which suggested a higher cytotoxic activity for the GZMB+/SARS-CoV-2 clusters,
whereas more memory markers were present for the GZMK+/CEF cluster.
Figure 3.21: Comparison of T-cell Clusters by Time, Vaccinations, and Infection Status high-
lighting the distribution and proportion of various T-cell clusters under different con-
ditions, providing insights into the dynamics of T-cell responses over time, after vacci-
nations, and following infections. Notably, the two effector memory clusters show sig-
nificant differences, with the GZMK+ cluster containing a larger fraction of cells from
earlier time points, fewer vaccinations, and pre-infection.
Focusing on the SARS-CoV-2 specific cells, an increased proportion was observed with higher
vaccination counts (figure 3.22, panel A). This increase might be due to the cell selection pro-
cess before sequencing rather than indicating a more robust immune response. SARS-CoV-2
specific cells were primarily found in the GZMB+ effector memory cluster (figure 3.22, panel
B), while the removed CEF-specific cells were primarily located in the GZMK+ effector mem-
ory cluster. The SARS-CoV-2 specific cells were mainly targeted towards the spike protein and
were widely distributed across different cell types. Cells targeting other proteins were less
numerous and clustered mostly in non-effector-like clusters. The number of vaccinations
did not appear to impact the target proteins significantly (figure 3.22, panel E). Although a
higher fraction of nucleocapsid-specific T-cells was observed after three vaccinations, these
cells were mainly from patients P21 and P17, whereas samples from four and five vaccina-
tions were predominantly from patients P07 and P06 (figure 3.22, panel D). Looking at the
cell types during vaccination and infection, an increase in the effector memory T-cells could
be observed after infection and with increasing numbers of vaccinations (figure 3.22, panel
C and D). Indicating a maturation of the immune response with infection and/or successive
vaccinations, leading to a more robust memory T-cell population.
Page 32 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Data Analysis
3 Results
Figure 3.22: Comparison of SARS-CoV-2 specific T-cells by Various Parameters showing (A) the
different proportions of T-cells with viral specificity across vaccinations for the full
dataset. (B) UMAP projection of SARS-CoV-2 specific T-cells based on protein speci-
ficity. (C) Proportion of cell types before and after infection. (D) Distribution of cells
across patients and number of vaccinations. (E) Proportions of SARS-CoV-2 specific
cells targeting different proteins across different vaccination statuses. (F) Comparison
of cell types across different vaccination numbers.
3.4
Data Analysis
Data processing, cell identification, and characterization provided the foundation for subse-
quent analyses, enabling the investigation of the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection
and vaccination. The impact of pathogen exposure, vaccinations, and infection status on the
observed cellular responses in hematological cancer patients was elucidated. The following
analysis emphasized the number of vaccinations over time points, as the differences between
these two parameters were minor (as observed in figure 3.21).
3.4.1
The Impact of CEF vs SARS-CoV-2 Response, Vaccination Doses
and Infection Status
Previous analyses demonstrated distinct clustering patterns driven by pathogen exposure,
vaccination doses, and infection status (figure 3.20 and 3.21). Cells derived from 1-3 vacci-
nation doses, pre-infection cells (together denoted as early response cells), and CEF-specific
cells, predominantly clustered within the GZMK+ effector memory cluster. In contrast, SARS-
CoV-2-specific cells and cells from later responses clustered within the GZMB+ effector mem-
ory cluster. This suggested a functional difference between early response and late response
cells and a difference in the immune responses against different pathogens.
To further explore these differences, specific gene and protein expression profiles from single-
cell and pseudobulk Differential Expression Analysis (DEA) were examined (figure A.8, A.9 and
A.10, appendix A.7). Key differentially expressed genes (DEGs) included CMC1, GZMK, AOAH,
S100B, and GZMB (figure 3.23), the same markers identified during cluster annotation, which
verified the functional difference across these parameters.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 33 of 70
==PAGE:46==
3 Results
3.4 Data Analysis
Figure 3.23: Volcano plots illustrating single-cell differential expression analysis (DEA) under
various conditions. Each plot compares gene expression changes (Log2 fold change)
and statistical significance (-Log10 p-value) for different parameters. Top left: Com-
parison between 2 vs. 4 vaccination doses. Top right: Comparison between early
(time point 2) vs. late (time point 4) responses. Bottom left: Comparison between pre-
infected (FALSE) vs. post-infected (TRUE) cells. Bottom right: Comparison between
responses to CEF and SARS-CoV-2.
Key differentially expressed genes with higher
expression during the early/CEF-specific response included CMC1, GZMK, and AOAH.
Additionally, genes such as S100B and GZMB exhibited higher expression during the
late/SARS-CoV-2 specific response.
However, the DEGs identified were largely consistent across all parameters, suggesting a
strong underlying influence likely driven by one predominant factor rather than each pa-
rameter independently. The best p-values were associated with the virus-parameter, indi-
cating that this could be the predominant factor driving the observed expression changes.
To validate this observation, a multiple parameter DEA (~Vaccination + Infection + Virus) was
performed, controlling for potential confounding variables to isolate the effect of each pa-
rameter on gene expression (figure 3.24). This analysis showed that the difference between
CEF and SARS-CoV-2 accounted for most of the differentially expressed genes observed in the
previous step. Overall, the results indicated that pathogen exposure was the primary driver
of the observed expression changes, highlighting the importance of considering parameter
interdependencies in scRNA-seq studies.
The number of cells originating from CEF is significantly higher in the early response cells
(figure 3.22). This factor might contribute to the differences in vaccination and infection pa-
rameters, which argues for the exclusion of the CEF-specific T-cells in further analysis of the
dynamics in the CD8+ T-cell-mediated immune response against SARS-CoV-2.
Page 34 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Data Analysis
3 Results
Figure 3.24: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from multiparameter pseudobulk analysis
displaying the gene expression changes and statistical significance for different condi-
tions, with significant DEGs highlighted. Top left: Comparison between 2 vs. 4 vacci-
nations. Top right: Comparison between early (time point 2) vs. late (time point 4)
responses. Bottom left: Comparison between pre-infected (FALSE) vs. post-infected
(TRUE) cells. Bottom right: Comparison between responses to CEF and SARS-CoV-2.
3.4.2
Variation in SARS-CoV-2 T-Cell Responses Across Vaccination
Doses and Infection Status
Figure 3.25: UMAPs of Cell Type and
Vaccination Doses illustrating how the
number of vaccinations influenced the
clustering of cells, indicating potential
differences in gene expression profiles
and immune responses across different
vaccination dosages.
The differential expression analysis applied to the full
dataset offered a broad overview of the immune re-
sponse to different viruses. The following will focus
on SARS-CoV-2 specific cells to assess this response
during vaccination and infection and understand how
these factors influence gene expression profiles.
The UMAP projections of the SARS-CoV-2 specific
cells (figure 3.26) provided an overview of the dif-
ferences between the early (1-3 vaccinations, pre-
infection) and the late response (4-5 vaccinations,
post-infection), where the early response cells, pri-
marily clustered in the central-memory/naive-like
clusters, the later response cells mainly clustered in
the GZMB+ effector memory cluster. Therefore, the
phenotypic variations were expected to be reflected
in the DEA. The results of DEA did verify the obser-
vation, with key naive/central-memory markers such
as SELL, LEF1 and TCF7 (figure 3.26) more highly ex-
pressed in the early response.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 35 of 70
==PAGE:48==
3 Results
3.4 Data Analysis
Contrary, the late response cells show key markers such as cytotoxic markers GZMB and
FGFBP2 and activation markers ZEB2, CCL3 and CCL4. These DEGs indicate a phenotypical T-
cell change rather than a functional difference between the cells from the early and the late
response. Similar analyses were conducted using the time point parameter, which yielded
comparable results (figure A.11), and on pre- and post-infection samples, without significant
results.
Figure 3.26: Differential Expression Analysis across Vaccination Doses (A) Volcano plot showing
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between 2 and 4 vaccination doses. Significant
DEGs are highlighted, with genes such as LTB, LEF1, SELL, TCF7, GZMH, GZMB, and FGFBP2
marked. (B) Heatmap displaying expression profiles of selected genes across vaccina-
tion doses. The color gradient indicates low (purple) to high (yellow) expression levels.
(C) Heatmap of surface marker expression, illustrating differences in immune cell pop-
ulations between 2 and 4 vaccination doses.
These findings highlighted the potential importance of vaccination doses in modulating the
immune response. A pseudobulk analysis was conducted to further investigate the differ-
ences in vaccination dosages, time points, and infection status, but without significant find-
ings (figure A.13).
Additionally, gene set enrichment analysis (figure 3.27) indicated that more vaccinations cor-
related with higher cytotoxicity, while fewer vaccinations correlated with higher memory,
most likely attributed to the central memory phenotype of the early response cells and the
effector memory phenotype of the late response cells.
Page 36 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Data Analysis
3 Results
Figure 3.27: Pathway Enrichment Analysis across Vac-
cinations. The Cytotoxicity Pathway is positively enriched,
indicating an increase in cytotoxic activity in patients with 4
vaccinations compared to those with 2 vaccinations. In con-
trast, the Progenitor Exhausted Pathway and Memory Path-
way are negatively enriched, suggesting a decrease in these
activities in patients with 4 vaccinations.
Interestingly, when analyzing only
the effector memory clusters of
the SARS-CoV-2 specific cells (fig-
ure A.14), the naive/central mem-
ory markers SELL and TCF7 still ap-
peared among the most differen-
tially expressed genes.
Preliminary results suggested the
significance of considering vaccina-
tion dosage in immunization strate-
gies, as higher doses appeared to
provide more robust immune re-
sponses. However, additional anal-
ysis showed few significant func-
tional differences; any conclusions regarding function should be cautiously made due to the
phenotypic differences in the cells. Further studies with larger sample sizes could help con-
firm the observations and explore the dose-dependent effects on gene expression.
3.4.3
Phenotypic differences in Spike vs non-Spike T-cells
In addition to evaluating the effects of varying vaccination doses and infection status, dif-
ferential expression analysis was also applied to compare the immune responses between
Spike-specific and non-Spike-specific T-cells. The analysis showed that cells reactive to non-
spike epitopes mainly clustered in non-effector cell clusters, such as the NK-like and central
memory clusters. DEA did not reveal any clear functional difference (fig A.12) between the
spike and non-spike-specific T-cells, and neither did GSEA. Interestingly, the non-spike cells
did show high expression of several surface markers associated with activation across most
cells, indicative of a more uniform subset of cells. Further studies with larger samples would
be interesting to increase the understanding of non-spike-specific immune responses.
Figure 3.28: UMAPs of Cell Type and Protein Specificity illustrating how the protein specificity
influenced the clustering of cells, indicating potential differences in gene expression
profiles and immune responses across different Protein specificities.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 37 of 70
==PAGE:50==
3 Results
3.4 Data Analysis
3.4.4
Differential T-Cell Responses in SARS-CoV-2 Patients Across
Vaccination Numbers and Infection Status
The combined analysis provided a framework for understanding the general immune re-
sponse and highlighted key features relevant to SARS-CoV-2. However, the complexity and
heterogeneity of individual immune responses necessitated a more specific approach. There-
fore, the data were analyzed at the individual patient level to uncover patient-specific dynam-
ics and functional signatures that might have been masked in the combined dataset. The
analysis focused on patient 07, which had the most cells overall and the most early response
cells - a limiting factor throughout the analysis of this dataset. Notably, the findings regarding
vaccination numbers, time points, and infection status were similar to those observed in the
whole dataset, verifying the observations of the combined analysis.
Figure 3.29: Clonal Dynamics Across Vaccinations for
P07 highlighting the dynamics and proportions of T-cell
clones compared to CEF across vaccinations. The SARS-CoV-2
specific clones are highlighted with color, while the CEF spe-
cific clones are grey.
The plot demonstrated a clonal ex-
pansion of especially one SARS-CoV-2 clone, while the CEF-
specific clones contract.
The TCR sequences were analyzed
to identify and track clonal ex-
pansions of the different clones.
While SARS-CoV-2-specific clones
demonstrate strong and sustained
clonal expansion, indicative of an
active and adaptable immune re-
sponse, CEF-specific clones con-
tract rapidly and remain at low lev-
els. The strong expansion and pro-
liferation between 2 and 4 vaccina-
tions indicated an effective recogni-
tion and proliferation of T-cells in
response to SARS-CoV-2 antigens.
This observation aligns with the
fact that an infection occurred be-
tween these vaccinations and could be driving the observed clonal expansion.
Figure 3.30: Clonal Dynamics Across Vaccinations for P07 SARS-CoV-2 specific cells showing the
dynamics and proportions of persistent and emerging T-cell clones across vaccinations.
Infection happened before the fourth vaccination; clones appearing during the fourth
vaccination are termed emerging.
Page 38 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Data Analysis
3 Results
Furthermore, clonal analysis allowed for the differentiation between persistent and emerg-
ing T-cell clones (figure 3.30), providing insights into the dynamics of the immune response.
Persistent clones were identified as those existing before SARS-CoV-2 infection while emerg-
ing clones were those that appeared in response to the infection (for patient P07, between
vaccination doses 2 and 4). DEA and GSEA (figure A.15) were then performed on cells differ-
entiated by clonal analysis to compare the gene expression profiles of persistent and emerg-
ing clones. The results demonstrated slight differences in the enriched pathways between
the emerging and persistent T-cell clones, with higher cytotoxic activity and a slightly higher
vaccine-induced (VI-GEM) activity and viral response (figure 3.31). These findings indicated
improved cytotoxic activity, proliferative activity, and clonal expansion of the T-cells induced
by vaccination.
Figure 3.31: Comparative Violin Plots of Pathway Activity in Emerging vs Persistent T-cells il-
lustrating the activity of various pathways in emerging versus persistent T-cells. The
pathways analyzed include VI-GEM, Proliferating T-cells, Cytotoxicity Pathway, and Cy-
totoxicity Pathway 2. Each plot compares the distribution and range of pathway activity
scores between the two T-cell identities.
3.4.5
SARS-CoV-2 Epitope GVYFASTEK Mimics CEF Effector Functions
The GZMK+ effector memory cluster contained a higher fraction of cells responding to the
peptides from CEF. Interestingly, in samples from patient P07, a significant number of SARS-CoV-2
reactive cells also clustered within the more CEF-like GZMK+ effector memory cluster. Upon
further investigation, these cells were mostly reactive to one specific peptide, GVYFASTEK
(figure 3.32). This might indicate cross-reactivity between GVYFASTEK and previously elicited
immune response towards CEF.
Figure 3.32: UMAPs of viral infection and peptide-MHC specificity highlighting the
clustering of GVYFASTEK-specific T-cells with the CEF-specific cells.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 39 of 70
==PAGE:52==
3 Results
3.4 Data Analysis
The functional implications of the findings were investigated using DEA, which demonstrated
a higher similarity between the GVYFASTEK and the CEF epitope RPHERNGFTVL, compared
to the SARS-CoV-2 epitope KCYGVSPTK (figure A.16). Key DEGs for the comparison between
the two SARS-CoV-2 epitopes were, as expected, related to the cluster markers, highlighted in
DEA between the two effector memory clusters. GSEA showed lower exhaustion, cytotoxicity,
and vaccine-induced genes (VI-GEM) for GVYFASTEK (figure 3.33, left panel) consistent with
the previous findings related to the difference between the two effector memory clusters.
Moreover, the GVYFASTEK epitope did not cause clonal expansion of any of the TCR clones
reactive to this epitope (figure 3.33, right panel). Overall, GVYFASTEK results in a decreased
cytotoxic response and, unlike KCYGVSPTK and other SARS-CoV-2 epitopes, does not lead to
clonal expansion during vaccination.
Figure 3.33: Comparative Analysis of T-Cell in Response to Peptides GVYFASTEK and
KCYGVSPTK in Patient P07. Left panel: Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) results
compared pathways enriched in T-cells responding to the peptides GVYFASTEK and
KCYGVSPTK. Right panel: Proportional representation of T-cell expansion at 2, 4, and
5 vaccinations was shown in response to peptides GVYFASTEK and KCYGVSPTK in pa-
tient P07. The plot visualized the distribution and expansion dynamics of T-cells specific
to each peptide.
Page 40 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:53==
4
Discussion
Assessing the T-cell-specific immune response towards SARS-CoV-2 in hematological cancer
patients is essential for effective vaccine recommendations and could potentially reduce the
incidence of infection, severe disease, and infection-related deaths. T-cells are proposed to
be the major mediators of disease control, but the knowledge regarding T-cell-mediated im-
munity in response to SARS-CoV-2 is limited for these patients. This master thesis project
investigates the T-cell-specific immune response during vaccination and infection against
SARS-CoV-2 in hematological cancer patients. The project utilizes multimodal single-cell se-
quencing to investigate the functionality and dynamics of CD8+ T-cells at several time points
during vaccination and infection. The results will be discussed below, highlighting the im-
plications for future vaccination strategies and examining the potential and limitations of
multimodal single-cell sequencing in this context.
Induction of Antigen-Specific CD8+ T-cells Through SARS-CoV-2
Vaccination and Infection
Hematological cancer patients are among the immunocompromised individuals prioritized
for vaccination against SARS-CoV-2. Due to the combined impact of their malignancy and
the effects of cancer treatments, these patients often have impaired immune systems, which
likely results in reduced vaccine-induced immunogenicity, as indicated by several studies [3,
38, 39, 40, 42].
Despite the likely reduction in immunogenicity, an immune response is indeed elicited. SARS-
CoV-2-specific CD8+ T-cells were identified in samples from all time points, with significantly
higher numbers observed at time points 4 and 5. i.e., samples from post-infection with either
3, 4, or 5 vaccinations. However, a higher number of SARS-CoV-2-specific cells for these sam-
ples were selected for sequencing, which would affect the resulting cell numbers and data
interpretation. While the data indicates an enhanced immune response over time, defini-
tive conclusions about the exact magnitude of the CD8+ T-cell response should not be made
without considering this selection bias.
Distinct CD8+ T-cell phenotypes were identified, including naive, central memory, and effec-
tor memory T-cells. These were the project’s main focus, and a proportional change from
the early response (time points 1-3) to the late response (time points 4 and 5) indicated a
phenotypic development of the T-cells with more effector memory cells in the late response
compared to more central memory T-cells in the early response. Functional development
was also revealed through DEA and GSEA, where the late response showed more cytotoxic
markers and the earlier showed more memory markers. The alignment of the phenotypic
and functional development suggests a shift towards an effector response, which could be
due to either infection or vaccination, as additional vaccination and infection for most pa-
tients occur between time points 3 and 4. However, it is important to consider the selection
bias in the experiment, as only a few cells can be compared from the early response, which
may affect the interpretation of the results.
Additionally, clonal analysis linked TCR clones and pMHC specificity. The analysis identified
a significant proportion of SARS-CoV-2-specific T-cells targeting the Spike protein. This ob-
servation aligns with the design of the vaccine, which specifically targets the spike protein.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 41 of 70
==PAGE:54==
4 Discussion
Patient-specific clonal analysis revealed differences between persistent and emerging T-cell
clones. Persistent clones consistently maintain their presence, while emerging clones are
characterized as those induced following infection. Persistent clones exhibited higher cyto-
toxicity than emerging clones, indicating a positive effect of vaccination. Overall, the results
suggest a significant improvement of the immune response in hematological cancer patients
after supplementary booster doses, consistent with current research [70].
Functional difference between SARS-CoV-2 and CEF induced T-cell
responses
In addition to evaluating the immune response to SARS-CoV-2, the project also included CEF
specific T-cells to provide a comparative perspective between previously elicited and newly
elicited immune responses.
Comparing the SARS-CoV-2 and CEF immune responses showed clear functional differences,
as the cells clustered in different effector-memory clusters. The SARS-CoV-2-specific CD8+
T-cell cluster (GZMB+) exhibited higher expression of markers for cytotoxic activity, whereas
the CEF-specific T-cell cluster (GZMK+) exhibited higher expression of memory markers, while
still expressing effector markers. Contrary to a more established memory subset ready to
respond to CEF upon re-exposure, this difference likely reflects the ongoing exposure to
SARS-CoV-2 through infection or vaccination.
SARS-CoV-2 Epitope mimics CEF Effector functions
Interestingly, GVYFASTEK, one of the SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific epitopes, was found to clus-
ter in the GZMK+ effector memory cluster with T-cells specific to CEF. This could suggest
that there might be cross-reactivity between GVYFASTEK and an epitope specific to CEF, also
suggested by previous research [31]. In contrast to clones specific for other SARS-CoV-2 epi-
topes, these did not expand with further vaccinations or infection, which indicates a stable
cross-reactive memory response rather than an evolving adaptive response.
Advancing T-Cell Immune Response Assessment through Multimodal
Single-Cell Sequencing
In this project, the T-cell-mediated immune response has been investigated using multimodal
single-cell sequencing.
This approach integrates ADT, pMHC-multimers, TCR sequencing,
RNA sequencing, and Hashtag Oligonucleotide (HTO)s to provide a comprehensive, high-
resolution view of the T-cell. Utilizing these combined modalities achieves a broad under-
standing of T-cell functionality, phenotypic diversity, clonal dynamics, and antigen specificity
within T-cell subsets at multiple time points during immunization.
While scRNA-seq provides high-resolution transcriptomic data, it may not fully capture the
complexity of similar cells like T-cells. Multimodal single-cell sequencing overcomes this by
simultaneously capturing various data layers from individual cells. These include surface pro-
tein expression via ADT, gene expression profiles through RNA sequencing, TCR diversity with
TCR sequencing, antigen specificity via pMHC-multimers, and sample multiplexing through
HTO s. These data modalities allow for a detailed characterization of T-cell subsets, tracking
of their responses over time, and understanding their roles in various immunological con-
texts, and could help determine future vaccine strategies.
Page 42 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:55==
4 Discussion
Despite the inherent advantages of multimodal single-cell sequencing in assessing the T-cell
immune response, it also comes with challenges. The many data layers require numerous
experimental steps to prepare the cells for sequencing, many of which greatly impact the se-
quencing quality. This was highlighted in this experiment, where only 23% of the loaded cells
were successfully sequenced, compared to the normal capture rate of 80%. This was likely
due to a purification step during library preparation, which resulted in significant material
and data loss and could also have affected the quality of the remaining cells.
Furthermore, data processing of scRNA-seq-data is complex and requires several processing
steps to compare the cells biologically. The lack of standardized computational frameworks
complicates the data processing, with the choice of programming language or tool potentially
impacting the biological results. Moreover, the novelty of modalities such as pMHC means
there are currently no validated tools for data processing, resulting in a labor-intensive and
subjective manual approach. This can lead to variations in data interpretation, affecting re-
producibility. The development of automated, standardized, and validated tools for data
processing is crucial to increase objectivity and reproducibility.
In summary, multimodal single-cell sequencing holds the potential to provide detailed in-
sights into the T-cell immune response, which is not possible with other methods. However,
to exploit the data fully, it is important to overcome the limitations through technological ad-
vancements and standardizing analytical methods. Despite these challenges, the comprehen-
sive insights this assay provides into T-cell heterogeneity, dynamics, and functionality hold im-
mense promise for advancing the understanding of immune responses and improving future
vaccine recommendations.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 43 of 70
==PAGE:56==
5
Conclusion
This thesis explored the T-cell-specific response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and vaccination in
hematological cancer patients through a detailed single-cell multi-omics approach. By char-
acterizing the heterogeneity and dynamics of CD8+ T-cell populations, this study revealed di-
verse phenotypic and functional states as well as clonal expansions of CD8+ T during vaccina-
tion and infection. A significant proportional increase in effector memory cells was revealed
after four vaccinations and post-infection. Furthermore, these effector memory cells showed
high expression of cytotoxic markers such as granzyme B (GZMB), granzyme H (GZMH), and
granulysin (GNLY), indicating a well-working and active immune response. T-cell receptor
(TCR) sequence analysis revealed significant clonal expansion of antigen-specific CD8+ T-cells.
This effector response significantly differed from the CEF-specific T-cells, which had lower
clonal expansion and lower expression of cytotoxic markers, indicating a well-working mem-
ory response. Although it was difficult to separate the effect of vaccine-induced and infection-
induced T-cells, persistent and emerging clones could be identified. The persistent clones
showed higher cytotoxicity than the emerging clones, proving the positive effect of vaccina-
tion.
A big part of this project focused on applying and analyzing multimodal single-cell sequencing
data. This advanced technique allowed for the precise characterization of individual T-cells by
integrating transcriptomic, surface protein, TCR profiles, and pMHC-specificity. Furthermore,
HTOs facilitated the handling of samples from different time points within the same experi-
ment, ensuring accurate analysis and comparison across these time points. Understanding
and processing multimodal single-cell data was important for the reliable interpretation of
the data. Through careful preprocessing steps, including quality control, normalization, di-
mensionality reduction, integration, and clustering high quality, reliable data was prepared
for analysis.
This project enhances our understanding of T-cell responses in hematological cancer patients
and underscores the significance of careful data processing in single-cell sequencing studies.
Despite the complexities associated with T-cell-mediated immunity in hematological cancer
patients, this project has advanced the understanding of their immune responses to SARS-
CoV-2. The results confirmed the importance of vaccination, even for hematological cancer
patients. Future research should continue to refine these computational methods and apply
them to diverse immunological contexts to solve the complexities of the immune system
further and to optimize therapeutic and preventive measures for this high-risk group.
Page 44 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization. COVID-19 Epidemiological Update. May 2024. URL: https://
www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports.
[2]
World Health Organization. With the international public health emergency ending, WHO/Eu-
rope launches its transition plan for COVID-19. June 2023. URL: https://www.who.int/
europe/news/item/12-06-2023-with-the-international-public-health-emergency-ending--who-
europe-launches-its-transition-plan-for-covid-19.
[3]
Mounzer E Agha et al. “Suboptimal Response to Coronavirus Disease 2019 Messenger
RNA Vaccines in Patients With Hematologic Malignancies: A Need for Vigilance in the
Postmasking Era”. In: Open Forum Infectious Diseases 8.7 (June 2021). ISSN: 2328-8957.
DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofab353.
[4]
Luis Esteban Tamariz-Amador et al. “Immune biomarkers to predict SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
effectiveness in patients with hematological malignancies”. In: Blood Cancer Journal 11
(12 Dec. 2021). ISSN: 20445385. DOI: 10.1038/s41408-021-00594-1.
[5]
Eman Alefishat et al. “Immune response to SARS-CoV-2 variants: A focus on severity,
susceptibility, and preexisting immunity”. In: Journal of Infection and Public Health 15 (2
Feb. 2022), pp. 277–288. ISSN: 1876035X. DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2022.01.007.
[6]
Paul Moss. “The T cell immune response against SARS-CoV-2”. In: Nature Immunology
2022 23:2 23 (2 Feb. 2022), pp. 186–193. ISSN: 1529-2916. DOI: 10.1038/s41590- 021-
01122-w.
[7]
Armand N. Yazdani et al. Adverse Hematological Effects of COVID-19 Vaccination and Path-
omechanisms of Low Acquired Immunity in Patients with Hematological Malignancies. Mar.
2023. DOI: 10.3390/vaccines11030662.
[8]
Jean S. Marshall et al. “An introduction to immunology and immunopathology”. In: Al-
lergy, Asthma and Clinical Immunology 14 (2 Sept. 2018), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 17101492. DOI:
10.1186/S13223-018-0278-1/TABLES/4.
[9]
Malcolm Howell and Malcolm Shepherd. “The Immune System”. In: Anaesthesia & Inten-
sive Care Medicine 22 (8 Aug. 2021), pp. 518–521. ISSN: 1472-0299. DOI: 10.1016/J.MPAIC.
2021.06.006.
[10]
Lina Sun et al. “T cells in health and disease”. In: Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
2023 8:1 8 (1 June 2023), pp. 1–50. ISSN: 2059-3635. DOI: 10.1038/s41392-023-01471-y.
[11]
Kinjal Shah et al. T cell receptor (TCR) signaling in health and disease. Dec. 2021. DOI: 10.
1038/s41392-021-00823-w.
[12]
K. Murphy and C. Weaver. Janeway’s Immunobiology. W.W. Norton, 2016. ISBN: 9781315533247.
URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=GmPLCwAAQBAJ.
[13]
Choong Hyun Koh et al. “CD8 T-cell subsets: heterogeneity, functions, and therapeutic
potential”. In: Experimental & Molecular Medicine 2023 55:11 55 (11 Nov. 2023), pp. 2287–
2299. ISSN: 2092-6413. DOI: 10.1038/s12276-023-01105-x.
[14]
Luca Gattinoni et al. “T memory stem cells in health and disease”. In: Nature Medicine
2017 23:1 23 (1 Jan. 2017), pp. 18–27. ISSN: 1546-170X. DOI: 10.1038/nm.4241.
[15]
Susan M. Kaech, E. John Wherry, and Rafi Ahmed. “Effector and memory T-cell differen-
tiation: implications for vaccine development”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 2002 2:4
2 (4 2002), pp. 251–262. ISSN: 1474-1741. DOI: 10.1038/nri778.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 45 of 70
==PAGE:58==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[16]
Daniel G. Pellicci, Hui Fern Koay, and Stuart P. Berzins. “Thymic development of uncon-
ventional T cells: how NKT cells, MAIT cells and gamma-delta T cells emerge”. In: Nature
Reviews Immunology 2020 20:12 20 (12 June 2020), pp. 756–770. ISSN: 1474-1741. DOI:
10.1038/s41577-020-0345-y.
[17]
Jennifer L. Hope et al. “Striking a balance-cellular and molecular drivers of memory T
cell development and responses to chronic stimulation”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 10
(JUN July 2019), p. 457666. ISSN: 16643224. DOI: 10.3389/FIMMU.2019.01595/BIBTEX.
[18]
Sarah Adamo et al. “Signature of long-lived memory CD8+ T cells in acute SARS-CoV-2
infection”. In: Nature 602 (7895 Feb. 2022), pp. 148–155. ISSN: 14764687. DOI: 10.1038/
S41586-021-04280-X.
[19]
Yuhan Hao et al. “Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data”. In: Cell 184 (13
June 2021), 3573–3587.e29. ISSN: 10974172. DOI: 10.1016/J.CELL.2021.04.048.
[20]
Anastasia Gangaev et al. “Identification and characterization of a SARS-CoV-2 specific
CD8+ T cell response with immunodominant features”. In: Nature Communications 12
(1 Dec. 2021). ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-22811-y.
[21]
Veronika I. Zarnitsyna et al. “Estimating the diversity, completeness, and cross-reactivity
of the T cell repertoire”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 4 (DEC 2013). ISSN: 16643224. DOI:
10.3389/fimmu.2013.00485.
[22]
Chloe H. Lee et al. “Predicting Cross-Reactivity and Antigen Specificity of T Cell Recep-
tors”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 11 (Oct. 2020). ISSN: 16643224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.
2020.565096.
[23]
Mart M. Lamers and Bart L. Haagmans. “SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis”. In: Nature Reviews
Microbiology 20 (5 May 2022), pp. 270–284. ISSN: 17401534. DOI: 10.1038/s41579-022-
00713-0.
[24]
Esteban Ortiz-Prado et al. “Clinical, molecular, and epidemiological characterization of
the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), a comprehensive
literature review”. In: Diagnostic Microbiology and Infectious Disease 98 (1 Sept. 2020).
ISSN: 1879-0070. DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2020.115094.
[25]
Ahmad Abu Turab Naqvi et al. “Insights into SARS-CoV-2 genome, structure, evolution,
pathogenesis and therapies: Structural genomics approach”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta. Molecular Basis of Disease 1866 (10 Oct. 2020), p. 165878. ISSN: 1879260X. DOI:
10.1016/J.BBADIS.2020.165878.
[26]
Navya Bellamkonda et al. “Immune Response to SARS￿CoV￿2 Vaccines”. In: Biomedicines
10 (7 July 2022). ISSN: 22279059. DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10071464.
[27]
Anthony T. DiPiazza, Barney S. Graham, and Tracy J. Ruckwardt. “T cell immunity to
SARS-CoV-2 following natural infection and vaccination”. In: Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications 538 (Jan. 2021), pp. 211–217. ISSN: 10902104. DOI: 10.1016/J.
BBRC.2020.10.060.
[28]
Elie Antoun, Yanchun Peng, and Tao Dong. “Vaccine-induced CD8+ T cells are key to pro-
tection from SARS-CoV-2”. In: Nature Immunology 2023 24:10 24 (10 Sept. 2023), pp. 1594–
1596. ISSN: 1529-2916. DOI: 10.1038/s41590-023-01621-y.
[29]
Sam M. Murray et al. “The impact of pre-existing cross-reactive immunity on SARS-CoV-
2 infection and vaccine responses”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 23 (5 May 2023),
pp. 304–316. ISSN: 14741741. DOI: 10.1038/s41577-022-00809-x.
Page 46 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[30]
Yuanting Yang et al. “The characterization of CD8+ T-cell responses in COVID-19”. In:
Emerging Microbes and Infections 13 (1 2024). ISSN: 22221751. DOI: 10.1080/22221751.
2023.2287118.
[31]
Cilia R Pothast et al. “SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses can originate
from cross-reactive CMV-specific T cells”. In: eLife 11 (Nov. 2022). Ed. by Gabrielle T Belz
and Satyajit Rath, e82050. ISSN: 2050-084X. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.82050.
[32]
Mark M. Painter et al. “Prior vaccination promotes early activation of memory T cells
and enhances immune responses during SARS-CoV-2 breakthrough infection”. In: Nat
Immunol. 24 (10 Oct. 2023), pp. 1711–1724. ISSN: 15292916. DOI: 10.1038/s41590-023-
01613-y.
[33]
Rahul K. Suryawanshi et al. “Limited cross-variant immunity from SARS-CoV-2 Omicron
without vaccination”. In: Nature 607 (7918 July 2022), pp. 351–355. ISSN: 14764687. DOI:
10.1038/s41586-022-04865-0.
[34]
Petra Langerbeins and Barbara Eichhorst. “Immune Dysfunction in Patients with Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia and Challenges during COVID-19 Pandemic”. In: Acta Haemato-
logica 144 (5 Sept. 2021), p. 1. ISSN: 14219662. DOI: 10.1159/000514071.
[35]
Freda K. Stevenson, Francesco Forconi, and Thomas J. Kipps. “Exploring the pathways to
chronic lymphocytic leukemia”. In: Blood 138.10 (Sept. 2021), pp. 827–835. ISSN: 0006-
4971. DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020010029. eprint: https://ashpublications.org/blood/article-
pdf/138/10/827/1821451/bloodbld2020010029c.pdf.
[36]
Xiaohuan Peng et al. “The yin-yang of immunity: Immune dysregulation in myelodys-
plastic syndrome with different risk stratification”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 13 (Sept.
2022), p. 994053. ISSN: 16643224. DOI: 10.3389/FIMMU.2022.994053.
[37]
Laura Barreyro, Timothy M. Chlon, and Daniel T. Starczynowski. “Chronic immune re-
sponse dysregulation in MDS pathogenesis”. In: Blood 132 (15 Oct. 2018), pp. 1553–
1560. ISSN: 0006-4971. DOI: 10.1182/BLOOD-2018-03-784116.
[38]
Sabine Haggenburg et al. “SARS-CoV-2 vaccine-induced humoral and cellular immunity
in patients with hematologic malignancies”. In: Seminars in Hematology 59 (4 Oct. 2022),
pp. 192–197. ISSN: 15328686. DOI: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2022.11.001.
[39]
Elizabeth R. Francis et al. “Vaccinations in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia”.
In: Seminars in Hematology (2024). ISSN: 15328686. DOI: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2024.01.
003.
[40]
Vanessa Piechotta et al. “Effectiveness, immunogenicity, and safety of COVID-19 vac-
cines for individuals with hematological malignancies: a systematic review”. In: Blood
Cancer Journal 12 (5 May 2022). ISSN: 2044-5385. DOI: 10.1038/s41408-022-00684-8.
[41]
Joanne S.K. Teh et al. Immunogenicity of COVID-19 vaccines in patients with hematologic
malignancies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Apr. 2022. DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.
2021006333.
[42]
Niccolò Riccardi, Marco Falcone, and Dafna Yahav. “Vaccination for SARS-CoV-2 in Hema-
tological Patients”. In: Acta Haematologica 145 (3 May 2022), pp. 257–266. ISSN: 14219662.
DOI: 10.1159/000523753.
[43]
Lukas Heumos et al. “Best practices for single-cell analysis across modalities”. In: Nature
Reviews Genetics 24 (8 Aug. 2023), pp. 550–572. ISSN: 14710064. DOI: 10.1038/s41576-023-
00586-w.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 47 of 70
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[44]
Peter See et al. “A single-cell sequencing guide for immunologists”. In: Frontiers in Im-
munology 9 (OCT Oct. 2018), p. 415498. ISSN: 16643224. DOI: 10.3389/FIMMU.2018.
02425.
[45]
Dragomirka Jovic et al. “Single-cell RNA sequencing technologies and applications: A
brief overview”. In: Clinical and translational medicine 12 (3 Mar. 2022). ISSN: 2001-1326.
DOI: 10.1002/CTM2.694.
[46]
Tallulah S. Andrews et al. “Tutorial: guidelines for the computational analysis of single-
cell RNA sequencing data”. In: Nature Protocols 16 (1 Jan. 2021). ISSN: 17502799. DOI:
10.1038/s41596-020-00409-w.
[47]
Marlon Stoeckius et al. “Cell Hashing with barcoded antibodies enables multiplexing
and doublet detection for single cell genomics”. In: Genome Biology 19 (2018). DOI: 10.
1186/s13059-018-1603-1.
[48]
Joy A. Pai and Ansuman T. Satpathy. “High-throughput and single-cell T cell receptor se-
quencing technologies”. In: Nature Methods 18 (8 Aug. 2021), pp. 881–892. ISSN: 15487105.
DOI: 10.1038/s41592-021-01201-8.
[49]
Luke Zappia, Belinda Phipson, and Alicia Oshlack. “Exploring the single-cell RNA-seq
analysis landscape with the scRNA-tools database”. In: PLoS Computational Biology 14 (6
June 2018). ISSN: 15537358. DOI: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1006245. URL: %5Curl%7Bhttps:
//www.scrna-tools.org/%7D.
[50]
Malte D Luecken and Fabian J Theis. “Current best practices in single￿cell RNA￿seq anal-
ysis: a tutorial”. In: Molecular Systems Biology 15 (6 June 2019). ISSN: 1744-4292. DOI:
10.15252/msb.20188746.
[51]
Kerry A. Mullan et al. “Current annotation strategies for T cell phenotyping of single-
cell RNA-seq data”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 14 (2023). ISSN: 16643224. DOI: 10.3389/
fimmu.2023.1306169.
[52]
Timothy Sundell et al. “Single-cell RNA sequencing analyses: interference by the genes
that encode the B-cell and T-cell receptors”. In: Briefings in Functional Genomics 22.3 (Dec.
2022), pp. 263–273. ISSN: 2041-2657. DOI: 10.1093/bfgp/elac044.
[53]
Amalie Kai Bentzen et al. “Large-scale detection of antigen-specific T cells using peptide-
MHC-I multimers labeled with DNA barcodes”. In: Nature Biotechnology 34 (10 Oct. 2016),
pp. 1037–1045. ISSN: 15461696. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3662.
[54]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria: R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2021. URL: https://www.R-project.org/.
[55]
Kevin Ushey and Hadley Wickham. renv: Project Environments. R package version 1.0.7,
https://github.com/rstudio/renv. 2024. URL: https://rstudio.github.io/renv/.
[56]
Hadley Wickham et al. “Welcome to the tidyverse”. In: Journal of Open Source Software
4.43 (2019), p. 1686. DOI: 10.21105/joss.01686.
[57]
Cell Ranger 7.2 - Official 10x Genomics. URL: https : / / www . 10xgenomics . com / support /
software/cell-ranger/7.2.
[58]
Yuhan Hao et al. “Dictionary learning for integrative, multimodal and scalable single-cell
analysis”. In: Nature Biotechnology (2023). DOI: 10.1038/s41587-023-01767-y.
[59]
Jicun Zhang et al. “An Improved Louvain Algorithm for Community Detection”. In: Mathe-
matical Problems in Engineering (1 Jan. 2021), p. 1485592. ISSN: 1563-5147. DOI: 10.1155/
2021/1485592.
Page 48 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[60]
Ilya Korsunsky et al. “Fast, sensitive, and accurate integration of single cell data with
Harmony”. In: bioRxiv (2019). DOI: 10.1101/461954.
[61]
Luke Zappia and Alicia Oshlack. “Clustering trees: a visualization for evaluating cluster-
ings at multiple resolutions”. In: GigaScience 7.7 (July 2018). DOI: 10.1093/gigascience/
giy083. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/gigascience/giy083.
[62]
Arash Shahsavari, Andi Munteanu, and Irina Mohorianu. “ClustAssess: tools for assess-
ing the robustness of single-cell clustering”. In: bioRxiv (2022). DOI: 10.1101/2022.01.31.
478592. URL: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.31.478592.
[63]
Dvir Aran et al. “Reference-based analysis of lung single-cell sequencing reveals a tran-
sitional profibrotic macrophage”. In: Nature Immunology 20 (2 Feb. 2019), pp. 163–172.
ISSN: 15292916. DOI: 10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y.
[64]
Gianni Monaco et al. “RNA-Seq Signatures Normalized by mRNA Abundance Allow Ab-
solute Deconvolution of Human Immune Cell Types”. In: Cell Reports 26 (6 Feb. 2019),
1627–1640.e7. ISSN: 22111247. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.041. URL: http://www.cell.
com/article/S2211124719300592/fulltext.
[65]
Massimo Andreatta et al. “Interpretation of T cell states from single-cell transcriptomics
data using reference atlases”. In: Nature Communications 12 (1 Dec. 2021). ISSN: 20411723.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-23324-4.
[66]
Massimo Andreatta et al. “SPICA: Swiss portal for immune cell analysis”. In: Nucleic Acids
Research 50 (D1 Jan. 2022), pp. D1109–D1114. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10 . 1093 / NAR /
GKAB1055. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1055.
[67]
Michael I. Love, Wolfgang Huber, and Simon Anders. “Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2”. In: Genome Biology 15 (12 Dec.
2014), pp. 1–21. ISSN: 1474760X. DOI: 10.1186/S13059- 014- 0550- 8/FIGURES/9. URL:
https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8.
[68]
Gennady Korotkevich et al. “Fast gene set enrichment analysis”. In: bioRxiv (Feb. 2021),
p. 060012. DOI: 10.1101/060012. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/060012v3.
[69]
Nicholas Borcherding and Nicholas L. Bormann. “scRepertoire: An R-based toolkit for
single-cell immune receptor analysis”. In: F1000Research 9 (Jan. 2020), p. 47. DOI: 10.
12688/f1000research.22139.1.
[70]
Thomas R. Müller et al. “Additive effects of booster mRNA vaccination and SARS-CoV-2
Omicron infection on T cell immunity across immunocompromised states”. In: Science
Translational Medicine 15.704 (2023), eadg9452. DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adg9452.
[71]
Bingjie Zhang et al. “Multimodal single-cell datasets characterize antigen-specific CD8+
T cells across SARS-CoV-2 vaccination and infection”. In: Nature Immunology 24 (10 Oct.
2023), pp. 1725–1734. ISSN: 15292916. DOI: 10.1038/s41590-023-01608-9.
[72]
Anthony Kusnadi et al. “Severely ill patients with COVID-19 display impaired exhaus-
tion features in SARS-CoV-2&#x2013;reactive CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells”. In: Science Im-
munology 6.55 (2021), eabe4782. DOI: 10.1126/sciimmunol.abe4782. eprint: https://www.
science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciimmunol.abe4782.
[73]
Xinyi Guo et al. “Global characterization of T cells in non-small-cell lung cancer by single-
cell sequencing”. In: Nature medicine 24 (7 July 2018), pp. 978–985. ISSN: 1546-170X. DOI:
10.1038/S41591-018-0045-3. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29942094/.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 49 of 70
==PAGE:62==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[74]
Grégory Seumois et al. “Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of allergen-specific T cells
in allergy and asthma”. In: Science Immunology 5.48 (2020). DOI: 10.1126/sciimmunol.
aba6087.
[75]
Yannick F. Fuchs et al. “Gene Expression-Based Identification of Antigen-Responsive
CD8+ T Cells on a Single-Cell Level”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 10 (Nov. 2019). ISSN:
16643224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02568.
[76]
J. Adam Best et al. “Transcriptional insights into the CD8(+) T cell response to infection
and memory T cell formation”. In: Nature immunology 14 (4 Apr. 2013), pp. 404–412.
ISSN: 1529-2916. DOI: 10.1038/NI.2536.
[77]
Yanchun Peng et al. “An immunodominant NP105–113-B*07:02 cytotoxic T cell response
controls viral replication and is associated with less severe COVID-19 disease”. In: Nat.
Immunol. 23 (1 Jan. 2022), pp. 50–61. ISSN: 15292916. DOI: 10.1038/s41590-021-01084-z.
[78]
Jing Li et al. “KIR+CD8+ T cells suppress pathogenic T cells and ar active in autoimmune
diseases and COVID-19”. In: Science 376 (6590 Apr. 2022). ISSN: 10959203. DOI: 10.1126/
science.abi9591.
[79]
Curtis Cai et al. “Identification of human progenitors of exhausted CD8+ T cells associ-
ated with elevated IFN-γ response in early phase of viral infection”. In: Nature Communi-
cations 2022 13:1 13 (1 Dec. 2022), pp. 1–16. ISSN: 2041-1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-
35281-7.
[80]
Chunhong Zheng et al. “Landscape of Infiltrating T Cells in Liver Cancer Revealed by
Single-Cell Sequencing”. In: Cell 169 (7 June 2017), pp. 1342–1356. ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI:
10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.035.
[81]
Avraham Unterman et al. “Single-cell multi-omics reveals dyssynchrony of the innate
and adaptive immune system in progressive COVID-19”. In: Nature Communications 13
(1 Dec. 2022). ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.1038/S41467-021-27716-4.
Page 50 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
Cell Numbers
Table A.1: Sample Specific Cell counts throughout the scRNA-seq experiment for each sam-
ple, identified by patient ID. From the number of cells sorted during FACS, to num-
ber of sequenced cells, demultiplexed and those left after QC. Additional filtering
was applied, as some wrongly demultiplexed cells were identified during pMHC
classification and finally the cells excluded due to the lack of TCR gene expression
as well as CD3 and CD8 gene expression.
Patient
ID
Pre-seq-
uencing
Post-
sequencing
Post-
demulti-
plexing
Post-QC
Post-
pMHC
classifica-
tion
Post-
Extra
quality
filtering
P0303
1833
263
149
134
131
109
P0304
958
238
157
131
130
100
P0305
3833
1128
951
462
458
318
P0702
1833
609
508
478
477
419
P0704
3885
1173
866
792
790
676
P0705
3833
988
767
688
669
576
P1703
1239
305
199
166
165
137
P1704
2233
618
424
332
328
234
P1705
1313
333
0
0
0
0
P2801
758
165
107
100
100
81
P2802
818
0
0
0
0
0
P2803
859
0
0
0
0
0
P2804
1073
197
127
117
117
93
P0602
2150
558
395
376
376
346
P0604
2640
780
650
606
598
455
P0605
2200
627
485
459
448
388
P1203
500
0
0
0
0
0
P1204
2535
538
361
314
313
241
P1205
2020
481
348
299
299
239
P2102
2420
429
276
239
237
200
P2103
1700
312
181
160
160
151
P2104
1885
329
59
57
57
50
P2105
1132
166
97
80
80
71
P2603
500
0
0
0
0
0
P2604
690
0
0
0
0
0
P2605
610
0
0
0
0
0
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 51 of 70
==PAGE:64==
A Appendix
A.1 Cell Numbers
Table A.2: Cell Counts across Vaccination doses for the complete dataset, SARS-CoV-2 spe-
cific cells and for patient P07 specifically.
1
2
3
4
5
Complete dataset
CEF
46
445
172
31
1
SARS-CoV-2
1
239
144
1013
800
SARS-CoV-2 cells
GZMB+ Tem
0
102
56
802
604
GZMK+ Tem
0
12
1
53
66
Tcm-like
1
106
64
117
96
NK-like
0
14
14
23
21
Naive-like
0
3
8
8
3
MAIT
0
1
1
6
5
KIR+
0
1
0
4
5
Patient P07
GZMB+ Tem
0
51
0
423
296
GZMK+ Tem
0
8
0
35
43
Tcm-like
0
64
0
50
49
NK-like
0
12
0
19
17
Naive-like
0
1
0
3
2
MAIT
0
1
0
4
1
KIR+
0
0
0
3
3
Page 52 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:65==
A.2 Sample information
A Appendix
A.2
Sample information
Table A.3: Sample information used in analyzing the different samples.
hash.ID
Lane
Patient
pat_id
Time
Time_id
Vaccinations
vac_id
Infection
Infection_id2
Diagnosis
bi_vac
S1
1
P03
P0303
3
Early
3
Early
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S3
1
P03
P0304
4
Late
4
Late
TRUE
IA
CLL
FALSE
S4
1
P03
P0305
5
Late
5
Late
TRUE
LA
CLL
TRUE
S5
1
P07
P0702
2
Early
2
Early
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S6
1
P07
P0704
4
Late
4
Late
TRUE
IA
CLL
FALSE
S9
1
P07
P0705
5
Late
5
Late
TRUE
LA
CLL
TRUE
S11
1
P17
P1703
3
Early
3
Early
TRUE
IA
MDS
FALSE
S12
1
P17
P1704
4
Late
3
Early
TRUE
LA
MDS
FALSE
S13
1
P17
P1705
5
Late
4
Late
TRUE
LA
MDS
TRUE
S14
1
P28
P2801
1
Early
1
Early
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S15
1
P28
P2802
2
Early
2
Early
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S16
1
P28
P2803
3
Early
3
Early
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S17
1
P28
P2804
4
Late
4
Late
TRUE
IA
CLL
FALSE
S1
2
P06
P0602
2
Early
2
Early
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S3
2
P06
P0604
4
Late
4
Late
TRUE
IA
CLL
FALSE
S4
2
P06
P0605
5
Late
5
Late
TRUE
LA
CLL
TRUE
S5
2
P12
P1203
3
Early
3
Early
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S6
2
P12
P1204
4
Late
4
Late
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S9
2
P12
P1205
5
Late
5
Late
TRUE
IA
CLL
TRUE
S11
2
P21
P2102
2
Early
2
Early
TRUE
IA
MDS
FALSE
S12
2
P21
P2103
3
Early
3
Early
TRUE
LA
MDS
FALSE
S13
2
P21
P2104
4
Late
3
Early
TRUE
LA
MDS
FALSE
S14
2
P21
P2105
5
Late
4
Late
TRUE
LA
MDS
TRUE
S15
2
P26
P2603
3
Early
3
Early
FALSE
B
CLL
FALSE
S16
2
P26
P2604
4
Late
4
Late
TRUE
IA
CLL
FALSE
S17
2
P26
P2605
5
Late
5
Late
TRUE
LA
CLL
TRUE
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 53 of 70
==PAGE:66==
A Appendix
A.2 Sample information
Page 54 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:67==
A.3 CITE-seq antibody panel
A Appendix
A.3
CITE-seq antibody panel
Table A.4: CITE-seq antibody panel
CD101(BB27)
CD24.1
CD57
CD103
CD244(2B4)
CD58(LFA-3)
CD105
CD25
CD62L
CD107a(LAMP-1).H4A3
CD26
CD62P(P-Selectin)
CD112(Nectin-2)
CD267(TACI)
CD64
CD119(IFN-gamma.R).GIR-
208
CD268(BAFF-R)
CD69.1
CD11a
CD27.1
CD7.1
CD11b
CD270(HVEM)
CD71
CD11c
CD272(BTLA)
CD73(Ecto-5’-nucleotidase)
CD122(IL2RB)
CD274(PD-L1)
CD79b(Igbeta)
CD123
CD278(ICOS)
CD8
CD124(IL4RA)
CD279
CD81(TAPA-1)
CD127(IL7RA)
CD28.1
CD82.1
CD13
CD29
CD83.1
CD134(OX40)
CD3
CD85j(ILT2)
CD137(4-1BB)
CD303(BDCA-2)
CD86.1
CD14.1
CD31
CD88(C5aR)
CD141
CD314(NKG2D)
CD94
CD146
CD319(CRACC)
CD95(Fas)
CD152(CTLA-4)
CD32
CD99.1
CD154
CD328(Siglec-7)
CLEC12A.1
CD155(PVR)
CD33.1
CX3CR1.1
CD158(KIR2DL1/S1/S3/S5)
CD335(NKp46)
Fc.epsilon.RI.alpha
CD158b(KIR2DL2/L3.NKAT2)
CD35
GPR56
CD158e1(KIR3DL1.NKB1)
CD352(NTB-A)
Hamster.IgG
CD16
CD36.1
HLA-A.B.C
CD161
CD38.1
HLA-DR
CD163.1
CD39
HLA-E.1
CD169
CD4.1
Ig.light.kappa
CD18
CD40.1
Ig.light.lambda
CD183(CXCR3)
CD41
IgD
CD185(CXCR5)
CD42b
IgM
CD19.1
CD44.1
Integrin.beta7
CD194(CCR4)
CD45
KLRG1(MAFA)
CD195(CCR5)
CD45RA
LOX-1
CD196(CCR6)
CD45RO
Mouse.IgG1
CD1c
CD47.1
Mouse.IgG2a
CD1d
CD48.1
Mouse.IgG2b
CD2.1
CD49a
Rat.IgG1
CD20
CD49b
Rat.IgG2a
CD21
CD49d
Rat.IgG2b
CD22.1
CD49f
TCR.alpha/beta
CD223(LAG-3)
CD5.1
TCR.V.alpha7.2
CD224
CD52.1
TCR.V.delta2
CD226(DNAM-1)
CD54
TIGIT(VSTM3)
CD23
CD56
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 55 of 70
==PAGE:68==
A Appendix
A.3 CITE-seq antibody panel
Page 56 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:69==
A.4 Gene sets for FGSEA
A Appendix
A.4
Gene sets for FGSEA
Table A.5: Sample information
Gene set name
References
VI-GEM
Multimodal single-cell datasets characterize
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells across SARS-CoV-2
vaccination and infection [71].
Naive T Cells
Identification and characterization of a SARS-CoV-2
specific CD8+ T cell response with immunodominant
features [20].
Effector T Cells
Memory T Cells
T Cell Exhaustion
Severely ill COVID-19 patients display impaired
exhaustion features in SARS-CoV-2-reactive CD8+ T
cells cite [72]
Cytotoxic T Cells
Global characterization of T cells in non-small-cell lung
cancer by single-cell sequencing [73]
IFN Signaling
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of allergen-specific T
cells in allergy and asthma [74]
Viral Response
Gene Expression-Based Identification of
Antigen-Responsive CD8+ T Cells on a Single-Cell Level
[75]
Cell Cycle
Transcriptional insights into the CD8(+) T cell response
to infection and memory T cell formation [76]
Unhelped T Cells
CD4+ T help promotes influenza virus-specific CD8+ T
cell memory by limiting metabolic dysfunction [76]
Cytotoxicity Pathway 2
An immunodominant NP105–113-B*07:02 cytotoxic T
cell response controls viral replication and is
associated with less severe COVID-19 disease [77]
Inhibition Pathways
Cytotoxicity Pathway
KIR+CD8+ T cells suppress pathogenic T cells and ar
active in autoimmune diseases and COVID-19 [78]
Memory Pathway
IFN Response
CD8 EM T Cells
Identification of human progenitors of exhausted CD8+
T cells associated with elevated IFN-γ response in early
phase of viral infection [79]
CD8 TRM T Cells
CD8 Cytotoxic T Cells
NK Cell Receptors
NK-Like Cytotoxicity
NK-Like Suppression
NK-Like Activation
Progenitor Exhausted T Cells
Proliferating T Cells
T Cell Exhaustion Pathway
Landscape of Infiltrating T Cells in Liver Cancer
Revealed by Single-Cell Sequencing [80]
Persisting Clones
Signature of long-lived memory CD8+ T cells in acute
SARS-CoV-2 infection [18]
Effector Pathway
Single-cell multi-omics reveals dyssynchrony of the
innate and adaptive immune system in progressive
COVID-19 [81]
Exhausted T Cells
Terminally Exhausted T Cells
Progenitor Exhausted Pathway
Interferon Alpha/Beta Signaling
Response to Type I Interferon
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 57 of 70
==PAGE:70==
A Appendix
A.5 Peptide MHC Combinations
A.5
Peptide MHC Combinations
Table A.6: pMHC library from SARS-CoV-2 and CEF peptides selected based on pre-
liminary flow cytometry analysis. The pMHCs inducing significant responses in a sig-
nificant number of cells were prioritized to ensure the inclusion of activated T-cells
in the single cell sequencing experiment.
Peptide
HLA
Virus
Protein
FTSDYYQLY
A01:01
SARS-CoV-2
ORF3
LTDEMIAQY
A01:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
TPSGTWLTY
A01:01
SARS-CoV-2
N
TTDPSFLGRY
A01:01
SARS-CoV-2
ORF1
FLLPSLATV
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
ORF1
ALWEIQQV
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
ORF1
KIADYNYKL
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
RQLLFVVEV
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
ORF1
SLIDLQEL
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
SLLSVLLSM
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
ORF1
TLIVNSVLL
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
E
VLNDILSRL
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
YLQPRTFLL
A02:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
GVYFASTEK
A03:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
KCYGVSPTK
A03:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
APHGVVFL
B07:02
SARS-CoV-2
S
SPRRARSV
B07:02
SARS-CoV-2
S
SPRWYFYYL
B07:02
SARS-CoV-2
N
VPGLPGTIL
B07:02
SARS-CoV-2
ORF1
CVADYSVLY
B15:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
GQTGKIADY
B15:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
VASQSIIAY
B15:01
SARS-CoV-2
S
GVVFLHVTY
B35:01
SARS-CoV-2
S_Omi
QPYRVVVL
B35:01
SARS-CoV-2
S_Omi
VPFWITIAY
B35:01
SARS-CoV-2
ORF1
VVFLHVTY
B35:01
SARS-CoV-2
S_Omi
YANRNRFLY
B35:01
SARS-CoV-2
M
VTEHDTLLY
A01:01
CMV
pp65
ALMLRLLRI
A02:01
HHV-1
ICP0
FMVFLQTHI
A02:01
EBV
EBNA3A
GLCTLVAML
A02:01
EBV
BMLF1
ILIEGVFFA
A02:01
HHV-2
GD
RPPIFIRRL
B07:02
EBV
LMP2
TPRVTGGGAM
B07:02
CMV
pp65
RPHERNGFTVL
B07:02
CMV
pp65
LMTYLRGISY
B15:01
HEV
ORF2
Page 58 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:71==
A.6 Additional Plots - Data processing
A Appendix
A.6
Additional Plots - Data processing
Figure A.1: UMAP Projections of cell classification and sample assignment for Channel L2 be-
fore and after filtering. (A & B) UMAP plots showing the initial classification and as-
signment of cells. In panel A, cells are classified into singlets (red), doublets (green), and
negatives (blue) based on their HTO expression profiles. Panel B displays the initial as-
signment of cells to their respective HTOs. (C & D) UMAP plots of cells after excluding
doublets and negatives. In panel C, only singlet cells are retained. Panel D shows the
HTO assignment of the singlets, demonstrating improved separation of the samples fol-
lowing the removal of problematic cells.
Figure A.2: Variable Genes with and without TCRs. Comparison of gene expression variability
with and without T-cell receptors (TCRs). Each plot visualizes the relationship between
average gene expression and standardized variance. Key genes are labeled to highlight
significant variability and underline the significant impact TCR genes have on the vari-
ability between T-cells.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 59 of 70
==PAGE:72==
A Appendix
A.6 Additional Plots - Data processing
Figure A.3: Library Size Distribution per Cell Before and After Normalization. Distribution of
library sizes per cell in raw and normalized data, highlighting the effect of normalization
on cell count and library size. The distribution of the raw data is relatively broad (0-9000)
and peaks around 5000, whereas the normalized data has a more narrow distribution
which peaks around 3000.
Figure A.4: UMAP Projections After Batch Correction for RNA and ADT Data. illustrating the clus-
tering and distribution of cells based on RNA (top row) and ADT (bottom row) modalities
highlighting the correction of batch effects arising from different Patients. The cell rela-
tionships and differences were categorized by sequencing channel, patient, and sample.
The projections demonstrate reduced batch effects.
Page 60 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:73==
A.6 Additional Plots - Data processing
A Appendix
Figure A.5: Elbow Plots for Principal Component Selection in RNA and ADT modalities after
Harmony batch integration. The plots show the standard deviation of each principal
component for RNA (left) and ADT (right) modalities. The cutoff at PC 20 or PC 10 is
indicated by the red dashed line and ensures the caption of sufficient variance for both
modalities.
Figure A.6: Heatmap of Gene Expression and Protein Abundance for Effector Memory Clus-
ters comparing RNA gene expression and ADT protein abundance across two cluster 0
(GZMB+) and cluster 1 (GZMK+). The heatmaps highlighted a higher in cytotoxic activ-
ity in cluster 0 from the transcriptional data and higher abundance of memory surface
markers in cluster 1.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 61 of 70
==PAGE:74==
A Appendix
A.6 Additional Plots - Data processing
Figure A.7: Validation of Cell Type Annotations Using Automated Reference Mapping. Full Sin-
gleR dataset Left: UMAP plots showing cell type annotations. Right: Heatmaps illustrat-
ing consistency of cell type annotations across clusters. The SingleR reference mapping
highlights the difficulty in cell type assignment of closely related cells.
Page 62 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:75==
A.7 Additional Plots - Data Analysis
A Appendix
A.7
Additional Plots - Data Analysis
Figure A.8: Differential Expression Analysis (DEA) Heatmaps at Various Conditions highlighting
the most differentially expressed genes related to vaccinations, time points, infection
status and viral exposure. The heatmaps underlined the close resemblance between
the vaccination and the time points parameters. Only minor differences are observed,
mostly due to viral exposure.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 63 of 70
==PAGE:76==
A Appendix
A.7 Additional Plots - Data Analysis
Figure A.9: Differential Expression Analysis (DEA) Heatmaps for Surface Protein Abundandce
(ADT) at Various Conditions highlighting the the expression patterns of various pro-
teins under different conditions related to vaccinations, time points, infection status,
and viral exposure. The heatmaps underlined the close resemblance between the vac-
cination and the time points parameters. Only minor differences are observed, mostly
due to viral exposure.
Page 64 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:77==
A.7 Additional Plots - Data Analysis
A Appendix
Figure A.10: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from single-parameter pseudobulk anal-
ysis displaying the gene expression changes and statistical significance for different
conditions, with significant DEGs highlighted. Top left: Comparison between 2 vs. 4
vaccinations. Top right: Comparison between early (time point 2) vs. late (time point 4)
responses. Bottom left: Comparison between pre-infected (FALSE) vs. post-infected
(TRUE) cells. Bottom right: Comparison between responses to CEF and SARS-CoV-2.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 65 of 70
==PAGE:78==
A Appendix
A.7 Additional Plots - Data Analysis
Figure A.11: Differential Expression Analysis across Time Points (A) Volcano plot showing differ-
entially expressed genes (DEGs) between time points 2 and 4. Significant DEGs are high-
lighted, with genes such as LTB, LEF1, SELL, TCF7, GZMH, GZMB, and FGFBP2 marked. (B)
Heatmap displaying expression profiles of selected genes across time points. The color
gradient indicates expression levels from low (purple) to high (yellow). (C) Heatmap
of surface marker expression, illustrating differences in immune cell populations be-
tween time points 2 and 4.
Figure A.12: Differential Expression Analysis (DEA) Comparing Spike vs Non-Spike Epitopes on
RNA and ADT Levels Heatmap displaying the differential expression analysis between
Spike and Non-Spike epitopes at both RNA (left panel) and surface marker (ADT, right
panel) levels. The color gradient indicates low (purple) to high (yellow) expression lev-
els. Interestingly, the non-spike cells showed higher expression of surface markers
across most cells, indicating a more uniform and specialized cell subset.
Page 66 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:79==
A.7 Additional Plots - Data Analysis
A Appendix
Figure A.13: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from pseudobulk analysis displaying the
gene expression changes and statistical significance for different conditions, with sig-
nificant DEGs highlighted. Left panel show single parameter pseudobulk analysis and
with comparison between 2 vs. 4 vaccinations, between time point 2 vs. time point
4, and between pre-infected (FALSE) and post-infected (TRUE). Right panel show the
same comparison based on multiparameter pseudobulk analysis.
Figure A.14: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from Differential Expression Analysis dis-
playing the gene expression changes and statistical significance for the effector mem-
ory cells of SARS-CoV-2 reactive T-cells after 2 and 4 vaccinations, respectively. Signifi-
cant DEGs are highlighted and includes naive/central memory markers SELL and TCF7.
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 67 of 70
==PAGE:80==
A Appendix
A.7 Additional Plots - Data Analysis
Figure A.15: Differential Expression Analysis between Persistent and Emerging clones (A)
Heatmap displaying expression profiles of the most differentially expressed genes.
The color gradient indicates expression levels from low (purple) to high (yellow). (B)
Volcano plot showing differentially expressed genes (DEGs) persistent and emerging
clones. Significant DEGs are highlighted. (C) Heatmap of surface marker expression,
illustrating minor differences between persistent and emerging clones.
Figure A.16: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from Differential Expression Analysis dis-
playing the gene expression changes and statistical significance for P07. Compari-
son of (Left panel) two SARS-CoV-2 epitopes, KCYGVSPTK and GVYFASTEK; and Right
panel) CEF epitope RPHERNGFTVL and SARS-CoV-2 epitope GVYFASTEK.
Page 68 of 70
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
==PAGE:81==
A.7 Additional Plots - Data Analysis
A Appendix
Multiomics Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Reactive T-cells in Hematological Cancer Patients
Page 69 of 70
==PAGE:82==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
