==PAGE:1==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
Segmentation using Max-Flow/Min-Cut
Master Thesis
Christian Mikkelstrup
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
Segmentation using Max-Flow/Min-Cut
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Christian Mikkelstrup
Supervised by
Professor Inge Li Gørtz, Professor Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Professor Philip Bille,
and Associate Professor Vedrana Andersen Dahl
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Christian Mikkelstrup - s194345
Signature
Date
12/06/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Image Segmentation is an important problem for researchers, doctors, and biomed-
ical engineers. By transforming the problem, the Graph Cut presents one solution
with the advantages of not requiring training data and incorporating prior knowl-
edge into predictions [1]. The prediction time of this method depends on the graph
and the algorithm and can significantly impact performance for large datasets. The
algorithm BK [2] has a runtime of O(mn2|C|) while its theoretically improved al-
ternative IBFS [3] has a runtime of O(mn2). Despite the difference in theoretical
runtimes, both algorithms are widely used in segmentation problems due to their
strong practical performance. I investigate the practical and theoretical runtime
of these two algorithms. I improve the runtime of BK to O(mn|C|) and introduce
a variant of it, BKop, which uses orphan-path pointers to reduce the runtime to
O(m|C|). Additionally, I bridge the theoretical gap between BKop and IBFS, un-
der the assumptions of |C| = O(m) and m = O(n), commonly encountered in
image segmentation problems. I also show that we can improve the IBFS im-
plementation by keeping children in doubly linked lists. I test implementations of
the algorithms in Python on real-world and synthetic data. I find IBFS with dou-
bly linked lists to be the best algorithm choice in practice of the ones considered,
though other implementations are faster for some datasets. The synthetic data
experiments additionally show how parameters like size, noise, and shape of im-
ages and graphs affect the prediction time. I hope this is the first step towards
designing and choosing faster algorithms and graph constructions for Graph Cuts
in Image Segmentation.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Many thanks to my team of supervisors consisting of Professor Inge Li Gørtz,
Professor Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Professor Philip Bille, and Associate Profes-
sor Vedrana Andersen Dahl. I think we have gathered a great team, and I have
thoroughly enjoyed the first steps on this journey. I look forward to a fantastic
cooperation over the next three years.
I am grateful for my friends and family. They have been pillars of support and
patiently listened to me ramble about ”some new algorithm” that I had just worked
with.
iv
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:7==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Image Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Graph Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
History and related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Project Timeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.6
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.7
Algorithmic Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.8
Thesis Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Graph Cuts for Image Segmentation
6
2.1
Maximum Flow and Minimum Cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Maximum Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Minimum Cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Max-Flow/Min-Cut Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Residual Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.5
Augmenting Path Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Graph Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
First Order Markov Random Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Binary Image Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Surface Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.4
Size of the cut
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
The BK algorithm
21
3.1
The original BK algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Correctness of BK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Runtime of BK
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.3
Heuristics of BK
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
A tighter bound on the runtime of BK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
A faster BK variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.1
The BKop algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.2
Running time of BKop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
The IBFS algorithm
30
vi
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:9==
4.1
The original IBFS algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.1
Correctness of IBFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.2
Runtime of IBFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Improved runtime for segmentation instances . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
An oversight of IBFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Fixing the oversight
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Experimental running time of the Graph Cut
38
5.1
Experiment design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.1
Choice of programming language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.2
Algorithms and implementations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.3
Experimental setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.4
Hardware and software version specification
. . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Real-world data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.1
Real-World Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Synthetic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3.2
Synthetic data experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Discussion
49
6.1
Using Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Is BKop faster? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3
IBFS with doubly-linked lists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.4
IBFS or BK for computer vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.5
How data affects runtime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.6
Next steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Conclusion
54
Bibliography
56
A Appendix
62
A.1 Energy Minimization and Markov Random Fields . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 Synthetic data tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Image Segmentation
The Image Segmentation problem takes an image or a 3D scan as input and out-
puts classes for every pixel/voxel. That is, it divides the input data into segments.
Accurately dividing the data into regions can make downstream tasks possible,
such as further processing, analyzing, or visualization. Because of this, image
segmentation can be the first step in many problems ranging from self-driving
cars to understanding the 3D structures in materials and tissue.
Image segmentation is a significant problem in biomedical and medical image
analysis. Suppose the method is sufficiently accurate and fast. In that case, a
doctor or a researcher might use segmentation on scans to aid everything from
discerning and diagnosing unhealthy tissue to extracting structures of biological
cells and organisms [4]. It can also be a great tool to understand the 3D structure
of tissue after an MRI or CT scan.
The current state of the art within Image Segmentation uses Deep Learning mod-
els, as a trained network can have high pixel-wise accuracy. As a result, if one
has enough training data and is only interested in a model with high pixel-wise ac-
curacy, Deep Learning networks are the go-to model. However, depending on the
downstream tasks, high accuracy is not the only property one might want in Image
Segmentation. Some settings, especially within biomedical 3D image segmenta-
tion, might not have enough training data to train a Neural Network sufficiently.
Some downstream tasks might want constraints on the predictions. Sometimes,
we want to guarantee certain topological features such that the predictions match
our prior knowledge. One such constraint can be that one class has to be pre-
dicted ”inside” other classes, as one would expect the heart to be inside the ab-
domen, known as an inclusion constraint. Also, if we know that the classes we
are trying to predict are surfaces or ”layers” in the image, we would expect the
prediction of classes to follow this. Deep Learning models are pixel-wise classi-
fiers, so they cannot guarantee topological features and are therefore not optimal
if these constraints are essential.
1.2
Graph Cuts
Greig, Porteous, and Seheult [1] were the first to use graph cuts to give an exact
solution to the binary image segmentation problem using a maximum a posteriori
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
1
==PAGE:12==
(MAP) energy minimization formulation. The graph’s vertices correspond to pix-
els, and by choosing edges correctly, one can minimize energy corresponding to
likelihood and smoothness. One efficient algorithm for finding this minimum cut
is finding the maximum flow through the network [5]. Soon after, approximations
of multi-object segmentation were made using graph cuts [6], and interactively
adjustments to predictions were shown to be possible [7].
This graph-based approach does not require training but needs initialized weights.
The inference time is dependent on the image size and the algorithm used. Also,
as the interpretability is high, one can naturally implement small changes to the
graph structure and adhere to constraints and topological features, such as those
found in surface detection [8]. On their own, many of these properties make the
Graph Cut worth investigating. On top of this, some have used Graph Cuts as
a post-processing step to Deep Learning predictions [9, 10, 11, 12], hinting at
methods that utilize both methods to get the benefits of both.
Currently, three different families of algorithms exist that all solve the global energy
minimization problem using various approaches. As they are all exact solvers,
they all give solutions of the same value, so the difference between them lies in
how and how fast they reach the solution. However, the difference in runtime
can be between a few seconds and a few days. Therefore, choosing the correct
method can make or break the feasibility of the model in a real-world setting.
1.3
Scope
The scope of the thesis is within the graph cut algorithms for image segmenta-
tion with a focus on runtime. The investigations were limited mainly to the BK [2]
and IBFS [3] algorithms of the augmenting path family of algorithms. The inves-
tigations are based on practical performance and trying to narrow the theoretical
complexity gap between them. The thesis also considers how to create graphs
from the segmentation data and how different graph parameters affect the runtime.
We chose this scope as the first step towards choosing and designing faster and
more efficient graph cut algorithms for image segmentation.
1.4
History and related work
The graphs proposed for computer vision problems in [1, 13] can be large, which
is a problem for real-time processing. Because of this, Boykov and Kolmogorov
were the first to introduce a graph cut algorithm called BK designed to have high
efficiency within computer vision problems. Despite its poor theoretical complex-
ity, this augmenting path algorithm is still the default choice for many computer
vision problems. As the number of problems solvable by graph cuts and their size
2
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:13==
increased [14, 8, 15], other algorithms focused on computer vision have since
emerged. The newer algorithms focus on improved theoretical performance [3],
better practical performance [16], running in parallel [17], or focus on a different
algorithm family [18, 19, 20]. As the difference in practical performance between
the algorithms can be orders of magnitude, the authors of [21, 22] empirically com-
pared various algorithms on various computer vision instances. They showed that
the default choice of BK was rarely the fastest but could not find one fastest algo-
rithm for all types of problems.
1.5
Project Timeline
The project’s first step was a survey of using graph cuts for image segmentation.
This survey included different graph construction and algorithm families within
segmentation. We also began implementing in Python early on to get practical
results on the running time on datasets used by previous works. As the early
results were hard to interpret and as I had just researched the graph construction,
I created synthetic datasets. We hoped that these synthetic datasets would allow
us to isolate variables in the data to explain the tendencies in the ”real-world”
datasets. Since we could reliably test data of different sizes and of arbitrary size,
we returned to the algorithms.
The existing Python implementations included BK [2] and the high-label variant
from the Push Relabel family HI-PR [23]. Previous work has shown that Push Re-
label algorithms are not as competitive for many computer vision instances [22,
24]. On the other hand, the pseudoflow algorithms seemed like a large project
to begin, as the only public implementations contain 1500 −2500 lines of code in
C++ [25, 26]. We focussed on the IBFS algorithm [3] as it closely resembles BK
but improves on the theoretical bounds. When I wanted to narrow down what
caused the sizeable theoretical gap between the algorithms, I made a runtime
analysis of BK, not present in previous works. This analysis reduced the theoreti-
cal runtime of BK and highlighted the bottleneck for further theoretical reductions.
I then implemented IBFS in Python to compare the practical performance with BK.
Even with the original paper and code, I found poor performance. I narrowed the
poor performance down to a small detail in the original implementation and fixed
it by replacing a singly-linked list with a doubly-linked list. The explorations and
findings have a chapter each, as presented in section 1.8.
1.6
Contributions
I present a runtime analysis of BK improving on the best-known complexity to
O(mn|C|) in section 3.2. I also introduce a variant of the algorithm called BKop in
section 3.3, which further improves the complexity to O(m|C|) or O(m2) assuming
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
3
==PAGE:14==
|C| = O(m). I have implemented IBFS in Python and in section 4.3 pointed out
an alteration that greatly improves practical performance on some segmentation
instances. I also analyzed IBFS under the assumption of |C| = O(m) and found
a complexity of O(mn) in section 4.2. I compared all Python implementations
on ten real-world segmentation datasets in section 5.2, showing large differences
in practical runtime. In section 5.3, I also created two types of synthetic data in
Python, allowing me to find that the image’s size, constraints, noise, and shape
all affect the practical runtime.
1.7
Algorithmic Techniques
The novel variant of BK introduces orphan-path pointers when the search for a
terminal vertex leads to an orphan. The original BK algorithm can repeat this
work multiple times, which is a limiting factor for the algorithm complexity. On the
other hand, when BKop encounters an orphan-path pointer, it will stop the search,
avoiding repeated work. The minor adjustment ensures that BKop follow parent
pointers at most once in an adoption stage, reducing the overall complexity to
O(m|C|). The alteration of IBFS keeps the children in a doubly-linked list. The
existing IBFS algorithm keeps the children in a singly linked list, forcing a linear
search for every saturation of an edge. Even though the sum of work done for
linearly traversing children is within the original O(mn2) bound, I showed that this
causes poor performance for simple binary segmentation graphs. Using doubly
linked lists only needs constant work for every saturation, significantly improving
the practical runtime for many segmentation instances.
1.8
Thesis Organization
The thesis has chapters corresponding to the results and explored topics. An
introduction to Graph Cuts for Image Segmentation is in chapter 2. This section
covers both the family of algorithms considered and the graph construction. The
chapter 3 presents a deep dive into the BK algorithm, which includes an improved
theoretical running time and a faster algorithm variant. Chapter 4 presents a deep
dive into the IBFS algorithm, which includes a variant of the algorithm improving
on a detail in the publicly available code. The chapter 5 then presents experiments
testing the running time on real-world and synthetic data discussed in chapter 6.
4
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:15==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
5
==PAGE:16==
2
Graph Cuts for Image
Segmentation
In section 2.1, the problem of maximum flow and its relation to the minimum cut is
introduced. The introduction will touch on both residual graphs and augmenting
paths. Afterward, section 2.2 describes the graph construction specific to solving
Image Segmentation problems.
2.1
Maximum Flow and Minimum Cut
The minimum cut on a properly designed graph is useful within image segmenta-
tion. We assume a directed graph G = (V, E). To G, we add two unique vertices,
s and t, called terminal vertices. Edges to and from terminal vertices are called
terminal edges, denoted by E(s) and E(t). Adding these to the graph, we get
Gst = (Vst, Est) = (V ∪{s} ∪{t}, E ∪E(s) ∪E(t)). Each edge e ∈Est has a ca-
pacity c(e) ∈Z. We can assume the capacity to be integers, as the graphs come
from images with pixel values represented by integers.
2.1.1
Maximum Flow
The maximum flow problem adds the concept of flow. Along each edge e ∈Est,
we are allowed to send non-negative flow f(e) ∈R>0. If we assign a flow along
each edge e ∈Est, we have a flow f. The flow must be within the bounds of
0 ≤f(e) ≤c(e), ∀e ∈Est, known as the capacity constraint. We say that an edge
e ∈Est is saturated if we can push no more flow along it, meaning that f(e) = c(e).
Additionally, for all vertices v ∈V (not including s and t), we require that the
incoming flow equals the outgoing flow, known as the conservation constraint. In
the maximum flow problem, we want to maximize the outgoing flow from s with
these constraints. We can safely assume s to have only outgoing and t only to
have incoming edges. By the conservation constraint, the outgoing flow from s
equals the incoming flow to t. In other words, we want to push as much flow from
s to t as possible. I denote the value of the flow by |f|.
We can let f in(A) and f out(A) be the sum of the incoming and outgoing flow from
A, respectively. Here A can be a single vertex v ∈Vst or a set of vertices A ⊆Vst.
It is possible to write this graph problem mathematically as a linear programming
problem.
With this, we can write this graph problem mathematically as a linear programming
problem [27].
6
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:17==
2.1.2
Minimum Cut
In the minimum cut problem, we want to partition the vertices Vst into two sets,
denoted S and T. We assume s ∈S and t ∈T. This partition (S, T) ”cuts” the
edges from S to T (not from T to S). We can assign the cut a value |(S, T)| as the
sum of the capacities of the edges cut,
|(S, T)| =
∑
(v,w)∈Est,v∈S,w∈T
c(v, w).
(2.1)
The minimum cut problem wants to minimize |(S, T)|, and we denote the minimum
value by |C|. It is possible to show that the dual to the linear programming problem
of maximum flow is the mathematical formulation of the minimum cut problem [27].
2.1.3
Max-Flow/Min-Cut Theorem
Consider any partition (S, T) of the vertices Vst, where s ∈S and t ∈T, and a
valid flow f. We know that |f| = f out(s) = f in(t). Since we assumed no edges
with incoming capacity into s and no edges with outgoing capacity from t, we also
have |f| = f out(s) −f in(s) = f in(t) −f out(t). By the conservation constraint, we
know that |f| = f out(S) −f in(S) = f out(S) −f out(T). By the capacity constraint,
we then know that |f| = f out(S)−f out(T) ≤f out(S) ≤|(S, T)|. Since this holds for
all cuts, we must have |f| ≤|C|. With this in mind, if we ever have |f| = |(S, T)| for
any partition (S, T), we have that |f| ≤|C| ≤|(S, T)| = |f|. In this case, |f| = |C|,
so we have a maximum flow and a minimum cut.
2.1.4
Residual Graph
We can now introduce the concept of a residual graph, which most maximum
flow algorithms use. A residual graph Gf uses the same vertices Vst but uses
residual edges Ef. Each residual edge e ∈Ef has a residual capacity r(e) ∈R>0.
We can always translate from a graph Gst and a flow f into a residual graph Gf
in the following way: For each edge (v, w) ∈Est, we create a forward residual
edge (v, w) ∈Ef with r(v, w) = c(v, w) −f(v, w) and a backward residual edge
(w, v) ∈Ef with r(w, v) = f(v, w). For multiple residual edges from v to w, we
sum their residual capacities to get a single (v, w) ∈Ef. We remove residual
edges with r(e) = 0. With this construction, each forward residual edge e ∈Ef
with r(e) > 0 corresponds to an edge e ∈Est, where we can push r(e) more
flow before it is saturated. Additionally, each backward residual edge e ∈Ef with
r(e) > 0 corresponds to an edge e ∈Est, where we can reduce its flow by up to
r(e) before f(e) = 0. If we have both Gst and Gf, we can recover f, so many
maximum flow algorithms do operations on Gf instead of altering f.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
7
==PAGE:18==
s
t
5
8
5
3
3
3
2
3
7
4
(a) Graph with capacities.
s
t
5/5
6/8
0/5
1/3
0/3
0/3
1/2
3/3
2/7
4/4
(b) Graph with flow.
s
t
5
2
5
2
4
3
1
3
5
4
2
1
6
(c) Residual graph from 2.1b
s
t
5/5
7/8
3/5
2/3
0/3
3/3
2/2
2/3
6/7
4/4
(d) Max flow and min cut.
Figure 2.1: Example graph Gst with n = 6 vertices and m = 10 edges. Bold edges
specify an augmenting path, and dashed edges specify cut edges.
2.1.5
Augmenting Path Algorithms
One family of algorithms to find the maximum flow of a graph uses augmenting
paths. We start with an empty flow f, such that f(e) = 0, ∀e ∈Est. The algorithm
tries to find a simple path from s to t that follows edges e ∈Est where c(e)−f(e) >
0 or goes in the opposite direction of edges e ∈Est with f(e) > 0, called an
augmenting path. In the residual graph Gf, an augmenting path corresponds to a
simple st-path, as we have removed all edges e ∈Ef with r(e) > 0. The algorithm
then pushes δ flow along e ∈Est corresponding to used forward residual edges
and reduces the flow by δ on e ∈Est corresponding to used backward residual
edges. In the residual graph Gf, this corresponds to reducing the residual capacity
r(e) by δ along the augmenting path and increasing the residual capacity r(e) by
δ in the reverse direction. If any edges e ∈Est become saturated by the push,
this corresponds to reducing r(e) of a forward residual edge to 0, removing that
edge from Ef. Similarly, if we remove all the flow f(e) of an edge e ∈Est, this
corresponds to reducing r(e) of a backward residual edge to 0, removing it from
Ef.
We know that we are allowed to push δ > 0 flow along the found augmenting path
because we only follow residual edges with r(e) > 0. If we do this, the updated
flow f ′ with |f ′| = |f| + δ still satisfies the conservation constraint on all vertices
8
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:19==
v ∈V , as we balance out any increase of flow into v by a corresponding decrease
of flow out of v. Suppose we let δ be the minimum r(e) on the augmenting path.
In that case, we know that we also satisfy the capacity constraint for all edges
e ∈Est, as r(e) exactly corresponds to the flow we are allowed to push or reduce
along edges e ∈Est. We also know that we cannot push more flow along this
path, as we have saturated (and thus removed) at least one residual edge on the
augmenting path in Ef, corresponding to f(e) reaching 0 or c(e) in Est.
Augmenting path algorithms find and push flow along augmenting paths as long
as they exist. If we cannot find an augmenting path, consider the vertices A that
are reachable from s and its complement B = Vst\A. Since we cannot find an
augmenting path, no residual edges go from A to B. Therefore, all edges (a, b) ∈
Est with a ∈A and b ∈B are saturated (f(a, b) = c(a, b)), and all edges (b, a) ∈Est
have no flow (f(b, a) = 0). In this case, |f| = f out(A)−f in(A) = f out(A) = |(A, B)|.
By section 2.1.3, |f| is a maximum flow, and (A, B) is a minimum cut. Therefore,
if an augmenting path algorithm terminates, it can return both the maximum flow
and the minimum cut.
If we assume integer residual capacities (r(e) ∈Z) before pushing flow, and since
we set δ to the minimum r(e), we know δ ∈Z. Since r(e) is increased and de-
creased by exactly 0 or δ, we also have r(e) ∈Z after pushing flow. Starting with
an empty flow, all residual edges e ∈Ef have r(e) = c(e) or r(e) = 0. Since
we assumed c(e) ∈Z, we have by induction that both the residual capacity, δ,
and the flow value are integers (r(e), δ, |f| ∈Z). Since we increase the flow by
δ after each push, we must have a finite number of pushes (at most |C|) before
terminating with a maximum flow, |f| = |C|.
The difference between algorithms in this family lies in how they find augmenting
paths. If we take any augmenting path we can find, for instance, using depth-
first search in O(m), we get the Ford Fulkerson algorithm in O(m|C|) time [5].
For a deep dive into two algorithms used for computer vision instances, see the
chapters 3 and 4.
2.2
Graph Construction
Section 2.2.1 describe First-order Markov random fields, the general mathemat-
ical formulation on which the graph constructions lie. Then, a few examples of
classic graph constructions will be described and related to the Markov random
field, of which section 2.2.2 describe binary image segmentation and section 2.2.3
outline surface detection. Examples of graph constructions will be on the toy-
problem image found in fig. 2.2a.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
9
==PAGE:20==
2.2.1
First Order Markov Random Field
The standard way to model an image into a graph uses first-order Markov random
fields (MRF). I will use romantypestyle for MRF graphs to distinguish them from
the graph on which we find the graph cut. The MRF consists of an undirected
graph G = (V, E), a set of labels L = {l1, ..., lk}, and a probability distribution
P on the label space X = L|V|. That is, each possible assignment of labels to
vertices X ∈X has a probability of that assignment being correct, P(X) > 0. The
Markovian assumption is that the assignment of a label to a vertex q ∈V depends
only on the assignment of neighboring vertices, Nq. For first-order MRF, we can
maximize this probability and thus find the optimal label assignment by minimizing
the energy,
E(X) =
∑
(u,v)∈E
g(u, v, Xu, Xv) +
∑
v∈V
h(v, Xv).
(2.2)
Here g and h are real-valued functions that depend only on the vertices u, v ∈V
and their label assignments Xu, Xv ∈L. For more details on this transformation
from maximizing probabilities to minimizing energy, see appendix A.1. The sim-
plest neighborhood, Nq, is just the 4 pixels that surround q (corresponding 6 voxels
in 3D) and can be seen in fig. 2.2b. These 4- and 6-neighborhoods are extendable
to 8- and 26-neighborhoods by connecting the diagonals with an identical energy
formulation under the first-order assumption.
In eq. (2.2), the terms h(v, Xv) describe the energy required for deciding that the
vertex v ∈V should have the label Xv ∈L. This term can be thought of as related
to the likelihood of the pixel assignment. The terms g(u, v, Xu, Xv) describe the
energy required for setting labels to pairs of (neighboring) vertices. For an image,
this can punish similar pixels being labeled differently or contrasting pixels given
the same label. Think of this term as related to the prior knowledge of the pixel
assignment, which can encode assumptions like smoothness across the image.
Note that we can assume both g(u, v, Xu, Xv) and h(v, Xv) to take non-negative
values. Otherwise, we can find two values, cg and ch.
cg =
min
u,v∈V
Xu,Xv∈L
{g(u, v, Xu, Xv)}
ch = min
v∈V
Xv∈L
{h(v, Xv)}.
(2.3)
We get the same assignment of labels X ∈X if we subtract cg and ch from all
terms (for g referring to identical and different neighboring labels). Therefore, we
10
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:21==
57
101
24
225
238
9
12
38
200
180
141
63
59
27
245
194
(a) Noisy image to run segmentation on.
(b) 4x4 Markov random field
Figure 2.2: Here are the steps to go from an example (4x4) image to a Markov
random field with |Nq| =4. Vertices in 2.2b are given colors to indicate that color
values can determine the energies g and h but otherwise hold no meaning in the
Markov random field.
assume non-negative values for h and g.
min
X E(X) = min
X
∑
(u,v)∈E
(g(u, v, Xu, Xv) −cg) +
∑
v∈V
(h(v, Xv) −ch)
= min
X
∑
(u,v)∈E
g(u, v, Xu, Xv) +
∑
v∈V
h(v, Xv) −|E|cg −|V|ch
= min
X
∑
(u,v)∈E
g(u, v, Xu, Xv) +
∑
v∈V
h(v, Xv).
(2.4)
2.2.2
Binary Image Segmentation
The first use of graph cuts for image segmentation was by Greig, Porteous, and
Seheult [1]. They created a directed graph Gst, with two additional vertices, the
source s and the sink t and terminal edges E(s) and E(t). That is, Gst = (Vst, Est) =
(V ∪{s, t}, E ∪E(s) ∪E(t)). The vertices v ∈V correspond to the vertices in the
MRF v ∈V. They then give every edge e ∈Est a capacity c(e) based on it being
a terminal or neighboring edge.
c(e) = c(u, v) =



g(u, v, Xu, Xv)
if e ∈E
h(v, Xv)
if e ∈E(s) ∪E(t)
(2.5)
Figure 2.3 shows this graph. The authors make additional assumptions on eq. (2.2)
specific to the binary segmentation problem.
• L = {0, 1}
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
11
==PAGE:22==
(a) Example Graph (top-down)
t
s
(b) Example Graph (side view)
Figure 2.3: Both figures depict the same graph for binary image segmentation
from two different angles. In 2.3a, we see none of the terminal edges (shown in
black), and in 2.3b, we see only some neighborhood (shown in grey) and terminal
edges. Despite not being shown, all edges have a capacity.
• g(u, v, Xu, Xv) = αuv(1 −δXuXv).
Here, αuv is a non-negative symmetric scalar, and δX,Y is the indicator function. In
other words, αuv = αvu ≥0 and δX,Y = 1 if X = Y . That is, the energy contribution
from g is 0 when neighboring vertices have the same label, and αuv when given
different labels. Note that the value of αuv is a scalar value that can vary for every
edge (u, v) ∈E. αuv can be set for an image based on the difference in image
intensity or as a constant over the entire image (general smoothness). Inserting
this into eq. (2.2) gives
E(X) =
∑
(u,v)∈E
αuv(1 −δXuXv) +
∑
v∈V
h(v, Xv)
(2.6)
We still have the freedom to select h(v, Xv) as we want. In the original paper [1],
they assume conditional independence of a vertex v given only the label Xv with
known conditional density function f(v|Xv). Then, we can set
h(v, Xv) =



max(0, ln f(v|1)
f(v|0))
if Xv = 0
max(0, ln f(v|0)
f(v|1))
if Xv = 1.
(2.7)
By letting αuv be related to the prior distribution, they argue for the graph cut being
the exact solution to the maximum a posteriori estimate for eq. (2.6). We encode
this energy into the graph G by setting the terminal edge capacities before finding
the minimum cut. If the distribution is unknown, various approximations of the val-
ues exist. Neural Networks and user interaction are options, but using differences
12
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:23==
in image intensity to a known class is the simplest. For the graph corresponding
to fig. 2.2a, where vertices reachable from s predict the white class, a sensible
choice would be
c(s, v) =I(v)
c(v, t) =255 −I(v)
(2.8)
Note that if both c(s, v) > 0 and c(v, t) > 0 for some vertex v ∈V , we can prepro-
cess the graph by pushing min{c(s, v), c(v, t)} flow along both, saturating one of
them. This preprocessing ensures that we only connect each vertex v to s or t.
Using these capacities for the image, graph G gives the graph construction and
corresponding maximum flow in the residual graph seen in fig. 2.5.
Correctness of the cut
To see that the minimum cut of the graph in fig. 2.3 also gives the corresponding
minimum in eq. (2.6), we can take a look at an arbitrary cut in fig. 2.4. Above
or below every vertex, we cut exactly one terminal edge with its capacity corre-
sponding to the energy of h. Therefore, we can use the cut edge to determine the
pixel class corresponding to that vertex. Also, when neighboring vertices have dif-
ferent labels, we cut precisely one neighbor edge with its capacity corresponding
to the energy of g. That is, there is a one-to-one correspondence to the energy
minimization problem.
min
X E(X) = min
X
∑
(u,v)∈E
αuv(1 −δXuXv) +
∑
v∈V
h(v, Xv)
= min
cut on V
∑
(u,v)∈cut neighbor edges
αuv +
∑
(s,v),(v,t)∈cut terminal edges
h(v, Xv)
(2.9)
Since the cut directly corresponds to the energy, and we are finding the minimum
cut, we are also finding the minimum energy.
t
s
Figure 2.4: Example binary graph cut (side view). The graph shows cut edges
as dashed. The gray edges correspond to αuv and black edges correspond to
h(v, Xv) from eq. (2.9).
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
13
==PAGE:24==
Size of the graph
We have two terminal vertices and one vertex for every pixel in the image I, so
n = O(|I|). Every vertex is connected to its neighbourhood of size |Nv| = O(1)
and the terminal vertices, so m = O(|I| · (2 + |Nv|)) = O(|I|).
2.2.3
Surface Detection
Li et al. presented a Surface Segmentation in [8], describing how to find one or
multiple surfaces in 3D in volumetric data. By assigning energy (or a cost) to
the voxels of the surface, this graph construction also corresponds to an energy
(or cost) minimization problem with added constraints of a surface. This section
explains a graph construction restricted to 2D images. It will go through single
surface and multiple surface detection and describe its relation to eq. (2.2).
A Single Surface
Single surface segmentation in an image has constraints on the predictions: if
one pixel is part of the surface set, all pixels below it (in the same column) must
be in the same set. The surfaces have further constraints on smoothness, such
that the surface can never jump more than ∆edges up or down from one column
of pixels c to the next c + 1. These constraints make sense if the image we are
considering depicts a cross-section or different layers of material. We can also
force these constraints by ”unfolding” a circle through radial sampling, as shown
in fig. 5.3.
Li et al. described how to transform the segmentation problem into the closed
set graph problem in a directed graph. Here, if one vertex v is part of the set, all
vertices reachable from v should also be in the set. In [28], they show that the min-
imum cost set is solved using the minimum cut algorithm on the proper graph. The
following will describe this graph from the perspective of the energy minimization
framework from eq. (2.2), matching the descriptions given in section 2.2.2.
The most straightforward single surface graph is similar to binary image segmen-
tation. It has a single layer of vertices V corresponding to the pixels of the image
and reuses the terminal edges with capacities h(v, Xv) if e ∈E(s) ∪E(t), as de-
scribed in section 2.2.2. Other options exist for energy/costs that might use image
intensities and prior knowledge to guide the surface’s position based on the edge’s
properties (edge-based cost functions) or the interior and exterior of the surface
(region-based cost functions). The cost function is an engineering choice and can
be adjusted to find the desired surface. Examples of cost functions and how they
affect the capacities are found in the original paper [8] but do not affect the running
time.
The internal edges (u, v) ∈E, have capacity c(e) = g(u, v, Xu, Xv) = ∞and are
only present to ensure the cut satisfies the constraints of smoothness and the
14
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:25==
(a) Binary graph for image with αuv = 50
(b) Partition of vertices on either side of the minimum cut in the residual graph after running
maximum flow.
Figure 2.5: Graph G and residual graph Gf corresponding to the image in fig. 2.2a.
Green and orange edges correspond to terminal edges to and from s and t, re-
spectively.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
15
==PAGE:26==
∆
(a) Visualization of inter-column edges,
Ecol. Placing edges of capacity ∞going
diagonal and ∆downwards enforce con-
straints. The dotted and dashed lines rep-
resent two different impossible cuts. As-
suming S is below the lines, the shown
lines cut the bold edges of infinite capac-
ity.
The dotted line crosses a column
more than once, and the dashed line has
a height change of more than ∆.
δu
col a
col b
δl
(b) Visualization of inter-layer edges, Elay.
Assuming column a represents a surface
”above” column b, the diagonal edges en-
force upper and lower bounds between
the surfaces. The dashed line must have
a height change of at least δl
= 1 to
avoid cutting an edge, guaranteeing non-
overlapping surfaces. The dotted line has
a height change of more than δu = 3, cut-
ting the bold edge, and is therefore impos-
sible.
Figure 2.6: Visualization of how inter-column edges enforce constraints. I have
taken inspiration from [8] for this figure.
closed set. One set of edges connects all the vertices in a column with a directed
edge ”downwards,” denoted with Ecol. These edges ensure that at most one edge
in a column can be cut, as the alternative implies a cut with capacity ∞. The
other set of edges diagonally connects neighboring columns of the image c and
c′, denoted with EN. It connects all pairs of vertices between the columns (both
ways) with a difference of ∆”going down.” Figure 2.6a visualize these edges. To
see that these edges enforce smoothness, assume that each vertex in column c
of height y has an edge going to column c + 1 at height y −∆. Now consider that
the first vertex ”below the cut” in column c (the first vertex in the column in S) has
height z. That would force the vertex in column c + 1 at height z −∆to also be in
S, as we otherwise would have an edge from S to T with capacity ∞. As these
edges are symmetric from column c + 1 to column c, the cut also cannot increase
by ∆, which shows the wanted smoothness.
Like we did in section 2.2.2, we can construct a graph based on the example image
in fig. 2.2a. Figure 2.8 shows the above-described constraints in the surface graph
and the maximum flow in the residual graph. Looking at fig. 2.7, we see that the
constraint edges have affected the prediction. Where the binary segmentation
16
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:27==
(a) Binary image segmentation.
(b) Single surface segmentation.
Figure 2.7: Predictions of the same image from the binary and single surface
segmentations.
predicts blobs of both foreground and background (white and black), the surface
segmentation predicts one connected and ”smooth” surface.
Multiple Surfaces
If we are to segment an image with k ≥2 surface, we enter the multi-class classifi-
cation problem with k + 1 > 2 classes. The smoothness constraints still apply, but
now we constrain the predictions of each class to non-overlapping surfaces across
the height of the image. We can place additional surface constraints that specify
the minimum or maximum distance between two surfaces. In a cross-section, this
corresponds to imaging k + 1 layers of material or k changes in layers of material.
Like for section 2.2.3, we can get these constraints by ”unfolding” layered circles
through radial sampling, as shown in fig. 5.3. By constructing the graph described
below, we can do multi-class surface segmentation using a single cut.
The graph for multiple surface segmentation makes k copies the graph’s ver-
tices in section 2.2.3, described as k layers. We connect each layer to the same
terminal vertices s and t. The terminal edges in each layer have their capacity
set corresponding to a cost function h for that layer. We can set a smoothness
∆i, i = 1, ..., k within each layer and keep the edges Ecol, ensuring that the cut
does not cross a column in a layer more than once. If we were to find the min-
imum cut using this graph, we would be able to find k surfaces. However, they
would most likely overlap in some places and have large distances between sur-
faces in others. We might have prior knowledge telling us this is impossible, say
if we are imaging inner, center, and outer materials or different tissue walls in a
medical scan. In this case, we can add inter-layer edges, Elay, placing an upper
bound δu and a lower bound δl on the distance between each neighboring pair of
surfaces.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
17
==PAGE:28==
All edges in Elay go diagonally between the same column in neighboring layers
and have capacity ∞. Assume that column a corresponds to a surface ”above” the
surface corresponding to a column b in a neighboring layer. If we want to enforce
an upper bound δu on the distance from surface a down to surface b, we make
diagonal edges from column a go diagonally ”down” to vertices of column b with
a height difference of δu. Like the smoothness constraints, these edges force the
cut to satisfy the upper bound between a and b, as any height difference of more
than δu implies that the cut moves more than δu vertices ”down.” In this case, at
least one cut edge starts in column a and ends in column b with capacity ∞. If we
want to enforce a lower bound δl on the distance from surface a down to surface
b, we make diagonal edges from column b go diagonal to vertices of column a
with a height difference of δl. If the edges go ”upwards,” this ensures that the two
surfaces are non-overlapping, and if the edges go ”downwards,” they are allowed
to cross, but surface b cannot be more than δl above surface a. The arguments for
this follow the case for the constraints on the upper bound. Figure 2.6 visualize
these edges.
Size of the Graph
As k layers of the graph are present in multiple surface segmentation, the number
of vertices in the graph is O(k|I|). Each vertex has up to 6 edges: one terminal,
one down the column, two smoothness edges between columns in a layer, and
edges for upper and lower distances between layers. Therefore, we can deter-
mine the number of edges to be O(k|I|). Single surface segmentation has k = 1,
so the number of vertices and edges is O(|I|).
2.2.4
Size of the cut
In section 2.1.5, we found that algorithms might have their runtime upper bounded
by the cut capacity, |C|. In general, we are unable to give a bound on this value.
However, for many segmentation problems, we have |C| = O(m). We get this
bound if we have an upper bound cu on the capacity of edges in the cut, which
is independent of the size of the graph. If we have this upper bound, we know
that |C| ≤m · cu = O(m). We can get the upper bound of cu if we design h and g
such that h(v, Xv) ≤cu and g(u, v, Xu, Xv) ≤cu. We can still have some of them
be of infinite capacity like those introduced for constraints as long as a feasible
solution exists. The minimum cut does not include edges of infinite capacity for a
solution satisfying the constraints. As a result, if we let c(e) ∈{0, 1, 2, ..., cu, ∞} for
a problem with a feasible solution, we limit the number of augmentations to O(m).
This will be useful later.
18
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:29==
(a) Simple surface graph with ∆= 1.
(b) Partition of vertices on either side of the minimum cut in the residual graph after running
maximum flow.
Figure 2.8: Example surface segmentation graph for the image in fig. 2.2a. Green
and orange edges correspond to terminal edges to and from s and t, respectively.
Yellow edges have infinite capacity.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:31==
3
The BK algorithm
The BK algorithm [2] by Boykov and Kolmogorov is an augmenting path algorithm
developed for vision instances like image segmentation. Despite having a poor
theoretical worst-case running time, it has good empirical performance on many
problems. It is common to find BK or variants in many libraries used for vision [29,
30, 31, 32], and it is often the default choice. Because of this, and as it was the
first graph cut algorithm developed for vision instances, it is often the benchmark
when presenting new algorithms for vision.
This chapter will first describe the original BK algorithm. The following section
will lower the best-known upper bound on the complexity of the BK algorithm.
The final section will present a new variant of the BK algorithm, BKop, that is
theoretically faster than BK.
3.1
The original BK algorithm
The algorithm maintains two trees, S rooted in s and T rooted in t, over the residual
edges. Initially, we have only s ∈S, t ∈T. The algorithm then loops through 3
stages: growth, augmentation, and adoption. At the start of the outer loop of the
algorithm, each vertex is either an S-vertex (in S), a T-vertex (in T), or a free
vertex (in neither). Vertices in S or T can be either active or passive. Edges in
S have positive residual capacity towards the leaves (away from the root s), and
edges in T have positive residual capacity towards the root (t).
The description of the growth stage assumes that we grow the tree S, but the
arguments are symmetric for T. We pick any active vertex v ∈S and explore all
its neighbors w (for S, along the forward edges (v, w)). If w is a free vertex, we
add it to S, update its parent pointer, and make it an active vertex. If w is in T,
we have found an st-path and go to the augmentation stage. Having explored all
neighbors, if we find no edges from v to T, we continue to the next active vertex.
If no more active vertices exist, then there are no edges leaving S with positive
residual capacity, and we can terminate the algorithm with a maximum flow.
We only enter the augmentation stage when we have found an edge (v, w), where
v ∈S and w ∈T. We get an augmenting path if we follow parent pointers from
v to s and w to t. Pushing flow along this path saturates at least one edge. If the
saturated edge (x, y) ̸= (v, w) has x, y ∈S, y becomes an S-orphan (added to
Os), otherwise x, y ∈T and x becomes a T-orphan (added to Ot). If we create
any orphans, we process them during the adoption stage.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
21
==PAGE:32==
s
t
v1
v2
v3
v4
S
free
T
u1
u2
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
w6
Figure 3.1: A visualization of S, T, and the free vertices maintained throughout
the algorithm. This visualization is valid for both BK and IBFS.
We go through all orphans v ∈Os∪Ot in the adoption stage. Since we might have
saturated edges in S and T, we lose the guarantee that they are trees. Instead,
they are forests, where the root of each tree is either s, t, or an orphan. Note that
orphans must be roots of their respective trees. The following steps assume that
v ∈Os as the argumentation for the other case is symmetric. We go through all
(for S, incoming) edges (u, v) with positive residual capacity. We need to check if
u ∈S (the forest) for each of them. If u ∈S, we still need to check if the root of its
tree is s, as the augmentation might have saturated an edge on the su-path. If we
find an su-path, we reconnect v to S with u as its parent. On the other hand, if we
cannot find any potential parent u with a path back to s, we make v a free vertex
and add all children of v as orphans. After adding the children, we go through all
(for S, incoming) edges (u, v) and make u active, as we might find an su-path at
a later time, whereby we can grow along the (u, v) edge.
3.1.1
Correctness of BK
We terminate when there are no active vertices in S or T, which means that either
S or T consists of only passive vertices. Assuming that all vertices in S are pas-
sive, we must show that all edges (v, w) starting from the (passive) vertex v ∈S
implies that w is in S. We make a vertex passive only once we have scanned
all its (for S, outgoing) neighbors and found none in T. All encountered free ver-
tices along edges with positive residual capacity are added to S and made active.
Therefore, making a vertex passive implies that all outgoing neighbors in Gf are in
S. If we later remove that passive vertex from S, we scan all potential parents and
make them active again, ensuring that no residual edges from passive vertices
leave S. No residual edges leave S, so no augmenting paths exist at termination.
By section 2.1, the cut across the partition (S, V \S) is minimum. The arguments
are similar if all vertices in T are passive.
22
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:33==
v
s
u1
u2
w1
w2
w3
Figure 3.2: A visualization of S after v becomes an orphan. This visualization is
valid for both BK and IBFS.
We can only process each vertex once within the same growth stage, so the
growth stage either terminates the algorithm or initiates the augmentation stage
with the edge (v, w), where v ∈S and w ∈T. In the augmentation stage, we can
follow parent pointers from v and w. S is a tree that contains v and T is a tree that
contains w, so we clearly have an st-path. By the properties of S and T, all edges
from s to v, the edge (v, w), and all edges from w to t all have positive residual
capacity. If the capacities are integers, we can push an integer flow before an
edge is saturated. The integer capacity assumption guarantees that the number
of iterations is at most |C|. We remove saturated edges in S or T from that tree,
creating orphans and ensuring edges in S and T always have positive residual
capacity.
When we have orphans to process in the adoption stage, S and T have become
forests with each orphan as the root of their tree. When processing an S-orphan,
we will either reconnect it to S (using an edge with positive residual capacity) or
make it free, which creates new orphans (roots of new trees) at an increasing
distance from s. As new orphans have strictly increasing distance, we will even-
tually process all S orphans. When no orphans are left, we have restored that S
is a tree because the only tree in the forest has s as the root. Similar arguments
hold for T. As S and T are trees in the first iteration (they only consist of s and
t, respectively), this shows that S and T always are trees with positive residual
capacity along their edges when the growth stage begins.
3.1.2
Runtime of BK
Boykov et al. base the runtime of BK on the runtime of Dinic’s algorithm [33].
Dinic’s algorithm has the complexity O(mn2) by augmenting on shortest paths.
As the search trees S and T are not shortest-path trees in BK, Dinic’s complexity
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
23
==PAGE:34==
analysis no longer holds. Noting that BK make at most |C| iterations of the stages,
where |C| is the cost of the minimum cut, the authors claim a trivial (and possibly
very large) upper bound of O(mn2|C|). In their experimental comparison, it out-
performs other flow algorithms with better theoretical bounds on vision instances,
explaining the use in practice. No examples show this complexity to be tight [3],
but a review of the performance across a large range of computer vision datasets
shows the performance to vary significantly depending on the dataset [22]. The
section 3.2 looks closer at the running time of BK.
3.1.3
Heuristics of BK
The BK algorithm uses a list of heuristics. They might speed up the practical
running time but do not affect the algorithm’s worst-case running time.
The algorithm assigns to each vertex v ∈V a distance ds(v) or dt(v) when they
are in S or T, respectively, and a timestamp indicating when the algorithm last
updated the distance. This distance is a heuristic that (when updated) describes
the distance from s or t, tracing only parent pointers in S or T. These extra values
allow us to make heuristic improvements to the different stages of the algorithm.
During the growth stage, if the neighboring edge (v, w) is between vertices in the
same tree and allows for a shorter path to w, we use it. We reduce ds(w) by using
the sv-path and update its parent pointer, distance, and timestamp. The global
timestep is updated when the growth step ends with an augmenting path.
When processing the orphan v ∈Os (or v ∈Ot) in the adoption stage, we scan
for potential parents u, where we need to trace the su-path (or ut-path) through
parent pointers. If we find such a path, we can update the distance and timestamp
of both the vertices along this path and v. The next time we encounter any vertex
on this sv-path, which now has a valid distance (with an updated timestamp), we
do not have to repeat the work of returning to s (or t). The siblings of v do not have
their distance updated, which is not a problem, as they do not have an updated
timestamp. An updated timestamp would imply a path back to s, which at this
timestep does not exist as v was an orphan. We cannot avoid repeated work
if tracing parent pointers from the potential parent u leads to an orphan, so this
heuristic does not reduce the total complexity. However, we will use this fact in
section 3.3.
During the adoption stage, we process the orphans in the following order: During
the augmentation, we add orphans to a queue such that the orphans with the low-
est distance label are processed first. The processing of one orphan might create
new orphans. These new orphans should be processed first before returning to
the queue. The algorithm processes the orphans in this order to increase the
24
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:35==
chance of finding potential parents in the tree rooted at s (instead of an orphan).
Combined with the distance heuristic above, this should reduce the time spent
traversing the path to s or t.
Finally, S and T are grown ”simultaneously” by having a single list of active nodes.
We do not have any requirements on the order of processing vertices, so this does
not affect the correctness. Having two lists for S and T might allow us to terminate
slightly faster, as we can return a minimum cut as soon as all the active vertices
are from only one of the trees. However, finding an augmenting path is impossible
as soon as one of the lists is empty, so the difference is at most one growth step,
which does not affect the asymptotic running time.
3.2
A tighter bound on the runtime of BK
The theoretical running time for BK is O(mn2|C|), where |C| is the cost of the
minimum cut [2]. The authors did not elaborate on how they reached this bound
and mostly used it to state that the algorithm terminates. In this section, I review
the runtime of the individual stages of BK, as I have not been able to find it in
previous works. The runtime analysis finds a bound for BK that improves the
best-known bound.
We stay in the growth stage as long as we do not find an augmenting path. For
each active vertex, we scan edges up to its degree, possibly adding more vertices
which become active. After scanning edges, the vertex becomes passive and will
not become active before the next iteration. Summing the degree for (up to) all
vertices gives an iteration complexity of O
(∑
v∈V deg(v)
)
= O(m).
We only enter the augmentation stage when we have found a bridge (v, w) con-
necting S to T. For v and w, we follow parent pointers to s and t, respectively.
Along this st-path with O(n) vertices, we need to find the minimum capacity, push
flow, and check for saturated edges, leading to an iteration complexity of O(n).
We can split the work done during the adoption stage into the work related to
following parent pointers from a potential parent u (back to s or an orphan) and
the rest of the processing for an orphan v. Processing an orphan v might create
new orphans, but because of the tree structure, they will be added at a strictly
increasing distance from s or t, only in the tree rooted at v. Therefore, each orphan
v can be processed at most once in an iteration. We consider all edges from
potential parents u to v at most twice. Once when checking if u ∈S (in the scan
before finding the su-path) and once if we need to reactivate u (if we found no
parent for v). We consider all edges from v to children w at most once if we need
to add all children as orphans. Therefore, the complexity of the adoption stage,
when ignoring the work related to finding su-paths, is O
(∑
v∈V deg(v)
)
= O(m).
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
25
==PAGE:36==
We only trace the path from u back to s when checking a potential parent u. By
the previous analysis, we can do this up to O(m) times. Even with the distance
heuristic, we might trace the same path multiple times if u traces back to an or-
phan. Each path goes through up to O(n) vertices, so the complexity of following
parent pointers from a potential parent is O(mn).
In section 3.1.1, we showed that we go through growth, augmentation, and adop-
tion at most |C| times, where |C| is the capacity of the minimum cut. Therefore,
the total running time for the BK algorithm is O(mn|C|). This analysis reduces the
best-known complexity bound and indicates that the bottleneck of the theoretical
analysis is repeated work when following parent pointers from potential parents.
3.3
A faster BK variant
In this section, I present a novel variant of BK using orphan-path pointers called
BKop. I also show that the theoretical running time of BKop improves on BK. The
variant uses orphan-path pointers and the distance heuristic from section 3.1.3 to
reduce the repeated work when tracing parent pointers from potential parents.
3.3.1
The BKop algorithm
The BKop algorithm is my new variation of the BK algorithm that alters only the
steps in tracing parent pointers within the adoption stage by introducing orphan-
path pointers. Therefore, the overall algorithm structure, growth stage, augmen-
tation stage, and heuristics are identical to those described in section 3.1.
Orphan-path pointers are introduced when we, starting from a potential parent u,
follow parent pointers to an orphan x. In this case, for every vertex on the xu-path,
we add a pointer to a list of orphan-path pointers in that vertex. Each orphan-path
pointer specifies the opposite direction to the parent pointer used to reach the
orphan x and is only present in orphan-rooted trees. The search for s, starting
from a potential parent u, now stops if the current vertex y satisfies one of the
following. If we find that y = s, y = t, that y has a valid distance (with updated
timestamp), or that y has any orphan-path pointers. A valid distance indicates
that the search leads to s or t, and we can update the distance and timestamp for
all vertices on the yu-path, like we did when y = s. If y is an orphan or has an
orphan-path pointer, we know that u is in an orphan-rooted tree, and we can add
orphan-path pointers for all vertices on the yu-path. As a result, any time we follow
a parent pointer, we will either add a valid distance or an orphan-path pointer to
a vertex.
When processing an orphan x, it might contain orphan-path pointers. Reconnect-
ing x to the s-rooted tree will give x a valid distance. Therefore, by recursively
following orphan-path pointers, we can update the distance and timestamp of all
26
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:37==
o1
o3
o2
y
x
s
Figure 3.3: Visualization of how BKop improve on BK. x and o1 are orphans. Imag-
ine we start processing o1, and all its potential parents u are in the x-rooted tree.
In BKop, we only trace the entire way to x once, as reaching y with orphan-path
pointers will stop the search. In BK, we trace this path multiple times. Processing
o1 might create new orphans o2 and o3, which also might trace back to x. We
update the distance and timestamp along dashed lines in the s-rooted tree so we
do not repeat work here. If x finds a new valid parent, we can follow the dotted
lines using orphan-path pointers in the x-rooted tree to update the distance and
timestamp.
vertices along the once-traced orphan path, deleting the pointers after use. By
setting valid distances for all vertices that previously had an orphan-path pointer
in the x-rooted tree, the search for s will not repeat parent pointers after we recon-
nect x to s. We cannot reconnect to the original orphan v that traced this xu-path,
as it either found another parent or became a free vertex that the next growth
stage will discover. If we cannot find a new parent for x, we remove its orphan-
path pointers when all its siblings become orphans. As no orphan-rooted trees are
present at the end of the adoption stage, we will have processed all orphan-path
pointers at this time.
3.3.2
Running time of BKop
We can assign the cost of additional work related to orphan-path pointers to the
cost of following the parent pointer. The additional work includes creating and
deleting the pointer and following the pointer to set valid distances. The crucial
detail this variant adds over BK is that we add a stop-condition (either a valid
distance or an orphan-path pointer) for the coming searches every time we follow
a parent pointer, no matter where they lead. Because of this, we only follow a
parent pointer once in each adoption stage, ensuring that the iteration complexity
of following parent pointers is O(n). We have not reduced the other work in the
adoption stage, so its total iteration complexity is O(m). All other analysis steps
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
27
==PAGE:38==
in section 3.2 still hold, so the total running time of BKop is O(m|C|). Under the
assumption of |C| = O(m) from section 2.2.4, this runtime reduce to O(m2).
(a) Trees at termination for BK.
(b) Trees at termination for IBFS.
Figure 3.4: Visualization of the S and T trees for BK and IBFS for a binary seg-
mentation graph on a white noise image. s and t are not visible, but green vertices
are reachable from s and orange vertices are reachable from t. I set αuv = 100 to
get trees of larger depth.
28
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:39==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
29
==PAGE:40==
4
The IBFS algorithm
The Incremental Breadth-First Search algorithm [3] is inspired by the BK algorithm
from section 3.1, but augments only on shortest paths to obtain a theoretical run-
ning time of O(mn2), or O(mn log n) using dynamic trees. As the authors found
the dynamic tree-variant slower for vision instances, this chapter will investigate
the ”standard” algorithm, denoted as IBFS.
4.1
The original IBFS algorithm
The IBFS algorithm has the same overall structure as the BK algorithm with loop
iterations over a growth stage that might activate an augmentation stage and an
adoption stage. It also maintains an s-rooted tree S and a t-rooted tree T that
might become forests during the adoption stage. Each vertex v ∈S ∪T has
a distance label ds(v) or dt(v) from s or t, respectively, over the residual graph
Gf. The distance label differs from BK, which kept distances using only edges in
S or T and could find shorter paths during the growth stage. We also maintain
two numbers Ds ∈N and Dt ∈N that bound the depth of the trees S and T.
Finally, an edge (u, v) ∈S or (v, u) ∈T is admissible if ds(u) = ds(v) −1, and it
has positive residual capacity. These sets, values, and definitions interact in the
following ways, which will be proved in section 4.1.1:
• ds(v) ≤Ds and dt(v) ≤Dt. Both ds(v) and dt(v) are valid, non-decreasing
distance labels.
• All edges in S and T are admissible.
• At the start of an iteration, we increase Ds or Dt by 1 depending on if we
grow from s (forward) or t (backward). At this point, there are no orphans.
• At the end of an iteration, all vertices of distance ds(v) ≤Ds or dt(v) ≤Dt
are in the trees S or T respectively.
Because all edges are admissible and the labels are valid, S and T are shortest-
path trees, so L = Ds + Dt is a lower bound on the number of vertices in the
shortest augmenting path. As a result of the last property, if we find no new vertices
at the updated distance Ds or Dt, they do not exist, and we can terminate the
algorithm with a maximum flow. The algorithm is initialized by having s ∈S, t ∈T,
Ds = ds(s) = 1, Dt = dt(t) = 1, and all other vertices as free vertices.
Assuming that we grow from S in the growth stage, we start by increasing Ds by
one. Because of the final property, only vertices with label ds(v) = Ds −1 must
30
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:41==
be active and might grow to other vertices. We process all active vertices v ∈S
by going through all their (for S, forward) edges (v, w). If w ∈S, we do nothing
and continue. If w is free, we can add w to S, set ds(w) = ds(v) + 1 = Ds, and
update the parent pointer of w. Finally, if w ∈T, we have found a bridge from S
to T and go to the augmentation stage. When returning to the growth stage after
the augmentation stage, if the label of v did not change, we continue the search
of neighbors from that bridge (v, w). Once we have searched all neighbors, v
becomes inactive, and we go to the next active vertex. The growth stage (and
the iteration) ends when it has processed all active vertices (possibly calling the
augmentation stage multiple times), as opposed to BK, where the stage ends
whenever we enter the augmentation stage.
The augmentation stage is identical to the BK algorithm. We find an augmenting
path by following parent pointers from v to s and w to t and push flow along the st-
path until at least one edge is saturated. We create orphans for saturated edges
(x, y) if they are not the bridge. If x, y ∈S, we make y an orphan and add it to Os.
Otherwise, x, y ∈T, so we make x an orphan and add it to Ot. If the algorithm
creates any orphans, S and T are forests where each tree is rooted in s, t, or an
orphan, which we process during the adoption stage.
The adoption stage goes through all orphans v ∈Os ∪Ot. We assume the orphan
v ∈Os, but the case is symmetric for Ot even though we also assumed growth
from S, which included increasing Ds. First, it tries to recover the shortest path
tree during a scan by finding another parent u ∈S with the label ds(u) = ds(v)−1.
If unsuccessful, it runs the relabel operation on vertex v. To ensure that possible
parents are only considered once during the scan for a fixed label of v, we keep a
current pointer. We set current to the first edge when updating the distance label
or when the vertex goes from being free to being in S or T. Alternatively, if we find
a new parent for v during a scan, we set current to this edge. If we could not find
the parent with ds(u) = ds(v) −1 (still assuming v ∈S), the relabel operation goes
through all edges, starting from current, to find u ∈S with the properties:
• There exists an edge (for S, incoming) (u, v) with positive residual capacity.
• ds(u) is minimum among all neighbors of v and ds(v) ≤ds(u) ≤Ds −1.
If one such u is found, rejoin v to S through u, and update the label ds(v) ≤d′
s(v) =
ds(u) + 1 ≤Ds, effectively making v passive. Otherwise, make v a free vertex.
In both cases, we add all siblings of v as orphans, such that we either relabel
them or find a shorter path to S. Compared to BK, rejoining S and T might take
more steps, but we guarantee that all distances are valid when the adoption stage
terminates.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
31
==PAGE:42==
4.1.1
Correctness of IBFS
To show the correctness of IBFS, we have to show the assumptions made during
the algorithm. If the assumptions hold, S and T are shortest-path trees, so we
have a minimum cut when we cannot grow S or T. I will assume a forward pass
(growing S), but the arguments are symmetric for T. I have listed the assumptions
here:
1. Vertices in the s-rooted tree and t-rooted tree have a valid distance labeling
ds(v) and dt(v) on the residual graph Gf, that are non-decreasing over the
algorithm.
2. During the growth stage, there are no orphans, and S and T are trees rooted
in s and t using only admissible edges.
3. T holds all vertices up to distance Dt in the residual graph Gf. As we in-
crement Ds, the equivalent applies to S at the beginning and the end of the
growth stage.
4. The only edges (v, w) with positive residual capacity, where v ∈S and w /∈S
are from active vertices v with label ds(v) = Ds −1 or from newly added
vertices w with label ds(w) = Ds.
5. The only edges (w, v) with positive residual capacity, where v ∈T and w /∈T
satisfy that dt(v) = Dt.
6. The current edge precedes or is equal to the first admissible edge to u if
u ∈S or from u if u ∈T.
All assumptions hold at initialization. Using induction, we must consider how the
three stages might affect the assumptions from one iteration to the next.
The growth stage does not affect assumption 5 when growing from s. By the
inductive hypothesis on 3 and 4, we only need to consider vertices with label
ds(v) = Ds −1, which are exactly the vertices we start off making active. Before
the growth stage ends, we search through all (for S, outgoing) edges (v, w) from
active vertices v with positive residual capacity and add potential free vertices.
Encountering a bridge does not affect edges earlier in the search, so if v does
not change its label (meaning it is still active), we can safely continue the search,
starting from the bridge (again). Therefore, S will cover all vertices up to distance
Ds in Gf at the end of the iteration. Updating the distance to ds(w) = ds(v)+1 = Ds
makes (v, w) admissible, and extends the tree S with w. Therefore, the new label
ds(w) is valid, and if w previously had a label, the residual path from s must now
be longer, so ds(w) has increased, showing that 1 hold. An active vertex v ∈S
(label ds(v) = Ds −1) becomes inactive after considering all neighbors w /∈S or
32
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:43==
when rejoined at label Ds. Therefore, after processing all active vertices, all edges
leaving S with positive residual capacity are from label ds(v) = Ds, so 4 and 3 hold
throughout. Finally, we set the current pointer of newly added w as the first edge,
so 6 holds.
We can violate assumptions in the augmentation stage, so long as the adoption
stage fixes the list of potentially violated assumptions. Pushing flow from s to t can
remove residual edges by saturating them and add residual edges by pushing flow
back along a saturated edge. Removing residual edges affects only the validity
of labels in orphan-rooted trees outside the s-rooted tree and t-rooted tree, so
1 holds. However, the adoption stage needs to restore orphan-rooted trees to
satisfy 3 and 2. Removing edges cannot violate any other assumptions, so the
final case to consider is creating a new residual edge (u, v) ∈Ef by pushing flow
along (v, u) ∈Ef. If (v, u) is the bridge, this does not violate any assumptions
since v is active with ds(v) = Ds −1 and dt(u) = Dt. Alternatively, u and v are in
the same tree (v is the parent of u). In this case, we cannot violate 4 or 5, and
the added edge does not create shorter paths in the S-tree (since we have a valid
labeling), so 1 hold.
From the augmentation stage, the adoption stage has to fix 2 and 3. Processing
an orphan might create new orphans at an increasing distance in the orphan-
rooted tree, so we will eventually process all orphans. As the label ds(v) was
valid before the augmentation stage, finding a parent with ds(u) = ds(v) −1 will
restore this orphan-rooted tree and validity of all its labels. Otherwise, we apply
the relabel operation, where a potential new minimum label parent u must have
ds(v)−1 < ds(u) ≤Ds−1. Picking this parent will be the shortest path and update
the label of v to at most Ds with an admissible edge. When adding all v’s children
as orphans, we ensure that we restore or process the rest of the v-rooted tree.
Combined, this shows 2 and 3. Also, if we cannot find a new parent with these
constraints, no edges exist that could violate 4 or 5, so we can safely make v a
free vertex.
The final assumption to show in the adoption stage is 6. We might violate the
assumption only if current is not the first edge. In this case, a previous adoption
scan determined that all edges preceding current were not admissible. These
edges have zero residual capacity or come from potential parents u with a label
ds(u) ≥ds(v). Suppose these edges gain positive residual capacity after updating
current. In that case, we have pushed flow along (v, u) forcing ds(u) > ds(v).
Since relabelling v resets current, and labels are non-decreasing, the edge is still
not admissible (also needs ds(u) = ds(v) −1), so 6 holds.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
33
==PAGE:44==
4.1.2
Runtime of IBFS
First, we consider what happens to the label of a vertex v between two relabel
operations. We can safely assume v ∈S, as the other case is symmetric. Running
relabel either finds a new parent u at a height ds(v) ≤ds(u) ≤Ds −1, which
increases the label of v, or v becomes a free vertex for the next iteration. If v
becomes free, we can rejoin v to S no earlier than the next iteration, at which time
it will get height d′
s(v) = D′
s = Ds + 1 > ds(v), which also increases the label of v.
Therefore, a relabel operation on a vertex will increase the label of that vertex.
We now consider all operations that can occur for a vertex v with a fixed label
ds(v) that we are trying to grow from S. Each edge entering v ∈S is only consid-
ered once during a scan because of the current pointer and once during a relabel
operation (by our previous analysis). Edges leaving v ∈S might find a neighbor
w ∈T, which initialize the augmentation stage. We assign the cost of searching
this edge leading to an augmentation to the steps done during the augmentation
stage. We only scan all (for S outgoing) edges that do not lead to the augmenta-
tion stage once, after which v is made passive and must have its label increased
before it scans edges again. Therefore, for a vertex v, the total work of search-
ing (forward and backward) edges in the growth and adoption stages is deg(v),
totaling O(m) for all vertices. Since all labels in the S-tree and T-tree are valid,
they satisfy dt(v), ds(v) ≤n −1, so a total of O(mn) operations are done in the
algorithm searching edges in the growth and adoption stages.
We are now simply missing the augmentation stage. We can consider what needs
to happen between two saturating pushes along an edge (v, w). For it to be sat-
urated again, we first need to push flow the other way along (w, v), recovering
the residual edge. However, as tree edges are admissible and labels are non-
decreasing, the label of v increased. Therefore, at least the label ds(v) (and po-
tentially more) must increase before we can saturate the edge (v, w) again. Each
vertex v can only increase its label O(n) times and labels satisfy ds(v) ≤n−1 and
dt(v) ≤n −1. Since this bound holds for all O(m) edges, we can saturate a total
of O(mn) edges through augmentations. Each augmentation saturates at least
one edge, so we have O(mn) augmentations throughout the algorithm. Since the
augmenting path is of size O(n), the total work of finding the bridge, tracing a
single augmenting paths and pushing along it is O(n). This results in a running
time of IBFS when traversing the full path at O(mn2). The authors also claim to
achieve O(mn log n) using dynamic trees [3].
34
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:45==
4.2
Improved runtime for segmentation instances
I found an improved bound on the runtime for IBFS under the assumption of
|C| = O(m) given in section 2.2.4. Inspecting the runtime of IBFS in section 4.1.2,
we see that the total number of augmentations were O(mn), resulting in a com-
plexity of O(mn2) by traversing the full augmenting path. All other work done
by IBFS has an O(mn) complexity. However, the trivial bound of |C| augmen-
tations still applies.
Therefore, the work done in augmentations is limited by
O(n min(|C|, mn)). Now, assuming that |C| = O(m), the running time of IBFS
is also bounded by O(mn + n|C|). However, the assumption allows us to further
reduce this to O(mn). Therefore, it might be useful to upper bound the capacities
in the graph where we want to find the minimum cut using IBFS.
4.3
An oversight of IBFS
I have implemented IBFS using the publicly available paper and code.
From
the code, I found that the IBFS implementation keeps the children of all vertices
v ∈S ∪T in a linked list. This list is a last-in-first-out (LIFO) singly linked list.
As a result, the implementation can quickly add all children as orphans if we re-
label v during the adoption stage. However, when we saturate an edge (u, v) in
the augmentation stage, we must iterate the linked list of u to delete v in deg(u)
time. In section 4.1.2, we bounded the number of saturating pushes to O(mn).
Therefore, even if deg(u) = O(n), this does not break the running time of the
”standard” IBFS. Also, computer vision problems often have a constant deg(u) for
most vertices, so most would not consider this a significant problem.
However, I found that IBFS also maintain children for s and t, which for binary
segmentation graphs in section 2.2.2 have degree O(n). As a result, I can con-
struct an example where the LIFO-linked list performs poorly. Assume that each
row r of the grid of vertices V alternates between connecting to s and t. As IBFS
have no restrictions on the processing order within a growth stage, we can safely
assume that we process active vertices in the reading direction. The first two iter-
ations connect all rows to s and t, keeping O(n) children in their linked lists. In the
third iteration, we find augmenting paths by connecting each v ∈S downwards
to w ∈T in the row below. If we saturate terminal edges in this push, we must
remove v ∈S or w ∈T, located at the very back of the linked lists (O(n) time).
As we do this for all v ∈S, traversing linked list total O(n2) in just this iteration.
However, keeping the children of s and t for the binary segmentation graph is
redundant. The lists are redundant for s and t because we cannot relabel these
vertices, so we never add all their vertices as orphans, as that would require s or
t to be orphans.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
35
==PAGE:46==
4.3.1
Fixing the oversight
There are multiple ways to work around the redundant work related to the two
linked lists. If only the terminal vertices have more than a constant degree, we
can keep the children in linked lists for all vertices but s and t. As these terminal
vertices cannot become orphans, we will never relabel them, so we never make
all the children orphans at once. A more general solution is to keep the children
in a doubly linked list. As we have a pointer to the vertex v we want to remove,
and v keeps the pointers to the next and previous elements in the linked list, we
can remove v in O(1) time. Like the original, this solution can quickly make all
children orphans by moving a single pointer, but it can now remove individual
children faster.
36
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:47==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
37
==PAGE:48==
5
Experimental running time of the
Graph Cut
This chapter will review the practical performance of existing maximum flow al-
gorithms by exploring their running time. Section 5.1 details how the practical
running time has been found and compared for the implementations considered.
I present findings for real-world datasets in section 5.2 and compare them to ex-
isting review papers on the same datasets. Finally, section 5.3 presents a method
of creating synthetic data and the algorithm running time on that data.
5.1
Experiment design
This section explains the algorithms, use of Python, and design choices when
comparing the practical running time of the graph cut.
5.1.1
Choice of programming language
I did the practical runtime experiments in Python. I mainly chose Python as I have
significantly more experience writing in this language compared to C and C++ usual
for graph cut algorithms. Therefore, writing in Python allows for higher develop-
ment speed and knowledge to avoid language-specific pitfalls. However, I think
it makes sense, as I am not aiming to create a faster algorithm in practice. In-
stead, I want to determine the practical running time of each algorithm relative
to the other algorithms. Therefore, creating a ”fair” comparison was more critical
than fast algorithms. Additionally, Jensen et al. [22] have found factors such as
low-level optimization (like reducing cache misses) to significantly influence the
runtime besides the known variables like algorithm and data. As authors of new
algorithms want to present the fastest practical algorithm possible, we can assume
they put much effort into this. Re-implementing the algorithms, no matter the lan-
guage, allows us to give all the algorithms equal footing in low-level optimization.
Also, as programs in Python have less influence on the low-level details, I hope
the programs are optimized similarly, reducing one comparison variable.
Writing in Python also comes with a few restrictions. The language is significantly
slower than C or C++ in which the original implementations exist. As a result, I
cannot guarantee that a relative speedup also leads to a faster implementation
in C or C++. The number of implementations of algorithms is also significantly
lower in Python, as it requires a re-implementation. Many algorithms exist through
wrappers, but this calls the faster C or C++ functions, which would not be a fair
comparison. With this in mind, and to also have a relatively similar data structure,
38
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:49==
the standard implementations that I will compare against are the ones found in
the Python package NetworkX [34].
5.1.2
Algorithms and implementations
I use the teletype font for programming implementations to differentiate it from
the algorithm and their variants. The results include five implementations of al-
gorithms: BK, BKop, IBFS1, IBFS2, and HI-PR. BK is the NetworkX implementation
of BK described in section 3.1. BKop is my alteration of the BK implementation
to fit the BKop algorithm described in section 3.3. IBFS1 and IBFS2 specify my
implementations of IBFS with the children kept in singly-linked and doubly-linked
lists, respectively. Finally, HI-PR is the NetworkX implementation of the high-label
variant from the Preflow-Push Relabel family of algorithms [23]. This algorithm
has a complexity of O(n2√m) [35], which is the lowest of the included algorithms.
The results include this implementation as a reference for non-vision-developed
graph cut algorithms and to parallel the results in [22, 24].
5.1.3
Experimental setup
The experiments include running time and memory consumption. The running
time was the difference between the start and finish times, as measured by Python’s
time library. Reading the data, creating a graph G, and using it to build a resid-
ual graph Gf was done identically for all implementations before I passed Gf to
them. The time to do so is averaged and reported for the real-world data but not
included in the running time. Any additional information, data structure, or graph
construction different from the standard Gf is part of the running time. The results
report the average and standard deviation of the running time over three runs. Af-
ter building the standard Gf and throughout the algorithm’s run, the Python library
tracemalloc monitored the peak memory consumption. The reported memory is
the smallest valued peak over three runs. Be aware that the memory taken up by
Python, as measured by the system, was significantly higher than this. Though
memory usage was considerably higher, I did not observe memory usage exceed-
ing 90% of the system capacity.
5.1.4
Hardware and software version specification
A single PC did all the experiments. The relevant specifications are listed here.
Processor: 12th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-1255U. Memory: 32 GB at 3200 MHz.
Python version: 3.11.8. NetworkX version: 3.3. numpy version: 1.26.4. PyMaxflow
version: 1.3.0. slgbuilder version: 0.2.1.
5.2
Real-world data
I compare the implementations on various datasets to parallel the results in pre-
vious papers. I chose ten datasets of different sizes and origins to simulate real-
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
39
==PAGE:50==
Dataset
Paper
BK
IBFS
HI-PR
BK rate
deeplogismos.2
[22]
0.15 s*
-
0.16 s
1.07
deeplogismos.3
[22]
0.18 s*
-
0.24 s
1.33
deeplogismos.7
[22]
0.34 s*
-
0.36 s
1.06
handsmall.segment
[22]
4 ms*
-
10 ms
2.50
bunny.segment
[22]
0.12 s*
-
0.20 s
1.67
candle.segment
[22]
87 ms*
-
0.29 s
3.33
chair.segment
[22]
0.76 s*
-
0.86 s
1.13
bone_subxyz_subxy.n6c10
[24]
0.32 s
-
0.55 s
1.72
bone_subxyz_subxy.n6c100
[24]
0.34 s
-
0.56 s
1.65
bone_subx.n6c100
[22]
4.10 s*
-
10.34 s
2.52
[24]
13.01 s
-
20.54 s
1.58
[19]
4.07 s
1.89 s
-
0.46
[3]
5.32 s*
3.30 s
-
0.62
Table 5.1: The time to find the minimum cut presented by other works on the used
datasets. The BK rate column is the time ratio of the other algorithm compared to
BK, where less than 1 is faster. *: A non-original implementation was used
world performance. Descriptions of the datasets are in section 5.2.1. Table 5.2
holds the running time, and table 5.3 shows additional information like the size of
the graph, construction time, and memory consumption of the algorithms on all
datasets.
5.2.1
Real-World Datasets
The real-world datasets include three families totaling ten segmentation datasets.
The datasets range from 142K to 23.4M edges, all integer capacities. I did not con-
sider larger datasets as they approached and would be affected by the available
memory on the computer running the code. The dataset families are listed here.
• The Deep LOGISMOS dataset is a 3D benchmark dataset from [22]. It uses
graph cuts on the output of the Deep LOGISMOS neural network [36] on
prostate images from [37]. The datasets range from 500K vertices and 8M
edges to 1M vertices and 16M edges.
• The dataset segment is a mesh segmentation benchmark dataset from [22]
based on [38]. This segmentation dataset uses quadratic pseudo-boolean
optimization (QPBO) as described in [39, 40, 41, 42]. The datasets range
from 15K vertices and 142K edges to 300K vertices and 4M edges.
• The dataset bone is a voxel-based 3D segmentation dataset from the Uni-
versity of Waterloo benchmarks problems [43]. The xyz-xy specifier refers
to the bone_subxyz_subxy dataset of size 64 × 64 × 60, and the x specifier
refers to the bone_subx dataset of size 128 × 256 × 119. These datasets are
connected using a 6-neighborhood with a max integer capacity of 10 (speci-
40
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:51==
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
deeplogismos.2
34.97 s ± 0.94 s
35.43 s ± 0.62 s
52.02 s ± 1.27 s
49.32 s ± 1.57 s
40.20 s ± 0.53 s
deeplogismos.3
52.21 s ± 0.38 s
50.40 s ± 0.46 s
84.15 s ± 2.22 s
70.18 s ± 0.74 s
57.69 s ± 1.28 s
deeplogismos.7
145.18 s ± 5.35 s
138.26 s ± 5.76 s
210.73 s ± 7.16 s
101.92 s ± 3.48 s
84.45 s ± 1.32 s
handsmall.segment
3.54 s ± 31 ms
3.42 s ± 0.11 s
2.69 s ± 0.12 s
1.86 s ± 10 ms
3.38 s ± 53 ms
bunny.segment
781.62 s ± 46.3 s
741.04 s ± 30.3 s
112.46 s ± 0.56 s
38.73 s ± 0.43 s
86.79 s ± 0.89 s
candle.segment
754.38 s ± 6.08 s
741.49 s ± 14.0 s
137.11 s ± 4.37 s
33.16 s ± 1.22 s
80.21 s ± 0.80 s
chair.segment
0.77 h ± 103 s
0.77 h ± 69.6 s
568.55 s ± 5.71 s
180.28 s ± 2.20 s
201.76 s ± 1.12 s
bone-xyz-xy.n6c10
18.81 s ± 0.31 s
19.00 s ± 0.37 s
12.55 s ± 39 ms
12.70 s ± 0.14 s
18.86 s ± 84 ms
bone-xyz-xy.n6c100
25.43 s ± 0.26 s
23.58 s ± 0.33 s
14.69 s ± 82 ms
14.72 s ± 61 ms
18.92 s ± 46 ms
bone-x.n6c100
3.48 h ± 562 s
3.06 h ± 548 s
431.35 s ± 4.30 s
438.81 s ± 2.75 s
678.85 s ± 5.12 s
Table 5.2: The running time of five algorithm implementations on real-world data.
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Nodes
Arcs
|C|
Read
Residual
Peak memory usage
deeplogismos.2
511 K
8.2 M
26 K
11.13 s
19.36 s
1.66 GB
1.66 GB
1.86 GB
1.87 GB
1.95 GB
deeplogismos.3
707 K
11.3 M
13 K
15.04 s
27.03 s
2.36 GB
2.36 GB
2.65 GB
2.65 GB
2.76 GB
deeplogismos.7
989 K
15.8 M
234 K
18.98 s
39.36 s
3.30 GB
3.30 GB
3.68 GB
3.69 GB
3.85 GB
handsmall.segment
15 K
142 K
185 K
0.21 s
0.31 s
19 MB
19 MB
24 MB
24 MB
31 MB
bunny.segment
97 K
1.2 M
2.1 M
1.74 s
3.19 s
169 MB
169 MB
197 MB
197 MB
228 MB
candle.segment
159 K
2.0 M
1.9 M
3.45 s
5.85 s
216 MB
216 MB
265 MB
266 MB
327 MB
chair.segment
305 K
4.1 M
4.0 M
6.31 s
11.16 s
522 MB
522 MB
607 MB
610 MB
738 MB
bone-xyz-xy.n6c10
245 K
1.5 M
2.9 K
4.00 s
4.65 s
41 MB
41 MB
119 MB
121 MB
432 MB
bone-xyz-xy.n6c100
245 K
1.5 M
32 K
3.89 s
4.25 s
41 MB
41 MB
119 MB
121 MB
432 MB
bone-x.n6c100
3.9 M
23.4 M
334 K
63.52 s
70.39 s
626 MB
964 MB
1.89 GB
1.92 GB
6.80 GB
Table 5.3: Additional information on the data and solve related to the five algorithm
implementations on real-world data.
fied by c10) or 100 (specified by c100). Description of the graph construction
of the 2D equivalent graph is in section 2.2, and further descriptions are in
[13, 14, 44].
I chose these datasets, as previous work has used these exact datasets, allow-
ing us to compare the Python implementations with the corresponding C or C++
versions. I have gathered their time to find the minimum cut in table 5.1. There
are fewer of my chosen datasets from previous works that compare BK to IBFS in
the table, but I found a BK rate between 0.98 and 0.42 for ten more 2D and 3D
segmentation datasets in [19].
5.3
Synthetic data
5.3.1
Dataset
The experiments using synthetic data include two types of data. It consists of
the binary segmentation graph, as described in section 2.2.2, and the surface
segmentation graph, as described in section 2.2.3.
The binary segmentation graph uses images of handwritten digits [46]. I created
a binary (ground truth) segmentation mask by thresholding these images. I could
create images of arbitrary size by cropping or combining images from this dataset.
Adding noise results in an image on which we can run the segmentation algo-
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
41
==PAGE:52==
26
17
190
235
146
3
25
52
192
182
225
243
5
8
254
202
111
167
173
54
6
161
165
150
72
64
85
18
251
238
59
9
49
47
6
85
Figure 5.1: Two different synthetic binary images and their corresponding Graph
Cut segmentation. The images are of size 2 × 2 and 128 × 128.
Figure 5.2: Three synthetic binary images of increasing noise levels and their
corresponding Graph Cut segmentation. All images have size 25 × 25. The noise
levels correspond to level 2, 4, and 6 in S2.
42
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.3: Visualization of the steps to generate a surface image. The top-left
image shows one sample from [45]. The top-right image shows the ground truth
segmentation mask corresponding to that image with the inter-class boundary
removed. After grouping smaller classes, I get k = 5 surfaces of alternatingly
black and white color, to which I add noise. One line of red crosses corresponds
to one column in the surface image, with values sampled at each cross.
Figure 5.4: Visualization of different sizes of surface graphs. The top images show
the image and corresponding Graph Cut surface segmentation for k = 2 surfaces
and η = τ = 6. The bottom images also show this, but for k = 6 surfaces and
η = τ = 128.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
43
==PAGE:54==
rithms. The noise consists of salt and pepper noise with probability ρ and sampling
from a beta distribution with parameters (α, β). Figure 5.1 shows a range of image
sizes and fig. 5.2 shows a range of noise levels. I used ρ = 0.01, α = 1, β = 3
unless otherwise stated. I then created a 4-neighborhood graph from the image
as described in section 2.2.2 using the PyMaxflow package with αuv = 50. The
graph’s size only depends on the image’s size.
The surface segmentation graph uses images and segmentation masks from a
”Microscopic Shrub Cross-Sections” dataset [45]. Of these, I picked out the ones
where every class was present for a full rotation in the cross-section. I then filled
the inter-class boundary with the innermost class of the two it was separating.
The masks had 4 −10 layered classes. If I want k surfaces, where k is lower
than the number of classes I have, I combine neighboring classes until I get the
wanted number. To create an image from this mask, I made the classes alter-
nate between white and black and added noise, like for the binary segmentation
problem. Starting from this image, I predict the layer changes from white to black
and black to white. fig. 5.3 shows the steps to get to this black-and-white image.
To get surfaces from the layered circles, I did radial sampling. From the center
of the circles, I sampled η points on a line from a total of τ lines equally spaced.
Figure 5.4 shows a range of samples per line, lines, and different numbers of
surfaces. I then used the graph construction from slgbuilder to create surface
graphs. In all graphs, I set no maximum margin (δu = ∞), but ∆= 3 and δl = 1,
not allowing overlapping surfaces. For further details, see the examples in [47].
The graph’s size depends on the number of surfaces k, samples η, and lines τ
(not on the image size).
5.3.2
Synthetic data experiments
I carried out five experiments for the different types of synthetic data, named S1-
S5. I have listed the experiments and what they were trying to resolve below.
• S1 considers the binary graph of different side lengths. I picked equal side
lengths such that the number of pixels, and therefore vertices, increased by
(as close as possible to) a power of 2 each time. This experiment investi-
gates how the increase in vertices affects the running time. The smallest
graph has 4K vertices and 24K edges, and the largest has 1M vertices and
6M edges.
• S2 considers the binary graph of different noise levels. As all images have
size 512 × 512, the graphs all have the same number of vertices and edges.
Noise level 1 corresponds to the segmentation mask, and 8 corresponds to
white noise. This experiment investigates how the noise level affects the
running time.
44
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:55==
• S3 and S4 consider the surface graph with four classes (3 surfaces). Start-
ing from η = 8 points per line and τ = 8 lines, S3 and S4 increase η and
τ by a factor of 2 each time. The two experiments hope to shed light on
the difference in runtime depending on the height and width of the surface
to segment. These experiments have the added benefit of comparing the
surface graph with three surfaces to the binary graph of roughly the same
size. The smallest graph has 170 vertices and 1.2K edges, and the largest
has roughly 45K vertices and 400K edges.
• S5 considers the surface graph with between 1 and 8 surfaces. This ex-
periment investigates how the depth affects the size of the graph. With
η = τ = 64, the graphs had from 4K vertices and 31K edges to 32K ver-
tices and 300K edges.
64
90
128
181
256
362
512
724
1024
10−1
100
101
102
103
Image sidelength
Runtime [s]
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Figure 5.5: Synthetic experiment S1. I increase the sidelength for a binary image
and report the running time. Vertical lines indicate the standard deviation.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
45
==PAGE:56==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
101
102
Image noise level
Runtime [s]
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Figure 5.6: Synthetic experiment S2. I increase the noise added to the image for
size 512 × 512 and report the running time. Vertical lines indicate the standard
deviation.
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
η
Runtime [s]
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Figure 5.7: Synthetic experiment S3. Starting with η = 8 samples per line and
τ = 8 lines, I increase η by 2 each time. The larger the value for η, the taller and
skinnier the surface image, all with 4 classes.
46
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:57==
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
10−2
10−1
100
101
τ
Runtime [s]
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Figure 5.8: Synthetic experiment S4. Starting with η = 8 samples per line and
τ = 8 lines, I increase τ by a factor of 2 each time. The larger the value for τ, the
wider the surface image, all with 3 surfaces.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
100
101
Number of classes
Runtime [s]
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Figure 5.9: Synthetic experiment S5. Starting with 1 surface (2 classes), I increase
the number of surfaces to 8 (9 classes). All surface images sampled 64 points
along 64 lines each.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:59==
6
Discussion
6.1
Using Python
Python is a slower programming language than C or C++ for this problem, and we
lose many of the low-level optimizations engineered into the original implementa-
tions. However, we can compare the relative speed of my results to those found
in previous works on the same datasets from table 5.1 to see how representative
the running times are of performance in C or C++, and if they support their findings.
Comparing solve times directly, my running time in Python is usually 100 −500
times slower than the exact implementation in C or C++. The exceptions are HI-PR
with a few datasets around 35 times slower, and BK with a few datasets between 3K
and 9K times slower. Comparing BK and HI-PR on the given datasets, we expect
a ratio between the running times of not more than 4, with many of my results in
this range. However, for the larger segment datasets, and bone_subx.n6c100,
we find that BK is between 9 and 18 times slower than HI-PR. I am unaware if we
can attribute this solely to BK being slower in Python on large datasets, to the
used BK implementation, or both.
Additionally, I found the reported Python memory usage to be different from the
expected in two ways. Firstly, the memory usage on the bone dataset does not
align with the results presented in [24]. For BK and HI-PR, I found memory usage
of 0.4 and 4 times the memory usage in their results, respectively. The fact that
HI-PR has a higher memory footprint might result from the translation into Python.
However, the lower memory footprint of BK indicates differences in memory usage
measurements. Secondly, I found that the reported algorithm usage did not ac-
count for the Python memory usage throughout the experiments. Even though the
bone-x.n6c100 dataset has reported memory usage of 0.62−6.8 GB, the memory
taken up by Python was consistently above 17 GB. Because of these two points,
we can say little by looking exclusively at the relative memory performance be-
tween the algorithms. However, we can say that the Python memory usage is a
limiting factor for the datasets’ size.
6.2
Is BKop faster?
I found very few cases where using orphan-path pointers saved a lot of repeated
work, and this does affect the results. My novel BKop algorithm has a practical
runtime almost identical to that of the BK algorithm. For the synthetic data, we
find it to be faster and slower in some instances. However, the ordering has little
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
49
==PAGE:60==
structure, and the standard deviation often overlaps. For the real-world data in
table 5.2, the mean running time of BKop is 3.5% faster on average compared to
the mean running time of BK, though the standard deviation also often overlaps.
The only experiment with a significant difference is for bone-subx.n6c100, where
BKop is 12% faster. Based on these experiments, it is hard to claim that BKop is
faster in practice than BK on the vision instances considered.
Since BKop does not improve considerably in the cases considered, repeated work
in orphan trees does not seem to be the most significant problem of the BK algo-
rithm. The problem that orphan-path pointers solve also requires many steps to
reach. If I were to design an instance where this is a considerable issue, I would
need one or multiple orphans with neighbors in one or more trees rooted by or-
phans. Preferably, all the neighbors of the considered orphan would be in orphan
trees far from the root. This would create a lot of repeated work and add more
orphans. However, the distance heuristic of BK processes the orphan with the
lowest label first, making this elaborate setup unlikely. The advantage of BKop is
that this cannot happen, achieving an improved theoretical bound.
6.3
IBFS with doubly-linked lists
The IBFS1 implementation is less than 2% faster than my IBFS2 implementation for
the bone dataset. For all other experiments, IBFS2 is faster than the original IBFS1,
sometimes by orders of magnitude. Looking at the synthetic experiment S1, we
find that an increasing degree for terminal vertices results in a significantly worse
runtime growth for IBFS1 than IBFS2. This result is unsurprising, as I highlighted
a high terminal degree as an issue for the IBFS1 in section 4.3. Only for instances
with (almost) no noise will this be less of a problem, as we need very few iterations
before convergence, as shown by S2. However, as IBFS1 is never significantly
faster, but only possibly much slower, IBFS2 looks to be a faster algorithm in theory
and practice.
6.4
IBFS or BK for computer vision
The IBFS algorithm attempted to improve on BK both theoretically and in practice
[3]. Initially, there was also a large theoretical gap separating them. When com-
paring the IBFS runtime of O(mn2) with the BKop runtime of O(m|C|), the gap is
significantly smaller. Additionally, looking at table 5.3, we find that |C| < 2m for
all problems. Therefore, we can safely assume |C| = O(m) like we proposed in
section 4.2 and section 3.3.2. This assumption reduces the worst-case complex-
ity of IBFS to O(mn) and of BKop to O(m2). As the datasets additionally have
m = O(n), we close the theoretical gap, as both algorithms run in O(n2).
50
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:61==
Based on my experiments, I found that IBFS had better practical performance
in most cases. BK and BKop had slightly better performance for deeplogismos.2
and deeplogismos.3, but were outperformed by orders of magnitude on the seg-
ment datasets and the bone-subx.n6c100 dataset. Inspecting the synthetic ex-
periments, we see that BK can outperform IBFS2 on smaller problems or where
little noise exists. For S1, at an image size of 2562 or larger, the IBFS2 was faster,
whereas S3 and S4 only needed more than 2500 vertices for IBFS2 to be the better
option. In other words, IBFS looks to give better practical performance for larger
problems. Since the possible gain of the BK algorithm for smaller problems is less
for the smaller instances, I would choose IBFS2 as the default algorithm.
6.5
How data affects runtime
The synthetic experiments I have conducted confirm that the graph’s size, com-
position, and weights all contribute to the time it takes to find a solution.
S2 shows that finding a solution on a noisy image requiring significant cleaning
can take much longer. The white noise image had a cut more than 6 times larger
than the clean image. Since I created the images similarly, the cut with a larger
value means that more edges were saturated, which usually requires the algorithm
to find more augmenting paths. How the algorithms handle the larger number of
augmenting paths is very different. IBFS2 increase running time by a factor of 2.5
times, HI-PR by 10 times (though not an augmenting path algorithm), and BK by
35 times.
S3 and S4 show that the algorithms do not handle surface image height and width
equally. With an almost equal number of vertices and edges and a cut within a
factor of 2 of each other, the tall and skinny surface image took between 5 and
38 times longer than the wide and stubby surface image. One explanation for
the difference in behavior is due to the constraints between the surfaces. If the
algorithm places the uppermost surface low enough in a stubby image, it forces
the placement of the other surfaces because the surfaces cannot overlap. On
the other hand, since I set no upper margin between the surfaces, the placement
of one surface in the tall image had little influence on the placement of the oth-
ers. However, this does not explain the difference in growth between the different
families. Whereas IBFS2 and HI-PR increased by a factor of 9 −12, BK and BKop
increased by a factor of 38.
Another interesting comparison is comparing the surface shapes to the graph
sizes in S1. The largest graph sizes of S3 and S4 correspond to an image size of
256 × 256 for S1. Comparing the runtime plots, we see that S4 follows the relation
between graph size and runtime found in S1. However, S3 runs orders of magni-
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
51
==PAGE:62==
tude slower than S1 on the same graph size. Increasing the height of the image
even seems to be worse in terms of runtime compared to increasing the depth
by adding more classes. We find this as the largest graph in S5 has roughly the
same size as the largest graphs in S3 and S4, but a runtime much lower than that
found in S4 and closer to that found for S3.
6.6
Next steps
I did not consider algorithms from the pseudoflow algorithm family like HPF [18,
48] and EIBFS [19]. Considering these algorithms might be interesting, as this
family has shown good practical performance [22, 24, 19].
I have yet to find an example where BKop significantly reduces the repeated work
made by BK. I am unaware if such an example exists for larger problems, different
families of problems, or outside computer vision instances. On the other hand, if it
is possible to show that repeated work of tracing paths in orphan trees is bounded,
even just for segmentation instances, it is also possible to reduce the running time
of BK even further. However, as BKop does not improve significantly on BK, we still
need to find the root cause of ”bad instances” for the BK algorithm or use another
algorithm as default.
The synthetic datasets have shown running time tendencies that were difficult
to extract solely from the real-world data. I believe there is more to find within
synthetic data, which can guide both algorithm selection and algorithm design.
We can shed more light on utilizing or designing constraints, as we might use the
graph structure actively with the algorithm to improve running time.
If we want faster algorithms in practice, with the concerns raised for Python, one
next step is to implement IBFS2 and BKop in C/C++. Doing so will better indicate the
practical performance gains by these implementations when low-level optimiza-
tions also make a difference. However, this will also introduce another variable
to consider in the comparison. Furthermore, this will allow for comparison with a
broader range of algorithms than those compared here.
52
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:63==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
53
==PAGE:64==
7
Conclusion
I have investigated two minimum cut algorithms used in image segmentation prob-
lems in terms of theoretical and practical runtime. I found an improved bound on
the theoretical running time for the BK algorithm of O(mn|C|). I introduced BKop,
which uses orphan-path pointers to reduce repeated work in BK to improve the
theoretical running time to O(m|C|). For the IBFS algorithm, I found segmenta-
tion instances where the singly linked lists, used to keep track of children, caused
poor performance. I showed that replacing them with doubly linked lists fixes
this oversight. I also highlighted that the assumption on a minimum cut value of
|C| = O(m), which is typical for segmentation problems, improves the theoretical
running time of IBFS to O(mn) and of BKop to O(m2). As most segmentation
problems have a constant vertex degree, this assumption closes the theoretical
gap between the algorithms.
I have implemented BKop and IBFS with singly and doubly linked lists in Python.
As a result, I could compare them with existing BK implementations with the high-
label variant of Push Relabel, HI-PR. I compared the algorithms on various real-
world segmentation instances and new synthetic datasets for binary and surface
segmentation. With these experiments, I showed that using doubly linked lists
significantly improves the practical performance of the IBFS algorithm and is pre-
ferred over the BK and BKop algorithms. Though improved in theory, I could not
find instances that show significantly improved practical performance of BKop.
Further, the experiments showed that graph variables, such as constraints, ca-
pacities, structures in the data, and image size, all affect the practical running
time. For surface segmentation, I found the height of the surface image to have
the largest impact on practical runtime.
54
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:65==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
55
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
DM Greig, BT Porteous, and AH Seheult. “Exact Maximum A Posteriori Es-
timation for Binary Images”. eng. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
Series B-methodological 51.2 (1989), pp. 271–279. ISSN: 00359246. DOI:
10.1111/j.2517-6161.1989.tb01764.x.
[2]
Y Boykov and V Kolmogorov. “An experimental comparison of min-cut/max-
flow algorithms for energy minimization in vision”. eng. In: Energy Mini-
mization Methods in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2134 (2001),
pp. 359–374. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743.
[3]
Andrew V. Goldberg et al. “Maximum flows by incremental breadth-First
search”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
6942 (2011), pp. 457–468. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
642-23719-5_39.
[4]
Reza Azad et al. “Medical Image Segmentation Review: The success of
U-Net”. und. In: (2022).
[5]
L.R. Ford, D.R. Fulkerson, and RC. Flows in networks. eng. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1962, 12+194 s.
[6]
Yuri Boykov, Olga Veksler, and Ramin Zabih. “Fast approximate energy
minimization via graph cuts”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analy-
sis and Machine Intelligence 23.11 (2001), pp. 1222–1239. ISSN: 19393539,
01628828, 21609292. DOI: 10.1109/34.969114.
[7]
Y Boykov and MP Jolly. “Interactive organ segmentation using graph cuts”.
eng. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer-assisted Intervention -
Miccai 2000 1935 (2000), pp. 276–286. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743.
[8]
Kang Li et al. “Optimal surface segmentation in volumetric images - A graph-
theoretic approach”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence 28.1 (2006), pp. 119–134. ISSN: 19393539, 01628828,
21609292. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2006.19.
[9]
Leyuan Fang et al. “Automatic segmentation of nine retinal layer boundaries
in OCT images of non-exudative AMD patients using deep learning and
graph search”. eng. In: Biomedical Optics Express 8.5 (2017), pp. 2732–
2744. ISSN: 21567085. DOI: 10.1364/BOE.8.002732.
[10]
Dhara. Ashis Kumar et al. “Segmentation of post-operative glioblastoma in
MRI by U-net with patient-specific interactive refinement”. eng. In: Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
56
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:67==
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11383 (2019), pp. 115–
122. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-11723-8_11.
[11]
Fang Lu et al. “Automatic 3D liver location and segmentation via convolu-
tional neural network and graph cut”. eng. In: International Journal of Com-
puter Assisted Radiology and Surgery 12.2 (2017), pp. 171–182. ISSN: 18616429,
18616410. DOI: 10.1007/s11548-016-1467-3.
[12]
Suvadip Mukherjee, Xiaojie Huang, and Roshni R. Bhagalia. “Lung nodule
segmentation using deep learned prior based graph cut”. eng. In: Proceed-
ings - International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (2017), pp. 1205–
1208. ISSN: 19458452, 19457928. DOI: 10.1109/ISBI.2017.7950733.
[13]
Y. Y. Boykov and M. P. Jolly. “Interactive graph cuts for optimal boundary &
region segmentation of objects in N-D images”. eng. In: Proceedings of the
Ieee International Conference on Computer Vision 1 (2001), pp. 105–112.
DOI: 10.1109/iccv.2001.937505.
[14]
Yuri Boykov and Gareth Funka-Lea. “Graph cuts and efficient N-D image
segmentation”. eng. In: International Journal of Computer Vision 70.2 (2006),
pp. 109–131. ISSN: 15731405, 09205691. DOI: 10.1007/s11263-006-7934-5.
[15]
Hiroshi Ishikawa. “Exact optimization for Markov Random Fields with con-
vex priors”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence 25.10 (2003), pp. 1333–1336. ISSN: 19393539, 01628828, 21609292.
DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2003.1233908.
[16]
Ondrej Jamriska, Daniel Sykora, and Alexander Hornung. “Cache-efficient
graph cuts on structured grids”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2012),
pp. 3673–3680. ISSN: 2332564x, 10636919. DOI: 10 . 1109 / CVPR . 2012 .
6248113.
[17]
Jiangyu Liu and Jian Sun. “Parallel graph-cuts by adaptive bottom-up merg-
ing”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2010), pp. 2181–2188. ISSN:
2332564x, 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2010.5539898.
[18]
Dorit S. Hochbaum. “The pseudoflow algorithm: A new algorithm for the
maximum-flow problem”. eng. In: Operations Research 56.4 (2008), pp. 992–
1009. ISSN: 15265463, 0030364x. DOI: 10.1287/opre.1080.0524.
[19]
Andrew V. Goldberg et al. “Faster and more dynamic maximum flow by
incremental breadth-first search”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lec-
ture Notes in Bioinformatics) 9294 (2015), pp. 619–630. ISSN: 16113349,
03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-48350-3_52.
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
57
==PAGE:68==
[20]
Chetan Arora et al. “An efficient graph cut algorithm for computer vision
problems”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
6313.3 (2010), pp. 552–565. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-642-15558-1_40.
[21]
Tanmay Verma and Dhruv Batra. “MaxFlow revisited: An empirical compar-
ison of MaxFlow algorithms for dense vision problems”. eng. In: Bmvc 2012
- Electronic Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference 2012
(2012). DOI: 10.5244/C.26.61.
[22]
Patrick M. Jensen et al. “Review of Serial and Parallel Min-Cut/Max-Flow
Algorithms for Computer Vision”. und. In: (2022), p. 20.
[23]
A V Goldberg and R E Tarjan. A new approach to the maximum flow prob-
lem. eng. ACM Press, 1986, pp. 136–146. DOI: 10.1145/12130.12144.
[24]
B. Fishbain, Dorit S. Hochbaum, and Stefan Mueller. “A competitive study of
the pseudoflow algorithm for the minimum s–t cut problem in vision applica-
tions”. eng. In: Journal of Real-time Image Processing 11.3 (2016), pp. 589–
609. ISSN: 18618219, 18618200. DOI: 10.1007/s11554-013-0344-3.
[25]
Patrick M. Jensen. Max-Flow/Min-Cut Algorithms. https : / / github . com /
patmjen/maxflow_algorithms. [Online; accessed 10-June-2024]. 2024.
[26]
Hochbaum Group. pseudoflow-parametric-cut. https://github.com/hochbaumGroup/
pseudoflow-parametric-cut. [Online; accessed 10-June-2024]. 2024.
[27]
Ravindra K. Ahuja, Thomas L. Magnanti, and James B. Orlin. Network flows
: theory, algorithms, and applications. eng. Prentice-Hall, 1993, XV, 846 S.
(unknown). ISBN: 013617549X, 013617549x, 9780136175490.
[28]
JC Picard. “MAXIMAL CLOSURE OF A GRAPH AND APPLICATIONS TO
COMBINATORIAL PROBLEMS”. eng. In: Management Science 22.11 (1976),
pp. 1268–1272. ISSN: 00251909, 15265501. DOI: 10.1287/mnsc.22.11.1268.
[29]
NetworkX. boykov_kolmogorov. https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/
reference/algorithms/generated/networkx.algorithms.flow.boykov_kolmogorov.
html. [Online; accessed 11-June-2024]. 2024.
[30]
OpenCV. imgproc/gcgraph.hpp. https://github.com/opencv/opencv/blob/
master/modules/imgproc/include/opencv2/imgproc/detail/gcgraph.hpp. [On-
line; accessed 11-June-2024]. 2024.
[31]
Niels Jeppesen. thinmaxflow. https://github.com/Skielex/thinmaxflow. [On-
line; accessed 11-June-2024]. 2024.
[32]
pmneila. PyMaxflow. https://github.com/pmneila/PyMaxflow. [Online; ac-
cessed 11-June-2024]. 2024.
58
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:69==
[33]
E. A. Dinic. “Algorithm for solution of a problem of maximal flow in a net-
work with power estimation”. In: 1970. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:115824074.
[34]
NetworkX. Software for Complex Networks. https://networkx.org/documentation/
stable/index.html. [Online; accessed 11-June-2024]. 2024.
[35]
B. V. Cherkassky and A. V. Goldberg. “On Implementing the Push—Relabel
Method for the Maximum Flow Problem”. eng. In: Algorithmica 19.4 (1997),
pp. 390–410. ISSN: 01784617, 14320541. DOI: 10.1007/PL00009180.
[36]
Zhihui Guo et al. “Deep LOGISMOS: Deep Learning Graph-based 3D Seg-
mentation of Pancreatic Tumors on CT scans”. und. In: (2018), p. 4.
[37]
Amber L. Simpson et al. “A large annotated medical image dataset for the
development and evaluation of segmentation algorithms”. und. In: (2019).
[38]
Lei Liu et al. “Graph Cut Based Mesh Segmentation Using Feature Points
and Geodesic Distance”. eng. In: Proceedings - 2015 International Confer-
ence on Cyberworlds, Cw 2015 (2015), pp. 115–120. DOI: 10.1109/CW.2015.
31.
[39]
Carsten Rother et al. “Optimizing binary MRFs via extended roof duality”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Computer Society Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (2007), p. 4270228. ISSN: 2332564x,
10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2007.383203.
[40]
Endre Boros, Peter L Hammer, and Xiaorong Sun. Network flows and min-
imization of quadratic pseudo-Boolean functions. Tech. rep. Technical Re-
port RRR 17-1991, RUTCOR, 1991.
[41]
PL HAMMER, P HANSEN, and B SIMEONE. “ROOF DUALITY, COMPLE-
MENTATION AND PERSISTENCY IN QUADRATIC 0-1 OPTIMIZATION”.
eng. In: Mathematical Programming 28.2 (1984), pp. 121–155. ISSN: 14364646,
00255610. DOI: 10.1007/BF02612354.
[42]
Vladimir Kolmogorov and Carsten Rother. “Minimizing nonsubmodular func-
tions with graph cuts - A review”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern Anal-
ysis and Machine Intelligence 29.7 (2007), pp. 1274–1279. ISSN: 19393539,
01628828, 21609292. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1031.
[43]
University of Waterloo. Max-flow problem instances in vision. http://vision.
cs.uwaterloo.ca/data/maxflow/. [Online; accessed 05-June-2024]. 2024.
[44]
Yuri Boykov and Vladimir Kolmogorov. “Computing geodesics and minimal
surfaces via graph cuts”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee International Con-
ference on Computer Vision 1 (2003), pp. 26–33. DOI: 10.1109/iccv.2003.
1238310.
[45]
Alexander Gillert et al. “Iterative Next Boundary Detection for Instance Seg-
mentation of Tree Rings in Microscopy Images of Shrub Cross Sections”. In:
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
59
==PAGE:70==
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). 2023, pp. 14540–14548.
[46]
Li Deng. “The MNIST Database of Handwritten Digit Images for Machine
Learning Research [Best of the Web]”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Maga-
zine 29.6 (2012), pp. 141–142. DOI: 10.1109/MSP.2012.2211477.
[47]
Niels Jeppesen. Layered objects examples. https://github.com/Skielex/
slgbuilder-examples/blob/master/notebooks/DetectObjects.ipynb. [Online; ac-
cessed 05-June-2024]. 2024.
[48]
Dorit S. Hochbaum and James B. Orlin. “Simplifications and speedups of
the pseudoflow algorithm”. eng. In: Networks 61.1 (2013), pp. 40–57. ISSN:
10970037, 00283045. DOI: 10.1002/net.21467.
[49]
Ross Kindermann and James Laurie Snell. Markov random fields and their
applications. eng. Vol. 1. American Mathematical Soc., 1980, IX, 142 S. (un-
known). ISBN: 0821833812, 0821850016, 9780821833810, 9780821850015.
60
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:71==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
61
==PAGE:72==
A
Appendix
A.1
Energy Minimization and Markov Random Fields
This section outlines the steps from probabilities to an energy formulation in a
first-order Markov random field in eq. (2.2). The section is heavily inspired by
[49], where they further describe more general models and their applications.
The probability distribution P on the label space is said to define a Markov ran-
dom field (MRF) if the probability of assigning vertex q to Xq depends only on
the neighborhood Nq.
To describe this, we let XA be the set of assignments
X ∈X that agrees with the labelling on the subset of vertices A ⊆V, written
as XA = {Y ∈X|Yv = Xv, ∀v ∈A}. This notation allows us to write that the
conditional probabilities must satisfy the following for P to define a MRF.
P(X{q}|XV\{q}) = P(X{q}|XNq).
(A.1)
To see how this relates to energy, we first define the potential, UA(X), as a way to
assign a number to the label assignment X ∈X, restricted to the subset A ⊆V.
We can now define the energy of a label assignment, X, by the label assignment
in subsets A as
E(X) = −
∑
A⊆V
UA(X).
(A.2)
For a fixed assignment X, the negative of the energy sums the potential over all
subsets A ⊆V . The energy, E(X), then gives a probability through the Gibbs
measure,
P(X) =e−E(X)
Z
=
e−E(X)
∑
Y ∈X e−E(Y ).
(A.3)
If we assume a nearest neighbor Gibbs potential, then UA(X) = 0 for all subsets
A which are not a clique. Under this assumption, the energy becomes
E(X) = −
∑
A⊆C
UA(X),
(A.4)
62
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:73==
where C is the set of all cliques in the graph G. Note that for a square-grid lattice
structure, the set of cliques (other than the empty set) is only vertices and pairs
of adjacent vertices. However, different structures to the graph can add different
cliques. For instance, by including diagonals in the lattice, we must consider 3-
and 4-cliques.
To see that the nearest neighbor Gibbs potential satisfies the requirements on the
conditional probability from eq. (A.1), we first use the rules of conditional proba-
bility,
P(X{q}|XV\{q}) =P(X{q} ∩XV\{q})
P(XV\{q})
=
P(X)
P(XV\{q})
=
P(X)
∑
X′∈XV\{q} P(X′).
(A.5)
Here, X′ represents an assignment of labels where all labels except Xq must equal
that in X. Now, we can insert what we found in (A.3) and (A.4) to get
P(X{q}|XV\{q}) =
e−E(X)
∑
X′∈XV\{q} e−E(X′)
=
e
∑
A⊆C UA(X)
∑
X′∈XV\{q} e
∑
A⊆C UA(X′).
(A.6)
The critical observation is that between the nominator and the denominator, UA(X)
is only different from UA(X′) if the clique contains q. Therefore, most terms cancel
out to give the following equation.
P(X{q}|XV\{q}) =
e
∑
A⊆C,q∈A UA(X)
∑
X′∈XV\{q} e
∑
A⊆C,q∈A UA(X′).
(A.7)
That is, the conditional probability is only dependent on the assignment Xq and the
assignment of the neighbors from Nq. Therefore, this leaves us with just potentials
of cliques that contain q, which are precisely the neighborhood Nq. This restriction
gives the wanted form from eq. (A.1).
The restriction to first-order Markov random fields is the simplest restriction that is
still interesting and can still give rise to much flexibility in modeling [15]. Here, we
restrict the types of cliques to only edges and vertices (1- and 2-cliques). That is,
if we let
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
63
==PAGE:74==
UA(X) =









−h(v, Xv)
if A = {v} ⊂V
−g(u, v, Xu, Xv)
if A = {u, v}, where (u, v) ∈E
0
otherwise,
(A.8)
the energy of the assignment X becomes
E(X) =
∑
(u,v)∈E
g(u, v, Xu, Xv) +
∑
v∈V
h(v, Xv).
(A.9)
Note that these are the only potentials (of interest) when considering a lattice
structure with 4-neighborhoods (and similar for 6-neighborhoods in 3D). However,
if the Markov random field has an 8-neighborhood (or 26-neighborhood in 3D), we
assume that the 3- and 4-clique potentials are 0.
Finally, we can minimize this energy to get the same assignment as maximizing
the joint probability.
max
X
P(X) =e−E(X)
Z
= max
X
e−E(X)
= max
X
−E(X)
= min
X E(X).
(A.10)
This equation is the final step to give the energy-minimization problem as de-
scribed in section 2.2.
A.2
Synthetic data tables
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
S1-side-64
0.24 s ± 41 ms
0.14 s ± 1 ms
0.24 s ± 12 ms
0.20 s ± 6 ms
0.21 s ± 25 ms
S1-side-90
0.30 s ± 21 ms
0.31 s ± 15 ms
0.65 s ± 0.15 s
0.47 s ± 31 ms
0.75 s ± 0.37 s
S1-side-128
0.70 s ± 20 ms
0.75 s ± 24 ms
1.37 s ± 31 ms
0.90 s ± 56 ms
1.22 s ± 32 ms
S1-side-181
1.53 s ± 64 ms
1.69 s ± 80 ms
3.94 s ± 0.30 s
1.85 s ± 48 ms
2.72 s ± 39 ms
S1-side-256
4.10 s ± 0.41 s
4.21 s ± 0.17 s
11.40 s ± 50 ms
3.84 s ± 71 ms
5.70 s ± 0.20 s
S1-side-362
13.17 s ± 1.33 s
12.80 s ± 0.78 s
46.46 s ± 3.52 s
7.92 s ± 42 ms
21.70 s ± 1.09 s
S1-side-512
39.38 s ± 3.25 s
37.97 s ± 4.53 s
152.00 s ± 5.59 s
15.46 s ± 0.80 s
43.88 s ± 0.48 s
S1-side-724
160.33 s ± 4.83 s
200.27 s ± 29.7 s
611.71 s ± 46.4 s
29.45 s ± 0.19 s
161.18 s ± 5.95 s
S1-side-1024
697.38 s ± 136 s
615.88 s ± 50.7 s
0.65 h ± 484 s
67.76 s ± 3.98 s
555.51 s ± 21.5 s
64
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:75==
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Nodes
Arcs
|C|
ρ
(α, β)
Peak memory usage
S1-side-64
4.1 K
24 K
58 K
0.01
(1, 3)
2 MB
2 MB
3 MB
3 MB
7 MB
S1-side-90
8.1 K
48 K
112 K
0.01
(1, 3)
5 MB
5 MB
7 MB
7 MB
14 MB
S1-side-128
16 K
97 K
244 K
0.01
(1, 3)
11 MB
11 MB
15 MB
16 MB
28 MB
S1-side-181
32 K
195 K
479 K
0.01
(1, 3)
22 MB
22 MB
32 MB
32 MB
58 MB
S1-side-256
65 K
392 K
951 K
0.01
(1, 3)
44 MB
44 MB
63 MB
63 MB
113 MB
S1-side-362
131 K
784 K
1.9 M
0.01
(1, 3)
89 MB
89 MB
127 MB
128 MB
229 MB
S1-side-512
262 K
1.6 M
3.8 M
0.01
(1, 3)
177 MB
177 MB
254 MB
256 MB
455 MB
S1-side-724
524 K
3.1 M
7.6 M
0.01
(1, 3)
355 MB
355 MB
509 MB
513 MB
905 MB
S1-side-1024
1.0 M
6.3 M
15.2 M
0.01
(1, 3)
712 MB
712 MB
1.02 GB
1.03 GB
1.81 GB
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
S2-noise-1
5.65 s ± 0.24 s
5.93 s ± 0.46 s
10.52 s ± 1.13 s
11.31 s ± 0.72 s
19.89 s ± 0.30 s
S2-noise-2
6.00 s ± 0.95 s
6.34 s ± 0.19 s
14.05 s ± 1.74 s
10.33 s ± 0.92 s
21.28 s ± 0.93 s
S2-noise-3
11.54 s ± 0.91 s
11.76 s ± 0.87 s
57.92 s ± 4.99 s
13.22 s ± 0.41 s
26.01 s ± 1.99 s
S2-noise-4
37.48 s ± 5.31 s
41.31 s ± 2.16 s
151.99 s ± 5.16 s
16.29 s ± 1.03 s
44.69 s ± 0.99 s
S2-noise-5
75.38 s ± 6.94 s
75.86 s ± 13.1 s
242.58 s ± 20.6 s
19.21 s ± 0.82 s
79.59 s ± 1.07 s
S2-noise-6
132.52 s ± 10.7 s
122.61 s ± 11.2 s
289.95 s ± 10.5 s
25.16 s ± 0.26 s
138.10 s ± 3.58 s
S2-noise-7
194.46 s ± 26.3 s
232.29 s ± 34.1 s
479.54 s ± 111 s
28.27 s ± 2.18 s
192.27 s ± 3.76 s
S2-noise-8
202.84 s ± 44.0 s
228.86 s ± 35.3 s
377.94 s ± 16.2 s
28.26 s ± 1.29 s
190.86 s ± 10.1 s
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Nodes
Arcs
|C|
ρ
(α, β)
Peak memory usage
S2-noise-1
262 K
1.6 M
1.7 M
0.0
Not used
174 MB
174 MB
254 MB
256 MB
446 MB
S2-noise-2
262 K
1.6 M
1.7 M
0.001
(1, 10)
174 MB
174 MB
254 MB
256 MB
447 MB
S2-noise-3
262 K
1.6 M
2.2 M
0.005
(1, 5)
186 MB
186 MB
265 MB
267 MB
449 MB
S2-noise-4
262 K
1.6 M
3.8 M
0.01
(1, 3)
177 MB
177 MB
254 MB
256 MB
455 MB
S2-noise-5
262 K
1.6 M
5.6 M
0.05
(1, 2.5)
195 MB
195 MB
267 MB
269 MB
461 MB
S2-noise-6
262 K
1.6 M
7.7 M
0.1
(1, 2)
229 MB
229 MB
299 MB
301 MB
465 MB
S2-noise-7
262 K
1.6 M
10.1 M
0.03
(1, 1.5)
259 MB
259 MB
327 MB
329 MB
479 MB
S2-noise-8
262 K
1.6 M
10.5 M
0.5
(1, 1)
255 MB
255 MB
329 MB
331 MB
480 MB
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
S3-η-8
9 ms ± 1 ms
8 ms ± 0 ms
12 ms ± 0 ms
12 ms ± 0 ms
13 ms ± 0 ms
S3-η-16
27 ms ± 0 ms
27 ms ± 1 ms
40 ms ± 1 ms
41 ms ± 1 ms
44 ms ± 1 ms
S3-η-32
90 ms ± 3 ms
0.10 s ± 2 ms
0.11 s ± 4 ms
0.11 s ± 1 ms
0.11 s ± 1 ms
S3-η-64
0.65 s ± 20 ms
0.70 s ± 11 ms
0.53 s ± 18 ms
0.51 s ± 4 ms
0.31 s ± 9 ms
S3-η-128
3.25 s ± 2 ms
2.86 s ± 41 ms
1.27 s ± 73 ms
1.16 s ± 7 ms
1.04 s ± 12 ms
S3-η-256
13.29 s ± 0.31 s
13.64 s ± 85 ms
3.94 s ± 0.29 s
3.47 s ± 0.33 s
2.73 s ± 65 ms
S3-η-512
63.75 s ± 1.51 s
60.88 s ± 1.37 s
13.50 s ± 69 ms
12.93 s ± 0.38 s
6.65 s ± 0.12 s
S3-η-1024
234.32 s ± 5.45 s
211.16 s ± 5.71 s
31.67 s ± 0.99 s
27.36 s ± 0.13 s
19.57 s ± 38 ms
S3-η-2048
0.31 h ± 27.4 s
0.30 h ± 35.2 s
60.14 s ± 0.20 s
43.47 s ± 0.27 s
65.57 s ± 1.38 s
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Nodes
Arcs
|C|
ρ
(α, β)
Peak memory usage
S3-η-8
170
1.2 K
8.3 K
0.01
(1, 3)
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
S3-η-16
362
2.9 K
14 K
0.01
(1, 3)
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
S3-η-32
746
6.3 K
32 K
0.01
(1, 3)
1 MB
1 MB
1 MB
1 MB
1 MB
S3-η-64
1.5 K
13 K
69 K
0.01
(1, 3)
2 MB
2 MB
2 MB
2 MB
3 MB
S3-η-128
3.0 K
26 K
140 K
0.01
(1, 3)
4 MB
5 MB
5 MB
6 MB
6 MB
S3-η-256
6.1 K
53 K
268 K
0.01
(1, 3)
9 MB
10 MB
11 MB
11 MB
13 MB
S3-η-512
12 K
107 K
553 K
0.01
(1, 3)
20 MB
21 MB
24 MB
24 MB
26 MB
S3-η-1024
24 K
216 K
985 K
0.01
(1, 3)
40 MB
40 MB
47 MB
47 MB
51 MB
S3-η-2048
49 K
432 K
840 K
0.01
(1, 3)
82 MB
81 MB
95 MB
95 MB
103 MB
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
65
==PAGE:76==
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
S4-τ-8
8 ms ± 1 ms
7 ms ± 0 ms
12 ms ± 0 ms
11 ms ± 1 ms
15 ms ± 1 ms
S4-τ-16
18 ms ± 0 ms
17 ms ± 0 ms
22 ms ± 0 ms
22 ms ± 1 ms
29 ms ± 2 ms
S4-τ-32
35 ms ± 0 ms
44 ms ± 6 ms
47 ms ± 0 ms
44 ms ± 1 ms
61 ms ± 2 ms
S4-τ-64
89 ms ± 2 ms
94 ms ± 7 ms
0.11 s ± 5 ms
97 ms ± 3 ms
0.13 s ± 4 ms
S4-τ-128
0.21 s ± 0 ms
0.24 s ± 7 ms
0.22 s ± 3 ms
0.18 s ± 6 ms
0.29 s ± 5 ms
S4-τ-256
0.70 s ± 70 ms
0.65 s ± 25 ms
0.59 s ± 58 ms
0.41 s ± 5 ms
0.53 s ± 3 ms
S4-τ-512
2.45 s ± 0.34 s
2.32 s ± 9 ms
1.42 s ± 25 ms
0.93 s ± 9 ms
1.44 s ± 29 ms
S4-τ-1024
7.54 s ± 0.25 s
7.22 s ± 0.10 s
3.74 s ± 0.11 s
1.80 s ± 0.12 s
2.70 s ± 0.17 s
S4-τ-2048
28.96 s ± 0.46 s
28.06 s ± 0.16 s
11.79 s ± 0.19 s
3.67 s ± 37 ms
6.92 s ± 0.48 s
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Nodes
Arcs
|C|
ρ
(α, β)
Peak memory usage
S4-τ-8
170
1.2 K
8.3 K
0.01
(1, 3)
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
S4-τ-16
338
2.4 K
14 K
0.01
(1, 3)
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
S4-τ-32
674
4.9 K
26 K
0.01
(1, 3)
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
0 MB
1 MB
S4-τ-64
1.3 K
9.9 K
54 K
0.01
(1, 3)
1 MB
1 MB
1 MB
1 MB
2 MB
S4-τ-128
2.7 K
19 K
109 K
0.01
(1, 3)
3 MB
3 MB
4 MB
4 MB
4 MB
S4-τ-256
5.4 K
39 K
224 K
0.01
(1, 3)
6 MB
6 MB
8 MB
8 MB
10 MB
S4-τ-512
10 K
79 K
445 K
0.01
(1, 3)
13 MB
13 MB
16 MB
16 MB
19 MB
S4-τ-1024
21 K
159 K
906 K
0.01
(1, 3)
27 MB
27 MB
33 MB
33 MB
40 MB
S4-τ-2048
43 K
319 K
1.8 M
0.01
(1, 3)
54 MB
54 MB
66 MB
67 MB
79 MB
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
Solve ± Std.
S5-1-surface
1.71 s ± 24 ms
1.77 s ± 7 ms
0.82 s ± 49 ms
0.72 s ± 0.11 s
2.52 s ± 99 ms
S5-2-surfaces
3.33 s ± 0.17 s
3.51 s ± 0.28 s
2.37 s ± 0.19 s
1.99 s ± 60 ms
3.67 s ± 0.30 s
S5-3-surfaces
9.86 s ± 0.59 s
9.66 s ± 0.72 s
3.94 s ± 31 ms
3.02 s ± 0.15 s
7.03 s ± 0.93 s
S5-4-surfaces
16.27 s ± 1.39 s
12.95 s ± 1.37 s
6.61 s ± 0.10 s
4.58 s ± 0.19 s
8.07 s ± 0.79 s
S5-5-surfaces
17.03 s ± 0.39 s
17.81 s ± 1.39 s
8.53 s ± 0.74 s
5.02 s ± 0.13 s
9.21 s ± 0.28 s
S5-6-surfaces
22.27 s ± 0.13 s
24.85 s ± 1.80 s
12.29 s ± 1.03 s
6.79 s ± 90 ms
12.60 s ± 0.54 s
S5-7-surfaces
35.48 s ± 2.87 s
38.19 s ± 1.21 s
14.55 s ± 0.35 s
7.70 s ± 60 ms
13.91 s ± 0.35 s
S5-8-surfaces
43.02 s ± 1.62 s
45.40 s ± 1.63 s
18.03 s ± 1.42 s
10.54 s ± 0.56 s
18.47 s ± 1.13 s
Dataset
BK
BKop
IBFS1
IBFS2
HI-PR
Name
Nodes
Arcs
|C|
ρ
(α, β)
Peak memory usage
S5-1-surface
4.0 K
31 K
162 K
0.01
(1, 3)
3 MB
3 MB
4 MB
4 MB
8 MB
S5-2-surfaces
8.1 K
70 K
330 K
0.01
(1, 3)
13 MB
13 MB
15 MB
15 MB
18 MB
S5-3-surfaces
12 K
109 K
525 K
0.01
(1, 3)
22 MB
22 MB
27 MB
27 MB
30 MB
S5-4-surfaces
16 K
148 K
727 K
0.01
(1, 3)
31 MB
31 MB
36 MB
36 MB
40 MB
S5-5-surfaces
20 K
187 K
899 K
0.01
(1, 3)
39 MB
39 MB
46 MB
46 MB
51 MB
S5-6-surfaces
24 K
227 K
1.1 M
0.01
(1, 3)
49 MB
49 MB
58 MB
59 MB
63 MB
S5-7-surfaces
28 K
266 K
1.3 M
0.01
(1, 3)
56 MB
57 MB
67 MB
68 MB
74 MB
S5-8-surfaces
32 K
305 K
1.5 M
0.01
(1, 3)
65 MB
65 MB
77 MB
77 MB
84 MB
66
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
==PAGE:77==
Algorithms for Image Segmentation
67
==PAGE:78==
This may feel like the end, but it is only just the beginning.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
