==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
1
Predicting Emotional Responses in Urban
Environments: A Relational Graph Convolutional
Variational Autoencoder Model
Elysia Gao
Department of Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
elygao@biosustain.dtu.dk
Abstract—Previous research has established connections between spatial environments, temporal dynamics, and human emotions
through controlled experimental setups. However, the real-time, real-world dynamics between these elements remain underexplored.
This thesis, embedded within the eMOTIONAL cities initiative, seeks not only to address this gap by developing a Relational
convolutional Graph Neural Network (RGCN) model embedded in a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with a Regression Network but also
to create a model that simulates the complexity of interactions between a person’s emotional state and their real-time daily activity
patterns.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are employed for their effectiveness with graph-structured data and their ability to capture multiple
types of relationships. These relationships include interactions between each element track (emotions, locations, durations, activities,
and modes of each participant) using relational graphs, the spatial aspects of urban environments, and the temporal evolution of each
element. By utilizing this model, we can predict an individual’s emotional state at a new location, contributing to a deeper
understanding of how urban environments affect emotional health. This comprehensive understanding facilitates better urban planning
and helps create environments that support emotional well-being.
Index Terms—relational convolutional graph neural networks (RGCNN), heterogeneous graphs, variational autoencoders (VAE),
regression network, emotion prediction, graph interpretability, urban emotions
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
C
APTURING the intricate relationships between spatial
environments, temporal patterns, and human emotions
has been an area of significant interest across disciplines.
Previous studies have attempted to explore these connec-
tions through controlled experimental settings. There is a
growing need to better understand these dynamics in real-
world, real-time contexts within cities as well as utilize this
understanding to make coherent predictions [1]. This aligns
with the emerging ”Urban Emotions” field, combining spa-
tial planning, geoinformatics, computer linguistics, and sen-
sor technology to integrate citizens’ emotional perceptions
into urban planning [2].
Initiatives like emotion maps [3] have employed wear-
able technology to measure individuals’ arousal levels as
they navigate urban environments, aiming to identify loca-
tions that evoke emotional responses [4]. The Bio-Mapping
project and Emotional Cartography projects used Galvanic
Skin Response (GSR) sensors paired with GPS locators to
create visual representations of participants’ arousal levels
at different locations in cities [3].
However, these approaches often rely on a single metric
(arousal) and may not capture the full complexity of emo-
tional experiences. The GSR data alone does not indicate the
actual emotions experienced or their causes, which could be
related to physical activity rather than emotional responses
to the environment. Additionally, the temporal aspect of
these emotion maps is limited, providing only a snapshot
of emotional responses rather than tracking changes over
time [4]. While Nold attempted to mitigate this by allowing
participants to annotate their arousal maps, the added text
is often limited and may not fully reflect the complex
relationship between individuals and personally significant
places.
While wearable technology has been used to create emo-
tion maps, other researchers have explored different forms
of crowd-sourced data ( [5], [6], [7], [8]). Some rely on data
provided by participants through mobile apps or scraped
from social media usage. For instance, a study tracking emo-
tions in Vienna and Siena utilizes an EmoMap application
that prompts users for comfortability ratings and selects
appropriate adjectives from a set of environment-related
emotional adjectives [7].
Expanding on this approach, some researchers have
leveraged social media data and sentiment analysis tech-
niques to explore the spatiotemporal changes in the multi-
granularity emotions of urban residents. For example, Xiao
et al. (2022) [8] developed a method to reveal patterns
in the distribution and intensity of emotional expressions
across different areas and time periods in Nanchang City,
China. Their approach uses a BERT-CNN model (see Fig.
1) for emotion classification, dividing emotions into six
categories: neutral, happy, angry, sad, fearful, and surprised.
They employ spatial-temporal analysis techniques, includ-
ing Moran’s I index, LISA time path analysis, and spatiotem-
poral transition analysis, to uncover the dynamic nature of
urban emotions. This method allows for the examination of
==PAGE:2==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
2
Fig. 1: BERT-CNN model architecture for emotion analysis
in Weibo texts [8].
spatial associations between different emotions, the stability
of emotional patterns over time, and the evolution of spatial
relationships between adjacent areas. While this method
provides valuable insights into the temporal and spatial
distribution characteristics of emotions in cities, it may be
limited by the biases inherent in social media data and the
accuracy of sentiment analysis techniques. Additionally, the
reliance on text-based social media data or crowd-sourced
data may not capture the full range of emotional experiences
in urban environments.
Despite these efforts, Pykett (2022) [9] criticizes current
data-driven approaches for their limited perspectives on
urban emotions and well-being. She advocates for inter-
disciplinary insights from humanities, emotional cultures,
and political economies, arguing for a more nuanced under-
standing of urban emotional landscapes. Pykett emphasizes
the need to consider cultural, historical, and political factors,
as well as the collective dynamics of emotional well-being.
She suggests that integrating humanities perspectives and
understanding the historical specificity of emotions in polit-
ical economy could lead to more empathic and just urban
well-being strategies, encompassing diverse human values
and collective cultural practices.
1.1
Thesis Approach
To address the limitations of existing approaches in urban
emotion analysis, we propose a novel methodology using
Relational Graph Convolutional Networks (RGCNs) em-
bedded in a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with a Regres-
sion Network. This approach overcomes several shortcom-
ings of current methods:
•
Unlike traditional emotion maps, our model incor-
porates temporal aspects and goes beyond simple
arousal levels.
•
In contrast to sentiment analysis techniques, our
approach is not dependent on text data or user
awareness.
•
We integrate contextual location data, which many
existing models fail to consider.
Our model architecture achieves these improvements by:
•
Incorporating real-time physiological data.
•
Capturing both spatial and temporal aspects glob-
ally.
•
Integrating diverse data sources, including wearable
sensor information, environmental factors, and ur-
ban infrastructure details.
Specifically, we utilize an RGCN structure embedded
within a VAE framework, coupled with a Regression Net-
work for the final emotion prediction. This architecture is
tailored to handle both continuous and categorical variables,
with the encoder processing continuous data (e.g., emotions,
locations, durations) and categorical data (e.g., activities,
modes) separately.
The main contributions of this thesis include:
1)
Development of a novel graph-based VAE model
with Regression Network for analyzing multi-
modal daily activity and emotional patterns and
their emotional impacts.
2)
Application of the model to predict physiological
responses (heart rate) in urban environments.
3)
Analysis of feature importance in urban settings and
their correlation with emotional states.
4)
Demonstration of the model’s potential for urban
planning and well-being applications.
The thesis is organized as follows: we begin with a
relevant literature review and background on graph neural
networks and variational autoencoders. We then detail our
methodology, including data preprocessing, graph construc-
tion, and model architecture. The experimental setup and
results are presented, followed by an in-depth discussion of
our findings. We conclude with a summary of our contribu-
tions and suggestions for future research directions.
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1
A Comprehensive Survey of Graph Embedding:
Problems, Techniques and Applications [10]
Deep learning techniques have proven highly effective for
graph embedding tasks due to their ability to automatically
learn complex patterns and representations from graph-
structured data [11]. These approaches can be broadly cat-
egorized into two main groups: those that utilize random
walks and those that operate directly on the graph structure
[10].
One of the most influential works in the random walk-
based category is node2vec [12], which extends the idea of
skip-gram models and word2vec [13] from natural language
processing to graphs. A random walk is a stochastic process
that involves taking a sequence of steps on a graph where
each step is determined probabilistically [14]. node2vec
employs biased random walks to explore diverse neighbor-
hoods, allowing it to capture both local and global graph
structures.
In contrast, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [15]
represent a prominent example of methods that operate
directly on the graph structure. GCNs apply convolutional
operations directly on the graph, learning node representa-
tions by aggregating information from neighboring nodes.
The following table summarizes the characteristics, ad-
vantages, and limitations of these approaches:
Given these advantages of deep learning approaches
for graphs, we decided to further investigate both random
==PAGE:3==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
3
TABLE 1: Comparison of Deep Learning Approaches for
Graph Embeddings [10], Chosen Method: Deep Learning
without Random Walks
Deep Learning with Random Walks (e.g., node2vec)
Advantages:
•
Effective in capturing complex structures
•
Scalable to large graphs
•
Preserves higher-order proximity
•
No feature engineering required
Limitations:
•
Only considers local context within a path
•
Challenging to find optimal sampling strategy
Deep Learning without Random Walks (e.g., GCN)
Advantages:
•
Captures global graph properties
•
More stable and consistent results
•
Incorporates node features and edge attributes natu-
rally
Limitations:
•
Higher computational cost
•
Potential scalability issues for large graphs
Overall Deep Learning Approaches
Advantages:
•
Automatic feature learning
•
Robust to complex, real-world graphs
•
Effective for various graph analysis tasks
Limitations:
•
May require significant computational resources
•
Can be sensitive to hyperparameter tuning
walk-based and non-random walk-based methods. After
careful consideration, we chose to focus on the deep learn-
ing without random walks framework, specifically Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs). This decision was moti-
vated by GCNs’ ability to capture global graph properties
and naturally incorporate node features and edge attributes,
which are crucial for our analysis of urban emotional land-
scapes.
2.2
Graph-based Polyphonic Multitrack Music Genera-
tion [16]
Building upon the body of work in symbolic music gen-
eration, the present research draws inspiration from the
graph-based representation of polyphonic multitrack music
generation proposed by Cosenza et al [16]. This approach
introduces a graph representation to model the relationships
between different tracks (e.g., notes, chords, sections) in a
musical composition, allowing for controlled generation and
manipulation of the musical structure and content.
The proposed model processes polyphonic, multitrack
music represented as a multitrack pianoroll binary tensor.
A polyphonic multitrack music composition is represented
by a chord-level graph, where nodes correspond to the
activation of a chord in a specific track and timestep. Edge
features contain the edge type and the distance in timesteps
between two nodes. The content of the graph is represented
by the set of node features, containing the list of notes
played at the corresponding node, with pitch and duration
information stored as a one-hot token pair.
Fig. 2: Model Architecture for Graph-based Polyphonic Mu-
sic VAEs [16]
2.2.1
Model Architecture
The authors propose a deep Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
to reconstruct the structure and content of the chord-level
graph as shown in Fig. 2. The encoder models the encoding
distribution, while the decoder network models the decod-
ing distribution. The generative process is formalized using
latent variables for structure and content.
The encoder consists of a content encoder and a struc-
ture encoder, which output latent codes for content and
structure, respectively. These latent codes are combined into
a graph code through a linear layer. The decoder gener-
ates structure and content separately, first decomposing the
graph code, then generating the structure through a struc-
ture decoder, and finally generating the content through a
content decoder.
The content encoder develops progressively higher-level
representations for notes, chords, bars, and the whole piece
using a hierarchical processing scheme. It first embeds each
note, then processes the note embeddings through Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) to obtain chord represen-
tations. These chord representations are aggregated into bar
embeddings using a soft attention mechanism, which are
then compressed into the final content representation as
depicted in Fig. 3.
The structure encoder processes the structure tensor
through a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to obtain
the latent representation. The structure decoder functions
as a mirror image of the structure encoder, decompressing
the latent representation into bar representations, decoding
them into structure tensors, and finally producing the prob-
abilistic structure tensor.
The content decoder reconstructs the content from the la-
tent representation and structure. It decompresses the latent
content into bar representations, initializes the node states
with these representations, and processes them through
a GCN to obtain the final node states. A chord decoder
then transforms these node states into note representations,
which are further processed by pitch and duration decoders
to produce the probabilistic tensors containing pitch and
duration probabilities.
The structure encoder processes the structure tensor S
through a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to obtain
the latent representation zS as seen in Fig. 4.
==PAGE:4==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
4
Fig. 3: Content Encoder Architecture for Polyphonic Music
VAEs [16]
Fig. 4: Structure Encoder Architecture for Polyphonic Music
VAEs [16]
3
BACKGROUND
3.1
Relational Graph Convolutional Networks [17]
Our graph construction centers around building a relational
graph which will be fed into a R-GCN in our encoder
framework. This approach leverages Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs), which operate by aggregating feature
information from a node’s local neighborhood to learn a
node representation. However, traditional GCNs have lim-
itations when dealing with complex, real-world datasets
such as social networks, knowledge graphs, and biological
networks, as they do not explicitly handle multiple types
of edges (relations). To address this limitation, we employ
Relational Graph Convolutional Networks (R-GCNs), which
are specifically designed to process graphs with diverse
edge types.
Relational data refers to data that includes various types
of relationships between entities. In many real-world appli-
cations, these relationships are not uniform; instead, they
can be of different types and directions. For example, in
a social network, the relationships could include ”friend,”
”follower,” and ”colleague.” Each of these represent a dif-
ferent type of edge between the nodes. This complexity
requires models that can handle multiple types of edges
effectively.
Relational Graph Convolutional Networks (R-GCNs) ex-
tend GCNs which operate on local neighborhoods [18] to
handle large-scale relational data with multiple types of
edges. This extension is necessary for capturing the diversity
and complexity of relationships in such data. The R-GCN
model incorporates relational data by explicitly modeling
the different types of edges and their directions.
The message-passing framework in neural networks
[19], can be formulated as follows and see in Fig. 5:
Fig. 5: Message-passing Process in RGCN [20]
h(l+1)
i
= σ
 X
m∈Mi
gm(h(l)
i , h(l)
j )
!
,
(1)
where h(l)
i
∈Rd(l) is the hidden state of node vi in
the l-th layer of the neural network, with d(l) being the
dimensionality of this layer’s representations. Mi denotes
the set of incoming messages for node vi. The function
gm(·, ·) is typically a neural network-like function or a
linear transformation, and σ(·) is an element-wise activation
function such as ReLU.
To extend this framework to relational data, we define
the forward-pass update for a node vi in a relational multi-
graph as follows [17]:
h(l+1)
i
= σ

X
r∈R
X
j∈Nr
i
1
ci,r
W (l)
r h(l)
j
+ W (l)
0 h(l)
i

,
(2)
where N r
i denotes the set of neighbor indices of node
i under relation r ∈R. The term ci,r is a normalization
constant that can be either learned or predefined.
This approach allows the model to accumulate trans-
formed feature vectors from neighboring nodes through a
normalized sum, incorporating relation-specific transforma-
tions depending on the type and direction of edges. A self-
connection of a special relation type is added to each node
to ensure that the representation of a node at layer l + 1 can
also be informed by its representation at layer l.
3.1.1
Regularization
One challenge with applying R-GCNs to highly multi-
relational data is the rapid growth in the number of pa-
rameters with the number of relations. To address this, we
introduce two regularization methods: basis decomposition
and block-diagonal decomposition.
Basis-decomposition:
In basis-decomposition, each W (l)
r
is defined as:
W (l)
r
=
B
X
b=1
a(l)
rb V (l)
b
,
(3)
where V (l)
b
∈Rd(l+1)×d(l) are basis transformations with
coefficients a(l)
rb that depend on r.
Block-diagonal decomposition:
In block-diagonal decomposition, each W (l)
r
is defined
as a direct sum over a set of low-dimensional matrices [21]:
==PAGE:5==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
5
W (l)
r
=
B
M
b=1
Q(l)
br ,
(4)
where Q(l)
br ∈R
d(l+1)
B
× d(l)
B . The block-diagonal matrices
W (l)
r
are defined as:
diag(Q(l)
1r , . . . , Q(l)
Br).
(5)
The basis function decomposition can be seen as a form
of effective weight-sharing between different relation types,
while the block decomposition encodes an intuition that
latent features can be grouped into sets of variables that
are more tightly coupled within groups than across groups.
Both decompositions reduce the number of parameters
needed for highly multi-relational data, alleviating overfit-
ting on rare relations.
We utilize the standard message-passage framework of
R-GCNs as well as both regularization methods as well as
no regularization in our framework to enhance flexibility
and efficiency.
3.2
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [22]
Fig. 6: Variational Autoencoder (VAE) General Architecture
[29]
We utilize Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) as the over-
all architecture for our prediction model, leveraging the
resampling of the latent space to generate emotion predic-
tions. VAEs are a class of generative models that combine
neural networks with variational inference techniques, mak-
ing them particularly useful for learning latent representa-
tions of data in an unsupervised manner [23](see Fig. 6).
The key idea behind VAEs is to approximate the intractable
posterior distribution of the latent variables using a neural
network. In our implementation, we follow the standard
model formulation, employing variational inference and
the reparameterization trick. This approach allows us to
effectively learn and manipulate the latent space, which is
crucial for generating accurate emotion predictions from our
musical graph representations.
3.2.1
Model Formulation
The VAE consists of two main components: an encoder
and a decoder. The encoder approximates the posterior
distribution of the latent variables given the observed data,
while the decoder generates data samples from the latent
variables.
Let x be the observed data and z be the latent variables.
The generative process can be described by a prior distri-
bution pθ(z) and a likelihood pθ(x|z), parameterized by θ.
The prior over the latent variables is typically chosen to be
a centered isotropic multivariate Gaussian [22]:
pθ(z) = N(z; 0, I),
(6)
where N denotes a Gaussian distribution with mean 0
and identity covariance matrix I.
The encoder approximates the posterior distribution
pθ(z|x) using a neural network qϕ(z|x), parameterized by ϕ.
The approximate posterior is assumed to be a multivariate
Gaussian with a diagonal covariance structure:
qϕ(z|x) = N(z; µϕ(x), σ2
ϕ(x)I),
(7)
where µϕ(x) and σϕ(x) are the outputs of the encoder
neural network, representing the mean and standard devia-
tion of the approximate posterior.
3.2.2
Variational Inference
To learn the parameters θ and ϕ, we maximize the evidence
lower bound (ELBO) on the marginal likelihood pθ(x) [28]:
log pθ(x) ≥Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] −KL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z)), (8)
where KL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence. The
ELBO can be decomposed into a reconstruction term and
a regularization term. The reconstruction term encourages
the model to accurately reconstruct the data, while the
regularization term enforces the approximate posterior to
be close to the prior.
3.2.3
Reparameterization Trick
To enable backpropagation through the stochastic sampling
process, VAEs use the reparameterization trick. Instead of
sampling z directly from qϕ(z|x), we reparameterize z as
[22]:
z = µϕ(x) + σϕ(x) ⊙ϵ,
(9)
where ϵ ∼N(0, I) and ⊙denotes the element-wise
product. This allows the gradients to be backpropagated
through µϕ(x) and σϕ(x).
3.2.4
Loss Function
The resulting loss function for a single data point x(i) is
given by [22]:
L(θ, ϕ; x(i)) =1
2
J
X
j=1

1 + log(σ(i)
j )2 −(µ(i)
j )2 −(σ(i)
j )2
+ 1
L
L
X
l=1
log pθ(x(i)|z(i,l)),
(10)
where z(i,l) = µϕ(x(i)) + σϕ(x(i)) ⊙ϵ(l) and ϵ(l) ∼
N(0, I). The first term corresponds to the KL divergence,
and the second term is the reconstruction loss.
==PAGE:6==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
6
4
METHODOLOGY
The proposed approach utilizes a graph-based representa-
tion within a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with a Regres-
sion Network framework to analyze and model complex
daily activity and emotional patterns involving multiple
modalities. The input data is organized as a multitrack
tensor CN×I×T ×P , where N is the number of samples, I is
the number of ”tracks” (e.g., emotions, locations, durations,
activities, modes), T is the number of timesteps, and P is
the number of features per track. We denote the term tracks
to indicate the sequential representation of each individual
modality. The following details specifics about implementa-
tion. It’s important to note that in this context, ”timestep”
does not refer to a fixed unit of time (such as seconds or
minutes), but rather to discrete, consecutive activities or
events in a sequence. For example, in a sequence of activities
like home →work →shopping, each of these activities
represent a single ”timestep” in our model, regardless of
its actual duration. The duration of each activity is captured
as a separate feature within the data structure.
4.1
Data Preprocessing
The original data used in this study was collected through
two main sources. Participants wore the Empatica E4
wristband during the day, which recorded their physio-
logical data, including electrodermal activity, blood vol-
ume pulse/heart rate, skin temperature, and motion (3-
axis acceleration). The wristband aimed to evaluate par-
ticipants’ stress levels during their everyday lives. Addi-
tionally, participants installed and ran the X-ing mobile
application in the background throughout the study. The
X-ing app recorded GPS locations, times, inferred trans-
portation modes used for trips, and activities performed at
the destination of each trip. Participants were required to
validate and correct the information collected by the X-ing
app daily [1].
The preprocessing pipeline involves extracting relevant
information from various sources and organizing it into
a multitrack tensor format, with five tracks representing
emotions, locations, durations, activities, and modes. The
raw data consists of locations (latitude and longitude co-
ordinates), physiological data (such as HR values per unit
of time), activities (e.g., home, work, shopping), and trans-
portation modes (e.g., bus, car, bicycle). Table 2 indicates all
features used as model inputs.
We aggregate data for each unique consecutive activity
or transportation mode. This aggregation process results
in a structured representation for each ”timestep” in our
model. It’s important to note that each ”timestep” represents
a discrete activity or transportation mode, not a fixed unit of
time. This approach allows us to capture varying durations
of activities and trips while maintaining consistent data
structure. For each timestep, we record either an activity
or a transportation mode, as these are mutually exclusive
- the participant is either engaging in an activity or using
a mode of transportation. We also include the duration of
the activity or trip, calculated from timestamps, and the
location (latitude and longitude) updated at the start of
each new activity or mode. Emotional data, derived from
HR measurements, is aggregated throughout the duration
TABLE 2: Model Input Features
Feature
Description
activity
Current participant activity
latitude
Geographical coordinates
longitude
(for data extraction only)
mode
Transportation mode
duration
Activity or trip duration
poi *
Points of interest categories
sky, motorcyclist, bicycle, etc.
environmental object presence
Coordinate
Additional coordinate info
Heart Rate Statistics
mean hr
Mean heart rate
std hr
Heart rate std deviation
min hr
Minimum heart rate
max hr
Maximum heart rate
rmssd
Root Mean Square of Successive
Differences
cv hr
Coefficient of Variation
skewness
HR distribution skewness
kurtosis
HR distribution kurtosis
IQR
Interquartile Range
of the activity or trip. This aggregation is necessary because
there can be thousands of HR measurements during a single
activity or trip. Fig. 7 shows a heatmap of mean heart rate
over all collected locations for all participants. Figures 8
and 9 provide a more detailed view, showing an individual
participant’s heatmap along with activity markers. In these
figures, blue markers indicate home locations, red markers
indicate work locations, and bus markers represent trans-
portation modes.
Fig. 7: All Participant’s Mean Heart Rate Heatmap
Fig. 8: Individual Participant’s Mean Heart Rate Heatmap
with Activity Markers
==PAGE:7==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
7
Fig. 9: Individual Participant’s Mean Heart Rate Heatmap
4.1.1
Emotion Track
The emotion track is represented by a set of continuous
values derived from physiological data, specifically heart
rate (HR) measurements recorded by the Empatica E4 wrist-
band. Summary statistics are computed from the HR data
for each consecutive activity and used as input features
for the emotion track. These include Mean HR, Standard
Deviation of HR, Minimum HR, Maximum HR, Root Mean
Square of the Successive Differences (RMSSD), Coefficient
of Variation of HR, Skewness and Kurtosis of HR, and
Interquartile Range (IQR) of HR. Thus, HR is used as a
proxy state to represent emotions.
4.1.2
Location Track
The location track comprises two sets of features. First,
latitude and longitude coordinates are obtained from the
X-ing mobile application, which records GPS locations. The
latitude and longitude coordinates are not directly used as
input into the model but rather to find contextual informa-
tion. Second, additional contextual information is extracted
from these GPS coordinates using the Mapillary API [24]
and OpenStreetMap data [25]. This includes percentages
of different objects (e.g., buildings, roads, vehicles) present
in segmented images near the recorded locations, obtained
through the Mapillary API, and counts of different points
of interest (POIs) within a specified radius around the
locations, extracted from OpenStreetMap data.
4.1.3
Duration Track
The duration track represents the length of time the partici-
pant spent at each recorded location, which was calculated
using the timestamps originally obtained from the X-ing
application.
4.1.4
Activity Track
The activity track consists of categorical tokens representing
the participant’s activities (e.g., home, work, exercise, shop-
ping), obtained from the X-ing application.
4.1.5
Mode Track
The mode track comprises categorical tokens representing
the participant’s mode of transportation (e.g., bus, car, bicy-
cle, metro), also obtained from the X-ing application.
4.1.6
Data Handling
The continuous data (emotions, locations, and durations)
and categorical data (activities and modes) are treated sepa-
rately during preprocessing due to their different data struc-
tures. This separation allows the model to handle the unique
characteristics and nuances of each data type effectively.
The preprocessing steps involve tokenizing the categorical
data which is later one hot encoded, computing summary
statistics for the continuous data, and organizing all the
information into a multitrack tensor format.
4.1.7
Normalization
The preprocessing pipeline employs several normalization
techniques to ensure consistent scaling across different data
types. A MinMaxScaler is applied to both the ’duration’ fea-
ture and various Points of Interest (POI) features, transform-
ing them to a 0-1 range. This normalization is performed
on data aggregated from all participants and activities,
allowing the model to interpret these features consistently
across different scales. Heart Rate (HR) features undergo a
two-step normalization process. Initially, a StandardScaler
standardizes all HR features per participant. Subsequently,
a custom scaling function maps most features to a 0-1
range using a sigmoid function, with special handling for
skewness and kurtosis to ensure they fall within a 0.25-0.75
range. This approach preserves the interpretability of HR
statistics while avoiding negative values.
4.2
Graph Construction
The proposed approach represents transportation patterns
as a relational graph G = (V, E, A, X), where V is the set
of nodes, E is the set of multi-type edges, A is the set of
edge features, and X is the set of node features. This graph
structure (example construction shown in Fig. 10) captures
the complex relationships and dependencies between dif-
ferent elements of the data. The graph construction process
utilizes a relational graph structure with three distinct types
of relations: onset, next, and track edges. Each of these rela-
tion types are further stratified to prevent weight-sharing
between modalities that may have significantly different
characteristics. This stratification allows the model to learn
modality-specific representations while still capturing the
inter-modality relationships.
4.2.1
Track Edges (solid blue edges in Fig. 10):
These edges connect consecutive activations within a single
track, capturing the temporal evolution of a specific modal-
ity (e.g., changes in emotion or location over time). The
track edges are constructed by iterating over each track in
the structure tensor S, identifying the active timesteps for
that track, and creating edges between consecutive active
timesteps. The edge type for track edges is further stratified
based on the specific track combination, allowing the model
to learn track-specific representations.
4.2.2
Onset Edges (dashed red edges in Fig. 10):
These edges connect simultaneous activations across differ-
ent tracks, modeling the co-occurrence of different modal-
ities (e.g., a specific emotion and activity happening at the
same time). The onset edges are constructed by iterating
==PAGE:8==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
8
Emotions
Location
Duration
Activity
Modes
Fig. 10: Graph representation of multi-modal daily activity
and emotions data. Rows represent different modalities
(e.g., emotions, locations, durations, activities, modes re-
spectively), nodes represent events, and edges represent var-
ious relationships between events. Track edges are dashed
in blue, the onset edges are dashed in red, and the next
edges are solid in black.
over each timestep in the structure tensor S, identifying the
active tracks for that timestep, and creating edges between
all pairs of active tracks. Similar to track edges, onset edges
are stratified based on the track combinations they connect,
enabling the model to learn modality-specific representa-
tions for co-occurring events.
4.2.3
Next Edges (black solid edges in Fig. 10):
These edges connect activations in consecutive timesteps
across different tracks, capturing the transitions between
different modalities over time. The next edges are con-
structed by iterating over consecutive active timesteps in
the structure tensor S, identifying the active tracks for each
timestep, and creating edges between all pairs of active
tracks across the two timesteps, excluding pairs with the
same source and destination track (as these would represent
track edges). The graph construction process is guided by a
structure tensor S, which is derived from the input content
tensor C. The structure tensor S is a binary tensor that
indicates the presence or absence of a value in the content
tensor C for each track and timestep. This structure tensor
is used to identify the active nodes and timesteps in the
graph, as well as to determine the appropriate edge types
and connections between nodes.
The graph construction algorithm iterates over the struc-
ture tensor S and constructs a graph G for each individual
bar (a group of consecutive timesteps). The algorithm iden-
tifies the active nodes and timesteps based on the structure
tensor S. It then constructs the appropriate edges (track,
onset, and next) between these active nodes, considering
the stratification based on track combinations. The resulting
graphs for individual sections are then merged into a single
graph G using a collation operation.
4.3
Model Architecture
Our model architecture consists of two main components:
a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with a Graph Convolu-
tional Network (GCN)-enhanced encoder, and a regression
KLD loss
Reconstruction loss
Categorical loss
Continuous loss
µ
σ
encoder
decoder
N(0,1)
x
x’
x
ϕ(x)
φ(x)
y’
regression
network
MSE loss
y
Fig. 11: Overall VAE Architecture where GCN is embedded
in the Encoder block
network. The VAE component processes and understands
the graph-structured data representing the daily activity
patterns. Its encoder network, augmented with GCN layers,
maps the input data x into a latent space, producing a
mean µ and standard deviation σ. These parameters are
used to sample latent variables from a normal distribution.
The decoder network then reconstructs the input data x′
from these latent variables. The reconstruction is evaluated
using a combination of reconstruction losses (continuous
and categorical) and KL divergence loss. Simultaneously,
the regression network uses the latent variables to predict
continuous targets y′, specifically the mean HR values (emo-
tions), optimized using mean squared error (MSE) loss. As
shown in Fig. 11, this overall architecture integrates VAE
principles with regression to effectively model and predict
emotions.
4.3.1
Graph Convolutional Layer (GCL)
The core component of our model is the Graph Convolu-
tional Layer (GCL), an extension of the Relational Graph
Convolutional Network (RGCN). The GCL is crucial for
processing graph-structured data, as it allows the model to
capture fine-grained temporal and inter-modal relationships
[15].
4.3.2
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and Graph Convolu-
tional Network (GCN)
Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) are used throughout the
model for various transformations. They provide non-linear
mappings that allow the model to learn complex patterns in
the data [30]. The Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) is
constructed by stacking multiple GCL layers. This network
structure allows for the propagation of information across
the entire graph, enabling the model to capture both local
and global patterns in the data.
4.3.3
Encoder and Decoder
The Encoder is responsible for processing the input graph
and encoding it into a latent representation (see Fig. 12). It
consists of several sub-components:
1)
Separate embedding for continuous and categorical
data
2)
A multi-modal encoder for processing simultaneous
events across different tracks
3)
A graph encoder (GCN) for processing the entire
graph
4)
A soft attention mechanism for focusing on relevant
parts of the sequence
==PAGE:9==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
9
Fig. 12: Architecture of Encoder
The Decoder reverses the encoding process, generating
multi-modal graphs from the latent representation. It in-
cludes:
1)
A sequence decoder for expanding the latent repre-
sentation
2)
A graph decoder (another GCN) for generating the
full graph
3)
Separate decoders to generate both continuous and
discrete features
This encoder-decoder structure allows the model to learn
a compact representation of the input data and then recon-
struct it, capturing the essential patterns and relationships
in the daily activity patterns and emotions network.
4.3.4
Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
The overall model is structured as a Variational Autoen-
coder combined with a regression network, integrating both
the encoder-decoder framework and a heart rate prediction
component. The VAE operates as follows:
µ, σ = Encoder(x)
z = µ + σ ⊙ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I)
x′ = Decoder(z)
hrpred = RegressionNetwork(z)
(11)
The encoder produces parameters µ and σ of a Gaussian
distribution. The latent vector z is sampled from this dis-
tribution using the reparameterization trick, enabling back-
propagation. The decoder then generates the reconstructed
output x′ from this latent representation. Additionally, the
regression network predicts heart rate from the same latent
representation.
The VAE is trained to minimize both the reconstruction
loss and the KL divergence between the learned latent distri-
bution and standard normal distribution. This dual objective
encourages the model to learn a compact, meaningful latent
space [23] of daily activity and emotional patterns while
maintaining the ability to generate diverse outputs. The
regression network is trained to predict heart rate from the
latent representation, adding a physiological dimension to
the learned patterns.
4.4
Regression Network
The regression network is a key component of our VAE
model, designed to predict heart rates from latent space rep-
resentations. Implemented as a sequential neural network, it
consists of an input layer, two hidden layers, and an output
layer. Each layer, except the last, includes linear transfor-
mations, batch normalization, LeakyReLU activation, and
dropout to prevent overfitting. This architecture enables
the model to learn complex, non-linear relationships (even
sparse data) [26] between urban environment representa-
tions and physiological responses.
4.5
Training
The training process involves optimizing a complex loss
function that accounts for categorical and continuous data
types, the regularization of the latent space, and heart rate
prediction. The process is divided into two phases:
1)
VAE Training: The encoder and decoder are trained
to reconstruct the input data and learn a meaningful
latent space.
2)
Regression Training: The regression network is
trained to predict heart rate from the latent repre-
sentation, while the encoder is frozen.
The encoder is frozen (i.e., its weights are not updated)
during the regression training phase to preserve the learned
latent space representation. This approach ensures that the
regression network learns to predict heart rates based on
the stable, informative features extracted by the pre-trained
encoder.
4.5.1
Loss Function Components
The reconstruction loss measures how well the decoder can
reconstruct the original input data from the latent represen-
tation. Due to the multi-modal nature of our data, we use
different loss functions for categorical and continuous data.
For categorical data (e.g., transportation modes, activities),
we employ the Cross-Entropy loss:
Lcat = −
N
X
i=1
C
X
j=1
yij log(ˆyij)
(12)
where N is the number of samples, C is the number
of categories, yij is the true label, and ˆyij is the predicted
probability for the j-th category of the i-th sample. For
continuous data (e.g., emotions, locations, durations), we
utilize the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) loss:
Lcont = 1
N
N
X
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(13)
where yi is the true value and ˆyi is the predicted value
for the i-th sample. The total reconstruction loss is the sum
of these two components:
Lrec = Lcat + Lcont
(14)
==PAGE:10==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
10
In addition to the reconstruction loss, we incorporate a
Kullback-Leibler Divergence loss that acts as a regularizer,
encouraging the learned latent distribution to be close to
a standard normal distribution. This KL divergence loss is
defined as:
LKL = −1
2
D
X
i=1
(1 + log(σ2
i ) −µ2
i −σ2
i )
(15)
where D is the dimensionality of the latent space, and
µi and σi are the mean and standard deviation of the i-th
dimension of the learned latent distribution, respectively.
We also include an L1 regularization term to promote
sparsity in the latent space:
LL1 = λL1|µ|
(16)
where λL1 is a hyperparameter controlling the strength of
the L1 regularization.
Thus, The total loss function for the VAE component
combines the reconstruction loss, the KL divergence loss,
and the L1 regularization:
Ltotal = Lrec + βLKL + LL1
(17)
where β is a hyperparameter that controls the trade-off
between reconstruction accuracy and latent space regular-
ization [27]. This formulation is an extension of the β-VAE,
which allows for better control over the disentanglement of
the latent space, with the addition of L1 regularization to
promote sparsity.
For the regression network and heart rate prediction, we
employ a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss:
LMSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(hri −ˆhri)2
(18)
where hri is the true heart rate and ˆhri is the predicted heart
rate for the i-th sample.
4.5.2
Optimization Process
The optimization process for the VAE component involves
minimizing both the categorical and continuous loss func-
tions separately with respect to their respective model pa-
rameters. Due to the multi-modal nature of our data and
the different loss components, we employ a specialized
optimization strategy. We use separate optimization steps
for the categorical and continuous losses, allowing us to
fine-tune the learning process for each data type. For re-
gression training, only the regression network parameters
are updated while the encoder is frozen.
5
EXPERIMENTS
5.1
VAE with Regression Network (VRN)
This model integrates a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with
a Regression Network, as outlined in the methodology sec-
tion. The VAE encoder incorporates a Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) to process graph-structured data. The re-
gression network predicts heart rates from the latent space.
This approach allows for simultaneous learning of the graph
structure and prediction of physiological responses.
5.2
VAE with Resampling
This approach uses a VAE for reconstruction and employs
a resampling technique for predictions. The encoder trans-
forms the input graph data into the latent space, formulated
as:
µ, log σ = Encoder(G)
(19)
The model then samples from the learned latent distribution
using the reparameterization trick:
z = µ + ϵ ⊙σ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I)
(20)
For prediction, we use Monte Carlo sampling:
ˆE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Decoder(zi, Gp),
zi ∼qϕ(z|Gp)
(21)
5.3
Baseline
A standard VAE without graph structure serves as our
baseline model. It uses the same general methodology as
the VRN model but without the GCN or graph components.
This simpler model helps us evaluate the importance of
incorporating graph structure in our predictions.
5.4
Model Comparison
Method
Total
Reconstruction
KLD
RMSE
MAE
VRN
0.113
0.104
5.75
0.199
0.162
VAE
0.112
0.1
8.81
0.411
0.353
Baseline
155.9
66.5
894.2
0.549
0.512
TABLE 3: Model Evaluation and Prediction Results
The results presented in Table 3 demonstrate the su-
perior performance of the VAE with Regression Network
approach. This method achieved the lowest Root Mean
Square Error (RMSE) of 0.1989 and Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) of 0.1622, significantly outperforming both the VAE
with Resampling and the Baseline VAE. The VAE with
Regression Network also maintained a good balance be-
tween reconstruction loss and KL divergence, indicating
effective learning of the latent space while preserving the
ability to reconstruct input data. The VAE with Resampling
showed moderate performance, with higher prediction er-
rors than the Regression Network approach but lower than
the Baseline. The Baseline VAE, which lacks graph struc-
ture, performed the poorest in terms of prediction and had
substantially higher loss values across all metrics.
5.5
Experimental Setup for Results for VRN
Using the VRN model, we conducted several experiments
to assess its performance and gain insights into urban-
physiological interactions. We generated 590 random loca-
tions in Copenhagen and extracted features using Open-
StreetMap and Mapillary API. We then used these locations
to predict heart rates with the VRN model, evaluating the
model’s ability to generalize to unseen urban environments.
To understand the relative importance of different urban
features, we performed a feature importance analysis using
linear regression between the extracted features and pre-
dicted mean heart rates. Additionally, we generated specific
==PAGE:11==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
11
location tensors with increasing feature intensities to ana-
lyze how changes in specific urban characteristics impact
predicted mean heart rates. These experiments aim to pro-
vide a comprehensive evaluation of the model’s capabilities
which results further discussed in detail in the next section.
6
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
6.1
GCNN Interpretability Graphs
(a) Saliency Map
(b) Grad-CAM Map
(c) UGrad-CAM Map
Fig. 13: GCN Interpretability Graphs
This analysis interprets the explainability of the graph
structure embedded in our Variational Autoencoder model,
focusing on a specific portion of the graph. We employ three
complementary techniques adapted from CNN explainabil-
ity methods to understand the importance of different fea-
tures in our GCN model.
6.1.1
Saliency Map (Fig. 13a)
Gradient-based saliency maps provide our first insight. This
method computes the gradient of the output with respect to
the input features for each node, offering a direct measure
of how changes in input features affect the model’s output.
While efficient and quick to highlight impactful features,
it may be sensitive to local changes. Emotions, locations,
and activities show notable feature importance with several
high-impact nodes (darker red), indicating a higher impor-
tance.
6.1.2
Grad-CAM Map (Fig. 13b)
Our second technique, Gradient-weighted Class Activation
Mapping (Grad-CAM), extends the idea of saliency maps
by focusing on the importance of feature maps in the final
convolutional layer. This approach captures more abstract
concepts learned by the model, providing a higher-level
interpretation of the decision-making process. Gradient here
indicate nodes weights are more even (nodes are variants of
blue).
6.1.3
UGrad-CAM Map (Fig. 13c)
Lastly, we implement Unified Gradient-weighted Class Ac-
tivation Mapping (UGrad-CAM), which averages the Grad-
CAM heatmaps across all layers. This method offers a com-
prehensive view of feature importance, balancing both low-
level and high-level features in the interpretation. A specific
region of duration nodes shows higher weights, indicating
particular importance.
It’s crucial to note that these observations are based on
a specific section of the graph and may not represent the
entire model’s behavior. The interpretability is most relevant
for understanding the specifics of individual nodes, such as
what particular location or activity is occurring, rather than
indicating global importance of entire tracks.
6.2
Embedding Visualizations
Embedding visualizations reveal clustering and separation
of data types, crucial for understanding model performance
and representation capabilities.
(a) Categorical Embeddings
(b) Continuous Embeddings
(c) Continuous Embeddings
Fig. 14: Visualization of Embeddings
6.2.1
Categorical Embeddings (Fig. 14a)
The 3D plot shows clear clusters of categorical embeddings,
indicating effective differentiation. A dense central cluster
suggests similar categories are embedded closely. Outliers
may represent uncommon categories or noise.
6.2.2
Continuous Embeddings (Fig. 14b)
Continuous embeddings form a dense, spherical cluster,
indicating cohesive mapping of continuous variables. The
color gradient (purple to yellow) represents variation in the
third dimension, suggesting stable embeddings.
6.2.3
Combined Embeddings (Fig. 14c)
This visualization integrates categorical and continuous em-
beddings. Points are more dispersed than in categorical em-
beddings alone, reflecting increased complexity. Identifiable
clusters persist, indicating successful merging of data types.
==PAGE:12==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
12
The broader distribution suggests a richer embedding space
capturing nuanced relationships. The color gradient (nega-
tive to positive) highlights variance in the third dimension,
potentially corresponding to combined features.
6.3
Feature Importance Plot
Fig. 15: Feature Importance Plot
The feature importance plot (Fig. 15) ranks features
based on their linear regression coefficients, indicating their
impact on mean heart rate predictions. Features with pos-
itive coefficients (red), such as traffic lights, curbs, and
public services, correlate with higher heart rates. Negative
coefficient features (blue), including vegetation, sky, terrain,
and road transportation, are associated with lower heart rate
predictions, indicating more relaxed environments. Features
near the center (e.g., food and drink, public services, and
amenity) have less impact. Urban infrastructure and traffic
features correlate with higher heart rates, while natural and
recreational areas are associated with lower heart rates.
Services and amenities show varying impacts, reflecting
complex interactions.
6.4
Mean Heart Rate Predictions
(a) Overall
(b) Zoomed in to see detail
Fig. 16: Predicted Mean HR Heatmap Based on Location
The heatmaps in Figures 16a and 16b illustrate the pre-
dicted mean heart rate across different locations in Copen-
hagen. The intensity of the heatmap colors represents the
magnitude of the predicted heart rate, with red indicating
higher values and blue indicating lower values.
In Fig. 16a, the overall distribution shows several
hotspots with elevated mean heart rate predictions, particu-
larly in central and densely populated areas like Frederiks-
berg, Vesterbro, and Nørrebro. These regions likely have
higher levels of physical activity or stress due to urban
congestion and lifestyle factors.
Fig. 16b provides a closer view of the central area,
highlighting specific zones with concentrated high mean
heart rate predictions. Notably, areas such as Christianshavn
and the vicinity of major transit hubs show significant activ-
ity, reflecting the impact of transportation and movement
patterns on heart rate.
6.5
Analysis of Feature Importance Maps
These maps reveal the most influential features affecting
predicted mean heart rates across Copenhagen, providing
insights into how physical and point-of-interest (POI) fea-
tures correlate with heart rate patterns.
Fig. 17: POI Feature Importance Map
6.5.1
POI Feature Importance Map (Fig. 17)
Diverse POI features (e.g., arts, food, transportation) con-
tribute to higher heart rates, reflecting the complex urban
environment. High heart rate areas show a predominance of
food/drink establishments, public services, and transporta-
tion. Lower heart rate areas often feature more greenery.
Fig. 18: Physical Feature Importance Map
==PAGE:13==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
13
Fig. 19: Feature Intensity Grid
6.5.2
Physical Feature Importance Map (Fig. 18)
Key physical features include curbs, traffic lights, roads,
and buses, especially prominent in high heart rate areas.
A correlation between urban infrastructure/activity and
predicted heart rate is evident. Lower heart rate areas are
associated with sidewalks, residential buildings, and green
spaces, suggesting less busy, pedestrian-friendly environ-
ments contribute to lower heart rates.
6.6
Feature Intensity vs. Mean HR
Figure 19 shows how feature intensities affect predicted
mean heart rate. Urban and transportation features (roads,
transportation, public services, tourism, utility pole, car)
show increasing heart rate prediction trends, while natural
features (terrain, curb) show decreasing trends. Some fea-
tures show non-linear relationships (amenity, shop), reveal-
ing complex interactions. These findings align with previous
analyses on feature importance and spatial patterns. This
model allows us to simulate how changes in urban features
might affect emotional states, as indicated by heart rate. By
adjusting feature intensities for specific locations, we can
predict the impact of urban design changes on physiological
responses.
7
CONCLUSION
This thesis introduced a novel approach to modeling phys-
iological responses to urban environments using a Vari-
ational Autoencoder (VAE) with a Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) and a Regression Network. Key findings
include:
1)
The model outperformed alternatives in heart rate
prediction, demonstrating the effectiveness of graph
structure and direct regression.
2)
Urban infrastructure correlated with higher heart
rates, while natural areas were associated with
lower heart rates.
3)
Location-based heart rate predictions provided in-
sights into the physiological impact of urban envi-
ronments.
4)
Feature intensity analysis enabled simulation of ur-
ban design changes on emotions.
7.1
Future Directions
Future work could enhance the model in several ways.
Incorporating additional features such as air quality data,
noise levels, and detailed socioeconomic indicators would
provide a more comprehensive representation of urban
environments. Integrating context-specific data like time
of day, weather conditions, and seasonal variations could
capture temporal effects on physiological responses.
To validate and refine the model’s predictions, future
research could benefit from focused experimental studies.
This could involve conducting studies in specific locations,
where participants’ physiological responses are measured
in various urban settings. Such studies would not only
validate the model but also provide valuable data for further
refinement. The model could then be used to simulate the
impact of proposed urban design changes, such as adding
green spaces or modifying transportation infrastructure, on
predicted heart rates. Additionally, further investigation of
specific locations, activities, or modes through graph inter-
pretability techniques would complement these experimen-
tal studies.
Furthermore, we could investigate and incorporate tem-
poral patterns more directly. The current model utilizes a
hierarchical structure (tracks, multi-tracks, groups of multi-
tracks, then GCN), but we could explore incorporating tem-
poral chunks like ”weekdays” vs. ”weekends” or separate
embeddings for days spent entirely at ”home”. This could
provide deeper insights into how physiological responses
vary across different temporal contexts and lifestyle pat-
terns.
Another enhancement would be developing more so-
phisticated emotional state proxies beyond mean heart
rate. This could involve mapping physiological data onto
a valence-arousal space or implementing a multi-modal
emotion classification system, providing a more nuanced
representation of individuals’ emotional experiences in dif-
ferent urban environments.
These adjustments could further transform the model
into a robust tool for urban planners and policymakers, aid-
ing in the creation of health-promoting environments. The
model could offer even more precise and actionable insights
==PAGE:14==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
14
for urban design and public health initiatives by capturing
more nuanced temporal and contextual information.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Dubois, M. Monteiro, S. Haustein, C. Lima Azevedo, and L. Tor-
res, “Mobility Field Study Design Document: eMOTIONAL Cities,”
Technical University of Denmark, Unpublished manuscript, Sep.
2022.
[2] P. Zeile, B. Resch, L. D¨orrzapf, J.-P. Exner, G. Sagl, A. Summa, and
M. Sudmanns, “Urban Emotions – Tools of Integrating People’s
Perception into Urban Planning,” in REAL CORP 2015 Tagungsband,
May 2015, pp. 905–912.
[3] C. Nold, “Emotional Cartography - Edited by Christian Nold,”
Emotional Cartography - Edited by Christian Nold. [Online]. Available:
emotionalcartography.net/. [Accessed: 26-Jun-2024].
[4] S. Stals, M. Smyth, and O. Mival, “Capturing, exploring and sharing
people’s emotional bond with places in the city using emotion
maps,” Airea: Arts and Interdisciplinary Research, no. 1, pp. 47–62,
Sept. 2018.
[5] K. M. Jang and Y. Kim, “Crowd-sourced cognitive mapping: A
new way of displaying people’s cognitive perception of urban
space,” PLOS ONE, vol. 14, no. 6, p. e0218590, Jun. 2019, doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0218590.
[6] R. Kamal, M. A. Shah, C. Maple, M. Masood, A. Wahid and
A. Mehmood, ”Emotion Classification and Crowd Source Sens-
ing; A Lexicon Based Approach,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
27124-27134, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2892624. keywords:
Sensors;Twitter;Meteorology;Data mining;Mood;Organizations;Big
data;crowd-sourced sensing;lexicon-based approach;Twitter;social
networks
[7] C. Capineri, “Tracking Emotions in Urban Space. Two Experiments
in Vienna and Siena,” Bollettino della Societ`a Geografica Italiana, vol.
IX, no. 1-2, pp. 273-283, 2016.
[8] X. Xiao, C. Chen, Z. Ren, Z. Hu, and Y. Chen, “Exploring spa-
tiotemporal changes in the multi-granularity emotions of people
in the city: A case study of nanchang, China,” Computational Urban
Science, vol. 2, no. 1, Jan. 2022.
[9] J. Pykett, “Why is emotional data failing to produce more humane
cities? urban governance and the (interdisciplinary) problem of
Wellbeing,” Urban Geography, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 358–376, Feb. 2022.
[10] H. Cai, V. W. Zheng, and K. C.-C. Chang, “A comprehensive sur-
vey of graph embedding: Problems, techniques, and applications,”
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 30, no. 9,
pp. 1616–1637, Sept. 2018.
[11] D. Bacciu, F. Errica, A. Micheli, and M. Podda, ”A gentle intro-
duction to deep learning for graphs,” Neural Networks, vol. 129,
pp. 203–221, Sep. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2020.06.006. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2020.06.006.
[12] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “Node2vec: Scalable Feature Learn-
ing for Networks,” arXiv:1607.00653 [cs.SI]. [Online]. Available:
arxiv.org/pdf/1607.00653.pdf. [Accessed: 26-Jun-2024].
[13] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, ”Efficient
Estimation
of
Word
Representations
in
Vector
Space,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1301.3781,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.
[14] R.
Diestel,
Graph
Theory
(Graduate
Texts
in
Mathe-
matics),
3rd
ed.
Springer,
2005.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.amazon.ca/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=citeulike04-
20&path=ASIN/3540261826.
[15] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, ”Semi-Supervised Classification with
Graph Convolutional Networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907
[16] E. Cosenza, D. Tosti, C. Bellini, F. Stulp, and F. Pachet, “Graph-
based polyphonic multitrack music generation,” in Proceedings of the
Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Aug. 2023.
[17] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. van den Berg, I. Titov, and
M. Welling, “Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional
Networks,” arXiv.Org, Oct. 2017.
[18] D. K. Duvenaud, D. Maclaurin, J. Iparraguirre, R. Bombarell,
T. Hirzel, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and R. P. Adams, ”Convolutional
Networks on Graphs for Learning Molecular Fingerprints,” in
*Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS)*, 2015.
[19] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
“Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017,
pp. 1263–1272.
[20] L. Xia, Y. Zhou, P. Jiang, Y. Jiang, and J. Hong, “Maintenance
planning recommendation of complex industrial equipment based
on knowledge graph and graph neural network,” Reliability Engi-
neering & System Safety, vol. 232, p. 109068, Apr. 2023.
[21] B. Yang, W. Yih, X. He, J. Gao, and L. Deng, ”Embedding entities
and relations for learning and inference in knowledge bases,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6575, 2014.
[22] Y. Chen, D. P. Kingma, and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding varia-
tional Bayes,” Cambridge Explorations in Arts and Sciences, vol. 2, no.
1, Feb. 2024.
[23] P. Li, Y. Pei, and J. Li, ”A comprehensive survey on design
and application of autoencoder in deep learning,” Applied Soft
Computing, vol. 138, 2023, Art. no. 110176, ISSN: 1568-4946.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110176.
[Accessed:
Jul.
1,
2024].
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568494623001941.
[24] Mapillary, Mapillary API Documentation, 2024. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.mapillary.com/developer/api-documentation/
[25] OpenStreetMap,
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.openstreetmap.org
[26] D. F. Specht, ”A general regression neural network,” in IEEE Trans-
actions on Neural Networks, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 568-576, Nov. 1991, doi:
10.1109/72.97934. keywords: Neural networks; Nonlinear systems;
Multi-layer neural network; Space technology; Multidimensional
systems; Linearity; Nonlinear dynamical systems; Predictive mod-
els; Nonlinear control systems; Control systems.
[27] I. Higgins, L. Matthey, A. Pal, C. Burgess, X. Glorot, M. Botvinick,
S. Mohamed, and A. Lerchner, ”beta-VAE: Learning Basic Visual
Concepts with a Constrained Variational Framework,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy2fzU9gl.
[28] I.
Goodfellow,
Y.
Bengio,
and
A.
Courville,
Deep
Learning,
MIT
Press,
2016.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[29] ”Understanding
and
Implementing
Varia-
tional
Autoencoders
(VAEs),”
[Online].
Available:
https://pub.aimind.so/understanding-and-implementing-
variational-autoencoders-vaes-ebf74b6241e7.
[Accessed:
Jul.
1,
2024].
[30] M.-C. Popescu, V. E. Balas, L. Perescu-Popescu, and N. Mas-
torakis, ”Multilayer Perceptron and Neural Networks,” Faculty of
Electromechanical and Environmental Engineering, University of
Craiova, Faculty of Engineering, “Aurel Vlaicu” University of Arad,
“Elena Cuza” College of Craiova, ROMANIA, Technical University
of Sofia, BULGARIA, 2021. [Online].
==PAGE:15==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
15
APPENDIX A
GRAPH CONSTRUCTION
The graph construction process transforms a tensor rep-
resentation of multitrack sequences into a graph structure
suitable for Graph Neural Network processing. This process
involves three main steps: node creation, edge generation,
and feature extraction. Node creation is performed by as-
signing unique labels to each active time step in each track.
Edge generation involves creating three types of edges:
track edges (connecting consecutive nodes within the same
track), onset edges (connecting nodes across different tracks
at the same time step), and next edges (connecting nodes
across different tracks and consecutive time steps). Feature
extraction assigns one-hot encodings to nodes based on their
track membership.
Algorithm 1 Graph Construction from Tensor
1: procedure GRAPHFROMTENSOR(S)
2:
G ←∅
3:
for each bar b in S do
4:
N ←CREATENODES(b)
5:
Et ←GETTRACKEDGES(b, N)
6:
Eo ←GETONSETEDGES(b, N)
7:
En ←GETNEXTEDGES(b, N)
8:
E ←Et ∪Eo ∪En
9:
X ←GETNODEFEATURES(b)
10:
Gb ←(N, E, X)
11:
G ←G ∪Gb
12:
end for
13:
return G
14: end procedure
Algorithm 2 Edge Generation
1: procedure GETTRACKEDGES(b, N)
2:
Et ←∅
3:
for each track t in b do
4:
T ←ACTIVETIMESTEPS(bt)
5:
for each consecutive pair (t1, t2) in T do
6:
e ←(Nt,t1, Nt,t2, TRACK, t2 −t1)
7:
Et ←Et ∪{e, e−1}
8:
end for
9:
end for
10:
return Et
11: end procedure
Algorithm 3 Node Feature Extraction
1: procedure GETNODEFEATURES(b)
2:
X ←zeros(|N|, |tracks|)
3:
for each node n in N do
4:
t ←GETTRACK(n)
5:
Xn,t ←1
6:
end for
7:
return X
8: end procedure
The resulting graph G preserves the temporal and cross-
track relationships present in the original tensor data. This
structure enables effective processing by Graph Neural Net-
works, capturing both the sequential nature of each track
and the interactions between different tracks.
APPENDIX B
MODEL DEVELOPMENT DETAILS
B.1
Graph Convolutional Layer (GCL):
The core component of the model is the Graph Convolu-
tional Layer (GCL), an extension of the Relational Graph
Convolutional Network (RGCN). The GCL incorporates
edge attributes and employs a neural network for edge-wise
operations, allowing it to capture fine-grained temporal and
inter-modal relationships between daily activity patterns
and emotions.
Fig. 20: A visual representation of the Graph Convolutional
Layer (GCL) process
The GCL processes information in a graph by aggregat-
ing messages from neighboring nodes, considering the type
of relationship (edge type) between nodes. The forward pass
of the GCL is mathematically expressed as:
h(l+1)
i
= σ

X
r∈R
X
j∈N r
i
1
ci,r
W(l)
r h(l)
j
+ W(l)
0 h(l)
i


(22)
In this equation, h(l)
i
denotes the hidden state of node i
at layer l. The summation over r ∈R accounts for different
types of relations in the graph. The inner summation aggre-
gates information from the neighbors N r
i of node i under
relation r. The normalization constant ci,r ensures proper
scaling of the aggregation. The weight matrices W(l)
r
are
specific to each relation type, allowing the model to learn
different transformations for different edge relationships.
The term W(l)
0
applies a transformation to the node’s own
previous state, incorporating self-connections.
To enhance the flexibility and efficiency of the GCL, three
methods for weight matrix decomposition are implemented:
B.1.1
Block-diagonal Decomposition
The block-diagonal decomposition method reduces the
number of parameters while maintaining expressiveness. It
decomposes the weight matrices into smaller blocks:
Wr = diag(Q1
r, ..., QB
r )
(23)
Each Qb
r is a smaller matrix of size db×db, and the sum of
all db equals the full dimensionality d. This approach allows
the model to capture different aspects of the data in separate
subspaces.
==PAGE:16==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
16
Fig. 21: Block Diagonal Decomposition Process
Fig. 22: Basis and Block Diagonal Decompositions
B.1.2
Basis-decomposition
The basis-decomposition approach expresses each weight
matrix as a linear combination of a set of basis matrices:
Wr =
B
X
b=1
arbVb
(24)
Here, Vb are the basis matrices, and arb are learnable
coefficients. This method enables parameter sharing across
different relation types, potentially capturing commonalities
in how different relationships are processed.
B.1.3
No Regularization
In this approach, each Wr is learned independently without
any decomposition. This allows the model to learn separate
transformations for each type of edge relationship, at the
cost of increased parameter count.
A key feature of the GCL is the use of an edge neural
network to compute weight tensors from edge attributes.
These edge attributes encode information about the rela-
tionships between the modalities, such as time differences
or mode transitions. This approach enables more flexible
and context-aware message passing operations.
B.2
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
Standard Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) [30] are em-
ployed for various transformations throughout the model.
The operation of an MLP layer is expressed as:
h(l+1) = σ(W(l)h(l) + b(l))
(25)
Here, h(l) is the input to layer l, W(l) and b(l) are the
weight matrix and bias vector respectively, and σ is an ac-
tivation function, typically ReLU. MLPs are used in various
parts of the model, including the edge neural network in the
GCL and in the encoding and decoding processes.
B.3
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
The Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) is constructed
by stacking multiple GCL layers. Each layer in the GCN is
represented as:
H(l+1) = GCL(l)(H(l), A, E)
(26)
where H(l) is the node feature matrix at layer l, A is
the adjacency matrix representing the graph structure, and
E is the edge attribute matrix containing information about
relationships between the modalities. The GCN processes
the entire graph, propagating information between related
events and constructing a context-aware representation of
the daily activity and emotional patterns.
B.4
Configuration Details
Our model’s configuration is detailed below, covering batch
size, model architecture, optimizer settings, learning rate
scheduler, and beta scheduler parameters.
B.4.1
General Settings
•
Batch Size: 128
B.4.2
Model Architecture
Parameter
Value
Dropout Rate
0.1
Batch Normalization
Yes
GNN Layers
6
Embedding Dimension (d)
80
Number of Bars
2
Resolution
8
Hidden Dimension
128
TABLE 4: Model Architecture Parameters
B.4.3
Optimizer Settings
We use separate optimizers for categorical, continuous, and
regression components. All optimizers use Adam with the
following settings:
Parameter
Categorical
Continuous
Regression
Learning Rate
5e-04
1e-07
2e-04
Betas
[0.9, 0.98]
[0.9, 0.98]
[0.9, 0.98]
Epsilon
1e-08
1e-08
1e-08
TABLE 5: Optimizer Settings
B.4.4
Learning Rate Scheduler
We employ a learning rate scheduler with the following
parameters:
•
Peak Learning Rate: 1e-04
•
Final Learning Rate Scale: 0.01
•
Warmup Steps: 4,000
•
Decay Steps: 400,000
==PAGE:17==
MASTER THESIS JULY 2, 2024
17
B.4.5
Beta Scheduler
The beta scheduler for the VAE is configured as follows:
•
Annealing Start: 5,000 steps
•
Maximum Beta: 0.01
•
Step Size: 0.0001
•
Annealing End: 500,000 steps
APPENDIX C
TRAINING: OPTIMIZATION PROCESS FOR VAE
The losses are scaled by the number of gradient accumula-
tion steps:
L′
cat =
Lcat
Naccum
(27)
L′
cont = Lcont
Naccum
(28)
where Naccum is the number of iterations to accumulate
gradients before performing an optimization step. This gra-
dient accumulation technique allows for effective training
with larger batch sizes, which can be particularly beneficial
for graph-based models.
We perform separate backward passes for the categorical
and continuous losses:
∂L′
cat
∂θcat
= backward(L′
cat)
(29)
∂L′
cont
∂θcont
= backward(L′
cont)
(30)
where θcat and θcont are the model parameters related to
categorical and continuous data processing, respectively.
We then use separate optimizers for updating the param-
eters related to categorical and continuous data:
θcat = θcat −ηcat
∂L′
cat
∂θcat
(31)
θcont = θcont −ηcont
∂L′
cont
∂θcont
(32)
where ηcat and ηcont are the learning rates for categorical
and continuous optimizers, respectively.
The KL divergence loss is included in the total loss,
which is used for monitoring the overall training progress:
Ltotal = L′
cat + L′
cont + βLKL
(33)
APPENDIX D
GCNN INTERPRETABILITY AND FEATURE IMPOR-
TANCE
To
interpret
the
model’s
predictions
and
understand
the
importance
of
different
features
in
our
graph-
based
Variational
Autoencoder,
we
employ
several
complementary techniques adapted from Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) explainability methods to Graph
Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs). Each technique
offers unique insights into the model’s decision-making
process.
D.1
Gradient-based Saliency Maps
Gradient-based saliency maps provide a straightforward
approach to identifying important features. For our GCNN
model, we compute the gradient of the output with respect
to the input features for each node:
Lc
Gradient[n] = ReLU
 ∂yc
∂Xn

(34)
where yc is the score for class c, and Xn represents the
input features for node n.
We use this method because it offers a direct measure of
how changes in input features affect the model’s output. It’s
computationally efficient and can quickly highlight which
input features or nodes have the most immediate impact
on the model’s decisions. However, it may be sensitive to
local changes and might not capture higher-level features
effectively.
D.2
Gradient-weighted
Class
Activation
Mapping
(Grad-CAM)
Grad-CAM extends the idea of saliency maps by focusing
on the importance of feature maps in the final convolutional
layer. For our GCNN model, we define the class-specific
weights as:
αl,c
k = 1
N
N
X
n=1
∂yc
∂F l
k,n
(35)
The Grad-CAM heat-map for layer l is then computed
as:
Lc
Grad-CAM[l, n] = ReLU
 X
k
αl,c
k F l
k,n(X, A)
!
(36)
Grad-CAM is valuable because it provides a more
high-level interpretation of the model’s decision-making
process. By focusing on feature maps rather than individual
input features, it can capture more abstract concepts that
the model has learned. This is particularly useful in our
multi-modal
analysis,
where
complex
patterns
might
emerge from the interaction of different data types.
D.3
Gradient-weighted
Class
Activation
Mapping
(UGrad-CAM)
We also implement a variant called Grad-CAM Avg, which
averages the Grad-CAM heat-maps across all layers:
Lc
Grad-CAM Avg[n] = 1
L
L
X
l=1
Lc
Grad-CAM[l, n]
(37)
Grad-CAM Avg provides a comprehensive view of fea-
ture importance across all layers of the network, balancing
both low-level and high-level features in the interpretation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my supervisors Professors Francisco
Camara Pereira and Carlos M. Lima Azevedo for their
continuous guidance, feedback, and support as well my
friends and family.
