==PAGE:1==
Investigation of the effect of the different
AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model per­
formance
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Microwaves and Remote Sensing
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model
performance
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Athanasios Athanasiadis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
ESA Archive, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Microwaves and Remote Sensing, Ørsteds Plads,
Building 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for five (5) months at the Department of Microwaves and
Remote Sensing at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU and at the Danish Meteoro­
logical Institute, DMI, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Athanasios Athanasiadis ­ s222651
Signature
Date
ii
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
June   22,    2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The goal of this thesis project is to identify the potential redundancy of the DMI­ASIP
(Automated Sea Ice concentration Products) model by evaluating the impact of the in­
put Passive Microwave (PMW) channels it currently ingests. The project provides an
overview of the theory of Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) and Passive Microwave Ra­
diometers (PMR) while it presents the basics of remote sensing of sea ice. Given the use
of Machine Learning (ML) techniques, an overview of the theory behind ML and Convo­
lutional Neural Networks (CNN) is presented. A description of the used ASIP data set
is provided with SAR and PMR example scenes along with an analytical description of
the sea ice charts. The identification of the model’s redundancy is carried out using the
Permute­and­Predict (PaP) method. Two experiments were conducted: the first applied
the PaP algorithm to one trained model, and the second to ten trained models. The first
experiment indicated the high importance of the channels in the frequency range of 18.7­
36.5 GHz with the 36.5 GHz (V­pol) being the most important channel while very high
and very low frequency channels were shown with low importance. The second exper­
iment identified the 23.8 GHz (V­pol) as the most important channel with the 18.7 GHz
(V­pol) and 36.5 GHz (H and V­pol) channels to be of high importance. To confirm these
experiments, a model without the important channels (experiment 1), a model without the
low­importance channels (experiment 2) and a model simulating the future CIMR mission
were trained and the performance metrics were evaluated.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor from DTU, Rasmus Tage Tonboe, for
his guidance and scientific insights throughout my research. His support has been very
helpful for shaping this thesis. Also, special thanks to my supervisor from DMI, Tore Wulf,
with whom we had valuable discussions. His experience, particularly on the technical
parts of the project, was very significant to the completion of this work.
Finally, I dedicate this project to my parents, who are always supporting me in every aspect
during my two years of studying abroad.
iv
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Remote Sensing Theory
5
2.1
Remote sensing of sea ice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Active measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
SAR Example Scene Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Passive measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
PMW, Sea Ice Signatures and Atmospheric Windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4.1
PMR Example Scene Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Machine Learning and Neural Networks
18
3.1
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.1.1
Gradient Based Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.2
Optimizers and Cost Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2.1
Activation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.2
Pooling and Classification Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.3
U­Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
Interpretable AI and Feature Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Datasets
28
4.1
Sentinel­1 SAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
AMSR2 Brightness Temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Ice charts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Algorithm Implementation
37
5.1
Hardware Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
Design and Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.3
Preprocessing and Data Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.4
U­Net Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.4.1
Evaluation and Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.5
Inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.6
Permutation Feature Importance Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.6.1
Permutation Feature Importance in One Trained Model
. . . . . . . 44
5.6.2
Permutation Feature Importance Across Different Trained Models
. 45
5.7
Sea Ice Type Prediction using CIMR channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Results and Discussion
47
6.1
Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
PFI Scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
v
==PAGE:8==
6.2.1
PFI scores From One Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.2.2
PFI scores From Different Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.3
Model Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6.3.1
Model Without Important Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.3.2
Model Without Low Importance Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.3.3
Model With CIMR Input Channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.4
Considerations and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7
Conclusion
65
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Bibliography
67
A Inference scenes
70
vi
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
EO
Earth Observation
ML
Machine Learning
AI
Artificial Intelligence
SoD
Stage Of Development
SIC
Sea Ice Concentration
SAR
Synthetic Aperture Radar
EW
Extra Wide
PMW
Passive MicroWave
PMR
Passive Microwave Radiometer
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
ERA5
ECMWF Reanalysis v5
AMSR2
Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer 2
CIMR
Copernicus Imaging Microwave Radiometer
DMI
Danish Meteorological Institute
CIS
Canadian Ice Service
ASIP
Automated Sea Ice concentration Products
SHAP
SHapley Additive exPlanations
LIME
Local Interpretable Model­agnostic Explanations
PaP
Permute and Predict
PFI
Permutation Feature Importance
FYI
Fist Year Ice
MYI
Multi Year Ice
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Literature review
Satellite measurements of the polar regions have undergone a rapid evolution in the last
decades. The need to deliver fast and reliable Earth Observation (EO) data has led to
extended research about exploiting Machine Learning (ML) techniques in order to handle
vast datasets and provide fast results about different sea ice parameters such as Sea Ice
Concentration (SIC) and Stage of Development (SOD). Today’s pan­Arctic sea ice pa­
rameters retrieval algorithms are mainly relying on passive microwave (PMW) data (R. T.
Tonboe et al. (2016) and Lavergne et al. (2019)). Numerous studies have been dedicated
to developing algorithms that retrieve sea ice parameters from brightness temperature
data in different channels and polarizations, such as the NASA/TEAM algorithm (Comiso
(1986)), the NASA/TEAM2 (Markus and Donald J Cavalieri (2000)) and the Bootstrap
(Comiso (1995)). Seasonal variability in the characteristics of the sea ice surface has
been a driving factor for studies to compare the different algorithms and the best combi­
nations of channels and polarizations as it has been done by Andersen et al. (2007) and
Natalia Ivanova et al. (2014).
The need for continuous and high­resolution monitoring of the polar regions has driven
the scientific community to include active microwave data such as SAR which are not
dependent on the weather (clouds, polar night) and can offer high resolution information.
The interaction of an active microwave signal with the sea ice has been studied for a lot of
years and is one of the fundamentals in the remote sensing of sea ice (Frank (1992)). The
characterization of sea ice types using SAR data started to be investigated (Lyden, Burns,
and Maffett (1984)) and was followed by automation of their extraction using classification
methods (as in Kwok et al. (1992) and C. Wackerman (1988)).
High resolution sea ice maps are helpful for navigation in the Arctic and serve the Arctic
maritime sectors but also the local communities. Such work, to develop a SAR­based sea
ice retrieval can improve the quality of sea ice forecasts and has been investigated in vari­
ous papers such as Park et al. (2019) and Boulze, Korosov, and Brajard (2020). Synthetic
aperture radar (SAR) images are used for the manual ice charting due to their high resolu­
tion capability and the independence of the time of the day and the clouds. Conventional
classification tasks of the sea ice concentration and type were followed by the introduc­
tion of artificial intelligence (AI) and the use of convolutional neural networks (CNN) and
deep learning techniques as was initially published by Wang et al. (2016). For automated
sea ice charting in the Arctic, various AI4Arctic projects were initialized in the period of
2020­2022 in order to promote the use of deep convolutional neural networks for Earth
Observation applications in the Arctic region. The developed datasets used in this scope
(Saldo et al. (2020)), (Buus­Hinkler et al. (2022)) contained Sentinel­1 imagery, passive
microwave observations from AMSR2 and numerical weather prediction data from the
ECMWF Reanalysis v5 (ERA5) dataset. As for labels, ice charts produced by the Green­
land Ice Service and Canadian Ice Service were used. In this scope, studies about solving
ambiguous SAR textures in CNNs were developed (Stokholm et al. (2022)) showing that
developing a deep U­Net convolutional network, followed by proper modifications in its
receptive field and in the convolutional layers can provide accurate predictions about sea
ice features. Continuing, the combination of different satellite sensors started to show the
capabilities that it can offer.
2
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:11==
A recent study by Malmgren­Hansen et al. (2021) was focused on the development and
implementation of a CNN designed for fusing Sentinel­1 SAR imagery and AMSR2 data.
The primary benefits of this fusion is the prediction of the Arctic sea ice. The study pre­
sented a method for accommodating the big difference in the spatial resolution of the two
data sources by integrating the low­resolution (AMSR2) data at a deeper layer in the net­
work. Finally, by using the ice concentrations as target probabilities in the CNN’s error
function, it was found that the CNN performs robustly in predicting sea ice concentrations.
An operational service that uses data from different sources, is the DMI’s service that
was developed under the projects ASIP (Innovation Fund Denmark) and AI4Arctic (ESA)
which produces sea ice products using Sentinel­1 imagery and AMSR2 data along with a
CNN.
Exclusively regarding the Machine Learning (ML) aspects, the U­Net was first imple­
mented by Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox (2015) and since then has found a lot of appli­
cations in the earth observation field as it has been applied in several studies (Stokholm
et al. (2022) and Malmgren­Hansen et al. (2021)) and has been proved effective because
of the balanced path between the contracting and expansive path, along with the data
augmentation strategies that can be applied. An important advancement in complex ML
techniques, is the interpretability of deep learning models. This has been studied with
the integration of techniques like SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) and some pre­
dict and permute (PaP) methods. Some studies have highlighted the practical applica­
tion and benefits of using SHAP values in deep learning networks. An example study of
Temenos et al. (2023) showcased the SHAP deep explainer to enhance the interpretability
of the CNN’s predictions. Moreover, regarding sea ice studies, a study (Andersson et al.
(2021)) showcased the use of a deep learning networks for sea ice predictions, while a
permute and predict method was used to reveal the inputs that contribute the most to the
predictions of the trained network.
Interpretable AI methods can be proved useful in order to understand which features con­
tribute the most to the model. This knowledge provides the researchers the ability to re­
duce the input data to deep learning networks while preserving the performance and thus,
reduce the redundancy of the developed model. Until the time of the writing of this project,
SHAP values and in general, explainable deep learning algorithms, have not been used
for multi­class semantic segmentation tasks in Earth Observation. The main limitation
is the current ability for deep explainable algorithms to work only for single dimensional
outputs and not for outputs from multi­class and multi­dimensional deep learning models.
1.2
Project contribution
The current project is an investigation of how we can understand which Passive Mi­
crowave (PMW) channels are helpful for predicting the sea ice type in polar regions using
Machine Learning (ML) techniques. By employing a deep convolutional network with a U­
Net architecture, which is known for its efficiency in semantic segmentation tasks, along
with leveraging of passive microwave data from AMSR2, high resolution sea ice mapping
can be investigated in detail. In a novel approach, this project will integrate a permuta­
tion and prediction algorithm with which importance values will be assigned to the input
features in order to improve the interpretability of the U­Net model. The extended use of
AI techniques in earth observation, has led to the need of improving the decision­making
processes of deep learning models but also to the need of developing precise and inter­
pretable EO models, as delineated in previous mentioned studies.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
3
==PAGE:12==
This research will contribute to the knowledge of examining the AMSR2 channels’ im­
pact on a deep learning model, thus addressing a gap in literature where the specificity
of channels contributions to polar EO tasks has been under­explored. Current models
ingest all the available channels of AMSR2 data, leading to a redundancy and higher
computational power and time. By employing feature importance values, the study could
reveal the model’s predictive behavior, providing insights about the data features that are
critical in driving the sea ice type classification.
1.3
Objectives
The scientific question that the current project will try to answer is the following:
”Can we reduce the redundancy of a deep learning model that ingests all the available
input data?”
Following this, the next step is to answer the question of
”Can we sort the available channels based on their importance in driving the estimation
of sea ice type?”
In order to be able to answer these questions, a score of each channel’s contribution to
the model will be calculated. This can be done with the PaP algorithm in a similar way as
in the study of Andersson et al. (2021). To cross­validate the results of the PaP algorithm,
an inter­comparison of the trained models ­without the selected channels­ with a baseline
model is conducted.
4
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:13==
2
Remote Sensing Theory
In the following chapter, it was considered necessary to present the theory and back­
ground of the remote sensing principles of sea ice. The chapter will be split into sub­
chapters each of them describing the different techniques and methods used for the mea­
surement of sea ice. The sub­chapters will present the two main methods of measuring
and monitoring sea ice which are the Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) and the Passive
Microwave (PMW). Initially, the basic principles of the remote sensing of sea ice are pre­
sented. Following, the SAR technique is analyzed along with signatures of the sea ice in
the SAR images and finally the passive measurements are analyzed with the respective
signatures of different types of sea ice.
2.1
Remote sensing of sea ice
Polar oceans are covered seasonally by a thin and uneven sheet of sea ice formed by the
freezing of the ocean water during the cold months. This seasonality can be seen when
measuring the sea ice extent in the spring and in the late summer. In spring, the sea ice
extends up to mid­latitudes while in late summer there is a minimum coverage observed
in the most remote places in the Arctic Basin and the Antarctic margins.
Over the years, navigators, geographers and climatologists have showed more interest
in studying sea ice due to the climate change that is affecting the planet. In the climate
system, sea ice cover is a key factor of indicating the global warming and this makes its
interpretation very crucial. In the figure 2.1 the interaction of sea ice with the ocean and
the atmosphere can be seen.
Figure 2.1: Microwave emission and scattering from different surface elements (Frank
(1992))
Satellite instruments have been proved valuable for monitoring the polar regions and the
evolution of the microwave and radar systems has contributed to overcome the limitations
(such as polar night, clouds etc.) of the visible and infrared satellite sensors. During
specific times of the year, almost 10% of the world’s ocean is covered by sea ice. This big
extent is mostly uniform and has small variations during different time periods of the year.
In the winter, a small fraction is open ocean and in the summer another fraction is fresh
meltwater in the form of melt ponds or as a wet element on the snow. The emission and
scattering of microwaves by sea ice has been proved very sensitive to these variations in
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
5
==PAGE:14==
its structure. Consequently, using microwaves, is an effective way for monitoring sea ice
variables.
Since 1970s, various campaigns have been conducted in the Arctic in order to collect
seasonal data about sea ice (fall freeze­up, spring, summer). These data span in a big
part of the electromagnetic spectrum (frequencies), different polarizations (horizontal and
vertical) and incidence angles. This wide range of collected data has helped scientists to
determine the sea ice types by looking at the different emission (passive measurements)
and backscatter (active measurements) values. The unique signature that each sea ice
type has, offers the ability for developing algorithms to retrieve various sea ice parameters
such as the type (FYI, MYI), the concentration and the floe size.
Regarding the first­year ice, when the sea ice is formed, its physical and electrical proper­
ties are strongly dependent on the conditions under which was formed. Sea ice is formed
when seawater reaches a freezing temperature . Firstly, the layer of seawater at the air­
sea interface has to be cooled to around ­1.8◦C. The resulting form of the ice depends on
the environmental variables of the sea (wind, temperature). When the sea state is calm,
without wind or waves, a smooth layer of ice is formed at the air­water interface. If waves
and wind are present, then frazil ice is formed and is released in the sea water. During
the ice formation, waves and wind lead to the congealing of the ice crystals. Finally, when
the ice has a thickness more than 1 cm, it will form the pancake ice which has a rough wet
surface(Jackson (2004),p.82). Following the cold temperatures, the sea ice thickness will
increase by its additional freezing on its bottom. Sea ice can be described by its visual
characteristics (related to the thickness) as: nilas (thickness up to 10 cm), grey (thickness
10­15 cm), grey­white (thickness 15­30 cm). After that point, it can be defined as first­year
ice and can reach up to 2.5 m of thickness.
During the summer, the snow pack on the sea ice melts. If the first­year ice survives the
melting season, it will be desalinated and will have a rippled surface. Multi­year ice (MYI)
is the ice that has survived more than one melt season (Jackson (2004),p.82) and can be
differentiated from the first­year ice by its larger thickness (more than 2 m). Furthermore,
multiyear ice has lower salinity and bigger snow cover. The dielectric properties and the
scattering mechanisms are also different due to the reduced density of the upper layer
which in the case of multi­year ice contains a notable amount of gas bubbles. In the
figure 2.2, a simplified cross­section of first­year and multi­year sea ice is presented to
show the differences in the properties (salinity, density) of the two sea ice types.
Figure 2.2: Cross­section of first­year and multi­year ice (Jackson (2004))
6
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Active measurements
Satellite radar measurements for measuring and monitoring the sea ice in polar regions
have been utilized since 1980s. SAR systems are classified as active due to the fact
that they produce an electromagnetic radar pulse in the microwave frequencies and they
transmit it using their antenna.
Regarding the geometry of the SAR systems and measurements, the SAR is placed with
an inclination towards the illuminated surface (side­looking). The electromagnetic pulses
are reflected from the illuminated area (or absorbed) and they are collected by the radar
receiver. By measuring the time difference between the time of transmission and the time
of reception of the signal, the radar can determine the distance of the illuminated object
(slant range). The view of the SAR is a 2D ”grid” with the slant range R (serving as y
coordinate) and the along track or azimuth (serving as x coordinate). The area covered
by the SAR is defined by the antenna footprint and its respective gain pattern while the
mapped area on the ground is called swath. All the mentioned SAR principles can be
seen in the figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: SAR geometry (Remote Sensing course (DTU), Lecture Slides)
As mentioned before, the SAR measures the reflected signal that has come to the an­
tenna. The returning amount of the signal is a function of the surface and volume prop­
erties of the illuminated objects. In the figure 2.4, different scattering mechanisms are
presented.
Different surface and sub­surface properties of the illuminated objects, such as the sea
ice, lead the signal to scatter in different ways. It ranges from smooth surface scattering
(specular reflection) and rough scattering where more of the incidence wave will be re­
flected back to the radar, to double­bounce scattering and to volume scattering. Volume
scattering happens in some cases where the signal has either penetrated to the subsur­
face (snow on the surface of the sea ice) or has scattered inside a vegetation volume.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Scattering cases in sea ice (Shivangini Singh, S. Kumar, and N. Kumar (2023))
The principal measurement in the SAR measurements is the radar backscatter. The radar
backscatter is defined by the differential radar cross­section, σ0 which also serves as a
measure of how detectable an object is in the SAR images. Also, σ0, is the most crucial
parameter when determining the average received power. The received power can be
obtained using the integral radar equation (Frank (1992)):
Pr =
λ2
(4π)3
∫
A
PtG2σ0
R4
(2.1)
with λ as the wavelength of the signal, Pt the power transmitted, G the antenna gain, the
backscatter cross­section (or backscatter coefficient) σ0, R denotes the range from the
radar to the earth’s surface and A is the illuminated area.
The backscatter coefficient that is measured back in the radar after reflection, depends on
the frequency of the signal, the incidence angle and the polarization (HH, HV, VH, VV). The
type of the surface affects the backscatter signal in different frequencies. For example,
for a given incidence angle of 40o, the figure 2.5 illustrates the frequency dependence
between the backscatter coefficient and the type of sea ice measured. Multi­year ice
has higher backscatter signatures in the microwave spectrum than first­year due to its
different surface and the different amount of salinity that is included in the ice. Backscatter
mechanisms regarding surface and physical properties of sea ice can be seen in figure
2.6 where the low salinity in multiyear ice allows penetration into the ice sheets while
first­year ice backscatter is mainly characterized by surface scattering.
Regarding the open water, it has been proved that it is very important to understand its
impact on the expected sea ice signatures. The signature of open water is largely de­
pendent on the roughness of the sea surface. Surface roughness from wind leads to
ambiguous signatures that resemble the signatures from first year ice because of the sur­
face scattering of the radar signal (figure 2.6). The backscatter signal is also a function
of air ­ sea temperature difference, slope of the waves and orientation of the radar to the
wind (Frank (1992)). To overcome the ambiguous backscatter, using the HV polarization
of the SAR, helps for a more clear separation of the backscatter intensity (about 6 to 7
dB) (Frank (1992)). As per figure 2.7, it is better recommended to operate the SAR with
incidence angles that exceed 20 degrees, as this provides contrast between open water
and sea ice signatures.
8
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: Backscatter signatures for multiyear and first­year ice for (a) normal/winter
and (b) extreme/summer conditions (Frank (1992))
Figure 2.6: Scattering mechanisms for different sea ice types (Frank (1992))
Regarding the sea ice types, the primary scattering mechanism that is present in the first
year ice is the surface backscattering that is mainly dependent on the surface rough­
ness. Snow cover plays a significant role in the backscattering, where thick first year ice
covered with snow shows higher backscattering (Frank (1992)). Finally, the snow cover
affects differently the backscatter depending on the surface roughness. For signals with
higher frequencies, it can be seen that snow on smooth surfaces has a larger response
in comparison to snow on rough surfaces.
On the contrary, multi year ice exhibits volume scattering as the main backscattering
mechanism. Following the melt season, air bubbles in the upper layer of the sea ice
contribute to the volume scattering. Additionally, the smaller amount of salinity that is
contained in the multi year ice, leads to an allowance of the radar signal to penetrate
further into the sea ice.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.7: Backscatter signatures as a function of SAR incidence angle (Jackson (2004))
2.2.1
SAR Example Scene Signatures
Following the theory behind the signatures in the SAR images, it was considered useful
to showcase an example scene in HH polarization for distinguishing the open­water and
the sea ice cover.
In this example scene (figure 2.8), it can be seen that it contains first­year ice which ap­
pears as bright areas in the image. Even brighter areas compared to their surroundings,
are multi­year ice following the figure 2.5 that presents that the multi­year ice has in gen­
eral larger backscatter response than the first­year. Regarding the open­water, it appears
with lower backscatter values on the right side of the image.
10
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.8: SAR HH polarization signatures of sea ice and open water in an example
scene
2.3
Passive measurements
On the other side, Passive Microwaves (PMW) are a passive method of measuring earth’s
properties. Instead of transmitting a signal and measure the received amount, they mea­
sure the electromagnetic energy coming from Earth’s surface. The state of the objects,
in terms of temperature, dielectric properties and the incidence angle of which is mea­
sured, determine the amount of the radiation coming to the sensor. PMR sensors are
usually equipped with multiple channels so they can receive the emitted radiation in vari­
ous frequencies. In the figure 2.9 the antenna of a satellite based radiometer can be seen
receiving the thermal radiation emitted from an object on Earth’s surface.
Ideally, objects absorb all the incoming radiation and emit the equal amount depending on
their physical temperature. These objects are theoretical, and they are called blackbodies.
The equation to describe them is the equation from Planck’s Law of radiation
Bbb = 2hf3
c2
1
ehf/kT −1
(2.2)
where Bbb is the brightness of a blackbody given in
[
W
m2Hz sr
]
, h is the Planck’s constant
equal to 6.63 · 10−34 J s, k is the Boltzmann’s constant equal to 1.38 · 10−23 J
K, c is the
speed of light and T is the temperature in Kelvin.
In reality, the objects’ brightness is a fraction of their temperature (greybodies). Conse­
quently, the emissivity, e, is defined as the ratio of the energy radiated from an object to
that radiated from a perfect emitter (blackbody) at the same temperature and wavelength
and under the same viewing conditions and can be mathematically described with the
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.9: Radiometer and a thermal radiation source (Remote Sensing course (DTU),
Lecture Slides)
following equation (Le Vine and Skou (2006)).
e = Bgreybody
Bbb
(2.3)
Taking a look in the figure 2.9, the brightness of the object is measured by the antenna,
which has its antenna pattern. The recorded power can then be related with the antenna
temperature TA, with the following equation (Le Vine and Skou (2006)):
P = kTA∆f
(2.4)
where k is the Boltzmann’s constant and ∆f is the frequency bandwidth. In real case
scenarios, the measured power is affected from the generated thermal noise from the ra­
diometer and various procedures should be employed in order to get to the real measured
power.
Today’s radiometers that satellites have onboard, have the ability of using the same an­
tenna for measuring the brightness temperatures in different frequencies such as from
6.9 GHz to 89 GHz for the AMSR2 radiometer. The radiometer’s resolution depends on
the wavelength used, the antenna aperture and the distance from the earth’s surface.
Regarding the technical aspects of the resolution, the beamwidth can be derived from the
equation (Le Vine and Skou (2006)):
θ ≈1.4λ
l
(2.5)
and using the beamwidth, the footprint can be calculated as:
FP = θ · H
(2.6)
where H is the distance between the radiometer antenna and the measured object. The
above equations can give an explanation of the reason that the same radiometer onboard,
has different resolutions for various measuring frequencies.
12
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:21==
Regarding the open water and the sea ice types and how they are illuminated in the mi­
crowave radiometers, there are several factors that affect their signature. Water and ice
generally, represent completely different radiometric materials. The water surface is very
reflective and is not emitting a significant amount of energy. This leads to having satellite
images of the water in which it appears cold radiometrically. In order to have a com­
prehensive overview of these, the figure 2.10 presents the different passive microwave
signatures from the open water and sea ice. The open water signature is strongly depen­
dent on the polarization showing large differences in the observed emissivity.
Figure 2.10: Emissivity of open water and first year ice (top) and multi year ice (bottom)
(Frank (1992))
Based on the different brightness temperatures signatures that sea ice and open­water
have, data from PMR can be proved helpful in distinguishing them in conditions where
active measurements (SAR) are ambiguous.
2.4
PMW, Sea Ice Signatures and Atmospheric Windows
Throughout the years, numerous algorithms have been published for estimating the sea
ice concentration and differentiating between sea ice types (N. Ivanova et al. (2015)).
The algorithms can be distinguished based on how many different channels use. One
channel algorithms are very simple and they are sensitive to the temperature of the target
object and to the different emissivities of sea ice types (first­year and multi­year). Two
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
13
==PAGE:22==
channel algorithms use two channels in order to remove these kind of sensitivities, but
they still remain sensitive to the physical temperature. One of the most popular and wide­
used algorithm is the three channel NASA Team sea ice concentration algorithm (D. J.
Cavalieri, Gloersen, and Campbell (1984)). By using brightness temperatures (TB) ratios
the sensitivity to the physical temperature and sea ice types is eliminated. It uses the
polarization ratio (PR) in 19 GHz and the gradient ratio (GR) in 19 and 37 GHz as follows:
PR = Tv(19 GHz) −Th(19 GHz)
Tv(19 GHz) + Th(19 GHz)
(2.7)
GR = Tv(37 GHz) −Tv(19 GHz)
Tv(37 GHz) + Tv(19 GHz)
(2.8)
The values of PR and GR usually cluster around three values that correspond to different
surface types. These types are the ice­free surface (open water), the first­year ice and
the multi­year ice. Both PR and GR can help identify the sea ice type because they are
sensitive to it. The three clusters form a triangle that can be seen in the following figure:
Figure 2.11: Example of PR and GR values for the NASA Team algorithm. The triangle
determines clusters of 100% FYI and 100% MYI (source:nsidc.org)
Other algorithms have also been developed to make the estimation of the sea ice extend/­
concentration more precise and insensitive to various parameters. Some of them namely
are the bootstrap algorithm (Comiso (1995)), the NASA Team 2 (Markus and Donald J
Cavalieri (2000)) and the Bristol (Smith and Barrett (1993)). Important channels, accord­
ing to the NASA Team algorithm, for the identification of the sea ice types is the 37 GHz
channel in vertical polarization and the 19 GHz in both polarizations. From the theory of
14
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:23==
Passive Microwave Remote Sensing, it is known that the 37v GHz channel is sensitive
to sea ice type because of the scattering properties. Multi­year ice contains in its interior
air bubbles leading to a larger volume scattering that first­year that is characterized from
surface scattering.
Finally, it is worth noting that the atmospheric conditions affect the microwave signals.
Atmospheric absorption affects the propagation of microwave signals through the atmo­
sphere mainly due to water vapor and oxygen. Each component has different and specific
frequencies at which they absorb the microwave radiation. In the following figure, the at­
mospheric absorption for different frequencies from 0 to 200 GHz.
Figure 2.12: Atmospheric absorption in microwave frequencies. Expressed in a logarith­
mic scale of dB/km (source: Remote Sensing course (DTU), Lecture Slides)
In the figure 2.12, the black curve indicates the overall attenuation due to all the atmo­
spheric components, the blue curve shows the contribution of water vapor and the red
curve the contribution of the oxygen. Worth noting is the significant absorption of the 23.8
GHz channel by water vapor making it less reliable for surface observations. Lower fre­
quency channels are not affected in a notable extend by the atmospheric components.
The big effect of the atmospheric components happens for the high frequency channels
where significant absorption due to both water vapor and oxygen can be observed.
It should be noted that, when penetration depth is mentioned, it is meant that the mea­
sured microwave radiation by the ice originates from different depths (depending on the
measured frequency) in the ice providing different information. In the table 2.1, penetra­
tion depths from different sea ice types are presented as were estimated from a study.
(R. Tonboe et al. (2006)).
For low frequencies, the snow depth in the Arctic is transparent and only the penetration
depth inside the ice is considered, while, for high frequencies (above 35 GHz), snow cover
is very crucial for the penetration depth because of scattering events in the snow. Based
on that, different frequencies can be helpful for determining different sea ice parameters
such as the sea ice type.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
15
==PAGE:24==
Table 2.1: Penetration depths in cm for different sea ice types
f [GHz]
First­year ice
Multiyear ice
6.9
7.5
30.0
10.6
4.5
20.0
18.7
2.0
11.5
23.8
1.83
10.5
36.5
1.4
7.12
89.0
0.94
4.0
2.4.1
PMR Example Scene Signatures
As in the SAR scene signatures, different channels of PMW data will be presented to
visualize the different signatures that sea ice and open water have in both polarizations.
Figure 2.13: AMSR2 brightness temperatures from the same scene as the figure 2.8 for
different channels and polarizations
The visualized channels are the 6.9 GHz, 18.7 GHz and the 89.0 GHz. Firstly, it is worth
16
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:25==
mentioning the observed difference in the spatial resolution among the different channels.
The 89.0 GHz channel has the highest spatial resolution due to the higher frequency that
it is using. Except for this, as it was expected from the theory (figure 2.10), the horizontal
(H) polarization appears colder for all three frequency channels in comparison with the
vertical (V). Additionally, the H polarization offers better contrast between open water
(”colder” colors ­ lower brightness temperature) and sea ice (first­year and multi­year).
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Machine Learning and Neural Networks
In recent years, AI has advanced with extraordinary pace and has found application
in almost every aspect of the daily (traffic management, housing market) and scientific
(biomedical advancements, astrophysics) sectors. The blossoming of the Machine Learn­
ing and AI has been triggered by the large digital datasets and the increasing available
computational power. Inevitably, Earth Observation and Remote Sensing have seen a
similar progress with their datasets progressively expanding. AI gives the ability to com­
puters to understand the world in terms of hierarchy of concepts and so, to learn com­
plicated concepts by constructing them from simpler ones. The visualization of these
concepts as layers and adding them creates networks that are deeply interconnected,
which is the sector of AI that is named Deep Learning.
In this chapter, the theory underlying the neural networks will be presented. Following,
the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) will be analyzed along with the U­Net architec­
ture that has been used in this project and finally, AI interpretation techniques will be
investigated in order to make the connection with the current project.
3.1
Neural Networks
The feedforward neural network is the backbone of deep learning models. Its goal is to
approximate a function f that can map an input x to a specific category y. For example,
for a classifier, y = f * (x) maps an input x to a category y. Specifically, a feedforward
network, defines a mapping of the category as y = f(x;θ) and learns by itself the value of
the parameters θ that lead to the best function approximation (Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville (2016)). The terminology ”network” and ”deep” comes from the fact that these
networks are usually developed by connecting together different functions. For example,
three different functions can be connected in a chain to form f(x) = f(3)(f(2)(f(1)(x))).
In this example, f(1) is the first layer of the network and so on. The length of this chain
of functions, defines the depth of the model. Based on the approach of C. M. Bishop
(2006), the linear models that are usually used for regression and classification problems,
are based on linear combinations of non­linear basis functions ϕj(x). These models can
mathematically be described as follows :
y(x, w) = f


M
∑
j=1
wjϕj(x)


(3.1)
where f is a nonlinear activation function. The ultimate goal is the extension of the model
by pushing the basis functions ϕj(x) to depend on parameters and adjust these param­
eters and the coefficients wj during the training phase of the network. The basic neural
network model can be described as a series of transformations and M linear combinations
of the inputs (x) can be constructed as:
aj =
D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
(3.2)
where j = 1,..., M and the superscript (1) points the layer at which the specific parameter is.
The parameters indicated as w(1)
ji are the weights of the model, the parameters w(1)
j0 are
18
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:27==
the biases and aj are the activations of the neurons. The activations are transformed by
a nonlinear activation function h resulting in the so­called hidden units. Frequently used
activation functions are the logistic sigmoid, the ’tanh’ which is a hyperbolic tangent acti­
vation function and the ’ReLU’ which is a rectified linear unit activation function. Following,
in the figure 3.1 the outline of a simple neural network can be seen. After the information
forwarding through the network (in the direction of the green arrows), the output of the
network can be written as:
yk(x, w) =
M
∑
j=0
w(2)
kj h
( D
∑
i=0
w(1)
ji xi
)
(3.3)
Resulting, the feed­forward neural networks are non­linear functions that take input vari­
ables xi and result in some output variables yk, handled by a set of parameters w.
Figure 3.1: Typical two­layer neural network (C. M. Bishop (2006))
All the above mentioned, can be visualized in the form of a network diagram in the figure
3.1 where the green arrows indicate the flow of the information through the network, the
input and hidden variables (x and z) and the outputs (y). The weights of the network are
represented with links between the nodes and the biases with additional links from the x0
and the z0 variables.
3.1.1
Gradient Based Learning
In the deep learning algorithms, the foremost goal is to minimize a specific error func­
tion f(x) by adjusting x. This procedure happens during the training phase of the model,
where the weights and biases of the model are learnt from the model itself and its called
back­propagation. Theoretically, the error function can be minimized numerically through
a series of direct error function evaluations which is computationally demanding. Instead
of this, the optimization of the error function is implemented by using a gradient information
by evaluating the derivatives of the error function with respect to the network parameters
(weights and biases) (Christopher M. Bishop and H. Bishop (2024)). Following the ap­
proach presented in Christopher M. Bishop and H. Bishop (2024), the goal is to optimize
w (vector containing the network parameters) by evaluating small changes in a selected
error function E(w). Mathematically, a small step in the the weight space from w to w +
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
19
==PAGE:28==
δw will produce a change in the in the error function as:
δE ≈δw⊤∇E(w)
(3.4)
where the vector ∇E(w) points in the direction of the biggest rate of increase of the error
function. This mathematical description can be seen in the following figure showcasing
the error function in the weight space.
Figure 3.2: Geometrical aspect of the error function (Christopher M. Bishop and H. Bishop
(2024))
Supposing that the error function is a continuous function over the weight space, its small­
est value (minimum) will happen at a point where the gradient of the function is zero as:
∇E(w) = 0
(3.5)
Consequently, the mathematical goal of the back­propagation is to find a vector w such
that E(w) reaches its smallest value. This process is called Gradient Descent and leads
to a new point that further reduces the error function. The optimization of the weights and
biases of the units is an iterative process and is based on a selected gradient optimizer
algorithm.
3.1.2
Optimizers and Cost Functions
Deep learning algorithms require an optimization process that usually includes the finding
of some parameters of a neural network that lead to the minimization of a cost function. In
most of the cases, this can be achieved by evaluation of the performance over the training
dataset. Nowadays, advanced algorithms that are very popular, have their learning rates
adaptive during the training phase. The learning rate is one of the hyperparameters of
a neural network. It is considered to be one of the most difficult hyperparameters to
select and works differently for different model parameters. Because of this, in many deep
neural networks, it is beneficial to use an algorithm that uses an adaptive learning rate
method. One of the most popular optimization algorithms is the Adam algorithm (Kingma
and Ba (2017)). The Adam algorithm is an extension to the stochastic gradient descent
and it updates the network weights iteratively based in the training data. Mathematically,
Adam calculated the exponential moving average of the gradient and the squared gradient
20
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:29==
while controlling the decay rated of the moving averages. Some of the advantages of this
algorithm are its straightforward implementation, the computational efficiency, the light
memory consumption and its fit to problems that involve large amounts of data and model
parameters. Among other optimizers, the adaptive ones seem to perform more robustly
and accelerate the learning (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville (2016)).
Regarding the loss function for a specific application, it is dependent on the expected
output of the neural network. For multi­class classification problems (predicting discrete
classes), the cross­entropy loss function is a very frequent choice. Its value ranges from
0 to 1 and lower values indicate better performance of the model. For classification tasks,
the model usually predicts the probability of a sample belonging to a particular class. Since
each sample can belong only to one class, the true probability would be 1 for this particular
class and 0 for the remaining classes. The cross entropy loss function measures the
difference between the predicted ­ from the model ­ probability and the true one. It is based
on the principle of the maximum likelihood and is equal to minimizing the negative log­
likelihood. For models that are used in multi­class classification cases, the cross entropy
loss is calculated as:
−1
N
N
∑
i=1
C
∑
j=1
(yi,j · log(pi,j))
(3.6)
where
• N is the number of samples
• C is the number of classes
• yi,j is the true label for class j of sample i
• pi,j the predicted probability of sample i belonging to class j
3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a specific type of deep learning networks that
has gained a lot of popularity in computer vision and AI applications. It is a specialized type
of neural network that works for data arranged in grids such as images and time series.
CNNs use the mathematical operation of convolution instead of matrix multiplication and
consist of many layers that usually represent a hierarchy of structures in the dataset.
Mathematically, convolution is defined as:
s(t) =
∫
i(t′)k(t −t′) dt′
(3.7)
where
• i(t’) is the input,
• k(t­t’) is a function, known as kernel function, and
• s(t) is the output, known as the feature map
In the most cases of Earth Observation applications, the inputs are multi­dimensional
arrays of data (e.g. multispectral bands of optical satellite data, dual­polarization images
of SAR data) and the kernel function is a multi­dimensional array of weights, Based on
this, if we consider a two dimensional image I as input, and the kernel functions to be zero
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
21
==PAGE:30==
everywhere except for a finite subset of points, then the convolution with a two dimensional
kernel K can be written as:
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
∑
m
∑
n
I(m, n)K(i −m, j −n)
(3.8)
An example of a 2D convolution can be seen in the figure 3.3 where arrows with boxes
show how the top left element of the output is formed by the convolution between the
kernel function and the top left part of the input.
Figure 3.3: Graphical representation of a 2D convolution (from Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville (2016))
The Convolutional Neural Networks have typically sparser interactions compared to the
fully connected networks due to the fact that the kernels are smaller than the inputs. In­
evitably, this leads to lower memory requirements making them more efficient. Moreover,
CNNs allow parameter sharing (weights of the model are used for more than one function
in the model) which also makes them very efficient.
3.2.1
Activation Functions
A fundamental parameter in neural networks is the activation function. The activation
function in principle, decides whether a neuron should be activated or not.Its goal is to
introduce non­linearity to the output of the neurons of the network. This helps the network
to perform better and learn more complex tasks (Feng and Lu (2019)).
In CNNs, the activation functions are applied after the convolutional layers. In the following
figure, various activation functions can be seen.
Some of the wide used functions are:
• the Tangent Hyperbolic function, known as tanh (seen in 3.4a),
22
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: Examples of non­linear activation functions (from Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville (2016))
• the softplus function, as can be seen in 3.4c,
• Rectified Linear Unit, known as ReLU (3.4d), which is the most widely used function
in neural network because of its computational effectiveness
3.2.2
Pooling and Classification Layers
The pooling operation, mathematically, utilizes a sliding 2­dimensional kernel (filter) over
the different channels of the feature map summarizing the features in the region where it
is applied. In common CNN architectures, a number of convolution and pooling layers are
stacked one after other. The reduction of the feature maps leads to smaller computation
time in the network. Additionally, the summarized features make the model robust to
variations of the input features. Two of the most popular pooling operations are the max
pooling and the average pooling that can be seen visualized in the following figures (3.5
and 3.6)
Figure 3.5: Visualized max pooling operation
Regarding the max pooling, is an operation that selects the maximum element from a
specified region (highest values of pixel in the case of an input image). Thus, the resulting
output layer will contain the most prominent features of the input feature map. In the figure
3.5 the max pooling operation is visualized.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.6: Visualized average pooling operation
Regarding the average pooling, it computes and outputs the average value of the features
that are present in a specified region. This leads to an output feature map that captures
the average behavior of the features on the applied patch of the input map. As per the
max pooling, the average pooling operation applied the kernel that outputs the average
instead of the max features. (figure 3.6)
Moreover, the classification layers involve the evaluation of the feature maps to produce
the resulting classification/segmentation map. The goal is to produce the probabilities for
each target class. For a classification layer with e.g. 5 classes, each output pixel will
contain the probabilities of belonging to each class. The final output layer (softmax) maps
all the classes to sum to 1. Finally, an argmax function will be used to select the class
with the highest probability. In this way, each pixel will be mapped to a specific class and
a classification map will be produced.
3.2.3
U­Net
In semantic segmentation tasks, every pixel of an image is assigned to a specific class.
Usually, the input image has a predefined number of channels, I, and the output array
will have ­defined by the user­ a C number of classes that contain the probability for each
pixel to belong to this class. Using the appropriate functions, like the argmax, the highest
probability can be chosen, resulting in an image showing the class assignment of each
pixel. In a simple way, the semantic segmentation involves the building of a convolutional
network that processes an input, which is usually a rectangular area of the input image
centered around a pixel, and the application of softmax/argmax function that leads to the
classification of this pixel to a specific class. Applying the network to each image, will
lead to a segmentation of the entire image. Obviously, this is extremely computational
expensive and inefficient because of the added redundancy coming from the overlapping
patches of the input image. To overcome this, grouping together the forward­pass cal­
culations for the different input locations in a single network will lead to a CNN whose
each layer has the same dimensionality as the input image (Christopher M. Bishop and
H. Bishop (2024)).
The majority of the CNNs down­sample the input image in order to allow for an increase in
the number of channels without the size of the network to be prohibitive for calculations.
The most important drawback of this process, is the reduction of the spatial resolution and
the loss of information about the position of the pixels during the forward­pass calculations.
A revolutionary approach to resolve this issue was first presented with the introduction of
a U­Net architecture for the CNNs (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox (2015)). The term
U­Net is derived from the shape of the network that can be seen in the following figure.
The architecture of the U­Net is unique due to its contracting and expansive paths. The
24
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.7: Typical U­Net architecture
contracting path identifies the features in the input image. The encoder layers that it
contains, perform the convolution operations to the feature maps reducing their spatial
resolution. At the same time, as they increase in depth, they capture abstract representa­
tions of the input image. On the other side of the network, the expansive path, locates the
features along with the maintenance of the spatial resolution of the input by up­sampling
the feature maps. The U­Net’s skip connections from the contracting path contribute to
the preservation of the spatial resolution that has been down­graded in the contracting
path.
Regarding the figure 3.7, it illustrates the conversion of a grayscale input image of size
572 x 572 x 2 to a binary segmentation map of size 388 x 388 x 2. In the contracting path,
the size of the input image is reduced while the number of channels is increased in order
to capture high­level features. The last part of the contracting path is called ”bottleneck”
and the expansive path starts by taking the feature map from there and converting it finally
to the original image size. The conversion happens by using up­sampling layers which
increase the spatial resolution of the feature maps and reduce the channels. The imple­
mented skip connections contribute to the location of the features in the image. Finally,
each pixel in the output map is assigned to a specific class by using a softmax and an
argmax function.
3.3
Interpretable AI and Feature Importance
Because of the expansive use of the AI in every science field, and especially in the Earth
Observation field, a new framework came out. This new field is called Explainable AI and
is used to understand and interpret the predictions of neural networks. Popular tools for
this, are the LIME (Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Guestrin (2016)) and the SHAP values.
Different studies have dived into the exploitation of these to explain ML models’ outputs.
(Lundberg, Allen, and Lee (2017)).
A model agnostic technique that has been also recently used in an Earth Observation
study about sea ice (Andersson et al. (2021)) is called Permutation Feature Importance
(PFI). With this technique, the contribution of each feature to a fitted model’s perfor­
mance can be measured. The PFI measurement, was first introduced by Breiman in
2001 (Breiman (2001)) for random forests. Based also on this, a study by Fisher, Rudin,
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
25
==PAGE:34==
and Dominici (2019) showcased the model­agnostic capabilities of the feature importance
while at the same time raised some concerns by indicating feature importance’s limita­
tions. The importance of each feature is measured by calculating the reduction in the
model performance after permuting each feature’s values. A feature will then be impor­
tant, if the shuffling of its values leads to a big degradation on the model’s performance.
On the other side, a feature is considered unimportant, if the shuffling of its values does
not affect the model’s performance. By permuting the values of each feature, this tech­
nique breaks the relationship between the feature and the target, indicating how much
the model relies on the specific feature. In the following figures, the effect of permuting
features can be seen.
Figure 3.8: Effects of permuting informative and non­informative features. On the left
side, the model without permutation is seen and on the right side, the model after feature
permutation is presented (source: scikit­learn.org)
On the top figure, when a predictive feature is permuted, the correlation between the
feature and the target and the model performance decreases. On the bottom figure, a
26
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:35==
permutation of a non­predictive feature is not affecting the model’s performance signifi­
cantly.
Mathematically, the PFI algorithm, based on Fisher, Rudin, and Dominici (2019) can be
described as follows:
• Estimation of the model error with all the input features present as eorig = L(y, ˆf(X))
• For each feature j ∈{1, . . . , p}:
– Creation of a new feature matrix Xperm by permuting feature j in the data X.
– Error estimation eperm = L(y, ˆf(Xperm))
– PFI calculation as the difference FIj = eorig −eperm
• Repeat until having a sufficient sample
A study from Hooker, Mentch, and Zhou (2019) supports against the use of permute­
and­predict (PaP) methods as tools for interpreting ML models. The limitation and the
misleading results that this study raises refer to the condition that a correlation exists
among the input features. In this case, PaP metrics can be biased. When two features
are correlated and one of the features is permuted, the trained model still has access to
the information of the permuted feature through its correlated one. This will result in lower
importance score for both features though they might be important for the predictions.
Different approaches to mitigate this bias have been suggested from Hooker, Mentch, and
Zhou (2019). One approach is to generate perturbed versions of the feature of interest
conditionally based on the remaining features. In this way, the feature distribution is not
affected. Another approach is to re­train the model and measure the performance change
when the particular features are muted.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
27
==PAGE:36==
4
Datasets
In this chapter, the datasets that were used for conducting the project are going to be
presented. All the transformations that have been applied to the data, along with any
additional information and external sources will be presented. This chapter gives the
reader a comprehensive overview about the origin and the form of the data. In this project,
a modified version of the original dataset is used. Because of this, it was considered useful
to also include a description of the original dataset along with the modified one. Both of
the versions, are part of the Sea Ice Challenge Dataset that has been produced by the
AI4Arctic project (ESA Contract No. 4000129762/20/I­NB­CNN1 supported by ESA ϕ­lab)
and are available on the DTU Data Portal. (Buus­Hinkler et al. (2022)).
The Sea Ice Challenge Dataset contains Sentinel­1 SAR imagery, passive microwave ra­
diometer observations from the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer 2 (AMSR2)
onboard the GCOM­W1 satellite and numerical weather prediction data from the fifth gen­
eration ECMWF atmospheric reanalysis (ERA5) regarding the period of January 2018 to
November 2021. Finally, ice charts manually produced by ice analysts at the Greenland
Ice Service and the Canadian Ice Service are serving as label data. It includes 533 files
(513 training files and 20 test files) in netCDF format. The two versions that are included
are the raw version and the ready­to­train version that has been the main source of data
for this project. An optical overview of the spatial distribution of the scenes included in the
dataset is presented in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Geographical overview of the coverage of 513 Sentinel­1 SAR training scenes
The Sea Ice Challenge dataset has been produced under the following AI4Arctic project
partners: the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI), the Technical University of Denmark
28
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:37==
(DTU), Nansen Environmental Remote Sensing Centre (NERSC), Polar View and the
Norwegian Computing Centre (NR).
4.1
Sentinel­1 SAR
Sentinel­1 is the radar mission of the Copernicus Earth Observation programme of the
European Union. Sentinel­1 mission consists of a constellation of two polar orbiting satel­
lites called Sentinel­1A and Sentinel­1B collecting C­band (with wavelength of 4.5 cm)
synthetic aperture radar images. The Arctic region is mainly characterized by cloud cover
and polar darkness. Consequently, the foremost advantage of the Sentinel­1 mission is
that provides SAR images independently of the cloud cover and lack of illumination (day
and night). The Sentinel­1 mission operates in various imaging modes offering different
spatial resolutions (below 5 m) and coverage (almost up to 400 x 400 km). Except for
this, it provides dual polarization capabilities with combinations of HV and HH where HV
indicates the horizontal polarization for signal transmission and vertical polarization of the
signal received by the antenna. Respectively, HH indicates the horizontal polarization
for both transmission and reception. Dual polarization offers different perspectives in the
scattering mechanisms of the sea ice and the open water. Regarding the dataset, the
Sentinel­1 images are in the following mode: Sentinel­1 Extra Wide Swath Mode (EW)
Level­1 Ground Range Detected products in Medium resolution (GRDM) and in dual po­
larization, HH and HV. Each Sentinel­1 scene covers an area of 400 x 400 kilometers
and has a pixel spacing of 40 x 40 meters. The SAR noise correction algorithm for these
images is provided by NERSC (Korosov et al. (2022)).
The SAR data are provided by the following variables in the netCDF files:
• nersc_sar_primary ­ Sentinel­1 image in HH polarization
• nersc_sar_secondary ­ Sentinel­1 image in HV polarization
which contain the backscatter coefficient (σ0) in decibels (dB).
As for the ready­to­train version, the data used from this, have undergone some process­
ing steps from the raw version. These processing steps made them almost ready for
ingestion in deep learning algorithms, as the one that is developed in the current project.
Regarding the SAR data, they have been downsampled from 40 meters to 80 meters
pixel spacing to reduce the required computational power and time consumption. For
the downsampling, a 2 x 2 averaging kernel was used and has been considered that the
downsampling process is not affecting the data quality (as in Malmgren­Hansen et al.
(2021)). The scenes are also normalized using statistical information for each variable
(minimum and maximum values).Finally, NaN values in the SAR images were replaced
with the value of 0 for evaluation purposes in the deep learning algorithm.
An example of an individual Sentinel­1 scene that is part of the ready­to­train dataset,
located in the Labrador Sea, in both polarizations (HH and HV) is shown in the figures 4.2
and 4.3. Compared to the example scene that was presented in the figure 2.8, it can be
seen that the values of the backscatter coefficient are normalized to a specific range in
order to be more easily ingestible from the deep learning algorithm.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: Example Sentinel­1 scene in HH polarization
Figure 4.3: Example Sentinel­1 scene in HV polarization
4.2
AMSR2 Brightness Temperatures
The Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer 2 (AMSR2) is a remote sensing instru­
ment for measuring the microwave emission from the surface and the atmosphere of the
Earth. The measurements are from about 700 km above the Earth’s surface and they
come from an antenna that obtains data from over a 1450 km swath. The AMSR2 data
used in this project, are Level­1b data and the swaths have been resampled to the coordi­
nates of every 50th pixel in the Sentinel­1 image due to the significantly coarser resolution
of the AMSR2 data (table 4.1). For the matching of the AMSR2 data with the SAR, for
30
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:39==
each Sentinel­1 image, the AMSR2 data contained in the dataset are produced by finding
the AMSR2 swaths which intersect with the Sentinel­1 swath in a 7­hour window. For the
final AMSR2 data, the AMSR2 swaths were resampled onto the subsampled Sentinel­1
pixel coordinates using Python’s pyresample geospatial package.
The naming of the AMSR2 variables in each netCDF file that were used is representative
of the different channels and polarizations and has the form of btemp_FFP. The naming
indicates that the variable is a brightness temperature (btemp), in a specific frequency
(FF) and in the indicated polarization (P). The available frequencies and polarizations
from the AMSR2 instrument that are present in the netCDF files, can be seen in the table
4.1.
Center
Frequency
(GHz)
Band Width
(MHz)
Pol.
Beam Width
(degree)
Ground
Resolution
(km)
6.925/7.3
350
V / H
1.8
35 x 62
10.65
100
1.2
24 x 42
18.7
200
0.65
14 x 22
23.8
400
0.75
15 x 26
36.5
1000
0.35
7 x 12
89.0
3000
0.15
3 x 5
Table 4.1: Frequencies and resolutions of AMSR2 data (source: suzaku.eorc.jaxa.jp)
By following the workflow that was described, the generated AMSR2 dataset, can include
mosaiced AMSR2 files which contain pixels that were obtained from two or more AMSR2
swaths. This can be seen, for example, in the figure 2.13 where it is more obvious in the
lower resolution channels.
The ready­to­train data differ from the raw ones in terms of the range of its values. To have
a comprehensive view on both versions of data, followingly (figure 4.4), the ready­to­train
AMSR2 data are presented. It can be seen, that the physical and spatial patterns are
being presented. The expectations of ”cooler” brightness temperatures in the horizontal
(H) polarization and also the separation of open water and sea ice is still obvious. The
only difference is the range of the values that have been normalized based on the data
statistics (max, min, mean).
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.4: Example AMSR2 scene in different frequency channels from the ready­to­train
dataset
4.3
Ice charts
The ice charts contain valuable information for the development of the current project.
They serve as the labels for the training of the U­Net neural network and provide the
necessary information about the Stage of Development (SoD) of the sea ice. Manual ice
charting has been for many years the way that National Ice Centers were producing sea
ice information mainly, for marine navigation. The primary source was SAR imagery due
to its high resolution capabilities and its independence of clouds and polar night. The ice
charts that are present in the used dataset, were produced by the Greenland Ice Service
at DMI and the Canadian Ice Service and they cover sub­regions of the Canadian and
Greenland Waters (figure 4.1).
An example of an ice chart in East Greenland produced by the Greenland Ice Service at
DMI, can be seen in the following figure (figure 4.5). The ice charts can be considered as
snapshots of the ice conditions that are present only during the time of the SAR acquisition.
As mentioned before, the primary source of information are the SAR images which, along
32
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.5: Example of a regional ice chart in East Greenland (Saldo et al. (2020))
with information from other satellite observations, serve as inputs to the manual production
of the ice charts. The texture of the sea ice in the SAR image is the driving factor of the
drawing of the ice chart by an experienced ice analyst. The ice charts consist of polygons
which contain information about the sea ice that is in the limits of the polygons. The main
parameter of the ice charts is the sea ice concentration which ranges from 0% (open
water) to 100% (total ice covered ocean). Additionally, each polygon contains information
about the SoD of the sea ice within the polygon.
The ice chart coding follows the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) code for sea
ice, which is called ”egg code”. They are provided as shapefiles with the SIGRID3 (Sea
Ice GeoReferenced Information and Data) coding. The SIGRID3 coding, consists of a
total sea ice concentration for each polygon (CT), concentrations for (up to) 3 different
Stages of Development which are specified by their partial concentration (CA, CB and
CC), their SoD (SA, SB, and SC) and their floe size (FA, FB, FC). (Saldo et al. (2020)).
An overview of an ice egg code is presented in the figure 4.6
Regarding the SIGRID3 codes, and specifically the SoD codes, which are more of interest
in the scope of this project, they are presented in the figure 4.7. In the ready­to­train
version of the dataset, the original ice charts have been converted already into netCDF
format. This conversion was done with a script which uses a lookup code table. For the
SoD, the partial sea ice concentration is used to determine if there is a dominant category
in the polygon. The lookup tables indicate the conversion from ice code to the specific
classes and the resulting labels contain the Stage of Development as a number of class
between 0 and 5. The correspondence to the SoD classes is the following:
• 0: Open­water
• 1: New ice
• 2: Young ice
• 3: Thin First­Year ice
• 4: Thick First­Year ice
• 5: Old ice (multi­year ice)
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.6: Overview of ice egg code by the World Meteorological Organization (source:
nsidc.org)
Figure 4.7: SIGRID3 codes for Stage of Development (Saldo et al. (2020))
For visualization reasons, the following figure showcases the raw version of the ice chart
that is used to generate the SoD labels.
34
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.8: Example of a polygon ice chart (Saldo et al. (2020))
It is very important to note that the ice charts cannot be regarded as the complete truth
of the real conditions. Due to the manual interpretations of the SAR images, it has been
proven (Karvonen et al. (2015)) that ice charts from different ice analysts agree to a spe­
cific degree, but they have at least 20% uncertainty and discrepancies. Due to the ultimate
reason of the production of the ice charts, which is the marine navigation and safety, the
ice charts can be considered more precise near the ice edges.
In the ASIP V2 dataset that is used here, the distribution of the classes in the labels can
be seen in the following histogram.
Figure 4.9: Distribution of ’Stage of Development’ labels in the ASIP V2 training dataset
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
35
==PAGE:44==
It can be seen that the class labels in the training dataset are very unbalanced. Except for
the open­water pixels that are beyond the interest of the current project, the intermediate
stages are extremely under­represented (1.7­2.5%), while the thick first­year ice and the
old ice are quite more represented (12­14%).
Finally, an example of the data used from the ready­to­train dataset is presented. The SAR
HH (horizontal ­ horizontal) polarization along with the 36.5 GHz brightness temperature
in V (vertical) polarization and the corresponding labels of the SoD can be seen.
Figure 4.10: SAR HH, brightness temperature and SoD label in an example scene in
Davis Strait
36
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:45==
5
Algorithm Implementation
In this chapter, the algorithm implementation will be presented. Considerations and limi­
tations that were taken into account during the preparation of data and the implementation
of the processing pipeline will also be presented. Firstly, the various choices that were
made regarding the set­up of the data processing will be quoted, followed by the distribu­
tion of the training and validation data. Moreover, the U­Net design is shown along with
the hardware that was used for the training of the deep learning network. Furthermore,
the reader will get a comprehensive overview of the test (inference) data that were used
for testing the model performance on and, the different algorithms for the experiments
that were conducted will be presented.
5.1
Hardware Setup
For the current project, the personal equipment was not enough to implement the various
algorithms. DTU’s HPC cluster (DTU Computing Center (2024)) was utilized using the
student credentials to gain access. The accessible equipment includes two Intel Xeon
Gold Central Processing Units (CPU), two Graphical Processing Units (GPU) and 378GB
of memory shared between these GPUs and CPUs. The GPU that was main used for
the training of the model and the different experiments was the Tesla V100­SXM2 with
32 GB high­speed memory. To gain a large computational power, Pytorch’s multiprocess
dataloader was used during the training to effectively use both the GPU and CPU at the
same time. This equipment allowed to train a deep learning model with a fairly big amount
of data in a realistic amount of time (∼12h for a training for 70 epochs)
5.2
Design and Parameters
Before starting implementing the chosen algorithm and conducting the experiments, some
choices regarding the algorithm parameters have been made. The first of them, is the
resolution of the model’s output. The original resolution of the Sentinel­1 EW acquisition
mode is 93m x 87m. The ready­to­train version of the dataset, contains the original dataset
but subsampled to 80m (∼5000 x 5000 pixels) instead of the original resolution of 40m
(∼10000 x 10000 pixels). This compromise is not affecting the data quality, corresponds
well with the original resolution of Sentinel­1 and it is acceptable in the scope of this
project. In this way, the data size is sub­quadrupled. This leads to an acceleration of the
training process with a trade­off of decreasing the number of training samples.
The second parameter that plays a significant role on the implementation algorithm is the
patch size. The training data, which are in form of .nc files, contain the relevant train­
ing variables (SAR and PMW data) and, for the needs of the model training, they were
patchified into samples. The patch size determines the scale of the samples and in gen­
eral, large patch sizes lead to high model performance (in terms of prediction accuracy)
but will lead to high computation time and large computational memory. It is generally a
”rule of thumb”, that the patch size should be in order of 2n because the pooling layers
in the network, half the image size four times. So, information will be lost in the decoder
stage of the network leading to necessary extra padding during skip connections to en­
sure equal feature map size. Based on that, and the available resources, the choice was
between 256 x 256 or 512 x 512 pixels. The time constraints in the training phase led to
the choice of 256 x 256 pixels for the patch size.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
37
==PAGE:46==
5.3
Preprocessing and Data Distribution
The preprocessing of the data is a very crucial step in pipelines that involve deep learning
models. As mentioned, the training dataset that was used (ASIP V2) contains 513 scenes
in the Greenland and the Canadian Arctic waters (see figure 4.1). The preprocessing
phase involves the preparation of these data in order to become easier to be ingested
by the deep learning network. Firstly, each scene is patchified in 256 x 256 samples as
mentioned before. The scene is cropped from random points until the batch size (8) is
filled. The patches that are formed are 3­dimensional containing as the third dimension,
the variables for training. These variables are the two SAR variables (HH and HV po­
larization) and the fourteen AMSR2 variables (in H and V polarization). Because of the
lower resolution of the AMSR2 variables, an up­sampling of these variables is happening
during that phase. The up­sampling method is the ”nearest” and leads to the matching
of the resolution of the AMSR2 variables to the SAR variables. It is worth noting, that
for the project purposes, some variables that were included in the dataset were omitted.
These variables are the numerical weather parameters (components of the wind, air tem­
perature, column water vapor and column liquid water), the incidence angle of the SAR
measurements and the distance­to­land variable. It was considered useful to focus only
on the SAR and AMSR2 measurements, since developing a model trained only on these
variables, will be more sensitive to changes in these inputs.
Furthermore, a part of the preprocessing that was already implemented in the dataset
was the normalization. The dataset has been normalized using the standard deviations,
minimum and maximum values of each variable. Regarding problematic (NaN) data, they
have been masked by using the values of 0 (for SAR images) and 255 (for the ice charts).
These values represent missing data and masked pixels. Masking is a very important
step, since, as it will be analyzed in the paragraph 5.4.1., plays an important role in the
performance evaluation.
From this dataset, 20 scenes will serve as the validation set. For an effective validation
process, the validation set ideally has to contain the variety of the classes of the sea
ice and to expand in the geographical area of the dataset. The geographical span of
the validation dataset can be seen in the figure 5.1. Example locations of the validation
scenes are the South Greenland, the East Greenland (and the Greenland Sea), the Baffin
Bay and the Labrador Sea, the Hudson Bay and the Beaufort Sea.
38
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.1: Geographical distribution of the validation scenes used in model training
5.4
U­Net Implementation
The choice of a U­Net architecture was driven by several factors as described in the 3.2.3.
section. The U­Net model was implemented using Deep Learning Python’s library called
PyTorch. Regarding the input block, the forward pass begins with the input image passing
through the initial double convolutional layer where it undergoes two consecutive convolu­
tion operations with 16 output feature maps, batch normalization and the ReLU activation.
This step extracts the initial features from the input image. In the contracting path (en­
coder) the feature map from the input block is processed through a series of contracting
blocks. In each block, a max pooling operation is followed by a double convolution making
this procedure to progressively reduce the spatial dimensions and to increase the number
of feature maps based on the sequence of the U­Net feature maps which, here are defined
as [16,32,64,64]. At the deepest part of the network, the bridge block further processes
the feature map from the last contracting block. In this way, it maintains the same number
of feature maps (64) and ensures that there is a continuity between the contracting and
the expanding paths.
Following, the expanding path is involved. The feature map is upsampled and processed
through a series of expanding blocks. Each block performs upsampling (here, with the
bilinear method), concatenation with the corresponding features from the contracting path
(through the skip connections) and a double convolution. This phase is crucial with which
the spatial dimensions are restored while at the same time, the number of feature maps
are reduced following the reverse sequence [64,64,32,16].
In the last step, the final layer maps the output feature map from the last expanding block
to the number of output classes (6), using a 1x1 convolution. For visualization purposes,
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
39
==PAGE:48==
in order to have an image showing the class that each pixel belongs to, an argmax function
is used to select the class with the highest probability (coming from a softmax function) for
each pixel. The described process can be seen visualized in the U­Net that was drawn.
(figure 5.2)
Figure 5.2: Implemented U­Net
5.4.1
Evaluation and Metrics
In this subsection, the evaluation process and the metrics that were used to keep track
of the developed model will be presented. As described in the section 3.1.2, the cross­
entropy loss function was used to evaluate the performance of the training process and
to update the weights. The cross­entropy function was chosen because is very useful
when it comes to interpreting the outputs of deep neural networks that utilize the softmax
function. The cross­entropy function for this project, was implemented using PyTorch’s
built­in CrossEntropyLoss function which computes the loss between the input logits (out­
put from the model) and the targets. The input contains the un­normalized logits for each
class and the target contains the class indices in the range [0,C) where C is the number
of classes. An important parameter in the calculation of the cross­entropy function, is the
ignore_index. Due to masked pixels in the labels, which have the value 255, the calcu­
lation of the cross­entropy function should ignore these values in order to have realistic
results. Mathematically, the function is explained through the following equation:
ℓ(x, y) =
N
∑
n=1
1
∑N
n=1 wn · 1yn ̸= ignore_index
ln
(5.1)
40
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:49==
where w indicates the weights of each class and it is a technique that is used to miti­
gate the imbalance between the classes present.In the current project, there was not an
assignment of different weights for the classes, leaving room for future work.
Choosing an evaluation metric for the model’s performance is a very crucial part in the
ML pipeline. A very wide­used metric is the model’s accuracy. Accuracy computes how
many times the model made a correct prediction across the entire dataset. However, in
real­world datasets, like the one used here, there is a class imbalance making this metric
useless. The metric used here, is the F­1 score. F­1 score is a harmonic mean of two
other metrics called precision and recall. Precision measures how many of the ”positive”
model’s predictions were correct, while recall measures how many of the positive class
samples were correctly identified. The F­1 score combines them in one metric by using
the following formula:
F1 = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(5.2)
However, based on the equation 5.2, for multi­class classification tasks, the F­1 score is
calculated per class. The formula now is modified to:
F1(class = a) = 2 × Precision(class = a) × Recall(class = a)
Precision(class = a) + Recall(class = a)
(5.3)
In order to have a unique F­1 score for the model, the class F­1 scores are averaged by
using the number of instances in each class as their corresponding weight, leading to a
single F­1 score representative for the whole dataset. In this way, the performance of the
model is straightforward comparable with other developed models. As a continuation of
the F­1 score, the confusion matrix will be visualized giving insights about the accuracy
for each class and highlighting which classes are being confused more than others. The
confusion matrix is a CxC matrix, where C is the number of classes. The diagonal of the
confusion matrix shows the number of the predicted classes that are correctly predicted
while the non­diagonal elements show the number of pixels that are incorrectly predicted
as a specific class and what the ground truth actually is.
5.5
Inference
The last step in this model development is the inference (or testing). For machine learning
models, this phase is for testing the model on unseen data. For the model developed
here, the inference is about testing the model on its predictions of the sea ice Stage of
Development (SoD) in new data. During that stage, the model (weights and biases) is
loaded and then is applied to the inference data to give its predictions.
For the full inference, 20 test scenes were used. The testing dataset was included also in
the ready­to­train dataset. Ideally, the testing scenes are selected in a way so they can
evaluate the model in diverse conditions, different seasons and different geographical re­
gions. For visualization reasons, 4 of them will be presented in each testing scenario and
evaluation of the different model experiments. As mentioned, the testing scenes include
the 2 SAR (HH and HV) channels and the 14 (7 frequencies, each in 2 polarizations)
AMSR2 channels. The geographical distribution of the 20 inference scenes can be seen
in the figure 5.3
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.3: Geographical distribution of the inference scenes used in the inference of the
model
The selected inference scenes that are going to be presented here, are highlighted in
the table below with their corresponding acquisition date and region. The abbreviations
indicate the orientation regarding Greenland.
#
Date
Region
Size [pixels]
1
2020/10/13
Scoresbysund (E)
5244 x 4996
2
2021/03/28
Cape Farewell (S)
5297 x 4998
3
2020/03/19
Labrador Sea
5245 x 4999
4
2019/08/10
Baffin Bay (NW)
5188 x 5354
Table 5.1: Details about the selected example inference scenes
42
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:51==
It was selected to present the HH SAR image, the 23.8 GHz H and the 89.0 GHz H
brightness temperature along with their corresponding reference labels of the Stage of
Development (SoD) for each of the 4 inference scenes. It can be seen that the fourth (4)
inference scene contains only open water pixels. The third (3) and the first (1) inference
scene contain different types of sea ice and the second (2) contains only multi­year ice.
The selected inference dataset in higher resolution, can be found in the appendix.
Figure 5.4: Example inference scenes from table 5.1 including the SAR HH, 23.8 GHz H, 89.0 GHz
H channels and the corresponding ice charts
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
43
==PAGE:52==
5.6
Permutation Feature Importance Experiments
Having established a model for predicting the sea ice type ­ stage of development, a
choice had to be made for the algorithm that will help us understand which input features
are the most important. As mentioned in the literature review section, the first choice
was to calculate the SHAP values through the built­in Pytorch’s function. However, based
on the literature review, the SHAP values are still available only for single dimensional
outputs and not multi­class deep learning models. An attempt to calculate them for every
output of the model led to memory issues and unrealistic computation times for the scope
of this project. Based on this, the permutation feature importance was the way to go.
As described in the section 3.3, the experiment is about permuting the input features to the
model. The question that was risen before implementing the algorithm, was about which
data (training or test) to compute the PFI scores on. Two factors led to choosing the test
data. The first was that if we measure the model error on the same data on which the
model was trained, the measurement usually is very optimistic. Because the PFI method
is based on measurements of the model performance, is better recommended to use the
test data (Christoph Molnar (2022)). High values in the PFI scores will indicate that the
features are important for the predictions, but usually the model would overfit to the train­
ing data. The second reason was the computation times. Calculating the PFI scores on
test (unseen) data, which are 20 scenes, takes from 1h to 2h based on the selected algo­
rithm. If the training data (493 scenes) were selected, the experiments will not be viable
for the time limitations for this project.
5.6.1
Permutation Feature Importance in One Trained Model
For the calculation of the PFI scores, a trained model (based on the process described
on sections 5.4 ­ 5.5) was used. The model was trained on the 2 SAR (HH and HV) and
on the 14 AMSR2 (H and V) channels. To calculate the PFI scores, the F­1 score of the
model has been calculated and saved. This is called ”baseline F­1 score” indicating the
F­1 score for the base model that includes all the AMSR2 channels ­ like the operational
model that was developed in DMI. The channels that are permuted are the 14 AMSR2
ones. The redundancy can only come from these channels, since the SAR channels
are providing different kind of information and are of a high importance for distinguishing
different sea ice types. The permutation of the AMSR2 channels will provide information
of which channels are not providing so much information for the model’s predictions.
For the permutation of the input features, Pytorch’s tool called torch.randperm was used
to permute each input feature by shuffling its data. In this way, the data from the spe­
cific feature become unstructured and meaningless providing little to no information to
the model. Following, the effect of the random permutation of the input features can be
visualized in the figure 5.5. This is an example of permuting the 36.5 GHz V channel.
In image datasets that involve sensor data or images with different channels, the included
features usually have internal correlations and dependencies. By permuting a channel,
the correlations are broken and the model performs without the structured information of
the channel. Also, this technique, can be proved useful when the model is redundant. If
the performance of the model does not degrade when a feature is permuted, it probably
indicates that the information included in this feature can still be accessed through another
feature.
44
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.5: Effect of the random permutation of the data contained in the 36.5 GHz V
channel
Referring to the PaP method described in 3.3., the baseline F­1 score was calculated.
Following, each input channel (6.9/7.3/10.65/18.7/23.8/36.5/89.0 GHz) in both polariza­
tions (H and V) was permuted. For each permutation, the new F­1 score of the model was
calculated. This resulted to 14 new F­1 scores representing the score of the model when
each of the channels is permuted. Finally, each new F­1 score was subtracted from the
baseline F­1 score leading to the Permutation Feature Importance (PFI) score.
Finally, it should be mentioned that two considerations were taken into account. Firstly,
because of this project’s focus, the calculation of the F­1 score on the PaP method will
exclude the open­water pixels due to the interest in the sea ice pixels. The PaP method
has the same results in both scenarios. Accounting for open water pixels or not, leads to
the same ordering of the input channels ­in terms of PFI scores­ but, as expected, with
different scores because of the non­inclusion of the open water pixels in the calculation of
the F­1 scores. Secondly, due to the random permutation of the input channels, the results
cannot be trusted with only one experiment. This fact, in combination with the known
limitations of the PaP methods to provide very accurate results for correlated features
(Hooker, Mentch, and Zhou (2019)), arose the need to implement the PaP method at
least 10 times in order to moderate these two limitations by averaging each channel’s PFI
score.
5.6.2
Permutation Feature Importance Across Different Trained Models
Having in mind the limitations of the PaP methods, it was considered useful to calculate
the PFI scores with an additional way. Previously, the PFI scores were calculated based
on one trained model and repeating the random permutation 10 times. Now, the PFI
scores are calculated once per each model. Ten (10) different models were trained with
the same input channels (all the available from the AMSR2) but the stochastic process of
the training led to different weights and biases of the model. The different models now, will
differ only by some internal factors of the U­Net networks. In order to have comparable
results, for each PaP method in each model, the random permutation of the features was
conducted with fixed seed. By fixing the random seed of the permutation, it is ensured
that the features are going to be permuted in exactly the same way. For example, the
permutation of the 36.5 GHz V channel, will be the same for each experiment and will be
as in figure 5.5. The above algorithm will lead to 10 different PFI scores for each channel.
To get one score for each channel, the average of the PFI scores will be calculated along
with the standard deviation in order to evaluate the stability of each PFI score and to
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
45
==PAGE:54==
assess its reliability.
5.7
Sea Ice Type Prediction using CIMR channels
Following the prediction of sea ice type based on the results of the PFI scores, it was
considered useful to simulate the usage of the channels that will be onboard the CIMR
mission. This potentially could be a link to future missions and give an idea of how dif­
ferent frequency channels from future missions can help identify the sea ice Stage Of
Development.
Copernicus Imaging Microwave Radiometer (CIMR) is a future satellite mission within the
European Commission’s Copernicus Expansion program. It will contain a conically scan­
ning microwave radiometer imager in order to gain meaningful insights and improve the
spatio­temporal measurements of sea ice in the Arctic regions. The three main products
that it will deliver, will be the Sea Surface Temperature (SST), the Sea Surface Salin­
ity (SSS) and the Sea Ice Concentration (SIC) with the Sea Ice Type (SoD) to be in the
secondary deliverable parameters. To achieve this, the system will be based on a multi­
frequency imaging radiometer containing channels in different frequencies. The following
table summarizes the onboard channels.
Table 5.2: CIMR onboard channels
Band
Frequency [GHz]
Spatial Resolution [km]
L­band
1.414
60
C­band
6.925
15
X­band
10.65
15
K­band
18.7
5
Ka­band
36.5
5
Based on the available dataset (section 4.2), the experiment will involve the use of the
common channels between AMSR2 and CIMR. Since AMSR2 does not include the 1.414
GHz channel, this specific channel will be excluded from the experiment. This leads also
to the exclusion of the 7.3, 23.8 and 89.0 GHz channels of AMSR2. Conclusively, the
simulation will utilize the 6.9, 10.65, 18.7 and 36.5 GHz channels in both polarizations (V
and H). The confusion matrix of the model will be calculated and the 4 inference scenes
will be presented to visualize the sea ice type predictions. Although the data from CIMR
will be different from those used here, this scenario could provide some insights about the
model’s performance when only specific channels are available.
46
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:55==
6
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the results from the different experiments that were analyzed in the chapter
5 will be presented. Starting, the baseline model will be presented along with its inference,
its performance in terms of F­1 score and the confusion matrix. Following, the resulting
PFI scores will be shown. The resulting PFI scores are divided in two different sections.
The first results are coming from the PaP method applied in 1 trained model with 10 ran­
dom permutations of the input channels, while, the second ones, from the PaP method
applied in 10 different trained models with fixed seed (same permutation of the input fea­
tures). Finally, based on these results, the performance of the new trained models will
be presented along with the results of the simulation of using the channels that will be
onboard the future mission of Copernicus Imaging Microwave Radiometer (CIMR).
6.1
Baseline Model
For the training of the baseline model, all the available channels of the AMSR2 and the two
SAR channels are used. The tracking of loss is very crucial for the training and can help
identifying the smooth training of the model. As mentioned, the training and the validation
loss is calculated via the cross­entropy function and can be tracked across the epochs of
the training. Among the same 10 trained models that differ only because of the stochastic
nature of the internal parameters, it was selected to show the model #4 which achieved
the highest F­1 score. The mean F­1 score from the 10 trained models is 80.22%. In order
to have a confidence level when it comes to comparing with the model experiments, the
3­sigma rule was applied. The 3­sigma rule creates a range around the mean F­1 score
based on the standard deviation. The resulting range is 78.06% ­ 82.38%.
Figure 6.1: Training and validation loss during the training of model #4
It can be seen that the training loss has a sudden decrease at around the 5th epoch and
continues the downward trend until around the 35th epoch. After this, the loss shows little
oscillations and after the 65th epoch has a smoother trend. The training is finished at the
70th epoch and the best F­1 score of the model is 81.21%. Along with the F­1 score, the
confusion matrix that has been calculated on the test dataset, is also presented.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.2: Confusion matrix of model #4
Based on the confusion matrix, it can be seen that open water class is predicted almost
perfectly with a percentage of 98.9%. Also, the 5th class (number 4) which corresponds
to thick first­year ice, is correctly predicted with a percentage of 80.2%. However, the 2nd
(young ice), the 3rd (thin first­year ice) and the 6th (old ice) classes are misclassified as
thick first­year ice with a percentage of 66.9%, 52.1% and 53.2% respectively.
Except from the calculation of the above metrics, following, the inference of the trained
model is presented along with the reference labels. Regarding the inference scene #1,
the old ice (multi­year ice) in the reference labels is partially predicted as old ice while is
also predicted as thick first­year ice. New ice is correctly predicted for the majority of the
pixels. The white regions are masked regions based on the fill values of 255 and on glacial
ice. As for the inference scene #2, the labels contain only multi­year ice while the model,
except for the multi­year ice, predicts also some young ice and some thick first­year ice.
In the inference scene #3 the reference thick first­year ice is correctly predicted in the
most cases while there is a small confusion with the predictions of young ice. Finally,
in inference scene #4, the open­water is correctly predicted with a very small amount of
some pixels that are predicted as thick first­year ice.
48
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.3: Baseline model predictions (left plots) and reference labels (right plots) for the
4 inference scenes
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
49
==PAGE:58==
6.2
PFI Scores
In this section, the PFI scores obtained from the two different methods that were ap­
plied are presented. Firstly, the PFI scores from 10 random permutations of a randomly
selected model (here #6) are shown. Continuing, the PFI scores from the same permu­
tations across the 10 trained models are shown.
6.2.1
PFI scores From One Model
Each one of the PMW channels (14 channels) has been permuted (following the figure
5.5). The resulting F­1 score of the model from each channel permutation is stored and
then is subtracted from the baseline F1­score (for the model #6 the F­1 score is 79.39%).
The resulting difference (PFI score) is then used for sorting the channels from the most
important to the least important. Firstly in the figure 6.4, the 10 different PFI scores from
the permutations are shown.
50
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.4: PFI scores from 10 random permutations of the input channels in the model
#6
Each plot corresponds to a different permutation of the input channels. In the x­axis the
different channels are shown while the y­axis contains the mean PFI scores. It can be
seen that from each permutation, each channel has the same PFI score meaning that
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
51
==PAGE:60==
each permutation has the same effect on the model.
In order to have a comprehensive overview of the PFI scores, a bar plot, in figure 6.5,
was constructed showing the descending sorting of the importance of each channel.
Figure 6.5: Sorted mean PFI scores for each channel after 10 random permutations in
the model #6
This experiment indicates that the most important channel is the 36.5 GHz (V pol). Fol­
lowing the same frequency channel in H polarization is the second most important while
23.8 GHz (H pol) and 18.7 GHz (V pol) are also of high importance. The PFI scores of this
range of frequencies (18.7 to 36.5 GHz) aligns also with the theory as explained in the
chapter 2.4 where the different algorithms that estimate the sea ice type were explained.
One thing to consider and to discuss, is the high importance of the 23.8 GHz channel
which is known from the literature (Grody (1976)) as the channel which is very sensitive
to the atmospheric water vapor content. Furthermore, the very high frequency channels
(89.0 GHz) appear to be of low importance. These channels are of very high resolution
and are affected from atmospheric conditions and they cannot offer so much information
for the sea ice type. Additionally, for high frequencies, as mentioned in the chapter 2.4.,
the scattering effects on the snow cover of the ice, is an obstacle to determining the sea
ice type. Regarding the low resolution channels (6.9 and 7.3 GHz), it can be seen that
they don’t appear very low in the hierarchy but also not very high. The low frequency
channels have bigger penetration depths and can provide some information (limitations
on section 6.4) about volume scattering inside the ice (a characteristic of the multi­year
ice) but little to no information about surface scattering (mostly on first­year ice). Finally, it
should be mentioned that because of the utilization of both SAR and PMW data, the later
have been upsampled to match the SAR resolution. This potentially could be a reason of
attributing low PFI scores in the low frequency channels which have an extremely coarse
resolution.
Ideally, if the time limit was not a barrier, the above algorithm could have been applied
for each one of the 10 trained models. Having 10 random permutations in each of the 10
52
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:61==
models would be a safer ­in terms of confidence levels­ way to have more reliable results.
6.2.2
PFI scores From Different Models
For having as reliable results as possible for the PFI scores, the PaP algorithm was applied
across the 10 trained models. The permutation across the models was fixed in order to
be comparable. The PFI scores obtained for every model are visualized in the following
figure:
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.6: PFI scores from 1 fixed random permutation of the input channels across the
10 models
Referring to figure 6.6, the PFI scores differ among the various trained models. Even
though the permutation was fixed (but still random), the different model parameters in each
model, led to more diverse results than the previously applied method. At first glance, the
36.5 GHz (V), 23.8 GHz (V) and the 18.7 GHz (V) appear to have consistent high values
54
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:63==
of PFI scores. On the opposite the very high frequency channels (89.0 GHz) appear to
contribute the least to the model predictions while the low frequency channels show the
most unstable results.
The mean PFI scores were calculated, along with their standard deviation, to summarize
the 10 experiments.
Figure 6.7: Sorted mean PFI scores for each model experiment
Averaging the PFI scores, resulted in the 23.8 GHz (V) channel to be shown as the most
important followed by the 36.5 GHz (V) channel. 7.3 GHz (H), 18.7 GHz (V) and 36.5 GHz
(H) are also of high importance. It is necessary to take into account the standard deviation
of the mean PFI scores. The black lines can be considered as error bars, which show
the standard deviation of each mean PFI score. Longer lines indicate bigger standard
deviation. A better way to visualize the distribution of the 10 experiments is the violin plot
which is shown below (figure 6.8).
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.8: Violin plot of the distribution of the PFI scores across different models
Regarding the figure 6.8, the 23.8 GHz (V) channel is seen to reach a higher value. The
advantage of the violin plot is the visualization of the experiments’ distribution. Although
the 23.8 GHz (V) channel reaches a higher value, the 36.5 GHz (V) channel violin plot is
seen to have a higher value in its main body. The dots that are inside the violins’ body
indicate the individual experiments. Based on this, it can be drawn that in general, the 36.5
GHz (V) channel appears to have equal or even a bit higher importance. Following, the
18.7 GHz (V) channel appears to be important. Again, the high (89.0 GHz) and the low (6.9
GHz, 10.65 GHz) frequency channels appear with low importance. As for the 7.3 GHz (H)
channel, combining the figures 6.7 and 6.8 leads to an obvious outlier in the experiment
that drives the importance to appear as one of the highest (3rd). As mentioned, ideally,
the above figures would be even more reliable if the experiments were more (e.g. > 30
experiments).
6.3
Model Performance Metrics
Based on the results from the PFI scores, the model has been trained again with different
input channels. The first experiment involves the removal of the very important channels.
The second experiment is about the removal of the very low and very high frequency chan­
nels which appear to be of a low importance. Lastly, the third experiment is a simulation
of the performance of a model that uses the channels that will be onboard of CIMR. The
new models will be examined by evaluating their F­1 scores and their confusion matrices,
compared to the baseline model which utilizes all the available AMSR2 channels. The F­1
score evaluation will be based on the comparison of the new F­1 scores with the mean
F­1 score obtained from the 10 trained models which is 80.22% with a standard deviation
of 0.72%. For a confidence level of 99.7%, the 3­sigma rule of thumb around the mean
F­1 score of the 10 trained models was applied in order to evaluate the new F­1 scores.
56
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:65==
6.3.1
Model Without Important Channels
The first experiment involved the removal of the very important channels based on the
PFI scores. The model was trained without using the brightness temperatures from the
18.7 GHz (V), 23.8 GHz (H) and 36.5 GHz (V & H) channels.
The F­1 score that the model achieved was 76.66% which is out of the 3­sigma range of
the F­1 scores of the 10 trained models and the standard deviation. Also, the resulting
confusion matrix is presented.
Figure 6.9: Confusion matrix of the first experiment
Based on the F­1 score and the confusion matrix, it can be said that the performance
decreases when the important channels are removed. Comparing the confusion matrix
of the baseline model (figure 6.2) with the current one, there is a clear degradation in the
accuracy of the correct prediction of the young ice (class 2). The new model predicts
young ice very rarely. Also, a higher mis­prediction of thick first­year ice (class 4) instead
of young ice (71.5%) and thin first­year ice (84.4%) can be seen.
Following, the inference of the 4 scenes is presented. Regarding the inference scene
#1, in the northern regions where the labels indicate multi­year ice, the model predicts
new ice whereas the baseline model was predicting multi­year and thick first­year ice.
So, the degradation in the F­1 score can also be seen here. Furthermore, regarding the
inference scene #2, the new model predicts thick first­year ice in the majority of the pixels
where the labels indicate multi­year ice. Compared to the baseline model, the new model
does not predict any young ice. As for the inference scene #3, the new model mostly
identifies the same regions as the reference labels as thick first­year ice while there is
some indifferences where the new ice is predicted instead of thick first­year ice. Lastly,
the inference scene #4 indicates a good performance of the new model in open­water
pixels.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.10: Experiment 1 model predictions (left plots) and reference labels (right plots)
for the 4 inference scenes
58
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:67==
6.3.2
Model Without Low Importance Channels
The second experiment was about removing the low importance channels in order to
confirm that they are redundant and they do not offer so much information to the model.
The brightness temperatures that were removed were the low frequency channels 6.9
GHz (V & H pol), the 7.3 GHz (V & H pol) and the high frequency channel of 89.0 GHz (V
& H pol)
The F­1 score of the new trained model was 80.44% which is very close to the mean F­1
score of the 10 trained models. Based on this, it can be said that there is not a significant
reduction of the model’s performance. The resulting confusion matrix is presented.
Figure 6.11: Confusion matrix of the second experiment
Comparing the new confusion matrix (figure 6.11) with the baseline model’s (figure 6.2),
there are some similarities that can justify the similar F­1 scores. The patterns regarding
the confusion of the true classes with the predicted are the same with some numerical
changes, as expected. Again, there is a significant confusion (66.9% and 67.9%) of young
ice (class 2) with thick first­year ice (class 4). The elements in the main diagonal have
remained almost the same which indicates the similar F­1 scores.
Following the methodology, the inference of the 4 scenes based on the new model is
shown in the figure 6.12). To have a comprehensive overview regarding the baseline
model (figure 6.3) and the experiment 1 (figure 6.10), a comparison among all of them
will be done. Regarding the inference scene #1, the predictions from the model from the
experiment 2 are closer to the baseline model confirming the similar F­1 scores. The old
ice is predicted for almost all the same regions while new ice and young ice are present
in similar regions. On the opposite, the model from the experiment 1 predicts more new
ice instead thick first­year and old ice. As for the inference scene #2, the new predictions
show more old ice than the experiment 1, which is closer to what the baseline model and
the reference labels also indicate. For the inference scene #3, as it was expected, the
predictions are closer to the ones from the baseline model, identifying almost the same
regions with young and thick first­year ice. Finally, regarding the open­water inference
scene, the predictions have similar behavior with the baseline model mis­predicting the
same few thick first­year ice pixels.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.12: Experiment 2 model predictions (left plots) and reference labels (right plots)
for the 4 inference scenes
60
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:69==
6.3.3
Model With CIMR Input Channels
The new model is trained with the 4 channels (6.9, 10.65, 18.7, 36.5 GHz) in both po­
larizations (table 6.1). In the same way as for the model experiments in the previous
sections, the confusion matrix was calculated to give an overview of the mis­predictions
and the confusion of the true and predicted classes. Also, the F­1 score was calculated
as 77.49% which falls out of the 3­sigma range of the mean F­1 score of the baseline
model, meaning that we can consider that a drop in the performance occurred.
Figure 6.13: Confusion matrix from CIMR simulation
This drop in the performance can be seen in the bigger confusion (93.1%) of the class
3 (thin first­year ice) with the class 4 (thick first­year ice) and the increased confusion
(70.9%) of old ice with thick first­year ice. Finally, the 4 inference scenes are presented.
In the inference scene #1 (Scoresbysund), large areas of old ice (class 5) are mispredicted
as new ice and as thick first­year ice, as the confusion matrix indicates. Regarding the
inference scene #2 in Cape Farewell, the new model outperforms the baseline model in
the multi­year (old) ice prediction by predicting more of it and more of thick first­year ice
than young ice. Furthermore, for the inference scene #3, the CIMR simulation predictions
indicate more thick first­year ice than the young ice, which is closer to the reference labels.
Lastly, in the open­water inference scene, the CIMR simulation model has a slighlty better
performance than the baseline model predicting less pixels as thick first­year ice.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.14: Experiment 3 model predictions (left plots) and reference labels (right plots)
for the 4 inference scenes
62
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:71==
To get an overview of the three experiments, comparing to the baseline model, the follow­
ing table summarizes the different models’ performance.
Table 6.1: Overview of the model experiments
Model
Used Channels [GHz]
F­1 Score [%]
Mean
All AMSR2*
80.22 ± 2.16
Experiment #1
6.9 / 7.3 / 10.65 / 18.7H / 23.8V / 89.0
76.66
Experiment #2
10.65 / 18.7 / 23.8 / 36.5
80.44
Experiment #3
6.9 / 10.65 / 18.7 / 36.5
77.49
*Includes all the available channels in both polarizations
Each experiment can provide us with some insights. The removal of the most important
channels led to a significant degradation of the model’s performance. This confirms that
the PaP algorithm actually provided meaningful results. On the other side, removing the
low importance channels, did not have an impact on the performance. This can be very
helpful in identifying the redundancy of the baseline model and figure out which channels
are indeed informative for the neural network. Because of the nature of this data, some
of them are correlated leading the network to gain information only from some channels
without using the other channels. This leads to a high dimensional feature space. High­
dimensional data lead to the so­called ”curse of dimensionality” and for ML models, results
in the requirement of a big amount of training data to make meaningful models. As for the
CIMR simulation (experiment #3), the exploitation of only the 6.9, 10.65, 18.7 and 36.5
GHz channels resulted in a smaller degradation of the model performance compared to
the first experiment.
6.4
Considerations and Discussion
Some things should be taken into account when the PaP method is applied. As men­
tioned in the theory of the feature importance (section 3.3), this method can have some
limitations in the results that provides. Often, multichannel data from a sensor are corre­
lated. For example, the information that is included in the 6.3 GHz channel can be very
correlated with the information in the 7.3 GHz channel. In this cases, although the one
of the channels is permuted and does not offer any information to the model, the latter
still has access to this information through its correlated channel. In this way, both of the
input channels might appear of low importance though they are very important. In the
current project, in order to mitigate this effect, the PaP method was applied in 10 mod­
els. The averaging of the PFI scores can potentially contribute to the retrieval of more
reliable results. Moreover, an issue can be seen in the confluence of PaP algorithm and
patch size selection. The resolution of the upsampled brightness temperatures is 80m
and based on the patch size that is 256 x 256 pixels, this leads to having training samples
of approximately 20.5 x 20.5 km. In some cases, the whole patch can be only one kind of
sea ice type (e.g. multi­year ice) and the model has learnt solely based on the absolute
values of the patch. On the other side, the PaP algorithm permutes only the structure of
the data (figure 5.5), arising some concerns about the efficiency of this method in cases
like these.
Regarding the PFI scores (figures 6.7 and 6.8), the relatively low importance of the low fre­
quency channels follows the theory of passive microwave remote sensing of sea ice. Low
frequency channels are not capable of providing information of the Stage of Development
of the sea ice. Sea ice type is mainly characterized by the surface and volume scattering
mechanisms. Low frequency channels have long wavelengths that can be even bigger
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
63
==PAGE:72==
than the scatterers (e.g. air bubbles inside the multi­year ice) making them incapable of
identifying them. Making a connection with the future mission of CIMR, the 1.414 GHz
channel won’t be used for the sea ice type due to its very coarse spatial resolution (60km)
and its very big wavelength.
The 23.8 GHz (V) channel which appears as one of the most important channels, it is
known to be the most informative for the water vapor content in the atmosphere (Grody
(1976)). The resulting high importance that is given to it, could potentially originate from
the training process. For the training of the model, only the SAR and the AMSR2 channels
were used without the numerical weather prediction data (ERA5) which include the total
column water vapor. In this way, the model hasn’t learn to correlate the 23.8 GHz channel
data with the water vapor in the atmosphere. Also, except for the training process, a
possible explanation could be that, usually, the conditions over sea ice are dry without a
significant amount of water vapor in the satellite observation column. It should also be
taken into account that the PaP algorithm’s permutation is random. Figure 6.8 shows that
there could be an outlier in the PaP experiments that drags the PFI score of 23.8 GHz
(V) channel upwards. Very high frequency channels of 89.0 GHz, appear in almost every
experiment (figure 6.6 and 6.7) with low importance. This was expected due to the very
noisy data coming from the high frequency channels that are affected from the overall
atmospheric conditions. Regarding the ice type, high frequency signals cannot provide
information about it since they cannot penetrate through the ice and usually are limited to
the snowpack over the ice.
On the performance side, some things should be considered such as the ice charts that
are used as labels in the training and testing of the U­Net model. The ice charts, as it
was mentioned in section 4.3, have uncertainties of approximately 20%. The model so, is
trained on reference labels that are biased due to personal judgements. In ambiguous sea
ice regions, ice analysts, usually label the ice towards higher concentration and thicker
types to ensure safe marine navigation for the ships in the Arctic.
64
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:73==
7
Conclusion
In this project, the ultimate question was if we can reduce the redundancy of a deep
learning model for the classification of the sea ice Stage Of Development. In order to an­
swer to this question, a base model that simulates the operational DMI­ASIP model was
constructed in accordance with the model that was built for the AI4Arctic Sea Ice Chal­
lenge. The reference model here, includes the two SAR channels (HH and HV) and the
14 AMSR2 (H and V) channels. Based on this model, the investigation of Permutation
Feature Importance (PFI) scores for the passive microwave channels resulted in some
interesting insights. By training the model exclusively on the SAR and AMSR2 data, we
were able to assess the relative importance of each PMW channel. The results showed
that channels in the range of 18.7 to 36.5 GHz, and particularly the 36.5 GHz (V) channel,
are crucial for the sea ice type estimation. This can be confirmed also from the theory
saying that these channels are sensitive to the structural properties of sea ice. In con­
trast, low frequency (6.9 and 7.3 GHz) and high frequency (89.0 GHz) channels are less
important due to their insensitivity to the surface and volume scattering mechanisms that
are present in the sea ice.
The validation of these results came by measuring the change in the performance of the
model when it is trained with and without the important channels. With the removal of the
high­importance channels, the F­1 score dropped significantly and the confusion matrix
showed a higher rate of misprediction of the sea ice types. Removing low­importance
channels did not affect the model’s performance, highlighting the redundancy in the DMI­
ASIP model that ingests all the AMSR2 data. Moreover, the simulation of the upcoming
CIMR mission, using only the relevant AMSR2 channels, resulted in a slight degrada­
tion on the performance compared to the baseline model, showcasing the robustness of
the high­importance channels in determining the sea ice types. Regarding the PaP al­
gorithms, the limitations were mentioned and should be taken always into account. A
go­around solution, as implemented here, is to repeat the PaP algorithm many times in
order to leverage the randomness by estimating the mean PFI scores.
Conclusively, the project is an attempt to explore the synergy between remote sensing
data, cutting edge ML methodologies along with model interpretability. The foremost goal
of this thesis, is to enhance and provide insights about the AMSR2 input data on deep
learning models and to highlight the significance of interpretability in environmental ML
applications.
7.1
Future work
Based on the actual limitations of the project and the prospects that came out during the
experiments, various directions for research can be seen.
Regarding the training phase and the model development itself, some different aspects
can be taken into future consideration. Firstly, a more extensive trial and error procedure
for finding the optimal number of epochs for training (depending on time limitations). Ad­
ditional variables such as the numerical weather prediction data (ERA5) could be used
to make the model complete and more inclusive (such as the DMI­ASIP model that uses
also the ERA5 data). The patch size of the training samples can be increased to 512 x
512 or even 1024 x 1024 pixels if the computational resources allow it. This will help the
model to learn from larger features at once by providing more context per each training
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
65
==PAGE:74==
sample allowing it to generalize better. Also, including more training data from the earlier
versions of the dataset and applying data augmentation techniques (rotation, flip, etc.)
will improve the model’s generalization ability.
Regarding the PFI scores and the ML interpretation techniques, future possibilities can be
seen. Taking into account the correlation of the input features should be of high priority.
Conditional PFI, which permutes a feature while conditioning on the correlated features
can provide also accurate results in such cases (C. Molnar, König, and Bischl (2023)).
Also, the repetition of the PaP algorithm that was applied here, for more than 30 times,
would provide more reliable and robust results overcoming the randomness of the permu­
tation. Finally, if the current limitations of applying model­agnostic explanation techniques
on models with multi­dimensional outputs (as the one developed here) are overcome,
techniques such as SHAP and LIME can be applied to provide features importance val­
ues.
66
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
Tonboe, Rasmus T. et al. (Sept. 2016). “The EUMETSAT sea ice concentration climate
data record”. In: Cryosphere 10 (5), pp. 2275–2290. ISSN: 19940424. DOI: 10.5194/tc-
10-2275-2016.
Lavergne, Thomas et al. (Jan. 2019). “Version 2 of the EUMETSAT OSI SAF and ESA CCI
sea­ice concentration climate data records”. In: Cryosphere 13 (1), pp. 49–78. ISSN:
19940424. DOI: 10.5194/tc-13-49-2019.
Comiso, J. C. (1986). “Characteristics of Arctic winter sea ice from satellite multispectral
microwave observations.” In: Journal of Geophysical Research 91 (C1), pp. 975–994.
ISSN: 01480227. DOI: 10.1029/JC091iC01p00975.
Markus, Thorsten and Donald J Cavalieri (2000). An Enhancement of the NASA Team
Sea Ice Algorithm.
Comiso, J. C. (1995). “SSM/I sea ice concentrations using the bootstrap algorithm”. In:
Andersen, Søren et al. (Aug. 2007). “Intercomparison of passive microwave sea ice con­
centration retrievals over the high­concentration Arctic sea ice”. In: Journal of Geophys­
ical Research: Oceans 112 (8). ISSN: 21699291. DOI: 10.1029/2006JC003543.
Ivanova, Natalia et al. (2014). “Retrieval of arctic sea ice parameters by satellite pas­
sive microwave sensors: A comparison of eleven sea ice concentration algorithms”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 52 (11), pp. 7233–7246. ISSN:
01962892. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2014.2310136.
Frank, Carsey D. (1992). Microwave Remote Sensing of Sea Ice.
Lyden, J., B.A. Burns, and A. L. Maffett (1984). “Characterization of Sea Ice Types Using
Synthetic Aperture Radar”. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND RE­
MOTE SENSING GE­22 (5).
Kwok, R. et al. (1992). “Identification of sea ice types in spaceborne synthetic aper­
ture radar data”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 97 (C2), pp. 2391–2402. ISSN:
01480227. DOI: 10.1029/91JC02652.
C. Wackerman R. R. Jentz, R. A. Shuchman (1988). “Sea Ice Type Classification Of SAR
Imagery”. In:
Park, Jeong­Won et al. (2019). “Classification of Sea Ice Types in Sentinel­1 SAR images”.
In: DOI: 10.5194/tc-2019-127. URL: https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-2019-127.
Boulze, Hugo, Anton Korosov, and Julien Brajard (July 2020). “Classification of sea ice
types in sentinel­1 SAR data using convolutional neural networks”. In: Remote Sensing
12 (13). ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs12132165.
Wang, Lei et al. (Aug. 2016). “Sea Ice Concentration Estimation during Melt from Dual­
Pol SAR Scenes Using Deep Convolutional Neural Networks: A Case Study”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 54 (8), pp. 4524–4533. ISSN: 01962892.
DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2016.2543660.
Saldo, Roberto et al. (2020). AI4Arctic / ASIP Sea Ice Dataset ­ version 2. https://doi.
org/10.11583/DTU.13011134.v2. Dataset.
Buus­Hinkler, Jørgen et al. (2022). AI4Arctic Sea Ice Challenge Dataset. https://doi.org/
10.11583/DTU.c.6244065. Dataset.
Stokholm, Andreas et al. (2022). “AI4SeaIce: Toward Solving Ambiguous SAR Textures
in Convolutional Neural Networks for Automatic Sea Ice Concentration Charting”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 60. ISSN: 15580644. DOI:
10.1109/TGRS.2022.3149323.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
67
==PAGE:76==
Malmgren­Hansen, David et al. (Mar. 2021). “A Convolutional Neural Network Architecture
for Sentinel­1 and AMSR2 Data Fusion”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 59 (3), pp. 1890–1902. ISSN: 15580644. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2020.
3004539.
Ronneberger, Olaf, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox (May 2015). “U­Net: Convolutional
Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.
04597.
Temenos, Anastasios et al. (2023). “Interpretable Deep Learning Framework for Land Use
and Land Cover Classification in Remote Sensing Using SHAP”. In: IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Letters 20. ISSN: 15580571. DOI: 10.1109/LGRS.2023.3251652.
Andersson, Tom R. et al. (Dec. 2021). “Seasonal Arctic sea ice forecasting with proba­
bilistic deep learning”. In: Nature Communications 12 (1). ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.
1038/s41467-021-25257-4.
Jackson, C. (2004). Synthetic Aperture Radar Marine User’s Manual. ISBN: 0­16­073214­
X.
Singh, Shivangini, Shashi Kumar, and Navneet Kumar (Feb. 2023). “Evolution of Ice­
berg A68 since Its Inception from the Collapse of Antarctica’s Larsen C Ice Shelf Using
Sentinel­1 SAR Data”. In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 15 (4). ISSN: 20711050. DOI:
10.3390/su15043757.
Le Vine, David and Neils Skou (2006).
Ivanova, N. et al. (Sept. 2015). “Inter­comparison and evaluation of sea ice algorithms:
Towards further identification of challenges and optimal approach using passive mi­
crowave observations”. In: Cryosphere 9 (5), pp. 1797–1817. ISSN: 19940424. DOI:
10.5194/tc-9-1797-2015.
Cavalieri, D. J., P. Gloersen, and W. J. Campbell (1984). “Determination of sea ice pa­
rameters with the Nimbus 7 SMMR.” In: Journal of Geophysical Research 89 (D4),
pp. 5355–5369. ISSN: 01480227. DOI: 10.1029/JD089iD04p05355.
Smith, DM and EC Barrett (1993). In:
Tonboe, R. et al. (2006). “Sea ice emission modelling applications (in Thermal Microwave
Radiation ­ Applications for Remote Sensing)”. In:
Goodfellow, Ian, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville (2016). Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press.
Bishop, C. M. (2006). Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science
and Statistics). Springer­Verlag. ISBN: 0387310738.
Bishop, Christopher M. and Hugh Bishop (2024). “Gradient Descent”. In: Deep Learn­
ing: Foundations and Concepts. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 209–
232. ISBN: 978­3­031­45468­4. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 031- 45468- 4_7. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4_7.
Kingma, Diederik P. and Jimmy Ba (2017). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs.LG].
Feng, Jianli and Shengnan Lu (July 2019). “Performance Analysis of Various Activation
Functions in Artificial Neural Networks”. In: vol. 1237. Institute of Physics Publishing.
DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1237/2/022030.
Ribeiro, Marco Tulio, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin (Aug. 2016). “”Why should i
trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any classifier”. In: vol. 13­17­August­2016.
Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 1135–1144. ISBN: 9781450342322. DOI:
10.1145/2939672.2939778.
Lundberg, Scott M, Paul G Allen, and Su­In Lee (2017). A Unified Approach to Interpreting
Model Predictions. URL: https://github.com/slundberg/shap.
Breiman, Leo (2001). Random Forests, pp. 5–32.
68
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:77==
Fisher, Aaron, Cynthia Rudin, and Francesca Dominici (2019). In: 20.177, pp. 1–81. URL:
http://jmlr.org/papers/v20/18-760.html.
Hooker, Giles, Lucas Mentch, and Siyu Zhou (May 2019). “Unrestricted Permutation forces
Extrapolation: Variable Importance Requires at least One More Model, or There Is No
Free Variable Importance”. In: URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.03151.
Korosov, Anton et al. (2022). “Thermal Denoising of Cross­Polarized Sentinel­1 Data in
Interferometric and Extra Wide Swath Modes”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing 60. ISSN: 15580644. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3131036.
Karvonen, Juha et al. (Apr. 2015). “A Comparison Between High­Resolution EO­Based
and Ice Analyst­Assigned Sea Ice Concentrations”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Top­
ics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 8 (4), pp. 1799–1807. ISSN:
21511535. DOI: 10.1109/JSTARS.2015.2426414.
DTU Computing Center (2024). DTU Computing Center resources. DOI: 10.48714/DTU.
HPC.0001. URL: https://doi.org/10.48714/DTU.HPC.0001.
Molnar, Christoph (2022). Interpretable Machine Learning: A Guide For Making Black Box
Models Explainable. ISBN: 979­8411463330.
Grody, Norman C. (1976). Remote Sensing of Atmospheric Water Content From Satellites
Using Microwave Radiometry.
Molnar, C., G. König, and B. Bischl (2023). “Model­agnostic Feature Importance and Ef­
fects with Dependent Features – A Conditional Subgroup Approach”. In: DOI: 10.1007/
s10618-022-00901-9.
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
69
==PAGE:78==
A
Inference scenes
Figure A.1: Inference scene #1 (left column) and inference scene #2 (right column) with
their corresponding SAR HH channels (first row), reference labels (second row) and base­
line model predictions (third row)
70
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.2: Inference scene #3 (left column) and inference scene #4 (right column) with
their corresponding SAR HH channels (first row), reference labels (second row) and base­
line model predictions (third row)
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.3: Inference scene #1 (left column) and inference scene #2 (right column) with
their corresponding SAR HH channels (first row), reference labels (second row) and ex­
periment #1 model predictions (third row)
72
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.4: Inference scene #3 (left column) and inference scene #4 (right column) with
their corresponding SAR HH channels (first row), reference labels (second row) and ex­
periment #1 model predictions (third row)
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.5: Inference scene #1 (left column) and inference scene #2 (right column) with
their corresponding SAR HH channels (first row), reference labels (second row) and ex­
periment #2 model predictions (third row)
74
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.6: Inference scene #3 (left column) and inference scene #4 (right column) with
their corresponding SAR HH channels (first row), reference labels (second row) and ex­
periment #2 model predictions (third row)
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.7: Inference scene #1 (left column) and inference scene #2 (right column) with
their corresponding SAR HH channels (first row), reference labels (second row) and ex­
periment #3 model predictions (third row)
76
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.8: Inference scene #3 (left column) and inference scene #4 (right column) with
their corresponding SAR HH channels (first row), reference labels (second row) and ex­
periment #3 model predictions (third row)
Investigation of the effect of the different AMSR2 channel data on DMI­ASIP model performance
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
